
The ban on Russia’s track and field athletes will continue into 2017 after the 
taskforce responsible for assessing the country’s fight against doping 
confirmed it would wait until February to outline a road map for a return to 
international competition.

Sebastian Coe: IAAF reforms are about standing tall for the clean athletes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/sebastian-coe-iaaf-reforms-standing-tall-for-clean-athletes>
However, there was a chink of light for Russia, with Rune Andersen, the 
Norwegian heading the IAAF’s taskforce, conceding that RussianAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> had started making structural 
reforms after being banned from the Olympics in June.

“Rusaf has made further progress since June, including anti-doping education 
modules and securing the cooperation of the Russian criminal authorities and 
parliament in criminalising the supply of doping products,” Andersen told a 
news conference. “But one of the key remaining issues is how to demonstrate the
IAAF <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/iaaf> and Rusada [Russian Anti-Doping] 
will be able to carry out testing without interference, which is a key part of 
their reinstatement. The taskforce will go to Moscow in January to assess the 
response to part two of the McLaren report on 9 December and to monitor 
progress.”

Andersen said the taskforce would report back to the IAAF’s council in 
February, when it hoped to “identify a clear road map” for Russia’s return but 
he declined to give any further likely timeframe.

Sebastian Coe, the IAAF president, agreed with Andersen’s evaluation but said 
he would not be making any judgments about whether there had been a cultural 
shift in Russia. “What I am satisfied with is that we are making progress,” he 
said. “There has to be recognised that this is a system that cataclysmically 
failed clean athletes.”

Earlier the Russia president Vladimir Putin used his state of the nation 
address to say he thought effective measures would be in place early in the new 
year. “I am sure the so-called doping scandal will allow us to create the most 
advanced system of righting this evil in Russia,” he said. “I assume the 
national programme of counteracting doping will be ready as early as the 
beginning of next year.”
 