
Those bikies must be clever devils. The elaborate apparatus of laws and law 
enforcement against organised criminals, as opposed to disorganised ones, has 
not been effective – if a report from Queensland is any guide.

And that applies in most Australian states, despite the chest beating from law 
and order politicians.

Former Supreme Court judge Alan Wilson’s report, which he finished in December 
last year, on the Queensland Criminal Organisation Act (COA) has just been 
released by the government and it makes forgripping reading 
<http://www.parliament.qld.gov.au/documents/tableOffice/TabledPapers/2016/5516T432.pdf>
. It is accompanied byanother doorstopper 
<http://www.justice.qld.gov.au/corporate/justice-initiatives/new-regime-to-tackle-serious-organised-crime-in-queensland-in-all-its-forms>
 of a report from the taskforce on organised crime.

Wilson and the taskforce are saying that the clutch of anti-bikie laws 
introduced by the Newman government in 2013 and the earlier Labor government’s 
criminal organisation legislation are not working effectively and there should 
be another shot at a “renewed organised crime framework”.

These laws were at the time accompanied by some high pitched braggadocios from 
the premiers. In 2009 Anna Bligh said: “We will not be left behind Queensland 
will match any state in regard to the toughness of our laws to deal with the 
threat of outlaw motorcycle gangs.”

Anti-bikie laws are getting public used to loss of civil liberties, academic 
warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/02/anti-bikie-laws-are-getting-public-used-to-loss-of-civil-liberties-academic-warns>
In 2013 premier Campbell Newman when introducing the Vicious Lawless 
Association Disestablishment Act (VLAD) and associated measure, went 
full-throttle: “Today we will introduce to this parliament the toughest laws 
against these thugs this state has ever seen. Indeed, they will be the toughest 
in the world. They are not designed to just contain or manage the gangs; they 
are designed to destroy them.”

The outcome presents a different picture. Law enforcement has been delayed by 
test case litigation in the high court, proceedings turned out to be so costly 
that they were abandoned on the basis that police resources could be better 
deployed elsewhere, and the procedures under the Act proved to be frustratingly 
slow and cumbersome.

Take the case of the Finks Motorcycle Club. Under the COA the Queensland 
police made an application to have it declared a criminal organisation. Vast 
amounts of criminal intelligence had been prepared which went to a judge who 
was to assessed it. This was done in secret, without the Finks being part of 
the process or permitted to see or test the criminal intelligence.

The Finks then challenged the COA in the high court, in what is known as the 
Pompano case 
<http://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/judgment-summaries/2013/hca7-2013-03-14.pdf>
, arguing that they could not know the substance of the allegations against 
them because it was based on secret police material. The criminal justice 
system was being asked to depart “to a significant degree from the methods and 
standards which have characterised judicial activities in the past”.

The high court upheld parts of the legislation but did not address other 
issues, such as the rights of parties to have acts of the executive reviewed.

In any event, the Finks thwarted the entire procedure by simply disbanding and 
“patching over” to the Mongols. The police application was abandoned, but not 
before a great deal of time and around $2m of QPS money had been expended to 
get precisely nowhere. That was the ignominious end to the one and only 
application to outlaw a motorcycle gang under the Criminal Organisation Act.

As Alan Wilson pointed out, “A sufficiently agile respondent can, therefore, 
continually evade the operation of the COA.” The VLAD law and other associated 
legislation did not pick-up where COA dropped off. Wilson said that the Liberal 
government’s 2013 “suite of legislation” is similarly infected with “serious 
deficiencies”. Ahigh court challenge against VLAD 
<http://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/judgment-summaries/2014/hca-46-2014-11-14.pdf>
 failed because the applicant hadn’t been charged with any offence, so he 
lacked standing. A substantive challenge to VLAD remains a possibility and four 
of the high court judges suggested that a challenge would be inevitable because 
the law sought to categorise people as criminal simply by an executive act.

Wilson also raises the irreconcilable differences between the use of “criminal 
intelligence” and “evidence”. Criminal intelligence might be a contradiction in 
terms – it is based on hearsay, often from unreliable sources. The court is 
required to assess its worth before it can be declared as “criminal 
intelligence”. As such it is not evidence, but when ticked-off by the judge it 
effectively takes on the nature of evidence as part of the criminalisation 
process.

Wilson says the application of criminal intelligence in this way, “subverts 
long-established procedures within our adversarial system of justice”.

The emphasis of the legislation is on attacking organisations through the 
“novel medium of criminal intelligence”. The outcome is not viable when weighed 
against the costs of the proceedings. Instead, the former judge suggests the 
law should focus on criminal activity by outlaw motorcycle gang members, as 
opposed to organisations, using existing laws which deal with problems like 
drugs, sexual assaults, theft of property, standover activities, and the like. 
“These long-settled laws provide a logical starting point and a sound 
foundation.”

The conspicuous acts of “barbarian violence” in public by motor cycle gangs 
were dealt with under established laws, not special anti-bikie legislation: the 
Milperra massacre in 1984, the Ballroom Blitz at Royal Pines on the Gold Coast 
in 2006, and a riot at Sydney airport in 2009 where Anthony Zervas, the brother 
of a member of the Hells Angels, was killed. There was also a riot at 
Broadbeach in 2013.

Even within associations that are assumed to be criminal in nature, not all 
members are engaged in organised criminal activities. At the time of the VLAD 
laws, the Australian Crime Commission said thatmost outlaw motorcycle gang 
chapters do not engage in organised crime 
<https://crimecommission.gov.au/publications/intelligence-products/crime-profile-fact-sheets/outlaw-motorcycle-gangs>
 as a collective unit.

Rather, small numbers of members conspire with other criminals for a common 
purpose, but overall outlaw motorcycle club gang members account for less than 
1% of the crime in Queensland.

In other states legislative attempts to tackle organised crime have been only 
rarely successful, with the possible exception of public safety orders in South 
Australia. Control orders do have some utility and the UK’s version of these 
orders, known as serious crime prevention orders, are effective because they 
focus on serious crime rather than organised crime – consequently there is no 
necessity to show the existence of a criminal organisation. SCPOs are mostly 
used as a post-conviction sentencing option.

NSW has just come up with its own version of serious crime prevention orders 
with new legislation that is to be debated early next month. It gives wide 
powers for police, prosecutors and the crime commission to apply for orders 
that prohibit or restrict the activities of anyone convicted of a serious 
offence, or has engaged in “serious crime related activity” whether charged or 
convicted, or not.

The legislation has appalled the legal profession 
<http://www.nswbar.asn.au/docs/webdocs/SCPO_13042016.pdf>, which calls it 
draconian and a breach of fundamental liberties. Normal standards of proof have 
been discarded, and hearsay criminal intelligence is permitted. It will 
certainly be the subject of a high court challenge should the bill be passed.


NSW has the longest history of legislation seeking to disrupt criminal 
organisations, starting with the Pistol Licensing Act in 1927, which saw gang 
members abandon pistols for razors. The Crimes (Criminal Organisations Control) 
Act was introduced in 2009, just after the Sydney airport affray. Supreme court 
judges could be appointed as “eligible judges” to make declarations against 
organisations. Their deliberations were in secret and there was no requirement 
to provide reasons. The high court found the scheme was repugnant to the 
integrity of the supreme court and struck it down.

The legislation was re-stoked in 2013 to address the shortcomings found by the 
high court. The year before new consorting offences were also introduced, 
aiming to deter people from associating with criminals. The intention was to 
combat criminal gangs, but Alan Wilson says the evidence suggests that police 
have used the consorting powers to disproportionately target marginalised 
groups.

Bikie gang laws: first person convicted under Vlad act is spared longer jail 
term
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/03/bikie-gang-laws-first-person-convicted-under-vlad-act-is-spared-longer-jail-term>
The NSW ombudsman found that Aboriginal people accounted for 38% of all people 
issued with an official warning under the consorting legislation. Some 83 
children have also been issued with warnings. Homeless people too are more 
likely to be targeted under the new powers.

In NSW there has only been one abortive attempt to declare a criminal 
organisation and that was in 2010 when the acting police commissioner applied 
to an “eligible judge” to have the Hells Angels declared. It failed because the 
high court found the legislation invalid.

Where to next? Wilson asks whether special anti-organised crime legislation is 
actually necessary and warranted – he recommends abandoning the use of criminal 
intelligence because it doesn’t work in an adversarial framework.

The next legislative attempt to address organised crime should be evidence 
based, using existing criminal laws dealing with drugs, child pornography, 
homicide, theft, break and enter, and so on and focusing much more on 
individuals and individuals in concert – rather than the costly, compromised 
and, in the end, futile efforts to nail “organisations”.
 