
José Mourinho admits that losing Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> to a long-term injury 
would be a “disaster”, yet the Manchester United manager has no plans to buy an 
experienced goalscorer in January as cover for the Swede.

Ibrahimovic is United’s leading marksman by some distance, his 17 goalsadding 
to the 33 for his previous club, Paris Saint-Germain, in 2016 to leave his 
total at 50 – one behind Lionel Messi’s highest of 51 this calendar year. As 
the Barcelona forward is on a winter break in Spain, Ibrahimovic can end the 
year as the top scorer in Europe by registering two against Middlesbrough at 
Old Trafford on New Year’s Eve.

West Brom bid for Morgan Schneiderlin has been rejected, says José Mourinho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/morgan-schneiderlin-manchester-united-west-brom-jose-mourinho-anthony-martial>
United have won their past four Premier League games and Ibrahimovic has 
scored four times in the most recent three, with 11 in the past 10 games in all 
competitions. Of United’s 27 league goals Ibrahimovic has 12 and his total of 
17 accounts for more than a third of the team’s tally of 49. Mourinho is clear 
regarding how difficult it would be should the 35-year-old be injured for any 
length of time: “A disaster – obviously a disaster but that’s football.”.

Wayne Rooney, who will miss Middlesbrough’s visit because of a muscle problem, 
has scored only three times, while Marcus Rashford and Anthony Martial have 
four each. Asked if a proven Premier League goalscorer might be added in next 
month’s window, Mourinho said: “No. We are not going to do that. We have 
Zlatan, Rooney, Rashford and Martial, who can also be a No9 in a different 
style.

“We have a squad of 24 players. I know we’ve a lot of competitions to play but 
where is the striker to come here with that quality to play for United? Where 
is that striker, where the club can let him come? That’s not something for the 
January market. It’s probably something for the summer.”

Mourinho is impressed that Ibrahimovic could break Messi’s 2016 mark. “In 
Spain Messi and Cristiano [Ronaldo, who has 42] have a lot of penalties to 
score. They are phenomenal players with lots of penalties to score goals. Here 
Zlatan has 18 matches and one penalty. It’s not so easy to score goals.”

The manager also explained why Memphis Depay has been given little opportunity 
this season. The Dutchman has managed only 124 minutes in eight appearances and 
been linked with moves to clubs including Everton and Fenerbahce. “He was not 
playing last season [much either],” Mourinho said. “It was not that last season 
he was playing phenomenally and this season he is not playing at all. That’s 
not the situation.

Manchester United v Middlesbrough: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/manchester-united-middlesbrough-match-preview>
“I have to say that in the past couple of months my decisions in relation to 
Memphis were influenced by the feelings and information that he would like to 
leave in January and that we were going to have a real offer that we would be 
willing to accept. That obviously influences me.

“If I know, if I have the feeling that a player is leaving, if I have to give 
chances and develop other players, then I go to Lingard, Mkhitaryan, Martial, 
the players I know 100% are going to stay with us. It is a position where we 
have more options.”

Mourinho, however, insists there is no problem with Depay’s approach. “He’s a 
very good professional is the only thing I can say. I know the public image is 
always influenced by some details of their private lives but the reality is 
that he is a very good professional, a very good boy. He has a high level of 
education, super polite, super professional, and works really hard. But it’s a 
position where I have Martial, Mkhitaryan, Mata, Lingard plus Rooney and 
Rashford who can also play in this position. So we have six, seven players. But 
if we arrive in January and nothing happens – and we have lots of matches – 
then if he is going to be my player until the end of the season I will help him 
and he will be useful for us.”
 