
At some point on Saturday Sebastian Coe will address all 214 member 
federations of athletics’ governing body, the IAAF, and urge them to support a 
revolution. “This is a pretty important week in the history of our sport,” the
IAAF <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/iaaf> president admitted on Thursday 
night.

IAAF to be told Russia making little progress on anti-doping reforms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/30/iaaf-russia-little-progress-anti-doping-reforms-rune-andersen>
“Because I do not want us ever to return to the grotesque stories that even 
over the last few days we have been waking up to.”

Coe did not refer to those stories directly. There was no need. It has been 
impossible to escape the festering stench of corruption left by several former 
senior IAAF officials, who this year were banned for life for conspiring to 
demand money from Russian athletes in order to cover up anomalies in their 
biological passports.

This week the French newspaper Le Monde and the German broadcaster ARD 
reported that the practice was more widespread than initially thought, based on 
documents from a continued investigation by French prosecutors into the former 
IAAF president Lamine Diack, his son Papa Massata Diack and others over alleged 
corruption and money laundering. Meanwhile the steady drip of positive retests 
from Beijing 2008 and London 2012 – while ultimately good for the sport – has 
deepened the impression that more needs to be done to stop doping.

However, Coe hopes to perform the equivalent of a hard reset on a calamitous 
few years for athletics by introducing a series of governance reforms – 
including some that are surprisingly radical in places. They include stripping 
himself of some powers as IAAF president, creating an integrity code and 
anti-doping body, ensuring a greater voice to athletes and creating a roadmap 
to ensure a 50/50 male/female split among the IAAF council by 2027. Under Coe’s 
plans the president and IAAF council will not be allowed to serve more than 12 
years and there will also be greater checks and balances to stop the president 
taking major decisions alone.

“This is a moment to be bold, not to be timid,” he said on Thursday night. 
“The reforms create the strongest set of foundations upon which we need to 
build new fans, create new formats, to find new partners and frankly to create 
new and exciting events. We must engage with young people, we must find new 
fans – and that sits at the heart of our strategy.”

Coe stressed that his key reform was a plan for a beefy and independent 
integrity unit that would manage all anti-doping matters and be responsible for 
greater intelligence gathering. He also pointed out that an online portal to 
allow people, privately and securely, to forward on information about doping 
had received 43 leads in its first 48 hours. “These reforms are fundamentally 
about standing tall for the clean athletes,” he said. “The clean athletes have 
to know we are in their corner.”

Coe needs the backing of two-thirds of the federations to get the proposals 
through and, while he knows there will be some resistance, he has urged 
doubters to think of the consequences of maintaining the status quo. “We have 
sponsors and stakeholders watching very carefully how we address the issues 
facing our sport and facing all sport, as we strive for greater transparency 
and accountability,” he wrote recently in the IAAF’s booklet Time for Change. 
“Our partnerships and revenue streams are directly under threat if we do not 
act promptly and decisively.” Privately his supporters hope the reforms will 
turn the IAAF into one of the most open and transparent bodies in global sport 
– perhaps even the most transparent, an exemplar for others. They also point to 
the vocal backing of the IAAF Athletes’ Commission, which says the “future of 
the sport” depends on the proposals being voted through.

Coe knows not everyone is so positive about him or the sport’s future. 
However, as he might reflect, Friday isa year to the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/02/iaaf-sebastian-coe-athletics-parliamentary-committee-crossroads--diack>
 since he faced a hostile three-hourgrilling from MPs on the culture and media 
select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/dec/02/sebastian-coe-faces-grilling-from-mps-over-athletics-doping-scandal-live?page=with:block-565f0162e4b0bd851920bfc6>
 over his relationship with Lamine Diack and why he did not know more about 
corruption at the IAAF. As Coe confessed to the MPs, the IAAF’s problems were 
like a “horror show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/02/sebastian-coe-waffling-apologist-iaaf-parliament>
”. Now, perhaps, it is more like a 12 certificate than an 18 – but much work 
remains, as Coe concedes.

“We must accept that the reputation of the IAAF and athletics has been 
tarnished by events that came to light a year ago,” he says. “We still have a 
lot of work to do to restore our reputation, credibility and trust within our 
own sport and the wider world of sport.”

Saturday, though, could prove a significant step in the right direction.
 