
Has Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> sorted out the 
difference between the nudity of Michelangelo’s full frontal David and the 
naked nine-year-old Vietnamese girl fleeing a napalm attack?
How risqué in Facebook-world is an eyeful of Titian’s Venus of Urbino, 
complete with “fully nude female breast”, buttocks and partially covered 
genitalia or a thousand Renaissance works featuring nude children, aka cherubs?

This is a pressing issue now that Facebook has censored a post by a Norwegian 
writer Tom Egeland in which he showed the famous war-time photo of Kim Phúc 
running from a toxic cloud.

Mark Zuckerberg accused of abusing power after Facebook deletes 'napalm girl' 
post
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/facebook-mark-zuckerberg-napalm-girl-photo-vietnam-war>
For his violation of “community standards” Egeland was suspended from 
Facebook, a form of punishment equivalent to being belted with rotten tomatoes 
in the stocks. When the Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten reported on this 
ham-fisted piece of taste management, using the same photo to illustrate the 
story, someone or something at Palo Alto, removed the entire article and sent a 
message to the newspaper, saying:

Any photographs of people displaying fully nude genitalia or buttocks, or 
fully nude female breast, will be removed.

Facebook had to endure a lecture from Aftenposten’s editor, Espen Egil Hansen, 
who brought a generous dose of Scandinavian censoriousness to his front page:

Even though I am editor-in-chief of Norway’s largest newspaper, I have to 
realise that you are restricting my room for exercising my editorial 
responsibility. I think you are abusing your power, and I find it hard to 
believe that you have thought it through thoroughly.

Under Facebook’s community standards policies <http:// 
https://www.facebook.com/page_guidelines.php>, David’s fully nude willy is 
perfectly safe, but be careful of those buttocks, breasts and vaginas.

Curiously, Palo Alto took no action in response to the Guardian’s Facebook 
post reporting these events, which used the same photo taken by the Associated 
Press’ Huynh Công Ut on June 8, 1972.

Maybe the algorithms were out to lunch, or because a global fuss was well and 
truly underway, Mark Zuckerberg’s lieutenants were in a conference trying to 
decipher their own community standards policies.

We must remember that it is the posts on Facebook that are subject to erratic 
censorship – Egeland and Aftenposten would encounter no such difficulty 
publishing the photo on their own sites.

The realisation comes too late that the rush by news publishers to sign up 
their content to Facebook hands Zuckerberg & Co control not only of tone and 
content but the ability to snaffle the revenue.

There are all sorts of other rules and regulations tucked in the backend of 
these social media platforms, which no one reads.Facebook’s “hate speech” policy
 <https://www.facebook.com/communitystandards#> is a triumph of uncertainty. 

Being rude to people on the basis of their race, ethnicity, religion, sexual 
orientation or disabilities is not allowed. However, “People can use Facebook 
to challenge ideas, institutions and practices ... Sometimes people share 
content containing someone else’s hate speech for the purpose of raising 
awareness or educating others about that hate speech ...”

It’s a balancing act with shifting borders, so little wonder the outcome 
results in torrents of sewerage that passes for “challenging ideas” – as long 
as there are no “fully nude” female genitals.

Actually, if Facebook had half a wit it would know that it wasn’t the nudity 
of “the Napalm girl” that affronted – it was the vision of terror and 
destruction brought on by that futile western intervention in someone else’s 
war.

This is as clear an indication as any that automated news delivery is unable 
to distinguish stupidity from relevance.

In firing human editors, Facebook has lost the fight against fake news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/29/facebook-trending-news-editors-fake-news-stories>
It’s going to get worse as more and more news curation gives way to the march 
of the algorithms. The business news publisherBloomberg is charging into 
automated journalism 
<http://www.poynter.org/2016/bloomberg-eic-automation-is-crucial-to-the-future-of-journalism/409080/>
 with its ears back. It starts with computers writing what in the trade is 
known as “commodity news” but as artificial intelligence becomes more 
intelligent the business of writing features, analysis and commentary will 
steadily shift to the machines.

Zuckerberg insists he runs a tech company, not a media company. Yet, the two 
are inseparable. He’s on relatively safe ground when his content consists of 
dancing bears and cats playing the piano, but anything requiring context and 
perception may be beyond his mathematics.

One thing is certain: journalists and editors hate being censored, 
particularly by unworldly geeks who are eating their lunch.
 