
Barrels of ink are required for the reporting of high crimes and 
misdemeanours. A decent murder, drugs trafficking, corporate skulduggery or 
kidnapping trial is a favourite part of the media diet and also feeds the 
insatiable appetite of the public’s curiosity, or as we sometimes more grandly 
put it, “the public’s right to know”.

On a good day court reports can amount to more than 20% of the content of a 
newspaper.

Sydney courts have recently completed a giddy round of “celebrity” criminal 
trials:Oliver Curtis for insider trading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/25/oliver-curtis-spends-first-night-in-prison-after-being-sentenced-for-insider-trading>
,Roger Rogerson and Glen McNamara for murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/15/roger-rogerson-and-glen-mcnamara-found-guilty-of-of-jamie-gao>
, andnow Eddie Obeid  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/eddie-obeid-guilty-misconduct-public-office>
on a charge of misconduct while holding a public office.


In these cases the accused were found guilty by juries. Curtis has been 
sentenced to two years in prison with the requirement to serve one year. On 12 
August there will be sentencing submissions relating to Obeid’s conviction and 
on 25 August for Rogerson and McNamara.

Justice Lucy McCallum’s remarks 
<https://www.caselaw.nsw.gov.au/decision/576b84c0e4b058596cb9ca74> dealing with 
Oliver Curtis’s sentence contained some graceful backhanders, as well as a 
salutary reminder as to what insider trading is all about: “It causes loss 
(albeit unquantifiable) to individual traders and it causes harm to the 
community at large by damaging the integrity of the market as a level playing 
field. The offending in the present case, which saw superannuation funds 
competing with 20-year olds using inside information to pay for a skiing 
holiday, stands as the paradigm for scepticism as to the fair operation of the 
market.”

The defamation case that is bad news for journalism and the protection of 
sources | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/30/the-defamation-case-that-is-bad-news-for-journalism-and-the-protection-of-sources>
The judge said that Curtis’s forfeiture of $1.43m, after the guilty verdict, 
“may be regarded as cynical”. After all, this was a very special type of guilty 
person. For three-and-a-half years he was on bail, pending the trial, yet with 
the permission of the corporate regulator Asic he travelled overseas 24 times 
in that period – that’s an overseas trip on average every seven-and-a-half 
weeks.

Nor is he a man who faces any career adversity as a result of his criminality 
because, as was acknowledged, his wealthy father will “always look after him”. 
The judge remarked that insider trading cases are “often defended vigorously, 
with the assistance of the best lawyers. The contrast with the resources and 
incarceration rates of other sectors of the community is stark”.

At the very least a lot of money can buy some decent delays and Curtis used 
every available opportunity to challenge the trial process. Last year he sought 
to stop the prosecutor having access to the transcript of his pretrial 
examination by Asic.

He won a stay against further criminal proceedings pending the removal of any 
member of the prosecution team who had access to the examination. This was later
overturned on appeal 
<https://www.caselaw.nsw.gov.au/decision/55c40aaae4b0a51fc30eed7e> in August 
2015.

There were other applications by Curtis’s lawyers, out of earshot of the jury, 
to completely close down the trial. They wanted a directed verdict to dismiss 
the case on the grounds that the Crown had not proved essential elements of its 
case. The judgedismissed the application 
<https://www.caselaw.nsw.gov.au/decision/5761055be4b058596cb9c598> and the jury 
went on to bring in a verdict that established that the Crown had indeed proved 
its case.

We only know about these things because the suppression orders that secreted 
this background manoeuvring were lifted after the jury had done its job. The 
court suppressed publication of this information ostensibly to protect the 
“proper administration of justice”, a concept that competes with and invariably 
overwhelms the noble aim of “open justice” – ie, court proceedings in full view 
of everyone.

As the 18th century British philosopher Jeremy Bentham neatly put it, open 
justice is the “keenest spur to exertion and the surest of all guards against 
improbity”.

After Rogerson and McNamara were convicted of murder the court lifted 
suppression orders 
<https://www.caselaw.nsw.gov.au/decision/570ae131e4b05f2c4f04cc28> on no fewer 
than 55 judgments affecting the conduct of the joint trial, the admissibility 
of evidence, prior offences, reliance on tendency evidence, the prohibitive 
value of statements, the conduct of one of the barristers for McNamara and then 
the later withdrawal of McNamara’s second successive trial counsel for 
mysterious reasons.

We now are allowed to know that McNamara’s first barrister opened his case 
rather spectacularly with claims of Rogerson “killing two people” when he was a 
police officer and being “sacked” from the force – information that was 
out-of-bounds and led to thetrial being scuttled <http:// 
https://www.caselaw.nsw.gov.au/decision/55b80ebae4b06e6e9f0f8369> and having to 
start all over again.

Quite apart from the general public, it would be interesting to know what 
jurors make of these after-the-event revelations. Do they think they have been 
deprived of important information, or that the information would be relevant 
for their deliberations? They may feel cheated only to be fed the bits the 
court filleted for them. We aren’t allow to know because jurors are forbidden 
to give post-mortems about how they went about their job or what factors 
influenced them. They can even be punished and sent to jail if they conduct 
their own research outside the confines of what is seen and heard in the 
courtroom.

In Rogerson-McNamara, many of the suppression orders remain in place and we 
cannot mention them for fear of proceedings for contempt of court.

While the mainstream media comply with suppression and internet take-down 
orders, the utility of these demands is questionable when it is seen that other 
information providers are not compliant. For instance, there was much that 
could have been learned about Rogerson’s colourful history from overseas online 
sources, including Wikipedia.

All of this is in stark contrast to the USA, where the First Amendment allows 
almost open-slather reporting of what goes on, including publication of 
interviews with prosecutors, defence counsel, the families of the accused and 
the victims and even the jurors - all while the trial is in progress.

The criminal trial documentary Making a Murderer showed the US system of open 
justice first hand.

The Americans don’t think their administration of criminal justice is any less 
fair because proceedings are not conducted with jurors wrapped in cotton wool.

We have an Orwellian 'shadow government' and your liberty is at risk | Richard 
Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/we-have-an-orwellian-shadow-government-and-your-liberty-is-at-risk>
Certainly the media in Australia is up in arms about the ballooning number of 
suppression, no-publication and internet takedown orders that are liberally 
handed out by the courts.

On the figures available from the states and territories that record this 
information, suppression orders have increased 46% between 2011 and 2015, from 
593 to 865.

Media lawyers Robert Todd, who advises News Corp publications, and Peter 
Bartlett, who acts for the Age, have both questioned the necessity of many of 
these orders, which are liberally handed out without being accompanied by 
adequate reasons.

One of the longest, most important criminal trials in NSW criminal history is 
currently under way and cannot be reported because of a series of complex 
suppression orders. As Todd says, open justice is not just for the commercial 
benefit of the media, it is also for the public benefit.

Increasingly the courts are conducting their work in private and this is 
happening in an age when so much more information is open and available. It 
shows that the judiciary doesn’t really trust the jury system unless it is 
tightly corralled.

Where’s Jeremy Bentham when you need him? 
 