
The well-worn refrain about the Australian republic is that it is off limits 
until Her Majesty the Queen shuffles off the mortal coil. She is such a 
respected monarch that it would be offensive to get out from under her skirts 
while there are still freshly laundered petticoats to comfort us. Apart from 
that she is, apparently, such a constitutional adornment that it would be 
impossible to carry a referendum to change the head of state while she was 
still on the throne.

Malcolm Turnbull was at it again 
<https://www.pm.gov.au/media/2016-12-17/address-australian-republican-movements-25th-anniversary-dinner>
 just before Christmas at the dinner in Sydney tomark the 25th anniversary of 
the founding of the Australian Republican Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/18/malcolm-turnbull-urges-plebiscite-on-republic-but-opposes-direct-election-model>
, now subtly rebadged as the Australian Republic Movement:

The vast majority of Australians have known no other head of state than the 
Queen. She is so admired and respected that few of us can say – whether 
monarchists or republicans – that we are not Elizabethans.

I do not believe Australians would welcome, let alone support, another 
republic referendum during her reign. And as you know I have held this view for 
some time.

It might then be just as cogently argued that the Prince of Wales has waited 
so long to be crowned that it would be impolite for us to decamp the moment the 
poor fellow got the job.

Malcolm Turnbull urges plebiscite on republic but opposes direct election model
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/18/malcolm-turnbull-urges-plebiscite-on-republic-but-opposes-direct-election-model>
Then there’s Wills and Kate and adorable little George and Charlotte – they 
are all so lovely and popular that it could not possibly be in our hearts to 
constitutionally disown them.

Yet this notion that the royal line is some benign, bedazzling outfit that 
binds our polity in certainty, charisma and continuance needs to be addressed 
and a few unpleasant truths remembered.

One certainty is that the main job of the House of Windsor is to keep 
themselves in business, to protect their jobs, station and privileges – and 
that requires a ruthless determination.

We may be sentimental about the monarchy, but “the firm”, as the royal family 
is popularly known, itself is utterly unsentimental (this is not to be confused 
with “the firm”, a criminal gang operated by the Kray brothers).

A good example of that ruthless self-interest was the decision by the reigning 
dullard King George V to oppose his cousin Tsar Nicholas II of Russia’s plea, 
after his abdication in 1917, to be allowed asylum in Britain.

The request had been supported by Lloyd George’s government but the monarch 
was opposed, believing it might inspire socialist unrest in the country and be 
a threat to his line of succession. The result was that Nicholas and his entire 
family were imprisoned and executed in 1918 by the Bolsheviks.

Off with their heads – the firm comes first, first cousins come nowhere. 

The pitiless determination to keep business ticking over could also be seen in 
the abdication of Kind Edward VIII after he married Wallis Simpson – keeping 
him at a safe distance out of the country so that his love affair didn’t 
besmirch the royals’ brand of self-basted rectitude.

Poor Princess Margaret didn’t marry the divorced man she loved 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-11-17/the-true-story-of-princess-margarets-forbidden-love-for-peter-townsend>
 because she would have been required to surrender her royal titles and quite 
of bit of cash – at least that’s the conventional explanation.

The blaze of glory that keeps Australians in thrall to royal people is a 
curious thing. After all, most of them are a pretty uninspiring lot – 
interested in horses, a bit of shooting and breeding more royals. You’d want to 
stick forks in your eyes before being stranded on a desert island with Prince 
Andrew or Prince Edward. The only one who seems engaging is Charles, with his 
love of gardens, trees, organic vegetables and biscuits, his war against modern 
architecture and an ability to turn out adecent Christmas message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/prince-charles-christmas-day-message-today-future-monarch>
.

The Netflix series The Crown is a drama, not a documentary – nonetheless it 
doesn’t stray too far from the truth. There was a marvellous scene when a 
scratchy and unhappy Prince Philip, played by Matt Smith, is being outfitted in 
another ridiculous military uniform before being dispatched on a royal tour of 
the Commonwealth in 1954. The prince says:

Nobody wants to face it or deal with it, so they send us out on the 
Commonwealth roadshow. If the costumes are grand enough, if the tiaras sparkle 
enough, if the titles are preposterous enough, the mythology incomprehensible 
enough, then we’ll still be fine.

And like a bunch of easily hoodwinked suckers, sufficient numbers of us do 
swallow it. Maybe, we haven’t come all that far since the time monarchs 
believed they were chosen by God and everyone had to walk backwards as they 
they walked forward.

In truth, the House of Windsor might need us more that we need them. If 
Australia became a republic, then Canada and New Zealand would be at risk also 
of peeling off.

What’s left to reign over: Jamaica, Barbados, the Bahamas, Grenada, Papua New 
Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines, Belize, Antigua and Barbuda, and Saint Kitts and Nevis.

Then the UK may find that Scotland has left the union and things could unravel 
quickly. What the royals need is stability. Once one jewel is dislodged the 
entire tiara would lose a lot of its sparkle.

The reasons in favour of an Australian republic are well-rehearsed – 
essentially we need to grow up and be a serious country and an Australian as 
head of state who is not 17,000km away would help provide us with a truer sense 
of ourselves.

But there is a less-discussed reason why the imperial head of state is 
objectionable, and it has to do with the concept of the divisible crown. The 
divisible crown is an organising principle of imperialism which sees HM the 
Queen as head of state of over 20 dominions, including the states of Australia. 
At its heart this arrangement reduces Australia to being a bit player among 
many far-flung component parts.

There are obvious democratic reasons for Australia to become a republic | Jeff 
Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/29/there-are-obvious-democratic-reasons-for-australia-to-become-a-republic>
Contrary to the fervent belief of monarchists, Australia doesn’t have a 
special relationship with the crown because if that were permitted it would 
bring disquiet elsewhere.

None of which is to say that converting to a republic does not present a range 
of hurdles. Quite apart from the selection model, what happens to issues such 
as the reserve powers in the constitution? Surely reserved monarchial powers 
could be a dangerous thing in the hands of someone who is, as Turnbull put it, 
“a potential alternate centre of political power to the prime minister and the 
parliament”. In fact, a president would be the only directly elected government 
official in Australia.

Constitutional change is glacial, and no more so than on the foundation issue 
and binding principle of who should be the head of state.
 