
The World Anti-Doping Agency’s chief investigator has set his sights on 
exposing systemic doping in countries other than Russia but admits a lack of 
resources means he already has a backlog of cases only two months into his new 
job.

Gunter Younger, who worked with Dick Pound and Prof Richard McLaren on last 
year’sindependent commission report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/09/wada-iaaf-russia-dick-pound-banned>
 that exposed the staggering scale of Russia’s doping before he joined Wada 
full-time in October, told the Guardian he planned to run more big cases in 
future but was already having to pick his battles.

“I fully agree that it can’t be just Russia,” Younger said when asked whether 
there needed to be further independent commissions into countries such as 
Kenya, Ethiopia and Turkey. “There are other countries and it is only fair to 
address them. Of course as soon as it becomes public it’s harder to find 
evidence, so I will not mention which we will address next. But I can assure 
you we are developing strategies to address these problems.”


Russian boxer and Romanian weightlifter stripped of Rio 2016 medals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/russian-boxer-romanian-weightlifter-stripped-rio-2016-olympic-medals>
Younger, who was speaking before McLaren’s highly anticipated second report 
into doping in sport, which will be published on Friday, said he had 
deliberately avoided finding out the contents of the report. However, he 
believes that his former colleague “would not have called a press conference in 
London unless he had something significant to say”.

McLaren’s report is expected to add far greater detail to his first excoriating
report in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/18/wada-report-russia-sochi-winter-olympics>
, which accused Russia’s government, security services and sporting authorities 
of colluding to hide widespread doping across “a vast majority” of winter and 
summer sports. And they might not be the only targets, with the Canadian law 
professor also said to be examining the failings of the global anti-doping 
system.

However Younger, in his new role as Wada’s director of intelligence and 
investigations, is determined to show that his beefed up yet still small 
department, which has six investigators and greater powers to respond to 
whistleblowers under the 2015Wada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> 
code, can make a significant difference in the fight against doping.

“I think it is perhaps the right step to start with a small group, because we 
have to prove the investigations are a very important tool for the future of 
the fight against doping, but I’m 100% sure we will succeed and then people 
will invest more,” he said. “On the other side I know the budget is very low 
for Wada. After two months I have a backlog of information that I would like to 
follow up but, due to lack of resources, it’s hard so I need to prioritise. Of 
course, if we get more money, we will do more. We will run more big cases. For 
the Russian case, for example, it took me six months and we were sometimes 10 
people working on it.”

But Younger has rejected recent criticism from the German journalist Hajo 
Seppelt that Wada did nothing to deal with corruption inside athletics’ 
governing body, theIAAF <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/iaaf> – pointing out 
that Wada’s independent commission handed material to the French police because 
they would be better at investigating it.

“I have a very good relationship with Hajo but saying Wada did nothing is 
wrong because we gave all the evidence to the French authorities, who later 
arrested the former president Lamine Diack and his lawyer Habib Cissé,” he 
said. “I realised during the independent commission investigation that, if I 
approached Cissé, he would know we were after him and he would destroy 
everything. This is why we handed everything to the law enforcement and gave 
them our opinion about what should be done.”

One of Younger’s plans is to develop a network of global whistleblowers but he 
says he will do his utmost to avoid cases such as that of the Russian Yuliya 
Stepanova who has admitted she fears for her life after exposing doping in her 
country. “I was a police investigator for many years so I would always ask 
whistleblowers: ‘Can I use the information you have given me?’ If they said no, 
I would find another way of getting it. When I investigated Russia I had 
whistleblowers helping me. I’m not saying they were Russian or not but they are 
not known, they are not in public and they love their life like it was before.”

But could he really have protected Stepanova and her husband? “I had the 
pleasure to speak many, many hours with them and I will know Hajo will not love 
what I am going to say but I would never have put them out in public. Because 
as soon as they are public, how can you protect them? It is not possible. Their 
biggest chance was to keep them confidential.”

Having previously been head of Interpol’s drugs unit and a cybercrime division 
in Germany, Younger is used to tough challenges. And he is realistic but 
hopeful about what lies ahead.

“What I know for sure with is that with six people we will not able to follow 
up all cases,” he says. ”I hope my team will be pivotal in coordinating action 
with our partners at national anti-doping agencies, international federations 
and law enforcement. But we need to combine all our strength in order to really 
fight against doping. It can’t only be done by one organisation – it has to be 
done by all organisations together.”

Wada pushes for power to suspend non-compliant countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/wada-ioc-rio-olympics-drugs-in-sport>
• This article was amended on 9 December 2016. An earlier version said 
“coruscating” where “excoriating” was meant.
 