
With headlines proclaiming double-digit rises in house prices and predicting 
more to come, and estate agents ramping up interest with open days and sealed 
bids, it is little wonder some would-be buyers are panicking. Agents have 
reported properties attracting hundreds of viewings and tens of bids, and not 
just in London – homes in Cambridge, for example, are regularly going for 
£50,000 more than the asking price.

So, to paraphrase Kipling: how can you keep your head when all the buyers 
about you are losing theirs? Here are 10 things to consider before you rush to 
buy:

Your future plans


Before you buy, it's vital to work out how long you think you'll be able to 
live in the property. There's no point trying to buy a studio flat if you think 
in a couple of years time you might want to start a family. Similarly, if your 
job or your financial circumstances are in any way unstable, ask yourself 
whether now is a good time to tie yourself to a location and the monthly 
commitment of a mortgage. If you buy the wrong place now not only could you 
quickly encounter the expense of moving again, if property prices fall you 
might find yourself forced to sell at a loss.

What happens if interest rates rise?


Interest rates have sat at a historic low for six years , but the general 
consensus is they will start to rise in spring 2015. As of mid-April, lenders 
will be stress testing mortgage applicants to check that they would still be 
able to afford their mortgage repayments if rates went up, but you too should 
consider the impact of a bigger monthly outlay. If rates go up, will repaying 
your mortgage mean you can't afford any of the other things you like to do?

"If a relatively modest increase in interest rates would put your monthly 
budget under pressure then you should reduce the amount you are looking to 
borrow. At the very least, consider a fixed rate, perhaps over the medium 
term," says David Hollingsworth from broker London & Country. Borrowing less 
will also allow you to access more competitive mortgages because your deposit 
will make up a bigger proportion of the purchase price.

The implications of your bid on your finances


Before you overstretch yourself to place the winning bid on a property – 
especially one at a high loan-to-value – it is vital to first assess the 
long-term impact of the sacrifices you will have to make. Are you truly ready 
for the commitment of such a large mortgage? What if house prices fall and you 
end up in negative equity? You will be stuck there, unable to sell? Will you 
regret your decision to buy in those circumstances?

"In my view, it's much better to move to a cheaper, less popular area, than 
buy a property that means you can't afford to go out or you risk losing your 
home," says Kate Faulkner, MD of Propertychecklists.co.uk. "Make sure you have 
a back-up plan if prices fall. Check whether you could be prevented from 
letting the property by the lease or the terms of your mortgage, and that all 
your costs can be covered by the rent minus any tax you may have to pay."
 Are you prepared for extra expenses as a home owner? Photograph: Ian 
Hodgson/Reuters 
The hassle of homeownership


Owning your own home might seem like a dream come true, but if the boiler 
breaks down, the roof starts leaking or your new neighbours party every night 
till 3am, you may not find it quite so desirable. As well as the inevitable 
repair bills, there's the fact it is not as easy to move if you decide you are 
not happy there.

Would a long-term tenancy make you feel as secure?


Renting for the long term tends to be viewed as much more attractive elsewhere 
in Europe, where tenants have greater rights. But it's a mistake to assume that 
in the UK you cannot rent if all you want is security of tenure and a home that 
you can make your own.

"There are thousands of landlords out there who are interested in the security 
and stability of a long-term tenancy, and if you find one, you can often agree 
that you can decorate the property and make it feel like your home," says Glenn 
Nickols from online tenant forumThe Tenants' Voice 
<http://www.thetenantsvoice.co.uk/>. It may even be possible to negotiate a 
cheaper rent if you are happy to rent the property long-term.

Widening your search area


House prices in London are rising up to three times faster than house prices 
in northern regions of the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/02/britains-housing-gap-widens-london-prices-surge-business-live>
, according to Nationwide. Could you include cheaper parts of the UK in your 
search? Even if you have to work in London, it's worth considering whether you 
could afford to buy your dream home elsewhere and rent weekday lodgings near 
your office.Monday to Friday room rentals in central London 
<http://www.spareroom.co.uk/flatshare/index.cgi?&search_id=167593514&offset=0&sort_by=price_low_to_high>
 (zone 1) start at just £400 a month and you can keep long-distance commuting 
costs low if you book train tickets in advance.

Cutting out the middlemen


The easiest way to beat the competition in a booming market is to avoid it 
completely. Try to find properties in your desired area that are not on the 
market yet. For example, look at properties that are being offered to let and 
consider making an offer. Alternatively, Faulkner advises "putting notes 
through doors so sellers can contact you directly". You could also put a notice 
in local shop windows, papers and online forums as well as on social media. 
Search on Twitter for your desired area and ask locals to retweet a message 
stating what you are looking to buy.

What is happening to prices in your chosen neighbourhood?


"Research is key to keeping calm when entering the fraught house-hunting 
process," says Nick Mead from The Buying Solution. "See as much property in 
your particular price bracket as possible and try to understand the prices 
achieved for comparable properties."

Once you have figured out which postcodes you are interested in, set up email 
alerts on Zoopla and Rightmove, and create a spreadsheet that tracks how 
quickly these properties are selling and, ideally, the price they are achieving 
relative to the asking price. Why are some properties and roads less popular 
than others and are you willing to compromise when others aren't?
 Photograph: Photodisc/Getty Images 
Is your mortgage lined up?


To get ahead of the pack in a booming market, you need to have your mortgage 
in place, advises Nicholas Ayre, MD of home-buying agency Home Fusion. That 
way, when you come to make an offer, you'll be able to demonstrate that you can 
move quickly and are a serious buyer. Typically, a mortgage agreement in 
principle lasts for six months and isn't specific to any particular property. 
However, don't panic and assume you have to stick with this deal if your bid is 
accepted. "It may be that another lender will have the better rates at this 
point," says Hollingworth. He also warns against taking out a large number of 
agreements in principle in a bid to head off rate rises. "This can ultimately 
damage your credit score, as each agreement leaves a footprint on your credit 
file."

Estate agents are there to get as much as possible for the seller


Obvious, but always worth remembering if you're getting caught up in a frenzy 
of viewings. "We are increasingly seeing estate agents using open houses as a 
tool to try and achieve the highest possible prices for their clients," says 
Caspar Harvard Walls from buying agency Black Brick. "The advertised price for 
the property is often artificially low to encourage as many buyers to view as 
possible, thereby creating a sense of high demand and multiple bids above the 
guide price."

Some estate agents have even started charging buyers who make successful 
sealed bids a "finder's fee" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/feb/10/house-buyers-beware-estate-agents-double-charge>
, usually 2-2.5% of the cost of the property. "Other agents try to use the 
current state of the market to blackmail applicants into seeing their in-house 
mortgage adviser, who in many cases only uses a panel of lenders rather than 
being independent," says Ray Boulger from brokers John Charcol. It is against 
the law for agents to pressure you to accept the in-house broker, but try to 
stay calm and polite, even if you think the agent is trying to rip you off. 
"The more the agent likes you, the more support you'll get when a choice has to 
be made," says Mead.
 