
Top tips for stepping away from your smartphone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/david-lloyd-clubs/2016/oct/27/top-tips-for-stepping-away-from-your-smartphone>
 * Getting your family in the mood starts with yourself: follow up your usual 
gym session with a swim to both relax and work on that all-over body tone. A 
quick backstroke in a heated outdoor pool lets you enjoy some fresh air, while 
gazing up at the (albeit probably grey) sky. 
 * Travel broadens your kids’ horizons: designate one British heritage site, 
gallery or garden to visit every other weekend throughout the winter. It’ll 
also keep them away from their phones. 
 * Busy kids are happy kids: enrol them on a course such as tennis, gymnastics 
or swimming to get them active – though you might find yourself defeated in 
family doubles next year … 
 * Choose one day a week to visit a different continent with your cooking, 
reviving the spices, tastes and techniques you’ve enjoyed on previous holidays. 
Eventually, the kids will stop begging for fish fingers - we guarantee it. 
 * When it comes to shaking up your family, a good night’s sleep is half the 
battle. Build up those good circadian rhythms with a seasonal adjustment 
disorder lamp, which wakes you up steadily with a sunrise glow. 
 * Good news for stressed out parents: now’s the time to go for a spa 
treatment, or soak up the warmth of a sauna, steam room or hot tub. Your family 
instinctively take their cues from you: coming home chilled-out and happy will 
spread the vibe around. 
 * Our sense of smell is intimately connected to mood and energy levels, so 
wake up the clan with a well-chosen candle or oil burner. Look for rosemary, 
lavender and jasmine fragrances that stir the senses. 
 * Let’s face it – you’re probably reading this on a smartphone: give your 
bunch a much-needed dose of zen by setting all family mobiles to “airplane” at 
least an hour before bed and at mealtimes, to keep them more engaged with 
family moments. 
 * Excite the kids with a few spontaneous activities: rainy-day board games, 
hide and seek, frisbee or a rounders match will give that sense of play that 
makes holidays so special, as well as staying healthy as a family. 
 * Bring your kids in on the planning for next year’s holidays – ask them for 
a list of activities they’d love to do, then vote for the winners. Of course, 
at the end of the day, you can just choose your favourite…  