
Swimming

Forever blowing bubbles
“The most important skill when swimming freestyle is to be able to exhale 
freely into the water … by blowing bubbles,” says former Great Britain swimmer 
Nuala Muir-Cochrane, now a David Lloyd Clubs swimming participation manager, 
based in Camden. “Most people instinctively hold their breath when their face 
is in the water, but being able to blow bubbles will improve the number of 
lengths you can swim because you won’t be starved of oxygen.”

Master the art of floating and trust the water
“Initially, most people think they have to frantically move everything in the 
water at once, otherwise they will sink,” says Nuala Muir-Cochrane. “Actually, 
if you relax and let the water support you, it will help you. You have to trust 
it to hold you. Practice simply floating on your front or on your back on the 
surface of the water to master this art, which will make each stroke more 
efficient.”

Find your best fit at David Lloyd Clubs – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/david-lloyd-clubs/gallery/2016/sep/21/find-your-best-fit-at-david-lloyd-clubs-in-pictures>
Short numbers of lengths keeps your technique sweet
“If you have a target of, say, 20 lengths to swim in one session, it is more 
beneficial to have a break every two lengths or so, rather than just trying to 
plough on, becoming gradually slower and more rugged in terms of technique,” 
recommends Muir-Cochrane. “You improve your strength by stopping regularly, and 
won’t end up being so exhausted that your stroke breaks down. Bad habits creep 
in with fatigue.”

Little and often rule for swimmers
“Two or three short swims a week will develop your technique so much quicker 
than just one long one,” says Muir-Cochrane. “That regularity will improve 
endurance, and your ‘feel’ of the water, meaning you will understand how to 
float better.”

Divide and conquer for a better swimming technique
“Good, efficient swimming is created by a balance of effort,” suggests 
Muir-Cochrane. “Most pools have floats you can use to build on either your arm 
or leg technique by isolating one half of your body. For instance, occasionally 
working only your arms while using a ‘pull buoy’ between your straight legs 
will help your front crawl no end.”

Tennis

Power comes last for top tennis technique
“To improve at tennis, develop your consistency, build up your accuracy, and 
the final thing to add is your power,” says David Lloyd Clubs tennis 
participation manager Martin Fuller. “A lot of people will hit the ball too 
hard, and the accuracy and consistency never follows, because so many errors 
are being made.”

Swing then you’re winning
“On forehand and backhand shots, make sure you are hitting the ball out to the 
side of your body, so you have space to swing,” continues tennis expert Fuller. 
“Don’t become cramped with your swing, as you will lose power and accuracy, and 
give your opponent the advantage. To do that, however, you have to be nimble 
and ready to react.”

The early bird catches the ball better
“Whether you are returning a serve or playing a mid-rally shot, draw your 
tennis racquet back for a hit good and early,” says Fuller. “That way you give 
yourself the most time to return the ball on your terms and won’t feel rushed. 
Being prepared for the shot your opponent plays is at least as important as 
your technique playing the shot.”

Forward thinking servers reap rewards
“If you work on your serve it can soon become your most potent weapon; 
neglecting it, though, can mean it is your biggest weakness,” says Fuller. 
“With the throw, toss the ball slightly in front of you. It should be easy and 
comfortable to hit, so you strike it while stretching, at full-racquet length. 
Beginners tend to throw the ball in all different directions and hit the ball 
regardless. Having control, and forward momentum, is crucial for a decent 
service – and keep your eyes on the ball. Further, you can practice on your own 
without the need for a partner, so you have no excuse to not better your ace 
count.”

Overplaying your drop shot is a poor ploy
“When you play a drop shot it so often gives an attacking advantage to your 
opponent,” warns Fuller. “If you do play it, choose the right time, when your 
rival is out of position, or on the back foot, and use a little bit of 
backspin, so it dies on impact, or near enough.”

Strength and fitness training

Squat your way to fitness
“So many people use poor form for certain exercises in the gym, and they can 
do more harm that good,” says Elaine Denton, group health and fitness support 
manager at David Lloyd Clubs. “The squat, which is so good as it works most leg 
muscles and should be a go-to exercise, helps functionality tremendously, and 
is worth the time it takes to master. With the weight evenly balanced across 
your shoulders, you feet should be wider than your hips, but in a stance which 
is comfortable, and your toes should be pointed out slightly. Keep your chest 
lifted when squatting, and push the hips back and down, making such you don’t 
go further than your knees.

Bench press to impress
“For all-round fitness, the bench press – lying on a bench and raising a 
weight with both arms – is a superb exercise,” suggests Denton. “Have your feet 
planted wider than your shoulders. Keep the bar in line with the centre of your 
chest and never go lower than your body.”

Eat within two hours of a workout – and shortly afterwards
“Nutrition can really affect performance, so really think about what you eat 
both before and after your workouts to gain the most benefits,” says Denton. 
“Studies show that you should eat within between one to two hours before your 
training session, so you are not running on empty. And if you don’t take on 
board some protein following your workout then it will hamper your development, 
because the muscles won’t recover as quickly as they would with proper, careful 
nutrition.”

Keeping well hydrated is vital for maximum workout gains
“We should be aiming for a minimum of three litres of water a day to maintain 
hydration,” says Denton. “Activity performance can suffer if you are 
dehydrated, which can lead you to feeling unsuccessful or taking longer to 
achieve your goals – both of which are really demotivating.”

Early morning workouts don’t work for everyone
“To get the most out of your workout you need good hydration, decent nutrition 
and quality – rather than quantity of – sleep, and play around with the time 
you train,” adds Denton. “It has to be right for you. If you are not a morning 
person, and don’t sleep well, don’t force yourself to work out, because you 
will basically give up.”

Put these tips to the test at a David Lloyd Club near you with a three month 
membership 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/trackclk/N178802.133705GUARDIAN.CO.UK/B10366666.139477975;dc_trk_aid=311730881;dc_trk_cid=75125694;dc_lat=;dc_rdid=;tag_for_child_directed_treatment=>
*

*Terms and conditions apply
 