
A 250-year-old census has revealed St Kilda islanders ate more than 1,600 
seabirds every day.

The document is the earliest recorded list of the archipelago’s population and 
was discovered by archivists among a hoard of clan papers.

The census lists 90 people living on the main island of Hirta on 15 June 1764 
– 38 males and 52 females, including 19 families and nine individuals.

Further light is shed on the islanders’ diet, with each resident said to eat 
“36 wild fouls eggs and 18 fouls” daily – an island-wide total of 3,240 eggs 
and 1,620 birds every day.

The 1764 census also includes the ancestors of the final five families to be 
evacuated from the archipelago, which lies 41 miles (66km) west of Benbecula, 
in 1930 – the MacQueens, Fergusons, Gillies, MacDonalds and MacKinnons.

Until now, the oldest known record of the population dated from 1822.

As the later document includes ages, it is now possible to track five 
residents of St Kilda who appeared on both censuses, 52 years apart.

The census was discovered among the papers of Clan Maclachlan during 
cataloguing by the National Register of Archives for Scotland (NRAS), the 
branch of the National Records ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> which holds historical papers held in 
private hands.

Alison Rosie, the NRAS registrar, said: “This document sheds new light on the 
history of St Kilda and the families who lived there and gives us an insight 
into their lives more than 250 years ago.

“Through it we can trace individuals back 50 years earlier than the next 
surviving census, and many of the people listed were the ancestors of the 
families who left the island in 1930.”

Donald Maclauchlan, of Clan Maclachlan, said: “The document was found as part 
of a hoard of papers – around 13 large boxes. When I heard from Charlie 
Maclachlan of Maclachlan the younger that they had been found, I asked to see 
some of them and the first document I pulled out dated from 1590. I realised 
the time had come to call in the professionals.”


He said an NRAS team took a year and a half to catalogue the papers, including 
the St Kilda census.

The archipelago is the largest seabird colony in the north-east Atlantic with 
600,000 nesting birds each year.

But the National Trust for Scotland (NTS), which owns the islands, recently 
warned that after a century of growth bird populations are falling rapidly.

An NTS spokesman said: “It’s very familiar that seabirds were part of the 
staple diet of the islanders and oil products and feathers from seabirds were a 
major part of the islands’ economy.

“This new research underlines our previous knowledge of the people of St 
Kilda.”
 