
An increasing number of patients are having to endure long waits for 
operations, according to a study that provides the latest evidence of the NHS’s 
failure to meet waiting time targets because hospitals are so busy.


Analysis by the Royal College of Surgeons found that over the past year an 
average of 193,406 people a month did not get surgery within 18 weeks of being 
referred.

The figure compares with 139,240 the previous year and 105,427 four years ago, 
and is the NHS’s worst performance by this measure since 2008. It covers 
patients waiting for operations including for broken limbs, traumatic injuries, 
brain conditions and eye problems.

NHS chief Simon Stevens refuses to buckle under No 10 pressure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/12/nhs-england-simon-stevens-refuses-to-buckle-theresa-may>
Ian Eardley, the college’s vice-president, said: “We are now struggling to 
meet the standards and timeliness of care that the public rightly expect. 
Waiting longer creates prolonged pain, uncertainty and immobility for patients 
and is stressful for them and their families, especially those who may be very 
ill or in significant pain.

“Many of these patients are older and in the most serious cases, such as heart 
or cancer surgery, waiting longer could have a big effect on the quality of 
someone’s life and their eventual recovery from surgery.”

He said the sharp rise in the number of patients waiting longer than 18 weeks 
suggested theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> had passed a tipping 
point.

In October 2016, for example, patients who had been on the waiting list for 
more than 18 weeks included 52,816 who needed trauma and orthopaedic surgery, 
33,547 classified under general surgery, and 24,578 who needed a procedure to 
improve their eyesight.


The increases were most pronounced in ear, nose and throat surgery, up 124% 
since 2012-13, to 23,454 a month in 2015-16, and neurosurgery, up 109%, to 
5,004.

The number of women who did not receive gynaecological surgery within the 
target time rose by 102% in the same period, to 14,795 a month..

Some NHS hospital trusts are leaving notably large proportions of patients 
waiting longer than 18 weeks for certain forms of surgery. For example, of the 
717 patients who were waiting for neurosurgery at PlymouthHospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> NHS trust last October, 59% had 
been waiting longer than 18 weeks.

The same applied to 48% of the 1,359 people awaiting oral surgery at Walsall 
Healthcare NHS trust and 44% of the 655 patients awaiting oral surgery at the 
University of South Manchester NHS foundation trust.

The shadow health secretary, Jon Ashworth, said he hoped hospitals’ poor 
performance against surgery waiting time standards would not prompt the 
government to soften the targets.

“We already know ministers want to water down the A&E target. Given this more 
widespread deterioration in waiting times, I hope this won’t lead to ministers 
abandoning others standards too,” he said.

Eardley said the delays in accessing surgery were likely to get worse given 
the intense pressure on hospitals and widespread bed shortages. “There is no 
sign of waiting times reducing any time soon and they are very likely to have 
become worse this winter. The key question is: how much longer will patients 
have to wait before the government steps in to relieve the pressure?”

On Friday, Theresa May seemed to edge closer to acknowledging the seriousness 
of the crisis confronting the NHS. “I recognise, and we have acknowledged, that 
the NHS is under pressure,” she said at a Downing Street press conference. She 
stressed the NHS had put £400m into preparations for coping with winter 
pressures.

She had said on Thursday there had been a “small number” of incidents of 
unacceptable practice in NHS trusts, and the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, 
said there were problems in “one or two” areas.

Earlier on Friday, NHS England revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/13/nhs-crisis-hospitals-issue-alert-first-week-january>
 that 65 out of its 152 acute trusts had had to declare an alert during the 
first week of January.
 