
If you’re considering studying law, but you’re not sure what career to pursue 
afterwards, law graduate Alicia Murphy’s story might well inspire you. With a 
job focusing on financial crime and anti-money laundering efforts, Alicia has 
used the transferable skills gained from her degree from The University of Law 
to embark on a fascinating career journey. The consultant with Exiger, a global 
regulatory and financial crime, risk and compliance company, explains more 
about her career, her skillset and how studying law can open the door to all 
kinds of jobs.

What made you choose to do a law degree?

I had always planned on studying law and initially intended to become a 
criminal barrister. During my time at The University of Law there were 
significant legal aid cuts which made me re-evaluate my choices. I eventually 
decided on a career in consultancy.

What has your law degree given you in terms of transferable skills?

During my studies I developed analytical skills which have benefited me 
greatly in my work. I am able to read legislation and interpret it, which is 
useful in the work I do. My course was very practical and often involved 
interviewing or speaking in front of audiences, which helped me to develop my 
confidence. I also learned how to read and interpret various types of documents.

Related: 60 Seconds with Ollie Persey, organiser of RebLaw UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/partner-zone-university-of-law/2016/dec/02/60-seconds-with-ollie-persey-organiser-of-reblaw-uk>

What makes law such a useful and relevant degree?

Having a law degree shows future employers that you are capable, hardworking 
and dedicated. Law graduates have a highly sought after skillset that is 
attractive to all kinds of employers.

What does your job involve?

My work predominately focuses on assessing the anti-money laundering and 
sanction controls of financial institutions, and includes working on 
monitorships imposed by government agencies in the UK, the US and elsewhere.

You work for US and UK jurisdictions. How did your degree prepare you for 
working with two sets of legislation?

My degree required me to read and interpret a range of legislation, guidance 
and case law. In my job I am able to apply this skill when advising clients by 
searching for relevant legislation and drawing on practical examples from my 
work.

What do you most enjoy about your job?

 I love the variety and flexibility. I am able to work on a range of projects, 
meaning that almost every day is different.

What’s your advice to anyone considering applying for an undergrad law degree?

A law degree is a wise decision and generally a safe bet. It makes you stand 
out compared to other candidates and in that sense it puts you ahead of the 
game.
 