
Ollie Persey recently organised student law conference RebLaw UK 
<http://study.law.ac.uk/RebLaw>. It’s the British version of the hugely popular 
RebLaw <http://reblaw.yale.edu/>, which takes place at Yale Law School, US. 
Both events aim to build a community of activists fighting for justice and 
equality in legal practice and education.

Ollie studies the Bar Professional Training Course 
<http://www.law.ac.uk/postgraduate/bptc/> at The University of Law 
<http://www.law.ac.uk>, which hosted RebLaw UK.

RebLaw originated in the US . What were the main differences between the US 
and UK versions?

RebLaw US is a two-day event so participants have the time to address more 
issues than on our one day. Having said that, this was our guinea pig year, so 
who knows – perhaps we could do a whole weekend next time …

What specific UK issues were highlighted at RebLaw UK?

The Investigatory Powers Bill AKA Snooper’s Charter is an astonishingly 
invasive piece of legislation and I’m not sure RebLaw US would ever have to 
consider anything like it. The constitutional protections for privacy in the US 
are stronger than they are here, meaning it would never see the light of day. 
Well, the surveillance activities outlined in the Snooper’s Charter happened 
illegally for years in the US but it would never be put on the statute book - 
unlike in the UK.

How did you select the speakers for RebLaw UK?

I came up with a dream list of people: leading movers and shakers in various 
areas of law, people at non-governmental organisations (NGOs) at the forefront 
of work in an area, or barristers I knew from before – and most said yes. Sarah 
Corbett, my tutor at The University of Law, knows a lot of activist lawyers, 
either because she taught them or they are friends or colleagues of hers, and 
she put me in touch with them. Many of the student panel chairs knew people who 
could be added to their panels. For example, John, who chaired our prisoners’ 
rights panel, was a police station rep before he came to law school, so he had 
a lot of contacts.

The panels at RebLaw UK were chaired by students of The University of Law. How 
did they get on and what will chairing these discussions have done for their 
skills and careers?

The student chairs were brilliant. They had the opportunity to work with 
leading activists and lawyers in their areas of interest. Hopefully some of 
their panellists will turn into useful mentors and even colleagues in the 
future. Some of the students were a little daunted at the start, but they 
received so many positive comments that their confidence has been really 
boosted.

What public interest law cases are you following right now that future lawyers 
should also be following?

The Brexit/Article 50 case is the most high profile public interest law case 
at the moment.

My main area of interest is freedom of information and freedom of expression. 
While it’s not a case, I think we should be very wary about the weakening of 
the Freedom of Information Act. It’s an issue that does not get a lot of 
attention amid Brexit.

Why are you so interested in practising public law?

I’ve always been interested in the relationship between the individual and the 
state. My dad was a farmer who was affected by the foot and mouth disease 
outbreak. He was the lead claimant in a judicial review challenging the 
government’s decision not to hold a public inquiry into the causes of the 
outbreak. He lost in the high court after a long battle, but it instilled in me 
a commitment to practising public law and holding the state to account.

What’s your advice for anyone aiming for a career in public interest law, 
either as a solicitor or as a barrister?

Try and get experience volunteering with a charity, or get involved with a 
campaign group such asJoint Enterprise: Not Guilty by Association 
<http://www.jointenterprise.co/> (JENGbA). Go to talks, lectures and 
conferences and network with people working in the field. Don’t be afraid to 
ask them for guidance on how to get into that area of law.
 