
More than 750,000 families with children are living with severe debt problems, 
according to the charity StepChange, which claims that living on the edge of 
problem debt is now the norm for millions across the UK.


Research for the debt charity found that the recent growth in zero-hours 
contracts, self-employment and other forms of less secure work has left more 
people susceptible to “income shocks” – changes in circumstance that lead to 
sudden falls in income.

The report, Navigating the New Normal, released on Thursday, said 2.6 million 
Britons are now struggling with severe problem debt, down from 2.9 million in 
2013.

However, the number of families with children with severe problem debt has 
risen by 16% since 2013, and now stands at 750,000.

The charity, which helps people in serious financial difficulties, said those 
on low and middle incomes – £15,000 to £25,000 and £25,000 to £35,000 
respectively – are most likely to be in serious debt and an increasing 
proportion of this group are finding themselves in this position.

Ever increasing rents seen in recent years and largely stagnant wages are 
thought to have had a huge impact on those living on insecure incomes.

Researchers found that 67% of people on a zero-hours contract had suffered an 
income shock in the past year. For those who were self-employed or on a 
fixed-term contract the figure was 53% and 59% respectively, whereas for those 
in permanent positions it was lower, at just 33%. Overall, people in insecure 
forms of work are twice as likely to suffer income shocks as those in permanent 
jobs.

Mike O’Connor, chief executive of StepChange, said: “People have always faced 
ups and down in their incomes, but the changing nature of work means that 
income shocks are now a regular feature of more people’s lives.


“These changes may be here to stay and social policies need to reflect the new 
normal. Our social policy is not keeping up with our economic policy.”

He said with real-term wages still only at 2005 levels, households have little 
spare income to help protect themselves from potential income shocks. He has 
called for new mechanisms and safety nets that will ensure a drop in income 
doesn’t precipitate a rapid fall into problem debt.


For too many, he warned, credit is used as part of a coping strategy, which 
often has dangerous consequences. Therise in the payday loans industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/datablog/2014/mar/12/payday-lending-shops-boom-in-uk-the-full-data>
 since 2009 has thrived on the back of the conditions set out in the report.

In 2014, Britain was named as the only country in the G7  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/14/uk-inequality-wealth-credit-suisse>
group of leading economies where financial inequality had increased this 
century. The proportion of the country’s wealth controlled by the richest 10% 
increased to 54.1% in 2014, up from 51.5% in 2000, according to the 2014 Credit 
Suisse global wealth report.
 