
One little boy, a teddy clutched in each hand, is dancing in his seat as a 
group of girls clap him on enthusiastically. Two brothers snuggle under a 
blanket, while several children stroll the aisles. Many are wearing 
noise-reducing ear defenders.

The audience is enjoying the first dedicated autism-friendly performance of 
Wicked, the award-winning West End musical, on Saturday 14 May, and the 
atmosphere in the theatre is almost palpably celebratory and joyful.

Autism heroes: Guardian readers send in their stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/may/24/autism-heroes-guardian-readers-send-in-their-stories>
The show’s producer Michael McCabe is delighted to host the event. “We know 
how important and inspiring live theatre can be for young people and we want to 
share that with everyone,” he says. “We need to provide the right environment 
for all families to be able to share a special experience and treat together.”

After careful preparation with the assistance of the National Autistic Society 
(NAS), the show has been specially adapted to reduce sensory difficulties – 
modifying lighting and sound effects and removing some shock elements – while 
staff and cast have received specialist training, and families are absolutely 
free to move around and make as much noise as they like.

“We want people to relax and enjoy the experience, knowing that no one is 
judging them,” says McCabe. “Wicked is a story about friendship, acceptance and 
doing right, so doing this feels particularly rewarding and humbling.”

Fittingly, there are loud cheers when one of the lead characters, Elphaba, 
finds acceptance in the land of Oz after a lifetime of exclusion, announcing 
happily: “Nobody is pointing, nobody is staring. I’m somewhere I belong.”

Angela and Terry Gallagher are here with daughter Molly, 21, and son Kieran, 
20, who is autistic. “Kieran absolutely loved it,” says Angela after the show. 
“He enjoyed all the special effects and got really involved. An audience 
normally just claps politely but he really joins in. It is very genuine 
feedback!”

Inclusive theatre performances offer a rare opportunity for Kieran to enjoy 
theatre and follow the story. “He would find a pitch black theatre or silent 
audience too stressful and he needs space to walk around,” says Angela.

The audience helped make the occasion special, she adds. “There was a real 
feeling of solidarity – a sense that everyone understood. That made Kieran feel 
freer and the fact that we didn’t have to contain him all the time meant we 
could all relax.”

For Louise Williams, attending the show with her sons James, eight, who is 
autistic, and George, nine, the experience has been a “hugely positive one”.

 “James was very curious about the theatre and the show. He was so excited and 
happy at the start and he loved the effects,” she says. Persuading him to leave 
the house can be very difficult, she adds, so successful family outings provide 
both a much-needed break and an invaluable confidence boost.

As the audience files out after the show, two girls – Hope, nine, and Kiera, 
10 – are singing a song from the show while poring over a programme as they try 
to choose their favourite parts.

The girls met for the first time as they took their seats in the theatre, 
going on to comfort each other through sad or potentially frightening scenes.

This rapport, their mothers agree, has been another element of a wonderful 
experience. It is one Hope is keen to repeat: “Can we come again? I loved it!”

To find out more about autism, the person, and what to do visit 
autism.org.uk/tmi <http://www.autism.org.uk/tmi>
 