
My wife and I flew to Austria for a week’s winter walking in February. We had 
to fly back to the UK on the advice of hospital staff, as my wife’s aunt had 
been taken seriously ill. My wife was her aunt’s official next of kin and 
unofficial carer. She died before we arrived home.

We contacted our travel insurance company, Axa, from Austria and were assured 
that we could make a claim. We sent the form and a medical report from the 
aunt’s GP and Axa informed us by phone that the claim had been approved.

Days later we received another call from Axa, telling us that a mistake had 
been made and the claim was no longer approved because an aunt does not qualify 
as a “close relative”. I wrote to protest and received a further call from Axa, 
advising that an independent underwriter had agreed that, in the circumstances, 
the aunt could be deemed to be a “close relative”.

There was then a further delay before we received a letter from Axa, once 
again disallowing the claim, this time on medical grounds. We appealed and 
heard nothing, in spite of two further reminder letters. I asked for a copy of 
the company’s complaints procedure and was told that my letters had not been 
replied to as Axa “considered the case closed”. That was last month. Since 
then, we have heard nothing. It appears to us we are being ignored.MW, Hexham, 
Northumberland

Insurance <https://www.theguardian.com/money/insurance> companies are 
notorious for wriggling out of claims but few duck and weave as shamelessly as 
this. Axa is disinclined to explain how it plumbed such depths of customer 
service. It merely blames, primly, “some confusion around the circumstances” of 
your claim which led to “a level of communication below Axa’s usual standards”.

Apparently, the call handlers have been hauled in or, rather, in Axa’s words, 
“given the necessary guidance” to ensure your plight is not repeated. Within 
hours of my contacting the press office you were told that your claim would be 
settled in full with the excess waived as a goodwill gesture.

And you’ve finally been sent the complaints procedure with the assurance that 
the global travel complaints manager will handle your case personally. So it 
would be a happy ending, save for the sneaky feeling that if Axa hadn’t run 
scared of a headline, your laments would still echo through emptiness.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 