
A small fraction of the population is likely to account for the majority of 
societal costs, according to new research into the impact of childhood 
disadvantage on later life.

The research – based on New Zealand data but involving an international team – 
also revealed that such “high cost” adults can be predicted when as young as 
three years old from an assessment of their brain health.

The study, which followed around 1,000 children from birth, found that at 38 
years of age just 22% of the group accounted for 81% of its criminal 
convictions, 78% of pharmaceutical prescriptions, and 66% of welfare benefits.


“About 20% of the population is using the lion’s share of a wide array of 
public services and we found that the same people use most of the national 
health service, the criminal courts, insurance claims for disabling injury, 
pharmaceutical prescriptions and social welfare benefits,” said Terrie Moffitt, 
co-author of the research from Duke University, North Carolina.

Why the Tories’ so-called free childcare will punish children and families | 
Neil Leitch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/tories-free-childcare-punish-children-families>
But she cautioned that the results should elicit compassion rather than being 
used to stigmatise individuals.


“Very often when we think of the people who are the greatest burden on society 
we can jump to the conclusion these are lazy layabouts who are happy to live 
off the public purse,” she said. “But in fact what this research suggests is, 
yes, there is a very high cost fragment of society, but these are people who 
weren’t very well prepared as pre-schoolers for making their way into the 
really modern, fast-paced, higher technical, education-dependant job markets.”

Josh Hillman, director of education at the Nuffield Foundation, who was not 
involved in the research, agreed, adding that while the study was based on 
children in New Zealand, the findings are likely to apply in other developed 
countries, including the UK.

“The implications are that we have really underestimated the long-term 
benefits of investment in early years education for disadvantaged children, 
both in terms of the benefits for the children themselves but also in terms of 
the payback for the public purse,” he said.


Writing in the journal Nature Human Behaviour 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/s41562-016-0005>, the team from the US, 
UK and New Zealand, described how they analysed data collected from 1,037 
children born in Dunedin, New Zealand, who took part in what is known as the 
Dunedin Longitudinal Study.

Around 95% of the children were followed up until the age of 38, when data was 
collected from personal interviews and a host of national administrative 
databases, allowing the team the rare chance to explore connections between 
factors in childhood and a host of outcomes in adulthood.

The results reveal that 20% of the group accounted for the majority share for 
each of the different resources or services considered, ranging from criminal 
convictions to welfare benefits and cigarettes smoked.

But they also found that many individuals cropped up as heavy users of 
multiple services. “They did tend to be the same individuals who were showing 
up again and again and again in each of the different government databases,” 
said Moffitt.

Mental illness and poverty: you can't tackle one without the other | Dean 
Burnett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/dec/13/mental-illness-and-poverty-you-cant-tackle-one-without-the-other>
Indeed, analysis of heavy users of three of more services revealed that the 
same 22% of the cohort accounted for 81% of the group’s criminal convictions, 
77% of fatherless children, 36% of injury insurance claims, 78% of 
prescriptions, 66% of welfare benefits and 40% of excess obese kilograms, as 
well as more than half of cigarettes smoked and nights spent in hospital.

It was possible to predict which of the children were most likely to grow up 
to become part of this high cost segment of society from measures of their 
socioeconomic background, experience of maltreatment, IQ and self-control, 
which were taken repeatedly from birth to age 11.


But the team also discovered that a rating of “brain health”, based on the 
combined results from a 45 minute-long assessment of motor skills, 
understanding of language, social behaviour and IQ at three years of age, was 
almost as accurate a predictive tool.

“Given two pre-schoolers about 80% of the time we can accurately predict which 
group they will end up in,” said Avshalom Caspi, another author of the 
research, also from Duke University.

Geoff Lindsay, director of the Centre for Educational Development, Appraisal 
and Research at the University of Warwick said the study adds powerful evidence 
in support of the need for research into early interventions.

Frances Gardner, professor of child and family psychology at the University of 
Oxford, described the new research as both novel and impressive in looking at 
the use of a wide range of services in adulthood. But, like Lindsay, she 
believes further work is needed to determine how to best ensure every child has 
a good start in life.

“On its own this study doesn’t tell us all that much about how to intervene or 
when, but it reassuring that the problems that we are trying to tackle in these 
childhood interventions have even stronger evidence of their long-term 
implications that we thought before,” she said.
 