
Are you a student? Based in the Midlands? In possession of such a crippling 
compulsion to be correct that you’re willing to devote several years of your 
life to it?

Great news, because Birmingham City University has just announced its new 
Centre for Brexit Studies 
<http://www.bcu.ac.uk/news-events/news/birmingham-city-university-to-launch-centre-for-brexit-studies>
. The centre promises to “further enhance understanding of the consequences of 
the UK withdrawing from the European Union”.

With both leave and remain standpoints tailored for, the centre plans to host 
a series of Brexit conferences, workshops and seminars that anyone can attend. 
What might it look like? Here’s our best guess.

Introduction to marketing


This series of seminars will pass on important lessons learned by the leave 
campaign during the run-up to the referendum. Modules to include “What’s the
highest nonsense figure you can claim you’ll give the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/10/brexit-camp-abandons-350-million-pound-nhs-pledge>
?”, “Campaign posters: How racist is too racist?” and “Booing immigrants for 
power and influence”.

Decision making


In a volatile and unpredictable environment, it can be hard to know when the 
time is right to strike. Do you nail your colours to the mast from the outset, 
or pin your professional future on a vote that you’re far from certain to win? 
Perhaps you should just sit back, refuse to participate and then waltz to power 
once your opponents have all blown themselves up. This conference promises to 
explore all the options.

What does Brexit mean? 


This four-hour lecture takes the form of a call and response exercise, where 
the question “What does Brexit mean?” is replied with the cry “Brexit” over and 
over again until everyone is tired and scared and full of regret.

Speed-writing


This workshop will provide you with all the skills necessary to prepare and 
deliver a 5,000-word speech announcing your candidacy for a leadership position 
within hours of it becoming available, without it looking as if you’ve had it 
saved on your hard drive for ages like some sort of berserk Napoleon figure. 
Lecturer: ProfessorMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>.

Crafting the perfect exit


Attendees will learn how to get whatever they want, and how best to 
immediately resign in a panic as soon as they get it, saving them the trouble 
of actually dealing with the almighty headache they’ve created for everyone.

Hobbies for the 48%


A fun workshop offering a number of activities for remain voters who want to 
distract themselves from the dawning realisation that, Christ, those idiots 
actually went and did it. Includes pottery, screaming into a bucket for hours 
on end, and adopting a false smile so painful that you don’t even realise that 
your face is stained with tears.

There will be no formal graduation ceremony on completion of the events, 
because you won and should get over it. Fees are either 500 Great British 
pounds, 300 euros, 100 US dollars or literally just a shiny chocolate bar 
wrapper you found on the side of the road, depending on the state of the 
economy at the time of payment.
 