
Donald Trump has been elected the 45th president of the United States. This 
comes after a controversial campaign that included contentious remarks about 
Muslims: Trump said he wouldban them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
 from entering the US if elected president; he later downgraded this threat by 
saying he would impose“extreme vetting” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/15/donald-trump-immigration-test-isis-islamic-state-foreign-policy>
 on anyone coming from a land he considers suspect. So how do Muslims in the US 
feel now he’s been voted into office?

Wardah Khalid, from Texas: ‘I am worried that negative sentiment will grow 
because of Trump’

People in the Muslim community are really shocked. I was at a party with 
friends earlier and when I left we were in high spirits: Trump was winning, but 
not by much. I never expected this to happen – I thought the American people 
wouldn’t let Trump be president. This is a lot of people’s worst nightmare come 
true.


There are lots of different emotions among Muslims today – students are crying 
because they are worried about their siblings, or they are worried about 
wearing the headscarf in public. Some people are joking (or not joking) about 
leaving the country. People like me think this is a chance to continue the work 
we’ve been doing, being politically active, to make sure such a nasty election 
doesn’t happen again. We will fight so people cannot make statements about 
banning Muslims.

Hate crimes and attacks against Muslims doubled in California last year – 
report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/28/california-muslim-attack-hate-crime-report>
It’s a wake-up call. It shows half of the country either agrees with what 
Trump has said, or that they have just chosen to ignore it and vote for him 
because of their dislike of Hillary Clinton.

Trump has mentioned some scary things, such as surveying mosques, but I am 
more worried about the backlash from his supporters. There hasbeen a growing 
number of attacks and hate-crimes against Muslims in America 
<https://www.rt.com/usa/325922-hate-crimes-muslims-mosques/>. Obviously, these 
attacks are not carried out by Trump but his rhetoric encourages them. I am 
more worried about the negative sentiment that might grow because of Trump than 
what he will actually do. I don’t know though; he is very unpredictable, and 
that in itself is scary.

Reem Subei, from Ohio: ‘Since his campaign started, people have been more 
negative about Muslims’

I was working in the polling station yesterday, because I wanted to do my duty 
to the community and my country. I wanted to represent not just Muslims, but 
all minorities so that when people walked into the polling station they would 
feel empowered. I was in shock when I realised Trump had won. There are 
arguments about whether he can or cannot make things worse for black and Muslim 
Americans, and for women in the US. Many would argue that we have checks in 
place, so no one can disrupt our system, but I worry his presence in the White 
House will empower every racist person on my street who might discriminate 
against me. I cover my hair and wear a hijab and I stand out when I walk down 
the street. Everyone has always been very welcoming to me, and I haven’t 
experienced discrimination, but right now I can feel that world shattering in 
front of my eyes. I took an oath to respect the laws of Ohio but now the state 
has elected someone who doesn’t speak respectfully about me as a woman or as an 
Arab.


I have noticed a change in tone since his campaign started and people are more 
vocal about Muslims being unwelcome. People have been unashamed to make 
derogatory statements about every group because they feel strengthened by him. 
People will now think: if he can say these things and win the presidency of the 
US, why shouldn’t others speak like this?

Farzana Waseeq, from Los Angeles: ‘We are disappointed but it’s pointless to 
just despair’

A feeling of disbelief has settled over the world. Even though it was clear as 
the night went on that the result was heading this way, it still came as a 
blow. While I acknowledge that Trump has won the presidential race it doesn’t 
make it any easier to accept.

I cast my vote for Senator Bernie Sanders in the primaries, but voted for 
Clinton this week in the presidential election.

I am concerned about what this means for the discourse around women in the 
United States. Clinton has repeatedly altered her image over the past three 
decades in order to appeal to the American public and yet it hasn’t worked. 
What does ourfailure to elect arguably the most qualified woman in the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/us-election-result-misogyny-america-panel-woman>
 for the job say about us?


The Muslim community, like the majority of Americans who did not vote for 
Trump, are disappointed with the result, but we feel it is pointless to 
despair. This is just the beginning, especially for those who remain dedicated 
to the country, regardless of who the electorate chose. Optimism and diplomacy 
are difficult at the moment, but we will need those qualities over the next 
four years.

However, it is ridiculous to say that Muslims in the United States should not 
be concerned about our future in this country. Trump has made statements about 
banning Muslims and they should not be taken lightly, especially if he is 
backed by Congress in the years to come.

Tamur Karim, from New York: ‘Who will protect us minorities now?’

I am going through so many different emotions right now. I am shellshocked by 
what has happened. I asked my mother this morning whether we were in some sort 
of nightmare. I haven’t seen such hatefulness and such a negative climate 
towards Muslims since the aftermath of 9/11. It’s just very hard to stomach 
that Trump, a man who has been using hateful rhetoric over and over again, will 
be the leader of the free world.

I thought the election was going well. I was up watching it until 1am. I knew 
Clinton was behind but thought she would pull it back somehow. Waking up this 
morning and finding out Trump had won, I was floored. I couldn’t imagine that 
he would be leader, and that the Republicans had won so many seats in Congress. 
Who will protect us minorities now? I know a lot of politicians have always 
said there are certain lines they won’t cross but it feels like Trump has no 
lines, he’s crossed them all. He has been accepted by the general population 
despite this, which is scary.

Panel: What does the US election result say about misogyny? | Patricia 
Williams and others
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/us-election-result-misogyny-america-panel-woman>
Hate has been elevated to a high platform. I always used to joke that I would 
move to Canada if he were elected, but I never thought Trump would win. I have 
lived in this country for 26 years: I came here at six months old as an Afghan 
refugee. My whole family is here, we don’t want to leave this country.

Anonymous: ‘Trump loves this country and fought hard to win. I am pleased he’s 
the next president’

I’m very satisfied with the result. This really is a historic moment and as a 
Muslim, and part of a Muslim family, I owe allegiance to America first and 
foremost. To see the state it’s been in, with widespread corruption throughout 
the media and the government, is just disheartening.

Not many people thought Trump could win with so little political support, but 
his own father was an immigrant and he built his own business empire against 
great odds. He loves this country and fought hard to win, rising above the 
petty propaganda that has attacked his temperament and character.

We need to focus now on internal issues and improving the quality of life here 
before anywhere else.





 