
Teachers are coaxing a five-year-old out from under a table while the rest of 
the year rehearse for their Christmas concert and the principal seems strangely 
delighted. They are year 6 teachers and he’s a reception child, she explains: 
“When I first came here they would have walked by and left it for his teachers 
to sort out. Now all our staff take collective responsibility for all our 
pupils.”

It’s not the only thing that’s changed. In less than three years Lorraine 
Clarke, a former police detective sergeant now in her first headship, has 
turned around the 500-pupil Ark Blacklands primary academy from Ofsted’s 
“inadequate” to “outstanding” – with the same staff. Only two left when the 
school was put into special measures in February 2014 and none was sacked. 
“It’s very rare that you come across a bad teacher. What you find is a lack of 
training, a failure to keep up with changes and weak leadership,” says Clarke.
 Lorraine Clarke in her days as a policewoman. 
Today the whole school is celebrating leapfrogging from “inadequate” to 
“outstanding” – in every category. A nine-year-old girl on her way to the 
playground flings her arms around the headteacher in a hug of congratulations 
and there are smiles everywhere. Only 11 schools in England have made the jump 
and the fact that Ark Blacklands is in Hastings, East Sussex, serving a 
disadvantaged part of a coastal town where standards often lag behind the rest 
of the country, adds to its achievement.

The inspectors called the improvement “dramatic” and praised the executive 
principal for establishing “a culture of aspiration and ambition for the pupils 
that cascades throughout the school”. Disadvantaged pupils make especially 
“tremendous” progress, they said in their report, and teaching is outstanding 
because teachers have secure subject knowledge and are reflective.

Blacklands primary school – as it was called before becoming an academy – was 
Clarke’s first headship 12 years after she switched from the police force to 
teaching. She knew the school was under-achieving but it wasn’t until she 
started there that she realised just how much it was in trouble. She alerted 
the local authority, which sent in an external observer who confirmed her fears.

But it was too late. Five weeks after taking up the headship in September 2013 
Ofsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> called. Inspectors put 
the school into special measures saying teachers’ expectations of pupils were 
too low, the teaching was inadequate and pupils’ behaviour was poor. They 
blamed the leadership, management and governance but added that Clarke, the new 
headteacher, had rapidly understood why pupils were not making sufficient 
progress and was beginning extensive reforms.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F156840183&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F156840183>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F156840183&media=>
The school’s governors did not accept blame and handed out “Lorraine Clarke 
must go” leaflets at the school gate (the governing body was disbanded after 
the local authority told them it was they who were accountable). A parent 
launched a Facebook page with comments such as “I will make sure she leaves 
education for good” and “I hope her children are born disabled.”

“If anything nearly broke me it was that. They thought I was some middle-class 
teacher from London who had come in with my newfangled ways and destroyed their 
school in five weeks. In fact, I’m a Hastings girl. I grew up on a council 
estate in a single-parent family and I went to school here. It’s my community, 
but they didn’t want to listen. They refused to give me access to their page to 
respond,” she says.

‘Criminalised’ as a failing school – in the midst of Oxford’s wealthy spires
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/02/failing-school-oxford-property-prices-recruit-teachers>
“In the police you are told that when people insult you and call you pig and 
worse, it’s not you they are attacking but the role. This attack on me as a 
headteacher was very personal. I had become public property, my name was on 
that report.”

Clarke joined the police on the fast-track graduate scheme after studying 
psychology at the University of Plymouth and quickly rose up the ranks. “I 
specialised in child protection and sex offences and was always working with 
people who had had something awful happen to them, or witnessed something 
horrendous. After eight years, in my early 30s, I decided I wanted a different 
career that would allow me to have an impact earlier on,” she says.

After teacher training at Brighton University, Clarke was promoted to middle 
manager of a primary school within two years, then won a British Council 
scholarship to teach in the US for a year. On her return she was promoted to an 
assistant headship at Grovelands community primary in Hailsham, East Sussex, 
and then became a deputy head at Little Common School in Bexhill-on-Sea before 
becoming head in Hastings, where her mother still lives.

So how did she do it? “I told the staff that we were all in this together and 
that I was not shifting responsibility. I ‘owned’ the decisions made by the 
previous leadership and if we were to improve we needed to be honest about 
where things were going wrong, not defensive. The most important thing was to 
improve the teaching in the classroom. We did this by monitoring teachers in a 
supportive way through a daily support package that I call small steps 
training, geared to the individual. If a teacher came to me saying that their 
class wouldn’t pay attention I would watch and give specific advice, such as 
stand still when you are talking to them, stop moving around the classroom, 
lower your voice.” New systems to monitor pupil progress and 
performance-related pay for staff followed and Clarke solved the school’s 
budget deficit by saving tens of thousands of pounds on photocopying and 
printing contracts and cancelling services the school bought in that had no 
demonstrable impact on pupil progress.

Lucy Kellaway plans to lead the way to teaching for career changers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/21/lucy-kellaway-plans-to-lead-the-way-to-teaching-for-career-changers>
She temporarily cancelled lunchtime and after-school clubs and trips to give 
staff more time to concentrate on developing their teaching skills. “Because we 
were in special measures we had to become an academy. When we joined the Ark 
academy network after that first year we really began to motor with its support 
because the staff were hungry for improvement,” she says. In 2013 before Clarke 
arrived, for example, only half the pupils passed the phonics screening test. 
“In my first year we raised this to 72% and then when we joined Ark we were 
trained in phonics literacy and it shot up to 93%.”

For pupils, the biggest excitement was the change in uniform from green 
sweatshirts to smart, teal jumpers, shirts and ties and, for the top two forms, 
blazers. Ashton, 10, loves the uniform: “I feel very proud wearing a tie and 
blazer. It makes me feel smart and older than I am,” he says. The pupils have 
also noticed a big change in the teaching. “Lessons are harder now and a lot 
more interesting,” says Melanya, 10. “We all used to do the same thing and it 
was boring for those who found it easy but now we go on to do harder 
challenges. We get pushed a lot more.”

A month ago, when the Ofsted inspectors privately revealed their finding of 
“outstanding”, it was the executive principal who became emotional with relief. 
Now it’s Melanya with tears in her eyes. “When I was younger I had a dream of 
becoming a physicist but I kept on doubting myself because I used to get some 
not very nice feedback from teachers. Now my teachers have given me the 
confidence to go back to that goal. I’ve got my dream back. I can be anything I 
want to be.”
 