
The ambulance arrived swiftly, and within an hour of suffering a stroke early 
on Monday, 66-year-old Pauline Freeman was on a hospital trolley at the 
Worcestershire Royal hospital.

From then on it went less smoothly. “My wife woke me up at 4.30am and said she 
couldn’t feel her left side,” said her husband, John. “The ambulance was there 
in record time and she was on a trolley at the hospital by 5.30am. And there 
she stayed.”

For 54 hours.


Three patients die at Worcestershire hospital amid NHS winter crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/three-deaths-worcestershire-royal-hospital-nhs-winter-crisis>
“It was horrendous,” he said. “The nurses did all they could but the place was 
in meltdown. It was manic. There were at least 20 people on trolleys. It was 
very difficult to manoeuvre around them. A porter told me they were putting 
some patients in a decontamination room – basically a big shower room – to cram 
in more beds. They ran out of pillows and blankets.”

John, from Worcester, said his wife was close to a doorway and was woken every 
time it opened. At one point she was moved to the plaster room so she could get 
some peace. He said they struggled to get enough for her to eat. “I went and 
got her a sandwich and a flask of tea.”

He said he had written to the hospital and his MP to complain. “They should 
kick the executives out of their offices and put in more beds,” he said. 
Pauline eventually made it to the stroke ward on Wednesday. Her husband said 
recovery would be a long process. “What she has gone through will not help.”

The difficult conditions were echoed by others. One woman who was at the 
hospital on the evening of New Year’s Day said the corridors looked like a war 
zone.

Another, Sharon Shepherd, said it looked as if the hospital was dealing with a 
disaster. She had a six-hour wait overnight on Wednesday after her daughter 
Mollie, 12, injured her foot in a gymnastics session.

“The corridors were lined with patients, with elderly people being treated. 
The place was rammed and ambulances kept coming,” Shepherd said. “The doctors 
and nurses were brilliant but they were rushed off their feet. We counted 10 to 
12 trolleys on one corridor alone. It was horrendous. It was if there had been 
a major incident.”

I'm a junior doctor in the NHS, and I'm terrified for this winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/nhs-crisis-winter-deaths-worcestershire-private-sector>
Shepherd said she would have taken Mollie to the minor injuries unit near her 
home in Tenbury Wells, but it shuts at 9pm. “We had no choice but to go to 
Worcester.”

Other patients and relatives described their experiences on social media. 
Sharon Reeves said when she went to A&E with her son they saw elderly patients 
crying for help on the corridors. Liz Morgan said her mother was in severe pain 
but could not even get from the ambulance into the building because it was so 
busy. “I get the nurses are doing what they can but we need another hospital,” 
she said.

Keith Gormley, 74, has spent many hours waiting in corridors at the 
Worcestershire Royal. At the end of last year, his wife, Jackie, said he had to 
wait for 27 hours to be seen. On Thursday it was a more manageable three hours 
after he had problems with his pacemaker.

 Jackie, 72, a retired social worker, said: “We came in at 8am and had a long 
wait in the corridor to be seen. We were worried it was going to be like the 
last time we were in hospital on 29 November, when we had to wait 27 hours to 
be seen. On that occasion we told the staff about his heart problems but he was 
just left in a corridor.


“Something needs to be done to address the issue because it has been an 
absolute nightmare.”

Worcestershire Acute Hospitals <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> 
NHS trust said the trolleys were not hard metal contraptions but A&E beds on 
wheels, and insisted patients were treated and monitored while on the trolleys, 
not left to wait.

It said the corridors in question were within the enclosed emergency 
department, not general corridors. The level of care was not what it would like 
to provide, it said, but the alternative would be to turn patients away.

 A spokesperson said: “Our focus continues to be on providing safe emergency 
care, however we do recognise that long waits in our A&E departments can cause 
distress and for this we apologise. We would reiterate that A&E patients 
continue to be seen and treated in order of clinical priority.”
 