
For more than half a million Britons, January provides the mother of financial 
hangovers. The darkness of the days is compounded by the need to trawl the 
internet to find a new home for credit card debts swollen by the Christmas 
spending orgy.

For some it is an annual ritual that keeps their share of a £192bn unsecured 
consumer credit mountain ticking over and out of sight. But last week, alarm 
bells started ringing as official figures showed consumers racking up debt at a 
rate not seen since the spending frenzy that preceded the 2008 financial crisis.

“Every month is stressful to be honest but January, being a new year and time 
of reflection, was tough and you’d beat yourself up,” says Alexis Hall, a 
48-year-old PR executive and recovering shopaholic who wrote a book about 
getting in – and out of – £32,000 of debt during the years of lax lending 
before the credit crunch hit. “There was no limit to the amount of credit I was 
getting: I had six or seven cards at the time as well as a loan on top. No one 
was turning me away and I was constantly getting offers through the post and by 
email.”

Related: How to tackle your debts if you overspent this Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/07/tackle-your-debts-if-you-overspent-christmas-credit-cards-overdraft>

The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-credit-cards-borrowing-debt-economic-crash-fears>
 figures made it look like UK consumers were partying like it was 2007 as 
credit card borrowing reached a record £66.7bn in the year to November. The 
Bank said that consumer credit, which means all credit cards and car loans, had 
risen at its fastest rate in 11 years, up 10.8% over the last 12 months period 
to reach £192bn. To put that in context, when Lehman Brothers imploded in 
September 2008 and the banking crash triggered a worldwide recession, the 
figure peaked at £208bn. The average household in the UK now owes a record 
£12,887, before mortgages are taken into account, according to the TUC.

So what does this mean for consumers and where is the country heading?

“The fact credit is growing may not mean armageddon is coming,” says Peter 
Tutton, head of policy at debt charityStepChange <https://www.stepchange.org/>, 
who expects borrowing to revisit the 2008 peak within a “matter of months”. 
“But past experience shows that when credit grows quickly, the result can be 
people standing on a financial cliff edge. A lot of households using credit are 
‘just about managing’ (theJams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2016/nov/20/jam-the-new-government-acronym-just-about-managing-to-make-sense>
), then something happens that turns them into ‘no longer managing’.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Another economic crash is coming. How did this happen? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/feb/04/another-economic-crash-is-coming-how-did-this-happen-video>
So far, so 2008. But are we really falling back into old ways? Loading 
spending on to the never-never thanks to the welter of 0% credit card deals. 
Some of the controversial lending that took place before the banking crisis has 
disappeared. You can’t take out a 125% mortgage any more or constantly 
remortgage to go on holiday or buy a new car. But new forms of lending have 
taken hold. PCP – personal contract purchase – hire purchase deals, for 
example, now make up more than three-quarters of the finance deals provided on 
new car purchases, according to the Finance and Leasing Association.

Last year more than 588,000 Britons shuffled their credit card balances in 
January, with a collective debt of £1.4bn finding a new home during the month, 
according to the British Bankers’ Association (BBA). A similar number are 
expected to go through the process this year.

After the lean years of 2008 and 2009, choice is once again a feature of the 
market, with 122 balance transfer deals for consumers to scrutinise, according 
to Moneyfacts.co.uk. That compares with 133 in January 2007, before the 
financial storm hit. The key battleground is now the length of deal, which can 
be measured in years rather than months: today the average balance-transfer 
deal lasts 659 days versus just 295 days in January 2009, when the country was 
mired in recession. Many Britons rely on being able to shuffle debt from one 
company to another, with industry data showing 43% of credit card balances are 
being managed on an interest-free basis, the highest level ever.

While on the surface it looks like great news for consumers that they can 
borrow for free for so long, the industry cynically relies on a portion of its 
customers failing to keep up with minimum repayments. One missed repayment on a 
balance-transfer deal can force a borrower on to the standard interest rate, 
which is typically 18-20%.

“Zero per cent offers are extremely popular,” says Andrew Hagger, of financial 
website MoneyComms. “The problem is nobody knows how many of the people on 0% 
are using them because they are savvy with their money or because they are 
struggling financially and just treading water.”

The Bank indicated that it was not at present concerned about the scale of 
consumer debt. “Interest rates are still very low, and are expected to remain 
so for the foreseeable future, so there are fewer concerns on debt servicing 
than there were in the past,” said Andy Haldane, the Bank’s chief economist, 
last week.

The last recession provided a rude awakening for a generation that had become 
reliant on cheap credit to fund their lifestyles. As the financial markets 
seized up, banks and credit card companies pulled the rug out from under 
millions of their customers, in some cases knocking a zero off their card limit 
overnight. In 2007,Barclaycard reduced the credit limits of 1 million of its 12 
million customers while the following year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/feb/08/credit-cards-credit-rating> Egg 
infamously withdrew credit cards from 161,000 customers suddenly deemed “high 
risk”.
 There are now 31.3m cards in circulation in the UK. Photograph: Martin 
Meissner/AP 
While the current credit boom may be sustainable, the extra borrowing could 
prove harder to manage this year if the economy stumbles. The vote for Brexit 
did not make consumers worse off in 2016 as robust high-street spending in the 
runup to Christmas proves, but there is a storm brewing.The pound’s weakness 
since the Brexit vote makes imports more expensive, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/uk-firms-brace-for-further-brexit-price-rises-surveys-show>
 which will feed into higher prices at the shops, while prices at the pumps 
started the year at theirhighest since 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/petrol-food-prices-uk-rising-2017>
.

The TUC research calculated that unsecured debt in 2016 is up £1,117 on the 
year before, the highest annual increase since at least 1997.

“These increases in household debt are a warning that families are struggling 
to get by on their pay alone,” said the TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady. 
“Employment may have risen, but wages are still worth less today than nine 
years ago. The government is relying on debt-fuelled consumer spending to 
support the economy, with investment and trade in the doldrums since the 
financial crisis.”

Related: No one can afford to stop the new consumer credit crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/08/new-consumer-credit-crisis-no-one-can-afford-to-stop-bank-of-england-interest-rates>

If you look under the surface of the credit card market, debt built up in the 
freewheeling days before the last recession never really went away. Last year, 
the UK’s financial watchdog attacked credit card providers for squeezing 
profits out of consumers who were stuck in the trap of making monthly minimum 
repayments for years rather than actually paying off their debts. The Financial 
Conduct Authority report found that one in nine card holders had balances that 
would take them more than a decade to repay, with 1.6m customers repeatedly 
making minimum repayments.

Hall, who eventually wrote a book, In the Red, about her now vanquished 
shopping addiction, is surprised that history could be about to repeat itself. 
“It’s a time I look back on with regret as it takes up so much of your time 
worrying about debt,” she says. “I feel the situation is different today. It’s 
more about people surviving than using their credit card to buy fripperies.” 
Things are looking up for the recently promoted Scot, who has cleared her debts 
and recently started a new job and life in Berkshire.

There is already a gulf between the groups that can get their hands on a 
credit card in the first place. In 2015, there were nearly 31.3m credit cards 
in circulation, but while 75% of households with annual incomes of more than 
£50,000 had one, that figure fell to less 25% when the income was less than 
£10,000, according to the more recent market study by the UK Card Association 
(UKCA). The number of credit cards per customer is 1.94 with only 10% of 
cardholders carrying around more than four in their wallets.

The transition to a digital economy sees cards playing an increasingly central 
role in everyday life, a trend that makes it harder to keep track of your 
spending. Commuters are corralled into tapping instead of buying tickets and 
cash has now disappeared from many lunchtime transactions as contactless cards 
let you wave a seemingly magic wand to pay for your sandwiches and coffee. 
Finance gurus used to tell you to carry around cash to know the value of money, 
but a recent industry survey found that the average Briton now carries less 
than a fiver on them while one in 10 carries just a credit or debit card in 
their pocket.

StepChange reports a recent stream of clients coming for help after falling 
behind on essential household bills, which it believes is indicative of the 
general squeeze on household incomes. “There are millions of people in 
persistent credit card debt, with the market structured to allow this to happen 
because it is profitable [for the industry] for people to be stuck making 
minimum repayments,” says Tutton. “Lenders, regulators and the government need 
to ensure that the mistakes made in the lead-up to the financial crisis are not 
repeated and that there are better policies in place to protect those who fall 
into financial difficulty. Yes, the credit market is opening up again but have 
we learned the lessons of the last financial crisis?”
 