
The treasurer of Momentum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/momentum> 
tried to persuade colleagues to resist major changes to the pro-Jeremy Corbyn 
campaign group by calling for “everyone to be friends and eat cupcakes and 
think about butterflies”, leaked emails show.

Michael Chessum wrote to Momentum’s 12-strong steering committee to protest 
against founderJon Lansman <https://twitter.com/jonlansman?lang=en>’s rapidly 
executed plan to require members of the grassroots leftwing campaign group to 
join Labour.

His pleas were ignored, and Lansman gained the six votes and one abstention 
needed to impose a constitution that would force members to leaveMomentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/momentum> if they did not comply. The 
move means Lansman has effectively wrested back power over a group that had 
seemed to have escaped his control and isolated his internal rivals.

Committee members whose future in Momentum is in doubt include Jill Mountford, 
of the Trotskyist group Alliance for Workers’ Liberty, and the former Militant 
activist Nick Wrack, both of whom were expelled from the Labour party last 
year. Jackie Walker, an activist fighting suspension fromLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has also disagreed with the new 
structure.

In an email trail detailing exchanges between Momentum’s steering committee 
members, Chessum, an ally of Mountford and Wrack, grew increasingly exasperated 
as it became clear that the plans, which were drawn up secretly by Lansman, 
would be approved.

“This is completely insane. Why won’t you people compromise? Why are you 
insistent on a split?” he wrote to his fellow committee members, addressing 
Lansman’s supporters in particular.


Chessum, a former student activist who has written articles for the Guardian, 
claimed that the plans would destroy an organisation that he claims is pivotal 
to the left in the UK. “I just want everyone to be friends and eat cupcakes and 
think about butterflies, and –” at this point he switched to upper case – “NOT 
SPLIT AND THROW AWAY THE MOST IMPORTANT ORGANISATION ON THE BRITISH LEFT OTHER 
THAN THE LABOUR PARTY ITSELF JUST BECAUSE YOU LOSE ONE BLOODY VOTE.”


In a further email he wrote: “I’m almost impressed by the heady mixture of 
deceit, boldness and total lack willingness to compromise with anyone.”

A Momentum spokesperson said: “Momentum’s constitution ensures it is a truly 
member-led campaigning movement that can help to secure a Labour government. 
Members are empowered to shape the organisation through directly electing their 
representatives to the NCG, proposing and voting on constitutional amendments, 
campaign priorities, and other key decisions via a digital democracy platform.”

Momentum burst on to the political scene in 2015 as a broad, non-aligned 
campaign group after it backed Corbyn’s first successful party leadership 
election. In recent months, it has been riven by rows between Lansman, who 
controls the all-important database, and activists from Trotskyist and 
hard-left factions.


In December, Lansman lost a crucial vote on the organisation’s structures, 
preventing him from installing a one-member-one-vote system that his opponents 
say would have made the group easier to control. His critics say they were 
astonished by the speed of the so-called “coup”. They say they first heard of 
the plans in an email sent to members of the steering committee at 7.39pm on 
Tuesday under the heading “Proposal to steering group: a new constitution for 
Momentum”. An hour and 15 minutes later, the alleged coup was successfully 
completed.

Lansman, a longstanding ally of Corbyn, wrote that he had spoken to “the 
leader’s office and trade unions that have supported Jeremy Corbyn” and had 
sought legal advice before drawing up proposals for a new constitution. It 
would require “all members to be party members” and would wind up the existing 
steering committee, national committee and conference committee.

His email concluded: “If you are happy with all these proposals as they stand, 
please indicate by email. If there is a majority – I think we all recognise 
that we shall continue to disagree on this matter – I propose that we seek the 
approval of members immediately.” It was signed, “In solidarity, Jon Lansman.”

Six minutes after Lansman’s email had been sent, Labour NEC member and Corbyn 
supporter Christine Shawcroft offered her support. “Hi everyone, yes, I very 
much welcome this initiative and support the proposed actions being taken,” she 
said.

At the same time, Momentum’s social media coordinator, Marsha-Jane Thompson, 
registered her approval. And at 7.58pm, Sam Tarry, an activist for the TSSA 
union, replied: “You [Lansman] have the support of TSSA, and myself in moving 
forward.”

Chessum sent his angry reply at 8.02pm, followed by an email from his ally 
Walker at 8.25pm that said: “Of course I do not agree.”


But at 8.54pm, Lansman sent an email saying that he already had six votes of 
support and an abstention, which meant his proposals had passed. “Dear Comrades 
… I do hope we can now build an organisation which the Labour party,Jeremy 
Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> and all those who 
depend on election victories desperately need,” he wrote.

Lansman’s opponents have vowed to fight the new constitution by campaigning 
among activists on the ground.

Momentum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/momentum> face an uphill battle 
lasting several years to affiliate to the Labour party, according to senior 
party sources, who have cast doubt on whether the group would ever be able to 
affiliate in its current form.

Organisations must have three years of accounts before they can apply to 
affiliate, and Momentum has been in existence for little more than a year. 
Organisations that support a particular faction of the party, either left or 
right, cannot affiliate, and affiliates cannot have a separate political 
agenda. Some Labour MPs have also said they would oppose any attempt by 
Momentum to affiliate. One, Tom Blenkinsop, wrote to the party’s general 
secretary, Iain McNicol, on Thursday, asking him to scrutinise the application.

Also on Thursday, Lansman resigned as a director of Momentum Ltd, according to 
Companies House records, to be replaced by Shawcroft, who is on Labour’s 
candidate selection panel for the Copeland byelection at the end of the month.

Crucially, however, Lansman is still the sole director of Jeremy for Labour Ltd
 <https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/09655767/officers>, set up during 
Corbyn’s first leadership election last year. That company isthe registered 
controller <http://www.peoplesmomentum.com/company_structures> of data 
collected during both of Corbyn’s leadership campaigns, through both Momentum 
and the official campaigns.

In a statement, Chessum said on Wednesday he and colleagues would fight for a 
new democratic system within Momentum. ”Abolishing the organisation’s 
democratic structures by an email vote of a tiny committee in the space of 
about an hour is no way to build the new, kinder politics that we are striving 
to create,” he said.
 