 A Glasgow University law professor is being dropped from an expert panel on 
the Lockerbie bombing following allegations that he was a high-ranking MI6 
officer. Andrew Fulton will be asked today to stand down from his role as 
deputy director of the university's Lockerbie trial briefing unit.
The unit was set up by the university to give foreign and UK journalists 
"impartial and objective" advice on Scottish legal procedures used in the trial 
of the two Libyans accused of causing the 1988 explosion on Pan Am flight 103. 
Professor Fulton joined the unit last year after he retired from a 31-year 
career in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Last Friday, the Guardian raised questions about his links with MI6, and over 
the weekend a series of reports claimed Professor Fulton had been one of 
Britain's most powerfulMI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> officers, 
acting as head of station for the intelligence service in Washington.

He is said to be on holiday on Skye and cannot be contacted, but he is 
expected to attend a meeting at the university today to discuss the 
revelations. Asked to comment on the claims last week, he neither confirmed nor 
denied them, saying only that he had worked as a diplomat for 30 years.

A university spokesman said Professor Fulton was being asked to stand down 
because of the risk of publicity overshadowing the unit's work, regardless of 
the truth or otherwise of the allegations.

No decision had yet been taken on his post as a visiting professor at the 
university's law school. "We are not in a position to confirm or deny Professor 
Fulton's status but it will be put to him that as he has become the story, 
rather than the work of the unit, he should stand aside in the interests of the 
unit."

The unit had avoided commenting on "rumours or speculation" about the 
Lockerbie evidence, instead confining itself to explaining Scottish legal 
principles, procedures and terminology. John Grant, director of the unit, 
posted a notice on its website saying: "I am disappointed that we have become 
the story when a major criminal trial is trying to determine who is responsible 
for the deaths of 270 people.

"The unit has consistently offered impartial advice and assistance to those 
with an interest in the trial. The news organisations throughout the world who 
have spoken to members of our team can bear testimony to our impartiality.

"I have no personal knowledge of any connection between Andrew Fulton and the 
British intelligence service. I cannot contact Andrew at the moment, but I 
shall be speaking to him during the week from Camp Zeist, where I am covering 
the restart of the trial.

"Our independence and impartiality are articles of faith with us. Any 
prejudice to that independence and impartiality is, of course, of great concern 
to us."

The trial of the two men accused of the bombing resumes today in Holland under 
Scottish law but before three judges instead of a jury.
 