
Modern stag parties tend to be synonymous with boozy weekends, involving 
various raucous activities from bar-crawling to quad-biking. But do men always 
enjoy these ritualistic celebrations?

A new study suggests not and that some of the characteristics of stag parties, 
which can include “extreme shaming, humiliation and deviance” actually make men 
feel uncomfortable.

The study was carried out by Daniel Briggs of Madrid University and Anthony 
Ellis of Salford University, andpublished in the journal Deviant Behavior 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01639625.2016.1197678>. It found 
that men often succumb to peer pressure during stag nights, taking part in 
activities that leave them degraded and scared.

We spoke to a group of men about the reality of stag weekends, and what they 
really think about them. Here’s what they said.

Rob, 34, from Berkshire: ‘The groom’s brother disappeared and returned 
completely naked’

The first stag do I went on was the most debauched, representing everything 
that makes these nights awful. The groom and best man were forced to go 
gorge-walking in Borat-style mankinis, and in an Indian restaurant that evening 
the groom’s brother disappeared into the bathroom and returned completely 
naked. He sat back down in the buff until the waiter asked him to get dressed.

I didn’t feel comfortable but because of the powerful herd mentality and the 
fact we’d all been drinking for some time I just sort of accepted everything 
that happened. I was there with one of my best friends, who was similarly 
uncomfortable. We supported and enabled each other to join in some lewd 
drinking games. There was a feeling of “I guess we’re doing this then, aren’t 
we”, but we were all staying in a hostel together so leaving early wasn’t an 
option, and we wanted to be there for our friend, the groom. Later, in the 
lap-dancing club, the night fell apart. Out of money and absolutely hammered, 
we went back to the hostel.


I didn’t feel comfortable, but because of the powerful herd mentality I just 
sort of accepted everything that happened
Rob Barbour 
I hate these clubs. I’m not good in high-pressure sales environments and I 
find the dancers’ flirtations awkward. I’m usually a confident guy but the 
combination of aggressive door staff, sleazy atmosphere and false affection 
creates a perfect storm of anxiety I find impossible to deal with unless I’m 
really drunk. Then, I have to admit, I can enjoy them; but I think it says a 
lot that I have to drink until my personality evaporates.

Stag dos reflect those who arrange them. I’m putting together a stag do for my 
brother next year. It’s going to be just a group of people having fun and 
probably getting quite drunk. During the day we’ll have an activity in line 
with the stag’s hobbies. Then we’ll go to a fun venue in the evening. We may 
all dress up as the stag but that’s about as far as the wackiness will go. I 
don’t understand the urge to humiliate someone you supposedly care about, but 
some people seem to really enjoy it.

Anonymous, 28, from Glasgow: ‘I was really offended by the homophobic language 
others on the stag used’

I’m 28 and a lot of people I know are getting married. In the past year and a 
half I’ve been to nine stag dos which were, for the most part, thoroughly 
enjoyable. We’ve done everything from paint-balling to quad-biking and changed 
my expectations of stag dos.

However, there were two parties I just did not enjoy. The first was when an 
old work friend and I went to Poland. We were with a very “laddish” crowd whose 
expectation was drinks at the airport, drinks in the hostel and drinks in the 
club, drinks at breakfast and drinks before visiting Auschwitz. After the first 
night I couldn’t handle it and checked into a hotel on my own. I couldn’t show 
my respect for the tragedy of the Holocaust with a hangover. We met for lunch 
then I went off and did my own thing. In the end I had a great time and didn’t 
need to participate in the “let’s dress up the groom in a tutu” part of the 
holiday, which just isn’t me.


As a gay guy with mostly straight friends I’ve somehow managed to avoid the 
casual homophobia that comes with a “lad’s day out”, but this last stag party 
was a shock to the system. The word “poof” was thrown around as if it meant 
nothing, there was chat about “giving him his first homosexual experience”, and 
the kind of remark that made you wonder if any of them had ever met a gay 
person before. I guess you can only hear what you are thrown around as “banter” 
so many times before it hits a sore spot. You straddle a fine line between 
wanting to be liked and wanting to beat down this kind of ingrained behaviour 
that makes you feel that there’s something wrong with you. I called it a night 
shortly before the shots arrived.

Tim, 36, from Plymouth: ‘We went to a strip club. Afterwards everyone admitted 
it was quite dark and not enjoyable’

Most stag dos I’ve attended have been good-natured. I would class myself and 
friends as liberal conservatives (little c), mainly with a sporting club or 
military background. Generally a stag do is an expensive weekend in the UK or 
abroad.Usually, alcohol features heavily, but not drugs. On Friday night, the 
“quiet” night, people meet in a local pub, almost certainly extremely heavy 
drinking occurs and people take themselves out completely. On Saturday morning 
the best man will probably have organised some overpriced activity like carting,
coasteering <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coasteering> or live rugby. 

 Saturday afternoon is always a low point as tiredness and dehydration lead to 
a lack of conversation before the best man attempts to rally the troops for the 
“big night” of drinking and eating. The groom will almost certainly by now be 
dressed like a dick and will probably have been sick. On Sunday everyone 
usually disperses as soon as they can, leaving the best man to clean up or 
explain.

Rarely do boys want to be seen as the sensible ‘party pooper'
Tim 
 At a stag party in Newcastle the best man had arranged a stripper. We walked 
miles to a pub in the middle of nowhere. The back room we booked was full of 
old men leering at the show. The girl was slim with massive fake boobs. Nobody 
really chatted about it but the general consensus was it was quite dark, and 
not at all enjoyable.

I do not enjoy strip clubs on stag dos, they seem very old-fashioned and I 
consciously avoid them. Maybe they were fun 10 to 15 years ago. Some people go 
along with them, not wanting to cause an argument, but I usually say something.

 Within reason, the debauchery can be amusing, but only the good-natured boozy 
fun. Anything that humiliates the groom or the party is uncomfortable. I was 
humiliated at my own stag party a few years ago. My university housemates 
arranged a stripper who took my clothes off in a pub, which I didn’t appreciate 
and had specifically said I didn’t want. I was a bit annoyed that my wishes 
hadn’t been respected. Stag groups work to the lowest common denominator, so it 
only takes one idiot to drag the group down. Boys rarely want to be seen as 
“party poopers”.

Louis Valenzuela, 29, from London: ‘For my stag I’d like to go to the country 
and hang out with my best pals’

I have been to a weird mix of stag dos, the usual “lads, lads, lads” type as 
well as more refined and classy ones.

On a stag party it is always slightly uncomfortable being with a bunch of guys 
who, quite often, you don’t really know. The conversation normally starts off 
something like: “So, what work do you do?” Then as more alcohol gets pumped 
into the mix, the stilted conversations flow a bit more.

Whoever has the best piss-stain map of Africa is declared the winner or ‘Laddy 
McLadface'
Louis Venezuela 
I like getting together with people and having a good time but on a stag, when 
levels of testosterone and bravado are quite often high, it can turn pretty 
messy quite quickly. Anything to do with: a) bodily fluids or b) downing dirty 
pints makes me feel uncomfortable. If a forfeit or task incorporates both, I’m 
out. At one party I was introduced to “Map of Africa,” where you have to don 
chinos/khaki/camel shorts, appoint a troop leader and go out on the razz. After 
the drinks have been flowing for a while the troop leader yells out “MAP OF 
AFRICA!” and you all have to piss yourselves, there and then. Whoever has the 
best piss-stain map of Africa is declared the winner or “Laddy McLadface”.

Stag dos still serve the purpose for which they were created, bringing 
together wedding guests who may not interact on the big day in what normally 
ends up as a piss-up, providing a lot of ammunition on the day and for many 
days to come. My sort of stag is neither massively alternative nor hugely 
traditional. I’d like to go to a country estate, go shooting, try various 
spirits, get out on a boat of some description and hang out with my best pals.
 