
Men who behave like promiscuous playboys or feel powerful over women are more 
likely to have mental health problems than men with less sexist attitudes, 
according to a study released on Monday.


 The analysis found links between sexist behavior and mental health issues 
such as depression and substance use, said the study in the Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, published by the American Psychological Association.

 “Some of these sexist masculine norms, like being a playboy and power over 
women, aren’t just a social injustice, but they are also potentially bad for 
your mental health,” said Joel Wong, an associate professor of counseling 
psychology at Indiana University Bloomington and lead author of the study.

 Its release comes on the heels of the election to the US presidency of Donald 
Trump, whose comments aboutwomen that emerged during the election campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/list-of-donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations>
 were condemned by many as sexist and misogynist.

 The research synthesized results of more than 70 US-based studies involving 
more than 19,000 men over 11 years.

 This involved looking at 11 norms generally considered by experts to reflect 
society’s expectations of traditional masculinity including a desire to win, 
risk-taking and pursuit of status, Wong said.

 The traits, or norms, most closely linked to mental health problems were 
playboy behavior, or sexual promiscuity, power over women and self-reliance, he 
said.

 “Men who have trouble asking for directions when they’re lost, that’s a 
classic example of self-reliance,” Wong said.

 Also, men who exhibited those attitudes were also less likely to seek mental 
health treatment, the study said.

 The researchers said there was one dimension for which they were unable to 
find any significant effects.

 “Primacy of work was not significantly associated with any of the mental 
health-related outcomes,” said Wong in a statement.

 “Perhaps this is a reflection of the complexity of work and its implications 
for well-being. An excessive focus on work can be harmful to one’s health and 
interpersonal relationships, but work is also a source of meaning for many 
individuals.”
 