
You’ve just watched your dad’s car leave campus and you’re wondering what to 
do with yourself. It’s freshers’ week: a 14-day portal into university life. A 
cocktail of homesickness and Jack Daniels, capped off with a few induction 
presentations.

We campus security guards see the same mistakes made every September. Here are 
the ones to avoid.

Us and them: life at the bottom of the campus heap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/05/us-and-them-life-at-the-bottom-of-the-campus-heap>
If you’re in halls, say hello to your neighbours. This is a must, and can be 
done under the pretext of sorting fridge space. Even if you’re terminally 
awkward or everyone looks like a dick, it’s crucial that you break the ice. If 
you don’t, you’re at risk of spending three terms in social Siberia.


But don’t go overboard and give the WhatsApp group you’ve just joined the 
wrong impression. No one wants to be remembered as the numpty who threw a party 
in the kitchen, stole everyone’s mugs and filled the sink with vomit.


Do. Not. Get. Stoned. In. Your. Bedroom. We know you’re not so skint that it’s 
a roll-up you’re sharing. We know that bong isn’t a lava lamp. Socks belong on 
the floor or on your feet, not hanging off the ceiling over the smoke detector. 
If you open your door to us at 11pm and the air’s 10 parts fags, 200 parts 
Lynx, we know that you’ve been smoking inside – you haven’t “just been out for 
one”. Getting your 29 flatmates evacuated isn’t a great way to expand your 
social circle.


If you’re pissed off with passive aggressive Post-It notes left on your 
celery, please don’t lock the communal kitchen and go home with the key. 
Breaking back in will involve a succession of security guards, one armed with a 
ladder and a pathological hatred of veg.

Our job ​is to look after you​. Everything else comes second – even bollocking 
you for climbing a gas cupboard

Register with the local doctor: we’ll give you directions. This is essential 
if you like to push through assignments until you faint and crack your head on 
the printer.


If you’re asthmatic, carry your inhaler. Worried Ventolin makes you look 
uncool? Polish the gas can and pretend it’s nitrous oxide, or stop worrying 
what strangers think about you. Don’t wait until the point that your breathing 
sounds like a jackdaw and we have to call an ambulance.

No, we can’t give you the reset code for the fire panel in your accommodation 
block. If you’re cooking steaks to get your protein fix and are repeatedly 
triggering the alarm… switch to soy cheese, or that powdered stuff with topless 
blokes on the front. To the more switched-on kitchen user, get a cleaning 
roster sorted early.

And for those whose parents have had the pleasure of cleaning their pants for 
the past 18 years: learn how to do laundry. Clean the filter that lives at the 
front of the tumble dryer before you put your washing in. We once had to get 
the brigade out because a block had filled with white smoke, and the walls were 
heating up. It was only when one guard noticed that the fumes smelt like 
Comfort that we realised fluff was cooking in the dryer grille.


The most important piece of advice: don’t be afraid of the wildlife. The first 
time you see a gang of hoodies throwing Daz in the campus fountain, don’t 
panic: it’s just the locals. You’ll be copying them come the summer ball.


Summer on a university campus: 'We become the worst hotel in England'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jul/22/summer-on-a-university-campus-we-become-the-worst-hotel-in-england>
If you see something that really throws you, like some blokes stealing pot 
plants at 2am, come and have a word with us. In fact, come and have a word with 
us even if the pot plants are fine. Freshers’ week isn’t always a picnic: it 
can be a brutal, isolating experience where you’d give your arm to get back 
even the bad things from home. We can help.

Our job is to look after you and make sure you keep your marbles. Everything 
else comes second – even bollocking you for climbing a gas cupboard and peeling 
felt off the roof, or protecting you from Tot, the man with no shoes who runs 
into the campus shop, swearing, before being pulled out by his ankles.


So, to repeat: come and visit security. Want to know where the best places are 
to meet people? Want to know where in the city you can steal wifi? Want to see 
if you can beat our Pokemon Go score? Come to our desk. This place isn’t so 
different from wherever you’ve just come from. You’ll be fine.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>

 