 For Leanne, it has been a frightening but potentially life-saving few days. 
Two weeks ago the 22-year-old from the east end of Glasgow succumbed to her 
worsening heroin habit and began injecting, rather than smoking, the drug. But 
this weekend, with nine of the city's heroin-users - eight of them women - 
killed by a horrific mystery infection and health experts bracing themselves 
for more fatalities, she has pulled herself back from the brink.
'When you are withdrawing, you don't care about the the risks, but there is no 
way I will inject gear again,' she told The Observer . 'It has been terrifying 
for me because it is women who have been dying and I don't really know what I'm 
doing when I'm injecting. It is not worth the risk any more.'

Over the years, Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> in general, 
and Glasgow in particular, have become inured to heroin deaths. Figures 
released last week forecast that the country's drug death toll this year is 
expected to top 300 for the first time. Before the new outbreak, 36 addicts had 
already died in the Strathclyde area alone, which includes Glasgow.

Fears are growing that the outbreak will spread beyond Glasgow and even 
Strathclyde. Grampian police revealed yesterday that its officers are 
investigating the death on 1 May of a heroin-user in the light of the crisis in
Glasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow>.

But this weekend heroin users across the city are confronting the same reality 
as Leanne. As the death toll has mounted in what one government adviser has 
dubbed a 'public health disaster', they have been forced to realise just how 
vulnerable they are to contaminated drugs and dangerous dealers. 'People with 
serious drug misuse problems don't believe they are going to die,' explained 
Andrew Horne, of Turning Point Scotland, the charity which runs a Glasgow drugs 
crisis centre. 'They know they might overdose at some point, but they have come 
so close so many times they think they can evade death.

'Everybody has been shocked by this. It has made them realise they have no 
control over what they buy, who they buy from or what is in the heroin they 
buy.'

It has been a costly lesson. The crisis began two weeks ago in the Victoria 
Infirmary in the south of the city. Two female heroin-users turned up at the 
casualty department with abscesses that appeared no different from the tissue 
infections common around the injecting area of drugs users. They were given the 
normal treatment of antibiotics, but the abscesses grew rapidly and their 
condition deteriorated fast as they developed a severe septi caemic-type 
illness.

Despite receiving intensive medical treatment, they suffered multiple organ 
failure and were dead within hours. But it was not until last Tuesday, almost 
10 days later, that health experts from the Greater Glasgow Health Board were 
certain enough that the outbreak was not isolated to go public. By then, 13 
cases had emerged. Six of them were already dead - five of them women.

'The problem for us was that there are so many drugs deaths in Glasgow it took 
some time to put everything together,' said Laurence Gruer, the health board's 
senior public health consultant. The cases were strikingly similar. All 13 were 
from Govanhill, a rundown area of tenement flats just south of city centre. All 
had injected straight into muscle tissue, mostly around the groin. All had 
developed horrendous abscesses before their condition deteriorated rapidly. One 
woman who survived had developed an abscess 12in by 8in in diameter. All had 
used citric acid to break down the heroin for injection, and most had got it 
from the same grocers' shop. Suspicion fell on the citric acid. Experts 
believed it may have been contaminated with a toxic substance which caused the 
infection.

Women were more at risk because their veins are harder to find, making female 
users more likely to deliberately inject straight into muscle - known as 
skin-popping - or to accidentally miss a vein. On Tuesday afternoon, Dr Gruer 
outlined the theory at an emergency meeting to public health and medical 
experts, senior police officers, the procurator-fiscal and representatives of 
drugs services.

'Everybody there had a lot of experience dealing with drugs users but none of 
us had come across anything like this before,' said Gruer. 'We didn't know 
whether it was the tip of the iceberg.'

At a press conference afterwards, users were warned to avoid injecting into 
tissue and to seek immediate medical help if they developed abcesses or other 
signs of tissue infection.

By Wednesday afternoon, however, the crisis was deepening. Six more cases had 
emerged, and two more women had died. But this time, they were from the north 
of the city, in the Sighthill and Possil areas where heroin use is rife. They 
had used citric acid but had bought different brands from different stores. 
Health officials were forced to turn their attention to the heroin.

This weekend heroin samples, some taken from one sufferer and some bought on 
the street, have been sent to a specialist laboratory in London for analysis. 
Tests on tissue taken from sufferers has revealed evidence of bacteria but only 
of the sort normally found on the body.

Experts are working on the theory that an unknown contaminant in the heroin 
reacts with these bacteria when injected directly into tissue.

But there is also another, more sinister theory doing the rounds among 
Glasgow's heroin-users. 'People are starting to wondering whether it's some 
real nasty bastard, somebody right at the top of the supply tree who hates 
junkies and just wants to wipe them out,' said Derek, 39, who has been 
injecting heroin for 20 years and who says he will not be able to stop despite 
the new threat.

Senior police officers are of the same opinion. Within 24 hours of the first 
warnings being announced, Strathclyde's chief constable had set up a special 
unit, under a senior detective, to investigate the outbreak. The unit has been 
equipped with the Holmes computer, the Home Office Major Enquiry System more 
commonly used in murder investigations.

For those working with drugs users, the last week has provided another 
salutary lesson, said Andrew Horne. 'There have been so many warnings from some 
agencies in the past that users don't really take them seriously,' he 
explained. 'Warnings should only go out when we are certain of what we are 
warning about.'

For the time being, warnings are all the heroin users have to go on. 'It is 
the not knowing that is the worst part,' said Leanne. 'Even if there are no 
more deaths, you will always be wondering whether this is going to come back 
again. The threat is always going to be there.'

stuart.millar@observer.co.uk <mailto:stuart.millar@observer.co.uk>
 