
An online pawnbroker that styles itself on payday lender Wonga is claiming to 
offer “market-leading” next-day loans against assets from guitars to Gucci bags 
– just as debt advisers are issuing fresh warnings about the dangers of 
short-term borrowing.

Unbolted.com is offering loans for up to six months from £500 to £300,000 at 
rates of between 26% to 48% secured against any assets that are likely to be 
saleable at auction. “Bespoke” pricing applies for loans above this amount. Its 
founders say their aim is to “shake up” the short-term secured credit market 
and claim their rates are less than half those charged by some competitors.

So far loans have included £700 to a musician against his £1,000 guitar and 
£4,000 against a piece of contemporary British art. Borrowers can be given a 
provisional loan agreement by sending in a photo of the asset and the money can 
then be paid out within three hours of receiving the asset and confirming the 
valuation.

In line with other pawnbrokers, there are no credit checks as the loan is 
secured against an asset.

“There is a big demand from asset-rich people who have short-term liquidity 
issues,” says co-founder and ex-investment banker Ashwin Parameswaran. “We use 
a peer-to-peer online model which strips out many costs and ensures our 
customers can benefit from lower rates than typical larger loan companies or 
pawnbrokers.”

The website is designed almost exactly like Wonga and uses “sliders” that 
allow borrowers to instantly compare the total amount they would repay on 
various loan sizes.

There is a big demand from asset-rich people who have short-term liquidity 
issues
Ashwin Parameswaran 
The City watchdog imposed a price cap on payday lenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/02/payday-loans-caps-fca> earlier 
this month and introduced other rules that end some of the sector’s unfair 
practices. The Financial Conduct Authority has said it expects the cap to 
result in the majority of payday lenders leaving the market.

“After the FCA’s very welcome moves to reform payday lending we have to remain 
vigilant as new business models in the high-cost credit market begin to 
emerge,” says Jane Tully from the Money Advice Trust, the charity that runs 
National Debtline.

“While some new high-cost lenders may position their products as cheaper than 
the kind of payday loans we have seen in recent years, they are still an 
extremely expensive way to borrow.”

Mike Dailly, consumer rights campaigner and principal solicitor at the Govan 
Law Centre in Glasgow agrees. “With the restrictions on payday lenders you have 
potentially got more people who will find it harder to get a loan, or at least 
a subsequent payday loan, and they might be tempted to borrow from websites 
such as Unbolted.”

He continues: “The danger is that as this sort of borrowing becomes so much 
easier to do, people might not necessarily understand the full consequences of 
not meeting repayments.”

Borrowers who default on their loans with Unbolted (and other pawnbrokers) 
will have their goods put up for auction and will continue to accrue monthly 
charges until the item is sold and the debt paid off.

A spokesperson for debt charity StepChange said: “Pawnbrokers are a familiar 
concept to many, and that may make people feel more comfortable borrowing from 
them. However, it is still a relatively expensive form of credit over a short 
period, and people need to be fully aware of the risks before committing to any 
agreement.”

Debt advisers are already worried 2015 will see more people turning to 
short-term loans as a way of trying to tackle existing debt problems.Figures 
from the Bank of England show that Britons ran up their highest level of new 
debt in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/03/new-consumer-debt-reaches-7-year-high>
 for nearly seven years, with the month’s borrowing on credit cards, loans and 
overdrafts hitting more than £1.25bn.

StepChange believes 2015 will be tough for many households. It says: “The 
peril of using credit to cope has been exacerbated by people’s increasing 
reliance on high-cost loans. The government must do more to provide affordable 
alternatives to the increasing number of households of all shapes and sizes who 
are desperately looking for ways to plug the gap in their finances.”

Companies that operate as alternatives to high street banks include not just 
payday lenders and pawnbrokers but the growing number of guarantor lenders, 
operating in a sector that industry magazine Credit Todayrecently described as 
a “hotbed of new activity” 
<http://www.credittoday.co.uk/article/17578/online-news/news-analysis-lending-cap-prompts-alternative-finance-debuts>
.

Guarantor lenders include the likes of Provident, which launched glo in 
November last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/nov/12/glo-loans-consumers-poor-credit-records>
. It is aimed at people with poor credit records who can find someone able to 
guarantee their borrowing. It offers loans from £1,000 to £7,000 available over 
a period of one to five years at a typical APR of 49.5%.

Their appeal, and that of pawnbrokers, is that they offer solutions to those 
who might not otherwise be able to borrow due to a poor credit rating. These 
increasingly include middle-income and high-net-worth borrowers.

Luxury online pawnbroker Borro recently announced that it had reached a 
lending milestone of £100m and said its average loan size more than doubled 
from £7,000 to £15,000 in 2014.

Meanwhile, industry body The National Pawnbrokers Association is running its 
first ever national advertising campaign in a bid to attract more money from 
middle-income households. It claims its research shows that 25% more people 
would use pawnbrokers if they understood how they work.

“In the past five years the number of middle-income people who use pawnbrokers 
has increased from about 3% of the market to 8%,” says Ray Perry, chief 
executive of the NPA. “The traditional pawnbroking customer is now borrowing 
less and new people are coming in to replace them. We want to grow that 
middle-income market.”

He added that he doesn’t see the online pawnbroking sector taking off in a big 
way. “Some people just don’t want to put their heirloom in an envelope”.

• This article was amended on 12 January 

 