
Lost in translation


In 2017, we can study the unimaginably small and share unimaginably vast 
amounts of data. But, as a GP involved in the day-to-day delivery of primary 
health care, I often wonder why, if so much is known, we can do so little? Why 
is there such a lag between the headline scientific discoveries and what a 
local GP can offer? Bridging that gap as speedily and effectively as possible 
is the aim of an emerging field of biomedical science calledtranslational 
medicine <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Translational_medicine>. Scientists, 
healthcare professionals, pharma and funders are collaborating to translate 
science into solutions, or “bench to bedside”. The mantra for governments and 
agencies that fund health services across the world is “value-based care” – 
basically, payment by results. To be fair, it’s not all about cutting costs: 
the idea is to stop funding poor-value healthcare, and move towards an era of 
“precision medicine” in which your genomics, epigenomics (chemicals that tell 
the genome what to do), environmental exposure (eg pollution) and other factors 
guide the care you are offered.

Computer assisted medicine 


Precision medicine – or, indeed, any form of modern medicine – is no longer 
possible without data. Data from your body is increasingly being collected by 
wearable devices; not just footsteps but measurements of weight, blood 
pressure, heart rate and temperature. Platforms such asIBM’s Watson 
<http://www.ibm.com/watson/health/> can mash up your personal data with 
information from “big data” – vast repositories of information from 
universities, scientific institutions and publications as well as commercial 
companies. Algorithms will deliver tailor-made advice to you via an app, such as
Nutrino <https://nutrino.co/#/>, that provides guidance about diet. The system 
“learns” from your input and gets ever cleverer. Meanwhile, online avatars are 
being trialled to help people with schizophrenia and have been used to detect 
early signs of depression in servicemen and women in the field. An immersive 
virtual reality therapy that helps people with depression to be less critical 
of themselves has also reported promising results.

Go for the gut 


Analysis of your gut biome will become increasingly popular. We have 100tn 
microbes (mostly bacteria) in and on our body; most live in our gut, the rest 
on our skin and elsewhere. That’s 10 times more than our own human cells. The 
genetic information carried in these microbes is thought to play a major role 
in producing chemicals that drive vital processes such as healing, metabolism 
and immune function. The holy grail is understanding what a healthy biome looks 
like, how to feed ourselves to nourish it and which foods or supplements will 
restore an ailing biome to prevent or treat ill health. If you want to know how 
your biome compares to other family members and other volunteers, you can take 
part inThe British Gut Project <http://britishgut.org/>.

The next public health challenge?


Alcohol is now the leading risk factor for early death, ill health and 
disability among 15- to 49-year-olds, according to anew report from Public 
Health England 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/574427/Alcohol_public_health_burden_evidence_review.pdf>
 [pdf]. Setting a minimum price for alcohol helps to cut drinking but the 
alcohol industry obviously opposes it. Overall, smoking, poor diet, obesity and 
untreated high blood pressure all trump alcohol when it comes to risk factors 
that contribute to disease in the UK. Legislation banning smoking in cars 
carrying under 18s has proved hard to enforce and campaigners will be looking 
for convictions to drive the message home. Vaping remains controversial, but 
seems to help people to quit and stay off the fags. Critics’ fears that 
widespread vaping would trigger a rise in smoking among the young haven’t been 
realised. Tight EU legislation controls vaping and tobacco industries; but 
smokers looking for looser controls as a result of Brexit may be disappointed. 
The most pressing public health challenge must be closing the health gap; life 
expectancy in England has increased from 75.9 years in 1990 to 81.3 years in 
2013. But behind this piece of good news lies a shameful fact; rich men live 
nine years longer and rich women seven years longer than their poorest 
compatriots.

Zika virus


Last year saw the first UK case of a woman who got zika from her partner who 
had been on holiday in an area where it’s rife, and with international travel 
and no specific treatment, we’re likely to see more cases in the UK this year. 
The virus can cause microcephaly with associated developmental delay if a woman 
gets it while pregnant. Men returning from a zika area are advised to use 
condoms or abstain for six months; women should avoid getting pregnant and use 
barrier methods for eight weeks.

Is scurvy coming back?


The number of people with scurvy in the UK is small but growing and many more 
are at risk because of poor diet that lacks the fruit and veg that contain 
vitamin C. Alcoholics, drug users and the homeless are most vulnerable. Scurvy 
is caused by a lack of vitamin C, which is needed for collagen. Severe 
deficiency causes bleeding gums, dry skin, poor healing and muscle pains. You 
need 40mg a day – that’s equivalent to half a large orange, a kiwi fruit, a 
small red pepper or a 50g portion of sprouts. Frozen and tinned fruit and veg 
retain their vitamin C. Women who are pregnant and breastfeeding need a bit 
more (50mg a day in pregnancy, 70mg a day while breastfeeding).

Will ketamine replace morphine for severe pain?


The anaesthetic drug ketamine can be given as a nasal spray and provides good 
pain relief, compared with an injection of morphine. On the street, it’s a 
class B drug, popular for the dissociative feelings it induces, but at higher 
doses it can cause a “K-hole”, which is a longer, deeper detachment from 
reality, often with hallucinations. At lower doses, it may be increasingly 
prescribed for severe pain. Currently, it is used mostly as an anaesthetic in 
children, who don’t seem to be as susceptible to its mind-altering effects.

Will this year see proper treatments for dementia?


There was disappointment that the trial into injectable antibody solanezumab 
failed to live up to expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/23/dismay-as-alzheimers-drug-solanezumab-fails-in-clinical-trials>
. But now there is excitement about the drug brimonidine. It is currently used 
to lower eye pressure in glaucoma, which reduces amyloid protein in the retina 
of the eye. The hope is that it may have a similar effect in the brain, where 
toxic amyloid deposits are implicated in the nerve damage and death that occur 
in Alzheimer’s disease.

Will the UK get the artificial pancreas for type 1 diabetes?


The artificial pancreas is a wonderful piece of kit that continuously monitors 
the blood glucose levels of people with type 1 diabetes and links to their 
insulin pump to deliver the correct dose of insulin. This is exactly what 
happens in the body naturally in non diabetics who have a functioning pancreas. 
It has FDA approval in the US and, with several trials underway, may be 
available in the UK soon.
 