
We have known for a long time how the senior officers of the British 
Broadcasting Corporation in London regardScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and the regions as we are reminded of 
it every weekday evening around 6.30pm. That’s when amiable George Alagiah 
looks meaningfully into the camera and says: “And now the news from where you 
are.” This little sentence suggests that another one preceding it has been left 
unsaid, something like: “Right, that’s the important stuff out of the way… ” 
Scots, not unreasonably, do not believe that they inhabit a region of England 
such as the north-east or the south-west.

So here’s the latest news about the future of the BBC from the Scottish 
district of Wheryouarr. Last month, the incoming director of BBC Scotland, 
Donalda MacKinnon, wasinterviewed by the National  
<http://www.thenational.scot/news/14989377.We_ll_win_back_trust__vows_new_BBC_Scotland_chief_Donalda_MacKinnon/>
about her vision for the service north of the border. Ms MacKinnon was 
remarkably frank and direct about the perceived breakdown in trust that had 
occurred between the BBC and many people in Scotland in the course of the 
independence referendum. Indeed, according to the new director, this wasn’t 
just a perception, it was a fact.

“There is a significant number still in Scotland whose trust we lost,” she 
said, “and I think there’s still a bit of work to be done in that regard. I 
think it’s part of my mission to try to address these perceptions which may 
have led to that loss of trust.

“I don’t think that’s across the piece, but I think we have to be alive to it 
and I think part what I’m trying to do is to demonstrate that we want to be 
open; we want to understand why people don’t trust us; we want to be able to 
explain what it is that we do more clearly perhaps. There will be efforts taken 
particularly on my part and on the part of colleagues here to do a bit more of 
that.”

The National, which recently celebrated its second anniversary, is the only 
daily newspaper in Scotland that supports independence. As such, MacKinnon was 
rebuked by assorted unionist voices for even having granted an interview to 
such a perfidious organ. That she exacerbated this by readily admitting to a 
breakdown in trust between the corporation in Scotland she now leads and a 
significant section of its audience led to some familiar claims and accusations 
being laid at her door.

It was yet further proof of SNP bullying not only the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> but also STV, Scotland’s main 
independent television station, and forcing them to bend the knee to the forces 
of Scottish nationalism.

It is in this atmosphere of political tribalism that MacKinnon will seek to 
address concerns about BBC news coverage of Scottish affairs in the months 
ahead. Her first big decision will be to decide, once and for all, if the fabled
Scottish Six evening flagship news programme will go ahead. This would see the 
nationalNews at Six replaced in Scotland by a one-hour news programme offering 
Scottish, UK and international news but produced and anchored almost entirely 
in Scotland.

The same unionist voices in Scotland have always resisted the Scottish Six. 
Despite offering no evidence, they claim that any programme made here would 
become a propaganda tool for Scottish nationalism. Some of them, who are quite 
happy to collect fees for appearances on BBC Scotland, are openly contemptuous 
about the ability of some of their broadcast colleagues to make “a serious news 
programme”. Ironically, none of them would ever question their own ability to 
write for UK national newspapers if they were ever afforded the chance.

Related: BBC Scotland bosses lobby for 'Scottish Six' news programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/13/bbc-scotland-bosses-lobby-for-scottish-six-news-programme>

Already, several pilots have been made inside BBC Scotland’s Pacific Quay 
headquarters in Glasgow. Senior BBC staff I have spoken to have stated that 
these were of a high quality and designed to cover all the major UK and 
international stories, giving due weight to them within the programme’s running 
order. Ms MacKinnon is due any day now to learn if BBC Scotland will receive 
the extra funding required from London to make aScottish Six. The case for this 
has been long argued and is now beyond reasonable debate. The BBC’s own figures 
reveal that its Scottish operation receives barely 50% of licence money raised 
in Scotland as opposed to 74% in Northern Ireland and 95% in Wales.

Yet even if MacKinnon is minded to give the green light to a Scottish Six she 
will still have to sell it to Tony Hall, the BBC director general, a man who 
believes that the corporation’s national news bulletins are the glue that keeps 
the union together. Under MacKinnon’s predecessor, Ken MacQuarrie, all 
discussion of more autonomy for the BBC in Scotland was simply dismissed or 
ignored. His successor, though, knows that maintaining the status quo is simply 
unthinkable.

How much money she feels she needs to produce an hour-long nightly news 
bulletin from Scotland is debatable. Those who inhabit television land will 
tell you that any major changes that occur in their environment are necessarily 
expensive. Their news-gathering operations are so much more complicated than in 
any newspaper newsroom. Much of this, though, simply doesn’t wash with the 
public. BBC Scotland has more than 200 full-time journalists and hundreds of 
regular freelances and contributors. Many of its staff reporters and presenters 
are gifted and highly trained journalists who gather and present the news 
without bias.

It has a massive Glasgow headquarters the size of an aircraft hangar that has 
tumbleweed blowing through it in some parts of the week. The notion that an 
operation such as this might not be up to delivering a one-hour long nightly 
news programme is bizarre.

The two biggest ongoing stories dominating the UK news agenda for the past six 
months have been Brexit and Donald Trump. Each of them possesses several 
uniquely Scottish perspectives: the nature of Brexit will probably determine 
Scotland’s constitutional future while the US president-elect is virtually a 
Scottish national and has significant business interests here.

BBC Scotland desk editors are accustomed to being treated with disdain by 
their London counterparts when seeking to book interview time with overseas 
correspondents, despite their salaries being partly paid by funds raised in 
Scotland. If the director general is incapable of altering that mindset then 
the case for BBC Scotland’s own correspondents being stationed in news 
hot-spots around the globe and paid for by fees raised in Scotland cannot be 
resisted.
 