
I was involved in a minor shunt while driving more than two years ago. It was 
my fault so I notified my insurer, NatWest, and was told it would settle with 
the other driver’s insurer.

Months later, I received a letter informing me a county court judgment (CCJ) 
had been made against me for an unpaid insurance claim of £10,000. This was the 
first I had heard about the debt or the court case.

A claims-handling firm contacted by NatWest said it had contested the claim 
for repairs from the third party. The other driver then filed for the judgment.

So much time has elapsed that the CCJ can no longer be removed from the 
register. NatWest held its hands up and sent me a £750 goodwill payment. 
However, thanks to the CCJ, I have been refused credit, an application for a 
bank account has been turned down, and my business expansion plans have been 
set back. NatWest considers the case closed.TS, London

The most frightening aspect of this case is the fact that a CCJ can be issued 
against someone without their knowledge. CCJs are meant to be a last resort for 
creditors wanting to recover a debt. If a court finds in their favour a charge 
can be put on the debtor’s home and the judgment remains on their credit file 
for six years, making it almost impossible to obtain a mortgage or even a phone 
contract. Defendants are notified of court action via an address supplied by 
the creditor and if they do not respond within 14 days the judgment is passed. 
This means that if the address is incorrect or out of date they lose their 
chance to argue their case.

Last year 740,000 CCJs – 85% of the total – were signed off by courts to 
recover alleged debts in the absence of the defendants, many of whom, like you, 
owed nothing to anyone.

NatWest, which took more than two months to respond to me about your saga, 
says an “avoidable internal misunderstanding” caused the third-party insurer to 
take the legal route. “Unfortunately, over the course of six months, the third 
party insurers issued no warning to us that they were considering legal 
action,” says a spokesperson. “The only communication was the legal summons, 
issued directly to the policyholder once legal proceedings had begun, which 
unfortunately was not received.”

Since you only have a year to get a contested CCJ removed from the court 
register, you have been deprived of the chance to clear your name, but NatWest 
says it has “worked hard” to get it hidden so it will no longer affect your 
credit rating. It will consider more compensation if you can prove that your 
business has been compromised.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk  
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk>or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 