
The historically mighty Mirror Group and the equally mighty Express Group 
announce that they’re in takeover-cum-merger talks. The shades of Cecil King 
and Lord Beaverbrook shimmer with portent. It would have been a big story 
50 years ago.

Back then the Daily Mirror sold 5.1m copies a day. Now that’s 733,000. Back 
then theDaily Express sold 3.9m. That’s a mere 396,000 today. And the figures 
of Sunday declines are even more staggering. From 4.2m at theSunday Express to 
341,000. From 5.5m atThe People to an ever-shrinking 248,000.

Such shrinkage, of course, is the driving force behind any deal. Richard 
Desmond, like otherExpress owners before him, has been content to squeeze every 
last sliver of profit out of accelerating decline. But all squeezed things 
finally die.

Meanwhile Trinity Mirror’s bosses – though more ambitious digitally – are 
following their well-trodden local newspaper route of buying up competitors and 
putting printing plants and newsrooms together. You can cut costs and increase 
revenue in annual reports this way. You also merely delay the inevitable.

Which is, perhaps, why more titans of yesteryear than King and the Beaver may 
be turning in their graves today. Think Hugh Cudlipp and Arthur Christiansen, 
most legendary ofMirror and Express editors.

Snakes alive! They don’t make ’em like Clare any more

I knew the late, great Clare Hollingworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/clare-hollingworth-obituary> 
when I was a youngGuardian correspondent. We were a double act during the 1965 
India-Pakistan war. (I drew Pakistan; she got India.) But Clare was an 
inspiration as well a terrific reporter. There was no more fearless coverage 
than her work from Algeria: a cauldron of danger she stirred alone. And, of 
course, that went with an almost heedless indifference to her personal safety 
(let alone comfort).

One summer she offered my wife and me a stay in her “little place” high on the 
hills above Nice. We arrived when it was dark, struggling to it across a steep 
vineyard. Rats scuttled across the roof throughout the night. When my wife went 
to the well to get water, she shrieked. It was full of snakes. And, reader, we 
fled – which is probably why, unlike Clare, we will never live to be 105.
 