
I starting sabotaging my relationship with academia as a teenager. Desperate 
to rebel against my reputation as a real-lifeLisa Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons>, I switched schools in 
11th grade and hit the self-destruct button immediately, forfeiting any 
academic ambition for nights out with friends. I accepted failure as a badge of 
honour – as proof of my rebellion and my commitment to the cause. I assumed I’d 
get to university if it was “meant to be”, cramming for tests minutes before 
they began, and at one point doing an entire assignment the day it was due in 
the school cafeteria (alongside my best friend who was doing the same thing).

But thanks to my affinity for doing nothing but talk in classes (and getting 
kicked out of them), I didn’t have the grades to finish high school on time, 
let alone get intouniversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-league-tables-2016>
, and by 18 I found myself repeating my last year of high school out of 
necessity, not choice. In the midst of this victory lap, I vowed to get into 
college.

And I did. On 1 April 2004, I found out I had got on to a journalism course at 
a local school, and provided I show up on time for my last batch of high-school 
exams (unlike the year before when I slept in), I’d be set. Finally, I told 
myself, I’d be a grown-up woman destined for professional greatness, so I 
happily stepped up: I bought the books, I bought the clothes, I tried to make 
friends. But by November, I was miserable.

I was finally ready to leave behind the slacker girl I’d become

So I did what served me so well in the past: I stopped caring. I went in for 
shifts at my part-time job instead of showing up to class, I didn’t hand in 
assignments because I knew I was dropping out, I spent lectures on MSN chat, 
attempting to woo the boy I had crush on, and I chose sleep over studying 
(which I still stand by). Unsurprisingly, by December, college was barely on my 
radar.

Which is why getting into university four years later really meant something. 
Between the last day of journalism school and the first day of my bachelor of 
arts, so much had changed. I’d grown-up. I’d soul-searched. I’d been a cash 
supervisor at a hardware store, a keyholder at American Eagle Outfitters, I’d 
re-done 12th grade for the second time (and achieved top marks), suffered 
personal victories, failures, and regularly cried at the cash desk in front of 
my teenage staff. I was ready. I’d earned a place at university (damn it) and 
was ready to leave behind the slacker girl I’d become.

And I tried my best. Desperate to prove I wasn’t the failure I felt my family 
believed I was, I went to every class, threw myself into every assignment, and 
prepped for every exam with the tenacity ofHermione Granger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/22/hermione-black-harry-potter-star-wars>
. Finally, I was a student. An academic. A person the professor asked to please 
stop raising her hand because it was annoying. I made the dean’s list, and got 
an A on an exam I wrote while ill with the flu, days after totalling my car. I 
was a success story, not the teen whose law teacher once told her it would take 
a long time for her to achieve anything. And I was miserable.

I wanted to write. I wanted to be a comedian, taking on essays and TV scripts 
and even jokes, burying myself in the world of pop culture I was so obsessed 
with. I’d told myself this degree would deliver that just that, but I was 24 
and impatient and desperate. So that summer, I went on Craigslist, and got my 
first writing job. And then I got another (never do this, anybody). And by 
October – at the start of the second year – I was writing about fashion, beauty 
and music for next to nothing, but I was doing it. A cool thing. And I didn’t 
need to be at school.

A moment that changed me: David Cameron got me and my dad together | Victoria 
Anderson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/28/moment-changed-me-david-cameron-dad-daily-mai-rasta-friend>
In November, I made a choice. I’d dropped down to part-time studies, begun 
skipping the class I wasn’t interested in, then dropped that too, and kept only 
the course I needed to eventually fulfil my degree requirements. I’d missed a 
handful of classes, but I didn’t care, and that familiar sense of apathy began 
dictating my approach to the rest of the semester. Instead of using computer 
labs and tutorials to apply what we’d learn, I’d use it to chat with the 
teaching assistant and work on my writing. I’d leave early to attend gigs. And 
even now, just over six years later, I have no recollection of what that class 
even was. I just wanted to write, and I was doing it, so I threw myself into 
that.

I don’t know why I even showed up for the exam. I knew I was done with 
university, but I think I felt I’d be letting my parents down if I rejected a 
world I’d fought hard to get into. My friend sat in the seat next to me and we 
joked about failing. I told her I didn’t study and I was probably going to 
leave as soon as I could and then she laughed, and the exam started. I knew I 
was screwed. I spent the mandatory hour randomly selecting multiple choice 
answers, and at one point answered “a Matt Damon movie” to the question, “What 
is an informant?” Even at the end, I wrote a note apologising to my professor, 
adding that I knew I “didn’t belong there” – which probably read much darker 
than I had intended. When the hour was up, I was the only person who got up, 
handed her exam in, and left. School, for me, was out – at least in the 
traditional sense.

At the time, I was painfully unaware of what it takes to be a writer or even 
just an adult person, and what I learned through the next six years of 
relationships, misunderstandings, mistakes, miscommunications, failure, more 
self-destruction and near-bankruptcy taught me what I never would have learned 
in a traditional academic setting. Which isn’t to say that university is bad – 
it’s just not for me. Especially when there are millions of students who will 
seize the day and take that opportunity seriously. And not cite a terrific Matt 
Damon movie on an exam that could make or break their degrees.
 