
Happiness and sunlight are inextricably intertwined; they are perfect 
bedfellows. Everyone looks forward to summer – when the clocks go forward, you 
can practically hear the collective sigh of relief. Summertime means picnics in 
the park, summer dresses and sandals, drinks by the river. It means warmth, joy 
and romance.

Last year, I started to get a rash when I was running. I loved running in the 
park; it was my coping mechanism for times when I felt sad or stressed. The 
rash would appear on the exposed parts of my body – my arms and hands, 
shoulders, and legs. It was uncomfortable, and it would turn into hives. 
Usually it would disappear within about an hour. I didn’t really understand 
what was happening, I thought that it might be a topical allergy to pollen, so 
I’d just down some antihistamines and they seemed to help.

One day I was showering at the lido, having been for a swim, and I started to 
become very hot and itchy. When I got out of the shower, there was a clear 
delineation of my exposed and unexposed flesh – my swimming costume still 
visible on my naked body – a boundary between soft, pale skin, and angry, red 
flesh. I started to feel faint.

A friend I was with hurried away to get me some water. Two members of staff 
followed her back into the changing room; they were freaking out about my 
reaction, and wanted to call an ambulance. One of them put on a latex glove, 
which struck me as bizarre. It turned out she wanted to feel my temperature 
without having skin-to-skin contact, but seeing someone snap on a latex glove 
only added to my rising feeling of panic.

I remember desperately trying to put on my knickers as a room full of people 
gawped at me, while my mind filled with visions of being carted out on a 
stretcher naked and covered in hives. I imagined people crowding round as my 
throat closed up, with – why not? – a few ex-lovers and colleagues thrown in 
for good measure. I’ve always loved the grand and dramatic, and I prepared 
myself to receive the Oscar for best public humiliation.

Some days there are small patches of rash on my exposed skin, others it’s 
everywhere, and I feel like I will pass out

In the end, they didn’t call an ambulance. I managed to get dressed, and my 
friend administered the classic British remedy – tea and cake. I sat in the 
cafe shivering and shaking, my body’s reaction to the physical duress. I think 
I came pretty close to anaphylaxis that day.

Following that episode, I was diagnosed with a condition called solar urticaria
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_urticaria>, which means I’m allergic to 
sunlight. Mostly, when I tell people I’m allergic to the sun, they laugh 
because they think I’m joking – that I burn easily, or that I’m not too keen on 
sunny weather. But I’m literally allergic to sunlight.

The worst thing about my allergy is how unpredictable it is. Some days there 
are small patches of rash on my exposed skin, other days it’s everywhere, and I 
feel like I’m going to pass out. It’s not always the sunniest days, either. The 
UV index can be high even when it’s not particularly hot.

Last summer, during the months that I waited for an appointment with a 
dermatologist, I started to fear going outside. I got a kind of inverseSad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/23/how-do-i-deal-with-seasonal-affective-disorder>
. Seasonal Affective Disorder can make people feel depressed as the days get 
shorter and darker; I got more depressed as the days got longer and brighter. I 
started to think about killing myself. It would be easy – I could just stand in 
the sun.

A moment that changed me: becoming homeless | Emma Allinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/10/moment-changed-me-becoming-homeless>
One seemingly cloudy day, I had a bad reaction while walking along the South 
Bank. I took cover in the Tate Modern. As I stood in front of Picasso’sNude 
Woman With Necklace 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/picasso-nude-woman-with-necklace-t03670>, 
I thought to myself: if I have to go now, at least it will be in front of 
something beautiful. I prayed that her gushing life force would save me.

Before all of this, when I was having a bad day at work, I used to look at the 
photos onholiday <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/familyholidays> websites 
of infinity pools and beach bars, of someone sipping from a coconut on a sun 
lounger. Those photos make me anxious now. I preemptively feel my skin start to 
itch and burn. I have nightmares about being stranded in the sunlight. The idea 
of travelling is much less appealing now that I have to take strong 
antihistamines and wear factor 30+ even in the British winter. When just 
leaving the house feels like a military operation, leaving the country can feel 
a bit overwhelming. And worse than being pickpocketed for my holiday cash or my 
passport – what if someone took my antihistamines?

I’m still waiting for UV testing, where you are tested for the specific 
wavelengths of light that affect you, and how long it takes you to react. Some 
people’s allergy extends to the wavelength that emanates from computer screens 
and electric lights. I dread mine worsening, not being able to go out in the 
daytime, or having to black out all the windows. Imagine if you couldn’t turn 
on the light in the bathroom on a dark morning? It’s such a socially isolating 
affliction.

At first I felt like my sunlight allergy took away my coping mechanisms – but 
I’m discovering that I can run in long-sleeved tops and factor 50, and that you 
can buy swimming leggings and socks to cover up. In summer my look is 
“Victorian goth” – think long, black gloves and a parasol. I try to make it 
more like a fashion choice and less like an affliction. I think that if I can 
find the fun, then maybe it won’t be quite so depressing.

Doctors don’t always know very much about solar urticaria, and their reactions 
are not always sympathetic. One GP told me that I’d probably need an EpiPen, 
but, in the meantime, if I felt my throat closing up, just to call 999. “How 
will I know?” I asked. “Don’t worry,” she said, “you’ll have an impending sense 
of doom”. How very reassuring. Another time, a dermatologist asked me why I was 
so bothered by my condition: “It’s better to put sunscreen on every day 
anyway.” I was so angry I couldn’t look at her.

As well as antihistamines, there are other treatments. There’s a process 
called “skin hardening” that works on the same principle as a vaccine – 
exposing you to small doses of UV can help you to build up an immunity. There’s 
also a relatively new drug called Xolair which was invented for asthmatics but 
has been effective on many patients with solar urticaria. At the moment I’m 
dreading summer – but I hope there will be some light at the end of the tunnel. 
Or in my case, shade.
 