
On Valentine’s Day 2008, with a clarity that was long overdue, I left an 
abusive relationship. The hearts, the flowers, Barry White on the radio – they 
all brought things into sharp focus. For three years I’d been paralysed with 
doubt. That’s the insidiousness of it. By degrees, like a frog being boiled – 
before you know it, you’re soup.

When it’s good, he’s charming: holds your hand in public, and lets you share 
his sweets in the cinema. When it’s bad: the constant criticism, the sulks, the 
explosive rages, the intimidation, the isolation – it’s so relentless, lonely 
and bewildering, you start to doubt reality. “Maybe itis me?” you think. You 
say sorry. Try harder.

We’re blind to an epidemic of domestic abuse | Joan Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/08/blind-epidemic-domestic-abuse>
It took time to see how scared I was, to realise how my sense of self had 
disappeared. The shame was awful. I lost my high-flying job due to “stress”; 
and worse, I lost my confidence. I was financially dependent, utterly confused. 
“Couples therapy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/sep/21/what-really-thinking-couple-therapist>
” turned into two against one. I’m not sure what was more traumatic: being 
shouted at by the therapist, or the huge rows that ensued when we got home.

“Why doesn’t she just leave?” is an ignorant question. There is a pattern to 
abuse <https://www.theguardian.com/society/domestic-violence>: how it starts, 
escalates, and how it messes with your mind. My ex never hit me (threatened to, 
yes), but abuse is not just physical violence. According toRefuge 
<http://www.refuge.org.uk/>, it is, “the repeated, random and habitual use of 
intimidation to control a partner ... If you are forced to alter your behaviour 
because you are frightened … you are being abused.”

In the UK, the police receive a domestic violence call every minute; every 
three days,a woman is murdered 
<http://www.refuge.org.uk/get-help-now/what-is-domestic-violence/domestic-violence-the-facts/>
. Maybe you work with one of these women, or say hi at the school gate; maybe 
she’s your friend.

My friend’s worst beating was with her newborn baby in her arms. Thrown down 
the stairs, her head bounced off the patio doors, her nose exploded from the 
force of his boot. She now helps other survivors (she helped me more than she 
knows), and is happily engaged to a good man. Her ex still threatens her, using 
access to his son to harass her. She logs everything with a solicitor; she has 
taken her power back.

There will be one significant, early red flag, so at odds with the man you 
thought you were dating, it won’t compute

Here’s what I’ve learned since I left:

Constant anxiety is not because you are neurotic, it’s called FEAR – listen to 
it.

Telling yourself that “all men are bastards” will keep you with the bastard 
you’re with – “all” men are decidedly not bastards, most are decent, some are 
really special.

Minimising his outrageous behaviour with: “all relationships have their ups 
and downs” will keep you in the shitty relationship you are in.

Charm is integral, look out for red flags – coming on too strong; using words 
like “always” and “forever”; calling all the time; turning up unannounced; 
keeping you so busy with romantic surprises that you don’t see your friends; 
bombarding you with presents; buying you a new phone (to check where you are, 
or even to track the GPS); picking out your clothes. We’re conditioned to see 
this as romance, but it’s control.

There will be one significant, early red flag, so at odds with the nice man 
you thought you were dating, it won’t compute. Mine? He sent me a barrage of 
abusive texts late at night in fluent Spanish (I don’t speak Spanish). By the 
time I got up the next morning, his apology was already in my inbox. Anyone 
telling you to “detach with love” and “work on your boundaries” or to “stop 
playing the victim” is not your friend. You are being victimised. I’m all for 
boundaries, but they are futile against a bulldozer.

Many people, including professionals, will collude with his excuses. But he’s 
not doing it because he’s drunk, stressed, insecure, had a terrible cheating 
ex, is mentally ill, or because his mother dropped him on his head when he was 
a baby. He’s doing it because he feels he has a right to do it. This is because 
he has certain beliefs about women which are fully supported by our culture. 
He’s a misogynist – simple. Millions of men are stressed, heartbroken, 
insecure, bonkers, and addicted, some even have really awful girlfriends, and 
they don’t abuse people or hate women.

'We are the men of a childhood where the monsters of family violence were 
real' | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/27/we-are-the-men-of-a-childhood-where-the-monsters-of-family-violence-were-real>
Your real friends won’t tell you until it’s really bad; they will listen to 
you endlessly complain, agonise, and cry. They will watch in dismay as you 
smooth it over, or worse, get engaged. If you are extremely lucky, one of them 
might eventually say, “you sound like a battered wife” (do I?) and blast you 
out of your paralysis.

All those fears you have that you’re unlovable, stupid, useless, ugly, fat, 
unemployable, and too sensitive are not true. They are the consequences of 
living with a woman-hating wazzock who will only resort to violence when his 
other tactics start to fail. Many men never use their fists; they don’t need to.

You are not alone. According to a poll, 33% of women 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/pa/article-2758654/33-women-suffer-home-abuse.html>
 go through this – it’s nothing to do with your background, your socioeconomic 
group, or your religion: it’s because you are a woman. Being a woman is not a 
crime, unlike domestic abuse. Remember that leaving is the most dangerous time; 
he’s likely to up the ante. Get support. Many men are extremely persuasive 
after you’ve gone; be prepared for promises and threats, for the friends he’s 
enlisted to tell you they’ve “never seen anyone so cut up, he really does love 
you”. You need a plan.

It’s called a “breakup” because it’s broken. The beautiful, liberating, 
wonderful day is coming when you’ll have him out of your system; you will wake 
up one morning and feel happy and free.

I still don’t know what love is, but I know it’s not warm and fuzzy feelings – 
it’s actions, it’s what you do. I still like men, I love male company, I have 
some great friends. I still want to love and be loved. There have been new 
relationships since I left, but men scare me a little. It’s going to be a 
special guy who takes my guard down – who will be patient as I flap about in 
the big blue yonder, and panic. I hope I meet him. But I’m not a half, looking 
for my whole. I don’t need looking after. But to lean in a little, we all need 
that. The way I see it, any man worth my time is already a feminist; he may not 
think of it that way, but he is. Decent men respect women, have got that whole 
macho v masculine thing figured out. I take heart from my favourite Maya 
Angelou quote: “I’ve been female for a long time now. I’d be stupid not to be 
on my own side.”

• Refuge <http://www.refuge.org.uk/> has a 24-hour helpline: 0808 2000 247
 