
I glanced across the cafe table at the man sitting opposite. We had the same 
prominent cheekbones, long chin and fine hair that wouldn’t do what it was 
meant to. We smoked the same brand of strong Dutch rolling tobacco and his 
purplish skin tone, like mine, revealed poor circulation. Although short, our 
conversation had already uncovered shared tastes in films, books and music. We 
crossed our legs in unison, tapped the ash from our cigarettes with the same 
studied mannerism, and jiggled our feet to a silent rhythm.

The man opposite was my father. I’d met him for the first time half an hour 
before.

Making sense of my identity


That first weekend in Paris meant different things to both of us. I was a 
confused 19-year-old student in desperate search of a sense of identity from a 
father I’d never met. He was a surrealist painter reunited with a son he hadn’t 
seen in 18 years. As we hugged somewhat awkwardly in the reception area of a 
hotel, I could see him welling up. I felt guilty for not experiencing a similar 
surge of emotion but to me he was a stranger.

I heard about Phil when I was 13 – a few years after Robert, the man I’d 
thought was my biological father, had died (in an industrial accident, I was 
told at the time, although I later found out he killed himself during a work 
trip to Australia). One day when I was off school sick, my mum started a 
conversation in the kitchen of our anonymous, pebble-dashed semi in Suffolk, 
explaining that Robert had adopted me. She and Phil had been art students in 
Brighton at the end of the 60s. They got married after she fell pregnant, but 
separated before I was born. The last she’d heard, this working-class Yorkshire 
lad was living in Venezuela. I pictured him paddling down the Orinoco in a 
dugout canoe – an image I still somehow connect with him.

Robert had treated me as his own son and – after his death and before she 
remarried – my mum performed the role of both parents as best she could while 
we struggled to get by on benefits and free school meals. I told her I wasn’t 
interested in meeting Phil and instead started to go quietly off the rails – 
smashing windows, breaking into cars and frequent drinking to the point of 
memory loss. I rarely got caught and, as I continued to do well at school, no 
one really noticed.

It was when I left small-town Suffolk for university at 18 that I realised I 
didn’t have a clue who I was. I hadn’t been conscious of leading a sheltered 
life, but suddenly I met people who had travelled the world and knew what they 
wanted to be. Much of that period is a stoned blur.

After some pretty self-destructive episodes, mum offered to get in touch with 
Phil and this time I agreed. She wrote a letter explaining I’d like to make 
contact. A week later (this was pre-internet) we had a reply. He was no longer 
living in Caracas, he wrote, and had moved with his Spanish wife and teenage 
daughter to Zaragoza, a city in the north of Spain. He’d recently finished 
exhibiting at the Venice Biennale and had another show coming up in Paris next 
weekend. Would I come and meet him?
 The Guardian, a painting by Philip West 
A few days later I found myself sitting opposite my father in a cafe in 
Montmartre. We spent a couple of nights in Paris with a group of painters and 
poets from the exhibition and then took a train south to Zaragoza to meet his 
wife Marisa and Sandra, my new sister. She had known nothing about my existence 
until I made contact the week before but we soon had a strong bond. Phil and 
his family welcomed me into their lives.

In those early days, Phil and I would trawl bars and talk until dawn. I 
badgered him with questions about the purpose of life and he pointed me in the 
direction of William Blake and the Marquis de Sade.

Back at university I finally felt I had an identity: I was the lanky one who 
dressed in black, took too many drugs and had a cool, bohemian father. It soon 
became clear, though, that too much time had passed and too much had happened 
for it all to be quite so easy. Phil’s determination to live the artist’s 
lifestyle meant putting creation – and an unquenchable thirst for brandy – 
above all else, including people’s feelings. When he divorced Marisa a couple 
of years later, I couldn’t cope with feeling torn between my new father and new 
sister. So I stopped visiting.

It was difficult with my English family too. Since meeting Phil, all sorts of 
skeletons had been aired. I found out how my grandmother had recommended my mum 
get an abortion; how my favourite aunt had disapproved of the squat Phil had 
proposed as our new home and convinced my mum to return to her parents. I heard 
how Phil would turn up for access visits still out of it on LSD from the day 
before. I even discovered I had originally been registered with a different 
name – Salvador West (my mum changed it before the six-week limit was up). What 
bothered me most was that my closest older relatives had known about all this 
and kept quiet. They had good intentions but I felt everything I trusted and 
believed in was crashing down.

It wasn’t until I became a father myself that I gained any real understanding 
of how Phil must have felt

After scraping through university, I borrowed a few hundred pounds for a plane 
ticket and set off round the world, generally favouring the dodgiest areas I 
could find. It was four years before I properly settled back in England and in 
those pre-mobile, pre-internet days it was easy to go weeks, often months, 
without contact.

I hadn’t been to Zaragoza for a couple of years when I got a call from Mum to 
say Phil was in hospital. I was 26 and, finally bored with my rootless 
lifestyle, was sleeping on a friend’s floor in south London as I waited to hear 
about a place on a post-grad journalism course. Mum paid for a flight and the 
next day I joined the rest of Phil’s family at his bedside. No one seemed to 
know what was happening at first but it eventually became clear that he’d had a 
toe amputated because of skin cancer the year before and now had a brain tumour 
the size of a small orange. With the cancer spread around his body he had taken 
the decision to refuse all but palliative care.

A few days later I flew back to London to start my course. A week after that I 
heard he had died. I didn’t have the money to fly over for his funeral.

The son becomes a father


I was consumed with regret. I’d known him for seven years but had wasted half 
that time not talking to him. His death before his 48th birthday had robbed me 
of any chance of reconciliation, of working it through together.

A moment that changed me: becoming a gym fundamentalist | Dave Whelan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/14/moment-changed-me-gym-exercise>
It wasn’t until I became a father myself a decade or so later that I gained 
any real understanding of how Phil must have felt. He was only 21 when I was 
born. Now that I’m the age he was when we met in Paris that first time, I can 
appreciate what it might have been like to be confronted by a confused 
19-year-old desperate for answers. Would I have done any better? I can see now 
how hard I was on him.

It was only after Phil’s death that I really began to work out who I was. I 
had felt stifled by an intense need to live up to his expectations, to be 
creative, but at once I was liberated. I threw myself into life as a news 
reporter, moved into a flat, had relationships and eventually got married and 
had a child.

It took five years of psychoanalysis to work through the anger and loss but 
I’m more at peace with him now. I’ve travelled a few times to the hills in the 
Pyrenees where his ashes are scattered, and visited the Eugenio Granell museum 
in Santiago de Compostela where most of his paintings are. While I still 
sometimes get the unsettling feeling that life isn’t real, I now prefer
ultrarunning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/nov/06/ultrarunning-ultimate-runners-high>
 to drugs and, for the most part, I’m content with a quiet life.

In the end I believe meeting Phil had an overall positive effect on my life. 
The experience certainly left me with a determination to make my own son’s 
early life as straightforward and stable as possible, while the incessant 
shocks – and all that death at an early age – taught me that life is short … 
and anything is possible.
 