
In 1993, much to my family’s surprise, I joined the Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> as a constable. For me, it 
was an obvious way to further my desire to support young people. Having spent 
my childhood helping out my dad at the local youth club, I had seen at 
first-hand the impact of a guiding force in the life of a young person.

The police was never a natural fit for me; I was never very good at taking 
orders or doing things the traditional way, and my blatant disregard for 
authority got me into trouble a fair few times. Despite all this I worked my 
way into my perfect position: as a school and youth liaison officer, my job was 
to work withyoung offenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/nov/21/young-offenders-institution-ashfield>
 and those at risk of offending. I slipped into the job easily; I loved being 
around these young people, and formed relationships with them that allowed me 
to effect change in the way I had always wanted to.

G4S youth jails: a story of revolving doors, dangerous restraints and death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/26/g4s-youth-jails-a-story-of-revolving-doors-dangerous-restraints-and-death>
I still remember the day I met Luke (not his real name), a 15-year-old who had 
several previous police cautions under his belt. I was at a school and he 
mooned at the office window, just to provoke me. Luke was a character: his 
mother was asex worker <https://www.theguardian.com/society/prostitution> and 
his father and older brother were in prison, yet he somehow managed to retain a 
sense of fun and he was a likable, if cheeky, kid. As the years went by I got 
to know Luke really well. I saw him as often as once a week, and we tried every 
intervention to keep him from following his family into prison: nothing worked.

His spark dwindled, and his bright blue eyes turned a sallow grey as drugs 
took hold of him. While I was still fond of him, he had become more of a burden 
to me now than a bright young boy with a future. The phone in the office would 
ring and I would know that, yet again, Luke had committed some petty crime – 
and, yet again, I would be the one dealing with another stream of paperwork 
concerning a young boy who had sealed his fate.

The day my life changed was like any other – a normal day in the office and 
another phone call to collect Luke, who had been arrested for breaching his 
bail. Exasperated, I sat in the back of a police van, handcuffed to Luke, who 
resembled a fraction of the bubbly boy I had met a few years earlier. I turned 
to him and said without thinking, “Luke, why on earth do you do this?” He 
looked at me and turned his gaze towards the floor.

“Sarah, what else is there for me? It was obvious which way I was going, long 
before I met you.” He paused and wiped his eyes. “When people tell you all your 
life how bad you are, you believe it and there is no way out from there.” I 
didn’t respond, I don’t know why, maybe I was too cross, maybe there was too 
much distance now between us, or maybe I just didn’t have a reply that I 
thought would be helpful. All I know is that I wish I had; because that was the 
last time I ever saw Luke.He took his life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/19/number-of-suicides-uk-increases-2013-male-rate-highest-2001>
 later that day. He wasted his young existence because he couldn’t see a way 
out; and I, perhaps the last hope for him, didn’t have a response.

He couldn’t see a way out and I, perhaps the last hope for him, didn’t have a 
response

I didn’t blame myself for Luke; I knew I wasn’t the problem, the system was. 
The system set up to protect and help Luke had failed him and it had failed me. 
I was ill-prepared to offer Luke the help he needed, and an overburdened system 
and mountains of paperwork meant he had fallen through the cracks. And now the 
job I had once loved felt uncomfortable; I was finding it harder and harder to 
reconcile the ones we saved with the ones we didn’t. I started to deal with 
young offenders differently, throwing away the rule book and just asking 
searching questions about them as people. But the work I was doing, although 
impactful, was not measurable, and I was soon told to toe the line. I couldn’t. 
In 2000 I left the police to figure out how to better help young people who 
felt helpless.

A year later I set up my own youth coaching business, and 15 years later that 
business is still going strong. While the work I do now differs wildly from my 
work in the police, every day I do what I do for Luke and those like him.

Luke could not see a future worth living; he thought he was worthless and had 
nothing to give to the world. I don’t believe any young person should feel like 
that. I think every young person has a gift to share, and the job of the adults 
in their lives is to shine a light on that gift and encourage them to use it. 
We all owe it to children like Luke to try.

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries can be 
foundhere <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>

​
 