
Selective mutism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/15/selective-mutism-complex-problem>
 wasn’t a diagnosis in common usage among teachers back in the 1980s when I 
started school; at least, no one ever used the phrase around me. I didn’t hear 
it until I was an adult, when suddenly it gave a name to “the thing that 
stopped me speaking for around 25 years of my life”.

Selective mutism: a complex problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/15/selective-mutism-complex-problem>
It certainly doesn’t feel selective if you’re stuck in it. As described on the 
websiteispeak <http://www.ispeak.org.uk/>, selective mutism (SM) is “a severe 
situational anxiety disorder … [which] generally starts in early childhood but 
can, if not treated early enough, continue into adulthood. Children and adults 
with SM are often fully capable of speaking … but cannot speak in certain 
situations because they are phobic of initiating speech.”

I was just a quiet kid at first – very shy, very jumpy – and I can’t remember 
exactly why that turned into just not talking any more. There often isn’t a 
specific reason SM children stop talking; it just happens. I stopped on one of 
my first days at school, when I mimed colouring a finished picture with a 
crayon for about an hour, because I couldn’t make myself speak to the teacher. 
The pretense continued until she realised that no child takes that long to 
perfect a daffodil.

Physically, I was able to talk. I was fine speaking to my family at home, as 
soon as the front door closed, but life away from those safe spaces became 
almost silent, and silent kids who stare wide-eyed at the floor just creep 
people out after a while. Especially teachers. “She’s very shy” turned into 
“She won’t answer me”. “She’ll certainly never go to university” in year 2 
became “She frequently has a pained expression and does not communicate” in 
year 5.
 ‘Selective mutism a lot like being frightened all the time and waiting for 
the next bad thing to happen that you won’t be able to stop.’ Phoebe-Jane Boyd 
(centre) with her brother David and sister Tammy. 
The problem was, as one of those kids that cared deeply about what adults 
thought of them, and genuinely valued good behaviour, not speaking was an 
Ironman challenge of self-destruction. Whenever a new adult with a wavering 
smile waited expectantly for me to answer them, I’d be torturing myself: “I 
need to answer her now – I have to, because she’s so uncomfortable, she’s 
worried. Stay still and she’ll leave.”

It’s difficult to explain the feeling of selective mutism to someone who’s 
never been trapped in it. It’s a lot like being frightened all the time and 
waiting for the next bad thing to happen that you won’t be able to stop. It’s 
not being able to force a decent voice out, even when you desperately try – a 
tiny whisper will emerge instead, and it hurts. For the kids at school it meant 
they could press their forearm against my throat in a hallway between classes 
if they were having a bad day, and it would be OK; they knew I’d just freeze 
and wait it out. Yelling, punching, stealing, touching – I’d hear my name being 
whispered as I went to classes, contorting me into a seven-hour school day 
cringe, adrenaline always raging.

Teacher after teacher would take me aside to gently ask if there were problems 
at home, did I get on with my parents, had anything changed recently? I’d fume, 
inside: “You just watched the class dipshit bounce my head off a wall because 
he doesn’t understand what you’re teaching him, and you’re asking me if the 
problem is at home?” What would struggle out was a hoarse “No” and I’d mentally 
file the teacher away as an idiot. Every year, every subject: “Phoebe works 
hard but never asks for help”, “Must try to discuss ideas more freely”, “If she 
were not so shy … ”

On a year 10 parent night schedule, I angrily scrawled this note for my mum: 
“I hate oral work, tell him to be more gentle on me when we do it! Tell him 
what we did with The Merchant of Venice was stupid and pointless! I get really 
upset and worried about performing in front of the class! Please tell him!” But 
teachers are there to prepare you for the world, not protect you by letting you 
skip reciting Shylock when it’s your turn. The message they’d instilled in me 
about what would happen outside, after school, had sunk in deep: I was not OK. 
Until I received a different message, at 17, from my English literature 
teacher, Mr Pearman.

A moment that changed me: stealing the book that saved my life | Jenn Ashworth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/moment-changed-me-school-library>
He had a blank face that showed no concern about whether his classes were 
taking in the lesson or not. He’d calmly insult kids he didn’t like with words 
he knew they wouldn’t understand, and enjoy the confused look he’d get back. He 
told us, while turning on the overhead projector and leaving it empty, about a 
fun game he liked to play of turning the projector on with nothing on it to see 
how long the class would stare stupidly at the wall.

“I hear your other teachers saying you don’t talk,” he told me one day, after 
I’d been in his class a few weeks. “It’s not a problem. I’ve read your work – 
it’s good. So, it doesn’t matter to me what you say or don’t. You don’t worry 
me.” He shrugged, and calmly gazed at me; quiet.

Thank you. “Thank you, thank you,” I whispered quickly, mind whirring: “How 
can I sum everything up to him – he knows already though, doesn’t he? But I 
want to tell him. I can’t, but I want to do that for him.”

I couldn’t yet. But that was the start.
 