
My childhood as I had known it changed forever when I was sent to a girls’ 
boarding school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/20/damage-boarding-school-sexual-abuse-children>
 in the seventies. My parents were in the process of splitting up, and my 
mother had gone abroad to look after my terminally ill granny – neither subject 
was discussed with me.

A few months before I left for my new life, aged just 11, I lost my teddy bear 
at an airport. The small bear had been my constant companion, and as my parents 
said goodbye there was nothing to cling to. The first night away, I sobbed in 
the small, unfamiliar bed. It was like falling off a cliff into the unknown 
with no one to catch me at the bottom.

The school was a former stately home situated in 25 acres of parkland that 
also contained a Saxon church and Italian gardens. The Jacobean-like exterior 
was huge and imposing. When we drove up the grand drive at the beginning of the 
autumn term, it was the first time I had actually seen the school.

I remember the heavy sense of impending doom as my parents said goodbye. I 
would see them on just two Saturday nights and for one short half term over the 
next three months. We communicated by letter, which we were obliged to write on 
a Sunday – the rumour being that the housemistress read and censored them all. 
It was a brutal way to live, supervised by embittered middle-aged women who 
didn’t appear to like children.

We were often cold and always hungry. The food was inedible, mostly. I 
remember oily pilchards, a disgusting dish of tinned tomatoes and crumble, 
slivers of hard meat that resembled pieces of leather, scrambled egg made from 
powder, pink bacon with more fat than meat. It was like being given a punitive 
sentence that never seemed to end.

Despite the “privileged” education we were being given, conditions were 
spartan: there were no curtains on our bedroom windows, we had one small drawer 
to store our personal items, and we were allotted three tepid baths a week. 
Every evening we stood in a line and sang vespers, which we had to learn off by 
heart. We wore enormous grey pants over our underwear, and every morning the 
matron would make us lift our skirts to check we were wearing them.

I remember interminable boredom. There was nothing to do after lessons or at 
weekends. At first I missed my mother desperately and wanted her to take me 
away. I wrote her tragic letters, which must have been hard to read. When I 
realised that she couldn’t save me, I gave up trying to succeed. I had been a 
happy, productive student at primary school, and had been made head girl in my 
final year. I enjoyed cycling, acting, reading, writing and climbing trees. My 
best friend from that time reminds me that I was pretty academic.

My gang of friends and I loathed our boarding school. We tried to rebel 
against the petty rules that prevented us being individuals. We began smoking 
at the age of 14 out of boredom and lost interest in anything but counting down 
the days until the end of term, when we would be released back into the real 
world for a short spell of freedom. None of our group achieved what we should 
have done academically.

We left at 16 and went to other schools for A-levels, but I railed against 
authority for years to come, and shirked anything that smacked of commitment or 
routine. After five years of heavy restraint, I wanted to be free to do exactly 
what I liked. Even the thought of university felt too restrictive, and I 
delayed going until my mid-twenties.

I think the worst aspect of that life, apart from being ripped from home, was 
the way we fell out of the habit of confiding in our parents. I wasbullied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/14/half-of-children-bullied-survey-schools>
 for a year by a housemistress with rolling eyes and a wobbling lip who made it 
clear that she disliked me. Almost every night she ordered me to stand in dark 
corridors for talking after lights out (everyone chatted in the dormitory, but 
she singled me out). She would leave me there for what seemed like hours, and 
would finally return, claiming she had forgotten me. One day she sent me to 
sleep on my own in a large empty dormitory for several weeks, which was 
terrifying. I didn’t tell my parents, but felt intensely persecuted and 
wretched.

Luckily, times have changed: parents, for whatever reason, still send their 
children to boarding school, but those institutions are far more accountable, 
and children have many ways to stay in touch with their parents. In those days 
we had access to one telephone box for more than 300 girls.

Living away from my parents greatly affected me. For many years, I lacked 
confidence and would too easily feel abandoned. Children need to be taken care 
of by people who truly love them as only parents can.
 