
“Tell me the truth, am I dying?”

“You are not dying but you have been in a bad accident,” I say, fighting to 
control my panic.

“If I die, I want you to know I love you.”

She has the bleeding wounds but I feel as if the air is being squeezed out of 
my lungs as I cradle my daughter, her helmet broken and her bicycle a twisted 
mass of metal from having collided with steel. Her brother is sobbing in 
fright, shirtless after I needed it to stem his sister’s bleeding.

Our NHS trust is close to a tipping point – and we are not alone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2017/jan/11/our-nhs-trust-is-close-to-a-tipping-point-and-we-are-not-alone>
I sit helplessly on the bike path, surrounded by blood and flesh and a grim 
silence, as my daughter’s consciousness wanes, vast waves of parental guilt 
second only to a mounting tsunami of panic at a regular bike ride gone horribly 
wrong in the blink of an eye. Neither an agile trauma surgeon nor a pragmatic 
emergency physician, I don’t even feel like a doctor as I coax my paralysed 
brain to recount the basics of first aid. Airway, breathing, circulation is as 
far as I get before help pulls up in the form of two young men, who go a bit 
green at the sight of the carnage.

“Help me help her,” I say, “I’m a doctor.” They instantly relax, so I don’t 
add, “But right now, I can’t function.”

An ambulance arrives, and with it, my first cocoon of safety. The officers are 
calm and methodical. They carefully lift the patient and usher me into the back 
of the ambulance. They administer drugs and ask about Christmas presents to 
keep her awake. I notice with admiration that they jot the major injuries 
silently but read aloud the normal numbers to reassure me.

At the public hospital, she is assessed quickly. The ensuing hours and days 
feel like a blur – an amorphous mass of protests and tears, decision trees and 
consent forms, insomnia and guilt.

But children are not called resilient for nothing – and as my daughter’s 
journey of recovery begins so does mine. Like any parent, I find her pain twice 
as pronounced, her suffering twice as acute and the injustice twice as 
undeserved. But the fact is, she is home, she is safe, and spared a host of 
tragic consequences that are the lot of many such children.

Thank you to the three ambulance officers who cared for not one, but two 
people.

“It could have been a lot worse,” I often muse to patients on my internal 
medicine rounds, meant as part consolation and part commendation. Now I know. 
So I would like to take this opportunity to thank the people who stopped it 
from being worse.

Thank you to the two young men who stopped. You minded my son, cleared our 
bikes, and waited till help arrived before seeking permission to leave because 
you were running late. You were working for extra holiday money, yet your final 
act was to open your wallet and offer us the little cash you had, with the 
additional assurance that it didn’t need to be repaid. Who does that? 
Obviously, total strangers do. I don’t know where you are but my wish for you 
is that your wallet may be filled many times over with the money you so 
generously offered to part with.

Thank you to the three ambulance officers who cared for not one, but two 
people. Amid myriad duties stabilising my daughter, you remembered to 
acknowledge my composure. I felt weak at the knees but your words restored me. 
I don’t know how you do it but the community is rightly indebted to you. Like 
practically everyone else you treat as first responders, I’m afraid I remember 
you by deed not name but please know that every time I see an ambulance I say a 
silent prayer that you exist.

Thank you to the specialists, fellows and residents, too many to name but not 
to praise. Treating the child of a doctor, that too a colleague, is a tricky 
business. If you don’t acknowledge the parent at all, you risk seeming 
unnecessarily hostile or dismissive but if you allow the parent to govern 
decisions you could compromise the patient. While I was only too glad and 
wholly relieved that you were her doctors, I took interest in how you dealt 
with the issue.

The emergency physician set the tone. “It must be awful to be on the other 
side,” she sympathised, “but we are here to take care of her.” In one sentence 
she nodded to my qualifications but left me to do the most important job, that 
of being a parent.

I watched in awe at the way the complex task of patient care came together, 
piece by piece, doctor by doctor. Of course, I quietly wished you haste but the 
premature baby born on the road absolutely took precedence as did the child 
with burns. My heart swells with pride that we work together in the public 
hospital system.

In her Notes on Nursing, Florence Nightingale wrote that the very first 
requirement in a hospital is that it should do the sick no harm. The nurses 
exemplified this spirit. Of the many ways they helped, two stick in my mind – 
one, a nurse bringing in a hairbrush amid all the upheaval to bring normality 
to my daughter’s matted hair and another painstakingly removing a small plastic 
adhesive off my daughter’s painful hand to avoid further trauma. The quickest 
way to remove it would have been to peel it off like a waxing strip but the 
nurse recognised her patient’s trauma and knew not to compound it as many other 
interventions were to come. If a parent were to be replaced as carer there 
could be no better substitute than a nurse.

I have walked past many operating theatres but never been inside. I hadn’t 
imagined my first time as an upset parent, surrounded by glaring lights, 
sterile tables, and a hushed air that belied a life and death enterprise for 
thousands of patients. Here, I watched my daughter’s eye glaze under the 
anaesthetic as I prepared to leave her to the team of surgeons. “It’s OK to 
give her a kiss,” the theatre tech whispered. Amid all the important things, 
thank you for encouraging the most human of gestures.

Back home, the tooth fairy came, leaving behind far too much money with the 
reasonable explanation that since the broken teeth went missing she had to look 
under every pillow.

Our grocer sent the softest berries, friends brought food, and concerned folks 
rang. But the most important gift of all was when setting aside their own fears 
of how confronting my daughter might look, parents brought their children to 
visit. For of course, a child doesn’t say, “thank God my spleen is safe” but 
frets, “If I am damaged, will my friends still care about me?” The love and 
laughter of friends is a powerful healer, no matter how young or old we are. 
Thank you to all those who instinctively understood this and normalised the 
accident.

‘As she is born, part of me is dying’ – how becoming a mother changes you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/09/born-mother-pregnancy-idea-frightening>
When my daughter emerged from surgery, the surgeon rang to tell me that she 
was fine before explaining the other injuries he had discovered, and fixed. I 
had never met him before that morning and yet, he had held my daughter’s life 
in his hand, been her guardian while I helplessly paced the corridor. In that 
corridor, my psychiatrist colleague on his rounds had stopped and offered to 
take a walk with me. “You have patients waiting,” I said disbelievingly. “This 
is important too,” he said.

“I don’t know how to say thank you,” I said to the surgeon, overwhelmed at 
being the recipient of so much favour, more used to being at the giving end.

 “There is no need,” he said. “It was nothing.”

I remember thinking then how insanely difficult it could be to make a doctor 
understand the true extent of your gratitude. And in that moment, I realised 
that this was the very corridor where my own patients had expressed their 
gratitude to me hundreds or even thousands of times and I had responded 
similarly, with a “it’s my job,” or “I am just happy you’re better”.

One unfortunate accident and a thousand acts of kindness, mostly from 
strangers just doing what they know to do. I have been wondering a lot about 
how to repay the debt. Cards or chocolates? My child’s painting or my heartfelt 
note? The answer often comes to me in the middle of the night.

There is actually no way to repay the debt and it’s best not to think of it 
like that. The only thing that comes close is paying it forward, repaying the 
thousand acts of kindness with a thousand of one’s own, as bystander, friend, 
colleague and doctor. For we are all susceptible to tragedy but it’s the 
humanity shown us by our fellow citizen that leaves an impression.
 