
In Alicia’s tiny attic flat (“like a doll’s house,” as she puts it) in 
Lewisham, southLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, she has reached 
day 20 without running water.

Since her landlord started to gut the two empty floors below her last year, 
the 55-year-old has been living on top of a building site. Scaffolding covers 
the outside of the three-storey house, a criss-cross of boards and metal poles 
metres high. The entrance hall ceilings are stripped bare, naked wires hanging 
down.

The flat’s electricity comes and goes: put the heating on and the circuit 
overloads. Two buckets and a hose sit near the front door on the ground floor, 
offered to her as a makeshift water supply.

To wash, Alicia has to carry water from the bucket downstairs up to the attic, 
then boil it. It’s too dirty for human consumption, so every other day she has 
to get drinking water from her nearest friend’s home, two bus rides away: she 
puts four empty bottles in a suitcase, travels for an hour on the buses, walks 
to her friend’s house, fills each of the bottles up, and then lugs the suitcase 
and water back to her flat.

Meet Sally, trapped in Concentrix’s circle of poverty, debt and fear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/concentric-poverty-debt-child-tax-credits>
Alicia has mental health problems – anxiety with suicidal tendencies, body 
dysphoria and obsessive compulsive disorder – and living conditions that would 
be distressing for anyone, are torture to her. “I hate it,” she says, her voice 
shaking. “I feel so out of control.”

She goes to Lewisham council’s offices to ask for help: she gets there at 9am, 
90 minutes before the first appointment to get the first ticket and waits all 
day. “Every time I go down there, I end up crying,” she says. “They don’t 
listen to me.”

As we talk, Alicia is notably hoarse. She’s a survivor of sexual and physical 
abuse and her voice shows the physical damage. “From the strangling,” she 
explains. Psychologically, the damage runs deeper: on top of an anxiety around 
being clean, she’s terrified around male strangers, to the extent that her 
medical records state it’s impossible for her to share a bathroom. But over the 
past month, the council has tried to push Alicia to two shared accommodations: 
one already occupied by a couple, and another with mould patches on the walls, 
a broken toilet and four other tenants, but no locks on the doors. Both 
properties happen to be owned by her current landlord.

In the centre of the capital’s housing crisis, tenants like Alicia are little 
more than a commodity for profit. Four years ago, she took this flat because 
she was desperate: her old private rental, a basement below a betting shop in 
Brixton, had no ventilation and “everything was rotting”. From the minute she 
moved in to the attic, the electrics were botched. She had to pay to get two 
safe plugs connected. She’s never had hot water, even before the building work 
started. The skylight in the hallway leaks and when it rains she has to line 
the hall with pots. “If I don’t get home in time, it’s flooded,” she says. 
Still, rent gets paid: £800 a month from Lewisham council in housing benefit.

Alicia has mental health problems, and living conditions that would be 
distressing for anyone are torture to her

“And the council knew about all the problems,” she says. “But nothing gets 
done.”

I speak to Caroline, a volunteer community worker, who’s been trying to help 
Alicia get a response from Lewisham council. She shows me copies of emails 
she’s sent, one after another. “The house is literally being pulled down around 
her,” she says. “But the council know this and they still aren’t doing anything 
about it.”

After pressure from Caroline and a legal aid solicitor, last week an 
environmental health officer from the council finally inspected Alicia’s flat. 
As a result, on Friday, Lewisham sent her to temporary accommodation: a hostel, 
filled with men, drinking and screaming. Alicia spent the night awake, huddled 
on the bed, unable to go to the shared toilet. By the morning, she was in the 
middle of a suicidal episode and had to call Caroline and get a taxi to take 
her home. “I was petrified,” she says. “I’d rather have no water than be 
scared.”

A Lewisham council spokesperson confirmed they were asked to visit to “verify 
the issues” with Alicia’s current landlord and have done so. “As a result of 
the findings of this visit, [Alicia] was placed in temporary accommodation 
which she has since vacated,” they added. “[Alicia’s] health needs in relation 
to her housing are currently being assessed and will be followed up with her 
care team. Her case is ongoing.”

The council’s environmental health officer gave Alicia’s landlord four working 
days to reinstate her water supply, Caroline says. That deadline passed on 
Tuesday. It means, in practice, that a vulnerable woman has been left in a 
derelict building site without running water.

“I just want to be far away from here,” Alicia says. “My health is getting 
worse.”

• Names have been changed 
 