
The abolition of the Department of Energy and Climate Change has been 
condemned by former ministers as a major setback to British efforts to combat 
global warming.

Decc was closed in a series of sweeping changes to the government unveiled by 
the new prime minister, Theresa May, on Thursday. Its functions, which include 
representing the UK at international climate talks, responsibility for meeting 
carbon targets and levying subsidies for green energy, have been transferred to 
a beefed-up business department led by Greg Clark.

But Ed Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-davey>, who served as 
Liberal Democrat secretary of state at Decc between 2012 and 2015, criticised 
the decision.

“This is a major setback for the UK’s climate change efforts. Greg Clark may 
be nice and he may even be green, but by downgrading the Whitehall status of 
climate change, Theresa May has hit low carbon investor confidence yet again,” 
he told the Guardian.

His view was echoed by Ed Miliband, the department’s first secretary of state 
when it was created in 2008 by Labour, who tweeted that the move was: “Plain 
stupid. Climate not even mentioned in new dept title. Matters because depts 
shape priorities, shape outcomes.”

Chris Huhne, the Liberal Democrat head of Decc between 2010 and 2012, said: 
“It is a big problem to have only one department charged with any environmental 
objectives – Defra. At a stroke, the number of cabinet voices with a 
departmental remit for the environment and climate change has been halved.

“It is a serious downgrading of British capability in the area, and it sadly 
fits with a shift to the right in government where Euroscepticism often goes 
hand in hand with climate scepticism.”

A group of international statesmen and women including Kofi Annan, Mary 
Robinson and Desmond Tutuissued a statement 
<https://twitter.com/TheElders/status/753867746677579776> saying they regretted 
the decision and it failed to encourage leadership on climate change.

Many environmental groups strongly criticised the decision as downgrading 
action on climate only months after more than 170 countries signed the Paris 
climate deal in New York. The UK is under pressure to ratify the agreement, 
both as part of the EU and domestically.

“This is shocking news. Less than a day into the job and it appears that the 
new prime minister has already downgraded action to tackle climate change, one 
of the biggest threats we face,” said Craig Bennett, the CEO of Friends of the 
Earth.

ClientEarth, a group of environment lawyers who won a court battle against the 
government last year on air pollution, said the closure sent the wrong signals 
to the world.

“At a time when the challenge of climate change becomes ever more pressing, 
the government has scrapped the department devoted to tackling it. This is a 
statement of disregard for one of the most challenging economic, social and 
environmental issues humans have ever faced,” said its chief executive, James 
Thornton.

“It sends a terrible signal at the worst possible time, undermining efforts to 
secure a clean, safe energy future.”

Angus MacNeil, the SNP MP and chair of the energy and climate change 
committee, said he was astonished by the abolition of Decc, as it came after 
government policy changes had already created uncertainty for investors.

Catherine Bearder, a Liberal Democrat MEP, said: “Scrapping Decc sends a 
terrible signal to the world. [It is] yet another concession to Tory Brexiteers 
and a blow to moderate, outward-looking Britain.”

The Green party said the axing of Decc was deeply worrying and long-time 
energy policy observers said it was a sign that energy and climate were 
slipping down the agenda, and that merging them with other departments before 
had failed to produce clear policy.

The New Economics Foundation thinktank said: “This reshuffle risks dropping 
climate change from the policy agenda altogether.” John Sauven, the executive 
director of Greenpeace, said: “Although, some might say ‘what’s in a name’, 
there is a very real worry that the progress made on tackling climate change 
could be relegated to the bottom of the intray.”

Staff said they expected to be moved out of the current Decc building as they 
are folded into the expanded Department for Business, Energy and Industrial 
Strategy.

Clark shadowed Miliband at Decc during 2008-10 and is seen as a green-minded 
Tory, although he has his environmental critics because he pushed through 
controversial planning reforms during the coalition. In a statement, he 
appeared to move to allay concerns that climate action would be downgraded.


“I am thrilled to have been appointed to lead this new department delivering a 
comprehensive industrial strategy, leading government’s relationship with 
business, furthering our world-class science base, delivering affordable, clean 
energy and tackling climate change,” he said.


Some green groups and experts were sanguine or positive about the folding of 
Decc into the business department. Lord Stern, a leading climate economist, 
said he was content with the change, and WWF said the department could be a 
“real powerhouse for change” if climate change “was hardwired” into it.


“Rather than bemoaning the demise of Decc, we should embrace the creation of 
BEIS,”argued the Policy Exchange thinktank 
<http://www.policyexchange.org.uk/media-centre/blogs/item/green-groups-should-embrace-not-bemoan-the-merger-of-decc-and-bis?category_id=13>
. “Decc has always been regarded as something of a minnow in departmental 
terms. By merging with BIS, energy and climate change issues can be elevated to 
a much higher level politically.”

Lord Deben, the chair of the government’s climate advisers, said 
<https://twitter.com/lorddeben/status/753931259026472960>: “what is done 
matters, not titles.... I’ll judge by actions.”

Greg Barker, former climate minister and climate advisor to David Cameron, said
 <https://twitter.com/GregBarkerUK/status/753612192608649216> the move made 
“huge sense”.
 