
While his classmates are busy wrestling with Roland Barthes and getting to 
grips with Mrs Gaskell, English literature student Alex Bisby – if the fancy 
takes him – might pop down to Hever Castle to hang out with Scarlett Johansson 
and Natalie Portman.

Bisby, from Reigate in Surrey, had never acted professionally before he
was called to appear in historical drama The Other Boleyn Girl but he had 
signed up to an extras agency specifically aimed at UK students.

"I had an email alert from the university website saying merely that
extras were needed in Dover and Sevenoaks," he says. "I clicked on 'yes', went 
to the Uni-versal Extras website (universalextras.co.uk 
<http://www.universalextras.co.uk/>) and uploaded a couple of pictures."

A couple of weeks later he found himself at a costume fitting in Elstree
and starring alongside two of Hollywood's most celebrated actors.

Now he earns a bout £75 a day (often more) as a film extra and has appeared in 
five films including Tim Burton's blockbuster Sweeney Todd. "It's really quite 
bizarre," laughs Bisby. "One day I was sitting in a lecture and the next I was 
standing next to Johnny Depp."

Work is predictably erratic, but it is a nice sideline and a canny way to get 
paid for doing nothing. "We do spend a lot of time sitting around waiting," 
Bisby explains, "but when you're paid £200 a day, who cares?"

Now in his third year, Bisby has even had to turn film work down. "It can be 
tough to juggle," he says, "and I have more university work on now than when I 
started. But I do plan to carry on doing as much as I can."

Wayne Berko set up Uni-versal Extras while he was still a student at
Oxford Brookes University. Now 26, he registered with an extras agency, did a 
couple of jobs and realised that there was a gap in the market for an "honest" 
agency purely for students. Uni-versal Extras is free for students to register. 
"We work quite differently," Berko explains. "If they can't do the job, they 
can't do the job. We don't penalise them for that and, as a student, you might 
live at home in London but go to Leeds University, so we try and find work to 
fit in with the holidays."

Berko thinks the money is easy as long as you are professional and punctual 
and willing to take direction. And you might find yourself living out your 
wildest fantasies. "We have one student who's a keen footballer who we've just 
placed as a goalie double in The Damned United [a forthcoming film based on 
David Peace's novel about football manager Brian Clough]."

The pay, says Berko, can vary. "It's a £70 minimum, including catering, and, 
if you don't work, you still get paid for the day. Commercials can pay really 
well, music videos less well."

But if you have the right look you might be on to a winner. Adds Berko:
"We need a wide range of people. So there might well be call for you if you 
have tattoos all over your face or are a good swimmer. Anyone and everyone can 
do it."

Another extra, Helen Kingston, an English, writing and performance student at 
York University, has worked on Peep Show and even been a stand-in for 
award-winning Australian actress Abbie Cornish in the forthcoming movie, Bright 
Star.

"I had done theatre studies at A-level and been involved in some productions 
outside of school," Kingston explains, "but that was about it. I went online to 
find an agency, joined up and didn't hear anything for ages."

Then one day she got a call asking if she could be in series five of the cult 
comedy Peep Show. "I was one of the festival goers at a Christian rock 
festival," she explains. "We spent a lot of time sitting on a bus and it really 
was the easiest job in the world. Ricky Gervais' Extras isn't far off the mark."

Anthony Dowling combines his extra work with a National Home Study
course in TV, film production and journalism and part-time work at O2 as an 
assistant supervisor. "Acting has been running through my veins ever since I 
was at school and our drama teacher asked us to do an improvised piece. I was 
transfixed," he laughs.

The 19-year-old's first role was in school drama Waterloo Road. "I signed up 
with an agent in July and immediately got a part in corridor and classroom 
scenes," he says.

Dowling has also made a music-based feature film in Liverpool. "I play
a punk rocker who gets in a big fight," he explains. "I had to do a couple of 
fight scenes and underground scenes."

Dowling thinks you need patience to be an extra. "When I first started I used 
to sit around doing nothing for ages, but you soon get to know people and learn 
the ropes. It's not for everyone, but it can be great fun."
 