
The red berries and fragrant white flowers of the rowan make it a sanctuary 
for wildlife, one reason why it’s been chosen as part of the Woodland Trust’s 
campaign to plant 64 million trees in the UK.

Why the UK needs 64 million new trees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/woodland-trust-64-million-trees/ng-interactive/2016/sep/23/why-the-uk-needs-64-million-new-trees>
When choosing a tree, you need to look into the future, to understand how fast 
it grows, how tall it will become, how much shade it creates and what delights 
it will offer from season to season. When planning its campaign to encourage 
people to plant more trees in the UK, the Woodland Trust considered which 
native tree would suit the smaller garden and survive from north to south. It 
chose a species that is sometimes overlooked, yet is a vital part of the 
landscape we should be protecting. It settled on the rowan.


The rowan has been part of the British countryside for centuries, where it has 
guided travellers and warded off dark magic, according to folklore. Knowing the 
tree’s other name – mountain ash – it’s little surprise that it flourishes in 
high altitudes and can survive for 200 years. Height-wise, the tree will reach 
just 15 metres, something that has prevented it being the first choice for 
timber forests. It has a smooth grey bark, is fast growing and is frost 
resistant.


A rowan sapling won’t mind a bit of shade, but it doesn’t like waterlogged 
ground. Plant it about two inches above the rootstock and, when returning the 
soil to the hole, gently compact it, to prevent frostbite reaching the roots. 
You may want to provide a stake for support and wrap a protective tree spiral 
around the sapling, if there is a risk of wild animals biting or tearing its 
bark.



Blood and feathers
Prior to sprouting, the buds on the maturing tree are purple, with fine hairs. 
The tree develops a conical shape, with feather-like, pinnate leaves made up of 
five to eight pairs of serrated leaflets. These are green above and blue-green 
beneath. Creamy white flowers follow between May and June, and attract 
pollinating insects with their sweet aroma.

 The flowers turn to red berries in autumn, while the leaves are still on the 
trees. While the berries are fine food for blackbirds and bullfinches, they are 
poisonous to humans when eaten raw. Cooked, however, they can produce a bitter 
jelly, rich in vitamin C, or are used to flavour ale and mead. The tempting 
berries were once used as bait by French and German bird-catchers. Crushed, 
fermented and mixed with oil, the berries also formed a type of bird-catching 
glue known as birdlime. Rowan branches form sturdy walking canes and tool 
handles. In Finland, the pliable wood is chosen for sleigh shafts and rake 
spikes.

 The rowan’s old Celtic name, ‘fid na ndruad’ means ‘wizard’s tree’. In 
folklore, the rowan’s berries were associated with magic – red being the best 
colour to fight against the evil brought by witches. Turn over a rowan berry 
and you will see a ‘protective pentagram’ on its base. The berries were worn as 
charms in Scotland, where cutting down a rowan was considered taboo. As a 
‘wayfarer’s tree’, the rowan was said to prevent pilgrims from losing their 
way, while druids saw the tree as a portal between worlds.

A Greek legend tells of a rowan sprouting from the blood and feathers lost by 
Zeus’ eagle in a battle against demons. The eagle’s blood became the tree’s 
ruby berries, the feathers its leaves. In Norse myth, woman was born of the 
rowan, while man came from the ash.


 From a slender sapling, a fine tree with magical associations and beauty for 
all seasons will emerge. For certain, the rowan makes an enchanting addition to 
any garden.

Half of all our ancient woodland has been lost or damaged in the last 70 
years. The Woodland Trust is leading a campaign to plant 64 million new native 
trees – one for every person in the UK – in the next 10 years. And right now 
the Trust are offering every new member a free rowan tree sapling (for a 
limited time only and while stocks last. One rowan sapling per each adult 
membership). Join now athttp://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/treeoffer 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/treeoffer>
 