
Of course I’m middle class, and so, if you are reading the Guardian, almost 
certainly, are you. It’s another of those questions that will not occur to you 
at all unless the answer is “yes”. The only thing that makes the question 
difficult to answer is that the middle class I belonged to no longer exists.

The crucial factor in the “traditional” English class system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/uk-class-identity-america-customs-socioeconomic-divide>
, which persisted from about 1832 to 1979, was that it was based around 
militarism just as much as money. You gained class from service to the imperial 
state, even if this wasn’t financially very rewarding. My father was a 
diplomat, although his father had died bankrupt when his architect’s practice 
failed in the Great Depression; my other grandfather was in theIndian civil 
service <http://www.britishempire.co.uk/maproom/india/ics.htm>, so that side of 
the family was embedded entirely in this system. So I learned when we moved 
back to England when I was eight that the family next door was much richer than 
we were, but still to be pitied as the money came because the father was an 
estate agent, and they had no culture. The second wasn’t entirely true, but the 
lie was a great consolation to us.

This particular layer of the middle classes was annihilated in the 
post-Thatcher world. My school contemporaries are all, for the most part, much 
richer than I am, and their children correspondingly richer than mine will ever 
be. But they make their money in different ways, and very seldom from the 
state, or, as we used to call it, public service.

The child had to be sent to boarding school, no matter how ghastly the parents 
had themselves found the experience

Although I had an expensive education, most of the cost was borne by the 
state, since diplomats had their school fees paid to some extent. It was an 
essential part of our consciousness that we knew rich people but would never 
ourselves be among them. Diplomats, army officers, dons and Anglican clergymen 
all lived in this curious shadow prosperity, enjoying the delights of money 
they did not own but which belonged to the institutions that they served. We 
lived on expenses, just as successful businessmen do today, but without a 
commensurate salary. In exchange, there was almost absolute job security and 
cast-iron pensions.

The disconnect of class from money was not absolute, of course. Class lagged 
about a generation behind money, so that you could become poor and remain 
middle class, or get rich without becoming upper class, but your children would 
acquire the class their income fitted them to, unless they were protected from 
downward movement by the right education.

It was understood by all concerned that this was the chief moral duty of a 
parent. The child had to be sent toboarding school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/08/boarding-school-syndrome-joy-schaverien-review>
, no matter how ghastly the parents had themselves found the experience, and 
all the spare money in the household must be spent on this. To fail was a 
catastrophe – that is why, for instance,Justin Welby’s school fees 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/religion/10176190/Archbishop-Justin-Welby-I-was-embarrassed.-It-was-like-getting-measles.html>
 were quietly remitted for the last two years of his time at Eton. His father 
had gone broke and the school wished to spare him the knowledge and humiliation.

'Middle class' used to denote comfort and security. Not anymore | Alissa Quart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/07/middle-class-struggle-technology-overtaking-jobs-security-cost-of-living>
Until about 30 years ago, this was the class that ran the literary and 
journalistic worlds: the founders of the Independent, the upper reaches of the 
Guardian, the Spectator and the Telegraph all belonged to it. Even then it was 
anachronistic, but neither those who campaigned against the establishment from 
the inside nor those who defended it could imagine how fragile it turned out to 
be. Nor did anyone foresee that the collapse of the old class system would lead 
to an enormous growth of economic inequality.

The old Labour party, which built and maintained the post-1945 welfare state, 
was after all an alliance between elements of my class and the trades unions. 
Neither now exist. The welfare state they built is failing too. I sometimes 
think I have fallen back into a different middle class – the one of my paternal 
grandfather, an architect who died broke in the last Great Depression. No 
doctors would visit him when he was dying of cancer, because he had not paid 
the bills for his wife’s death the year before.

That is of course a kind of panic-stricken pessimism. I am not bankrupt nor 
anywhere near it and I’ve had more fun and interest in my life than anyone 
deserves. But if I die of dementia, rather than the more likely cancer or heart 
disease, I can’t expect decent care on the NHS and I’ll certainly not be able 
to afford anything better. Maybe that’s the real class divide in my generation.
 