
I’m writing to you as a last resort. In 2014 I ordered a Cashplus prepaid card 
from a firm called Advanced Payment Solutions. I wanted to use it for holiday 
spending abroad.

Investigating a mortgage for a new home last year, I found that my credit 
rating had gone from excellent to very poor. After reviewing my Experian file I 
could see five late payments of £4.99 registered by APS. This was confusing as 
the card was a prepaid card only and would only ever hold money that I had 
transferred to it ... or so I thought.

After numerous calls to Advanced Payment Solutions I found out that it had 
applied a “credit booster” product to the card at £4.99 per month for 12 
months, to build a credit history. This is a product I didn’t need. I informed 
the company that it had made a mistake and could it please revoke the missed 
payments and correct the error.

A period of denial and unwillingness to help followed. Call after call and 
failed callback requests ensued. The financial ombudsman got involved but 
suggested that there was very little evidence to show that I did not request 
this product, therefore it could not enforce a retraction.

I work in financial services and must maintain a good credit rating to remain 
employed in the industry. The fact that the company can apply a “product” to 
any account without me having signed a contract is unbelievable.MA, Edinburgh

The case shows the problems of using an unmonitored email address when signing 
up for financial products. The company says it sent you several emails about 
these payments. You didn’t receive them because you used an old Hotmail account 
that you rarely looked at.

We asked the company to look again at this case, and it says it is certain 
that you did sign up for this service and therefore it won’t do anything to 
help you. “We have an obligation to report factual repayment information to 
credit agencies, which in light of the evidence we have, would not allow APS to 
overturn our decision. A decision which was also upheld by the FOS,” says Rich 
Wagner, APS’s chief executive.

You are adamant you didn’t, and have had your credit score messed up for what 
is a trivial sum.

Ultimately, if you genuinely believe that you didn’t, and restoring this score 
is important to you, start legal action against APS, and you may find it 
changes its tune, although it won’t be cheap. In the meantime, apply to the 
credit reference agency and get it to put a note of correction on your file to 
explain the reason for the missed payments. This should help in any future 
credit applications, given that it is a tiny sum.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 