
Slashing regulations for farmers will be the government’s key priority for the 
agriculture sector as Britain leaves theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, the environment secretary, Andrea 
Leadsom, has promised.

Speaking at the Oxford Farming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/farming> Conference, Leadsom announced 
one specific plan would be to end the “three-crop rule”, a measure designed to 
promote biodiversity on larger farms. This prompted criticism from the Green 
party, who called the idea “environmental irresponsibility”.

Leadsom, who has made few public pronouncements since taking the job in July, 
said too much time and money had been wasted on keeping up and complying with 
EU red tape.

She said: “Over the past six years we’ve done everything we can to reduce this 
burden, but I’m quite sure everyone here can still think of at least one piece 
of EU regulation you won’t miss.

“Now, as we prepare to leave the EU, I will be looking at scrapping the rules 
that hold us back and focusing instead on what works best for the UK.”

The three-crop rule, which was agreed by EU agriculture ministers in 2013, 
decrees that some larger farms must grow a variety of crops.

The measure is designed to mitigate the impact modern mass farming can have on 
the environment and local biodiversity and is unpopular with many British 
farmers.

However, the Greens condemned the plan. Molly Scott Cato, a Green MEP who sits 
on the European parliament’s agricultural committee, said the government seemed 
“determined to dive headlong into encouraging damaging monocultures”.

Leadsom’s announcement came on the day that a committee of MPs warned that 
departure from the EU could spell big problems for wildlife and habitats.

Brexit ‘zombie legislation’ could damage wildlife and farming, MPs warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/brexit-zombie-legislation-damage-wildlife-farming-mps-warn>
The Commons environmental audit committee said 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/environmental-audit-committee/news-parliament-2015/natural-environment-after-eu-report-published-16-17/>
 there could still be issues even if EU regulations were incorporated into UK 
law, and warned farmers could face a cut in income after Brexit.

The government has guaranteed farmers will receive the same level of financial 
support until at least 2020. Leadsom said her department’s rural development 
programme would provide an additional £120m to support rural growth.

However, the bulk of her address focused on what Leadsom argued was a “big 
potential win for farmers” through a promised bonfire of EU regulations on 
agriculture.

“No more 6ft EU billboards littering the landscape,” she said. “No more 
existential debates to determine what counts as a bush, a hedge, or a tree. And 
no more ridiculous, bureaucratic three-crop rule.

“By cutting the red tape that comes out of Brussels, we will free our farmers 
to grow more, sell more and export more great British food whilst upholding our 
high standards for plant and animal health and welfare.”

The Country Land and Business Association (CLA) welcomed her speech. Ross 
Murray, the CLA’s president, said: “Brexit presents the best possible prospect 
to design new rules to govern the way we farm and manage land. We can achieve 
increased productivity and improved environmental outcomes though a new 
world-leading food, farming and environmental policy and we are committed to 
working with ministers to deliver on this once-in-a-generation opportunity.”
 