
My fiance, Andrew Ward, who has died aged 38, was born with cystic fibrosis. 
The life expectancy of someone born today with CF is 41, but for Andy it was a 
triumph to reach adulthood. Throughout his life he defied the odds.

Andy was born and brought up in Leeds, the son of Valerie Bond (nee Ward), a 
cleaner, and Steven Westerman, a builder. He attended Whitecote primary, 
Bramley St Peter’s C of E middle and Benjamin Gott High schools, then left home 
to become a bar supervisor in Harvey’s wine bar,Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds>. After being retired through ill health 
in his early 20s, he returned to education and completed an access to higher 
education course in 2009.

He then embarked upon a full-time honours degree in media and popular culture 
at Leeds Beckett University. He viewed his condition as motivation for his 
drive, ambition and tenacity. He got up at 4.30 each morning to have time for 
nebulisers and physiotherapy before travelling to lectures and seminars. In 
July 2012 he graduated with first-class honours and a trio of awards: the best 
dissertation award, the Dean’s prize for outstanding student achievement in 
media and the Alan McGregor prize for outstanding work by a mature student. His 
dissertation tutor said: “It was an utter pleasure and privilege to teach 
Andrew and the highest mark I have ever awarded was to Andrew for his 
remarkable dissertation.”

Andy was awarded a scholarship for an MA course in cultural studies at the 
University of Leeds, where his intention was to build a module about disability 
and to become a lecturer. Unfortunately, he was unable to complete this because 
of declining health. He was placed on the transplant list and received six 
false calls for transplant before he died.

Andrew was witty, positive, funny and completely open and honest about all 
aspects of his life, his illness, organ donation and transplant. He was an avid 
reader of comics and a Star Wars fan. He enlightened and influenced many with 
his unique approach to life, appreciating each day as if it were his last.

In his own words: “I wouldn’t change a thing. Why? For better or worse, cystic 
fibrosis has given me so much. All I need to be happy is to wake up and feel 
relatively good and be surrounded by the people I love. CF has given me the 
ability to see life and all of its glory in a purer, more valued sense than 
most people do.”

He is survived by me and by two stepsons, Cameron and Morgan, by his parents 
and by his siblings, Sarah, Darren, Ben and Claire.
 