 Relatives of victims of the Lockerbie disaster are locked in a dispute with 
lawyers prosecuting the two Libyans accused of the bombing after they turned 
down requests for advance notice of when key witnesses will be giving evidence.
Three days into Scotland's biggest ever murder trial, in a specially 
constructed court at Camp van Zeist in the Netherlands, some relatives have 
accused prosecutors of ignoring their needs with a deci sion effectively 
denying them the opportunity to hear crucial testimony.

The prosecution team has listed more than 1,000 witnesses in its case against 
Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi, 48, and Al-Amin Khalifa Fhimah, 34, who deny 
charges of murder, conspiracy to murder and breaching airline security 
legislation. Their counsel have listed 119 witnesses and have told the court 
they will present evidence showing Palestinian terrorists were responsible.

All 259 passengers and crew on board Pan Am Flight 103 from London to New York 
were killed when a bomb concealed inside a radio cassette recorder exploded on 
21 December 1988. A further 11 people died in Lockerbie as wreckage landed on 
the town.

Relatives, spread around 16 countries, have repeatedly asked family liaison 
officials for advance notice of witnesses to allow them time to get to the 
court or to one of four remote sites set up in the US and Britain to offer them 
closed circuit viewing. They have been told two days notice is required before 
they can attend the remote sites.

The Crown Office, the prosecuting authority, insists that advance notice of 
the witness schedule would be a security risk. Members of US and British 
intelligence services and witnesses with links to Middle East terror 
organisations are expected to be called.

British relatives have not become involved in the dispute, but Rosemary Wolfe, 
an American whose 20-year-old daughter Miriam was a victim, told The Observer : 
'We are seriously concerned about this and have repeatedly asked for more 
information but it is just another one of those issues left hanging in the 
ether.'

Marina de Larracoechea, a Basque whose sister Nieves was a stewardess on Pan 
Am 103 said: 'It is ridiculous that we will not be told when witnesses are 
going to appear. I have a right to be here to hear the important witnesses.'

Officials are working on a compromise that will allow the relatives to be 
given gen eral information on which broad areas of evidence are coming up. 
There is also a secure website and a telephone hotline for families providing 
updates from the prosecution, the court service and the police.
 