
My father, Archie Norman, who has died aged 104, was an eminent paediatrician 
who pioneered research into cystic fibrosis and asthma at Great Ormond Street 
hospital, in London, and neonatal care at Queen Charlotte’s.

The son of George Norman, a radiologist, and his wife, Mary (nee MacCallum), a 
nurse, he was born in Oban, Argyll and Bute, and watched his father march off 
to the first world war. He grew up in the soot-covered mill town of Shaw in 
Lancashire (now part of Greater Manchester), and remembered the “waker” coming 
down the street and the sirens summoning workers to the morning shift.

After attending Charterhouse school, in Godalming, Surrey, he studied medicine 
at Cambridge University, taking psychology as a postgraduate and then went to 
the Middlesex hospital. He served as a house registrar at Great Ormond Street 
before the second world war when there were few antibiotics and no NHS. At his 
weekly whooping cough clinic distressed mothers with children queued around the 
block to be given coloured pills depending on their ability to pay.

During the war he was assigned as medical officer to the 4th battalion of the 
Northumberland Fusiliers, a reconnaissance unit sent to North Africa in early 
1942. At the battle of Knightsbridge he was left behind in the retreat tending 
the wounded and sending away his last vehicle to safety. He served in PoW camps 
in Italy and Silesia before being liberated by the Russians. He led 150 troops 
to freedom, marching on foot for weeks through Russian lines and then by train 
to the Black Sea. On their commendation he was appointed MBE in 1945. “They had 
an exaggerated idea of what I did,” he said.

Returning to Great Ormond Street, he arrived in an extraordinary new era for 
paediatrics. He founded the hospital’s respiratory clinic to pioneer research 
and treatment of cystic fibrosis and asthma. He undertook the first UK life 
tables for cystic fibrosis, which showed that in the early 1950s few children 
reached teenage years.Asthma <https://www.theguardian.com/society/asthma> was a 
significant cause of child mortality in smog-filled London and he raised money 
to pay for new lung function tests and pioneered the use of steroids to treat 
children.

As the numbers of patients grew, he organised the founding of the Cystic 
Fibrosis Research Trust <https://www.cysticfibrosis.org.uk>, cajoling parents 
and benefactors into getting it off the ground. Later he was a driving force 
behind the founding of theChildren’s Trust 
<https://www.thechildrenstrust.org.uk> at Tadworth, Surrey, as a centre for 
helping children with brain injury.

In 1953 he became consultant paediatrician at Queen Charlotte’s, where he 
worked on groundbreaking care of premature babies. He looked after the first 
quintuplets born in the UK, in 1969. At night he would dash up to London from 
the family home in Kingswood, Surrey, to do an emergency transfusion, driving 
home afterwards “feeling that I had done something worthwhile”.

He worked long hours and lived for his patients until he retired to spend more 
time with his wife, Betty, a GP. He never sought recognition and disdained 
bombast. He always wore a clean white coat on the ward and walked up the stairs 
even if the lift was available. He drank little and settled for a cheese 
sandwich for lunch.

He is survived by Betty and their five sons, Duncan, Thomas, Sandy, Donald and 
me, and by seven grandchildren.
 