
Shortly after releasing my autobiography 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrik_Sj%C3%B6berg>, in which I spoke about the 
sexual abuse I had suffered as a child from my athletics coach Viljo 
Nousiainen, I gave a public reading in Sweden. Afterwards I was approached by a 
93-year-old man who had been in the audience, and I will never forget what he 
told me. “I’m going to read the book, give one to my wife and one each to my 
children, and then I’m going to tell them what happened to me when I was 10 
years old,” he said. “You came out with this in your book. I’ve been ashamed 
all my life and was ready to take it to the grave, but now I’m going to tell my 
family.”

It shows there are no time limits on talking about something like this, and 
that’s one reason why the accounts that were so bravely given byseveral former 
footballers late last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/02/football-abuse-from-one-lone-voice-to-a-national-scandal>
 are so important in Britain. In my case, I waited 30 years to recount what had 
happened. Many people have been, and are, in the same situation, so it’s very 
encouraging to see high-profile athletes come forward and give confidence to 
others who have suffered similar experiences.

Because of what Nousiainen did, if I could go back in time I would never have 
got involved in the high jump – despite my achievements

Nousiainen stopped abusing me when I was 14, and after that I tried to forget 
what happened for many years. But I was an angry kid, and have been angry all 
my life. I had a successful career in the high jump, winning a World 
Championships gold and three Olympic medals, but I’ve done things I’m not proud 
of and wanted to explain why. In my case, I could at least let out my anger 
through sport, but I have received emails from guys who have ended up in prison 
– in some cases for killing someone. I’m sure that rage is the result of being 
abused during childhood.

Coming out with my story helped in many ways. The response to the book meant I 
could do a lot of charity work and use my profile in a positive way. That means 
a lot; now I’m able to help people as I understand those who have been in a 
similar position. It’s helped me to feel much better than before, although I 
still have bad days. In the end, I’m still a victim and have to live with that. 
Even today I can give a public speech and the memories come flooding back – the 
smell and so many other details. That is common for all victims, regardless of 
how well they are doing in life now. Because of what Nousiainen did, if I could 
go back in time I would never have got involved in the high jump – despite my 
achievements and the fame my career gave me.

The important thing now is that the momentum continues, and that huge strides 
keep being made in Britain and beyond. InSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> the subject stayed in the public 
consciousness after my book came out, and it is still there now. I always hoped 
it might help someone, but in fact thousands of people have got in touch – 
including others abused by Nousiainen, who we now believe may have molested as 
many as 200 people in the Gothenburg area. I continued doing media work, and 
other athletes came forward with similar stories.

You have to be strong to stay in the public eye like this, but the cause 
drives me. Efforts are now being made to create a new position in the Swedish 
government to deal with this issue in sport. The problem we have at the moment 
is that sports regulate themselves, and clubs are reluctant to report on such 
matters as it can damage their finances and reputations. That is true in many 
countries, including Britain, but I’m proud that a serious discussion is taking 
place. Without my book I think we would see the same situation as we had 10 
years ago, with nobody talking about sexual abuse in sport.

Football abuse: from one lone voice to a national scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/02/football-abuse-from-one-lone-voice-to-a-national-scandal>
In Sweden a lot of focus is put on the perpetrator, leaving the victims to 
sort out the problems by themselves. The sense of shame and taboo is hard to 
break, and there is an emphasis on forgiveness that perhaps comes from our 
Lutheran upbringing. But I did nothing wrong and nor did the footballers in 
Britain. We have to change that focus and eliminate the social barriers to 
coming forward, because if you do not talk about these issues then you are left 
to carry them with you for your whole life.

It is a problem that occurs all over the world, often involving children whose 
brains have not fully developed and can be more easily manipulated. Nousiainen 
destroyed my life, and those of many others. We cannot let something similar 
happen again. While I became an athlete, and people likeAndy Woodward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> and Steve 
Walters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
 made careers in football, only a small number of children who take part in 
sport make it to the top. I grew up with young athletes who were abused but 
went in a different direction in life and never had the platform to speak out. 
We are the voices of them all.
 