
Global warming may have begun to interfere with ocean circulation - and 
paradoxically could plunge Britain and Scandinavia into a colder future, 
scientists warn today.

The Gulf stream delivers 27,000 times more heat to British shores than all the 
nation's power stations could supply. Geographers estimate it keeps Britain 5°C 
warmer than expected at such latitudes.

But it may not do so forever. Researchers from Scotland, Norway and the Faroe 
Islands report in Nature magazine that they measured the flow of cold, dense 
water across the Faroe Bank channel and estimated it had decreased by 20% in 
the past 50 years. Most of the decrease had been in the past 30 years, and the 
rate of decline had accelerated in the past five years.

The past three decades have seen a dramatic thinning in Arctic sea ice. Six of 
the 10 hottest years on record occurred in the 1990s. The other four were in 
the 1980s. The ominous news from Faroe is likely to focus fresh efforts in Bonn 
next month to reach worldwide agreement on ways of limiting the exhausts from 
cars and factory chimneys that are driving global warming.

The ocean currents, like the winds, are a powerful engine of climate. They 
store the sun's heat at the tropics and deliver it to northern and southern 
seas. But this circulation is driven by colder, denser, less salty water at the 
poles. In the north Atlantic, the chilly downflow forms a submarine river 30 
times bigger than the Amazon, creeping along the ocean floor towards the 
equator - and driving the warm salty surface water north in its place.

Climate scientists have been warning for years that this planet-wide 
heat-circulation system could suddenly alter, as temperatures increased on 
average. In 1997, the oceanographer Wallace Broecker, of Columbia University in 
New York, suggested that if the Gulf stream turned off, winter temperatures in 
the British Isles could fall by an average of 11°C - plunging Blackpool or 
Berwick to the same temperatures as Spitsbergen, inside the Arctic circle. Any 
dramatic drop in temperature could have devastating implications for 
agriculture - and for Europe's ability to feed itself.

Last year Peter Wadhams, of the Scott Polar Research Institute, reported that 
for the fifth time in seven years a huge tongue of shelf ice had failed to form 
in the Greenland sea. This ice shelf was also a powerful agent in driving what 
oceanographers call the Atlantic conveyor. This would have catastrophic 
consequences for the climate of northern Europe in the long run, he warned. "It 
would not make us like Spitsbergen but it would be a very dramatic, serious 
change in the climate."

Bogi Hansen, of the Faroese Fisheries Laboratory in Törshavn, and colleagues 
in Aberdeen and Bergen report in Nature that they measured the current and 
studied the historic data of the flow of cold dense water over the Faroe Bank 
channel - one of the sources that drive the Atlantic conveyor in the Nordic 
seas.

"There is another component," Dr Hansen said. "About half of the flow goes 
between Greenland and Iceland, and there is a possibility that this could have 
compensated. There is no indication that it has, but there is a possibility."

But if the overall flow had fallen, he warned, there would be major 
consequences for global ocean circulation - and specifically for the warm flow 
of water north from the Caribbean .

 "If we talk about the Gulf stream - the whole flow east of the US - there is 
no reason to believe that it will be affected very much. But if we talk about 
that component of it which turns north towards Scandinavia and the Arctic, that 
component should decrease in about similar magnitude as the overflow. That 
component carries a lot of heat and is estimated to be fairly important for the 
European climate," he warned.

"This may be just a natural fluctuation, we don't know. It may be, but I see 
no reason to assume that it is natural."

Dr Hansen's findings fit a wider pattern of evidence for a changing world. 
Researchers have recently reported that:

• Arctic sea ice has thinned from an average depth of three metres to less 
than two metres in 30 years.

• The extent of the north polar ice is shrinking by an area the size of the 
Netherlands every year

• By 2100, the Arctic ocean could be virtually clear of ice in the summer, 
with just a couple of floes near the pole.

• Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere are at their highest for 20m years, 
according to evidence from seashells and ocean sediments

• Glaciers in the tropical Andes and Africa are in retreat, and could 
disappear by 2010.

An international panel of scientists has urged that carbon dioxide emissions 
should be cut back to 60% of 1990 levels, worldwide. At a meeting in Kyoto in 
1997 governments agreed to cut back 5.5% by 2010 - but the US, the biggest 
consumer of fossil fuels, in March announced that it would not agree even to 
this target. The panel warned that, even with severe cutbacks, world average 
temperatures would still rise by at least 1% - and if nothing was done, average 
temperatures would soar 6% by 2100.

 Scott polar research institute  <http://www.spri.cam.ac.uk>
Columbia university homepage of Wallace Broecker  
<http://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/dees/faculty/broecker.html>
Faroese Fisheries Laboratory <http://www.frs.fo>
Nature <http://www.nature.com>
 