
Sometimes, it’s hard to be a woman. Sometimes? When are the in-between times 
when it’s just about alright? Every other day there is some bad news but still 
we are meant to chug along and pretend to be free. A bit equal. And content.

There is an epidemic of anxiety and depression among young women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/22/third-teenage-girls-depression-anxiety-survey-trend-truant>
. We don’t know why exactly, but we suspect it has something to do with that 
vague term “self-esteem”. Boys suffer, too, but evidently many young women are 
unhappy when they should be having the time of their lives. The pressure on 
them to look a certain way grows. That pressure is no longer confined to youth.

Still, they can look forward to the next stage where they can “choose” to 
impoverish themselves by having babies,the apparent explanation for the gender 
pay gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/23/gender-pay-gap-average-18-per-cent-less-uk-women>
. Men don’t make this choice: I guess children are simply thrust upon them. 
Then comes the time of life when you can no longer have children, and feel 
tired and grumpy (can you tell?). You must also do everything you possibly can
not to look your age and soothe yourself with hormonal replacement therapy 
(HRT), which now increases your risk of breast cancer nearly threefold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/23/combined-hrt-increases-breast-cancer-risk-nearly-300>
. Give me a break. Literally, give me a break. Except, now we are to supposed 
to work till we are 67 because the pension age has been shifted.

No wonder then, in this confused state, we pursue almost anything that appears 
youthful as we cannot talk about the reality of ageing. We rarely talk about 
the menopause, which is why so many women either “suffer in silence” (not me 
obviously) or are entirely misinformed about HRT, and just bemused by this 
week’s headlines.

The main way we edge around these discussions remains the celebrity 
confessional where, again, everything is focused on how a woman looks and not 
what she thinks. Courteney Cox, for instance, hasapparently confessed “her 
regrets” – presumably about plastic surgery 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/style/2016/08/courteney-cox-plastic-surgery-aging> – 
to Bear Grylls. As you do. She felt the pressure to stay young and beautiful: 
“Sometimes you find yourself trying [to stop the ageing process], and then you 
look at a picture of yourself and you go: ‘Oh God. I look horrible … I have 
done things that I regret and luckily there are things that dissolve and go 
away.’ Don’t ask me what this means. There is now an entire genre of female 
celebs who regret their surgeries, and I feel for them. Of course they get work 
done. To get work.

If your sense of self-value is so absolutely bound up with how you look and 
not with how you feel, you will never be “worth it”, whatever age you are. This 
is how we live now, with ordinary women comparing themselves with those whose 
faces and bodies are their fortunes, while these most gorgeous creatures hate 
themselves for ageing.

The biggest compliment you can give a woman is not “Well done on that PhD”, 
but: “You don’t look your age.” This overvaluing of how we look and 
undervaluing of what we know, this mismatch between our insides and outsides, 
is a huge cause of misery right through a woman’s life-cycle, and it’s getting 
worse.

Our unhappiness is monetised with everything from overpriced moisturisers to 
sticking women on HRT for years without them fully understanding the risks or 
even the basic idea that they are delaying, not eradicating, the symptoms of 
menopause. I am not against surgery, fillers, fashion, makeup, antidepressants 
or HRT.Ageing <https://www.theguardian.com/science/ageing> gracefully is beyond 
me as I wasn’t even young gracefully. Nor do I fetishise the “natural”, as what 
is natural is often what used to kill us, from childbirth to disease. What I am 
concerned about is the denial around the subject.

The latest research on HRT, for instance, will mystify the many women who were 
told a year ago that it was safer than we once thought. There are all sorts of 
reasons why women take HRT, and one is certainly to do with its promise of 
better skin and hair. A slew of private clinics now promote bio-identical 
hormones as “natural” HRT, but any combined hormone treatment will carry the 
same risks as synthetic ones.

We can’t know what is best for us if we don’t talk about it. But the menopause 
remains embarrassing as it reveals the truth: we are ageing. Which is akin to 
dying, though is in fact the opposite of it. Where are the celebrity interviews 
that talk about medicating oestrogen depletion instead of the guff about good 
skincare regimes? Tell me, at what age can women just look the age they are? 
Give me less advice on avoiding all that is pleasurable, from booze to 
sunlight, and more on how reading actually improves memory and cognitive 
function. Tell middle-aged woman that their rage is not an individual problem 
to be feared, it’s fuel for the fire of the next stage of their lives. 
Nourishment means doing the things that make you feel full of yourself. That 
does not come in a jar. It never did.

On my wall I have a print I bought in Mumbai. It is one of the first ads for 
Pears Soap, marketed to an Indian audience. Underneath a goddess, the ad says: 
“Pure as Lotus. Learn without sorrow, the eternal truth, youth is Godlike and 
beauty is youth.” Learn without sorrow. If only we could. From girlhood to old 
age, women live exactly within that sorrow.
 