
Sir David Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough> has hailed the 
start of construction of a polar research ship, which shot to fame amid calls 
to name it Boaty McBoatface, as a “marvellous occasion”.

It was eventually decided to name the ship after the naturalist and TV 
presenter, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/06/boaty-mcboatface-ship-to-be-called-rrs-sir-david-attenborough>
 and he will lay the first block of the keel on Monday.

This is a traditional maritime ceremony to bring good luck to a vessel during 
its construction and its captain and crew during its working life.

Attenborough said: “It is a marvellous occasion. I have sailed on British 
Antarctic Survey (BAS) ships before and been on a BAS station in the Antarctic, 
so I know what sort of thing that ship is going to go through.

“I am very flattered to be asked to lay the keel.”

The £200m vessel has been commissioned by the Natural Environment Research 
Council (NERC) and is being built in the UK on Merseyside in the largest 
commercial shipbuilding project in the country in 30 years.

Once it sets sail in 2019, the RRS Sir David Attenborough will provide the UK 
with the most advanced floating research fleet in the world and will carry out 
work into the world’s oceans and tackling climate change, the NERC said.

It first grabbed headlines after a “name our ship” competition, in which the 
suggestion Boaty McBoatface topped the public poll with more than 124,000 
votes, more than three times its nearest rival.

Commenting on the name, Attenborough told ITV’s Good Morning Britain: “The 
name is actually going to be preserved on one of the submersibles which are 
going to be operating from the research ship when it’s built.

“So there will be a BAS, or whatever the correct initials are, Boatface or 
Boaty, or something of that sort.”

Boaty McBoatface: tyrants have crushed the people’s will | Stuart Heritage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/19/boaty-mcboatface-tyrants-have-crushed-the-peoples-will>
The final decision on the name was made by Jo Johnson, the science minister, 
and the announcement that the vessel would be called after Attenborough was 
made just days before his 90th birthday.

Asked about the importance of the work likely to be carried out by the ship, 
Attenborough added: “It is the research that comes from the sort of vessel 
which this is that is important, and you might not think that way down in the 
Antarctic has got that much to do with us, but in point of fact a lot of 
weather is generated from down there and it was research that was done down 
there in the Antarctic which was responsible for discovering the hole in the 
ozone layer.

“And it was that research that brought the world’s attention to the danger, 
and brought scientists together to figure out how to fix it, and nations 
together to fix it as we have done now.”

About 1,000 people will attend the keel-laying ceremony, including guests from 
the spheres of science, technology and engineering as well as the shipyard 
workforce.

Johnson said: “The RRS Sir David Attenborough, with Boaty McBoatface operated 
from her as a robotic underwater vehicle, will be one of the most advanced 
research ships in the world.

“It will help inspire the next generation of scientists in the UK and build on 
our status as one of the world’s leading nations in polar science, engineering 
and technology.

“With Merseyside’s proud history and expertise in ship building, this project 
will support over 460 local jobs and apprenticeships, and provide a boost to 
the region and the whole ‘northern powerhouse’.”
 