
 Research touted by the resources minister that reportedly suggests Australia 
can rely on coal to meet emissions reduction has been attacked by experts and 
appears to have been misreported.

The Australian reported on Tuesday 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/mining-energy/matt-canavan-backs-technology-to-cut-our-carbon-emissions/news-story/54c389f4553adbaf42c9f043f7518f0a>
 that research conducted by the Department of Industry, Innovation and Science 
– and commissioned by Matt Canavan, the federal minister for resources – showed 
Australia could cut its emissions by 27% if it replaced its existing coal power 
stations with the more efficient “ultra-supercritical” technology.

If true, that would get the country close to its 2030 target, which is a 
reduction of 28% below 2005 levels.

However, a summary of the analysis seen by Guardian Australia suggests the new 
coal technology – under a very expensive demolition and construction program – 
could reduce Australia’s emissions by 12% at most.

In fact, to reduce Australia’s emissions by 27% by relying on reductions in 
the electricity industry alone, the sector’s emissionswould need to be reduced 
to almost zero. Australia’s entire electricity sector only accounts for about a 
third of its carbon emissions.
 See the full visual 
On the basis of the analysis, Canavan released a statement attacking “people 
who oppose the coal industry for ideological reasons”.

“Coal has an important role to play as Australia, and the rest of the world, 
reduce carbon dioxide emissions,” he said. “Australia has the resources to be a 
low-cost and efficient energy superpower. Access to affordable and reliable 
power underpins our economy and is the key to long-term jobs in the 
manufacturing sector.”

But energy analyst Olivia Kember from the Climate Institute said locking in 
decades of emissions from new coal generators would jeopardise longer-term 
commitments made in Paris, including reaching net zero emissions in the second 
half of the century.

Related: Adani coalmine activists gear up to fight: ‘This will dwarf the 
Franklin blockade’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/14/adani-coalmine-activists-gear-up-to-fight-this-will-dwarf-the-franklin-blockade>

“Australia has committed through the Paris Agreement to achieve net zero 
emissions. Building new coal stations that can go no further than a reduction 
of 25% to 34% doesn’t achieve the net zero goal, and would lock Australia into 
decades of high-carbon electricity while the rest of the world is switching to 
clean power,” Kember said.

“That’s such a risky outcome that I doubt any financial institutions would 
even finance investments in ultra-supercritical coal in Australia.”

Australia’s chief scientist reached a similar conclusion in his preliminary 
report 
<https://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/97a4f50c-24ac-4fe5-b3e5-5f93066543a4/files/independent-review-national-elec-market-prelim.pdf>
 on the future security of the electricity market, which was commissioned by 
the Turnbull government.

In the report Alan Finkel said: “Owner-investors are exiting 
emissions-intensive power stations as these reach the end of their design 
lives. It has been clear from our consultations that no one is contemplating 
investing in new ones, nor would financial institutions provide finance.”

Rod Campbell, an economist at the Australia Institute, said an ambitious plan 
to replace all of Australia’s existing coal power stations with brand new ones 
would drive up electricity prices. And it would do so by more than if coal was 
replaced with renewable energy.

Campbell pointed to government-funded clean-coal research from 2015, which 
already showed energy from some new-built wind farms was cheaper than advanced 
coal power stations. And that report claimed that by 2030, all wind and solar 
would be cheaper.

Related: Climate change: 90% of rural Australians say their lives are already 
affected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/16/climate-change-90-of-rural-australians-say-their-lives-are-already-affected>

But more up-to-date analysis 
<https://www.lazard.com/media/438038/levelized-cost-of-energy-v100.pdf> from 
the US financial advisors, Lazard, shows that almost all new wind and and solar 
power is now cheaper than almost all new coal power.

Labor’s spokesperson for climate change and energy, Mark Butler, said 
Canavan’s intervention was part of an ideological attack on renewable energy.

“For a government that has been so vocal about not picking winners, the 
Turnbull government seems to be very comfortable picking coal as Australia’s 
future energy source,” he said in a statement.

“The latest intervention by Minister Canavan trumpeting coal isn’t about 
securing a reliable and affordable energy future; at its core it is just the 
latest ideological attack on renewables by a government desperate to draw 
attention away from the fact it has no plan on energy and climate,” Butler said.


Brendan Pearson, the chief executive of the mining lobby group, the Minerals 
Council of Australia, welcomed the departmental report saying it showed “new 
coal generation technologies can reduce Australia’s emissions sharply while 
providing reliable and affordable energy to households and businesses.”


“It is simply common sense that these technologies be part of Australia’s 
efforts to meet its emissions reduction targets while maintaining affordable 
and secure energy supply,” he said in a statement.
 