
Britons are weighed down by more mortgage debt than last year, but rising 
wages and low inflation means they are better placed to cope with a hike in 
interest rates, aBank of England study 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/quarterlybulletin/2015/q4.aspx>
 has found.

The average mortgage debt of a British householder has risen to about £85,000, 
compared with £83,000 in 2014, after a year of rising house prices and buoyant 
demand from first-time buyers.


The study found that higher debt levels weighed heavily on mortgage-payers 
alongside the impact of the government’s austerity measures, which have cut the 
incomes of about a third of households.
 Aggregate household debt-to-income ratio and mortgage debt-servicing ratio. 
Illustration: ONS and Bank of England calculations 
However, Threadneedle Street concluded that a 2% rise in average wages this 
year and low inflation had increased disposable incomes enough for the average 
mortgage-payer to cope with a rise in base rates to 2%.

Unsecured debt, which includes car loans and credit cards, remained at an 
average £8,000 per household this year.

The study is likely to provide policymakers with the comfort that a rise in 
interest rates next year will have only limited impact on the the ability of 
households to meet payments on their debts.

But thousands of low income families and first-time buyers with high 
loan-to-income mortgages would still face a tough time when interest rates 
begin to rise. A rise in rates to 2% would increase the share of mortgage 
holders paying more than 30% of income on repayments from 9% to 14% after a 
rate rise.

And renters continue to have an elevated concern about their ability to pay 
for their accommodation, despite a fall since the peak in 2013. More than a 
quarter said their rent remained a “heavy burden”, down from 36% two years ago.
 Measures of financial distress for renters. Illustration: BHPS, NMG 
Consulting Survey and Bank calculations. 
Matt Whittaker, chief economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “Living 
standards enjoyed a long overdue rebound in 2015, and it’s encouraging to see 
this feeding through into improved household budgets and reduced financial 
distress.

“But concerns remain about the financial position of many households, notably 
renters and the not insignificant group of mortgagors who continue to struggle 
to meet their monthly payments, despite years of rock bottom rates.


“With inflation set to pick up relatively rapidly in the coming months and 
interest rates expected to rise at some point in 2016, there’s a risk that the 
pace of the living standards ‘rebound’ will slow. Importantly, as the Bank 
acknowledges, the outlook for household finances will rest not just on the pace 
of income recovery, but its distribution too.”


The study by the central bank also found that families would limit their 
spending by much more than savers would increase theirs, leading to a 
contraction in consumption that will hurt GDP growth.

This trade-off between higher interest rates, further fiscal austerity and 
disposable incomes is one of the main reasons many officials have argued for a 
delay of a rates rise in recent speeches.

Minouche Shafik, a deputy governor at the Bank, said on Monday she will not 
vote for an interest rate rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/14/bank-of-england-deputy-governor-minouche-shafik-vows-to-tread-carefully-on-interest-rates>
 until she is convinced wage growth breaks back above 2%.

Annual wage rises reached 2.7% in April but have fallen back in recent months. 
Shafik said the rate of earnings growth in the UK had “levelled off” recently 
and that other factors were also keeping inflation low, such as the strong 
pound and a drop in commodity prices.
 