
The biggest hospital in Europe has been ordered to improve security on its 
maternity ward after inspectors found that mothers “might leave the unit with 
the wrong baby”. Some babies born at the Royal London hospital had no name tags 
– which could lead to them going home with the wrong families or even being 
given medication meant for another baby, according to theCare Quality 
Commission (CQC) <https://www.theguardian.com/society/care-quality-commission>.

Biggest NHS trust is failing on safety and quality of care, says watchdog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/22/barts-nhs-trust-london-failing-safety-care-quality-watchdog>
Inspectors said there was a “lax” approach to checking babies’ name bands. 
Even the head of midwifery at the hospital, in Whitechapel, eastLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, was unaware of a baby abduction 
policy, the regulator said. Inspectors found there were not enough midwives on 
the delivery suite to provide safe cover, and midwives said they had been 
ordered by managers not to raise concerns about low staff numbers.

There was a “mixed” view about how caring staff were: one mother told 
inspectors she was treated as “childish” because she was upset that her baby 
had been taken into special care.

Inspectors who visited the hospital in July this year said they also observed 
some “intracultural issues and some bullying behaviour” between groups of 
midwives, and between midwives and patients. Doctors and midwives on the 
postnatal ward referred to patients by their bed numbers rather than by name, 
according to the CQC.

Last year 4,645 babies were born at the Royal London, which is the largest 
stand-alone acute hospital in Europe.

The CQC has ordered the Barts health NHS trust, which runs the hospital, to 
improve security in maternity “urgently” after rating the service inadequate. 
The trust said it had already taken steps to address baby safety concerns, 
including the introduction of new baby ID tags. Overall the hospital was rated 
“requires improvement”.

Some of the other issues highlighted in the report include:

 * A two-week backlog of outpatient appointments waiting to be booked and some 
patients waiting for over a year for follow-up appointments.

 * The nutrition and hydration needs of patients were met, though in some busy 
departments this was enabled by patients’ relatives.

 * Nine “never” events were reported at the hospital between August 2015 and 
July 2016 – wholly preventable errors. These blunders included a surgeon 
leaving an object inside a patient after finishing an operation, the extraction 
of a wrong tooth, “wrong-site implants” and incorrect medication being given to 
a patient.

 * During the inspection, some patients in A&E had to wait an hour and 20 
minutes for an initial assessment from a medic, though national guidance 
suggests the majority of people should be assessed by a clinician within 15 
minutes.

 * Some medics had to complete mandatory training in their own time or during 
their holiday leave.

Professor Sir Mike Richards, chief inspector of hospitals at the CQC, said: 
“We were most concerned about the standard of care around maternity and 
gynaecology services. Staffing on maternity wards was sometimes inadequately 
covered. But most worrying of all was the lack of a safe and secure environment 
for newborn babies. At the time of our inspection we raised this with the Royal 
London hospital as a matter for their urgent attention.”


A spokeswoman for the trust said: “We acted immediately to improve the 
security of babies at the Royal London hospital. It’s important to stress that 
these reports are based on observations from five months ago. Since then we 
have subjected our processes and procedures to forensic scrutiny.

“As a result, we’ve introduced new baby ID tags, we’ve reviewed our procedure 
for locking down the hospital, and refreshed our policy. We have recirculated 
our policy to all staff and now test it every single month. Women should be 
assured our services are safe and we will review our processes regularly to 
ensure they remain safe.”
 