
Bank customers will be left vulnerable to fraudsters who trick them into 
transferring their money, the consumer body Which? has claimed, as it accused 
the payments regulator of letting banks off the hook.

Which? said the Payment Systems Regulator had not done enough to make banks 
responsible for reimbursing the tens of thousands of customers who have 
suffered losses as a result of fraudulent money transfers.

The consumer group was reacting to the work conducted by the PSR after a 
“super-complaint 
<https://www.psr.org.uk/sites/default/files/media/PDF/which-super-complaint-sep-2016.pdf>
” the consumer group had made in September about the rise of fraud over the 
phone, internet and on mobile devices.


Banks act to stop transfer scams and errors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/29/banks-transfer-scams-errors-payee-account-number>
The PSR said banks could do more to identify potentially fraudulent payments 
but that it did not intend to make banks’ liable for losses from what are known 
as authorised push payments (APP). It intends to do further analysis on whether 
banks should be held responsible and shift the burden away from consumers.

Alex Neill, managing director of Which? home & legal services, said: “The 
regulator has finally acknowledged the considerable consumer harm caused by 
bank transfer scams. However, while recognising that the industry is not doing 
enough, it has failed to adequately address the issue of liability and has let 
the banks off the hook, giving them little incentive to do more to protect 
their customers.

“The outcome for people is unfortunately that they will continue to be scammed 
out of millions of pounds. We need to see swift action and not see this kicked 
into the long grass in the second half of 2017,” said Neill.


Which? made the super-complaint in September when it raised concerns that the 
sums consumers were being tricked into transferring were “often large and can 
be life-changing”. The consumer body had argued that placing more liability on 
banks for the losses from such scams would create efficient incentives for 
banks to develop systems to better manage risks.

The Guardian has highlighted a case of a couple losing £25,000 from fraudster 
who posed as their builder and set up a copycat email address. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/fraud-scam-email-barclays-lloyds>

The consumer body described how the scam worked in two ways, either by 
fraudulent access to a consumer account or where the customer is deceived into 
authorising payment to the scammer’s account. The payment is almost instant and 
can take place over the phone, via online banking, or in person.

In response, the PSR set out three possible ways to clamp down. These require 
banks to work on how they can share customer data to help money be reclaimed. 
There would also be a common approach to dealing with scams and collection of 
data to establish the extent of the fraud.

Hannah Nixon, managing director of the new regulatory body, acknowledged 
scamming was a growing problem. “Tens of thousands of people have, combined, 
lost hundreds of millions of pounds to these scams, but the data we have seen 
so far is incomplete. We need a concerted and coordinated industry-wide 
approach to better protect consumers, and we need it to start today,” she said.

While the PSR will not make banks liable for losses immediately, it said it 
would keep monitoring the situation. “As work progresses and additional 
evidence comes to light, we will consider whether it is appropriate to propose 
changes to the obligations or incentives that banks have for these types of 
scams,” the PSR said.


Nixon said that while Which? had called for banks to be made liable it was not 
that simple. Changes are already underway to the way payments are made with a 
“confirmation of payee” system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/29/banks-transfer-scams-errors-payee-account-number>
being introduced so that a sort code and account number is typed in to transfer 
some money, an instant message appears to check that the recipient is the one 
intended.

“There is no silver bullet, but more can be done to prevent these scams in the 
first instance, and to respond faster when it does happen, in order to give 
consumers more support and help in recovering their money,” said Nixon.

The Financial Conduct Authority, which also looks after the interests of 
consumers, said it would work with firms to tackle concerns about the banks 
sending the payments and the banks which receive them. Christopher Woolard, 
executive director of strategy and competition, said: “Financial crime is a 
priority for the FCA and we will work to eliminate fraud by whatever means.”
 