
Fraudsters managed to steal £755m from British consumers and financial 
institutions during 2015 – a 26% increase on the year before.

Financial Fraud Action UK said the biggest growth area was remote banking 
fraud, which typically sees fraudsters posing as bank staff in a bid to con 
people into sending them money via online banking.

The figures 
<http://www.financialfraudaction.org.uk/cms/assets/1/2015%20year%20end%20fraud%20update%20report.pdf>
 published on Thursday show this type of fraud leapt by 72% in 2015 and more 
than £168m was stolen from unsuspecting consumers.

In most cases the banks involved would have refused to refund the customer on 
the basis that they had made the payment voluntarily. Victims of such fraud 
have told the Guardian that the police have not been interested in 
investigating such cases even though the losses have been as much as£25,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/fraud-scam-email-barclays-lloyds>
.

Internet banking fraud rose 64% to £133m during 2015, while losses due to 
telephone banking fraud rose 92% to £32.3m, Financial Fraud Action UK said.

In recent years, Guardian Money has highlighted the increasingly sophisticated 
tactics being adopted by scammers to steal consumers’ cash. As security systems 
have improved in other areas of banking, fraudsters have opted to target 
consumers directly by phoning them up, or using online vulnerabilities.

Scammers have pretended to be bank staff, police and from firms such as 
TalkTalk, and persuaded consumers to send money to their bank accounts, aided 
by the faster payments system and previously lax account opening requirements 
at banks.

Fraudsters have also increasing been hacking emails and then posing as 
builders, for example, to ask for deposits to be sent to them.

Katy Worobec, director of Financial Fraud Action UK, which represents all the 
major banks and bank card issuers, said: “With the continued rise in 
impersonation scams and data breaches it’s vital that all customers are alert 
to the dangers. Everyone should be cautious about giving out personal or 
financial information, and organisations holding data need to do all they can 
to protect people’s private details.”

She said fraud losses on UK payment cards remain the biggest area of fraud. 
Losses in 2015 totalled £567.5m, an 18% increase on the previous year. A total 
of £843.6m of attempted card fraud was prevented by banks and card companies, 
equivalent to £6 out of every £10 of fraud being stopped, it said.

The figures showed bank and card company security systems detected and 
prevented a total of £1.76bn worth of fraud from occurring in 2015 – equivalent 
to £7 in every £10 of potential fraud being stopped.

Overall, cheque fraud losses totalled £18.9m , a 6% fall on the 2014 figure as 
cheque usage declined. Just over £2.8m were lost to mobile banking fraud last 
year.

Last month, the home secretary, Theresa May, announced the creation of a new 
taskforce 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/home-secretary-launches-new-joint-fraud-taskforce>
to crack down on fraud in the UK, saying that “fraud shames our financial 
system”.

The Joint Fraud Taskforce will be comprise key representatives from 
government, law enforcement and the banking sector, but has a long way to go to 
restore confidence among victims, who have repeatedly been told by the banks 
and police that there is nothing they can do to help them.

Detective chief superintendent Dave Clark, who heads the City of London 
police’s economic crime unit, said: “Criminals are continually looking to 
exploit old and new technology alike to deceive both individuals and 
organisations into revealing private information that will enable them to 
commit fraud, sometimes on an industrial level. The only way this problem can 
be fully addressed is by having a multi-sector response focusing on 
prosecution, prevention and protection.”
 