
The consumer group Which? has criticised some of Britain’s biggest banks for 
failing to invest in security systems that would better protect their customers 
from fraudsters.

Against a backdrop of booming bank fraud, Which? tested the UK’s 11 biggest 
banks and building societies and found that the security at five of them was 
still not good enough.

One family's nightmare as fraudsters ransack Barclays account by phone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/13/barclays-bank-robbery-phone-family-nightmare-criminals>
Which? said Halifax, its sister brand Bank of Scotland, Lloyds, Santander and 
TSB had “consistently scored poorly” over the four years it had been analysing 
their security measures, and continued to do so as none of them offered 
two-factor authentication at login, despite having the technology to do so.

In 2014-15, banking fraud losses soared by 64% to £133.5m for online banking, 
and by 28% to £323.3m for phone banking, the consumer group said. It added that 
too many customers were still being let down by their bank’s security.

Which? has called on the industry to make greater use of two-factor 
authentication at the login stage of online banking. This combines two identity 
checks – typically a password or pin plus a single-use pass code sent via a 
card reader or mobile phone.

In its most recent test, carried out in August, Which? found that only five of 
the 11 banks had adopted such security checks to protect customers.


In September, Which? used its super-complaint powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/which-files-supercomplaint-against-banks-over-transfer>
 to call on the financial regulator to investigate whether banks could do more 
to protect people who are tricked into transferring money to a fraudster. Too 
often, fraud victims are not being refunded by banks and in some cases have 
lost in excess of £100,000

Alex Neill from Which? said: “Online banking is increasingly part of our daily 
lives, and at the same time online scams are becoming more sophisticated. 
People can only do so much to protect themselves from fraud – it’s time for 
banks to shoulder more of the responsibility and introduce extra protections to 
safeguard their customers.”

People can only do so much to protect themselves from fraud – it’s time for 
banks to shoulder more of the responsibility
Alex Neill, Which? 
In the test, First Direct and HSBC were given the highest security scores, 
closely followed by Barclays, M&S Bank and Nationwide.

TSB, which received the lowest score, said: “It is our number one priority to 
offer safe and secure banking facilities for our customers across all of our 
products and services. To achieve this we maintain complex and multilayered 
fraud prevention controls which will not be visible to the customer – or 
reflected in this survey. We continually review and improve our services to 
ensure they remain robust and fit for purpose.”

Lloyds, meanwhile, said the research did not accurate reflect “the highly 
sophisticated security our customers benefit from”.
 