
Black America’s conception of ourselves was forever changed by Barack Obama’s 
presidency. For African Americans, the first family helped to unlock the 
transformational potential that always existed in democracy’s beating heart, 
but which too often excluded black Americans. Today, that is no longer the case.

Barack and Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> 
changed how black folks thought of themselves and the wider nation they lived 
in. Obama’s attainment of the nation’s highest office illuminated the depth and 
breadth of black genius in American society, helping to inspire millions of 
young people to dream bigger dreams.

For black America, the euphoria of election day in 2008 did not elicit 
post-racial fantasies articulated by the mainstream press. Instead, the 
presence of the Obamas on the world stage confirmed deep-seated truths about 
black excellence, love and humanity that we’ve always taken for granted despite 
white denial of these very truths.


How Michelle Obama expanded the definition of a first lady | Margo Jefferson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/how-michelle-obama-expanded-definition-of-first-lady>
Barack and Michelle Obama, along with their intelligent and energetic 
daughters Sasha and Malia, set a new standard for American society, normalizing 
the once unthinkable prospect of having a black president and first family in 
the White House. Together, they broke powerful barriers installed by the 
nation’s brutal history of slavery, Jim Crow and institutional racism.

For eight extraordinary years, Obama and his poised, elegant and brilliant 
family occupied the domestic and world stage in a way that offered new models 
of excellence for millions of black children living in a society that continues 
to marginalize their hopes and dreams, accentuate their mistakes and errors, 
and place too little values on their lives or deaths.

One picture 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/24/us/politics/indelible-image-of-a-boys-pat-on-obamas-head-hangs-in-white-house.html>
 of Obama’s impact on black children remains especially poignant. A 
five-year-old African American boy visiting the White House asked to feel the 
president’s hair, as if to assure himself that the leader of the free world not 
only looked like him, but had similar hair as well. It’s one of the defining 
moments of Obama’s presidency. It illustrated how the very fact of having a 
black president unlocked new worlds of hope and possibility in millions of 
people – young and old –who never imagined that such a thing was possible.

Michelle Obama revealed a remarkable ability for grace when under pressure, 
even when faced with hurtfulmyths 
<http://www.snopes.com/michelle-obama-white-folks-quote/> that she hated 
America. She responded to racist assaults, character assassination by rightwing 
pundits and blatant lies by conspiracy theorists and alt-right fanatics with a 
now legendary poise. And Michelle’s defiant black beauty in the face of online 
trolls – who compared her to animals and used racial slurs against her – helped 
make her time as first lady both inspiring and instructive.

For millions of black girls and women, Michelle Obama became a role model both 
for her astonishing educational accomplishments and political achievements in 
the White House. Her public resilience in leading a charge to promote healthy 
eating across the nation, including providing nutritious foods for economically 
and racially segregated youth living in poverty, was illuminating – as was her 
willingness to speak truth to power at the Democratic national convention, 
where she acknowledged living in a house built by slaves. Moments like these 
cemented her soaring stature nationally and solidified the special place she 
holds within the hearts of black people everywhere.

The Obamas leave the White House, if not the world stage, having accomplished, 
through sheer force of will, something entirely unprecedented in American 
history: humanizing the black experience by simply being themselves.

In the process they normalized black excellence, codified graceful resistance 
to white supremacy and illustrated the profundity of black romantic and 
familial love. And they looked great doing it. The Obamas will be missed by 
millions – but no one will miss them more than black Americans. We found in 
Obama a president who justified the faith of generations who persisted in 
loving America – even when the nation refused to love us back.
 