
While contactless payment terminals have become ubiquitous in retail outlets, 
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> is set to trial 
contactless ATMs in a number of its branches.

The bank will unveil 100 contactless machines at 25 branches across “the 
north”, which will allow customers to withdraw up to £100 without putting their 
card into the machine, or by using their smartphone instead. The exact 
locations of the machines have not yet been released, but the bank said they 
would be rolled out to 180 branches across the UK if the project was a success.

Banks' online security is failing customers, says Which?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/20/banks-online-security-is-failing-customers-says-which>
ATM users will simply tap their contactless card against the machine’s reader 
before inputting their pin as normal. Barclays mobile app customers who have 
one of the latest Android mobile phones with NFC (near-field communication) 
won’t even need their card – once they open the app and select cash withdrawal 
they simply tap the phone on the card reader, input their card’s pin either on 
the ATM or the phone handset, and out pops the money.

Customers with iPhones won’t be able to use the scheme because Apple limits 
the use of its contactless technology to its own Apple Pay system.

Barclays suggested the facility was more secure than inserting a bank card, as 
it avoided the risk of having the card’s details hijacked by a skimming 
machine. The user also cannot walk off and leave their card in the slot.

Those taking out sums greater than £100 will still have to put their card in 
the machine.

Barclays is not the first bank to allow customers to make cardless 
withdrawals. Royal Bank of Scotland introduced its Get Cash facility four years 
ago, designed to help customers in an emergency. It allowed up to £130 to be 
taken out of an ATM by messaging the user a code via their smartphone which was 
to be typed into the terminal. The service was suspended for a short period in 
2012 after it was targeted by fraudsters.

Security experts have warned that users of the mobile app are probably better 
off inputting the card’s pin number on the ATM rather than mobile handset. 
“There could be malware on your phone which is recording the pin as it’s typed 
in – that would be a new risk,” said Steven Murdoch of University College 
London. “The malware might also be able to copy your credentials from one phone 
to another, allowing the other handset to make a withdrawal.”

Is Barclays doing enough to protect its customers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/12/barclays-fraud-email-con-trick-pressure-bank>
Last year, more than 90,000 UK bank accounts were defrauded through the use of 
counterfeit cards, and a further 152,727 because of lost or stolen cards, 
according to Financial Fraud Action UK.

Ashok Vaswani, chief executive of Barclays UK, said: “Our customers now expect 
to be able to use their smartphone to make their everyday purchases. We want 
taking out cash to be just as easy. With Contactless Cash, customers can 
quickly and securely take out money with just a tap of their smartphone – a 
first for the UK.”

• This article was amended on 14 December 2016 to make clear that the 
suspension of the Royal Bank of Scotland’s Get Cash facility in 2012 was 
temporary.
 