
Millions of Barclaycard customers will see their interest rates hiked 
automatically in line with any increases in the Bank of England base rate.

The credit card provider has started writing to its 10.5 million UK customers 
to tell them about a change in its terms and conditions, which will create a 
clear link between the rate customers pay and increases in the base rate.


From 1 February 2016, following any base rate movement, Barclaycard will 
change customers’ interest rates the day after their next monthly statement 
date.


Giving an example of how customers could be affected, Barclaycard said that if 
the base rate were to increase by 0.25%, they would pay 21p a month more in 
interest for every 1,000 of their balance.


Customers on special promotional rates, such as a 0% interest deal, will 
continue to get that rate on their balance for the length of the offer.


Five million of the customers being written to are also being told that the 
interest rate they are currently on is being reduced.


Barclaycard said the moves are part of efforts to simplify its products and 
provide more transparency to customers so that it is easier to understand how 
the cost of their borrowing might be affected by any increase in the base rate, 
rather than allowing a series of base rate rises to bunch up and then hitting 
customers with a steeper rate.


While the rates Barclaycard customers are paying vary, the bulk of customers 
are on deals that charge an annual rate of around 18.9%.


Barclaycard said it is giving customers at least six weeks’ notice of the 
change, which it feels is ample time for those who want to opt out of the 
change to close their account.


A Barclaycard spokesman said: “When the base rate changes, customers will know 
that their interest rate has changed accordingly.


“Alongside this, the interest rates for around five million customers will 
come down.”


A spokesman for StepChange Debt Charity said many households are already 
living on a “financial knife edge” and he urged anyone worried about the cost 
of their debt rising to get independent help.


He said StepChange’s research has found that last year, 14 million people 
suffered a shock to their income or a change in circumstances and 6.5 million 
used credit to cope.


According to financial information website Moneyfacts, the average credit card 
rate has been edging upwards in the years since the base rate fell to a record 
low of 0.5% in 2009. Back then, the average card rate was 17.7%, but it is now 
21.5%.


Recent speculation as to when the base rate might rise has ranged from next 
spring to around a year later. Any increases are expected to be small and 
gradual.


Rachel Springall, a spokeswoman for Moneyfacts, said: “Any speculation on an 
interest rate rise can and will give providers the opportunity to work in costs 
for the future, which is why it’s so important for customers to keep an eye on 
their statements each month.”

 