
Barclaycard is offering its 10.5 million UK customers free access to their 
credit score in a move the company said will give people greater control over 
their finances.

The credit card arm of Barclays said it was the first financial services brand 
in the UK to offer such a facility to all its customers. The move coincided 
with a separate decision by Tesco Bank to offer holders of one of its products, 
the Foundation credit card, a free copy of their credit report.

Barclaycard has linked up with Experian, one of the UK’s three credit 
reference agencies, and said that from Friday customers would have free and 
regular online access to their credit score. This is a number between 0 and 999 
that is a snapshot of an individual’s current credit status, and which is based 
on the information in their credit report held by the agency. The higher the 
number, the lower the perceived risk.

Many experts advise people to keep a close eye on their credit score 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/06/credit-ratings-agencies-mistakes-i-couldnt-buy-new-house>
, particularly before applying for products such as a mortgage or a loan, 
because it can help minimise the damage that any past defaults or other 
problems, mistakes or fraudulent activity can have on their creditworthiness.


Everyone should take time to manage and understand their credit score
Manoj Piplani, Barclaycard UK 
A Barclaycard spokesman said customers would not be getting their full 
Experian credit report at this stage. However, in addition to their score there 
will be commentary tailored to people’s positions, plus hints and tips designed 
to help them understand, improve or maintain their score.

Experian credit scores can be broken down into five categories: very poor 
(0-560), poor (561-720), fair (721-880), good (881-960) and excellent (961-999).

Customers will be able to access their score through their online account and, 
from early next year, via the Barclaycard mobile app. The company said its 
research showed that only 26% of people in the UK knew what their credit score 
was, and fewer than one in four (39%) had checked it in the past.

Manoj Piplani, Barclaycard UK’s managing director, said: “Customers have told 
us they recognise the importance of their credit score, but for a variety of 
reasons just one in 10 check it regularly … Everyone should take time to manage 
and understand their credit score – it’s not only an important deciding factor 
on whether you can get a mortgage, loan or credit card, but can affect your 
access to a much wider range of products and services including mobile phone 
contracts, monthly car insurance, bank accounts and more.”

 