
Thousands of Barclays’ business customers are to be given new bank sort codes 
by Easter 2018, the four-day weekend the bank intends to use to implement new 
rules to separate its high street arm from its investment banking business.

As the bank reported a 21% fall in first-half profits to £2bn, it emerged that 
it would use the Easter holiday to start pushing through the reforms designed 
by Sir John Vickers following the 2008 banking crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/12/vickers-report-banks-given-until-2019>
 which must be adopted by 2019. The reforms oblige banks to “ring-fence” their 
high street operations from their riskier investment banking operations.

Tushar Morzaria, Barclays’ finance director, compared the looming split to the 
uncertainty ahead of Y2K or the adoption of the euro and said other banks would 
also choose the same date in 2018. “That weekend we have to create a brand new 
bank, probably the largest bank that will ever be created in the UK”.

Barclays has not decided which customers will need new sort codes, but is keen 
avoid disruption to all 24m of them. The focus is expected to be business 
customers.

The bank’s chief executive, Jes Staley, said implementing the ring-fencing 
rules was more complicated than anything required to maintain Barclays’ 
investment banking business in the EU after the Brexit vote.

If a passporting deal – giving access to the remaining 27 members of the bloc 
– cannot be clinched, he said, operations might need to be beefed up in places 
such as Ireland. He played down suggestions that thousands of roles would move 
from London.


Staley also set out the case for UK banks to be given access to the EU. “The 
presence of Barclays in the European capital markets is important to Europe,” 
he said, adding that the bank had played a key role in helping Italian and 
Germany companies to raise money since 23 June.

The bank’s shares were the biggest risers on the FTSE 100 on Friday, gaining 
6% to 155p even though profits were knocked by Staley’s plan to pull back from 
Africa and another £400m provision for payment protection insurance (PPI) 
mis-selling. The so-called non-core division reported a £1.9bn loss, denting 
the £4bn of profits in the continuing operations.

After numerous run-ins with shareholders and politicians over bonuses, Staley 
said the full-year numbers for 2016 would be higher than previous payouts. At 
the half year, staff costs were £4.6bn, up from £4.2bn.

A US banker who took over in December, Staley said Brexit would not mean he 
had to tear up his new plan to turn Barclays into a transatlantic bank. He said 
he was not planning a branch closure programme and would try not to close in 
small towns.

“If we’re the last branch in a small town we’re very sensitive to the social 
price of what it would mean closing that,” he said.

He said customer activity had “paused” after the referendum result, but 
insisted it was not a re-run of the 2008 crisis when banks refused to lend. 
“One of our goals, in an environment like this, is we want Barclays to be a 
centre of stability. We want Barclays to be open for business,” he said.


“This is a political shock which has clearly challenged consumer and corporate 
confidence [but it has] not yet resulted in any credit deterioration.”

Pages of legal warnings attached to the half-year results 
<https://www.home.barclays/content/dam/barclayspublic/docs/InvestorRelations/ResultAnnouncements/2016InterimResults/20160729_H116_Results_Announcement.pdf>
 remind investors that the bank remains under investigation by the Serious 
Fraud Office over the way it raised £7bn in capital during the 2008 banking 
crisis. The bank is contesting a £50mfine from regulators in relation to the 
matter, which was first disclosed in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/16/barclays-fined-reckless-2008-fundraisings>
.

 