
Seventy years ago last month, allied leaders including Winston Churchill, 
President Eisenhower and Charles de Gaulle met on a train in the Hampshire 
village of Droxford to discuss the imminent D-day invasion. But now it has 
emerged that Droxford has another claim to fame: it has been officially named 
as one of a cluster of villages whose residents have the highest amounts of 
outstanding personal loan per person of anywhere in the country – an average of 
£1,880 per borrower.

The figures were issued by industry body the British Bankers' Association 
<https://www.bba.org.uk/news/press-releases/borrowing-levels-reported-by-british-lenders/#.U7_hlRa9yVv>
 (BBA), which has released its latest data on borrowing to individuals and 
businesses, classified by more than 9,000 postcode sectors across Britain.

As part of this, the BBA has used data provided by leading banks and building 
societies, plus information from the 2011 census, to create a top 10 of 
postcode areas with the highest levels of personal loans on a per-capita basis.

The organisation issued its last top 10 three months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/apr/08/uk-personal-debt-hotspots>. This 
was topped by a suburb to the north of Bath. Now, the BBA has produced updated 
figures and this time it is the SO32 3 postcode sector that tops the table. 
This includes several villages in the Meon valley area of Hampshire, not far 
from Southampton, including Droxford, Exton, Corhampton and Soberton. The total 
amount outstanding on personal loans in this area is just over £5.1m, with the 
average figure per person put at £1,880.

Close behind was PE7 0, which takes in the Peterborough neighbourhood of 
Hempsted. The total amount outstanding on personal loans was £327,003, while 
the average figure per person was £1,869.

In third place was the NE13 9 postcode sector in Newcastle, which takes in a 
number of roads to the west of the A1, a relatively short distance away from 
City of Newcastle Golf Club.

These latter two areas featured in the top 10 issued in April.

The next seven postcode sectors in the latest list are, in order: EC1V 2 (a 
stretch of City Road between Old Street roundabout and Angel tube station in 
central London); PR7 7 (Preston); LS17 0 (Leeds); MK42 6 (Milton Keynes); TD12 
4 (Galashiels); WC1X 8 (the Gray's Inn Road area of central London); and M3 3 
(Greater Manchester).

However, these figures do not include every personal loan provider: they are 
based on data from Barclays, Lloyds Banking Group, HSBC, the Royal Bank of 
Scotland group, Santander, the Clydesdale and Yorkshire banks and Nationwide. 
These institutions account for about 60% of the personal loan market.
 