
America has not one but two special relationships: one with Britain and one 
with Israel. When the two clash, the alliance with Israel usually trumps the 
one with Britain, as Tony Blair discovered to his cost in 2003. For the sake of 
the special relationship Blair dragged Britain into a disastrous war in Iraq, 
but in the aftermath of the war his American allies reneged on their promise to 
push Israel into a settlement with the Palestinians. Blair was no match to the 
power of the Israel lobby in the US. With American complicity, Israel’s 
occupation of thePalestinian territories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories> has now reached its 
50th year and there is still no light at the end of the tunnel.

White House races to save Middle East peace process before Trump takes office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/obama-and-allies-seek-to-isolate-netanyahu-before-trump-takes-office>
American politicians of both parties often use the mantra that the bond with 
Israel is unbreakable. But Israel’s continuing drift to the right has imposed 
serious strains on the relations with its principal ally and chief benefactor. 
In America,Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> is essentially an 
issue in domestic politics rather than foreign policy. And it is the subject of 
deep disagreement between the outgoing Obama administration and the incoming 
Trump administration.

Things came to a head following the passage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/24/israel-rejects-shameful-un-resolution-amid-criticism-of-netanyahu>
 of UN Security Councilresolution 2334  
<http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/RES/2334(2016)>on 23 
December with 14 votes in support and only the US abstaining. The resolution 
condemns Israel’s settlements on the West Bank as a flagrant violation of 
international law; demands that Israel “immediately and completely cease all 
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East 
Jerusalem”; and reiterates the international consensus in favour of a two-state 
solution to Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The Obama administration allowed the resolution to be adopted because by their 
lights it was not anti-Israeli but, on the contrary, essential for preserving 
Israel as a Jewish and democratic country. For them this was a last-ditch 
attempt to arrest Israel’s slide towards apartheid and to preserve the 
possibility of a peaceful solution. In this respect the resolution was entirely 
consistent with US policy since 1967 in viewing Israeli settlements on occupied 
land as illegal and as an obstacle to peace.

For Benjamin Netanyahu, however, the UN resolution was like a red rag to a 
bull. He lashed out in all directions, cancelling an aid program to Senegal; 
telling the New Zealand foreign minister that this resolution was tantamount to 
a declaration of war; summoning the ambassadors of the other countries who 
voted for the resolution for a dressing-down on Christmas Day; vowing to 
curtail funding for five UN institutions “that are particularly hostile towards 
Israel”; “punishing” Theresa May, one of the most pro-Israeli leaders in 
Europe, by cancelling a meeting with her in Davos; and accusing the Obama 
administration of treachery.

That Obama detests Netanyahu is common knowledge. What is less well known is 
that Obama’s personal antipathy towards the prime minister co-exists with a 
genuine commitment to the welfare and security of the Jewish state.

Obama’s actual record over his eight years in office makes him one of the most 
pro-Israeli American presidents since Harry S Truman. Obama has given Israel 
considerably more money and arms than any of his predecessors. He has fully 
lived up to America’s formal commitment to preserve Israel’s “qualitative 
military edge” by supplying his ally with ever more sophisticated weapons 
systems. His parting gift to Israel was a staggeringmilitary aid package of 
$38bn <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-israel-statement-idUSKCN11K2CI> 
for the next 10 years. This represents an increase from the current $3.1 to 
$3.8bn per annum. It is also the largest military aid package from one country 
to another in the annals of human history.

Netanyahu invariably repaid Obama’s generosity with ingratitude and abuse. He 
never missed an opportunity to attack Obama; he intervened crudely in the 2012 
presidential elections by backing the Republican candidate; he abused the 
privilege of an address to a special session of both houses of Congress to 
insult their president; and he conducted the most vociferous public campaign to 
sabotage the nuclear agreement with Iran. One is hard put to think of a more 
blatant example of biting the hand that feeds you. Netanyahu’s conduct marks 
him out as the special ally from hell.

Israel’s leader epitomizes what Senator J William Fulbright once called “the 
arrogance of power”. He is also devious and duplicitous. In theBar-Ilan speech 
of 2009 
<http://www.haaretz.com/news/full-text-of-netanyahu-s-foreign-policy-speech-at-bar-ilan-1.277922>
, he paid lip service to the idea of a demilitarized Palestinian state 
alongside Israel. But, in the run-up to the 2015 election, he abruptly reversed 
this position and solemnly pledged that there would be no Palestinian state on 
his watch.

Netanyahu has always believed what the Likud’s electoral platform continues to 
state explicitly: there can be no independent Palestinian state west of the 
Jordan River. He is a reactionary politician whose overriding aim is to 
preserve the status quo with Israel as a regional superpower, ruling over 
millions of disenfranchised Palestinians in what he and his colleagues insist 
on calling Judea and Samaria.

Netanyahu presides over the most rightwing, jingoistic, pro-settler, and 
overtly racist coalition government in Israel’s history. He and his government 
are addicted to occupation – the root of all evil. In the teeth of almost 
universal condemnation, they continue to expand the Jewish settlements on the 
West Bank, thereby deliberately destroying the basis for a viable and 
territorially contiguous Palestinian state.

Area C, where most of these settlements are located, comprises 60% of the West 
Bank. Several ministers, led by the ultra-nationalist Jewish Home party, 
advocate outright annexation of this area. A cabinet majority is pushing for a 
new law that would “legalize” the illegal Jewish outposts on the West Bank – 
illegal even by Israeli standards because they were built on private 
Palestinian land. This law, if passed by the Knesset, as seems very likely, 
will translate the ongoing practice of the ethnic cleansing of Palestine into 
official state policy.

As is the case with Britain, at the core of the US-Israel special relationship 
are common values like freedom, democracy, the rule of law, justice, and 
equality. If anyone has betrayed these values, it is not the Obama 
administration but Israel’s hawk-infested cabinet.


The Israeli hawks cannot wait for Donald Trump to enter the White House 
because he is a strong supporter not only of Israel itself but of the illegal 
settler movement. They believe he would give them a free pass to annex the 
rural parts of the West Bank and they hope that he will act on his promise to 
move the American embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem ̶ a move that woulddrive a 
stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/us-embassy-jerusalem-palestine-donald-trump-tel-aviv>
 through the two-state solution.

Trump has tweeted his opposition to the Security Council resolution and 
promised that things will change after 20 January. As president he will be able 
to align American foreign policy more closely with Israel but he would not be 
able to reverse the latest Security Council resolution. He can tweet until he 
is blue in the face; the resolution will still stand.


Resolution 2334 will not resolve the conflict but it has created a new legal 
framework and a new momentum. By instructing the UN Secretary-General to report 
every three months, the council put down a marker that from now on it intends 
to hold Israel to account for its actions. The resolution also opens the door 
for other bodies, such as the European Union and the International Criminal 
Court, to intensify their pressure on Israel to desist from its illegal 
practices on the West Bank and its war crimes in Gaza. Last but not least, the 
resolution provides a powerful impetus for BDS (boycott, divestment, and 
sanctions), the global grass-roots campaign against one of the most prolonged 
and brutal military occupations of modern times.
 