
What does it mean to be human in the 21st century – and what happens when we 
bring spirituality into that very diverse mix? The landmark festival Belief and 
Beyond Belief launches on 16 January and, over the course of the year, its rich 
programme will feature renowned names such as iconic physicist Stephen Hawking 
and composer Krzysztof Penderecki, in addition to topical debates and talks on 
religion, spirituality, science and literature, open learning opportunities and 
a range of world-class musical performances.

Belief and Beyond Belief took shape from a particularly heartfelt starting 
point, as Southbank Centre’s artistic director Jude Kelly explains: “There have 
been so many debates about faith and different approaches, but there hasn’t 
really been a place for communities to come together and discuss the need for a 
spiritual life,” she says. “Although we are a fairly secular society in the UK, 
we felt that there should be a shared space for investigating faith, equally 
validly as a believer or non-believer. All societies have rituals, regardless 
of whether or not they follow an established religion, and all are concerned 
with morality, and who decides what is right or wrong.”


Southbank Centre’s Belief and Beyond Belief festival: top 20 events
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-belief-and-beyond-belief/2017/jan/09/southbank-centres-belief-and-beyond-belief-festival-top-20-events>
Kelly mentions that she also felt inspired by creative and faith groups she 
encountered outside the UK, and that Belief and Beyond Belief offers a lively 
counterpoint to “reductive” views.

“We have a very binary idea of faith,” she says. “There is a lot of focus on 
attitudes that feel antagonistic, without necessarily being based on knowledge, 
and huge areas of mistrust, both about other people’s faiths, and within the 
faith communities themselves. The centre of the story should be interest and 
excitement.”


The festival’s events take in many big questions and contrasting viewpoints, 
with themed weekends ranging from the search for the meaning of life, to how we 
live with death, involving keynote speakers such as Karen Armstrong and Mona 
Siddiqui OBE. The weightier issues include faith and conflict, and whether 
science and religion are really opposing forces, and there is a dynamic 
approach to each element. “Cutting-edge science is still stumped by the big 
bang,” argues Kelly. “The pleasure of mystery is always going to be there, no 
matter what.”

The London Philharmonic Orchestra’s principal conductor and artistic adviser, 
Vladimir Jurowski, has also been a driving force behind Belief and Beyond 
Belief, and the LPO’s festival repertoire ranges from classical masterworks by 
devout composers such as Bach, to the otherworldly drama of John Adams.

“I was brought up in the belief that music and art in general connect human 
beings with higher ideas and levels of existence. So, even if there is no God, 
there are certainly some things we humans have created to celebrate the idea of 
God, one of which is music,” says Jurowski.


He points out that while these events encompass all the world faiths, it is 
also a space for non-belief, with a much broader definition to spirituality 
overall. For Jurowski, one of the festival’s aims is “to see if there is 
something in music that binds people together as religion used to do. It might 
sound naive, but my feeling is – if we learn ourselves and teach our children 
to listen to music with their hearts as well as their ears, in other words to 
become more compassionate, the world will eventually become a slightly better 
place.”

Throughout the festival, the multi-level Southbank Centre will also put its 
varied areas to great use, from the convivial Clore Ballroom and foyer to the 
grand main auditorium and the building’s “spirit level” rooms. “It will be 
quite celebratory, with pop-up talks, music and family events,” says Kelly. 
“Belief and Beyond Belief should be a powerful experience, with all of these 
people pouring into a central space.”


Southbank Centre’s Belief and Beyond Belief festival, in partnership with the 
London Philharmonic Orchestra, runs from 16 January-17 December 2017. For more 
information and to book tickets, visitSouthbank Centre’s website 
<https://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/festivals-series/belief-and-beyond-belief?utm_source=Guardian%20Labs&utm_campaign=SC%20BABB%202017&utm_medium=Gdn%20Labs%20article1%20-%20intro>
 