
It’s the number you need for a happy and fulfilled life – financially 
speaking. It could be the difference between getting a great mortgage deal or 
the best personal loan rate - or spending your life renting. It might even be 
the number that gets you a hot date or a partner for life.

Notch up a credit score of 961 or better and you are in the “excellent” 
category, according to Experian, the UK’s biggest credit reference agency. 
Score 881-960 and you “should get most credit cards, loans and mortgages, but 
the very best deals may reject you”. However, drop below 560 and you are 
considered to be “very poor” and more than likely in big financial trouble.

In the US, a person’s credit score has long been openly discussed, and there 
is even a dating website called CreditScoreDating (“Where good credit is 
sexy!”), dedicated to helping singles find someone with a similarly great (or 
disastrous) financial view of the world.

But over here credit agencies have chosen to inhabit the shadows – a place 
typically only visited by those trying to find out why they have been turned 
down for a credit card or mortgage. Until now, possibly?

Last week Barclaycard became the first big UK financial player to offer its 
10.5 million customersfree and regular online access to their credit score 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/20/barclaycard-customers-credit-scores-experian>
. Barclays’ card division has linked up with Experian, and for many this will 
be the first time they see the data finance companies use to decide their 
future.

Experian says the majority of people fall into its “fair” range – 721-880 – 
which sounds fine until you check the interest rates you are likely to be 
charged. The lower the score the higher the risk, and the more you will pay.

So why is this data so important? Contrary to popular belief, credit reference 
agencies – there are three in the UK – don’t decide whether you get credit; 
that is very much the prerogative of lender and is influenced by other factors 
such as your previous business dealing with that company.

However, the data held by the agencies will have a major impact on the deals 
you will be offered, particularly as a new customer.

According to Moneyfacts, someone with a “good” credit record can obtain loans 
from M&S Bank for just 3.5%, but once their credit score is classified only as 
“fair” that jumps to 31.9%.

Pay your bills on time and your score will rise, miss a mobile phone payment 
and it will head south

Each credit reference agency has a different scoring model, which makes it 
difficult to compare them directly. While the number you see may be different 
for each agency, they all provide you with a visual scale – five “bands” 
ranging from “very poor” to “excellent”.

Equifax <http://www.equifax.co.uk/> and Callcredit 
<http://www.callcredit.co.uk/> are arguably less upfront than Experian about 
their scoring. Equifax says its range is “0-600 roughly”, though it adds that 
there are some “outliers”. It says its advice to consumers is to “worry less 
about the number and more about the band you’re in. We focus on the bands in 
our communications”.

Callcredit’s scores range from 200-750. It uses a system that can be quite 
hard to get your head around. For example, a score of 500 arguably isn’t that 
great because it represents a ratio of 1:1. In other words, for every two 
people with this score that a lender takes on, one is likely to turn out to be 
a “good” customer and one is likely to turn out “bad”, ie will miss payments. 
However, a score of 600 represents a ratio of 32:1, ie 32 “good” customers for 
every “bad” one.

When you manage your credit successfully and pay all your bills on time your 
score will rise (or stay where it is if it’s already high). Miss a mobile phone 
payment and it will head south. “There are three main reasons why people get 
poor scores,” says Experian’s James Jones. “They might not have a history 
because they have just turned 18 or have just arrived in the country. Secondly, 
they might have a history of bad debts – missed payments etc – or even a 
bankruptcy. The third group tend to be the over-committed – those with lots of 
outstanding loans they are juggling.”

Jones says lenders are most interested in what a person has been doing over 
the past three to six months, and then for the past two years – although a 
credit report will go as far back as six years.

Improve your chances

• Having no information is likely to be seen as a negative. Use some credit 
(such as a card, mobile phone contract, bank account or loans), pay on time and 
stick to any agreed limits. Many organisations register regular information 
about their customers with credit reference agencies, including household bills 
such as gas and electricity. Any missed or late payments are likely to show on 
your credit report and may also harm your chances of getting credit in the 
future.

• Make sure you are registered on the electoral roll at your current address. 
Creditors use it to confirm who you are. Not being on it could lead to some 
creditors turning you down.

• If you’ve been turned down for a credit card, consider a “credit builder” 
card instead. Aqua and Capital One are among the providers. Use it responsibly 
and your score will rise.

• Check your credit report from time to time, particularly before an 
application, and make sure all of your information is accurate and up to date. 
Dispute anything you don’t agree with.

• If you have financial links to people on your credit report which are no 
longer relevant (for example, if you are divorced or separated), ask for them 
to be removed.

• Use a notice of correction to explain special circumstances behind previous 
arrears of defaults, such as illness or redundancy. This is a statement of up 
to 200 words that lenders will see when reviewing your credit report.
 