
Simon Woolley vividly remembers his introduction to the English suburbs. He 
was detained and handcuffed outside his own home by police officers who refused 
to believe he lived there. But for the intervention of his white English 
neighbours, who hurried to vouch for him, the black Briton was on an 
ignominious route to the local station. These things stay with you.

Two decades later, Woolley – a national figure as director of the pressure 
group Operation Black Vote – is now a veteran suburbanite. What is remarkable 
in our national story is the extent to which thousands of other black and Asian 
Brits have followed that trajectory. Demographers make much ofwhite flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/01/white-flight-diversity-cities> 
– the movement of white Britons from the inner cities to the suburbs and beyond 
– interpreting its meaning and consequences. Less talked about is the growing 
movement of visible minorities into the heartlands of Englishness.

In post-referendum Britain we have seen sudden waves of intolerance. Eastern 
Europeans told to go home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/27/family-safe-eastern-europeans-brexit-britain-eu-referendum>
.A BBC reporter branded a “Paki” 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/crime/bbc-journalist-sima-kotecha-in-utter-shoin-utter-shock-bbc-radios-sima-kotecha-reveals-she-was-a3282041.html>
 in the English town where she was born. An African-American on a bus told by 
fellow passengers to go back to Africa. This is distressing. But underneath, 
there is something more encouraging; the quiet riptide of communities adapting 
to significant, structural change.

John Betjeman would have spotted it immediately, for it is via the former poet 
laureate andhis celebrated 1973 BBC documentary Metroland 
<https://vimeo.com/89603339> that the traditional perception of the English 
suburbs has been formed. On a gentle jaunt, in his gentle way, he described 
communities stretching from Neasden in north-west London all the way to the 
Chiltern Hills, along the path of the Metropolitan underground line. Betjeman’s 
suburbia spoke of cricket pitches, golf clubs, women’s institutes and verdant 
farmland: a new life for indigenous Britons at arm’s length from the bustle and 
smoke of London.

Many migrants came from rural Caribbean, Africa and India. There is no 
particular cultural affinity for concrete

But that journey retraced, as I have been doing for a BBC radio documentary, 
reveals a very different Metroland. “Funereal from Harrow draws the train,” 
wrote Betjeman. “On, on northwestwards, London far away.” Harrow then, 
according to the 1971 census, had an Asian population of about 8,000 from a 
total population of 200,000. A further 1,500 settled there after Idi Amin’s 
mass expulsions from Uganda in 1972. Today, 31% of the residents there describe 
themselves as white-British; 69% are ethnic minorities. Betjeman’s Pinner, 
where he saw “sepia views of leafy lanes”, is much changed too. In 1971 there 
were fewer than 1,000 visible minorities. Pinner’s population of 19,000 is now 
38% ethnic minority.

Were Betjeman able to take other routes from other cities into other suburbs, 
he would encounter the same phenomenon. Analysis by thinktank Demos suggests 
that just 800 from 8,850 council wards in England and Wales now have a 98% 
white population.

Geographers at Leeds University led by Prof Philip Rees 
<http://www.geog.leeds.ac.uk/people/p.rees/> tracked the “internal migration” 
of people from one local authority to another, using census data to show that 
minorities were leaving core city neighbourhoods for lower-density suburban 
areas. In London, all minority groups are drifting out of the inner city. The 
trend is also noticeable around most other big English cities, including Leeds, 
Birmingham, Nottingham and Leicester.

And it will persist, not least because the absolute numbers of minorities will 
increase too. White Britons are expected to account for 70% of the UK’s 
population by 2061, with the ethnic minority population 30%. And those who have 
been here the longest are most likely to strike out for suburbia.

This tells us various things about our recent history. It means that, over 
time, the suburbs have become less forbidding for minorities. People seem more 
willing to move away from traditional inner cities, particularly when others 
have already done so, mirroring a phenomenon demographers have noted in parts 
of the US. That process isn’t always tension-free. The racist British National 
party sought to make political capital in Barking, east London, with claims that
black Africans were being lured into the area with public funding 
<https://socialistworker.co.uk/art/20509/The+myth+of+Africans+for+Essex>. In 
fact, those were largely families buying into an area with some of the cheapest 
house prices in the country. The rumours persist though – surfacing again as 
residents vented to reporters during the Brexit referendum campaign. Compared 
to the scale of change, however, there has been relatively little conflict. It 
tells us that minorities themselves feel psychologically able to move to new 
areas.

In making the documentary, I did encounter two highly successful professionals 
who buck that trend. One said he would be reluctant as a matter of principle to 
move from inner city to suburb because being away from his community would be 
undesirable. He actively wanted to stay among folk who were like him. The other 
felt that the departure of figures like him would – in time – degrade the 
social capital of his area.

But for the most part, the “internal migrants” I saw equated their move 
outwards with practical and social advancement. And all this was aided by 
Britain’s improving infrastructure. Businessman Wasim Rehman grew up in Aston 
in Birmingham, then moved his family to Chalfont St Giles in Buckinghamshire. 
It’s 100 miles away, but a clear M40 allows him to meet the challenges of being 
away from family and community. He can be back for cultural events in less than 
two hours and does so, he says, “even if we only stay for an hour”.

In addition, culturally specific purchases merely require a 40-minute trip to 
Southall, 15 miles away. “Being part of your community no longer has to be 
about geography,” he tells me.

And, of course, as sufficient numbers move into a suburb, eventually they 
create a local network of shops, community facilities and places of worship, 
further speeding up the process. The mainly black African King’s Family church 
in Chadwell St Mary, Essex, caters for a new community but also acts as a 
conduit. People visit the church, befriend the congregation. Many then move in.

Inevitably, this alters the look and character of the suburbs, and the nature 
of the local economy. Food, hair, clothes and jewellery shops, temples, 
mosques, gurdwaras. Traditional pursuits are adapted to new realities. What 
would Betjeman have made of Bollywood night at Pinner cricket club?

A defining question arises that goes beyond the fabric to the people: will the 
new surburbanites change or be changed by their new surroundings? And this has 
a particular relevance to politicians. Labour had hoped the phenomenon, 
reflecting traditional support from ethnic minorities, would help in the 
capture of suburban Tory marginal seats, but it didn’t work out that way in the 
2015 election. In places like Metroland too many of the upwardly mobile Asian 
voters plumped for the Tories. Hendon in north London stayed Tory – with an 
increased majority. Croydon Central, a recipient of aspirational minority south 
Londoners, could have fallen but didn’t. Neither did Harrow East. Quite the 
conundrum for politicians as they seek to recalibrate how votes are sought and 
won from an increasingly diverse electorate.

One can’t be Pollyannaish about this, as alongside black flight, demographers 
detect an extension of white flight. Minorities move out; many white Britons 
move out even further. But perhaps there is a natural filtering system at play, 
and perhaps that’s for the best. Those who can be comfortable with a changing 
Britain embrace it or make the best of it. Those who can’t just pack up and 
leave.

There is an inevitability about diversity in the inner cities. Poorer Britons 
of all origins live there. Migrants looking for jobs and cheap housing 
gravitate there. But it is not surprising that minorities should want a piece 
of Metroland. Many came from rural areas of the Caribbean, Africa, India and 
Pakistan. There is no particular cultural affinity for urban sprawl and 
concrete.

What the geographers detect is the sum of decisions – integration by design, 
not accident. Overall, we can be quietly hopeful about how it’s playing out.

• Black Flight and the New Suburbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/suburbia> is on BBC Radio 4 on Sunday at 
1.30pm
 