
What is it?

Blockchain is a digital ledger that provides a secure way of making and 
recording transactions, agreements and contracts – anything that needs to be 
recorded and verified as having taken place.

However, uniquely, rather than being kept in one place like the more 
traditional ledger book, the database is shared across a network of computers. 
This network can encompass just a handful of users, or hundreds and thousands 
of people. The ledger becomes a long list of transactions that have taken place 
since the beginning of the network, getting bigger over time.

How do you use it? 

Blockchain runs on specialised computer software that operates behind the 
scenes, automatically distributing information to the database as new 
transactions are made. Most individual users will not see a blockchain 
performing and this instantaneous nature means there is little to no window of 
time for someone to alter a transaction before it is recorded on to the ledger. 
Blockchain software is an area of experimentation and in June, a market 
assessment estimated that$1bn would be invested in blockchain technology in 2016
 
<https://www.finextra.com/newsarticle/29093/2016-wall-street-blockchain-investment-to-top-1bn>
 alone.

How is it secure? 

A blockchain database consists of blocks and transactions. Blocks contain 
batches of transactions that are “hashed” and encoded. Each block contains the 
hash of the block before it, which links the two and forms the chain. This 
process validates each block, all the way back to the original, and is integral 
to the database’s security.

The ultimate aim would be to track every pound in aid, from donor to recipient

When a transaction takes place, its details are encrypted and a unique 
multiple-character transaction number is generated. Instead of other users in 
the blockchain being able to see the exact details of the transaction, this 
number is recorded in the ledger as a placeholder. All the users of the network 
will be able to see that the transaction has taken place but only the parties 
involved in the transaction can access and view its details.

All this makes any fraudulent activity easier to spot. An external hacker 
would have to gain access to every computer that holds a copy of the blockchain 
database, and at the same time, in order to tamper with it.

 What is it used for?

Blockchain technology has been around for a number of years and its most 
well-known use so far isBitcoin <https://bitcoin.org/en/>, the virtual currency 
that came to prominence in 2008. The uses of blockchain are not limited to 
financial transactions, though, and enthusiasts are looking into other ways 
applications for the technology, especially for the types of transactions where 
there are often disputes or trust issues, such as with land rights.

What does it mean for development?

As an emerging technology, blockchain enthusiasts are hopeful it could be the 
next big development disruptor. In providing a transparent, instantaneous and 
indisputable record of transactions, its potential to remove corruption and 
provide transparency and accountability is one area of intrigue. But there are 
still many questions around how to apply the technology. Does blockchain really 
meet a need that is not already being served? And is there a market where it 
serves a purpose?

How could it be used in the sector?

Towards the end of last year, the Start Network <https://startnetwork.org/> 
announced a project to trial how blockchain technology can speed up the 
distribution of aid funding and trace how it is spent. The ultimate aim would 
be to track every pound in aid, from donor to recipient.

Blockchain could also be used for land tenure and property rights. 
Traditionally, governments keep records of who owns a certain piece of land or 
property, and the owner may or may not have a piece of paper to prove it. But 
government records can be lost or manipulated, or the government might have 
issued a deed to someone else for the same piece of land so two people could 
claim ownership for the same plot. The blockchain, however, could function as a 
neutral broker to determine who owns what; the chain could prove which parties 
are involved and what they agreed to as the original contract would have been 
verified by a blockchain database, and stored securely on the ledger.

Would blockchain work in a country where the government frequently shuts down 
the internet? Probably not
Ben Mann 
Development Alternatives Incorporated <https://dai.com/> (DAI) is also looking 
into how blockchain technology can be used in electronic medical records, which 
are becoming more common around the world. “There are so many people involved 
in the healthcare process for a single patient – hospitals, doctors, insurance 
companies and, in some cases, the government – so how do you make sure those 
records remain secure, encrypted, and that they’re not lost or corrupted?” says 
Ben Mann, global practice specialist at DAI. “Blockchain can act as an 
encryption process so that documents can be shared securely, and also ensure 
that documents are not altered.”

What are the drawbacks?

In the development space, there are concerns over whether the technology is 
appropriate. Blockchain is resource-intensive by its nature; distributing a 
common digital ledger across a network requires many servers, computers and 
people. “Would blockchain work in a country where the government frequently 
shuts down the internet, where there is civil unrest, or poor energy 
infrastructure and rolling brown outs? Probably not,” says Mann.

“We know that some governments struggle to equip their staff with basic IT 
equipment, let alone run expensive programmes on them. Any blockchain 
technology in this setting would need to be subsidised by development partners 
and donors … and that raises questions around sustainability.”

Should we be using blockchain?

In January 2016, the UK’s chief scientific adviser urged the government to 
adopt the technology, and companies such as Microsoft are developing their own 
blockchain services. But, like any nascent technology, there are still kinks to 
work out, such as those around cultural acceptance and uptake, building the 
right infrastructure, and making sure the right levels of regulation are in 
place.

“Bitcoin is the one solid, mostly-undisputed success story of blockchain, but 
there are lots of obstacles to come and we still don’t know if it can stand the 
test of time,” says Mann. “We’re still in the exploratory, Wild West phase of 
blockchain development but I am hopeful that it can serve a purpose.”

Is your development or humanitarian organisation using or investing in 
blockchain? Tell us how you’re using the technology in the comments below.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians and follow @GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. 
 