
Would you like to write a blog for us? Here’s how it works.

You need to pitch a new idea – we cannot publish pieces that have appeared 
elsewhere, even on a blog. If we think your idea is right forBlogging Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/series/blogging-students>, we’ll tell 
you to go ahead and write it. There’s an editing process - which may involve 
rewrites. And then it gets published, you get a writer’s profile page on the 
Guardian, we promote it through social media - and you’ve given your online 
profile a huge boost.

How to begin? Before you settle on a topic to pitch to us, it’s probably a 
good idea to read some of the blogs that have done well onBlogging Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/series/blogging-students>.

You’ll also notice that these blogs are not like people’s personal blogs. They 
are each focused on a specific area of student life. Some concern themselves 
with academic issues – revision, plagiarism – some with health issues – drugs, 
depression, illness – some with political issues – austerity protests, tuition 
fees – some with lifestyle – clubbing, accommodation, music. But each has a 
case to make and a clear focus for discussion.

Choose your topic and send us a pitch

Try to find a subject that has not been written about – or have something 
really fresh and surprising to say about an old theme.

The best topics tend to be small and specific rather than huge and 
wide-ranging. For example, don’t pitch “The state of higher education”, do 
pitch “Most of my course is being taught by other students”.

It’s not enough simply to have a topic, you need to have a point to make about 
that topic, so explain what your argument will be. Tell us who you plan to 
quote in your piece - it’s good to have a variety of voices with different 
points of view. What news reports, statistics, surveys or blogs are you going 
to link to to give your piece some context?

If we like your idea – and if no one else has pitched the same thing – then 
we’ll discuss your pitch with you, make further suggestions as to how you can 
develop it, and ask you to go ahead and put your piece together.

Once you’ve decided what you’re keen to blog about, pitch your idea to 
Blogging.Students@theguardian.com <mailto:blogging.students@theguardian.com>.

How to write for Blogging Students

• Your blog needs to be around 600 words long.

• Adopt a conversational, chatty style. Avoid cliches, jargon, academic 
language and acronyms.

• Put some serious work into your intro – is it intriguing, engaging and 
different?

• Always use specific examples, perhaps based on personal experience. Don’t 
generalise or waffle on about challenges and passion.

• Use common nouns as much as you can: “boots” and “apples” are much more 
evocative words than “footwear” and “produce”.

• Try to find recent research or media coverage about your topic, and link to 
it in your blog.

• Check your facts. Every article on the Guardian site has to be factually 
accurate. There’s no point in having a guess at, say, the number of students 
who drop out in first year. You need to have an up-to-date statistic, and a 
link, to show where you found it.

• You can’t break the law. You can’t make unsubstantiated libellous claims 
against people. You can’t change a quote to make it say what you want it to 
say. And if someone has said something they may later deny having said, it’s 
good if you have it on tape, or written down in your notebook word for word. 
Don’t throw your records away.

• Avoid standing on a soap-box and banging on about something. Quoting a 
variety of people will help to bring other voices into your piece.

• Read what you’ve written aloud when you’re finished. Is that how you talk?

• The reader should emerge clear about what you’re saying, what other people 
have said on the subject, and what they are being asked to comment on.

• If you’re the sort of person who wants to know what our style is on the 
spelling of a particular word, or how we punctuate quotations, theGuardian 
Style Guide <https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a> is 
available online.

What happens next

Once we’ve decided your blog is suitable for publication, we will edit it. 
Don’t be taken aback by the fact that the final version of your piece may be a 
bit different from what you submitted.

Everything that is written for the news media is edited, sometimes quite 
heavily, to make the writing punchier, to cut repetition, and to accord with 
the Guardian Style Guide and the tone of the website.

We will ask you for a headshot and a one-sentence bio for your contributor 
page. This can contain link to your own blog or twitter feed.

Who is eligible to blog?

• You need to be a member of Guardian Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> to be eligible to blog. To 
become a member, go to this sign up page and fill in the form. We’ll be happy 
to welcome you into the fold, and your membership will also bring you a weekly 
newsletter and a free ebook.

• You have to be a current student for us to consider your blog - you might be 
in sixth form, or studying at an FE college, doing an apprenticeship or 
attending university, either as an undergraduate or as a postgraduate student. 
There is no age restriction. And you can be studying anywhere in the world.

We’ve uncovered some brilliant writing talent since we launched this blog in 
2012. We’re keen to hear from every kind of student – from science to law, 
business to art, journalism to medicine – about the issues that affect their 
lives.

So if you’ve got something to get off your chest, write to: 
Blogging.Students@theguardian.com <mailto:blogging.students@theguardian.com>. 
We look forward to hearing from you.


Still not sure where to start? 

Here’s a few great examples of our student blogs to inspire you:
• 10 habits I’ve picked up while studying in America  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2014/jul/17/10-american-habits-studying-abroad-students>
• What happened when I started a feminist society at school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2013/jun/20/why-i-started-a-feminist-society>
• My drink was spiked. The next day the questions began… 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/aug/16/drink-spiked-student-reaction>
 