
About a decade ago, when we were sending our son to a mostly-white public 
charter school in Los Angeles’ East Side hipness zone, I got a pure sense of 
what “school choice” is all about. The school had been bouncing around like a 
dodgeball from location to location. First, it was located at a church on 
Fairfax, but soon outgrew that facility. Then, it occupied the edge of a rough 
Hollywood elementary school, where the mostly Mexican public-school population 
was kept at arm’s length from the Stellas and Elijahs and Dexters of the 
“charter” that longed for a permanent home.

 One night, we had a public meeting at an auditorium in Lincoln Heights, a 
neighborhood that’s been plagued by gang violence since the era of LA 
Confidential. Our school’s bourgeois brain trust had come up with the idea of 
merging its resources with another charter school, which mostly served Central 
American immigrant families. Proposed as the location for this new merged 
school: a former sanitarium for unwed mothers, which had gone unoccupied since 
1979 and was now certainly occupied by ghosts.

Public schools may not survive Trump's billionaire wrecking crew | Nikhil Goyal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/public-school-system-trump-administration-betsy-devos>
The head of the other school said, “our parents are mostly grateful that their 
children can go someplace every day that’s … dry.”

We gasped. Of course our children were dry. We didn’t even let them step in 
puddles! They were always safe and warm, and often went to movie premieres; our 
concerns revolved around them learning a second foreign language before middle 
school and hopefully giving them the opportunity to visit Paris.

But when it comes to public education, priorities vary. The next speaker was a 
sergeant from the local police district, who described how neighborhood gangs 
routinely initiated female members by gang-raping them.

The next week, the wealthiest families began to bail on our little charter 
school.

•••

There’s been a lot of hand-wringing in my semi-rarified circles since Donald 
Trump announced that he’d chosenBetsy DeVos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/betsy-devos-education-secretary-trump-administration>
 to lead the department of education. According to many terrified sources, 
DeVos will set into action an unstoppable series of reforms that will force our 
children to attend underfunded vacation Bible schools. Teachers will require 
kids to declare fealty to Jesus, the Republican party and the NFL.

Life will be one long trigger warning.

I encourage everyone to be alarmed at everything that the Trump administration 
does, but reports of the death of American education seem to be coming in a 
little late. If you have any contact with public education, you know that it’s 
been halfway in the ground for a long time. My wife and I don’t have education 
at the top of our list of fresh Trump-era worries: for us, it’s been a problem 
from the beginning, no matter who’s in charge.

Educating my son has been the equivalent of trying to buy clothes in a mall 
where the stores keep closing

I’ve spent the last dozen years trying to educate my son in American schools. 
Half that time, we’ve lived in Texas, the reddest of states, and the other 
half, California, the bluest. In both states, what DeVos proposes is already 
the reality, minus a sketchy voucher system. We’ve rarely stuck with one school 
for more than a couple of years.

“School choice” is the reality for most parents I know. Liberals, the most 
stalwart intellectual defenders of public education, often choose a private 
path when they’re financially able. As a friend of mine, a public defender in 
Los Angeles, wrote to me: “All our friends are saying that Betsy DeVos is going 
to force them to send their kids to private religious schools. And then they 
send their kids to private religious schools.”

Educating my son has been the equivalent of trying to buy clothes in a mall 
where the stores keep closing, or where one store has socks but not shoes, 
pants but not underwear, or shirts that consistently come in two sizes too 
small. He started in the aforementioned arts charter in Los Angeles, entering 
kindergarten before his fifth birthday not because he was so advanced, but 
because his name got pulled in a lottery. A decent free education was no 
guarantee in the LA neighborhoods where we could marginally afford to live.

Eventually, that school found a permanent home, in an office park by the 2 
freeway, occupying a cavernous building that came cheap because it was located 
next to a porn warehouse owned by Hustler. My son spent his third-grade year 
learning math and grammar in echoey recycled shipping containers. We attended 
endless fundraisers so the school could afford its outrageous rent.

Like many school charters, this one began to fray around the edges. There were 
rumors that the experienced, efficient principal, who for years had held the 
school together with sticking plaster and sheer will, was about to step down. 
And certain activist moms had forced mandatory “emotional intelligence” 
workshops into the curriculum, filling the children’s heads with questionable 
motivational speak.

We didn’t stick around to see the death of this empire, because the collapse 
of my Hollywood fortunes forced us to retreat to the distant LA suburb of 
Austin, Texas.

•••

We rented a dumpy little shack in an Austin neighborhood that we’d heard had a 
“good” public school. But we quickly learned that the public-school system in 
Austin in particular, and Texas in general, suffers from a pretty retrograde 
curriculum.

The principal pinched Elijah’s cheeks and said, “We’re going to have a lot of 
fun, aren’t we?” “Um, OK,” said our son, used to being educated by 
non-condescending people.

She then enrolled him in third grade, even though he’d already completed third 
grade. The school gave him math homework where the first problem was “1-0,” 
even though he already knew long division. And his teacher sent home an 
information sheet that began “To many times, their are students who …”

We pulled him out after two weeks, instead enrolling him in a “progressive” 
charter school that was only a 15-mile drive from our house. This school, 
located in a former mental hospital at the edge of a toxic waste dump near the 
airport, was so radical that it didn’t have a principal. Parents ran 
everything. The cinderblock buildings didn’t get washed very often. Supplies 
were in short supply. They combined fourth and fifth graders into the same 
class, which led to bullying problems. We spent three hours a day in the car, 
hauling Elijah back and forth.

At the end of the first semester, in lieu of a Christmas concert, the students 
performed a winter solstice dance in the midst of a freezing, stick-strewn 
field, like something out of a Lars von Trier film. My wife and I looked at 
each other and said, “no more”.

His teacher sent home an information sheet that began 'To many times, their 
are students who ... '

Come January, we began spending every spare cent we had to send Elijah to a 
private school for “gifted” students, which he tested into despite 
spatial-awareness scores that would have been embarrassing for a marmoset. The 
school had some great teachers, and many annoying quirks. Every year, students 
“graduated” while wearing togas and laurel wreaths. There were a constant 
series of assemblies where speakers came in and told the students how “special” 
they were for being “gifted”.

Real estate, as always, was a problem. The school couldn’t afford its own 
facility, so it rented space at a synagogue, which meant that it didn’t meet on 
Jewish holidays. Combined with regular school holidays plus mysterious 
in-service days, Elijah averaged about three days a week in school. He was also 
constantly having to move from classroom to classroom because the temple often 
used its classroom space to provide housing to homeless families. This caused a 
lot of tsuris among the private-school families, who were against homelessness 
in principle.

But Elijah learned some Latin and took a college-level physics course at age 
10. He had great English and social-studies teachers, and made friends with a 
cadre of bright weirdoes who he’ll probably know his entire life. Then the 
school, using sketchy evidence, decided to hold him back a year. Instead of 
advancing him to middle school, they placed him in something they called the 
“Leadership” class, even though it was only comprised of three kids. After the 
kids complained that “Leadership” was a condescending misnomer, the school 
changed the name of the class to the “Hybrid” class, and then proceeded to put 
all the kids in middle-school classes anyway. This, combined with an incident 
where Elijah and two friends were almost expelled for “plagiarism” after they’d 
failed to properly cite a source in a paper – in 5th grade – had us souring on 
the gifted academy.

•••

We could see that the school had begun a slow collapse, which culminated in 
the board rebelling and firing the founders in the middle of a semester. But by 
then, we’d bailed to the suburbs and enrolled Elijah in an ordinary, boring 
public middle school with good test scores.

This school, bounded by Texas state education standards, has its flaws.

A letter to … All of the permissive parents today
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/31/a-letter-to-all-of-the-premissive-parents-today>
 If Texas social-studies teachers want to tell students that human slavery 
existed in the United States, they need to take the initiative, because 
slavery’s not really in the curriculum. Evolution is “just one theory”. The 
sex-ed curriculum, called “Worth The Wait”, teaches “abstinence-only” and is 
not, by law, allowed to mention masturbation.

My son gets shielded, to some extent, from a less-than-adequate state 
curriculum by a roster of quality teachers and a principal who gives them 
leeway. He has a full grasp of algebra, already has a high-school Spanish 
credit and for once goes to a school with a well-funded theater department that 
performs in state competitions. Plus, the school is two blocks away and he 
walks there every day. That’s worth our real-estate taxes alone. Our son’s 
districted for a local public high-school that offers a lot of choices, 
including an acclaimed international baccalaurate program. He’s going to give 
it a try. I just hope our voucher, if we’re forced to accept one, covers the 
costs.

Meanwhile, a friend from Los Angeles reports that the arts charter is still in 
business in its East Side warehouse spare that’s designed to look like a 
millennial ad agency. At last telling, the school was raising funds by having 
its handsome Austrian-born gym teacher stand outside the gate with a basket. 
Parents can toss in money as they drop off their kids.

For American public schools, that sounds like business as usual. 
 