
Rogue company bosses could face fines of up to £500,000 if their firm is 
behind nuisance phone calls under a government move to clamp down on the 
problem.

Firms can already be fined if they are found to have breached the rules, but 
the people running them can try to dodge the penalty and set up a new company.

From spring 2017, a change in the law will mean directors will be held 
personally responsible and both they and their companies can be fined, facing 
combined penalties of up to £1m.

Plagued by nuisance calls? It’s time to ring some strategic changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/18/nuisance-calls-mandatory-caller-id-battle-spam>
The Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) will be able to impose the fines 
if firms and the people running them are found to be in breach of the privacy 
and electronic communications regulations.

The move has been welcomed by the information watchdog, while the consumer 
group Which? hailed the move as a “massive victory” following its campaign on 
the issue.

Under the current system, only businesses are liable for fines and many try to 
escape paying the penalty by declaring bankruptcy, only to open up again under 
a different name.

The digital and culture minister, Matt Hancock, said: “Nuisance callers are a 
blight on society, causing significant distress to elderly and vulnerable 
people.

“We have been clear that we will not stand for this continued harassment and 
this latest amendment to the law will strike another blow to those businesses 
and company bosses responsible.”

Elizabeth Denham, the information commissioner, said: “The people running 
nuisance call companies have little regard for the anxiety and upset they cause 
all in the name of turning a fast profit.

“We are inundated with complaints from people who are left shaken and 
distressed by the intrusion on their daily lives.

“We’re quick to fine the companies responsible but we’ve been speaking to the 
government about going further than that because we must do all we can to help 
protect people from these calls.

“Making directors responsible will stop them ducking away from fines by 
putting their company into liquidation. It will stop them leaving by the back 
door as the regulator comes through the front door.”

The ICO has issued fines totalling almost £3.7m to companies behind nuisance 
marketing. This year alone, the ICO has fined firms responsible for more than 
70m calls and nearly 8m spam text messages.

Alex Neill, the Which? managing director of home and legal services, said: 
“This is a massive victory for the hundreds of thousands of people who 
supported our nuisance calls campaign.

“It’s good to see the government has listened to consumers and will be 
introducing new rules to hold company directors to account.

“This legislation will stop rogues dodging fines for bombarding consumers with 
nuisance calls and sidestepping the rules by closing one business and 
re-establishing a new one.”
 