
Bovis Homes has been accused of pressuring customers to move into unfinished 
houses before Christmas by offering them cash incentives, a week before it 
issueda profit warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/28/bovis-profit-warning-investors-surprise-housebuilder-shares>
.

Several Bovis customers said they had been offered cheques of £2,000 to 
£3,000, or other incentives, if they completed on their house purchases before 
23 December.

Members of the Bovis Homes Victims Group on Facebook, which also has a YouTube 
channel <https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCnKzoIrkLZTHn-xxWd_gJHw>, have 
swelled to 650, with 244 people joining in the last two months.

Marc Holden, one of the group’s administrators, said: “We were getting a lot 
of people joining the group just before Christmas who were posting about being 
‘encouraged’ to complete by 23 December, some were being offered money and 
other incentives.”

He said a group of at least 30 disgruntled Bovis customers would stage a 
protest at the company’s annual meeting in Tunbridge Wells on 2 May.

A company spokesman said: “Bovis Homes is fully aware of the customer group 
and their complaints, and we take these issues very seriously. We recognise 
that in some of these cases we have not provided our best standard of customer 
service and have taken too long to rectify customer issues, for which we 
apologise.”

Bovis, one of Britain’s biggest housebuilders, added that a “limited number of 
customers were offered an incentive to complete before the year end and all 
homes were habitable with the requisite CML industry certification, with a 
timetable for outstanding finishing works to be carried out in the new year.”

The firm insisted that no one was forced to move in before Christmas and that 
the homes only needed some finishing touches. “Customers were clearly free to 
decide their preferred course of action. The group often offers a range of 
incentives at sale and completion in line with industry practice,” the 
spokesman said.

The housebuilder’s chief executive David Ritchie quit on Monday, less than a 
week after the group issued its profit warning. It warned last Wednesday that 
it wouldcomplete about 180 fewer homes than expected 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/bovis-homes-group--bvs-/rns/pre-close-update/201612280700147955S/>
 in 2016, blaming operational issues. This will affect profits – Bovis now 
expects to make an annual pre-tax profit of £160m to £170m, compared with 
analysts’ forecasts of about £183m.

 One couple was offered a post-completion cheque of £2,000 if they could 
legally complete on their property by 23 December, according to an email seen 
by the Guardian.

Comments from other customers suggest the homes lacked more than just 
finishing touches.

Chad Clifton said he and his wife were “forced” to complete on their 
four-bedroom house in Brockworth, Gloucestershire on 23 December and found the 
fridge had not been fitted yet and that the hallway was unfinished, out of a 
list of 115 defects. They were offered £350 and a free move. “We were told we 
didn’t have much choice – if the house is ready we have to complete on 23r 
December.”

None of the defects have been fixed yet but Clifton said the couple “love the 
house” and that the customer service had improved vastly after his wife sent a 
scathing letter to Bovis’s head office.

Another Bovis customer said he and his wife had been offered £3,000 if they 
completed on 23 December, but declined the offer because of numerous problems 
(such as the wrong kitchen being fitted) at the £320,000 three-bedroom property 
in Inkberrow, Worcestershire.

The couple are still waiting for the problems to be rectified and to complete 
on the purchase. He said they had not been offered any compensation despite the 
stress caused, time taken off work and the cost of extending storage.

Holden and his wife form part of a group of eight families who bought Bovis 
homes across the country in recent years and have taken the company to task 
over defects and the length of time it is taking to fix them. In response, the 
firm launched a review in December and set up a team from across the business 
to resolve the issues.

Bovis said: “We recognise that our customer service has to improve and the 
leadership of the organisation is absolutely committed to getting this right.”

Karen Louise Richardson and her family said it had taken until now, two years 
after they moved into a four-bedroom house in Norwich, to fix more than 200 
defects.

The Richardsons moved in on 19 December 2014 but maintain they were not 
advised that their house was unfinished until an hour after completion. “I’d 
never buy Bovis again; I’d never buy a new build again unless I did a lot of 
research,” she said.
 