
Millions of Britons are expected to flock to the shops on Boxing Day as they 
make the most of the honeymoon period before Brexit-related price hikes trickle 
down to the high street.

Some of the country’s biggest shopping centres are predicting bumper crowds as 
retailers slash the price of their winter clothing, TVs, laptops and furniture 
ranges.

Gordon McKinnon, operations director at Intu, which owns Manchester’s Trafford 
Centre and the Metrocentre in Gateshead, said it expected more than 1m shoppers 
to visit its centres. “It is a huge shopping day because even though there is 
more discounting before Christmas there are still a lot of retailers, like 
Next, John Lewis and Selfridges that don’t. There’s a big push from Boxing Day 
- that’s the emotional bit. People want to go out and get their first fix of 
the sales.”

Retailers across the board have signalled the weakness of sterling will push 
up prices in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/15/after-marmite-bitter-taste-price-rises-new-year-2017-retail>
 as the cost of importing goods increases. Fashion retailer Next has said its
clothing prices will rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/next-expects-higher-profits-despite-tougher-trading-conditions>
 by up to 5% while electrical goods retailers Dixons Carphone and AO have also 
said their suppliers want tocharge more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/white-goods-set-to-soar-on-black-friday-shoppers-rush-beat-price-rises-brexit>
. Apple haspushed up the price  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/brexit-apple-mac-customers-prices-rise-us-dollar-pound-sterling>
of every computer in its range, while Microsoft and Dell have also signalled 
that price hikes are on the way.

Myf Ryan, the chief marketing officer at Westfeld UK and Europe, said Boxing 
Day was the busiest day of the Christmas trading period for its London malls in 
2015. “Last year over 330,000 shoppers visited our two Westfield centres in 
London and this year we are expecting similar numbers,” she said. “During the 
Christmas period last year, shoppers spent over £500,000 per hour.”

Despite the pictures of crowded high streets at this time of year, Diane 
Wehrle, marketing and insights director at Springboard, says the overall number 
of people who physically visit the shops in December has declined in six of the 
last seven consecutive years - a worrying trend for retailers that helps 
explain why so many resort to offering pre-Christmas discounts.

Wehrle says shopper numbers were down by more than 2% in the first half of 
December but that the decline was less than the 3% drop recorded in 2015. “We 
are losing fewer people every year while online is growing but at a slower 
rate,” she said. “It’s not a boom year [for retailers] but it’s not a bad year 
either. Unlike Black Friday, Boxing Day is part of the holiday and culturally 
has a lot of significance.”

Retailers in London’s West End are expected to outperform the national picture 
as the devaluation of sterling since the Brexit vote draws high spending 
tourists to its high end department stores and luxury brands. Jace Tyrrell, 
chief executive of New West End Company - which represents retailers in Oxford 
Street, Regent Street and Bond Street - predicted today would be one of the 
district’s most successful single shopping days in recent years. Takings are 
expected to hit £55m.

“Boxing Day is becoming increasingly popular as a shopping day as customers 
become savvier, more price sensitive and better at researching purchases,” said 
Tyrell. “We expect a significantly higher number of Chinese tourists to come 
over specifically to bargain hunt.”

While the total number of transactions in the West End last week was actually 
down by more than 14% in the week before Christmas, the average “basket value” 
increased by 28%, highlighting the impact of the currency effect. The average 
value of a Chinese shopper’s purchase was nearly five times higher than that of 
a domestic shopper, at £1,073 versus £212, said Tyrell.

The pull of the Boxing day sales belies the 24 hour shopping trend ushered in 
by the internet.

With many retailers launching sales online on Christmas Eve, the shops never 
really close anymore, although this year there has been a push by several 
retailers, including Fat Face and jeweller Beaverbrooks to stay closed on 
Boxing Day. John Lewis has never opened the day after Christmas.

According to data compiled by the association for online retailers IMRG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/britons-expected-to-spend-13bn-on-black-friday-bargains>
, an estimated £805m will have been spent on the virtual high street yesterday 
[25th December] as Britons immediately cashed in gift cards, received as 
presents, to download games and music and take advantage of early bird sales. 
It predicts close to £1bn will be spent online again today.

Boxing Day Deals

Currys PC World’s best offers include a 49–inch Samsung 4K Ultra HD TV for 
£649 - a £250 reduction - and GoPro Hero+ camcorders half price at £99.99.

Offers at Habitat include the Pedley shelving unit, half price at £250 and the 
Abu coffee table, down from £180 to £80.

For fans of designer fashion, Whistles has slashed the price of the Mia 
patchwork sheepskin coat by £600 to £1,200. Its Drew collarless leather biker 
jacket is also half price at £180.

At footwear chain Office there is £50 off UGGs with the Australian brand’s 
classic short boots selling for £105 while white Adidas Superstar 80s are £50 - 
a reduction of nearly 40%.

Kitchen outfitter Magnet is trumpeting a half price sale with the Fusion 
Champagne kitchen (based on 8 units with laminate worktops) down from £10,420 
to £4,789.

Marks & Spencer’s homewares sale includes the Austen small corner sofa, which 
is half price at £999.50, while in clothing M&S Collection angular heel knee 
high boots are half price at £25.

The deals on website Very.co.uk include a £180 saving on a Christie storage 
bed frame, at £219, and more than 30% off a 14” HP laptop at £359.99.

Debenhams says it has slashed more than £130m off prices in its stores today 
with £75 knocked off a Butterfly by Matthew Williamson embroidered dress at 
£175 and bottles of Sarah Jessica Parker Lovely perfume going for half price at 
£17.

Eyecatching deals at Anthropologie include the statement floral burst 
chandelier, which at £2,179.95 is more than half price. There is also 30% off 
the Taunton reversible sheepskin gilet at £390.95.

Asos is also offering big discounts on men and womenswear: highlights include 
an Armani Jeans parka for £322, some 30% off, and a Sonia by Sonia Rykiel Sheet 
Stripe maxi dress reduced from £300 to £210.
 