
Kathryn Moore, 25, from Peterborough, works in customer service. She’s been in 
the role for eight days and hopes to remain. Though Moore, who is autistic, has 
never struggled to find work, hanging on to a job can be a problem.

“I find busy environments with lots of noise quite difficult,” she says, so 
retail roles are not ideal for her. Moore also struggles with social 
interactions and finds workplace relationships difficult to navigate: “I 
generally don’t pick up on subtle cues and body language, and that can lead to 
issues with colleagues.”

These businesses are redefining public space for autistic people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/jun/20/these-businesses-are-redefining-public-space-for-autistic-people>
But there are distinct advantages to having Moore as your employee. “I have a 
great memory and once I start a task I become absorbed in it and will keep 
going until it is done,” she says, adding: “I’m a perfectionist and I like to 
make sure things are done to the best of my ability. I am reliable – I can’t 
stand to let others down, so I’m always on time and make sure that I have done 
what I said I would.”

Moore also meets targets, and once she understands the main requirements of a 
job, is very capable. She believes these traits are shared by a lot of people 
on the autistic spectrum, making them potentially excellent employees. But this 
is only “providing that employers are willing to allow for areas in which we 
struggle”.

Moore believes that certain allowances for autistic employees can make all the 
difference: “If an employer needs to meet with an autistic employee, don’t 
simply say ‘we need to talk after work’, because I will spend the entire day 
worrying about the meeting. If possible, tell me what the meeting will be about 
and if it is negative then tell me at the last possible moment. Give feedback 
constructively; if there is an issue, don’t just tell me there was an issue, 
tell me how I contributed to it, how I should do things differently and what 
the best outcome will be, as there is every chance that I had no idea there was 
a problem until the very last moment.”

There are other ways employers can help, says Moore: “Five minutes of quiet 
can help someone with autism to reset and come back to the job. I personally 
really struggle with loud or repetitive noises, so can I wear headphones? Can I 
sit away from the source of the noise?”

Simply, she says, all employers need to do is “find solutions because we work 
better when we don’t have physical stressors. Sensory processing difficulties 
can be very painful and it’s not fair to ignore them and expect quality work.”

Getting and keeping work is a challenge for many people on the autism 
spectrum, and the National Autistic Society will be focusing on this in future 
as part of their Too Much Information (TMI) campaign, after hearing from 
autistic people how important it is to them. The charity, which has been 
promoting understanding of the problems autistic people face in its TMI 
campaign, has uncovered some alarming statistics about employment and autism. 
According to figures from the AGCAS Disability Task Group, 26% of graduates on 
the spectrum are unemployed, by far the largest proportion of any disability 
group; and the National Autistic Society’s own figures show that only 16% of 
adults on the spectrum are in full-time paid work. National Autistic Society 
surveys also indicate that around one third of adults who have worked have 
experienced bullying, been treated unfairly, or faced discrimination at work 
because of their autism.

Moore says she left one previous job because of her employers’ lack of 
support, which caused her to develop severe depression: “I declared my autism a 
few months into my role, but despite my disclosure [which included describing 
her deficits in understanding non-verbal communication], I was transferred to 
work with an individual who was known for their unpredictable temper.” She 
adds: “I was expected to pick up new tasks and learn new procedures with no 
instruction, despite this being my first job in this particular area.”

Other issues included changes being made at short notice, such as transfers to 
different teams, and last-minute alterations to the daily schedule. But when 
Moore raised this with management, they proved inflexible.

The National Autistic Society suggests that simple adjustments, such as making 
job interviews more accessible or providing support to those in work to help 
understand the “unwritten rules” of the workplace, can unlock the potential of 
autistic employees.

This starts at the application stage, says the National Autistic Society 
employment training consultant Emily Swiatek. “It’s important to make sure that 
job descriptions are clear and are asking for the things they actually need.” 
For example, she says: “‘Enthusiastic, team player’ is often automatically in 
there but isn’t always a requirement, and the same goes for ‘excellent 
communication skills’. An autistic person might be the perfect match for the 
job but may not apply because they don’t have these skills and will assume they 
are ineligible. Use plain English and avoid jargon.”

The interview process itself can be made easier too, says Swiatek. “Remember 
that interviews are all about knowing how to do the game of interviews and not 
actually about how to do the job. Be willing to try alternative interview 
formats. Remember to use questions that ask about experience and not 
hypothetical situations, and don’t take facial expressions and eye contact as 
indicators of interest.”


You can make a difference: sign the National Autistic Society’s petition 
<http://bit.ly/autism-employment-gap>, which calls on the government to take 
decisive action to double the number of autistic people in work.
 