
A quick trade deal with the US under Donald Trump could mean harsh compromises 
on issues such as the environment and food safety, campaigners and politicians 
including the former deputy prime ministerNick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> have warned.

In an interview with the Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/michael-gove-uk-interview-tory-times>
, Trump told the former cabinet minister Michael Gove he would seek a trade 
agreement with the UK “very quickly” once it left the EU. “I’m a big fan of the 
UK. We’re gonna work very hard to get it done quickly and done properly. Good 
for both sides,” the president-elect said.

On Monday at his monthly Brexit briefing, Clegg said he expected UK consumers 
would not want to see a watering down of food safety and animal welfare laws as 
the price of a quick trade deal with the US.

He recalled a debate he had with the outgoing US vice-president, Joe Biden, 
over EU food safety regulation while the coalition was in power. “I remember 
talking to Joe Biden some years ago about the TTIP thing and he said: ‘Listen 
Nick, we’re not going to sign anything that the chicken farmers of Delaware 
don’t like.’

“Chicken farmers of Delaware wash their chicken flesh is some form of chlorine 
or bleach, which is not allowed in the EU. I suspect that the good shoppers in 
Sainsbury’s might be a little bit shocked if they get this white, 
chlorine-washed American chicken flesh – and that’s the great triumph of the 
trade agreement.”

Samuel Lowe, the campaign lead at Friends of the Earth, said the US had also 
long pushed for the removal of an EU ban on hormone-treated beef and a general 
watering down of a precautionary approach to regulating health and the 
environment.

“There is a real risk that in its rush to sign a headline-grabbing UK-Trump 
deal as quickly as possible, the government will be forced into concessions it 
would never normally make,” he said. “Trump knows this; that’s why he’s 
interested. A trade agreement is not a good thing solely by virtue of its own 
existence. Substance matters. Context matters. Politicians forget that at their 
peril.”

Poultry processed with chlorine and hormone-treated beef have been held up as 
symbols of lower US food safety standards 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/eu-ttip-fears/> by opponents of the EU’s 
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, particularly in Germany and 
Austria.

The UK’s ambassador to Washington, Kim Darroch, has previously argued that a 
UK-US free trade agreement would be swifter to achieve than TTIP, which has not 
yet been completed after three and a half years of negotiations, because 
agricultural policy is less of a hurdle in the UK.

“For some of the European countries involved, agriculture is extremely 
important,”Darroch said last month 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/donald-trump-could-face-long-path-to-us-uk-trade-deal/>
. “For us, it’s a much smaller part of our economy. So some of the issues that 
were potential big blocks in the TTIP would simply not be anything like that 
big a problem for us.”

The UK is unable to begin formal trade negotiations until it leaves the EU, 
which is expected to be in 2019 barring any delay in the triggering of article 
50. On Monday, Downing Street played down any suggestion that a trade deal 
could be done any quicker, saying Britain would respect its obligations while 
it remained a member of the EU, and that these prevented EU member states from 
entering into free trade agreements.


The prime minister’s spokeswoman said “scoping discussions” about a deal could 
take place before the UK leaves, but did not challenge suggestions that these 
would not amount to full trade negotiations.

Other politicians, including the Green party co-leader Caroline Lucas and 
Labour’s Mary Creagh, chair of the environmental audit select committee, said 
theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> was likely to seek 
downgrades of environmental protections.

“A quick trade deal with Donald Trump runs real risks,” Creagh said. “Our food 
safety and environmental standards could be compromised if we simply open up 
our domestic markets to US interests without asking questions. The government 
is chasing positive Brexit headlines but that must not come at the expense of 
the UK remaining a world leader on environmental issues.”

Speaking to the BBC’s Daily Politics programme, Creagh said she regarded 
Trump’s assurances as “nonsense” and said any deal would involve compromise. 
“He is the big player here and we stand to lose … this will be a Trojan horse 
for Trump.”

Lucas said the UK should be seeking to emulate the EU’s environmental 
regulations. “Donald Trump has appointed at least nine climate sceptics to his 
cabinet,” she said. “If the British government is serious about climate change, 
we need to keep working closely with European countries who are leading the 
world in facing up to this challenge.”

In his Times interview, Trump said he was keen to meet the prime minister 
after his inauguration, which will take place on Friday. “I will be meeting 
with [Theresa May]. In fact, if you want you can see the letter, wherever the 
letter is, she just sent it. She’s requesting a meeting and we’ll have a 
meeting right after I get into the White House and … we’re gonna get something 
done very quickly.”

Joe Carberry, the co-executive director of Open Britain, said: “A quick deal 
will almost certainly mean the smaller partner acceding to the terms of the 
larger partner, the US, which in our case could threaten our NHS and high 
environmental standards. Coming on the back of the government now embracing a 
low spending, deregulatory agenda, working people will be very concerned about 
what this means for their futures.”
 