
At the Higher Education Policy Institute (Hepi), we have worked with London 
Economics and Kaplan International on the most detailed and sophisticated
econometric modelling yet undertaken on how Brexit will affect universities 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/2017/01/12/universities-lose-students-gaining-financially-brexit-new-restrictions-international-students-cost-uk-economy-additional-2-billion-year/>
. The results confirm that our departure from the European Union will be messy 
and difficult – but perhaps not as bad as feared in many respects. It is also 
likely to affect different universities in different ways.

Universities had a shock on 23 June – students and academics largely voted to 
remain. In truth, the on-campus consensus was a little stifling, perhaps even 
counterproductive. Had the arguments for staying in been crafted in the 
cut-and-thrust of fierce and open debate, they might have been more persuasive; 
less focused on cash and more on the benefits of collaboration across borders.

I saw this first-hand on my weekly visits to universities. Last year, I paid 
three visits to the University of Derby – before, close to and after the 
referendum. They have campuses across one of the most beautiful of English 
counties, in Buxton, Chesterfield and Derby itself, and strong links to local 
exporters such as Rolls-Royce, Toyota and Bombardier. The expectation was for a 
big remain vote. Yet every part of Derbyshire voted to leave on a big turnout.

Universities have responded to the new reality in two ways. First, by thinking 
about how they engage with their local communities. Bill Rammell, a previous 
minister for higher education and now vice-chancellor of the University of 
Bedfordshire, says the referendum result places “a real and significant burden 
on universities to take a more substantial role in civil society, rebuilding 
public trust through active engagement”.

‘There was no planning for Brexit’

The second part of the response is more parochial. It involves assessing what 
Brexit means for each university’s income and student enrolment. That is harder 
than it sounds because universities are in the same position as Whitehall: 
there was no planning for Brexit. While David Cameron was barring civil 
servants from contingency preparations, Universities UK concentrated on 
establishing a pro-EU campaign platform called Universities for Europe.

Of course the number of EU citizens who come to UK universities will probably 
fall as a result of Brexit. In part, this is because they are likely to lose 
access to tuition fee loans and to face full international fees, which are much 
higher than the UK fees they have been paying. Any fall is regrettable and, 
sadly, the latest Ucas figures suggest it has already begun.

But working out how big the drop-off will be is hard partly because it depends 
on the type, location and mix of students at each university. Our assessment of 
Brexit’s impact takes such factors into account and finds the effect on student 
numbers and university incomes could be less dramatic than expected.

There are almost three times as many foreign students in the UK from outside 
the EU as from within it. This is because, until recently, EU undergraduate 
students came within the student number controls imposed on universities. So 
there was limited incentive to recruit them. Our analysis shows that, overall, 
their numbers could fall by more than half – that is by over 31,000 new 
students each year. But that is still only about 3% of all first-year 
undergraduate and postgraduate enrolments.

Moreover, because of the higher fees, our modelling suggests that, despite 
receiving 31,000 fewer new EU students, universities will only lose £40m a year 
in the first year. That is just 0.1% of the total income of publicly-funded 
higher education institutions across the UK. Some institutions, such as Oxford 
and Cambridge, will actually see their fee income rise even as their EU 
students fall. This is because their full international fees are so high.

Even that is not the complete picture, because Brexit has led to a 
depreciation in the value of the pound. That makes studying in the UK cheaper 
for those outside the EU. Our analysis suggests that the number of non-EU 
students arriving to study in the UK could increase by 20,000 in the first 
year, thereby offsetting two-thirds of the fall in students from the EU.

Assuming that this is right, the income from these additional students’ 
tuition fees could total £227m in their first year alone – much more than 
offsetting the financial loss from welcoming fewer EU students.

A tale of two camps

None of this is guaranteed to happen. At last year’s Conservative party 
conference, the home secretary, Amber Rudd, promised “tougher rules” to reduce 
the number of students from overseas. If she were to bar those 20,000 new 
international students from coming to the UK, the total loss to the economy 
could eventually total £2bn a year. The loss would be split roughly equally 
between lost direct spending by international students (on fees, accommodation 
and living costs) and lost knock-on benefits for universities’ supply chains.

The academics and students who voted remain now tend to fall in one of two 
camps. Some do not accept the referendum result and think everything possible 
should be done to reverse it. Others think new opportunities have to be 
uncovered and used. Even Universities UK now says that “universities can thrive 
outside the European Union”. They can. But only if the government lets them.

The research is available at www.hepi.ac.uk <http://www.hepi.ac.uk>

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 