
The government must maintain free movement for EU academics or risk losing up 
to 15% of staff at British universities, a leading German academics’ body has 
warned.

It comes as evidence mounts that European researchers and lecturers are 
leaving or rejecting UK higher education posts because of Brexit fears.

Margret Wintermantel, the head of the academic exchange service DAAD, which 
represents more than 300 higher education institutions and student bodies across
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, said uncertainty about 
future working and residence conditions was “proving painful” and prompting top 
academics to turn down British university jobs.

Britain’s brilliant universities depend on openness – don’t let Brexit destroy 
it | Margret Wintermantel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/britain-universities-depend-openness-dont-let-brexit-destroy-it>
“The mobility of researchers should not be restricted, either for British 
academics in EU countries or EU citizens at British institutions,” Wintermantel
wrote in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/britain-universities-depend-openness-dont-let-brexit-destroy-it>
. “It is now up to the British government to create the necessary framework to 
ensure this can happen.”

More than 5,200 Germans are among the 32,000 non-British EU academics that 
make up 17% of UK university teaching and research posts. At higher-ranking 
institutions, the figure tops 20%. They include some of the leading researchers 
in the country: more than half the European research council’s prestigious 
mid-career grants in the UK are held by EU researchers.

The pro-remain campaign group Scientists for EU <http://scientistsforeu.uk/>, 
which has been collecting evidence on the impact of the Brexit vote, said it 
has received more than 430 responses, including nearly 30 cases of EU nationals 
turning down UK jobs or withdrawing applications, and eight of EU academics who 
were working in Britain and have left.


The group also received 40 reports from British members of international 
research projects, who were being asked by their EU partners to scale down 
their role or withdraw from the consortium altogether, and nearly 50 reports 
citing xenophobia as a concern. Several people said they had personally 
experienced abuse, such as being told to go home.

More than 120 EU academics said they harboured fears about the future of UK 
science or prospects for their own careers if they remained in Britain, while 
more than 90 said they or their colleagues were making concrete plans to leave 
the UK as a result of the Brexit vote.

Some have already applied to do so. Giorgio Bellettini, an Italian economics 
professor, said he had noticed a sudden post-referendum spike in applications 
for a vacancy in his department at the University of Bologna.

“Before 23 June, we had seven applicants from the UK in two-and-a-half 
months,” Bellettini said. “Then on 24 and 25 [June] alone, we had 12, including 
six Italians ... I think researchers feel they have zero to gain from Brexit, 
whereas they might incur quite significant losses in the future.”

Mike Galsworthy, the programme director of Scientists for EU, said science and 
research was “a fluid system” and many EU nationals in the UK field were 
clearly considering their futures, driven by a mixture of broad cultural 
concerns, practical worries about their personal status and future funding 
fears.


“The anti-immigrant focus of the leave campaign and the surge in xenophobia 
nationally since the referendum have made many foreigners in the UK research 
community feel less welcome,” Galsworthy said.

“But people also worry about their rights as citizens and about the future 
funding landscape. We know nothing about what British science structure and 
policy will be, or its relationship with EU programmes.”

Britain is the second-largest recipient of EU research funds after Germany, 
receiving €9.5bn (£8.2bn) in the past decade, compared with Germany’s €9.8bn.

The Treasury has said it will underwrite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/13/philip-hammond-treasury-to-guarantee-post-brexit-funding-for-eu-backed-projects>
 existing EU-funded projects, including bids to the €80bnHorizon 2020 programme 
<https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/>, for the life of the grant and 
beyond Brexit if necessary.

But many academics say this covers the bare legal minimum of what is needed 
and Britain urgently requires longer-term strategies for academic funding and 
immigration if its universities are to retain their world-leading role.

Wintermantel also raised the status of EU students at British universities, 
noting that there are 14,000 German students on Erasmus exchange schemes or 
doing full degrees in the UK.

Britain’s exclusion from Erasmus would be a “catastrophe”, she said, while the 
possibility that EU students could have to pay more than their British 
counterparts would lead to the “collapse of academic exchange with the UK”.

Some of the world’s most prestigious institutions have expressed concerns 
about the post-Brexit landscape. Paul Nurse, the Nobel prize-winning head of the
Francis Crick Institute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/02/francis-crick-institute-review-it-looks-better-from-1000-feet>
, Europe’s biggest biomedical research centre, said 55% of its staff and €6m of 
its funding were from the EU, and many researchers were worried for their 
future.

More important to his European employees even than a likely increase in the 
bureaucracy that they will face to live and work in Britain, Nurse told Agence 
France-Presse, was “the risk of a xenophobic reputation spreading out there – 
that Britain is not open for international business”.

Seven national academies, including the British Academy and the Royal Society, 
recently wrote to the government demanding that it reassure EU researchers that 
“they and their dependents will be able to continue to live and work here”.


Universities UK, which represents 135 universities, has urged the government 
to guarantee that existing EU staff will be able to remain after Brexit and 
send a “clear international message” that Britain remains “an attractive 
destination for academic talent”. It wants future immigration reforms to 
reflect the importance to the UK of international students and academic 
employees.

But many EU academics are not sure they will wait. María Huete-Ortega, a 
postdoctoral researcher at Sheffield University working in algae biotechnology, 
and her husband, Javier Iglesias-González, who is doing postdoctoral research 
into embryo development and regeneration at Manchester University, said the 
referendum result marked “one of the saddest days” of their lives.

“We came to the UK because the research opportunities were so much better than 
in Spain after the economic crisis,” Huete-Ortega said. “We thought we would 
stay and make our life here, and have a family. Now there is so much 
uncertainty, we really don’t know if we want to.”

Huete-Ortega said the couple “don’t feel welcome any more, as Europeans. We 
have even felt a little scared: should we be speaking Spanish on the street? 
Maybe academics will have a special status. But I don’t want to stay in a 
country where we have special status. We shouldn’t need it.”

They are also worried about the impact of a possible economic slowdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2016/sep/21/how-has-the-brexit-vote-affected-the-uk-economy-september-verdict>
. “We’re Spanish; we know what it is like to be in a country in recession. We 
have 18 months before our contracts here end, but we are looking ... If 
something good comes up, we won’t stay,” she said.


Prof Karola Dillenburger, a German clinical psychologist who is the director 
of Queen’s University Belfast’s centre for behaviour analysis, said only her 
current teaching commitments were dissuading her from leaving Britain 
“imminently”.


After 34 years in the UK, she said of the referendum: “[I felt] very upset. 
Gutted, in fact. I couldn’t even vote. Northern Ireland voted to remain, so at 
least my local community still wants me. But I feel there is little incentive 
to stay.”

Dillenburger, who has brought her university more than £1m in research income, 
much of it European, and set up two successful master’s courses, said she was 
“already not getting the emails about future international collaborations I 
would have been getting before. UK universities are becoming irrelevant”.

Michael Ladomery, an Italian associate professor of biomedical science at the 
University of the West of England, said he too felt very uncomfortable. “The 
nationalistic and xenophobic climate really puts me off, and I don’t want my 
child to be exposed to it,” he said. Ladomery said he had received “no interest 
whatsoever from EU applicants” for a recently advertised, fully funded research 
fellowship.

British academics are also considering moving away. Helen Fletcher, an 
associate professor of immunology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, said Horizon 2020 funding for her consortium of about 30 Europe-wide 
partners was secure for the next two years.

But because she is British, her continental partners are “worried for the 
future ... They are thinking of the next tranche of funding,” Fletcher said, 
adding that she would seek future funding through UK sources, rather than 
Horizon 2020.

“My home is here, in the UK,” she said. “But if it gets to the point that I 
can’t get research funding because the environment is detrimental to that, then 
I would move.”
 