
The rent-to-own firm BrightHouse has admitted that running more rigorous 
affordability checks on potential customers is hurting its business model.

The controversial retailer, which lets shoppers pay for goods in weekly 
instalments with annual interest rates of up to 99.9%, said that more detailed 
checks on shoppers’ finances were having a material impact on the number of 
customers signing contracts and hurting profits.

The company is seeking to bring its practises into line with the regulatory 
regime overseen by theFinancial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> (FCA), which 
took over regulation of the rent-to-own sector from the Office of Fair Trading 
in 2014.

The FCA revealed in the summer that it was concerned about some practices in 
the rent-to-own sector, including the way in which major players such as 
BrightHouse had been dealing with affordability assessments and customers who 
fall behind on payments.

Related: Buy now, regret later? The secret of BrightHouse's success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/oct/04/brighthouse-consumer-poverty-high-street>

“We have made changes to our customer sign-up process to include a more 
detailed assessment of income and expenditure,” said BrightHouse’s chairman, 
Henry Staunton, in accounts filed at Companies House. “This is proving to be 
onerous and time consuming for our customers and colleagues. These changes are 
having a material impact on the level of customer sign-ups and consequently on 
profit as we enter the new financial year.”

Rent-to-own firms sell furniture and other households goods to customers on 
weekly payment plans. The sector, led by BrightHouse, Perfect Home and Buy as 
You View, has flourished in recent years as it has become more difficult for 
some households to access credit. Interest rates are typically higher than on 
mainstream forms of borrowing. BrightHouse says its rates range from 69.9% to 
99.9% depending on the customer’s credit history and length of contract.

In the year to 31 March 2016, BrightHouse’s customer base shrank 0.4% to 
276,200 as it screened shoppers more carefully, but the average monthly spend 
for each customer increased by 5% to £120.87.

Group sales were up 5.4% at £370.7m, delivering a pre-tax profit before 
exceptionals of £21m, in line with 2015. The company took an exceptional charge 
of £3.3m, largely to cover the the cost of implementing a new “affordability 
action plan” designed to ensure its policies meet with FCA approval.

Rent-to-own firms faced fierce criticism last year from MPs, who accused them 
of preying on low-income households. Theall-party parliamentary group on debt 
and personal finance said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/10/rent-to-own-firms-ripping-off-customers-say-mps>
 people using the repayment plans offered by the likes of BrightHouse were 
often paying three times as much as they would if they could have bought the 
same items outright.

Citizens Advice said last week that the number of people struggling with debts 
to rent-to-own firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/27/rent-to-own-debts-rise-citizens-advice-payday-loans>
 and on guarantor loans rose by 16% in the second quarter, as borrowers no 
longer able to get payday loans move to other, less heavily regulated forms of 
borrowing.

A BrightHouse spokesperson said: “We have worked openly and constructively 
with the FCA to implement an agreed programme of activity to ensure that our 
offer is transparent and affordable for all of our customers. Inevitably this 
has impacted our profitability in the short term as we train colleagues and 
implement and embed new processes.

“We are making good progress on this and remain confident that the market size 
and demand for our proposition remain unchanged.”

BrightHouse, which is owned by the private equity firm Vision Capital, lodged 
its application for FCA authorisation in May but is still awaiting approval.
 