
I have just got off the phone with BT “customer services” in South Shields 
and, as usual with BT, I am fuming. I decided to check my latest BT bill online 
– I opted for paperless bills many months ago – only to discover I am being 
charged £6 a month for access to BT Sport. This is odd, as I never watch it, 
and nor did I ever agree to pay for it. It seems that as a BT broadband 
subscriber, I was given free access to BT Sport for a while. But the company 
has been charging me since August 2015. This is completely outrageous. I asked 
it a number of times at what point did I agree to pay forBT Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bt-sport> but have had no response. 

It claims to have emailed me to tell me that it would start charging me for 
this service unless I opted out. It now refuses to refund us.

I truly despair of BT’s treatment of its customers in situations like this. WE,
Abingdon

This letter is a timely reminder to all BT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> broadband customers who get 
their bills sent electronically to check them, because it is highly unlikely 
thatWE is the only one being charged for a service that they don’t use or want.

Originally, BT Sport was offered for free to all broadband customers whether 
they used it or not. It then became chargeable in August last year at £5 – 
since raised to £6 a month.

Somewhat controversially, the company took the view that everyone would 
automatically be included unless they opted out. BT said at the time that it 
would backdate refunds, but your letter shows that this has since been dropped.

We took up your complaint and the chairman’s office has agreed to credit you 
the £84 you wrongly paid plus £16 as a gesture of goodwill.

BT should have originally asked customers to opt into the service, which would 
have prevented letters like these.

However, it has to be said that if you are a sports fans you are now getting a 
lot of sport for a relatively small monthly fee on BT – a fraction of that 
charged by Sky and others for Sky Sports.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 