
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has 
imposed austerity measures on every family in Britain after announcing a £40bn 
package of emergency tax increases, welfare cuts and Whitehall spending 
restraint designed to slash the budget deficit by the end of the parliament.

The chancellor said the "unavoidable budget" required a VAT rise from 17.5% to 
20% next January, higher capital gains tax, a levy on banks, a two-year public 
sector pay freeze and less generous benefits, but insisted the package was 
needed to prevent the financial markets from turning on Britain.

In his debut budget speech, Osborne pleased the ratings agencies and the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development by intensifying the 
£73bn squeeze already planned by the last Labour government. But he signalled a 
second dose of gloom in October, when a three-year comprehensive spending 
review will spell out the size of the cuts for individual government 
departments.

Osborne warned today that ring-fencing the NHS and international development 
meant non-protected departments would face average real cuts of 25% but that 
some clemency would be shown to education and defence.

The chancellor avoided even deeper cuts in Whitehall by earmarking the welfare 
budget for more than a third – £11bn – of the £32bn reduction in spending. 
Child benefit will be frozen, and the government will eventually save almost 
£6bn a year by linking all state benefits other than pensions to the 
slower-growing consumer prices index rather than the retail prices index.

The Treasury will raise more than £12bn from the increase in VAT, but the 
chancellor sought to soften the blow from the toughest budget in modern times 
by raising personal allowances by £1,000, linking pensions to earnings and 
raising child credits for the next two years.

He said a four-year phased cut in corporation tax would help the private 
sector become the engine of growth, and the economy would have to rely more 
heavily on investment and exports over the coming years.

Seeking to pin the blame for the tough measures on Gordon Brown, the 
chancellor said: "Today we have paid the debts of a failed past. And laid the 
foundations for a more prosperous future. The richest paying the most and the 
vulnerable protected. That is our approach. Prosperity for all. That is our 
goal."

Vince Cable, the Liberal Democrat business secretary, agreed with the 
description of the budget as "tough but fair". Writing in the Guardian, Cable 
said the budget would be vilified by those who sought to undermine the 
coalition government or did not understand the depths of the crisis. "But it is 
necessary and right".

Osborne rejected criticism from Labour that the budget threatened to derail 
the recovery, saying that the independent Office forBudget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility had only marginally 
reduced its forecasts for growth this year and next as a result of today's 
spending cuts and tax increases.

The need to placate the markets after the sovereign debt crisis in the euro 
area last month meant the pace of deficit reduction had to be accelerated, the 
chancellor added. "The consequences for Britain would be severe.

Higher interest rates, more business failures, sharper rises in unemployment, 
and potentially even a catastrophic loss of confidence and the end of the 
recovery. We cannot let that happen." Net borrowing – a combination of the 
running costs of government and spending on infrastructure projects – will fall 
from 10.1% of national output to 1.1% within five years.

The budget measures are designed to turn a structural deficit in current 
spending of 4.8% of GDP into a surplus of 0.3% in four years, holding out the 
prospect of pre-election tax cuts if the economy performs as the chancellor 
expects.

Tonight, the ratings agency Fitch said the budget would "materially strengthen 
confidence" in the country's public finances, while the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, the Paris-based thinktank for developed 
country governments, praised Osborne for his "courage".

Harriet Harman, the interim Labour leader, picked out the Liberal Democrats 
for attack, saying: "This reckless Tory budget would not be possible without 
the Lib Dems. The Lib Dems denounced early cuts; now they are backing them. 
They denounced VAT increases; now they are voting for them. How could they 
support everything they fought against? How could they let down everyone who 
voted for them? How could they let the Tories so exploit them? Do they not see 
that they are just a figleaf?"

Nick Clegg faced tough questioning at his parliamentary party meeting tonight, 
but pinpointed proposals that would not have been in the budget but for his 
interventions. Simon Hughes, the deputy leader, said the VAT rise was 
difficult, but the scale of spending cuts was unavoidable. Clegg had been 
prepared for attacks by Labour that he has turned into a Tory patsy, but he is 
insistent he has ensured the budget has not followed the path of most previous 
fiscal consolidations by hitting the poor hardest. He also agreed with Osborne 
over dinner a month ago that the consolidation should represent a plan for a 
five-year parliament, and the bulk of the details should be spelled out now.

But figures produced by the Treasury purporting to show the richest will 
suffer most extend only to 2012-3, by which time most of the welfare cuts will 
not have been implemented. The Treasury argues that further reforms to combat 
child poverty will be announced later in the parliament, and cites suggestions 
by the Institute for Fiscal Studies that VAT is not necessarily regressive.

Clegg and Cable, who condemned a planned Tory VAT "tax bombshell" during the 
election, also admit privately it is not possible to tackle the deficit without 
hitting welfare. The Lib Dems are proud that the budget retains their plans for 
a rise in capital gains tax, and rightwing calls for a taper relief have been 
rejected.

Osborne told the Commons: "In this budget everyone will be asked to contribute 
but in return we make this commitment. Everyone will share the rewards when we 
succeed. When we say that we are all in this together we mean it." But he faces 
the charge that he has gone further than he needs to accelerate the deficit 
reduction.
 