
White House officials have undermined their own government scientists' 
research into climate change to play down the impact of global warming, an 
investigation by The Observer can reveal.

The disclosure will anger environment campaigners who claim that efforts to 
cut greenhouse gas emissions are being sabotaged because of President George W. 
Bush's links to the oil industry.

Emails and internal government documents obtained by The Observer show that 
officials have sought to edit or remove research warning that the problem is 
serious. They have enlisted the help of conservative lobby groups funded by the 
oil industry to attack US government scientists if they produce work seen as 
accepting too readily that pollution is an issue.

Central to the revelations of double dealing is the discovery of an email sent 
to Phil Cooney, chief of staff at the White House Council on Environmental 
Quality, by Myron Ebell, a director of the Competitive Enterprise Institute 
(CEI). The CEI is an ultra-conservative lobby group that has received more than 
$1 million in donations since 1998 from the oil giant Exxon, which sells Esso 
petrol in Britain.

The email, dated 3 June 2002, reveals how White House officials wanted the 
CEI's help to play down the impact of a report last summer by the government's 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), in which the US admitted for the first 
time that humans are contributing to global warming. 'Thanks for calling and 
asking for our help,' Ebell tells Cooney.

The email discusses possible tactics for playing down the report and getting 
rid of EPA officials, including its then head, Christine Whitman. 'It seems to 
me that the folks at the EPA are the obvious fall guys and we would only hope 
that the fall guy (or gal) should be as high up as possible,' Ebell wrote in 
the email. 'Perhaps tomorrow we will call for Whitman to be fired,' he added.

The CEI is suing another government climate research body that produced 
evidence for global warming. The revelation of the email's contents has 
prompted demands for an investigation to see if the White House and CEI are 
co-ordinating the legal attack.

'This email indicates a secret initiative by the administration to invite and 
orchestrate a lawsuit against itself seeking to discredit an official US 
government report on global warming dangers,' said Richard Blumenthal, attorney 
general of Connecticut, who has written to the White House asking for an 
inquiry.

The allegation was denied by White House officials and the CEI. 'It is absurd. 
We do not have a sweetheart relationship with the White House,' said Chris 
Horner, a lawyer and senior fellow of CEI.

However, environmentalists say the email fits a pattern of collusion between 
the Bush administration and conservative groups funded by the oil industry, who 
lobby against efforts to control carbon dioxide emissions, the main cause of 
global warming.

When Bush first came to power he withdrew the US - the world's biggest source 
of greenhouse gases - from the Kyoto treaty, which requires nations to limit 
their emissions.

Both Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney are former oil executives; National 
Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice was a director of the oil firm Chevron, and 
Commerce Secretary Donald Evans once headed an oil and gas exploration company.

'It all fits together,' said Kert Davies of Greenpeace. 'It shows that there 
is an effort to undermine good science. It all just smells like the oil 
industry. They are doing everything to allow the US to remain the world's 
biggest polluter.'

Other confidential documents obtained by The Observer detail White House 
efforts to suppress research that shows the world's climate is warming. A 
four-page internal EPA memo reveals that Bush's staff insisted on major 
amendments to the climate change section of an environmental survey of the US, 
published last June. One alteration indicated 'that no further changes may be 
made'.

The memo discusses ways of dealing with the White House editing, and warns 
that the section 'no longer accurately represents scientific consensus on 
climate change'.

Some of the changes include deleting a summary that stated: 'Climate change 
has global consequences for human health and the environment.' Sections on the 
ecological effects of global warming and its impact on human health were 
removed. So were several sentences calling for further research on climate 
change.

A temperature record covering 1,000 years was also deleted, prompting the EPA 
memo to note: 'Emphasis is given to a recent, limited analysis [which] supports 
the administration's favoured message.'

White House officials added numerous qualifying words such as 'potentially' 
and 'may', leading the EPA to complain: 'Uncertainty is inserted where there is 
essentially none.'

The paper then analyses what the EPA should do about the amendments and 
whether they should be published at all. The options range from accepting the 
alterations to trying to discuss them with the White House.

When the report was finally published, however, the EPA had removed the entire 
global warming section to avoid including information that was not 
scientifically credible.

Former EPA climate policy adviser Jeremy Symons said morale at the agency had 
been devastated by the administration's tactics. He painted a picture of 
scientists afraid to conduct research for fear of angering their White House 
paymasters. 'They do good research,' he said. 'But they feel that they have a 
boss who does not want them to do it. And if they do it right, then they will 
get hit or their work will be buried.'

Symons left the EPA in April 2001 and now works for the National Wildlife 
Federation as head of its climate change programme. The Bush administration's 
attitude was clear from the beginning, he said, and a lot of people were 
working to ensure that the President did nothing to address global warming.

Additional reporting by Jason Rodrigues
 