
Rob Hill is angry that his tax bill will go up £3,000 from April. Chris Cooper 
is furious that his personal tax bill will nearly double. Other landlords say 
that their effective tax bill will rise to 100%. As the buy-to-let market reels 
from last April’s stamp duty hike, and awaits the tightening of lending 
criteria starting in January and the steep increase in tax being phased in from 
next April, is the party over for Britain’s two million landlords?

Hill has three rental properties in south-west London, but says landlords are 
“getting a bashing” from the government’s changes to the tax regime, accusing 
it of ruining the retirement plans of thousands of people. An estate agent 
himself, he has let out a flat and two houses in Clapham for the past 10 years, 
which earn him an annual rental income of £40,813 after service charges and 
letting fees. The mortgages cost him £13,770, leaving him with a profit of 
£27,042. Currently he is liable for 40% tax on this, so the bill is £10,816.

Days of the buy-to-let landlord are numbered, says Fergus Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/09/buy-to-let-landlord-days-numbered-fergus-wilson-tax-changes-mortgage-rules>
But from April the government will begin to withdraw the tax relief landlords 
currently enjoy. At the moment, buy-to-let investors can offset all the 
mortgage interest against their tax bill, but this will be reduced in stages 
between 2017 and 2020, cutting the relief rate from 40% to a flat rate of 20%. 
(The full details and worked examples are explained on the next page.)

For Hill, it means he will be taxed at 40% on his turnover of £40,813, which 
comes to £16,325. Then he applies the 20% basic-rate tax relief of £2,754, 
which will bring his tax bill to £13,571 – nearly £3,000 more than in this tax 
year.

But with relatively small mortgages, Hill admits he’s in a better situation 
than many. He cites an investor who recently bought a flat in Soho for £985,000 
through his estate agency, with a £650,000 mortgage. The landlord makes a 
profit of just £3,343 a year on the deal, but by 2020-21 will be making an 
annual loss of £554 – and that’s before the boiler breaks down or there’s a 
void period.

“There’s a housing shortage, and landlords help this by providing 
accommodation – but they are being vilified,” Hill says. “Interest rates will 
go up at some point, and that will be the final nail in the coffin – many will 
have to sell. The government is penalising landlords at a time when confidence 
in the pensions system is at an all-time low. Many people put money in buy to 
let instead and now the goalposts are being moved drastically. In what other 
business can you not write off a fixed cost against tax?”

But the tax change is just one of three blows to landlords: since April, 
anyone buying a home that is not their main residence has had to pay a 3% stamp 
duty surcharge – for a £200,000 buy to let in England and Wales it meant the 
tax jumped from £1,500 to £7,500. And from 1 January, tough new affordability 
criteria imposed by the Bank of England means borrowers will be limited to 
smaller loans (see overleaf). Someone who previously qualified for a buy-to-let 
mortgage of £190,000 might find they can only borrow £150,000 in future.

Landlords scramble to avoid higher buy-to-let taxes, report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/02/landlords-scramble-to-avoid-higher-buy-to-let-taxes-report-finds>
Tenants who see themselves as toiling to pay their landlord’s pension, 
however, may see it another way. As Reuben Young of campaign groupPricedOut 
<http://www.pricedout.org.uk/> says (see below), the changes are “fantastic 
news” and will level the playing field for first-time buyers competing for 
homes with landlords.

But critics warn the clampdown may force up rents – and argue that they are 
not all fat cats. Cooper, 55 and from Windsor, is a landlord with 15 properties 
across the country, from Crawley in the south to Grimsby in the north. On paper 
he appears to be a millionaire, with the properties worth a total of £2.4m. But 
Cooper works as cabin crew on an airline earning £34,000 a year, and says he 
began doing buy to let to supplement his otherwise meagre pension.

His total rental income is £104,000 a year, but mortgage interest and charges 
are £88,000, leaving him with an annual profit of £16,000. Added to his pay it 
brings his annual income to £50,000. Currently he pays £12,320 tax and national 
insurance on that, but once the tax changes are fully phased in by 2020 his 
bill will rise to £22,720. Figures prepared by his accountant suggest the tax 
on his rental income will rise from £4,600 (or 29% of his profits) to £14,900, 
or 93% of his profits. If interest rates rise he says he will have to pay tax 
in excess of his profits.

Cooper is already increasing rents. Until now, he says, he has kept rents on 
his properties at around £500 a month when he could have charged market rates 
of around £550 because he wanted to attract good, long-term tenants. But now he 
says it is likely he will have to raise rents to above the market average to 
protect himself from the tax rises. The alternative would be to sell up, with 
many landlords weighing up the cost of the annual tax increases against the 
capital gains tax liability if they “crystalise” their property profits and 
sell up.

If landlords sell, their tenants will have to leave … there will be less 
rental property, so rents will rise

“I think a perfect storm is brewing in the rental market,” says Cooper. “There 
isn’t enough property being built of any tenure in the UK. Landlords will 
either have to raise rents or sell because of the tax rises. If they sell, 
their tenants will have to leave. But then there will be less rental property 
around, so rents for other places will rise. It’s supply and demand.”

Cooper was one of a group of landlords so enraged by the changes that they 
took their case to court. But the Axe the Tenant Tax group, represented by 
Cherie Booth QC,lost the case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/06/landlords-lose-legal-challenge-buy-to-let-tax-changes-cherie-booth>
, and hopes of a reprieve in the autumn statement from new chancellor Philip 
Hammond were dashed.

Instead, many landlords are scrambling to restructure their properties into 
corporate vehicles to avoid the tax. TheBuy to Let Britain report 
<http://www.kentrelianceforintermediaries.co.uk/resources/campaigns/buy-to-let-britain-report>
 from Kent Reliance last week found that some landlords have set up limited 
companies, while others have transferred properties to family members. In the 
first nine months of this year, it said, 100,000 limited company loans were 
taken out by landlords buying properties – double the number for the whole of 
2015. Over the page we detail how this works.

But according to Cooper, despite the high-profile court case, many buy-to-let 
investors are still unaware of the forthcoming changes. “A lot of landlords are 
sleepwalking into disaster,” he says.
 