 A fundamental split opened between cabinet ministers yesterday on the eve of 
the Scottish parliament election over an impending Labour-Liberal Democrat 
coalition.
With Labour unlikely to win an overall majority in today's Scottish parliament 
election, the party's Scottish leader, Donald Dewar, is set to open 
negotiations this weekend with his Lib Dem counterpart, Jim Wallace.

But the deputy prime minister, John Prescott, was openly hostile towards the 
idea. Only 24 hours before polls opened, and impervious to the emotions the 
issue is arousing in Scottish Labour circles, he said: 'I can assure you it's 
not the idea of the Labour party to be cosy with the Liberals. You know I'm not 
a Lib-Lab fan.' The chancellor, Gordon Brown, is also known to be lukewarm 
about a pact. He is irritated with the Lib Dems' demands on tuition fees and 
what he believes to be other uncosted commitments bandied about by the party 
during their campaign. 'Their promises are staggeringly unrealistic,' a source 
close to him said yesterday.

In theory, devolved government means the decision on whether to enter into a 
Lib-Lab pact should be Mr Dewar's alone. But, in reality, he cannot fully 
ignore the views of his cabinet colleagues.

Tony Blair despite weak cabinet support for links with the Lib Dems since the 
departure of one of the leading advocates of co-operation, Peter Mandelson is 
keen to useScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> as a template for 
a realignment of centre-left politics at Westminster.

The debate will become even more heated if the number of successful Labour 
candidates is close enough to the magic majority figure of 65 to make a 
minority government a feasible alternative to a coalition.

Labour is unwilling to say how many seats short of an overall majority it 
would need to be before it enters into negotiations with the Lib Dems. They 
will meet in Edinburgh on Saturday to discuss any conditions, while the Labour 
contingent in the Scottish parliament plans to meet on Sunday or Monday.

If the Lib Dems come third on Friday, they will stand a better chance of 
securing concessions from Labour over contentious issues such as tuition fees 
and proportional representation in local government elections.

As part of a deal taking shape, the Lib Dems would be offered two seats in a 
Scottish cabinet which would be taken by Mr Wallace and Nicol Stephen, the 
party's education spokesman as well as Lord Steel, the former leader, becoming 
presiding officer, the equivalent of the speaker.

Many Labour figures would prefer to see the party ruling alone, even as a 
minority administration. They predict trouble ahead in a coalition, especially 
from those Labour members on the backbenches denied a place in the Scottish 
cabinet.

Labour leftwingers, such as John McAllion and Malcolm Chisholm, will resent 
being silenced by party whips while Lib Dems, even though part of the 
government, will remain free to speak out on issues like tuition fees.

The Lib Dems are pledged to scrap the fees for Scottish students and Mr 
Wallace said it was his price for entry into a coalition. A compromise is being 
worked on that would exempt mature students and English students doing a fourth 
year at Scottish universities, who currently have to pay while their Scottish 
counterparts are exempt.

In a sign of the tensions at the top of the government, one senior cabinet 
minister ruled out giving any ground to the Lib Dems over the principle of the 
tuition fees, adamant there should not be one rule for England and another for 
Scotland. 'If you want to expand the number of students, you have to find a new 
system of financing that, which we have done,' he said.

Mr Dewar will also run into trouble from other cabinet ministers if he makes 
concessions on PR for local government. Mr Prescot said on the BBC: 'I'm not in 
favour of any extension of PR.'

In London, Tony Blair used Millbank's final press conference of the election 
campaign to attack the Conservatives and the Nationalists, but he held back 
from any direct criticism of the Lib Dems.

The Lib Dem leader, Paddy Ashdown, refused to speculate on any coalition north 
of the border.
 