
As I see from many posts on money forums and social media, I know I am not 
alone in complaining about the John Lewis Partnership credit card. But my 
situation is vexing me.John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> Finance revamped its website 
in early October, asking cardholders to re-register. I did so. Then, two weeks 
ago, I realised that my card expired this month and a replacement had not 
arrived.

It was apparent from the online posts about failed payments and direct debit 
problems that all was not hunky-dory. John Lewis said there was a “high volume 
of calls” and warned of a wait of up to 45 minutes. After 70 minutes I gave up 
and instead tried secure messaging, which then collapsed, so I sent a letter of 
complaint and asked that my card be mailed within a week.

So far this has not arrived, although my account has said for several weeks 
that a card is on its way. Repayment day resulted in my “faster” payment being 
returned. I attempted to reset this and try again. This time it was rejected.

The coup de grace, though, was last night when I tried to purchase my 
grandson’s birthday present, only to find the card was declined because it is 
now out of date.

John Lewis brand this as its own card, but the debacle has probably been 
created by HSBC which, I understand, runs the credit card side. As I can make 
no contact with the company I think John Lewis Partnership should be shamed 
into taking some responsibility for this.JM, Peebles, near Edinburgh

What a shambles. The John Lewis Partnership card – and yes, it is administered 
by HSBC – is the retailer’s flagship credit card product, offering rewards 
which can be used for shopping at John Lewis and Waitrose. But, from our 
postbag alone, it is clear that changes to IT systems in October have triggered 
major problems including rejected online payments, problems logging in, 
unhelpful and unsympathetic responses from customer services, and very long 
wait times when trying to contact them. We have included a second letter below 
but have received many more.

The company admits there have been problems: “Following recent changes to the 
website we experienced some initial technical issues which have now been 
resolved. This led to high volumes of calls to our customer services team, 
which resulted in customers encountering delays. We are very sorry for this and 
have significantly increased the size of the team to reduce call waiting times. 
We can assure customers that any late payment fees, along with the interest 
which was incurred as a result of the recent technical issues, have been 
refunded. Customers should be able to spend on their card as normal, however if 
they are experiencing problems we would ask them to contact us so we can 
investigate on a case-by-case basis.”

Given customers’ difficulties in getting through, John Lewis has listed 
answers on the FAQs page of its website. Since our intervention it has called 
you and, as a result, you managed to pay your bill. It gave you 5,000 points as 
a goodwill gesture, but it’s unclear if other similarly affected customers will 
get this. You still don’t have a replacement card, although you have been 
promised it will arrive by the end of this month.

• My problem concerns the non-payment of a long-standing direct debit into my 
John Lewis account last month, and the consequent imposition of interest.

Despite what it says on the Partnership card website and in the customer 
service telephone script, this matter is far from resolved, and anyone who has 
experienced a problem with their direct debit should persist in contacting 
customer services and speaking to someone. I spent 20 minutes on the phone 
(after many abortive attempts) and got the strong impression that the operator 
had no understanding of the issue or facts, and the eventual assurances I was 
offered about all being well in the next payment round were far from convincing.
DM, Malmesbury, Wiltshire 

After several phone calls from John Lewis your direct debit issues have been 
resolved and you have been refunded in full with the interest you were 
erroneously charged – £63.33. John Lewis said this payment now appears under 
the header “cash finance adjustment” rather than “interest credit adjustment” 
which had also caused confusion, and has confirmed exactly where the credit 
appears on your account. It has also given you £50 in compensation – again, 
this may not have been given to all cardholders.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 