
Poor David Cameron was defeated, he says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/david-cameron-brexit-vote-trump-movement-of-unhappiness-us-speech>
, by “populism”. It was not by people who disagreed with him or by his 
political enemies or those he had offended. It was an evil called populism. 
What on earth did he mean?

The answer is near meaningless. Populism has become a euphemism for exploiting 
the people’s will,supposedly by facile, short-term solutions to complex problems
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-4011874/POPULISM-s-BBC-s-new-buzzword-used-sneer-uneducated-17-million-voted-Brexit.html>
. For a politician to protest against such exploitation is rich. It is woven 
into the history of politics.

Cameron lost office because he was trapped into a referendum by pledges he had 
made to his own party. He then mishandled the honouring of that pledge. He 
should have done a Harold Wilson and stood aloof, promising only to abide by 
whatever result the public delivered. That he chose not to do so is honourable, 
but hardly makes him a victim of populism.

The reality is that the political words we learned in our childhood are 
turning to dust. Left and right are losing all meaning, as are liberalism and 
conservatism, globalism and nationalism. My morality is your self-interest.

The “people” by whom Cameron felt defeated were not the downtrodden masses of 
the traditional left or some retro-political horde of rightwing males. The 
nearest the pundits have come to a populist constituency are the “left 
behinders” – those who claim all parties, the entire so-called establishment, 
have ignored their hopes and fears.

These left-behinders see favoured groups – some rich, some less so – using or 
abusing liberalism as a front for ripping them off. The state is no longer a 
“welfare” one. It is a lucrative racket for those lucky enough to be on the 
right side of it. They are victims of negative discrimination.

To this extent, populism is a healthy dose of disruptive rebellion. It 
challenges all groups and interests who are doing well out of the state. But 
that is not so much radical as reactive.It is a howl of pain in a darkened room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/welcome-age-anger-brexit-trump>
.

This is the time to move carefully. We need political philosophers to listen, 
not dictate, to deconstruct and reconstruct our language, to give us tools for 
a new and rightly sceptical age. Democracy depends on parties, coalitions and 
coherences. It depends on populism in what should be its best sense, the 
craving for democratic legitimacy. Words are the life rafts of that legitimacy. 
Just now, they are sinking.
 