
Once again, this is turning out to be a summer marked by prominent police 
killings of innocent black men. Black popular artists in American culture are 
complicating things for those fans who would prefer to remain silent or choose 
not to engage in the most significant civil rights issue of our time. These 
artists are shaking moderates out of complacency and extending our awareness to 
this crisis – just as their forebears did during the civil rights struggle in 
the 1960s.

Black musicians and artists are key partners in dramatizing equality and 
justice for black citizens. The cynical among us may presume that artists who 
call for action against systemic, racialized police violence are simply jumping 
on a cause célèbre – or that their earned privilege no longer affords them the 
right to be outraged. But that is a selective and ahistorical reading.


The other week, 23 artists working in music, television and film released a 
video in support of theBlack Lives Matter movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement>. They urged 
the public to pressure Congress and the Obama administration to act against 
police violence that disproportionately affects black American citizens. Their 
call, which was organized by Alicia Keys, is significant and it exists within a 
tradition of activism among black artists.


Earlier this month, recording artists Jay Z, Miguel and Swizz Beats 
<http://www.complex.com/music/2016/07/jay-z-miguel-swizz-beatz-share-protest-songs-police-violence>
 released songs that serve as protest and balm to a public overwhelmed by 
tragedy. Drake, an American by choice,penned 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/speakeasy/2016/07/07/drake-posts-open-letter-to-instagram-following-alton-sterling-shooting/>
 a brief note of his concern in a post on Instagram, saying: “No one begins 
their life as a hashtag. Yet the trend of being reduced to one continues.” 
Solangesung 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/66636-watch-solange-cover-syreetas-black-maybe-in-response-to-recent-police-shootings/>
 an a cappella cover of Syreeta Wright’s Black, Maybe in solidarity with black 
Americans processing a fresh cycle of videos from body cameras and cellphone 
coverage by conscientious citizens.

It isn’t new that black artists are using every tool within their large 
platform to demand that we ensure the equal protection of black life in 
America. The strange and tragic thing we have to ask ourselves in 2016 is: why 
is it even necessary for them to do so?

When Billie Holiday first heard Strange Fruit, she immediately wanted to 
perform it to end her sets at Harlem Cafe Society. That was in 1939, years 
after Lawrence Beitler’s infamous photo of an Indiana lynching in 1930 reached 
a Bronx school teacher, who was so haunted and outraged by the image that he 
composed the poem and song. Strange Fruit sold more than a million copies, and 
history would declare it one of the most significant protest songs in the cause 
of civil rights and anti-racism.


When Billie died, Nina Simone would perform the song, among many others she 
composed herself. Simone’s cover of Strange Fruit is grotesque and melodic, 
sung with a powerfully controlled rage and gut-wrenching outrage at the crime 
of lynching. Her own protest song, Mississippi Goddam, was written in 
inconsolable heartbreak over the deaths of four girls in 1963, who were killed 
when a white supremacist bombed their church in Montgomery, Alabama.

John Coltrane also composed Alabama as part mourning, protest and rage over 
this event. Charles Mingus composed Fables of Faubus to protest against 
segregationist Arkansas governor Orval Faubus, who famously tried to use the 
national guard to block the integration of nine black Little Rock students in 
high school. Jazz musicians were early in their efforts as advocates for the 
cause of equality, asserting the dignity of black life in America.

More than 50 years later, there is still much work to do: 1,146 people were 
killed by police in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
. Between 1882 and 1968, there were 4,743 lynchings, 3,446 of them were black 
Americans, averaging to about 40 lynchings a year. It’s no surprise, then, that 
black artists are at the forefront of pushing for change.


Seeing leading artists or global superstars like Rihanna and Beyoncé; 
comedians like Kevin Hart and Chris Rock and actors Rosario Dawson and Taraji P 
Heson, evoke fatal interactions between black children, women and men and 
police is haunting. Perhaps the most haunting thing of all is how little has 
changed.

Jean-Michel Basquiat channeled his outrage at the 1983 police-related death of 
25-year-old street artist Michael Stewart in one of his most famous paintings, 
Defacement. Basquiat, who was haunted by this death, recognized:“It could have 
been me.” 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/codeswitch/2013/09/16/221821224/it-could-have-been-me-the-1983-death-of-a-nyc-graffiti-artist>

In 2016, black Americans fear not only that “I could be next”, but worse, “it 
could be my loved one.” And that is a fear that black Americans – both 
celebrities and everyday people – know all too well.
 