
Cheaper, more user-friendly mortgages are just months away after the 
government this week unveiled plans to clean up the industry by introducing 
minimum standards of fairness and simplicity.

The initiative aims to outlaw unfair practices, hidden charges and nasty small 
print, and will make it much easier to compare products. But the new regime is 
voluntary - lenders will not be forced to comply.

And the Consumers' Association has declared war on many of Britain's biggest 
lenders, naming and shaming those it says are the worst offenders and 
threatening court action if they do not remedy "unfair terms" in their loans.

The proposed new quality mark for mortgages will throw a lifeline to people 
struggling to work out which of the 4,500 products on the market is right for 
them. The system could be up and running by early next year.

There is one set of standards for variable rate loans and another for fixed 
and capped rate deals (discounted rate mortgages aren't included). To win the 
official seal of approval, a mortgage will have to meet a range of minimum 
standards covering cost, flexibility and clarity. These have been dubbed the 
CAT standards (it stands for fair Charges, easy Access and decent Terms).

In order to qualify, variable rate loans will have to be completely free of 
penalties for paying off the loan early, have no arrangement fee and have no 
separate charge for "mortgage indemnity guarantee" (Mig) insurance. They must 
also track the Bank of England base rate - the rate you pay will be set at a 
fixed amount above this rate. The government has not yet decided what this 
margin should be but it will probably be around 0.75%-1%, which would mean a 
current payment rate of 6%-6.25%. The Halifax's current standard variable rate 
is 6.99%.

Fixed and capped rate mortgages will be allowed to have early redemption 
penalties, but there will be restrictions on how much can be charged and they 
must not extend beyond the offer period. That means you will not be locked into 
a lender's uncompetitive standard variable rate when the fixed or capped period 
ends. Tying a loan to the sale of another product such as home insurance is not 
allowed and all documentation must be in plain English.

But for most homeowners the biggest single effect of a CAT standard mortgage 
would be seeing their interest payments calculated each day rather than each 
year. This makes a huge difference to the amount you pay over the years. Most 
lenders use the antiquated "annual interest" system, which results in people 
paying interest on debt they no longer owe.

Virgin Direct estimates that for someone with a £100,000 repayment mortgage, 
daily interest calculation would save them almost £100 a year or close to 
£2,500 over 25 years. The CAT standards will apply to new loans but lenders 
will come under great pressure to apply the rules to the mortgages held by 
millions of existing customers, or risk facing a mass exodus.

Twenty-four hours after the standards were unveiled, the Consumers' 
Association named the top 10 "worst" mortgage lenders. They were, in order, 
Halifax, Abbey National, Northern Rock, Woolwich, Nationwide, NatWest, Alliance 
& Leicester, Bristol & West, Bradford & Bingley and Barclays.

The CA also listed 20 popular "scams" used by the industry. Of the almost 
1,000 complaints it looked into, 58% concerned redemption penalties. One of the 
worst cases involved a NatWest customer with a £60,000 mortgage whose 
redemption penalty has been as high as £41,000 - that's 136 times higher than 
the £300 quoted as a "representative example" in the original contract.

The way interest is calculated was the second biggest bugbear while deals that 
force people to take out the lender's expensive home insurance came third. 
Another case highlighted by the CA involved someone who took out a £99,000 
Birmingham Midshires mortgage last year. The rate is 6.49% fixed for five years.

Someone who wants to quit within the five years must pay a penalty of six 
months' interest - more than £5,000. And then there is a requirement that the 
borrower takes Midshires' buildings and contents insurance for the whole 
five-year period - if this is cancelled at any time in the fixed period the 
interest rate rises from 6.49% to 6.74%.
 