 Voting in Scotland's parliamentary election was descending into chaos last 
night as the electorate and returning officers reported massive confusion over 
the voting system.
There was widespread concern that the electorate, confronted by three ballot 
papers, did not fully understand the voting procedures for the new parliament.

Returning officers admitted privately that many people were shocked to 
discover they had three ballot papers one for a constituency member, one for 
the additional member and another for the local government elections.

'It's been a nightmare, I've spent half the morning trying to explain to 
people how it's supposed to work. Even after I explained, half of them didn't 
understand. It's just too confusing,' a Glasgow polling station worker said.

Julie Sinclair, 24, a dance teacher voting in Stirling, said she was not clear 
which paper represented which election or candidate. 'I had to ask if you had 
to vote for the same party in all three or if you could change your mind. It 
seemed silly to vote for Labour locally but Tory overall,' she said.

To add to the confusion, voters were also given a third ballot paper to elect 
a local council candidate. Patricia Innes, 37, said she was totally unaware 
there was a local election as well as the Scottish parliamentary election.

'I thought there was only two papers so I wasn't prepared for the council 
election paper,' she said. 'I didn't have time to think about it so I just put 
down the same as the other two papers. I wish I had known beforehand so I could 
have made more of an informed choice.'

Despite a long-running government information campaign in the press and on 
television, there was confusion and party officials were becoming worried that 
this may skew the result.

The Scottish National Party criticised the government's decision to hold the 
elections to Scotland's first parliament for 300 years on the same day as local 
government elections.

Officials believe fewer problems would have arisen if the electorate had to 
concentrate solely on the new voting system.

The voting procedures for the new 129-seat parliament are complex. The first 
73 seats are elected on the same first-past-the-post system, and voters simply 
put a cross beside the candidate of their choice.

The remaining 56 seats the additional member seats are elected on a 
proportional representation basis. Here the voters put their crosses beside a 
party name and the seats are allocated using a complex arithmetical procedure.

As polling opened in Edinburgh, David Barber, one of the first to vote, 
admitted he had found the system difficult to understand. 'For some elderly 
people who have never used a system like this, it will be very confusing,' he 
said.

To try to make things easier, each of the ballot papers was colour-coded. But 
there was mounting concern last night that voters were putting their ballot 
papers into the wrong boxes. The Scottish Conservative party said the 
government had not done enough to educate the electorate.

A Scottish Office spokesman confirmed that a large number of extra workers had 
been employed to deal with problems. The new staff had been trained in how to 
walk the legal tight rope of helping voters without telling them who to vote 
for. Most polling stations had help desks, but workers at some stations said 
they were being overwhelmed during busy periods. Particular concern was raised 
over the new second round vote. Many people believed the ballot paper here was 
for a second-preference party rather than for an additional member.

This round of voting was crucial to all the parties Labour had to maximise it 
to have any hope of securing an overall majority, the SNP to challenge Labour, 
the Liberal Democrats for coalition bargaining power, and the Tories just to 
win some seats.

But the confusion may have muddied the waters. Election experts were asking 
last night why the government did not choose a simpler form of PR that required 
only one ballot paper. Others, however, dismissed the confusion as teething 
troubles.

Guardian political editor Michael White will be online to discuss the election 
results at 10am on the Guardian network at www.newsunlimited. co.uk
 