
The storms and floods ravaging Britain were the result of humanity's "arrogant 
disregard of the delicate balance of nature", the Prince of Wales said 
yesterday.

As the death toll from the severe weather rose to eight and fast-rising rivers 
threatened villages and towns, the prince warned that scientists must ensure 
that technological advance did not carry with it the seeds of destruction.

Prince Charles <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles>, who has warned 
before of the dangers of regarding nature as something to be engineered for 
human convenience, weighed into the national debate over the flooding with a 
typical intervention about the dangers, as well as benefits, of scientific 
progress.

The prince told a British Medical Association conference in London: "Some 
recent occurrences, such as the BSE disaster and... the present severe weather 
conditions in our country are, I have no doubt, the consequences of man-kind's 
arrogant disregard of the delicate balance of nature.

"Somehow we have to find a way of ensuring that our remarkable and seemingly 
beneficial advances in technology do not just become the agents of our own 
destruction."

His words follow warnings from politicians, government departments and 
environmental groups of the grim consequences of global warming and building 
new homes on flood plains.

Whatever the causes of the storms, they have brought fresh misery to thousands 
and claimed two more lives.

Two people died and a third was left fighting for his life after a tree fell 
on their car near Tenbury Wells, Worcester-shire, on Sunday night.

With 36 severe flood warnings in place on 27 rivers and more than 200 flood 
warnings, the environment agency warned that virtually every area of England 
and Wales was under threat, save the Thames and north-west regions.

"This is possibly the highest number of warnings we have had, but it could 
well go higher," said a spokesman.

"We all have our eyes down and are monitoring the situation carefully, but if 
you're in an area with a severe flood warning you should be preparing yourself 
for the possibility of evacuation."

Yesterday experts at the Met Office warned that another storm system could hit 
the country on Friday.

"The rain band over northern England and Scotland and the heavy rain in the 
south will stick around for quite a while, and probably won't turn showery 
until some time around Wednesday," said forecaster Mike Needham.

"At the moment it looks like Friday will start off fairly reasonable. 

"But then another system will develop on Friday, starting off the north of 
Scotland, but coming right across the country."

The threat of renewed bad weather brought gloom to householders struggling to 
recover from last week's deluge. Across England and Wales more than 3,600 
properties have been flooded, including at least 1,000 in York, which has seen 
its worst floods since 1625.

Elsewhere, 100 people were evacuated from the villages of Snaith and Gowdall, 
East Yorkshire, while about 100 homes were evacuated in Dorchester, Dorset, 
after the river Frome rose to its highest ever level.

Severe flooding was also expected in Kent and Sussex after more than 50mm of 
rain fell overnight.

North east Wales was badly hit again, with Ruthin virtually cut off. 

In Mold, Flintshire, 100 people were evacuated from their homes.
 