
As a tribe, we academics enjoy complaining. There’s too much teaching, too 
many committees, not enough funding. The reviewers are too mean, the houses too 
expensive, the wages too low. But I would like to stick my head above the 
parapet (anonymously) and propose a new idea for 2016: let’s celebrate academia 
for a change.

We need to remember that this profession is fun. We need to rekindle the fires 
that got us here in the first place. Yes, there are some rubbish bits. But when 
I take a break from complaining and reflect, there are lots of things that make 
me happy – and should make you happy too. Here are nine of them:

1 Everyday People

Academics Anonymous: the inside stories of universities in 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2015/dec/31/academics-anonymous-university-staff-revealed-the-inside-stories-in-2015>
The longer you work in academia, the wider your global network becomes. We 
have the privilege of working with brilliant, interesting people from around 
the world. Many are fascinated by the same obscure minutiae we are and will 
happily discuss them late into the night, often over a beer, in an interesting 
exotic place, or Brussels. We should bask in the company of our peers.

2 My Generation

Working with students allows you to reflect on the joys of youth through the 
mirror of their experiences. Undergraduates have a limitless capacity to 
imagine that they are pioneers; that their ironic fashion is the first of its 
kind; that no one else has ever pulled an all-nighter to complete a assignment 
because they were too busy organising an ironic fashion show.

Celebrate your acquired wisdom and maturity (while missing grant deadlines 
because you are too busy organising your children’s fashion show).

3 Getting Better

I don’t have much experience of the world outside academia, but compared with 
my short time as a night cleaner in a refrigerated yoghurt warehouse, working 
in a university is exciting. The job presents endless chances, particularly 
when it comes to learning.

You learn more because you are teaching a new course, you learn more because 
it drives your research. But most of all you learn more because it’s fun, 
because you love your subject and because it’s the essence of what we are all 
here to do.

Academics Anonymous: an open letter to university 'leaders'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/aug/08/academics-anonymous-open-letter-university-leaders>
4 Heal the World

Our work has societal value (measurable value, if you believe the research 
excellence framework). That is clearly a good thing. It is also a shield for 
your ego when faced with friends from your undergraduate days who are now 
earning millions in the City.

Remember this higher calling. It will take the sting out of the fact that your 
peers can afford houses in Oxford/holidays/Waitrose.

5 Money, Money, Money

We get to be the experts in our fields. We may not get to spend as much time 
as we would like on our research, and we may not get as much funding as we want 
to support it.

But we are extremely privileged to be given money, most of which comes from 
other people’s hard work – taxes, charity, benevolence – to indulge our 
personal curiosities, which, when you stop to think about it, is amazing.

6 Time is on my Side

As an academic, you are more or less your own boss. That means you can find 
the things you enjoy and do them: I get deep joy from taking a break to play 
football during the working day, for example.

There are disagreeable tasks: admin, marking, grant-writing. But the bad bits 
shouldn’t take all of your day – if they do, drop some. It is acceptable to say 
no. And where it is not, it is normally possible to shape courses and 
committees to reflect your research interests.

Academics, you need to be managed. It's time to accept that
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/aug/21/academics-you-need-to-be-managed-its-time-to-accept-that>
7 Under Pressure

Remember, there are far more stressful jobs out there – some involve people 
shooting at you (soldier), shouting at you (police) or dying on you (doctor).

There are others that involve horrible hours, terrible working conditions and 
repetitive tasks, but luckily I stopped being a post-doc.

8 The Kids are Alright

If my relentless optimism isn’t enough for you, think of the children/students.

Complaining about the stress of an academic job may be a cunning plan by 
established faculty to stop newer, smarter people snapping at their heels. But 
it isn’t fair on the next generation and it is a waste of the time, energy and 
money we have invested in getting them across the line.

9 Don’t Worry, Be Happy

In conclusion (and for the sake of balance), I do accept that there are 
problems with the system. There are fewer entry-level posts, and those that do 
exist come with considerably less job security than they used to. The demands 
of the career have changed significantly and it is much harder to get that 
critical break-in grant than it was 20 years ago. But dwelling on the negative 
doesn’t actually help anyone.

Happier people are healthier, more productive, and have better hair (Consider 
Donald Trump – he is really angry and has terrible hair). So, in 2016, let’s 
turn the tea room discussion around and celebrate what we have.

This week’s anonymous academic is a senior lecturer in biomedical sciences in 
London.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 