
The contaminated nuclear wasteland around Chernobyl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/chernobyl-nuclear-disaster> could be 
turned into one of the world’s largest solar farms, producing nearly a third of 
the electricity that the stricken plant generated at its height 30 years ago, 
according to the Ukrainian government.

In a presentation sent to major banks and seen by the Guardian, 6,000 hectares 
of “idle” land in Chernobyl’s 1,000 square km exclusion zone, which is 
considered too dangerous for people to live in or farm, could be turned to 
solar, biogas and heat and power generation.

Pressure has been mounting for years to allow industrial development, but no 
indication is given of where the solar panels would be located. “There has been 
a change in the perception of the exclusion zone inUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>. Thirty years after the Chernobyl 
tragedy [it] reveals opportunities for development. A special industrial area 
is to be created in compliance with all rules and regulations of radiation 
safety within the exclusion zone,” says the presentation.

Tens of thousands of people in Ukraine, Belarus and south Russia were 
evacuated immediately after the 1986 accident from a wide area around the 
nuclear plant and places where the radioactive plume descended. A few hundred 
people still live in 11 semi-deserted villages close to Chernobyl.

There is “about 6,000 hectares of idle land, some of which can be used for 
placement of electrical generation facilities, and some for energy crops”, 
according to the presentation.

The Ukrainian government said more than 1,000MW of solar and 400MW of other 
renewable energy could be generated. The nuclear plant had an installed 
capacity of around 4,000MW.

The advantage of generating renewable power at the site of the world’s worst 
nuclear accident is that the land is cheap and plentiful, and the sunshine is 
as strong as in southern Germany. In addition, the grid infrastructure and 
high-voltage power lines needed to transmit electricity to the national grid 
remain intact, the presentation added.


The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) this week 
indicated it would beprepared to lend money for the renewable energy plan 
<http://www.ebrd.com/news/video/chernobyl-investing-in-solar-power.html>. The 
EBRD has already provided more than $500m (£379m) to build a large stainless 
steel “sarcophagus” over the destroyed reactor, which will remain dangerous for 
thousands of years.

“The EBRD may consider participating in the project so long as there are 
viable investment proposals and all other environmental matters and risks can 
be addressed to the bank’s satisfaction,” said a spokesman.

The move to solar reflects a new energy reality involving plunging renewable 
energy costs and escalating costs of nuclear power. Hours of sunshine in the 
Chernobyl area compare favourably with southern Germany, one of the largest 
solar producers in the world.

In a recent interview, Ukraine’s ecology minister said the government was 
negotiating with two US investment firms and four Canadian energy companies, 
which have expressed interest in the Chernobyl’s solar potential.

Meanwhile in Belarus, just 20 miles from Chernobyl, a 22.3MW solar plant is 
already under construction in Brahin district, around 20 miles from Chernobyl. 
The district was one of the most contaminated by Chernobyl’s fallout and the 
land where the plant is to be built is not suitable for agriculture.
 