
The Chinese military is negotiating with US counterparts over the “appropriate 
handling” of an unmanned American submarine seized by the Chinese navy, 
officials have confirmed.

A one-sentence statement issued by the Chinese foreign ministry offered no 
details on what discussions were under way or whyChina had seized the drone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/china-seizes-us-underwater-drone-south-china-sea>
, one of the most serious incidents between the militaries of the two countries 
in years.

The device was being operated by civilian contractors to conduct oceanic 
research, according to the Pentagon. The US has issued a formal diplomatic 
complaint over the seizure and demanded the drone’s return.

“According to [our] understanding, the US and Chinese sides are working on 
appropriately handling this matter through channels between the two 
militaries,” the foreign ministry said in its statement faxed to Associated 
Press.

China’s defence ministry did not immediately respond to questions on the issue.

A Pentagon spokesman said the drone was seized on Thursday while collecting 
unclassified scientific data about 57 miles (92km) north-west of Subic Bay near 
the Philippines in the South China Sea, whichChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> claims virtually in its entirety.

Jeff Davis said the incident could be the first time in recent history that 
China has taken a US naval vessel. Some observers have called it the most 
significant dispute between the sides’ militaries since the April 2001 mid-air 
collision between a US Navy surveillance aircraft and a Chinese fighter jet 
about 70 miles from China’s Hainan Island that led to the death of a Chinese 
pilot.

“It is ours,” Davis said of the drone. “It’s clearly marked as ours. We would 
like it back, and we would like this not to happen again.” He said the drone 
costs about $150,000 (£120,000) and was largely commercial, off-the-shelf 
technology.

The incident is likely to fray the already tense relations between the US and 
China. Beijing was angered by President-elect Donald Trump’s decision to talk 
by phone with the Taiwanese president, Tsai Ing-wen, on 2 December. This was 
exacerbated by Trump’s subsequent comments that he did not feel “bound by a 
one-China policy” regarding the status of Taiwan, unless the US could gain 
trade or other benefits from China. Beijing considers the self-governing island 
its own territory to be recovered by force if it deems necessary.

There have also been increased tensions over Beijing’s ongoing military 
buildup in the South China Sea, mainly the development and militarisation of 
man-made shoals and islands aimed at extending China’s reach in the 
strategically vital area through which about $5tn in global trade passes 
annually.

In one of the few reports in state media about the drone’s seizure, a 
newspaper published by China’s ruling Communist party cited an unidentified 
military official as saying a “smooth resolution” was expected.

A Chinese navy ship had discovered the “unidentified device” and was checking 
on it for the sake of maritime safety, the Global Times quoted the official as 
saying.

“China has received the US request to return the device, communication is open 
between the relevant departments of the two sides and I believe this matter 
will obtain a smooth resolution,” the official said.

In a separate report, the paper quoted the retired Chinese admiral Yang Yi as 
saying China considered itself within its rights to seize the drone. “If China 
needs to take it, we’ll take it. [The US] can’t block us.”

Yang said he was unsure of the purpose of seizing the drone, but didn’t think 
the matter qualified as a “military conflict”. However, he said, the chances of 
a confrontation had risen since Trump’s recent comments, which were seen as 
testing China’s bottom line on Taiwan and other sensitive issues.

“It’s natural for us to take possession of and research for a bit these types 
of things that America sends to our doorstep,” Yang said. “The louder they 
shout, the more their protests ring hollow.”
 