
China’s decision to ban all trade in ivory by the end of the year has been 
widely hailed as a game changer by environmentalists in China itself and across 
the world. There is no doubt that this is very welcome news.

Many commentators have also pointed out that this new Chinese policy is also 
motivated by self-interest. China has rapidly growing economic and political 
interests in Africa and hopes to improve its image on the continent by 
responding to pressure from its African allies to reduce demand for ivory among 
Chinese consumers. If protecting elephants is in China’s self-interest—and if 
African leaders care enough about them to put pressure on China to change its 
policies—that is also welcome news.

Nevertheless, as someone who has long campaigned for China to shut down its 
ivory market, I can’t help worrying that this will prove a hollow victory: a 
case of too little, too late.

It is already too late for the 150,000 elephants estimated to have been killed 
by poachers in Africa since 2012, when the scale of the current crisis was 
already plain for all to see. No one doubts that China was the principal 
destination for the ivory from this slaughter.

Across Africa, it is no secret that the increasing number of Chinese workers, 
tourists, trade delegations and diplomats in Africa have provided a lucrative 
market for local criminals engaged in the ivory trade. For many, a visit to 
Africa is seen as an opportunity to acquire a suitcase of ivory bangles or a 
tusk to take home as a nest egg. Others have colluded with corrupt local 
officials to smuggle out much larger amounts of ivory. Until recently, the 
Chinese authorities have vehemently denied any responsibility for the role of 
China in the elephant slaughter, and even intervened to disrupt law enforcement 
proceedings against Chinese nationals.

Even more seriously, negligence and inaction by Chinese and other world 
leaders in the past four years have allowed international crime cartels to take 
control of the ivory trade. The cartels have used this time to set up 
infrastructure, supply chains to markets in China and neighbouring countries, 
financial instruments for money laundering, and contacts with corrupt 
politicians and law enforcement personnel in China and Africa.

These are all elements of a system, that is now fully operational, for 
efficiently—and profitably—moving ivory from the killings field in Africa to 
Chinese consumers.

We know very little about who these criminals are or the details of their 
operations. Studies have focused on specific elements of the systems that are 
relatively visible: such as the impact of poaching on the ground, the 
availability of ivory products for sale in retail outlets in Hong Kong and 
mainland China, and the presence of Chinese buyers in ivory markets in 
neighbouring countries such as Vietnam and Laos. But these are just fragments 
of a complex criminal enterprise that remains largely unknown.

The little we do know about the illegal ivory trade is cause for serious 
concern. We know it is a multinational enterprise, with branches in the Middle 
East and other Far East countries, operating under the protection of corrupt 
politicians and officials. It is well-placed to neutralise, sidestep or subvert 
piecemeal law enforcement measures.

Most worryingly, it seems clear that the ivory cartels are in reality 
“multi-product enterprises” for whom ivory is just one of a basket of illegal 
trading activities, alongside drugs, arms or people for example. This 
diversification makes them more resistant to attempts to shut down any one 
sector of their operations. Since they have already invested in setting up an 
ivory “product line”, they have an incentive to keep it going. Making the ivory 
trade a bit more illegal than it already is won’t stop them. They are experts 
in illegal trade: it’s their job.

We don’t yet know in detail what the Chinese authorities propose to do, but 
given the rapid growth of ivory trafficking across Asia, just closing down the 
existing legal trade in China will not be enough to save elephants.


A major intelligence gathering and law enforcement effort is required, 
targeting the ivory traffickers that have been operating under the cover of the 
legal trade. Organised crime will not go away but decisive action can send the 
message to the traffickers that ivory smuggling is not worth the risk:

1. Identify the source and age of ivory in markets and homes across Asia. 
Carbon 14 dating has been successfully used to determine the age of ivory, that 
is, the date that the elephant it comes from died. If Chinese authorities are 
serious about disentangling the legal and illegal trade, they should use this 
technique to examine supposedly “legal” pieces of ivory on sale in retail 
outlets. Since the last legal sale of ivory from African stockpiles took place 
in 2009, any ivory that is younger than this is, by definition, illegal. This 
will expose all involved in illegal trade. By combining this with DNA testing 
to trace the origins of ivory to a specific region or population of elephants, 
we can map supply chains.

2. Get serious about law enforcement. Employ bilateral mutual legal assistance 
agreements and use results of DNA and isotope ageing to pursue investigations, 
arrests and prosecutions of members of multinational criminal networks active 
in China, Africa and elsewhere

3. Conduct a massive media campaign to demonstrate the extent of criminal 
involvement in the ivory trade to the Chinese public.This will not only win 
public support for actions that combat poaching elephants and trafficking of 
ivory but also help reduce demand for ivory in China—and Chinese communities 
overseas—by associating the purchase of ivory with criminality and corruption. 
Chinese leaders and particularly President Xi Jinping have much more influence 
over consumer behaviour than politicians in western countries. They have it in 
the power to stigmatise the purchase of ivory among the vast majority of 
law-abiding consumers—so that owning ivory becomes a source of shame, rather 
than a status symbol.

This is the chance for China’s leaders to demonstrate they are serious about 
ending the ivory trade and to make up for the delay in changing policy which 
has been so devastating. Amplifying the effect of the ban on ivory trade in 
this way could not only save elephants, but also set a precedent for China’s 
new leadership in the conservation of endangered species.
 