
He would meditate on an overturned bucket while staring up at the sky and knew 
all the eagles that nested nearby. And in his 27 years of seclusion in the 
woods, Christopher Knight also refined his tastes in the food and gear he stole 
to survive, authorities said on Thursday after dismantling the hermit's lair in 
the far north-eastern state ofMaine <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/maine>.

In the 47-year-old's camp they recovered goods that included high-end LL Bean 
sleeping bags and a new tent.

He was wearing brand-new shoes and gloves, all believed stolen, when 
authorities arrested him after he tripped a surveillance sensor at a camp last 
week. They believe Knight may be responsible for more than 1,000 burglaries of 
food and other staples during the nearly three decades he hid in the woods.
 Christopher Knight, known as the North Pond Hermit. Photograph: Reuters/Maine 
police 
Game warden Sergeant Terry Hughes said on Thursday that authorities believed 
Knight broke into cottages and stole quality products because they would last 
longer and help perpetuate his life of solitude. And the hermit apparently 
didn't steal fridge leftovers either.

"He was a fussy eater," said Dave Proulx, a nearby cottage owner who tried to 
capture the hermit six or seven years ago after falling victim to more than a 
dozen break-ins.

Proulx, who said he came face to face with Knight while staking out his own 
cottage, said the hermit never made off with meat that wasn't in its original 
packaging. On the rainy, cloudy night of their encounter the hermit escaped by 
canoe after Proulx threw on a floodlight and chased him to a dock, Proulx said.

Authorities filled two pickup trucks on Thursday as they took apart Knight's 
camp, later displaying what they were calling evidence for local folks to sort 
through to try to recover their stolen goods. There were several Nintendo Game 
Boys and a wristwatch, along with shovels, rakes, coolers, cooking gear, a 
coffee pot and toilet paper.

Authorities said Knight used logs on the ground as a makeshift commode, and at 
one point attached an antenna to a treetop so he could get reception on a 
battery-powered TV in his tarp-covered camp.

Many locals said they were relieved by Knight's arrest after enduring years of 
break-ins. Frank Ten Broeck, a retired New Jersey police official who has a 
cottage nearby, marvelled at Knight's fortitude. "To me this is mind-boggling. 
I just can't believe this guy was here 27 years," Ten Broeck said. "This is 
some of the most severe weather you can go through."

A corrections officer at Kennebec county jail in Augusta said Knight was 
refusing requests for interviews. He had applied for a court-appointed lawyer 
and had not entered a plea to the burglary and theft charges stemming from the 
break-in at Pine Tree Camp, a facility for special needs people.

Authorities said they caught Knight with $283 in goods in his backpack after 
he fell into a trap set by Hughes, who has been trying to capture the elusive 
woodsman for years.

In his police mugshot Knight is clean-shaven and wears a style of spectacles 
from the 1980s. It's a contrast with his photo out of the 1984 yearbook of 
Lawrence high school in Fairfield, Maine. In it Knight is wearing horn-rimmed 
glasses and has long, thick dark hair as he leans against a tree.

The blurb accompanying the picture says he plans to become a computer 
technician. But authorities said by the time he was about 19 he had disappeared 
into the woods.

Authorities say Knight does not show signs of mental illness and they have 
uncovered no other motive for his seclusion except that he wanted to be alone.

Knight's arrest came a little more than a week after the capture of a 
self-styled mountain man in Utah who shared some of the same traits. For six 
years Troy James Knapp ransacked cabins on national forest land for guns, food 
and high-end camping gear, authorities said.

Knapp, a 45-year-old California parolee who went on the run in 2004, faces 29 
burglary-related felony and misdemeanour charges in Utah that could keep him in 
prison for life.
 