
Gas-powered lorries laden with Christmas parcels are set to have a lighter 
carbon impact this season thanks to the launch today of a new renewable fuel 
from CNG Fuels.


Retailers including John Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis>
, Argos and Waitrose have already confirmed some of their long-distance lorries 
will run on the green gas – a renewable biomethane fuel derived from food waste 
– which is up to 40% cheaper than diesel and emits 70% less carbon dioxide, CNG 
Fuel says.

The fuel can only be used in trucks with gas engines, which are less polluting 
than traditional petrol or diesel engines. Although gas trucks cost 50% more 
than diesel alternatives, companies can recoup the extra costs within three 
years of purchase thanks to the cheaper cost of fuel.

The new fuel is the first biomethane approved for use under the government’s 
Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation scheme (RTFO). The launch comes just a 
couple of days after the governmentpublished a lengthy consultation 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/analysis/3000438/biofuel-battles-loom-as-government-unveils-green-fuel-proposals>
 on changes to the RTFO scheme, including proposals to incentivise the uptake 
of biomethane in the transport sector.

“Renewable and sustainably sourced biomethane is the most cost-effective and 
lowest-carbon alternative to diesel for HGVs and is attracting increasing 
interest,” Philip Fjeld, chief executive of CNG Fuels, said in a statement. “We 
are expanding our refuelling infrastructure nationwide to help fleet operators 
save money, cut carbon and clean up our air.”

Waitrose <https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose> and John Lewis are 
two of the first companies to start using the new fuel in the UK. Together they 
own more than 500 HGVs, and have invested more than £1m in CNG trucks, two 
already in operation and 10 more on order.

Justin Laney, general manager of central transport at John Lewis, said the 
introduction of renewable biomethane will help make its fleet cleaner and 
quieter, while the “significant” cost savings mean there is a “compelling 
business case to switch from diesel”.

HGVs are some of the most polluting forms of transport – largely because of 
the hefty annual mileage they rack up. On average a typical articulated diesel 
HGV driving 125,000 miles per year emits 100 times more carbon dioxide than a 
typical passenger vehicle, which travels 7,900 miles per year.

CNG Fuels plans to target this market by developing a nationwide network of 
gas refuelling stations on major trunking routes. It has purchased enough 
Renewable Transport Fuel Certificates (RTFCs) to ensure its entire network will 
can run on biomethane. The purchase of RTFCs ensures the green gas comes from 
AD plants not supported by the Renewable Heat Incentive or any other subsidy 
schemes.
 