
The Church of England is bidding to open scores of new schools under the 
government’s free school programme to cement its place as the country’s largest 
provider of education.

It wants to run a quarter of the 500 free schools the government has pledged 
will open before 2020.


Stephen Conway, the bishop of Ely, said: “This is a moment to be bold and 
ambitious, and offer … a Christian vision for education.”

A report to the C of E synod, meeting in York, said the free schools programme 
was a “unique opportunity for the Church of England to renew and enhance its 
contribution to the education of our nation’s children.” It added that it was 
“an opportunity which should be seized wholeheartedly”.


The church wants to maintain its ratio of one in four schools in England being 
C of E, as educational provision expands over the coming years. It is also 
seeking to increase the number of secondary schools it runs.


There are 4,417 C of E primary schools and 209 secondary schools in England, 
and are attended by more than a million children in total. Many of these 
schools are oversubscribed.


“As the [education] system has fragmented from a dual system to one of 
multiple providers, we find ourselves as the largest single provider of schools 
and academies across the country,” Conway told the synod.


The C of E can offer “something deeper and richer than the often functionalist 
or utilitarian view of education that has become the dominant narrative”.


Ten C of E free schools have opened since the programme began in 2010. Eight 
more have been approved; 11 applications have been filed; and the church is 
applying for 15 more in the next round this autumn.


Free schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/free-schools> are funded 
by the government, but can be set up and run by parents, teachers, charities, 
businesses, universities, trusts, religious or voluntary groups. They are not 
allowed to make a profit.


They can set their own curriculum, but are subject to inspection by Ofsted, 
the schools’ watchdog, and must publish Sats, GCSE and A-level results.


They cannot be academically selective. If faith-based schools are 
oversubscribed, they can allocate up to 50% of places on the basis of faith 
with the remainder open to all applicants.


The C of E says its schools are open to children of all faiths and no faith, 
although church attendance is often a criteria for admission in oversubscribed 
schools.


The church says its schools combine high educational standards underpinned by 
a clear ethos, which parents are attracted to. “Our vision embraces the 
spiritual, physical, intellectual, emotional, moral and social development of 
children and young people,” said the synod report.


According to a written question submitted to the synod, the average cost of 
submitting each bid for a free school is £30,000, amounting to £3.75m for the C 
of E’s target of 125 such schools.


Competing applicants often had access to significant funds which could make 
“comprehensive and professional bids more compelling”, said Conway. But he 
added: “We do not think that the future of educational opportunity should be 
determined by the quality of marketing or the amount of money spent on a bid.”


The National Secular Society said the government should not hand over swaths 
of the education system to “a church seemingly in terminal decline”.


“The significant changes we’re seeing in the country’s religion and belief 
landscape means the church’s role in state education needs to be diminished not 
expanded,” said Stephen Evans, the NSS campaigns director.


“In a religiously diverse and secularised society it makes little sense to 
organise education along religious lines. The additional school places needed 
should be created in secular and inclusive schools equally welcoming to all 
pupils, irrespective of their faith backgrounds.”

 