
Migrating birds are responding to the effects of climate change by arriving at 
their breeding grounds earlier as global temperatures rise, research has found.


 The University of Edinburgh study, which looked at hundreds of species across 
five continents, found that birds are reaching their summer breeding grounds on 
average about one day earlier per degree of increasing global temperature.

The main reason birds take flight is changing seasonal temperatures and food 
availability. The time they reach their summer breeding grounds is significant, 
because arriving at the wrong time, even by a few days, may cause them to miss 
out on vital resources such as food and nesting places. This in turn affects 
the timing of offspring hatching and their chances of survival.

The Guardian view on climate change: bad for the Arctic | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/the-guardian-view-on-climate-change-bad-for-the-arctic>
The research included species that travel huge distances, such as the swallow 
and pied flycatcher, as well as those with shorter migrations, such as the 
lapwing and pied wagtail. British swallows fly through western France, across 
the Pyrenees, down eastern Spain into Morocco, and across the Sahara, to spend 
their winter in South Africa from around September or October.

Migrating swallows can cover 200 miles a day at speeds of 17-22 miles per 
hour, with a maximum flight speed of 35mph.

 The pied flycatcher, a bird slightly smaller than a house sparrow, is a 
summer visitor to the UK and breeds mainly in western areas of the country, 
before spending the winter in west Africa.

The northern lapwing, which is about 30cm long from beak to tail, can be seen 
across the British Isles throughout the year, favouring farmland, wetland and 
meadows during the breeding season and pasture and ploughed fields during the 
winter months.

The University of Edinburgh researchers examined records of migrating bird 
species dating back almost 300 years. They drew upon records from amateur 
enthusiasts and scientists, including notes from 19th-century American 
naturalist Henry David Thoreau.

They hope their study, published in the Journal of Animal Ecology and 
supported by the Natural Environment Research Council, will help scientists 
better predict how different species will respond to environmental changes. 
Long-distance migrants, which are shown to be less responsive to rising 
temperatures, may suffer most as other birds gain advantage by arriving at 
breeding grounds ahead of them.

 Takuji Usui, of the university’s school of biological sciences, said: “Many 
plant and animal species are altering the timing of activities associated with 
the start of spring, such as flowering and breeding.

“Now we have detailed insights into how the timing of migration is changing 
and how this change varies across species. These insights may help us predict 
how well migratory birds keep up with changing conditions on their breeding 
grounds.”
 