
The cost of payment protection insurance (PPI) payouts continues to hang over 
Clydesdale Bank after it announced a £450m charge for the mis-selling scandal 
in its first results as a stock market-listed company.

Officially known as CYBG since being spun out of National Australia Bank  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/nab-shareholders-vote-to-spin-off-british-bank-clydesdale>
(NAB) earlier this year, the bank is trying to cut costs to bolster its 
profitability as an independent entity.

When NAB sold the business, which includes Yorkshire Bank, it pledged to cover 
£1.7bn of any future PPI bills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/28/clydesdale-yorkshire-bank-floated-national-australia-bank-cybg-ppi>
, and this has cushioned the latest £450m charge on CYBG’s profits. The 
standalone bank is taking only £44m of the cost of the PPI provision.

The demerger of the bank was a milestone for NAB, which first revealed the 
CYBG’s £450m PPI charge when it published its own results earlier this month. 
NAB had faced years of speculation about its troublesome UK operations, which 
had taken hits for the PPI scandal as well as for mis-selling of complex 
interest rate insurance to small businesses.

CYBG has 274 branches, 40 business banking centres and employs 7,268 staff 
across the UK. The chief executive, David Duffy, had previously said he 
expected costs to be £762m for 2016, but 500 job cuts – including 150 senior 
roles – helped costs fall faster than expected.

Duffy said: “We are progressing with our plans to become a more efficient, 
responsive and productive business, and now expect our costs for the year to be 
£730m, materially below our previous guidance as we begin to see the benefits 
of actions we have taken to lower the cost base and standalone and separation 
costs which were lower than expected.”

Half-year profits were £58m compared with a £440m loss a year earlier, 
although Duffy focused on the 4% fall in underlying profits – which stripped 
out conduct costs and the cost of separating from NAB – to £107m.


He told reporters in Australia that a possible UK exit from the EU should not 
be a concern. “Its only impact is likely to be if there’s any growth softening 
and there we take the view that if we see the dynamics change on growth then we 
would adapt the other levers which we have within our control, including 
costs,” Duffy was quoted as saying.
 