
A computer error meant that 420,000 individuals who should be paying the new 
Scottish rate of income tax were not told of their changed status, the National 
Audit Office has found.

A report by the NAO reveals the number of potential Scottish taxpayers who 
were excluded from the initial identification exercise in 2015 because of an IT 
error and received their new “S” tax code three months after it came into force 
last April.

The report identifies “significant challenges” for HM Revenue and Customs, 
which will assess and collect the new tax on behalf ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. HMRC only discovered the initial 
scan of its database was incomplete after being contacted by members of the 
Scottish government and the public who had not received, or knew people who had 
not received, notification letters.


The Scottish parliament has had the power to apply a Scottish rate of income 
tax (Srit) since 6 April 2016. Holyrood’s tax-raising powers have been further 
enhanced by the Scotland Act 2016 and, from 2017-18, it will be able to set the 
rates and band thresholds, excluding the personal allowance.

The NAO noted that HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> failed to 
carry out any special exercise to inform those it had failed to identify, other 
than sending them a note of their new tax code. This risked the creation of “a 
less informed group of taxpayers”, it said.

The notification letters received by the 2.45 million taxpayers originally 
identified last December did not even contain a contact telephone number 
because HMRC’s strategy was “to minimise telephone contact”, said the NAO. 
Consequently, HMRC only recorded 312 calls between 1 December 2015 and 20 
January 2016 specifically in respect of Srit.

Recipients were instead directed to the relevant gov.uk website pages but, 
according to HMRC’s own analysis, there was no noticeable increase in the 
traffic as a result of the notification letters.

The report also identifies the risk of tax avoidance and evasion if there are 
differences in tax rates or thresholds between Scotland and the rest of the UK.


Scotland’s finance secretary, Derek Mackay, confirmed in his draft budget last 
week that he would not replicate the UK Treasury’s tax cut for higher earners, 
meaning that the 40% threshold would only rise by inflation, to £43,430 in 
Scotland, while it will start at £45,000 in the rest of the UK.

A Scottish government spokesperson said: “We have made it clear to HMRC that 
the identification of Scottish taxpayers must be robust and accurate. Our 
officials regularly meet with HMRC to receive assurances that the 
identification process is carried out in a satisfactory manner, that the 
integrity of Scotland’s income tax base will be maintained and to ensure where 
any issues are identified that they are addressed quickly.”

But Scottish Labour’s Westminster spokesperson Ian Murray said the error 
raised serious questions about HMRC’s capacity to administer the new tax powers.

“It is vital that businesses and taxpayers have all the information they need 
so that such errors are not repeated and that any disruption to taxpayers and 
future tax revenues is minimised. In order to achieve this, HMRC must have the 
staff and resources to function effectively, so the government should urgently 
review the planned closure of HMRC offices in Scotland, which could lead to the 
loss of around 2,000 workers,” he said.

“The transfer of new tax powers to Scotland is a major challenge to HMRC and 
the Scottish overnment – one which they must be prepared to meet. It is 
difficult to see how drastically cutting staff numbers is conducive to that.”
 