
The way energy suppliers dealt with serious customer complaints deteriorated 
over the past two years, according toOfgem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ofgem>, which named npower, Scottish 
Power and First Utility as the worst offenders.

The energy regulator said that while complaints to the energy firms had halved 
since 2014, satisfaction among those who had complained had worsened over the 
same period.

More than 40% of complainants whose cases had been closed by the supplier told 
Ofgem that as far as they were concerned, the matter remained unresolved. Only 
about a third of energy customers surveyed said they had been given a named 
contact at the supplier who was dealing with their compliant.

The providers that came out worst in the biannual survey were those that 
recorded the highest proportion of “very dissatisfied” complainants. But even 
the suppliers that fared best – SSE, E.ON and EDF Energy – had failed to show 
any significant improvement in overall complaints handling since 2014, Ofgem 
said.


Guardian Money regularly receives billing complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/01/npower-shambles-bill-2012-debt-collectors>
 from readers that have gone unresolved for up to two years, with many 
involving sums as large as £2,000.

Dermot Nolan, chief executive of Ofgem, said he had written to First Utility 
and Utility Warehouse, which performed next worst in the survey after npower 
and Scottish Power, asking them to conduct and publish a thorough independent 
audit of their complaints-handling procedures.

He noted that suppliers with the worst record on handling complaints faced the 
biggest exodus of customers. A majority of npower and Scottish Power customers 
who had complained said they had switched, or were planning to, as a result of 
their experience.

Ofgem said it had already taken action over suppliers’ complaints handling. In 
December 2015npower had to pay out £26m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/18/npower-ordered-to-pay-26m-for-customer-service-failures>
 as a result of its billing and complaints-handling failings. In AprilScottish 
Power was fined £18m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/26/scottish-power-fined-18m-pounds-for-poor-customer-service-ofgem>
 for similar failures following our intervention.

Lewis Shand Smith, chief ombudsman at Ombudsman Services, the body that 
arbitrates disputes between customers and suppliers, said: “While it is good to 
see an improvement in the number of people with eligible complaints bringing 
them to the energy ombudsman, it’s cause for concern that six out of seven 
issues are still being brushed under the rug.

“Providers are obligated to signpost customers to the energy ombudsman if they 
are unable to resolve their complaint, yet less than half received a referral 
letter.”

A spokesman for Energy UK, which represents energy suppliers, welcomed the 
fact that overall complaints had halved over the past two years.


“This is evidence that the industry is going in the right direction, but 
suppliers are in no way complacent. They continue to do everything they can to 
bring complaint numbers down,” he said.

In a separate move, Ofgem has forced E.ON to pay a total of £3.1m after it 
missed appointments with customers and then failed to offer compensation.

The company is handing £1.9m to energy charities and £1.2m in compensation to 
affected customers. The supplier said it missed around 35,000 appointments 
between 2011 and 2015 and failed to pay compensation.
 