 Sean Connery yesterday waded into the Scottish elections with a speech 
designed to inject some life into the SNP's faltering campaign.
In his first political speech, the former James Bond star said Labour had 
destroyed the spirit and positive enthusiasm that had surrounded the decision 
to create Scotland's first parliament in 300 years.

Connery said he detected a change in the political atmosphere north of the 
border since he last campaigned there in the devolution referendum.

'When I campaigned with Labour, the SNP and the Liberal Democrats there were 
no Tories of course for the referendum vote, there was a spirit and a positive 
enthusiasm,' said Mr Connery. 'Well the control freaks have blown it away. They 
have replaced it with fear and intimidation, the very same way that others have 
before them.'

Connery gave his address to 300 Scottish National Party activists at a 
pre-election rally in Edinburgh. With just nine days to go until the election, 
the nationalists are 20 points behind Labour in the polls.

Labour's highly successful 'Divorce is an Expensive Business' campaign led by 
the Chancellor, Gordon Brown, has forced the SNP on to the back foot. The 
intervention of Connery yesterday is the nationalists' last big hope of turning 
their campaign around.

When Connery addressed the troops whom he greeted as fellow SNP members there 
was always a danger that, like many expatriate Scots, his words would come more 
from the heart than the head. But his measured speech, with just the right 
level of sentiment, may turn out to be the fillip the SNP was hoping for.

'If I was asked, 'who do you think will win this election?', my answer would 
be, hopefullyScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>,' said Connery.

'We are about to have our own parliament. If it is to succeed it must be 
democratic and all the voices of all the parties must be heard. We have waited 
nearly 300 years. My hope is that it will evolve with dignity and integrity and 
it will truly reflect the new voice of Scotland.'

Since his arrival in Scotland to promote his latest film, Entrapment, Connery 
has been subjected to a barrage of criticism from the Scottish press. He has 
been accused of asking Scots to pay more tax from the safety of his Bahamas 
home.

He opened his four-minute speech with: 'Everything I have done or attempted to 
do for Scotland has always been for her benefit, never my own and I defy anyone 
to prove otherwise.'

And rounding on hostile journalists, he said: 'Let us understand something. I 
am not a politician and I have no intention of being one. I am reading this 
[speech] only because I have not been able to trust my emotions or my language. 
Because I have never in my life witnessed or experienced such shameful abuse by 
this Scottish media.

'I am ashamed of it and I am angry. I know the game was to provoke me. Well 
you succeeded.'

The actor, who donates around £40,000 each year to the SNP, received the 
loudest cheer when he told the rally of his life-long commitment to the 
nationalist cause.

'My position on Scotland has never changed in 30-odd years. Scotland should be 
nothing less than equal with all the other nations of the world,' he said.

Mr Connery ended his speech: 'The only thing left to do is to vote and vote 
again and I will be right with you.'

But it is a long way from his Caribbean home to the polling booths of 
Scotland. The SNP must hope his brand of patriotic sentiment travels well.
 