
A Conservative MP has spoken for more than an hour in the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> to try to derail a bill 
to protect women against violence.

Philip Davies, the MP for Shipley and an anti-feminist who was recently 
elected to parliament’s equalities committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/anti-feminist-tory-mp-philip-davies-elected-to-equalities-committee>
, said he thought it was sexist to say the focus should only be on violence 
against women.

He was unsuccessful in his attempt to stop the passage of the bill, but was 
accused by Labour and the Liberal Democrats of trying to filibuster the bill by 
talking for so long that it would run out of time.

The draft legislation brought forward by Eilidh Whiteford, a Scottish National 
party MP, is intended to force the government to ratify the Istanbul convention 
on tackling and preventing violence against women.

Feminist zealots want women to have their cake and eat it, says Tory MP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/12/tory-mp-philip-davies-claims-uk-legal-system-favours-women-at-mens-rights-event>
The MP for Banff and Buchan said: “The government needs to take the Istanbul 
convention out of the bottom drawer where it has been filed for far too long in 
a pile marked ‘too complicated, too difficult, too low a priority’.

“If parliaments like this one – where the rule of law is well established, 
where our legislative processes are robust – finds this too difficult to do, 
how on earth can we ask other countries where they don’t have the same 
traditions of governance to be following our example?”

It was supported by a number of MPs from all parties, with the vote passing by 
135 to two. The government ended up taking the unusual step of supporting the 
private member’s bill, saying it was committed to implementing the Istanbul 
convention even though it had some reservations about the way it was drafted.

“At this stage I am pleased to say that the government supports the bill in 
principle,” said Brandon Lewis, the communities minister.

Jess Phillips, the Labour MP for Birmingham Yardley, said: “For some people, 
they wake up on Christmas Day and they will try not to say anything wrong. They 
will try not to put a foot wrong. They will make sure everything is perfect. 
They will have risk-assessed every single step that they take throughout the 
day because just this one day their children deserve not to have the monster 
that lives in their home erupt in their faces.

“Just this one day, their children deserve to have the peaceful day that all 
of our children have taken for granted and so all of the stresses we’ll feel, 
for those people, will be terror and control over everything they say and do in 
order to keep things safe.”

Phillips denied Davies the opportunity to intervene in her comments, but he 
later made a 78-minute speech saying he had a fundamental objection to the idea 
that MPs only needed to deal with violence against women.

He said: “It basically comes with a worthy sentiment: who can possibly be 
against trying to stop violence against women? Nobody. I’m not aware of anybody 
who wants to argue that people should be violent towards women and girls, of 
course not.

“Because of the title the bill has, about ‘combating violence against women’, 
then it presumes as long as you support that premise you must support this 
particular bill, and therefore if you oppose this bill it means you must be in 
favour, as it follows, of violence against women and children.

“Now that’s the kind of level of debate I’d expect from the morons on Twitter 
but I still live in hope that we might have better quality debate than that in 
this house, although my experience is it doesn’t actually get much better 
normally.”

He continued: “I can’t really believe this needs saying, to be honest, but I 
think it’s so discriminatory and sexist to say that we should only be focusing 
on violence against women. If this was the other way round, there would be an 
absolute outcry from people in this house – and rightly so. I don’t take the 
view that violence against women and girls is somehow worse than violence 
against men and boys.

“As far as I’m concerned, all violence is unacceptable and all violence 
against the person should be punished by law. Both men and women are victims 
and both are perpetrators of these crimes. I believe in true equality and want 
people to be treated equally when they are a victim of crime and when they’re a 
perpetrator of crime.”

Speaking after him, Thangam Debbonaire, the Labour MP for Bristol West, said 
she had to cut her contribution short to make sure Davies’s filibustering did 
not succeed.

The Lib Dem press office tweeted:
Lib Dem Press Office (@LibDemPress) 
Why on earth would you spend your Friday trying to block this? Philip Davies 
constituents' getting very poor value.pic.twitter.com/q4lgAPmd1j 
<https://t.co/q4lgAPmd1j>
 <https://twitter.com/LibDemPress/status/809729348253208576> December 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LibDemPress/status/809729348253208576>  