
Construction of the polar research ship Sir David Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough>, which will 
explore the deepest waters of the Antarctic, is due to start on Monday with the 
laying of the vessel’s keel in Merseyside.

A competition to name the ship caused controversy earlier this year when 
voters overwhelmingly backed Boaty McBoatface, only for officials to override 
the outcome of the poll.

Boaty McBoatface received 124,109 votes, four times more than second-placed 
Poppy-Mai, the name of a 16-month-old girl with incurable cancer.


But the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) announced that the ship’s 
name would honour the British broadcaster and naturalist in his 90th birthday 
year, christening it RRS (royal research ship) Sir David Attenborough.

Boaty McBoatface will be used instead as the name of a high-tech sub on board 
the £200m RRS Sir David Attenborough, the world’s most advanced seaborne 
laboratory. NERC said the autonomous underwater vehicle would explore ice 
sheets to depths of 6,000m and was able to remain at sea for many months at a 
time.


Construction of the ship will officially start on Monday at a ceremony 
attended by Attenborough himself at the Cammell Laird shipyard in Birkenhead.


Attenborough will begin the keel-laying process by lifting the first 100-tonne 
hull unit by crane to the construction berth. This unit includes part of the 
ship’s keel and bottom shell plating and is the first of 97 units that will 
form the hull of the research ship.


The keel-laying ceremony is a tradition that formally marks the start of a 
ship’s construction and is said to bring luck.


Ministers hope that from 2019 the RRS Sir David Attenborough will provide a 
research base to help scientists tackle climate change, rising sea levels and 
the impact of environmental change on marine life.


The universities and science minister, Jo Johnson, said: “The RRS Sir David 
Attenborough, with Boaty McBoatface operated from her as a robotic underwater 
vehicle, will be one of the most advanced research ships in the world. It will 
help inspire the next generation of scientists in the UK and build on our 
status as one of the world’s leading nations in polar science, engineering and 
technology.”


The construction work will create more than 460 jobs and apprenticeships in 
Merseyside, ministers say.


Attenborough said: “I have had several opportunities to experience the power 
of these places first hand. This new ship will ensure that scientists have 
access to these enigmatic regions to uncover secrets that we can only imagine 
at this point. Scientists working on this new ship will inform everyone about 
our changing world for generations to come.”


The £200m cost is the largest government investment in Antarctic and Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> science infrastructure since the 
1980s and will enable the UK research community to conduct world-leading polar 
research for the next 25 years. The funding also covers the development of 
projects to support the ship’s work, including construction of a new wharf at 
Rothera, the largest British Antarctic research station.



 