
MPs have lambasted major banks for excessive overdraft charges and proposed an 
industry-wide cap on fees after concluding that consumers “don’t stand a 
chance” of being able to identify the best deal.

Banks await decision on proposals to cap overdraft charges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/16/banks-await-decision-proposals-cap-overdraft-charges>
Members of the Treasury select committee called for urgent action to tackle 
the problems after asking 12 of Britain’s banks to detail their charges for 
authorised and unauthorised overdrafts.


The responses, which have been published 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/treasury-committee/news-parliament-2015/retail-banks-overdraft-charges-chairs-statement-16-17/>
, reveal a dizzying array of charging structures, with some banks imposing 
daily fees, some imposing monthly charges, and some charging interest on the 
amount owed. In many cases banks use a combination of these methods, making 
comparisons between banks difficult.


Last month, following a two-year investigation into the sector, the 
Competition and Markets Authority (CMA)stopped short of imposing an 
industry-wide cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/09/watchdog-demands-banking-app-to-help-customers-shop-around>
 on overdraft fees. Instead banks will be able to set their own monthly maximum 
charge for unauthorised overdrafts, taking together all fees and interest, 
which they will be required to publish.


However Andrew Tyrie, who chairs the Treasury select committee, said yesterday 
that these proposed remedies “don’t appear robust enough to deal with this 
serious problem” and that the committee would be asking the CMA to justify its 
conclusions in the autumn.


At the moment going overdrawn on a current account without permission can be 
several times more costly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/09/unplanned-overdraft-fees-four-times-costlier-than-payday-loans>
 than taking out a payday loan. An individual borrowing £100 for 28 days via an 
unauthorised overdraft would face a bill of £90 at NatWest and its parent, 
Royal Bank of Scotland. With NatWest and RBS, if a customer goes into 
unauthorised overdraft by more than £10, they are charged a fee of £6 for each 
day they remain in that position, capped at £90 per “charging period”. A 
charging period runs from month to month.

Going overdrawn on a current account without permission can be several times 
more costly than taking out a payday loan

In this same scenario Lloyds, HSBC and TSB would each charge £80.


When asked what the daily charge was for a customer using an authorised 
overdraft, the banks provided a variety of answers. Barclays said its standard 
charge ranged from 75p a day up to £1,000 to £3 a day over £2,000, while RBS 
and NatWest said they would apply interest and a £6 monthly fee, and HSBC said 
its customers would only incur interest as it did not charge set-up or usage 
fees.


Tyrie said: “Some customers are being charged very high rates for using their 
overdrafts, both arranged and unarranged. Charges can also be very complex.” He 
added that better competition could bring choice and better results for 
customers but “this can only happen if consumers know what they are being 
charged, which they don’t at the moment”.


Rachel Reeves, a Labour MP on the committee, said the CMA report was a missed 
opportunity “and did not go nearly far enough to tackle excessive overdraft 
charges … What these responses from the banks now show is just how complex and 
confusing the charge structures are for overdrafts – customers don’t stand a 
chance of being able to identify the best deal.

“The ball is now firmly in the Financial Conduct Authority’s court. It must 
step up to the challenge and take necessary action, for example by imposing a 
monthly maximum charge on overdrafts, to ensure that those who are most 
financially vulnerable are protected.”

 