
Shoppers can make higher-value purchases with their contactless cards after 
the limit for a single payment rose from £20 to £30.

The increase is likely to broaden the appeal of such payments as more people 
make them part of their routine.

The use of tap and go technology has enjoyed strong growth over the past year 
as it has become accepted in a rapidly expanding variety of places – including 
supermarkets, post offices and public transport.

Contactless payments <https://www.theguardian.com/money/contactless-payments> 
were introduced in the UK in 2007 for low-value transactions. According to UK 
Cards Association, more contactless transactions took place during 2014 than 
the previous six years combined. More than £2.5bn was spent using contactless 
cards in the first half of this year, the trade body said.

Richard Koch, head of policy at the UK Cards Association, said: “Contactless 
payments are fast, easy and secure and use the same robust encryption 
technology as chip and pin. Consumers are increasingly choosing contactless as 
a way to pay and the new £30 limit will give shoppers and retailers even more 
opportunities.”

The technology enables customers to pay for goods with a single swipe of their 
card on a reader, without the need to sign or enter a pin number. There are 58m 
contactless cards across the UK.

The latest increase to the limit is the third to have taken place. The last 
increase to the contactless limit was made in June 2012, when £5 was added, 
taking the limit to £20. Before that, it was raised from £10 to £15 in 2010.

The £30 limit is being rolled out from Tuesday. However, not all retailers 
will offer the new limit immediately as payment terminals will require software 
updates. There are more than 200,000 bank-owned terminals, so the upgrading 
work could take some time.

Concerns have previously been raised about how susceptible contactless cards 
are to criminals using technology to steal personal details remotely. A recent 
investigation by the consumer group Which? used “easily and cheaply” acquired 
technology from a mainstream website to take enough information from cards to 
place orders for items including a £3,000 TV.

But the UK Cards Association has described instances of fraud on contactless 
cards as extremely rare, with losses of less than a penny for every £100 spent 
on contactless – far lower than card fraud generally.

If a contactless card is used fraudulently, consumers are fully protected 
against any losses and will not be left out of pocket, the association has 
said. Card providers should reimburse victims of contactless fraud, as long as 
they have taken reasonable steps to keep their card safe.

The Which? investigation found that one possible solution to foiling 
fraudsters trying to read a card remotely could be lying in the kitchen. It 
found that, while it is by no means essential, wrapping a card in tin foil 
could prevent it from being read.
 