
An academy chief who asked staff to reapply for their jobs as part of a 
cost-cutting drive while claiming thousands of pounds in perks, including the 
lease of a luxury Jaguar for him and his wife, has been put on “temporary 
leave” by his employer.

A spokesman for the Academy Transformation Trust (ATT), where Ian Cleland 
earns £180,000 a year, declined to explain why its chief executive was absent 
despite recently claiming that it was “committed to being open and transparent 
in all that we do”.

The trust’s managing director, Joyce Hodgetts, was also on “temporary leave,” 
a spokesman confirmed, but again declined to offer an explanation.

Cleland was at the centre of a row during the summer, after he told staff 
across ATT’s 20 academies that more than 30 staff roles were at risk due to 
“significant financial challenges”. Weeks latera joint C4 Dispatches and 
Observer investigation revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/23/education-academies-funding-expenses>
 that the taxpayer was paying Cleland to lease and have joint insurance with 
his wife on an XJ Premium Luxury V6 Jaguar car.

Included in nearly £3,000 worth of receipts was payment for servicing the car 
and the purchase of new tyres. Cleland had also spent £3,000 of taxpayers’ 
money on first-class rail travel, while dining expenses racked up on his 
taxpayer-funded credit card include a meal with other staff at a Marco Pierre 
White restaurant totalling £471 and at the Bank restaurant in Birmingham, at a 
cost of £703.45.

Taxpayers fund large wages and lavish perks of academy school chiefs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/23/education-academies-funding-expenses>
At the time the trust’s director of finance, Mike Giddings, said that 
Cleland’s role “requires significant, regular travel throughout the regions 
where our academies are based, hence the maintenance costs, including tyres and 
vehicle health checks”. He said “all expense claims are carefully considered to 
ensure that they are directly related to the operational costs of the business”.

Last month, a secondary-school principal at one of the trust’s academies was 
sacked following an investigation into breaches of safeguarding rules. In a 
letter to parents, the school’s sponsors said the decision had been taken 
because of what it called “serious breaches” in applying safeguarding 
procedures.

However, a spokesman for ATT said that the incident was not linked to the 
current “situation”, adding: “Academy Transformation Trust’s chief executive 
officer, Ian Cleland, and managing director, Joyce Hodgetts, are currently on 
temporary leave. The trust’s executive team – Claire Pritchard, director of 
resources, Lisa Crausby, principal improvement director, and Mike Giddings, 
director of finance – continue to lead the organisation, reporting into the 
board.”

Cleland announced in March that ATT was seeking to save £500,000 from its 
schools in the Midlands and east of England and had asked staff to reapply for 
their jobs. “The education sector is facing a number of significant financial 
challenges across the country with all schools, academies and multi-academy 
trusts being affected,” he said at the time. “As a result, it is essential that 
we review our costs and consider where savings can be made, without impacting 
on the quality of education.”

Despite the financial strains on the education system, evidence has emerged in 
recent weeks of high salaries being taken by executives and principals across 
the country.It emerged last week  
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/education/lambeth-outrage-over-headteachers-370k-per-year-salary-a3386991.html>
that the head of a south London primary school federation earned £370,000 last 
year. Sir Craig Tunstall, head of the Gipsy Hill Federation, was paid £330,000 
plus £44,000 in pension contributions by Lambeth council in 2015.
 