
Welsh pensioner Maggie Thomas didn’t ask for a contactless credit card, and 
didn’t want one. But when she objected she was told by her bank she had no 
choice. Why, she asks, should she be railroaded into taking the new technology?

Britain’s banks have issued 54m cards with the contactless symbol, enabling 
users to simply tap it at a terminal to pay for goods worth up to £20.

Usage rates are soaring – in part because contactless cards can now be used 
across the London Underground network and in supermarkets such as Tesco. Around 
40m transactions are being made every month on contactless cards – triple the 
level of just a year ago.

The banks reckon we are confidently adopting the technology, but there are 
some who are much less comfortable. As Thomas says: “As I get older and more 
forgetful, I am more likely to lose my card and I may not realise I have lost 
it immediately. I could lose a lot of money before I contact the bank and 
cancel my card. It seems unfair that this particular technology is being 
foisted on us.”

Is she right to be so concerned? And, irrespective of whether her fears are 
warranted, can she just opt out?

First, let’s consider the fraud picture so far. A thief who pinches, say, a 
handbag containing a contactless card can indeed use it immediately to buy 
goods worth £20, no questions asked. They could then scarper off on a tube, 
paid for, again, by the poor victim.

Yet the early evidence is that fraud is remarkably rare. According to the UK 
Cards Association, in the first six months of 2014, fraud on contactless cards 
totalled £51,000, which was just 0.007% of contactless card spending.

The reality is that once a card is used four or five times consecutively 
(without a chip-and-pin transaction or ATM withdrawal), or if the person spends 
more than £40-£50 in any one time frame, then the user is prompted to enter 
their pin at the terminal. So for most crooks, the money to be made from using 
the cards (nearly always in areas with security cameras) is simply not worth 
the risk.

Still, what if you simply don’t want a contactless card? Research by Guardian 
Money exposes a wide variety of approaches by different banks, with some 
allowing opt-outs on both debit and credit cards, some permitting opt-outs on 
debit cards only and some forbidding opt-outs altogether. And then there are 
the providers who haven’t yet got round to issuing contactless on credit cards 
yet.

Thomas banks with the Co-operative Bank, which told her that her new credit 
card could only be issued with a contactless facility.

Barclaycard takes a similar tack. It has led the way in issuing contactless 
credit cards and does not offer users an opt-out. On Barclays debit cards, if 
customers want to opt out, they can only obtain a Connect Electronic card.

Santander will, like most other banks, automatically issue new debit and 
credit cards with contactless, but will allow customers to call and request a 
card without the facility.

Lloyds, Royal Bank of Scotland/NatWest and the Yorkshire and Clydesdale banks 
allow customers to opt out of contactless on debit cards but not on credit 
cards. HSBC also allows debit card opt-outs but has yet to issue a credit card 
with a contactless symbol.

Metro Bank takes the toughest line: it automatically issues all its debit and 
credit cards with contactless, but says customers who don’t like the technology 
can ask for a free “card protector” which blocks the contactless function.

Nationwide is at the opposite end of the spectrum. It has attracted criticism 
because it has been the slowest of the major current account providers to issue 
cards with contactless technology. Only in November did it start issuing 
contactless on its standard FlexAccount.

A spokesman said: “We do recognise that not all customers want a contactless 
card and have said all along that we will launch the ability for customers who 
don’t want a contactless card to be able to opt out and receive a standard 
card. This facility will be launched at the start of next month.”

All the banks we contacted said requests to opt out of contactless have been 
very few – always under 1% of the customer base. Barclays says 99% of its debit 
card customers now have a contactless card and it has received almost no 
requests to opt out.

Meanwhile, the UK Cards Association says fears that fraudsters could steal 
from a passers- by in the street using reader machines to capture card details 
and deduct cash, are entirely unfounded.

Nonetheless, some people issued with contactless cards have been so keen to 
opt out of the technology that they havedrilled holes in the card chips’ 
antennae 
<http://www.instructables.com/id/How-to-Disable-Contactless-Payment-on-Your-Debit-C/>
 in the hope of disabling it.

The UK Cards Association advises against such a move. A spokesman says: 
“Contactless cards are safe and highly secure, embedded with multiple layers of 
security to protect you against fraud. Contactless cards have exactly the same 
legal protection from fraud as chip and pin, meaning that if your card is lost 
or stolen you will get your money back.”
 