
A series of medical failures led to the death of a young mother who had begged 
to be given a caesarean section, a coroner has found.


Frances Cappuccini, a 30-year-old primary school teacher, died at Tunbridge 
Wells hospital hours after giving birth to her second son.

She had pleaded for a caesarean but medical staff, who described her as 
frightened and tearful, decided she should continue with a natural birth.

After 12 hours in labour the medical team agreed to her wishes for a 
caesarean. But a series of medical errors led to her haemorrhaging several 
times within hours of giving birth, before she went into cardiac arrest and 
died.

Giving a narrative verdict at the conclusion of Cappuccini’s two-week inquest 
at the Old Town Hall in Gravesend, the coroner Roger Hatch criticised the way 
the C-section was carried out, the handling of her recovery from a general 
anaesthetic, record-keeping and monitoring of staff at the hospital, and a 
failure to diagnose sepsis or acute kidney injury.

Cappuccini had been “terrified” of giving birth naturally after suffering a 
placental tear giving birth to her first son four years earlier, her husband, 
Tom, told the inquest, and she had been advised by her obstetrician that she 
should have an elective C-section.

She had booked a caesarean birth at Maidstone hospital for 10 October. 
However, when she went into labour two days before the operation, she went to 
Tunbridge Wells hospital, where she was told she should not immediately have a 
caesarean.

Julie Ann Michaud, a midwife who saw Cappuccini, described her as “in great 
distress and in strong labour. She appeared to be frightened.”

A 4-5cm piece of placenta was left in her uterine cavity after the C-section, 
causing bleeding, which had to be surgically removed. During the operation she 
was put under general anaesthetic, but a breathing tube was removed too soon 
afterwards, leading to a steep decline in the level of oxygen in her blood.

Dr Nadeem Azeez, the anaesthetist who monitored Cappuccini after her surgery, 
said in a statement that the patient had been showing signs of regaining 
consciousness when he decided to remove the tube. His account was disputed by 
other medical witnesses.

Hatch said in his summary: “I do not accept the evidence from Dr Azeez that 
Frances was breathing, moving her arms and responding following the 
anaesthetic.” It emerged during the inquest that there had been a previous 
similar incident involving Azeez.

The coroner said it was likely that undiagnosed sepsis, which Cappuccini had 
possibly had before entering hospital, and kidney injury had also contributed 
to her death.

He recorded a narrative verdict and said: “As a result of my findings I 
propose to record that the death of Frances Olwyn Cappuccini was as a result of 
the failures, inadequate diagnosis and treatment of her at the Tunbridge Wells 
hospital on 9 October 2012.”


Speaking on behalf of the family afterwards, solicitor Kate Rohde said: 
“Frankie was a wonderful wife, mother, daughter and sister. She was bubbly, 
intelligent, beautiful, loving and much loved. Failures of Maidstone and 
Tunbridge Wells NHS trust and those employed by the trust cost Frankie her 
life. Nothing can heal that pain. At least today, after over four years, the 
truth is acknowledged.”

Cappuccini’s husband told the inquest the midwives and doctors had insisted 
there was no reason she could not give birth naturally, and he described them 
as having “almost a smirk across their face, almost laughing.”

Hatch said: “I do not consider she was under any pressure to continue with a 
vaginal delivery.” But he added: “The C-section was not carried out with care 
and as a result a small piece of placenta was left in the uterine cavity … The 
result of this failure led directly to the subsequent series of events which 
tragically ended in the death of Frances.”

Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells NHS trust said: “Patient safety remains of 
paramount importance to the trust. The trust has however recognised from the 
start that there were aspects of Frances’ care that fell short of the standards 
that the trust would expect and we wish to once again apologise to Frances’ 
family for this.

“As a direct result of Frances’ tragic death, the trust has made a number of 
changes to its processes that have further improved patient safety and 
experience.”
 