
The former chief of staff to a Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> government 
minister won’t spend any time behind bars after being found guilty of corruptly 
receiving travel kickbacks.

Paul Mossman was convicted of two counts of corruptly receiving a benefit from 
Latitude Travel’s Xana Kamitsis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/17/northern-territory-ministers-chief-of-staff-stood-down-due-to-corruption-charges>
 in 2014 while he was chief of staff to the then Country Liberals minister Bess 
Price.

Justice Peter Barr sentenced Mossman to a 12-month suspended sentence in the 
NT supreme court on Tuesday. Mossman was facing a maximum penalty of three 
years’ imprisonment.

Northern Territory minister's chief of staff stood down due to corruption 
charges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/17/northern-territory-ministers-chief-of-staff-stood-down-due-to-corruption-charges>
Barr said while Mossman abused a senior position of trust, he was the primary 
carer of a teenage daughter and jail time would impact on his role.

In his sentencing submissions, crown prosecutor David Morters compared 
Mossman’s crimes to those of the disgraced former New South Wales minister 
Eddie Obeid.

He said Mossman should receive a similar penalty to the former Labor 
powerbroker, who in December was sentenced to a maximum five years in jail for 
misconduct in public office.

Barr said the 44-year-old showed an “undignified eagerness” to ingratiate 
himself with the travel agent by offering her more than $300,000 in exclusive 
government contracts.

Mossman made it clear he’d be grateful to accept any travel benefits as a 
reward for favouring Kamitsis with significant commercial advantage, Barr said.

“Corruption is corrosive and ultimately destructive of good governance,” he 
said. “You were in a senior position of trust vis-a-vis the minister and the 
government of the Northern Territory. You betrayed that trust.”

Last October a jury found Mossman guilty of having service fees waived and a 
deferral of full payment for return flights to Sydney with his daughter and to 
New York with his son in 2014.

Barr said the fact that Mossman had no prior convictions and was of otherwise 
good character bore little relevance.

Morters argued that a harsh sentence was vital to send a message to other 
politicians and bureaucrats, who abuse powerful positions.

“That message [must be] sent loud and clear ... so the people of the Northern 
Territory can have confidence in their elected members and the people they 
employ,” he said.

The prosecution also argued Mossman should receive a similar sentence to 
Kamitsis, who in 2015 got a two-year jail term for a related offence. The 
sentence was suspended after 19 months.

But defence lawyer Tom Berkley said Kamitsis was motivated by long-term greed 
whereas Mossman’s crimes were purely opportunistic.
 