
Ministers are looking at increasing council tax to pay for social care but 
have been warned that it will not tackle funding problems which are “out of 
control”.

Experts, including the former Tory health secretary Stephen Dorrell, have 
warned of a growing cash crisis hitting local government and the NHS.

The government is preparing to allow tax precepts to be increased so local 
councils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/10/tory-plans-making-social-care-worse>
, which have suffered reductions in government grants totalling more than 40% 
since 2010, can claw in extra cash to cover the spiralling social care costs.

Izzi Seccombe, the Conservative chair of the Local Goverment Association’s 
community wellbeing board, confirmed that the idea of an increase in the 
precept was being considered.

“We have had some dialogue with ministers about this,” she told BBC Radio 4’s 
Today programme on Monday.

But she said the money raised from such a move would not be enough. Seccombe 
pointed out a 2% increase in precept imposed by most councils last year raised 
only £380m, which was not enough to pay the £600m needed to cover increased 
staff costs under the “national living wage”.

She also warned that a rise in council tax would create a postcode lottery in 
services because richer areas could raise more than poorer areas where the need 
is greatest.

Seccombe called for emergency funding. “We need an injection now of £1.3bn 
because there is a shortfall by the end of 2020 of £2.6bn.”

Shock figures show Tory plans are ‘making social care worse’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/10/tory-plans-making-social-care-worse>
Dorrell, who is now the chair of the NHS Confederation, said the shortfall in 
social care was spilling over into the NHS because discharged hospital patients 
had nowhere else to go.

He said: “What we are talking about is a cash shortage that is threatening the 
stability not just of local government but of the NationalHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Service. Unless we address this 
seriously, we will simply see a failure of service across the range of local 
public services and people will suffer as a consequence.

“It comes when people find they can’t have access to care homes, so they end 
up in A&E and GP surgeries. They can’t be discharged from hospital when they 
are fit and ready to go.”

Dorrell said he would welcome giving councils the flexibility to raise council 
tax for social care, but he called for a more “fundamental” rethink of both 
health and social care funding.

Martin Green, the chief executive of Care England, which represents care home 
providers, said hundreds of providers were on the brink of financial ruin.

He said: “Research recently showed 40% of care services will no longer be 
viable in the medium term so this is a huge number of care services that will 
be lost.

“The government needs to have a clear strategy on social care and if they 
don’t there will be a crisis right across both health and social care.”

Andrea Sutcliffe, the chief inspector for adult social care, told the Times: 
“The system is approaching a tipping point. We’ve got increased demand and 
potentially a restriction on capacity.

“Unless we really get to grips with some of these problems … we will get to an 
absolute crisis.”

Labour peer David Lipsey, who was involved in a royal commission on elderly 
care funding in the 1990s, added: “There could be mass closures of care homes.

“There’s a danger that poor people in poor areas will end up without care, 
living a squalid life. There could be care blackspots because the homes that 
are reliant on state funding will become unsustainable,” said Lord Lipsey.

Ministers considering letting councils raise council tax to fund social care - 
Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-treasury-social-care-considering-lettting-councils-raise-council-tax-to-fund-social-care-politics-live>
The Lib Dem shadow secretary of state for health, Norman Lamb, said: “This is 
dreadful crisis management from the Conservatives.

“They are lurching from crisis to crisis and this is yet another desperate 
sticking plaster solution which falls short of what is needed. Making councils 
bear all the burden will increase the postcode lottery which already exists.

“It will mean that wealthy parts of the country will find it easier to meet 
rising demand whilst those areas where council tax raises less money will be 
left struggling.

“The government must be held to account for the consequences of leaving more 
and more people without the care they desperately need.”

Barbara Keeley, the shadow minister for social care, commenting on reports of 
proposed council tax rises to fund social care, said: “Asking taxpayers and 
councils to pick up the bill for the Tories’ failure is no substitute for a 
proper plan.

“It is time for Tory ministers to deal with the crisis they have created in 
funding social care and to develop a sustainable way of funding the social care 
on which vulnerable and frail older people depend.”
 