
A court in Edinburgh is to decide whether an environmental activist can sue 
Donald Trump’s golf resort near Aberdeen for breach of privacy and damages 
after she was apparently filmed without her consent on the course.

Trump International Golf Course Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, which is wholly owned by the US 
president-elect, is expected to fiercely contest the action at Edinburgh 
sheriff court on Thursday.


A lawyer acting for Rohan Beyts, a long-time critic of the environmental and 
community impact of the resort, has accused Trump’s staff of breaching the Data 
Protection Act by taking mobile phone footage of her in April as she allegedly 
urinated behind a dune on the course.

The Guardian revealed in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/11/trump-scottish-golf-resort-admits-breaching-data-protection-law>
 that TIGC had breached the UK’s strict laws on data protection and privacy 
after it failed to register with the information commissioner’s office (ICO), 
despite operating an extensive CCTV system and handling data on thousands of 
golfers, guests, staff and suppliers. The resort insisted this was due to a 
clerical error.

The case results from an incident when Beyts, 62, and a friend used a public 
footpath across the Trump course to reach the sand dunes and beach that border 
the golf links.

As they returned from their walk, Beyts says she was challenged by resort 
staff and then photographed by a local newspaper photographer.

Three days later Beyts was visited at home by two police officers who formally 
charged her with public annoyance. A third officer in charge of the complaint 
told her that two members of Trump’s staff and a guest on the course had filmed 
her on their mobile phones as she ducked out of sight.

Beyts’s lawyer, Mike Dailly, the principal solicitor at Govan Law Centre in 
Glasgow, told the Guardian: “This is a straightforward claim for invasion of 
privacy, on the basis that the golf course has admitted that they weren’t 
registered with the ICO.”

Dailly has written twice to TIGCS advising it that Beyts is seeking £3,000 
damages for breach of privacy and for being “deeply distressed” at being filmed.


Her prosecution raised fresh concerns among local activists that Trump’s staff 
were deliberately targeting his critics and monitoring their movements on the 
resort.
 