
Millennials are missing out on the boom in cheap credit and using expensive 
payday loans, because poor credit scores lock them out of the best deals.

Borrowers born after 1982 are typically paying a higher rate on loans and 
credit cards than those born earlier, according to analysis of more than 
150,000 credit files.

The study, undertaken by the charity Toynbee Hall and the employee loan firm 
SalaryFinance and shared with the Guardian, found that younger borrowers were 
twice as likely to have taken out high-cost payday loans than those from the 
baby-boomer generation, and on average had used them twice as often.

The analysis found that millennials were much more likely to have poor credit 
records than older people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/dec/13/credit-reference-agency-security-data-protection>
. This is in part because they do not have a track record of payments, but also 
because the use of payday loans drags scores down.

Carl Packman, Toynbee Hall’s research manager, said young people were finding 
it difficult to access mainstream finance that helps to build their credit 
score.

“With few choices, and the pressures of low-wage jobs and increased 
insecurity, borrowing money out of necessity can only be done through 
alternative finance like payday lenders or friends and family, and not everyone 
has the luxury of the latter,” he said.


“Not only are the borrowing costs of a payday loan much more expensive than 
with mainstream finance, we can now demonstrate very strong evidence that it is 
having a detrimental effect on people’s credit scores and therefore their 
ability to build up that score and access cheaper forms of finance in the 
future.”


Loan and credit card providers have battled to top the best-buy tables in 
recent years. Rates on personal loans have fallen to record lows, with several 
banks now offering borrowing of up to £15,000 at an interest rate of just 3%.

Banks, meanwhile, have sought to attract credit card customers with longer and 
longer interest-free periods. Virgin Money recently launched a credit card 
offering customers 30 months of interest-free spending.

Older borrowers are able to get approval for these deals, but millennials are 
paying more. The analysis showed that for unsecured loans of up to £5,000, the 
average rate paid by adults born after 1982 was 18%, compared with 16% for 
those born between 1965 and 1981 and 15% for those born between 1946 and 1964.

The older baby boomers had typically taken out four payday loans each, while 
millennials had taken more than seven.


Packman said: “I think for many younger people the relative ease at which a 
payday loan can be obtained, compared with a small-sum personal loan from a 
bank or arrangement of a higher overdraft limit, has outweighed the potential 
risk of falling into a debt cycle. This has contributed both to the attraction 
and normalisation of a payday loan.


“Their lack of a financial track record counts against them and often the only 
answer left for them is to take out credit products like payday loans which, 
whether we like it or not, is damaging to credit scores and their ability to 
climb the credit ladder to more affordable forms of finance.”

Andrew Hagger, a personal finance expert at the website MoneyComms, said 
lenders looked at a range of factors to judge people’s creditworthiness, and 
many went against younger borrowers. “They might ask, for example, how long you 
have been in your job, which of course is going to count against millennials.”


Hagger said millennials were often caught in a “catch-22. If you can’t get 
finance it is difficult to build a credit record”.

Asesh Sarkar, chief executive of SalaryFinance, said: “With millennials set to 
make up 50% of the global workforce by 2020, there is an increasing need for 
employers to step up and support this group of workers who are cut out of 
mainstream finance.

“The government’s identification of the problems of the just about managing 
(Jams), who have less than a months worth of savings in the bank, support our 
urgent calls for better financial support systems for people in work but 
struggling.”
 