
Three times as many consumers have turned to payday loans or doorstep lenders 
rather than credit unions, despite considering the high-cost borrowing rates to 
be worse value for money, according to a new survey.

In research published on Monday, one in 20 people surveyed by Scape Group, a 
public-sector procurement specialist, and the Association of British Credit 
Unions (Abcul), said they had taken short-term loans from payday firms, while 
the same proportion had borrowed from doorstep lenders to make ends meet. In 
contrast, just 3% had used credit unions.

Credit unions offer savings accounts and loans, typically to people in a small 
geographical area. Borrowing is normally far cheaper than that available from a 
commercial lender, andin 2013 the Archbishop of Canterbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/jul/25/church-england-wonga> said he 
wanted to compete Wonga out of existence by offering loans through a church 
credit union.

However, the survey suggests that positive publicity for credit unions in 
recent years has convinced consumers that they make financial sense. Of those 
questioned, 41% said credit unions were good value for money, compared with 
only 1% who said the same of doorstep lenders and 2% who saw payday loans as 
being good value.

While take-up was low, 62% said they would use credit unions if accessing them 
was easier. Abcul is working on how to make credit unions more accessible 
through online and mobile channels and via payroll deduction schemes – the sort 
of innovation it said had led to the growth of credit unions in the US, where 
membership has passed 100 million people and there are now $1.2tn (£773bn) of 
assets under management.

Mark Robinson, chief executive at Scape Group, said: “It is worrying that 
people have turned to payday lenders who can charge over 2,000% APR and 
technically legal doorstep ‘loan sharks’ whose fees and methods are 
exorbitantly higher, rather than seek alternative finance such as in the form 
of credit unions.

“Equally, we are concerned that even though the recession has ended and the UK 
economy is growing, people are still having to rely on borrowing money from 
their friends and family, and are not in a position to save for when the going 
gets tough.”

The chief executive of Abcul, Mark Lyonette, said he wanted employers to make 
credit union membership an easier option for staff. “The most successful credit 
unions in the world have strong links with employers who allow staff to save 
and repay loans through payroll deduction. In fact in some places, credit union 
membership is seen as a fairly standard employee benefit,” he said.

However, a regulatory clampdown on the payday loans sector – led by a cap on 
the overall cost of loans – appears to be benefitting vulnerable borrowers. 
Citizens Advice said that the number of complaints it had received over payday 
loans had nearly halved since last year. The rights organisation said it helped 
with 5,554 payday loan problems across England and Wales from January to March 
2015, marking a fall of 45% on the same period in 2014, when 10,155 problems 
were reported.
 