
Fatima, a jolly-looking woman in a sparkly grey jumper and tightly wrapped 
headscarf that accentuates her round, smiley face, laughs as she shows me into 
her living room in Manchester, which is comfortable even though the family 
moved in just a fortnight ago. She offers me nuts and biscuits, but then her 
demeanour changes. She shifts in her chair; the laugh is gone. She looks down. 
She starts to talk about her life inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

“We moved and moved,” she says, “trying to find somewhere safe, but each time 
the bombing was as bad as before.” By the end, she says, they were 
semi-conscious, living only in that they were not dead.

“We forgot everything. We forgot our kids. All we could think was that we did 
not want to die,” she says.

“I will never forget the airstrikes. The children were terrified … And the 
things they saw … their grandfather’s dead body after he had been tortured … 
their uncle taken away with his T-shirt over his head [he has not been seen 
since] … The house hit by a barrel bomb. We were out, but the neighbour and her 
child were killed.”

Fatima’s daughter became racked with fear, her son a shadow of his former 
self. So when, newly arrived in Manchester, two years ago, she was approached 
and asked to help with a parenting project that would be delivered to Syrian 
families still in conflict zones and camps, she leapt at the opportunity. “It 
was perfect timing,” she says, “Finally, we were safe and I could focus on the 
children.”

But would parenting advice have been any use to her in the dark days in Syria? 
“Yes,” she says, without hesitation. “If I had been reminded what I should be 
doing, taught how to help … oh, yes.”

The woman behind the project is Aala el-Khani. She is sitting with us, 
translating Fatima’s Arabic. El-Khani, mother of two young children and a 
parenting trainer, had just started a PhD in psychology at the University of 
Manchester when the Syrian conflict began.

El-Khani’s parents are Syrian, and although she was born and raised in the UK, 
she still has family there. Her husband, Ammar, an NHS surgeon and also of 
Syrian descent, was soon travelling regularly to Syria with humanitarian 
organisations such as theDavid Nott Foundation <http://davidnottfoundation.com/>
, returning “numb” with stories and photographs.

Guardian and Observer readers raise over £500,000 for child refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/16/guardian-and-observer-readers-raise-over-500000-pounds-for-child-refugees-charities>
“One picture was of a little boy who looked so sad,” she says. “His father had 
been killed. His mother was caring for her two children and her elderly 
parents. My husband was staying with colleagues in the bottom of the building. 
One morning they heard screaming and rushed out. The mother had gone in a taxi 
to buy bread and been shot by a sniper. They couldn’t save her … I just kept 
thinking about that little boy. That could have been my son – or yours.”

Aid to Syria and to the refugee camps focuses on primary needs – food, 
shelter, medical supplies. But watching the horrors in Syria unfold night after 
night on television, El-Khani kept thinking about the children. How would her 
two children be changed if they had such experiences? How would she cope if 
faced with them seeing such things?

Mental health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health>, she says, 
is as important as physical health, and research confirms that family support 
has a big psychological impact on a child’s wellbeing. One study found that the 
quality of family relationships was a better predictor of children’s mental 
wellbeing than their wartime experiences. If warm, secure parenting – or 
caregiving – could be that powerfully protective, thought El-Khani, then help 
to achieve it must be delivered to those who needed it most.

She changed her PhD subject to exploring ways to support families and children 
in the war zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/16/guardian-and-observer-readers-raise-over-500000-pounds-for-child-refugees-charities>
 and nearby refugee camps and headed out to Syria and Turkey to talk to refugee 
parents: “Every parent I met was struggling with emotional or behavioural 
changes in their children.” Some had gone looking for advice, asking camp 
doctors, teachers and NGOs, “but these people were too overwhelmed with their 
own roles or didn’t have the knowledge to help”.

Back in the UK, El-Khani worked with Rachel Calam 
<http://www.manchester.ac.uk/research/rachel.calam/>, professor of child and 
family psychology at the University of Manchester, and psychologist Dr Kim 
Cartwright to produce a leaflet explaining to parents that bedwetting, 
nightmares, withdrawal and even aggression are normal responses to childhood 
trauma, and offering basic reminders and suggestions for looking after 
themselves and their children.

“When you become focused on survival,” says El-Khani, “you forget to praise 
your children, play, cuddle, or talk to them.” One young mother, after meeting 
El-Khani, later told her she had gone back to her tent and read her child a 
bedtime story for the first time since arriving in the camp.

To test the leaflet, El-Khani and her colleagues recruited a group of recently 
arrived Syrian refugee parents in Manchester, including Fatima. They read and 
approved the leaflet, but how was it to be distributed on almost no budget to 
thousands of families in a chaotic environment? An NGO worker had the answer: 
this “psychological first aid” should be delivered with the refugees’ bread. 
Two sheets of paper (the leaflet and a feedback form) and a pen were tucked 
inside the wrappers of 3,000 flatbreads and delivered to families and 
caregivers in northern Syria. Sixty per cent responded, a high figure anywhere, 
let alone in a conflict zone.

El-Khani remembers the excitement of opening the feedback forms. More than 80% 
of those displaced families who responded said the leaflet was useful; 400 had 
added comments. Most were positive remarks about the leaflet, some were prayers 
for better times, others asked for more information, particularly about 
bereavement and anxiety. The leaflet had hit a nerve.

When you become focused on survival, you forget to praise your children, play, 
cuddle, or talk to them

So the Manchester team has put the leaflet online 
<http://research.bmh.manchester.ac.uk/pfrg/resources> (in English and Arabic) 
for anyone to use and distribute, along with a version (in various languages) 
adapted to refugees already in Europe. When a Swedish version was put on the 
Swedish health website, it was downloaded 343 times in the first 45 minutes, 
the largest response the website has ever had. The leaflet has just been 
translated into Urdu and Pashto, and is about to be distributed with newspapers 
in Pakistan, with the hope that it will reach more than a million families.

Taking on board the Syrian refugees’ requests for more information, an 
expanded booklet and two-hour seminar will be trialled with Syrian refugees in 
Europe this year, and the Manchester team is also working on a new version of 
an established evidence-based programme for children with post-traumatic stress 
disorder. Teaching Recovery Techniques, created by the British-Norwegian charity
Children and War <http://www.childrenandwar.org/>, has been used successfully 
with children who have faced traumatic situations, from war zones to the
Zeebrugge ferry disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fromthearchive/story/0,,2027184,00.html>.

El-Khani and her team have created a five-week course for children and carers 
and piloted it successfully in a school for refugee children in Turkey. All 13 
eligible families attended every session and the results showed significant 
improvements in the children’s wellbeing and behaviour.

“We are developing video and Skype training that will allow us to reach many 
more families in places we cannot visit,” says El-Khani.

The primary purpose of this work is to help the families, but, she points out, 
it is also in the interests of their host countries. Without help, children 
with psychological problems become adults with problems.

Fatima is cheerful as we collect her children from school. Ten-year-old Khalid 
and nine-year-old Mariam skip and jump ahead. They like school and have made 
friends. Khalid is slight and considered; Mariam bubbly, chattering away in a 
mix of English and Arabic.

Back at home, the children are asked to tell me what they remember of Syria. 
Khalid claims not to recall that he used to recognise all the different threats 
from the sky by their sound. Mariam, however, points straight to the scar 
across her arm and tells me, haltingly, how she was hit by a car in 
post-airstrike chaos and nearly died. She mentions a dead aunt and the dangers 
of going outside, then a minor family disagreement leaves her suddenly tense. 
She puts her face in her hands and freezes, before bursting into 
disproportionate tears. El-Khani hugs her, and her mother says simply: “She 
remembered something.”

With both children smiling once more, we tuck into a selection of Syrian 
flatbreads. Fatima is pleased to be able to help El-Khani in her work, 
believing parenting advice – in a bread wrapper or by any other means – would 
have made things just a little less awful for her and her children. “It would 
have changed the way I was with them. We needed it.” The children are 
recovering now, she says. “We have a life again, not just a lack of death.”

Some names have been changed.

• The leaflet and more information about the Manchester group’s work can be 
found atresearch.bmh.manchester.ac.uk/pfrg/resources 
<http://research.bmh.manchester.ac.uk/pfrg/resources>
 