
When a UN inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/uk-austerity-policies-amount-to-violations-of-disabled-peoples-rights>
 ruled last week that Britain’s austerity policies amount to a “systematic 
violation” of disabled people’s rights, it was talking about people like Bessie.

Bessie, 51, has agoraphobia, Asperger’s and complex mental health problems, 
and for the last three-and-a-half years she’s lived the reality of Conservative 
cuts. First came the bedroom tax, taking with it £12 a week. Then she was told 
her lifetime disability benefit wouldbe scrapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/we-cant-help-being-disabled-reassessment-hysteria-scroungers-cheating-system>
. And now, as the latest cruel blow, Bessie – who’s received out-of-work 
sickness benefits since 2012 – has been declared “fit for work”. “You get over 
one thing and then another hits,” she says quietly. “It’s horrendous.”

I first spoke to Bessie in 2013, six months after the bedroom tax was brought 
in. It had been years since she had been well enough to earn a wage – before 
that, she worked in her late dad’s shop and then lived off some savings – and 
scraping by on benefits was always hard. The evidence of that was all around 
her then and still is today. There’s no oven or microwave in Bessie’s kitchen. 
No freezer either; she got rid of that to save money. When her washing machine 
broke, she couldn’t afford to replace it – not even with a second-hand one.

But it was the bedroom tax that meant, for the first time in her life, Bessie 
was pushed into debt. With her savings gone and struggling to pay the bills, by 
October 2013 she had six months of rent arrears, as well as for water, gas, and 
electricity.

UK austerity policies 'amount to violations of disabled people's rights'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/uk-austerity-policies-amount-to-violations-of-disabled-peoples-rights>
To be able to eat and have some heating through the winter, Bessie had to sell 
jewellery she inherited from her parents: a couple of rings, a gold sovereign. 
“It’s awful. All gone,” she says, when we talk again this week. “I sometimes 
wonder what they’d think. But you have to survive, don’t you?”

And Bessie had to work hard to survive. When we last spoke in 2014, the stress 
of the bedroom tax – stacked on top of her agoraphobia – was making it even 
harder for her to leave her flat, but over the last few years she’s managed to 
start volunteering at her local charity shop (“I feel safe because it’s 
familiar,” she says). In addition, she is now half way into a part-time Open 
University law degree.

She’s still in debt but found charity grants to help her ward off the utility 
companies. Other charities helped too, with the smallest of luxuries: a new 
mattress (“mine had a big spring coming out,” she says); some carpet for the 
bare floor; and, at last, a washing machine. “I’ve got a television again now 
too,” she says. “I’d given it up but you have to have something, don’t you.”

Then, she finally broke free from the bedroom tax: Bessie’s council agreed to 
write off her rent arrears and this summer her housing association found her a 
one-bed flat to which she could downsize. But as hundreds of thousands of 
disabled people just like Bessie know, the scale of the attack on disability 
support means that, as you get one bit of social security back, the odds are 
that the government will just pull another away.

For Bessie, that happened this month when the Department for Work and Pensions 
(DWP) informed her that after four years she’d no longer be receiving her 
out-of-work sickness benefit, employment and support allowance (ESA). Why? The 
DWP told her she neither turned up for a “fit for work” re-assessment nor 
filled in the form explaining her absence. In fact, Bessie says she received 
neither letter and hadn’t even been told when her medical would be.

Regardless, she’s now been sent to sign on for jobseeker’s allowance. That’s 
forcing an agoraphobic not only to look for work but get on a bus and sit in a 
jobcentre. “The first time I was almost in tears,” she says.

You get over one thing and then another hits. It’s horrendous.
Bessie 
Bessie’s appealing her “fit for work” ruling and, as she waits for the DWP’s 
decision, her JSA doesn’t get paid until next Thursday. That’s how this system 
works. The jobcentre has given her one £93 hardship loan to get her through 
until then – they’ll knock off £15 a week from her benefit for the privilege – 
but the loan came in last Monday and it’s running out fast. Food is her 
priority. That and topping up the electricity a couple of pounds a day. “I 
don’t want to put a tenner on it because I might need that for the bus to get 
to the jobcentre,” she explains.

Bessie’s mental health problems mean she can’t eat solid foods – she has a 
fear of being sick – and she lives off eight protein and nutrition drinks a 
day. That’s expensive on a low income, let alone no income at all: £5 a pack, 
£35 a week. She can’t go to a food bank. Even if they gave her soup, she has no 
cooker or microwave to heat it. She’s been phoning everyone she can think of 
for help – the jobcentre, the council, her GP. “No one does crisis loans any 
more,” she says.

Her utility company has let her have a pre-paid card for gas but not 
electricity, so she is rationing the light. The electricity is on a pre-payment 
meter with a weekly fee of £4 – when you’re poor, everything costs more – and 
the money racks up whether she uses it or not. “It’ll be £8 by 2am,” she counts.

Her disability living allowance doesn’t come in for another fortnight. 
Besides, she’s been told her lifetime award will end soon and she’ll need to be 
tested for personal independence payments. “That’s another hurdle to come,” she 
says.

Yesterday, I got an email from Bessie: she’s won her appeal and will be put 
back on ESA. Except there’s no date for when the money will come in; she just 
hopes it’s Monday. As a symbol of the sadistic futility of cuts, in the 
meantime, a disabled woman is left with nothing to live on.

“Even the bedroom tax wasn’t this bad,” she says. “It’s all made me feel like 
benefit claimants don’t matter.”
 