
My father, David Lloyd, who has died aged 86 after living for 15 years with 
Parkinson’s, was a musician and peripatetic teacher in NorthYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> who also ran a Saturday morning 
music centre in York.

David loved his teaching job with North Yorkshire county council schools, 
which included running wind bands, orchestras and recorder groups. He was held 
in great affection by his pupils, but promotion to administration left him 
utterly miserable. Taking early retirement in the mid-1980s, he applied to 
Leeds University, where he studied philosophy, and then history of art. “I’m a 
student, you know,” became his catchphrase.

Born in Norbury, south London, to Betty (nee Cornforth), and Frank Lloyd, a 
Fleet Street journalist, David, and his siblings, Nick and Brenda, grew up in 
complete freedom while their parents involved themselves in left-wing politics. 
Some of David’s best memories were from the village of Spetisbury, near 
Blandford Forum in Dorset, to where he was evacuated in 1940.

He took up the clarinet at 14, excited by the playing of Benny Goodman. When 
called up for national service he became a bandsman, and his love of marching 
music was later evident in his own teaching. On leaving, he won a scholarship 
to Trinity College of Music in central London.

David met Betty Lower at a dance, and they married in 1952. Betty worked as a 
teacher to support the family, before a move to Dublin in 1957 when I was one. 
My siblings, Ben and Frances, were born there. After working as a freelance 
musician, David’s job as first clarinettist of the Radio Éireann Symphony 
Orchestra (now the RTÉ National Symphony Orchestra) left him with some 
longlasting musical friendships. Recorder playing enjoyed a revival in the 60s 
and David took it up with gusto, running recorder groups for local children in 
the sitting room.

The family lived “the good life”, beekeeping, maintaining a peat bog, DIYing, 
gardening and head-standing. Gardening was David’s biggest hobby outside music 
and he proudly maintained five compost heaps to the end. In 1967 the family 
moved to Tadcaster in Yorkshire, to the house they would live in for 50 years.

A loving and encouraging father and a humanist by nature, he always allowed 
his children to make up our own minds about life. The whole family would attend 
his Saturday morning music sessions.

In his last couple of years he became very emotional about injustices and 
misfortunes in the world.

He is survived by Ben, Frances and me, nine grandchildren, two 
great-grandchildren, and by Betty, who shared his love of camping, gardening, 
thrift and opera.
 