
A few weeks ago, when much of the western world was preoccupied with other 
things, an idea reached the fringe of the news – and vanished. A classic 
example of kite-flying, the reportsuggested that 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4072186/Cameron-lined-UK-s-candidate-head-Nato-Britain-pledged-play-greater-role-following-Brexit-vote.html>
 the former prime minister David Cameron was being touted as the UK’s nominee 
to be the next head of Nato.

That the idea was more serious than perhaps it seemed was confirmed this week, 
when Julian Lewis, the chairman of the Commons defence select committee, spoke 
out – rather disloyally some might think –to argue against it 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38642170>. Cameron’s talents, Lewis said 
rather cuttingly, did not include “wisely judging strategic issues”. He also 
warned of the risks to Europe’s security that might result if the US turned 
away, in the light of president-elect Donald Trump’s description of Nato as 
“obsolete”.

Now it is possible to argue that the circumstances in which Cameron resigned 
militate against a return, let alone such an early return, to public life. 
Equally, six years as prime minister of a major OECD country provides a 
particular sort of experience that few people have and it seems a waste for it 
not to be used.

Cameron is still only 50. It appeared initially that he intended to remain in 
politics, contributing from the back benches – as the former chancellor George 
Osborne is now doing to some effect. But he soon concluded – wisely – that 
remaining in parliament was going to do him, and his successor, no favours. His 
every word would be parsed for its helpfulness or otherwise to the new 
government. So he is now in private life, devoting time to his brainchild,the 
National Citizen Service trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/12/david-cameron-to-chair-national-citizen-service-in-first-post-politics-role>
, and giving speeches for handsome reward.

His situation, of course, highlights the difficulties faced by politicians who 
reach, and leave, high office young: what are they to do with themselves 
thereafter? It was a problem faced by Tony Blair, and now confronts Barack 
Obama. But head ofNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato>?

First, there is the objection raised by Lewis. Perhaps unfairly, Cameron will 
always be judged by the decision to hold that ill-fated in-out referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> and his failure to secure 
a majority for remain. That defeat annuls in the public mind, not just in 
Britain, anything else Cameron might have achieved as prime minister. Rather 
than the competent, safe pair of hands Cameron appeared during the coalition 
years – how much of that was due to his coalition partners? – his promise of a 
referendum now looks reckless and his failure to win it negligent. Neither 
would be a recommendation to head the transatlantic alliance.

But there are other reasons why, even if Cameron eyes a return to public life, 
the defence alliance is probably not the job for him. As prime minister, he 
appeared to get along with almost all those he had to deal with – except, 
conspicuously, the top brass. Here, there were tensions, about structures, 
procurement and cost-effectiveness, from the start. It was unusual for a 
Conservative prime minister to have such complicated relations with the 
military – and in terms of cost-effectiveness and the top-heavy nature of the 
UK armed forces – he was largely right. But the lack of sympathy on both sides 
at national level would not bode well for peace and harmony within the alliance.

Then there is the new context created by the presidency of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/trump-reckless-on-nato-says-defence-committee-chairman>
. Nato looks set for a period of uncertainty, at very least; possibly some 
radical rethinking of its funding and purpose. Broaching and implementing 
change would probably not play to Cameron’s strengths which, as prime minister, 
tended more to calmly steering the ship of state along a familiar course. If 
the transatlantic alliance is to survive the Trump presidency, it is going to 
need someone more combative and free-thinking at its head.

Nato has the best part of two years before it needs to replace its current 
secretary general, the former Norwegian prime minister Jens Stoltenberg. The 
alliance can afford to take a little more time.
 