
Tim Dowling

Brien McMahon High School, Norwalk, Connecticut

Dear Ms Papastathis,
I would like to apologise for my behaviour in 10th-grade Language Arts, fifth 
period, specifically on that afternoon when I point-blank refused to offer a 
view about the use of symbolism in The House of the Seven Gables. It must have 
seemed strange the way I just stared at my folded hands, allowing an 
uncomfortable silence to ripen, especially after my friend Pete, who was 
sitting two rows in front of me, had raised his hand to suggest that I might 
have some particular insight to bring to bear on the use of symbolism in The 
House of the Seven Gables.

Looking back I can imagine that this sort of refusal to engage is one of the 
things that makes teaching young people so dispiriting. You may have quite 
reasonably concluded that I hadn't done the assigned reading, but I had, or 
most of it. You may have suspected that I was indulging in some juvenile form 
of rebellion, perhaps at the instigation of my classmates. Or that I was making 
a pathetic, private point of my own – maybe I objected to the way the term 
"symbolism" was bandied about so uncritically in the 10th grade. You might have 
chosen to class the episode as a sudden bout of extreme awkwardness 
characteristic of late-onset male puberty. Or the boorish sullenness of a shy, 
self-absorbed young man.

I was, in fact, incredibly high. So was Pete. Now I can't even remember what 
happens in The House of Seven Gables, but I learned a lesson that day, just the 
same.
Sorry again, 
Tim Dowling

Bim Adewunmi

Federal Government Girls' College, Sagamu, Nigeria

Dear Mrs Nwokebelu,
Where to begin? I've given it much thought, and all evidence points to Malory 
Towers, that blatant propaganda fed to us since we could read. Our boarding 
school in Sagamu, Nigeria, was a world away from Cornwall; where Malory Towers 
had rock pools and riding stables, we had elephant grass and soldier ants. But 
the one thing we had in common with Darrell and Sally and the rest of the gang 
was midnight feasts. And you, Nwonky – that's what we called you, you see – 
were charged with bringing these clandestine gatherings down. This meant you 
had to trudge through the bush from your house in staff quarters, in the middle 
of the night and armed with only a torch, to sniff out the contraband – tinned 
sadines, Indomie noodles, boiling rings, cream cakes – that we had snuck in 
past prefects and mistresses. It meant you had to hoist your not inconsiderable 
bulk into the roof cavities we'd stored them in. You conducted your on-the-spot 
inspections, knowing from our smirks and whispers that you were unlikely to 
find anything. The frustration must have driven you up the wall.

I'm so sorry. I hope your hip recovered. It certainly felt that way when you 
caned us.
Best wishes, 
Bim Adewunmi

Suzanne Moore

Northgate School for Girls, Ipswich

Dear Miss Paxman,
You were my favourite teacher and you taught my favourite subject: biology. I 
loved dissection. I loved the smell of chloroform in the morning … No, really. 
I used to regularly pass out in your lessons from sniffing it in the lab. You 
used to have to slap me awake. But I loved that you pointed out on your own 
body where your ovaries were. Underneath your white coat! For in sex education, 
it was just rabbits and syphilis. I loved that you were very scary and decided 
what it was we should know. The school could stuff itself.

I was terrified when you shouted at me for killing a worm even though we were 
dissecting worms. I must respect the worm for it would teach me in the end, you 
screamed. I loved the fact that you knew I was "bad" but told my mum I could do 
more than work in a shop. My mum said you were probably a lesbian. What normal 
woman would want to do biology; or "cutting up rats", as she called it?

But unlike most of the teachers I knew, you would not refuse to answer my 
questions. Instead you hinted at what could be known from working hard. 
Somehow, you made me understand that looking inside things makes people able to 
look outside them too. You embodied the confidence that comes from knowing an 
awful lot but you made us see that trying to know anything would take up the 
rest of our lives.

While we were taking apart dead frogs or drawing flowers we wanted to see the 
daft smile that sometimes broke through your "scientific" composure. I remember 
that: your pleasure at us seeing things for the first time. You encouraged my 
mind to whirr while most of my experience of school was "them" trying to shut 
it down.

I have no idea how you would fit into the lockdown that "education" has since 
become. You were your own woman. That was, to me, an actual amazing fact. I am 
sorry that I never became a biologist, but when I left school at 16 you simply 
said: "You are making a mistake, but go. And keep your eyes open. It's all 
there to see." So that's life. Biology, even? And sorry, miss, about the worm 
murder. I was just overexcited.
Yours always, Suzanne

Simon Hattenstone

Latham House School, Manchester

Dear Mr Roberg, 
Even five-year-olds have feelings. Just because I told the dinner lady to fuck 
off for stealing my balloon is no reason for hauling me out in front of the 
school by my ear and threatening ne with "double punishment". Also, why did you 
have to call out Sharon and humiliate her just for being my sister? She didn't 
do anything wrong.
Yours, Simon

Kersal High School, Manchester
Dear Mrs Tierney,
I was actually a brilliant cook before I came to your domestic science 
lessons. How was I to know that "elbow grease" didn't actually exist? No, I 
wasn't taking the piss when I asked where it was.
Simon J Hattenstone

Dear Mr Todd, 
Thank you for thanking me for coming to detention. I found it very touching 
when you said I was the first boy who had ever turned up and promised that you 
would never give me detention again.
Cheers, Simon Hattenstone

Dear Mrs Milme,
I know Steve is a bit on the dull side, but I really felt for him when you 
said: "Steve you are soooooh boring," just because he asked you, again, whether 
time really existed.
Love Simon (Hattenstone)

Dear Mrs French Teacher, 
Sorry for sticking pins on your seat. It must have been painful.
Yours sincerely, Simon Hattenstone

Dear Mr Pexton,
I wish you hadn't put in my report: "Simon has adapted so quickly to school he 
has rapidly become the class fool." My mum was very upset. She started crying 
and went straight to bed.
Yours curiously, Simon Hattenstone 

Dear Mr Butcher,
I remember so clearly the day you introduced yourself to us in the gym. "My 
name is Butcher. That is spelt B.A.S.T.A.R.D. Got it." PS I thought you'd take 
redundancy the day they banned corporal punishment.
Cheers, Simon

Dear Mr Davies,
You know when you used to say: "Give the boy a biscuit!" and: "Give the girl a 
banana!" when we answered questions correctly? Why didn't you?
Yours curiously, Simon Hattenstone

Dear Mr Gadja,
Sorry for saying: "Oy, Nobby, over here," in class. It was disrespectful. I 
know your real name is Norbert, and I know that even though I know it's Norbert 
really I should call you Mr Gadja. I understand now that only your best friends 
call you Nobby, and I'm not one of them.
Simon

Eccles Sixth Form College
Dear Mr Computer Studies teacher, 
Sorry for climbing out of the window when I saw you coming into class. At 
least it was the ground floor. (I'd had a drink.)
Yours faithfully, Simon Hattenstone 
(former part-time student)

Bury Grammar
Dear Mr so-called Roger Noel-Smith,
With reference to our conversation yesterday, I still disagree with you. Just 
because you say The Wasteland is an optimistic poem doesn't mean I have to 
think that too. I think the Wasteland is brilliant, but really depressing. When 
you explained to me a second time, and asked if I'd changed my mind … well that 
was bullying. And the third time was unforgivable. Especially when you called 
me an "obstreperous bastard". Anyway, I thought you might like to know I went 
straight to the head, told him what had happened, ripped off my school tie and 
shirt told him I wanted to leave his crappy grammar school. Anyway I have left 
… yes, I know six weeks isn't much of a stay. PS apparently, I've been expelled.
(Up) Yours
Hattenstone (as you called me)

Kersal High
Dear Mrs Beattie,
I was so terrified when I met you the first time. It's not just that you were 
really fat and shouted so loud. Everything about you was scary. All the 
teachers were frightened of you, too. But you were brilliant; the best-ever 
form teacher. The way that you screamed at us if we'd done something wrong in 
someone else's lesson, and then went to defend us to that teacher. The way you 
made us believe we were capable of anything if we put our mind to it. I hated 
art, and was ashamed at my inability to draw anything that resembled anything. 
So of course I mucked about. The way you took me aside and said I could do it, 
and I just had to concentrate on the lines, and if it was no good start again.

Do you remember how you made me draw, then paint, that photograph of the 
tennis player Nastase, and it was a bit crap at first but by the end I was so 
unbelievably proud of it? You could even see the veins in his legs. Mind over 
matter, you said, or something like that – and you were right. We thought you 
were an ogre, but you turned out to be the fairest person on earth.

There was the time I did really well in my mocks in everything but geography, 
and you said: "Simon has done brilliantly this year, and was only let down by 
his geography where he didn't work hard enough." I said I had worked hard but 
was rubbish at it, and asked if you'd changed my report, and you rewrote it 
saying, "Simon has done brilliantly except for geography, which he's not very 
good at." Thanks Mrs B. Hope you're still teaching up there.
Lots of love,
Simon xxx

Michele Hanson

Haberdasher's Aske's School, Acton

Dear Miss Denton,
I'd like to apologise, for myself and my whole class, for being generally 
horrid and playing such a nasty trick on you, 56 years ago in maths lessons. 
Because you were one of our least horrid teachers. You were young, rather shy, 
pleasant, blushed easily, and so we attacked. Because it was easy. We couldn't 
do much about the really horrid old witch teachers who made our lives hell, 
like Miss Titmuss, the RE teacher, who shook us whenever possible, or Miss 
Ashley, with her grey sausage curls and outrageous punishments – Latin 
detention for me, for jumping down three steps into the playground. No, Miss 
Denton, you were sweet and kind. So you got it in the neck.

One day, you had just got to the end of a gigantic sum, which had taken us 
half the lesson to do, and which you'd written up on the board. You wrote in 
the answer, and then were suddenly called away to the telephone. One of us, I'm 
not telling who, because we all egged her on, rubbed out the answer and changed 
it.

Back you came. "Please Miss," we said. "You've got the answer wrong.'"And you 
had to go through the whole gigantic sum again, until you got the right answer, 
and then apologised meekly for your silly mistake. We all looked very serious. 
You probably never knew that it was all a nasty joke. How we laughed when we 
got out of class. But why? You were never nasty to any of us. So, sorry Miss 
Denton. We liked you really.
Michele

Jenny Colgan

Queen Margaret Academy, Ayr

Dear wood- and metalwork teacher,
I am sorry that we didn't pay attention and ignored the safety briefing in 
favour of re-enacting the previous night's The Young Ones (the mouse episode).

I'm sorry that when you said to me: "You're good at maths, you should be a 
civil engineer, it's starting to be a fascinating industry for women," I blew 
out my fringe (grown to cover spots) and tutted and didn't bother to look into 
it even a tiny little bit, or do my technical drawing homework, and as a 
consequence got a dreadful report.

If the books hadn't worked out, creating roads and bridges and airports would 
have been vastly more fulfilling and rewarding than the junior public-sector 
admin role that was my only alternative. And now I've married an engineer, and 
have a son looking that way and he says: "I'm going to be an engineer like 
daddy," and I hiss "civil engineer" at him. Then I tell him to go talk to his 
grandpa. Because as every teacher's child knows, it's bloody awful being taught 
by your own dad, however much you love them. And when we walk down the streets 
of my home town, the number of gainfully employed, useful, successful, handy 
boys who come up and say: "Hello, Mr Colgan" (you never recognise them. Being a 
retired teacher in a small town is a bit like being a retired rock star), and 
thank you copiously for everything you did for them makes me feel even more 
foolish than I undoubtedly was back then.
With love, Jennifer xxxx

Kwame Kwei-Armah


Dear teacher,
All said and done, I had a great school life. However, as I grow older I find 
myself thinking more and more about why I have found it so hard to forget the 
time you called my mother to the school to tell her that you saw me holding 
hands with a white girl whose parents were "middle class" and that they would 
be very upset about it as the races really shouldn't be mixing in this way.

I have found it harder to forget the time you called me into your office and 
told me that because of the "structure of the black mouth" I would never really 
be able to speak English properly. What I find hardest of all, however, is that 
after all these years I have not forgiven you for these comments. I find it 
rather distasteful that I haven't, truth be told, because I have often preached 
to myself that I have long learned to hate the crime but not the criminal – or, 
more pertinently, hate the sin of racism and not the sinner. This was evidently 
not the truth in your case.

I am writing to you now to say I am sorry that I have only remembered you 
through that narrow and bitter lens. That the memory of those and similar 
events have clouded over the many good things you must have done for me while 
at your school. Many things that I'm sure sit positively at the heart of who I 
am today. You hired a brilliant teacher who made a huge and wonderful impact on 
my life! So there, this letter writing forgiveness stuff is working already. We 
are all bigger than our wrongs, right? I shall endeavour to remember that when 
I next think of you and my childhood.
Yours kinda sincerely (I'm working on it),
 Kwame

Hugh Muir

Lister Comprehensive, Plaistow

Dear Preston Thomas,
You were head of the lower school, deputy head, head, and my A-level tutor for 
economics, and there are a few things I might usefully get off my chest. The 
boy who surreptitiously gave a Refresher-shaped laxative to the greedy 
classmate who was stealing everyone's sweets, occasioning a hygiene crisis in 
Humanities? That was me. The waste of space whose spat with another pupil 
spilled from the classroom on to the gravel pitch and ended up with us chasing 
each other in circles around the playground, pursued by the supply teacher who 
never came again? Yep, guilty. I was one of the shadowy figures who were able 
to let themselves back into the school in the early evening by dint of a 
purloined skeleton key.

It all seems quite silly now but I am sure that had you been able to pull 
together the various strands and establish a pattern, you would have dealt with 
it in that calm, authoritative, sensible and humorous way that you dealt with 
everything. It was the funniest thing. We weren't scared of you; but at the 
same time, we thought we shouldn't mess with you. You said that I should opt 
for A-level economics, ignoring my protests about deficiencies in maths. You 
were right.

And then there's the occasion I carry with me. It occurred in the sixth form 
when I commandeered an empty classroom as a changing room and was locked in by 
schoolmates who, for good measure, had stolen my shorts and trousers. That took 
some explaining when the melee caught your attention, but you didn't ask for an 
explanation. "You don't stop making mistakes as you get older," you said with a 
wry smile. "You just hope to make fewer."
Hugh

Marina Lewycka


Witney Grammar School

Dear Miss Mitchell,
I'm glad to have this opportunity to apologise for having been such an 
absolute little cow during the years you taught me German, French and Russian. 
Although you are now at rest in the great staffroom in the sky, I still feel a 
pang of shame when I recall how badly I behaved during your lessons.

I remember your patient sigh when you caught me inking in little black spots 
on my legs below the holes in my black tights, or painting on pearlised orange 
nail-polish under the desk. You pretended not to notice my CND badge, banned on 
school premises, or the whiffs of cigarette smoke that lingered in the girls' 
toilets. I hope you never read any of the cruel notes my friends and I passed 
around in class, commenting on your appearance, and speculating on your love 
life. I felt ashamed when I learned, afterwards, that you'd lost your fiance 
during the second world war, and teaching us became your life instead. I would 
like to thank you for your perseverance.

As you must have guessed, at heart I was always a little swot, and at home in 
private I practised those strange gargling sounds you taught us, and memorised 
the Lorelei song, and long passages of Phèdre and Evgeny Onegin.

And thanks to you, even after all these years, I can still pull off a cool 
subjunctive, which impresses the Frenchies no end.
Do svidanya, auf wiedersehen, adieu, 
Marina

• Which former teacher would you write to, and what would you apologise for? 
Post your letter below
 