
Someone I recruited has been promoted above me – what can I do about it?

I am a salaried solicitor in my late 40s, employed by a medium-sized firm. I 
was recruited to build and run a department 10 years ago, and by 2010 we were a 
team of six. One of those I recruited, who is younger, indicated he wanted a 
managerial role, and three years later the firm decided to appoint him as team 
leader after I indicated I was fed up with managing (which involved much 
tedious administrative work), and he showed enthusiasm to step in.

I was offered a small performance-related bonus as an incentive to generate 
fees. Three years on the firm has announced this employee has been made a 
salaried partner on the basis of his managerial contribution.

I now feel overlooked and under-appreciated. Although I no longer have a 
managerial role, I generate twice as much income as the team leader, have been 
in the company twice as long, and am much older.

It also feels more hurtful as I was involved in recruiting this person.

I know I am seen as quiet and compliant, and it is true that I tend not to 
make a fuss. I am not looking for prestige, but I do like to feel wanted and 
appreciated. Instead, I feel rather humiliated, but it feels petty to complain. 

I really like my job and get on well with the rest of my team (including the 
team leader). Also, the salary is OK. Should I swallow my pride and simply 
soldier on, or raise the issue ?

Jeremy says

I can fully understand your feelings. On one hand, you know you can hardly 
complain since you chose to renounce your managerial responsibilities some 
years ago; on the other, your company’s pay structure is clearly based more on 
job title than contribution, and that rankles.

I suggest you write a very carefully considered note to your management. Don’t 
try to address the issue in person – it’s a bit too complicated and you might 
find yourself getting flustered.)

Say that you don’t regret having given up your managerial role several years 
ago, because it has freed you to generate income and you believe that other 
able employees might also choose to follow this path if it was openly 
acknowledged by the firm to be an accepted option. But point out that, at the 
moment, promotion to a management function is the only public recognition a 
staff member can expect or strive for, which may encourage some to follow the 
management route even though they are temperamentally less suited.

What you’re suggesting is the creation of a new title (perhaps no more than 
the addition of the word “senior” to an existing title) that publicly 
distinguishes those who make a significantly greater commercial contribution. 
Say you hope this would provide an additional incentive to those, such as 
yourself, who hope to progress not through ever-greater management 
responsibility but through ever-greater income generation.

Make it absolutely clear that you just believe that such an addition to 
existing internal signs of recognition could be of considerable benefit. You 
stand a good chance of a favourable response.

Readers say 

• Circumstances change in firms, so new recruits may get better deals. Often 
we carve out new roles (and enjoy doing so), and when we move on to new 
challenges others may benefit. You knew yourself well enough to choose quality 
of life over admin, which was brave.

It sounds to me like there is more to you than your job. Enjoy life, and if 
your nose is rubbed in your colleague’s success then leave. It is a big world 
out there.jjal44

• You need to swallow your pride. I work for an investment bank and it is 
often difficult for younger people to lead senior members. Try to be 
professional and learn from that team member rather than complain.Fulhamred

• I made this choice 10 years ago having been a manager for many years and 
became a full-time consultant. While it felt odd for a while, I am now 
appreciated for my experience and knowledge (I am 61), the amount of earnings I 
bring in, and my ability to mentor and train new employees.Markanthony2

How can I attract more customers as I try to build my Tefl business?

I am a self-employed Tefl <https://www.theguardian.com/education/tefl> teacher 
in London. I set up my business in 2012 and have been working hard on my 
website and blog. I really enjoy what I do, but the problem is that I don’t get 
that many inquiries because my website isn’t in the first few pages of Google.

I advertise through Gumtree but it’s £100 a week for a featured ad. I’ve tried 
Google adwords but it’s also very pricey. How can I advertise or get funding to 
build my business.

Jeremy says

You shouldn’t be looking to raise more money until you know what you plan to 
spend it on. As you’ve discovered, search engine optimisation (or SEO) can be 
an expensive business. There are outfits online that offer to give your website 
more prominence for relatively little outlay. I’ve no idea if they deliver and 
maybe you’ve tried them. If not, you might give them a cautious look. My own 
suggestion is far more primitive but certainly a lot cheaper, and is based on 
the fact you’re not looking for vast numbers of students.

You will know better than I do the areas of London where foreign students tend 
to congregate. You’ll also know which nationalities they tend to be. I suggest 
you publicise your website – and your phone number – on good old-fashioned 
postcards displayed (for very little money) in newsagents and other shop 
windows in the most promising areas. Write in the languages of the students 
whose business you were hoping to attract. It will involve quite a bit of 
initial legwork, but you should find out within a month or so whether it’s 
working.

Readers say 

• Word of mouth is always good, so encourage current students to recommend you 
to a friend – maybe offer a discount if they do (10% for bringing someone new 
in).Tippingpoi

• On funding, there may be small grants from charities or local authorities if 
you can phrase your proposal along the lines of: this is for the community/to 
help integration/to support women who are blocked from independence/employment 
due to lack of English language skills etc.christinej

• Tefl teachers tend to go overseas to teach English. Foreign students who 
come to England to learn English tend to go to language schools.

I do have one suggestion, however, and that is to explore foreign companies in 
the UK which may want an English teacher to visit and give lessons.Heliopower 

Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a 
brief email todear.jeremy@theguardian.com <mailto:dear.jeremy@theguardian.com>. 
Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply 
personally.
 