
US defense secretary Ash Carter arrived in Baghdad on Sunday to meet American 
commanders and Iraqi leaders and to assess progress in the fight to retake the 
northern city of Mosul from Islamic State militants.

US to send 200 more troops to Syria to bolster Raqqa assault
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/us-to-send-up-to-200-more-troops-to-syria-to-help-fight-against-isis>
The unannounced visit came as Iraqi security forces have been slowed in their 
nearly two-month-old offensive against Isis, which has occupied Mosul for more 
than two years.

Carter flew into Baghdad aboard a military cargo plane. He was scheduled to 
meet with the prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, as well as top US and coalition 
commanders.

In Bahrain on Saturday, Carter announced he was sending another 200 troops to 
Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/us-to-send-up-to-200-more-troops-to-syria-to-help-fight-against-isis>
 to train and advise local fighters combatting Isis. There were already 300 US 
troops authorized for the Syria effort, and some 5,000 in Iraq.

The recapture of Mosul, the country’s second-largest city, is crucial to Iraqi 
hopes of restoring sovereignty, although political stability will probably 
remain a challenge.

Carter told an international security conference in Bahrain that the battle 
for Mosul and for the Syrian city of Raqqa, the de facto capital of the 
extremists’ self-described caliphate, would be crucial for defeating the group, 
which has claimed attacks worldwide.

“The seizure of these two cities is necessary to ensure the destruction of 
Isil’s parent tumor inIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and Syria – 
the primary objective of our military campaign — and put Isil on an 
irreversible path to a lasting defeat,” he said, using another acronym for Isis.

He did not predict how long it might take for Iraqi forces to prevail in 
Mosul, but he sounded a note of optimism.

“This is a complex mission that will take time to accomplish, but I am 
confident that Isil’s days in Mosul are numbered,” he said in Bahrain.

Iraqi forces have only captured a handful of eastern Mosul neighborhoods since 
launching the offensive in mid-October. On Sunday they came under mortar fire 
as they worked to clear villages along the Tigris river to the south, part of 
operations to secure supply lines for a campaign that is likely to stretch into 
the coming year.

Carter, whose tenure as defense secretary will end in January if his 
designated successor – the retired marine general James Mattis – is confirmed 
by the Senate as expected, also made the case for keeping US forces in Iraq 
even after Isis is dislodged from Mosul.

“Beyond security, there will still be towns to rebuild, services to 
re-establish, and communities to restore,” he said in Bahrain. The extremists, 
he predicted, would attempt to survive by reinventing themselves “in some other 
shape or form” after they lose their grip on Iraq and Syria.

Left unsaid was a possible change in course under Donald Trump when he takes 
office next month.
 