
In the cavernous assembly hall at Victor public school in the Delhi suburb of 
Shahdara, hundreds of pupils sit cross-legged on the floor to watch a story 
about seven-year-old Komal.

Komal’s parents become friendly with a new neighbour. He treats her 
affectionately and her parents tell her to call him Bakshi Uncle. He gives her 
sweets. He plays hide-and-seek with her. Then he plays another “game” that 
leaves her feeling dirty. The video concludes with an explanation about the 
difference between “good” and “bad” touches.

Two female police officers then talk to the children about sex and sexual 
abuse.

The session is part of Project Nirbheek (meaning fearless in Hindi), launched 
in 556 schools in the north-east district of the city in August last year to 
raise awareness of child abuse and give youngsters a safe environment in which 
to speak out.

A new financial bond is helping us get more girls into schools in India
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/05/new-financial-bond-helping-us-get-more-girls-into-schools-india-education>
As well as the video and weekly visits by police officers, children can 
confidentially post any experiences of abuse or concerns they have in dropboxes 
installed in each school.

India has laws against child abuse <http://The Protection of Children from 
Sexual Offences Act, 2012>, but implementation and knowledge of them are 
problematic.

“I realised we had to take the law into the classroom and create an atmosphere 
that allows children to invoke the law, otherwise the laws are pointless,” says 
the deputy commissioner of police, Veenu Bansal, who devised the project.

In the first six months, the police received more than 5,000 written and 
verbal complaints of abuse. Encouraged by the overwhelming response, Delhi 
police extended the programme to all schools in the capital.

“For the first time, children have a non-frightening way of reporting abuse in 
the familiar environment of school,” says Mukesh Kumari, one of the police 
officers visiting Victor public school.

Many of the children tell her that they thought adults would punish them if 
they talked about such “shameful” things. “Even I felt uneasy at first. It’s 
just not something we Indians talk about,” says Kumari.

During the session, many pupils look embarrassed. “In our house we don’t talk 
about such things. My father would slap me if I talked about this,” says 
12-year-old Neelam Sharma.

'How can a girl become a taxi driver?': defying India's caste and gender taboos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/08/india-dalit-how-can-a-girl-become-a-taxi-driver-defying-caste-gender-taboos>
But others were less timid. Two girls speak to Kumari and her colleague, 
Preeti Tomar, to complain about rowdy youths standing outside the school gates 
as they leave, directing obscenities at them. Another says she doesn’t like the 
way the auto-rickshaw driver who drives her home insists she sit close to him 
even when there is space on the back seat.

Across the city, one or two female police officers visit a school every week, 
wearing a Nirbheek armband. The police have so far interacted with more than 1 
million children and installed complaint boxes in more than 1,500 schools.

Stalking, lewd comments by shopkeepers, inappropriate behaviour by 
auto-rickshaw drivers, and youths loitering outside the school propositioning 
girls are common complaints.

In many cases, it is relatively easy for the police to take prompt action 
against the lesser forms of harassment. If it’s a stalker, a visit to his home 
to speak to his family usually works. An auto-rickshaw driver can be warned. If 
it’s a teacher, the school authorities act to discipline, suspend or sack him. 
The more serious cases require a police investigation. The police have filed 
formal charges in 11 cases of sexual abuse so far in the north-east district 
alone.

The only statistics on child sex abuse 
<http://www.childlineindia.org.in/pdf/MWCD-Child-Abuse-Report.pdf> (pdf) in 
India are from a 2007 government survey that showed half of children under the 
age of 18 had suffered some form of sex abuse, ranging from rape to fondling 
and forced kissing.

“I think the 2007 figure is an eye-opener and the actual problem may be much 
larger,” Bansal says. “From what I see, a very large number of girls face abuse 
at some stage in their lives. It’s grim. It happens under everyone’s nose. How 
can we let our girls, one-quarter of our population, be damaged for life by 
sexual abuse?”

Bansal enlisted the support of the Recovery and Healing from Incest Foundation 
(Rahi) <http://www.rahifoundation.org/>, an NGO that works with child abuse 
survivors to train police officers. About 500 have been trained so far.


“It has to be handled sensitively because the social and family dynamics can 
be so complex. They need to understand these aspects because it will shape 
their response. It’s great that the police are not waiting for cases to be 
registered but are being proactive,” says Rahi’s founder, Anuja Gupta.

Tomar admits to being deeply distressed hearing some complaints. “A father had 
been raping his daughter for years. When she told her mother, the mother said, 
‘Just the way I’ve tolerated these things, you will have to tolerate it too.’ 
After the girl reported the abuse through the dropbox, the mother tried to 
force her to withdraw it but the girl refused,” she says.

Why is the rape crisis in rural India passing under the radar? | Priya Virmani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/06/why-is-the-crisis-in-rural-india-passing-under-the-radar>
In another case, says Bansal, a maths teacher had been assaulting girls for 
many years, touching them inappropriately when alone in the classroom. After 
two girls put a complaint in the dropbox, the other teachers sided with him and 
tried to bully the girls into retracting the allegation. But the police 
contacted ex-pupils who said they would testify against the teacher even if the 
two girls retracted their statements. The teacher is in police custody.

The success of Nirbheek in Delhi has come to the attention of Maneka Gandhi, 
minister for women and child development, and plans are being made to roll it 
out nationallyusing e-dropboxes 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Soon-an-e-dropbox-for-kids-to-report-abuse/articleshow/52931133.cms>
, which will be hosted on theNational Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
website <http://ncpcr.gov.in/>. 

Critics, though, say it’s not the police’s job to talk about sex abuse, and 
argue for sex education in schools 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Sex-education-in-schools-should-be-banned-Union-health-minister-Harsh-Vardhan-says/articleshow/37274947.cms>
.

Sex education <https://www.theguardian.com/education/sexeducation> is banned 
in 13 states and non-existent in the remaining 16. Because of ignorance, 
children usually don’t even know they are being abused. And the cultural 
pressure to respect and obey older relatives adds to their reluctance to speak 
out.
 