
Democratic members of Congress called on Monday for the creation of an 
independent commission to investigate Russia’s attempts to intervene in the 
2016 election, similar to the September 11 panel that investigated the 2001 
attacks on the US.

 Their Protecting our Democracy Act would create a 12-member, bipartisan 
independent panel to interview witnesses, obtain documents, issue subpoenas and 
receive public testimony to examine attempts by Moscow and any other entities 
to influence the election.

 The panel members would not be members of Congress.

 The legislation is one of many calls by lawmakers to look into Russian 
involvement in the contest, in which Republican Donald Trump defeated Democrat 
Hillary Clinton in the White House race, confounding opinion polls. Republicans 
also kept control of the Senate and House of Representatives by 
larger-than-expected margins.

US intelligence agencies on Friday released a report saying that President 
Vladimir Putin ofRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> ordered an 
effort to help Trump’s electoral chances by discrediting Clinton.

 Russia has denied the hacking allegations. A Kremlin spokesman said on Monday 
they were “reminiscent of a witch-hunt”.

Russia slates 'baseless, amateurish' US election hacking report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/vladimir-putin-slates-baseless-amateurish-us-election-hacking-report>
 “There is no question that Russia attacked us,” Senator Ben Cardin, the top 
Democrat on the Senate foreign relations committee, told a news conference.

 Versions of the bill were introduced in both the Senate and House. In the 
Senate it has 10 sponsors. In the House it is backed by every member of the 
Democratic caucus, said Congressman Elijah Cummings, the top Democrat on the 
House oversight committee.

 However, no Republicans currently back the bill so its prospects are dim, 
given Republican control of both houses of Congress.

 While a few Republicans, notably senators Lindsey Graham and John McCain, 
have supported calls for an independent investigation, party leaders have 
resisted the idea, saying that investigations by Republican-led congressional 
committees are sufficient.

McCain and Democratic senators Ben Cardin and Robert Menendez said on Monday 
they would introduce legislation to impose “comprehensive” sanctions on Russia 
over its attempts to influence the 2016 US election.

Democratic senator Amy Klobuchar, who just returned from a trip to the Baltic 
states, Ukraine and Georgia with Graham and McCain, said Russia’s actions 
justified an investigation by an independent panel of national experts.

 “This is not just about one political party. It’s not even about one 
election. It’s not even about one country, our country. It is a repeated 
attempt … around the world, to influence elections,” Klobuchar said.

 After September 11, 2001, Congress established an independent commission to 
look into the attacks and make recommendations about how to prevent similar 
actions in the future. Many of the recommendations were adopted into law.

 “The American people felt good about what they did,” Cummings said. 
 