
The Conservatives like to sell the public a promise: do “the right thing” – 
work hard, look after your family, pay your taxes – and in tough times, the 
welfare state will be there for you. But here’s a snapshot of what could happen 
to any one of us if bad luck hit. Denise, has been a nurse for the best part of 
30 years, but since she became too ill to work, she’s been left to live without 
sickness benefits for five months and counting.

Denise, now 48, trained as a mental health nurse straight out of school and 
tells me she has worked all her life. It wasn’t easy. In her mid twenties she 
was diagnosed with bipolar disorder, and by her thirties, as she raised a young 
son in Leicester, she developedfibromyalgia 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Fibromyalgia/Pages/Introduction.aspx>. With it 
came pain and exhaustion: each joint hurt to move, and for months she needed a 
wheelchair and hospital car to see a specialist. “At times, I actually crawled 
on my hands and knees to attempt to make us a meal,” she says.

Over the next 15 years, Denise did what many with long-term illnesses will be 
all too familiar with: she pushed herself to keep working – going part-time to 
try to manage her bipolar, pain and fatigue. When things were at their worst 
(in 2011, she had major surgery on her spine), she lived off the out-of-work 
sickness benefit, employment and support allowance.

Last winter, again, Denise tried to work. After being on ESA for almost three 
years, she felt well enough to move to Bristol to be near her partner and take 
a job nursing in a women’s secure hospital. But after eight weeks, the impact 
of the work on her mental health was too much (“helping pregnant women with 
psychiatric problems … it was very emotional,” she says) and she had to give it 
up. She got by on company sick pay – half her wage – for three months, but by 
April she was earning nothing at all.

It’s deeply shaming to have to prove to the state you’re still disabled | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/we-cant-help-being-disabled-reassessment-hysteria-scroungers-cheating-system>
Ask most politicians and this is exactly when they’d say the safety net would 
kick in. But when Denise contacted the Department for Work and Pensions to say 
she’d had to leave her job, she was told she was no longer eligible for 
out-of-sickness benefits – despite receiving them only four months earlier. 
Because she’d been off the benefit for more than 12 weeks, in the mire of DWP 
rules, technically Denise was making a “new claim”, judged on a different tax 
year – meaning the DWP could now rule her as not having enough national 
insurance points to get the benefit.

Worse, Denise was told she wasn’t eligible for the alternative either – the 
type of ESA based on income, rather than NI contributions. Why? Because she was 
now living with her boyfriend.

In another rarely publicised DWP rule, if a sick or disabled person shares a 
home with a partner, the fact that their partner earns a wage can be used to 
rule them out of sickness benefits (the income threshold varies). When I 
contacted the DWP, it confirmed: “Claims for ESA are assessed against a number 
of circumstances including living arrangements, income and national insurance 
contributions.”

That means that people like Denise – who the government are fully aware are 
too unwell to work – are effectively shut out from social security.

“I put my trust in the DWP,” Denise says. “I wouldn’t have taken a job if I’d 
known there wasn’t a safety net if I became ill again.”

Since April, with no sickness benefit, Denise’s only income has been her 
disability living allowance – which she needs to pay for the extra costs that 
come with bad health. As she puts it: “It’s meant to pay for taxis [to 
hospital], not bills and food.” But even that’s been cut now: when the 
government abolished DLA and transferred her topersonal independence payments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/pip-disaster-disabled-access-report-benefits>
 in May, she lost part of her benefit. Now she’s living off just £82.30 a week. 
“It’s horrific,” she says, and she’s becoming withdrawn and isolated.

When an employer won’t hire you and the state won’t help you, to be sick or 
disabled simply means having no income

Her partner has a decent wage as a transport contractor – fine for one but not 
easy to stretch for two – and besides, she says, it’s “awful” when he’s forced 
to pay for everything. “It’s not like we’re married. We don’t have a joint bank 
account,” she says. “I don’t like having to say, ‘can I have a money for a 
haircut, or for tampons?’”

As an insight into just what sick and disabled people are up against, Denise 
has been trying to find a nursing job this summer – one with less stress – but 
when she told an employer about her bipolar disorder, a medical report judged 
her as unfit for work and the job offer was withdrawn. She’s been “scrabbling 
together” information from the mental health charityMind 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/> to know her rights, and has put in a request to see 
if the employer will accept changes such as shorter shifts – but if it refuses, 
she has no way of paying the legal fees to take it to court.

When an employer won’t hire you and the state won’t help you, to be sick or 
disabled in Britain simply means having no income. Denise has adapted over the 
years to living on very little – “because I’ve had to”, she explains – but 
things have never been this bad.

“For anyone to go through this when they’re already ill … just to live, you 
really think at times like this you’re going to be protected by the government. 
But you’re not.”
 