 The funeral of Scotland's first minister, Donald Dewar, will take place next 
Wednesday in Glasgow, the city of his birth.
Mr Dewar's family had hoped for a private ceremony but were said to have been 
moved by the outpouring of grief at his death and had acknowledged the need for 
a public farewell. The setting will be Glasgow Cathedral. It is likely to be 
one of the largest funeralsScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> 
has ever seen.

Tributes have continued to flood in for Mr Dewar who died in hospital on 
Wednesday from a brain haemorrhage at the age of 63.

Flags across Scotland are at half-mast and condolence books have been filled 
with messages of warmth and sorrow.

The Liberal Democrat leader, Charles Kennedy, was among the first to sign a 
condolence book in the Scottish parliament building yesterday. He left a simple 
statement: "In affection, respect and gratitude."

Bouquets have also been left outside Bute House, Mr Dewar's official residence 
in Edinburgh, where he took the tumble on Tuesday that led to his death.

President Clinton sent a message of support to Mr Dewar's family, and in 
London, ministers held a minute's silence in memory of Mr Dewar when they 
gathered for the cabinet meeting. The prime minister told them that while there 
would be other occasions to mark Mr Dewar's life, they should stand in silence 
in memory of his "contribution to the country, parliament, the cabinet, the
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party and the people of 
Scotland".

Later today the Scottish parliament will reconvene from the autumn recess for 
a special sitting to remember Mr Dewar. Tributes will be led by the leaders of 
the opposition parties and the public has been invited to take part.

The parliament now has 27 days to approve the person who will take over the 
leadership of the devolved body - a timeframe written into the Scotland Act by 
Mr Dewar. If the deadline is not met, the parliament would be dissolved.

The Scottish Labour party, however, must use an electoral college to decide 
who its new leader and nominee for first minister is to be, and party sources 
say it will be difficult to do in the time available.

Immediately following Mr Dewar's death there was talk of a sole candidate, 
most probably the enterprise minister, Henry McLeish, being put forward to 
avoid a bitter succession battle. However, supporters of the finance minister, 
Jack McConnell, another front-runner, were said to have dismissed that idea.

Yesterday, there were suggestions that Labour may pick an interim leader who 
would become first minister within the deadline. There would then be a full 
leadership contest to confirm or overturn the appointment.

In the meantime, the deputy first minister, Jim Wallace, of the Liberal 
Democrats, has stepped in to act as first minister until the 28-day deadline is 
up.

Two further members of the Scottish cabinet have also been named as possible 
contenders for the post; the health minister, Susan Deacon, and the communities 
minister, Wendy Alexander. It is unlikely, however, that any will throw their 
hat into the ring until Mr Dewar has been buried.

There will also have to be byelections for Mr Dewar's Anniesland constituency. 

It emerged yesterday that Mr Dewar had left orders that his organs be used for 
transplant following his death. His family is said to have honoured his wishes

He had been on a life support machine at Edinburgh's Western general hospital 
after losing consciousness at 7pm on Tuesday .
 