
There is an accepted principle in cinema that, since the sequel always 
outstrips the original in box office sales, all successful films must be 
traduced by cupidity in the making of a mark two (exceptions, of course:Star 
Wars, Toy Story). This applies, too, to bestselling books, but the difference 
is that books often sell well for peculiar and unique reasons. An original idea 
– narrated S&M, for example, or radical tidiness – can never have the same 
impact again, because an idea cannot be novel twice. EL James redidFifty Shades 
of Grey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fifty-shades-of-grey> twice over 
anyway, and there was a cynicism to it. Good luck to her, frankly; the 
publishing industry ignored her for a long time, and the offer of untold riches 
must have seemed like sweet revenge.Spark Joy, by Marie Kondo, is different. 
She is cashing in, she can’t not be, and yet remains possessed by a zealot’s 
righteousness, so that, if anything, her philosophy is delivered with even more 
conviction than it was the first time.

Kondo’s first book, The Life Changing Magic of Tidying, sold 5m copies, having 
come out in English in 2014. With energetic rigidity, she spelled out her 
terms: there’s no point tidying a bit. There’s no point cleaning before you 
tidy. There are no half measures. Everything in your home must bring you joy 
and, if it doesn’t, bin it. Be ruthless with your sloppy side. Imagine your 
ideal home and, if it has no stuff in it, you could achieve that home by 
getting rid of your stuff.Spark Joy, her follow-up, was published at the 
beginning of this year, and has since boosted her total sales to more than 6m. 
It makes no claims to originality; she hasn’t diversified into mind-tidying or 
decluttering your lower intestine (and indeed, it’s hard to see how she could 
have done, since by her rationale, a tidy home is a tidy everything). Instead, 
this is “in-depth” and “illustrated”, which is to say, “the same, with 
pictures”.

Kondo’s repetitiveness is beyond shameless, she does it with gusto. “Finish 
discarding first,” she writes at the start of chapter two ofSpark Joy, “I’m 
sure you know by now that this is a cardinal rule of the KonMari method.” Well, 
yes. Not only because it was the substantive principle of the first book, but 
also because it was explored at length in the first 20 pages of this one. But 
does it work?

To treat our minds like our crud-filled apartments, let’s start with paring 
the KonMari method to its bare essentials: you cannot be tidy for life until 
you have done one defining tidy, which may take you many months. Pick up 
everything you own and ask whether or not it brings you joy. Do it by typology 
and not by room – clothes, books,komono (miscellany), sentimental items. You 
will be left, if you have anything resembling functional joy-judgment, with 
very little stuff, which will be brilliant for your house.

In the first book, there was a charming memoir element: the recollections of a 
person totally without self-awareness – who learns to tidy first by chucking 
out her own stuff, then by chucking out all her sister’s stuff – is astonished 
to find that her sister doesn’t like that very much and, while utterly 
unrepentant, decides for efficiency to refine her methods by concentrating on 
her own stuff. But there was also a fascinating practicality to it; a way to 
pack (rolling up clothes, for instance, for a bird’s-eye view) that was 
satisfying. For 15 minutes, it is quite fun. Then the joy filter fails: tights 
don’t bring me joy. But if I didn’t have any, that would bring me a lot of 
un-joy. Indeed, if I chucked out everything but joy-generating clothing, I 
would be left with one cardigan and I would have to stay in.

She is cashing in yet remains pos­sessed by a zealot’s righteousness, her 
philosophy delivered with even more conviction

So naturally, now I have to redefine “joy”, and here I would have a lot in 
common with Kondo, who redraws boundaries ceaselessly to uphold her creed. It’s 
not a “rebound”, it’s “temporary clutter”. It doesn’t have to be “joy”, it can 
be an item so useful that you find joy in its use (in one memorable anecdote 
fromSpark Joy, she throws out her screwdriver because it’s not joyful enough, 
then breaks her ruler trying to use it as a screwdriver). “This almost reduced 
me to tears, as it was one I really liked.” Well, obviously; all the ones you 
didn’t really like, you’d already thrown out. If you are a very fastidious 
person, using a treasured tool for a totally inappropriate task seems to me to 
be a recipe for unhappiness. An unforgettable tip of Kondo’s from the first 
book is to empty your handbag at the end of each day, wrap it in some nonsense 
fabric as a mark of respect, and give yourself the gift of tidying all the 
stuff you just evicted. When I read this, I speculatively put my hand to the 
bottom of my handbag and found a cocktail sausage, whereupon I did what any 
normal person would do and popped it in my mouth. All I mean to convey by this 
is that some people are starting a lot farther away from Kondo than she could 
imagine.

Spark Joy extends the original proposition partly with diagrams (the 
clothes-books-komono-sentimental rule has been audaciously padded out with 
naive drawings of the items), partly with philosophising (the god of tidying 
will never desert you), and partly with further explication. Tidying relates to 
objects, cleaning relates to dirt. There is a fascination in other people’s 
domestic arrangements that goes beyond any interest in interiors, but I’m not 
sure that we delve entirely for the purposes of self-improvement.

You’ll have noticed the flaw; this person has written a book about ridding 
yourself of extraneous stuff that is, itself, utterly extraneous. The brass 
neck of it brings me a complicated joy. I think I’ll keep it.
 