
It takes a brave man to take a shot at a national treasure, and they don’t 
come any more treasured than David Attenborough, so hats off to Martin 
Hughes-Games for bravery (Why Planet Earth II should have been taxed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/01/bbc-planet-earth-not-help-natural-world>
, 2 January). But I fear he’s wrong. He says programmes like Planet Earth II 
lull us “into a false sense of security” as wildlife species are decimated 
across the globe. That is almost certainly correct, but one thing we’ve learned 
from last year’s EU referendum is that ordinary people just don’t listen to 
“experts” lecturing them about unfolding, manmade disasters. Planet Earth II, 
with its beauty and grandeur, and, yes, entertainment value, takes a subtle 
approach worthy of the most sophisticated advertising campaign: it says, look 
at this marvellous planet, do you really want to allow its destruction?
Peter Lyth
Hockerton, Nottinghamshire

• At last, someone has dared to say it. I strongly agree with Martin 
Hughes-Games with reference to the series Planet Earth I and II. Presenting 
these programmes was a man who has integrity, presence and an attractive air of 
authority. People admire him and listen to him. SirDavid Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough> was (and is) in 
an almost unique position to tell it as it is, not how we would all like it to 
be. These nature programmes were brilliantly produced with extremely skilful 
photography and, yes, it was great entertainment. But unfortunately it told a 
very cosy story with scant allusion to what is really happening. Ignorance, 
greed, unsupportable population growth of our species and a curious assumption 
that we can trash the planet without consequences. There is only one point on 
which I would disagree with Hughes-Games. In 100 years’ time, I don’t believe 
anyone will be thinking or caring about wildlife. By then, it may well be 
apparent that the journey towards our own extinction had begun in earnest. 
Probably far too late to exit la-la land.
Carol Knight
Tisbury, Wiltshire

• Martin Hughes-Games’ claim that Planet Earth II has done nothing to further 
global conservation gets to the heart of the problem with the BBC Natural 
History Unit, that its programmes are made with money, ratings and global sales 
in mind rather than conservation. It is a sad fact that in over 50 years of 
making wonderful wildlife programmes, it has never made a globally successful 
big budget series about our destruction of the natural world, despite the unit 
generating huge profits for the BBC. This has been a big disappointment to the 
global conservation movement who regularly bring the issue up privately but are 
reluctant to criticise the BBC publicly. In September the BBCappointed Julian 
Hector as the head of the unit 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2016/julian-hector-nhu>, a 
producer who has made his name making very traditional wildlife programmes but 
who also made the Ivory Wars with Panorama, a hard-hitting programme about the 
decline of the elephant. It is exactly this type of unique partnership that the 
BBC Natural History Unit now needs to invest in, and to make it happen 
conservation organisations should write to Hector in support of Hughes-Games’ 
idea of a “conservation tax” on its programmes.
Nicholas Milton
Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire

• Congratulations to Martin Hughes-Games for putting his head above the 
parapet in criticising the wonderfully produced and fascinating Attenborough 
series as “escapist wildlife fantasy”. I have been a professional biologist for 
40 years, but am still not sure what “wildlife” is. I think it harks back to 
Rousseau and romantic ideas of primitiveness. There was just about no ecosystem 
unaffected by humans before anthropogenic climate change came as a “double 
whammy”. I have also occasionally criticised the philosophy behind these series 
to my biologist colleagues, and am generally faced with disbelief.

My criticism is different. The programmes follow the Animal Planet view of 
biodiversity and nature, where living things are almost entirely made up of 
large animals and land plants. The vast majority of the genetic biodiversity on 
earth is microscopic, and the former view is overwhelmingly widespread but 
completely skewed. Of the dozens of major groups of living things, animals are 
one and land plants are part of another.

I would like to offer two sets of New Year challenges.

First, to David Attenborough and his team, to produce a similarly wonderful 
series on Microscopic Life on Earth.

Second, to top billionaire entrepreneurs and futurologists (Mr Branson and Mr 
Musk, are you listening?). We can now buy simple “digital microscopes” for 
about £100 that can easily view insect parts. Within the next couple of years 
can you make widely available a digital compound microscope for less than £50, 
which can view single-celled organisms? Every home should have one. That can be 
followed a few years later with a home DNA sequencer, so that the 2027 
Christmas party game can be: how many different types of living things do you 
have in your kitchen/plantpots/toenails/pond?
John J Bolton
Professor of biological sciences, University of Cape Town

• So Martin Hughes-Games has gained publicity for himself by traducing David 
Attenborough: how shabby. Having just watched Islands on DVD, I hardly 
recognise the picture Hughes-Games gives. The subtext throughout David 
Attenborough’s commentary is the fragility of all ecosystems and, in the case 
of an island crab population decimated by ants, he actually states in so many 
words that humans have introduced the problem and will have to find the 
solution. .
Joanna Bazley
London

• Martin Hughes-Games cites humankind’s insatiable need for space as the prime 
factor behind wildlife extinctions. It was a pity that neither his article or
your accompanying story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/01/planet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-martin-hughes-games-bbc-springwatch>
 on the same day linked it with humankind’s equivalent need for contraception 
to be freely available. Impoverished countries cannot become better off while 
their birthrates are too high. Some of our own reluctance to accept refugees 
surely has to do with our own loss of countryside and wildlife.

We should look to see, first, whether planned cuts to local authority finding 
threaten our own family planning services; second, whether all charities 
serving third world countries include it where relevant; and, thirdly, how much 
more international aid could be given to it and maternal and child health 
services.

It is not often that so many problems could be eased by one, and such an 
easily provided, solution.
Helen Haran
St Albans, Hertfordshire

• Martin Hughes-Games makes an important point about the “fantasy” view of the 
natural world. I would like to add two points. If programme-makers are going to 
adopt a more realistic and pessimistic tone at times, then please also tell us 
what we as individuals can do to help. I can no longer watch natural history 
programmes because I feel hopeless and helpless, which isn’t a very productive 
situation. I’d also like to make the rather obvious point that it’s not just 
cheetahs and giraffes that we should worry about. Each time we in the UK turn 
grass, soil and woodland into brick and concrete we too leave less room for the 
bees, rooks, moles and their food supplies.
Neil Blessitt
Bristol

• Martin Hughes-Games is extremely critical of the BBC production Planet Earth 
II <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/planet-earth-ii> for not 
emphasising the disastrous worldwide mass extinction taking place. He makes the 
extraordinary claim that these programmes are “a significant contributor to the 
planet-wide extinction of wildlife we’re presiding over”.

There is no scientific evidence to support this statement. Others claim that 
such amazing programmes can increase people’s interest in conservation but Mr 
Hughes-Games says that “the scientific evidence shows this is nonsense”.

The idea that blame for the complex issue of destruction of habitat and the 
loss of species can be attributed to TV wildlife shows is in itself a 
profoundly unscientific concept. This is at best, speculation on his part.

In fact, most wildlife productions over the past few decades have more than 
emphasised the depressing loss of our natural world. So why does it continue? 
Perhaps just giving people depressing statistics about this disaster has not 
been helpful. Making them feel guilty, miserable and helpless may in fact 
demotivate and cause loss of interest.

It seems to me that to enable people to act, they need to be inspired and 
Planet Earth II certainly achieved that.

After the inspiration, you can then start to mobilise. Only with positive 
messages can we turn this around.
Dr Maureen Tilford
Norwich

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 