
Whether it’s anxiety about paying the bills, guilt at spending, or feelings of 
inadequacy over our income, polls frequently show money to be a leading source 
of worry, and one of the main causes of rows between couples. Even the rich 
aren’t immune, according to Capgemini’s annualWorld Wealth Report 
<https://www.worldwealthreport.com>, with top concerns for millionaires in 2015 
ranging from how they will maintain their lifestyle to whether their offspring 
will mismanage their inheritances.

So how do we make peace with our bank statements and instead spend the wee 
hours calmly contemplating whether that car alarm will ever stop? The answer, 
at least according to some, lies not in spreadsheets and interest calculators, 
but in financial therapy. A burgeoning field in the US, where the five-year-old
Financial Therapy Association <http://www.financialtherapyassociation.org/> 
counts more than 250 members, financial therapy combines traditional financial 
advice with a more touchy-feely psychological exploration of what is driving a 
client’s behaviour towards money.

It doesn’t come cheaply, of course, but financial therapists say we should 
think twice before rolling our eyes: they claim our emotional issues around 
money could be the exact reason we don’t have more cash to pay our bills.

They say the way we treat money is influenced less by logic and more by 
deep-seated beliefs that we are often unaware we hold. We may grow up watching 
our parents struggle with money and subconsciously develop negative, fearful 
emotions towards it, for example.

How to survive the January sales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/26/secrets-of-the-january-sales-revealed>
Low self-esteem can lead to the self-fulfilling prophecy that we will never 
make enough to be comfortable. “The obstacles that keep us from having more and 
being more are rooted in the emotional, psychological and spiritual conditions 
that have shaped our thoughts,” writes US financial expert Suze Orman in The 
Road to Wealth: A Comprehensive Guide to Your Money. “In other words, what we 
have begins with what we think.”

Financial therapists aim to identify and tackle a client’s psychological 
“blocks” about money through a mixture of established therapy techniques, such 
as asking them to recall early memories or write down word associations, and 
classic financial planning tools such as balance sheets and cash flows.

Practitioners tend to come from backgrounds that include psychology, marriage 
or family therapy, mental health, social work and financial planning, and what 
they offer depends on their training. A psychologist won’t necessarily be able 
to advise on Isas, for instance.

The practice has yet to make it to Britain – although Kristy Archuleta, 
president of the Financial Therapy Association, believes it is only a matter of 
time – but financial coaches such as Simonne Gnessen tread similar ground. The 
co-author ofSheconomics <http://www.sheconomics.com/who-are-we.html> and 
founder of Brighton’sWise Monkey Financial Coaching 
<http://www.financial-coaching.co.uk/>, Gnessen came to coaching via a course 
in neurolinguistic programming.

A petite woman with natural warmth, she had learned from her earlier, 10-year 
career as a financial adviser that traditional advice often doesn’t go far 
enough. “The financial industry tends to work on the basis that people are 
functional with money,” she says, with a wry smile. “You earn, you save a 
proportion, you always have the future in mind. In my experience, that isn’t 
the case and most of us are actually a bit dysfunctional.”

Financial coaching addresses the reasons we don’t always treat money in the 
way we should, identifying unhelpful patterns of behaviour and challenging 
attitudes we may have unknowingly developed over the years. Gnessen’s clients’ 
concerns range from debt to retirement, worries about providing for family to 
feelings of guilt about “undeserved” inheritances.

The reality of someone’s financial situation often has little bearing on their 
feelings about it, she says. “I’ve sat down with clients who will never run out 
of money in their lifetimes – and have the bank statements to prove it – yet 
I’ve had to reassure them again and again that they’re not going to end up 
destitute. The main issue from my point of view is whether someone’s money 
behaviour is supporting or hindering them – and if it’s hindering them, how can 
we change that?”

Sitting opposite Gnessen in her peaceful mews house office, I tentatively 
begin to describe my own feelings towards money. It’s possibly the first time 
I’ve ever discussed the subject from an emotional perspective and as we talk, I 
realise my attitudes are far from neutral, mainly oscillating between anxiety 
and an ill-advised recklessness.

Gnessen says she can understand the recklessness – it’s a time-honoured 
release from the exertion of self-control – but is curious about where the 
anxiety stems from. The idea someone wouldn’t be at least a little anxious 
about money is new to me, perhaps highlighting just how deep-seated the 
attitude is. When pressed, I identify debt, the precarious nature of freelance 
work and the prohibitive cost of living, but it strikes me that it’s something 
I’ve felt since the days when I only had my weekly pocket money to manage.

I think of money as an abstract concept, yet it’s inherently bound up with 
negative feelings. Although we start to unpick the reasons for this, I’m less 
interested in where the attitude has come from than how it’s holding me back 
and what I can do to overcome it.

Gnessen believes my worry about money is leading to some poor decisions in how 
I manage it. The debt I’ve accrued over years of renting in expensive cities 
and living slightly beyond my modest means is, at under £10,000, far from 
insurmountable, but it causes me grief. The solution is clearly to pay it off, 
but it’s not quite happening and Gnessen thinks this is related to my negative 
feelings about the situation.

I make hefty monthly repayments because they make me feel better initially 
(I’m tackling this problem!) but on an unpredictable freelance income they 
often end up leading to cashflow problems and more borrowing further down the 
line; cue more worry.

She suggests that instead of reacting to the anxiety the debt causes me by 
trying to pay it off quickly, I should instead focus on a more sustainable goal 
such as not accruing any new debt. I could then use the money “saved” by making 
more manageable repayments to build up an emergency pot I can draw on when 
times are tight, rather than resorting to more borrowing. The point, Gnessen 
says, is to balance the see-saw of emotions that accompanies the cycle of debt 
and repayment and encourage calmer, more rational financial behaviour.

Gnessen also thinks I have become too comfortable (in a miserable sort of way) 
with being in debt and am, inadvertently, ensuring I stay there. She points to 
the fact I have never allowed my borrowing to escalate beyond a certain level, 
but have frequently paid it down and then allowed it to climb back up again.

She asks me to imagine myself in a new situation and tell her what having 
money could do for me. I can only come up with not having to worry about it, 
which seems pretty good but apparently isn’t positive enough. Positive goals 
are known to be more motivating than negative ones, Gnessen says.

I’m not wholly convinced by this – wouldn’t there be a lot of rich daydreamers 
if that were the case? – and I struggle with the idea that worry isn’t also a 
good motivator. If we didn’t worry about paying bills and keeping a roof over 
our heads, I’m not sure many of us would go to work at all. Still, I concede 
that my perceived “reward” for getting out of debt is perhaps not enough of a 
reward and promise to work on finding a more meaningful alternative.

Talking about money with a stranger feels both exposing and liberating. It’s a 
subject that provokes strong emotions but we rarely discuss it even with our 
closest friends. Perhaps financial therapy just offers a much-needed platform 
to discuss these feelings with someone who won’t judge us. But I think it’s 
more practical than that.

For me, the soul-searching is interesting but becomes genuinely useful when it 
identifies patterns of unhelpful behaviour. Given our tendency to repeat 
mistakes in other areas of our lives, I think most of us could benefit from a 
closer examination of our attitudes to money.

 * Financial coaching with Simone Gnessen <http://www.financial-coaching.co.uk>
 starts from £185 for a two-hour session.  