
More than 1,000 doctors, healthcare professionals and public health experts, 
including heads of royal colleges and public health institutions, are calling 
on the prime minister to publish the latest tobacco control plan without delay.

In a letter to Theresa May, the senior doctors say the plan is essential to 
drive down smoking rates, which are highest and most damaging to health among 
the least well-off. The plan was due to be published last summer.

A third of children hospitalised with asthma 'exposed to cigarette smoke'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/a-third-of-children-hospitalised-with-asthma-exposed-to-cigarette-smoke>
Reminding May of her commitment to “fighting against the burning injustice 
that if you’re born poor, you will die on average nine years earlier than 
others”, they point out that half of that difference in life expectancy is 
caused by smoking.

The letter, which is being published in the British Medical Journal, is being 
sent to May by Dr Andrew Furber, president of the Association of Directors of 
Public Health, and Prof John Middleton, president of the Faculty of PublicHealth
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>.

Furber warned that progress against smoking, which has been good in recent 
years, could slip. “Directors of public health in local authorities are charged 
with the responsibility of reducing smoking prevalence. But to succeed needs 
leadership at national as well as local level,” he said.

“The government must renew the tobacco strategy without further delay. 
Otherwise we risk losing the momentum gained from recent welcome changes such 
as standardised packing.”

Middleton said: “Smoking rates have declined over the years, in large part 
because of concerted government action. However rates are still highest amongst 
the poorest and if the prime minister truly wants to increase the life 
expectancy of the poorest in society her government needs to renew its tobacco 
control strategy, which expired over a year ago.”


The first tobacco strategy in the UK was the Blair government’s white paper, 
Smoking <https://www.theguardian.com/society/smoking> Kills, published in 1998. 
Other plans followed, including Andrew Lansley’s in 2011, then health secretary 
in the coalition government, which included a commitment to consult on 
standardised cigarette packaging.

Some anti-smoking measures have been a response to EU legislation, such as 
advertising and promotion bans. However, says Deborah Arnott, chief executive 
of Action on Smoking and Health, tobacco control strategies have reduced 
smoking rates in England faster than in some other European countries, 
particularly among children.

In 1998, 24% of 15-year-olds were smoking, but by 2014 that proportion had 
dropped to 8%. “France and Germany had European legislation but their rates 
have not gone down as fast,” she said.

There is also evidence that smoking rates can rise again if the pressure is 
eased. New York City’s successful Tobacco-Free Living initiative, which lowered 
smoking rates from 21% in 2002 to 14% by 2010, suffered funding cuts to mass 
media campaigns from 2009. By 2011, smoking rates rose, reaching 16.1% in 2013, 
but fell again after more investment in 2014. 
<http://www.politico.com/states/new-york/city-hall/story/2015/09/nyc-smoking-rate-drops-to-lowest-on-record-025625>

Experts hope the new UK tobacco control plan, which has been delayed in part 
because of the Brexit vote and its fallout, will plot the course for driving 
smoking rates down to 5% by 2035, whicha report from Cancer Research UK  
<http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-us/we-develop-policy/our-policy-on-tobacco-control-and-cancer/our-policy-on-a-tobacco-free-uk>
 said was feasible.

“What we want is a smoke-free future,” said Dr Nicholas Hopkinson, a 
consultant chest physician at the Royal Brompton hospital and reader in 
respiratory medicine at Imperial College, who coordinated the letter.

Support for mass media campaigns is needed, he says, as well as the 
continuation of policies on the cigarette pricing and tobacco smuggling. 
Spending on media campaigns in England has dropped in the past five years from 
just under £25m in 2009-10 to £5.3m in 2015, although evidence shows they help 
people quit.

“It is absolutely clear these interventions work. It is just keeping up the 
momentum and making sure there is a high priority to this,” he said. “There are 
9 million smokers in the UK, and smoking is increasingly associated with 
inequality – it is quite a bit higher in the poorer parts of society.”

Among the signatories are the heads of several medical colleges. One of them, 
Prof Neena Modi, president of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child 
Health, said: “Most smokers become addicted as children and once addicted find 
it extremely difficult to quit. Since the government introduced a strategy to 
tackle smoking in 1998, smoking rates among 15-year-olds have fallen by 
two-thirds.

“We must not put that achievement at risk. The last tobacco strategy expired 
over a year ago, so we want to see the new plan published and enacted as a 
matter of urgency.”
 