
The University of Lincoln has created the Friends for Life campaign to help 
the institution stand out to applicants looking at several university choices – 
and almost a third of those applying for September 2016 enrolment have already 
signed up, leading to tens of thousands of conversations between prospective 
students.

The campaign, initiated by research showing the forging of new friendship 
groups was a chief concern among university applicants, builds on Lincoln’s 
reputation as a safe, friendly university with a close community feel on 
campus. It enables students applying to the University of Lincoln to form 
friendships months before they enrol by creating networks of like-minded 
friends.

Using a specially-created web app linked to social media sites Facebook and 
Twitter, Friends for Life connects students applying for undergraduate courses 
to their peers by matching special interests across topics such as music, 
sport, film, or university clubs and societies. Once registered, members 
receive targeted email newsletters steering them to closed Facebook groups and 
other social media activities tailored to the subjects they are interested in.

So far, a third of this year’s applicants have already registered with the 
service. Of those, 66% have selected music as an area of interest with many 
actively discussing favourite songs and helping to create playlists.

Among academic subjects, law applicants have been among the most active with 
more than 10,000 messages in Facebook group chats already. Meanwhile 32% of 
psychology applicants have registered as Harry Potter fans, and 61% of animal 
behaviour and welfare applicants have declared dogs among their favourite 
animals.

Elly Sample, director of communications, development and marketing at the 
university, said: “Young people applying to university weigh up a wealth of 
factors when choosing the right course and institution. We know that a key 
consideration is whether they will feel safe and happy at their chosen 
university, particularly for those who are leaving home for the first time.

“We have built on our strong community atmosphere here at Lincoln, and 
launching our Friends for Life campaign helps applicants who will soon become 
part of our academic family to begin building new friendships as soon as 
they’ve made the choice to study here.

“The campaign embraces the power of social media to find and connect with new 
people sharing similar interests. We are delighted with how many people have 
already signed up, and we are hearing great stories emerge about groups 
connecting over shared interests – whether it’s a genre of music or a 
discussion about A-level exams. The aim of the scheme is to support new 
students with the transition to university life – particularly those making 
their first move away from home and established friendship groups at school or 
college.”

Applicants can sign up to the Friends for Life scheme at: 
www.lincoln.ac.uk/friends/ <http://www.lincoln.ac.uk/friends/> 
 