
Since 2008 I have had five insurance policies with Domestic & General to cover 
all my kitchen appliances.

I currently pay £59 a month. In September I reported that my frost-free 
integrated freezer was faulty, and six days later an engineer called.

He could not rectify the fault, and said he had ordered a part that another 
engineer would fit.

Eight days later he arrived, only to say that the freezer was, in fact, not 
repairable and that he would have to order a replacement. That was delivered a 
week later, but it was too big.

Since then I have been chasing on a daily basis and all I get is an automated 
response sent in the middle of the night or early morning. Eventually, I was 
told by the product placement team that they could not source a freezer that 
would fit and offered £518 so I could buy a suitable one myself. If I hadn’t 
phoned again I don’t suppose I would have been contacted.

This has been going on for six weeks and I have never received a telephone 
call from anyone, an apology or explanation for the appalling service. On one 
occasion staff hung up on me when I told them their customer service title was 
an oxymoron – I think she thought I was calling her a moron. The service has 
been terrible – is this normal?JP, Totnes, Devon

You are far from alone in complaining about Domestic & General – we have been 
getting many letters along these lines in the past few months.

A lack of promised call-backs seems to be a recurring complaint. Maybe the 
company does not employ enough staff.

Domestic & General said: “We sincerely apologise for the inconvenience caused 
to JP. We take great pride in providing the best possible service to our 
customers and recognise that we fell short on this occasion.”

It has agreed to pay you an extra £250 compensation to cover the delivery 
charge and for the failed installations.

Meanwhile, I would strongly urge you and other D&G customers to consider 
whether these products offer good value.

You were spending £59 a month – which may not sound too bad until you consider 
that is more than £700 a year. White goods are so much cheaper now that almost 
all of us would be better off sticking some money in a savings account and 
repairing or replacing goods as required.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 