
I have four household appliances insured on a Domestic & General policy, one 
of which, my faulty fridge, was written off several months ago. But getting a 
replacement has been a saga.

In the past few months I have phoned D&G at least a dozen times, but was on 
hold for hours at a time, at great expense. Ultimately, nobody answered. In 
desperation I used the online complaints form twice, but again received no 
response. Then I wrote a letter, and was eventually told to phone during 
working hours. I did so but received only an answerphone message saying the 
office was closed. I wrote back asking if it could call me, but no one did.

I finally got through (after once being cut off) and after an hour was given a 
delivery date for the new fridge – the end of January. Because I am working 
that day it was then pushed back to the start of February.

Given the fact our fridge hasn’t worked for more than three months, we 
expected an earlier delivery date.CF, Saxtead Green, Suffolk

Oh dear – it’s not great to have a faulty fridge in the run-up to Christmas. 
We have never been a fan of these warranty products, mostly because they can 
offer poor value for money.

We contacted D&G, which said you had originally made contact in mid-September 
to report a fault, but that the engineer it sent advised that the fridge would 
need to be replaced as the necessary part was no longer available. The initial 
delay was due to your replacement fridge being out of stock at all retailers. 
The company then offered you a higher specification fridge at a higher value, 
and agreed to cover the upgrade fee. It has since said it will also refund the 
delivery charge as a gesture of goodwill in light of the lengthy delay.

We gather the company is also working on the communications issues highlighted 
in your complaint, including ensuring that customer service lines are 
connecting to the appropriate contact centres during operating hours.

The company needs to improve. We already have a bulging postbag of D&G 
complaints and would like to hear from other readers who have had problems.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 