
Scott Pruitt, attorney general of Oklahoma and a sceptic of climate science, 
has been chosen byDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>
 as the next administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.

Leonardo DiCaprio talks environment and jobs with Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/leonardo-dicaprio-donald-trump-green-jobs>
Pruitt, a Republican, has been picked at a time when he is part of legal 
action waged by 28 states against the EPA to halt the Clean Power Plan, an 
effort by Barack Obama’s administration to curb greenhouse gas emissions from 
coal-fired power plants. His nomination is a clear signal of Republicans’ 
desire to dismantle Obama’s climate legacy.


“We’re very accustomed to the naysayers and the critics,” said Trump aide 
Kellyanne Conway. “Attorney General Pruitt has great qualifications and a good 
record as AG of Oklahoma and there were a number of qualified candidates for 
that particular position that the president-elect interviewed. We look forward 
to the confirmation hearings.”


Pruitt has called the EPA’s rule “unlawful and overreaching” and has cast 
doubt on the overwhelming scientific evidence that human activity is causing 
the planet to warm. “That debate is far from settled,”he said in May 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/article/435470/climate-change-attorneys-general?platform=hootsuite>
. “Scientists continue to disagree about the degree and extent of global 
warming and its connection to the actions of mankind.”

Environmental groups said that Pruitt was a “puppet” of the fossil fuel 
industry, pointingto his intervention in 2014 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/07/us/politics/energy-firms-in-secretive-alliance-with-attorneys-general.html?smid=tw-share&_r=0>
 to push back against air pollution standards by using a three-page letter 
penned by Devon Energy, one of Oklahoma’s largest oil and gas companies.

“Having Scott Pruitt in charge of the US Environmental Protection Agency is 
like putting an arsonist in charge of fighting fires,” said Michael Brune, 
executive director of the Sierra Club. “He is a climate science denier who, as 
attorney general for the state of Oklahoma, regularly conspired with the fossil 
fuel industry to attack EPA regulations. Nothing less than our children’s 
health is at stake.”

Trip Van Noppen, president of Earthjustice, which has joined in defence of the 
Clean Power Plan in court, said “every American should be appalled” by Pruitt’s 
nomination.

“The head of the Environmental Protection Agency should be making sure that 
our air is clean to breathe and our water is safe to drink, not working to make 
sure polluters make more money,” he said.

Van Noppen added: “Pruitt has cast doubt about whether global warming is 
related to human activity. Anyone who doesn’t believe in scientific research is 
completely unqualified to lead the primary federal agency tasked with 
addressing this issue.”

Eric T Schneiderman, the attorney general of New York, said Pruitt was a 
“dangerous and unqualified choice” who had acted as an “agent of the oil and 
gas industry”.

“The science is clear: climate change and the existential threat it poses to 
all Americans is real,” he said. “Yet as attorney general, Mr Pruitt not only 
denied the existence of climate change, but took steps to accelerate its 
devastating effects on Americans.

“If the EPA under Scott Pruitt fails to uphold our nation’s environmental 
laws, I stand ready to use the full power of my office to compel their 
enforcement by the agency.”

US businesses push against Trump's attempts to dismiss climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/01/climate-change-donald-trump-us-companies>
Chuck Schumer, the Democratic senate leader, said Pruitt’s positions on 
climate change and public health meant that he would “have to answer many tough 
questions throughout the nomination process”.

A key ally of the energy industry, Pruitt has sided with Exxon Mobil, which is 
the subject of an investigation by attorneys general in Massachusetts and New 
York over claims that it misled investors by covering up its knowledge of 
climate change.

If confirmed, he will probably aid the effort to demolish the Clean Power 
Plan, although this will not be a simple task as it is underpinned by the Clean 
Air Act of 1970. Pruitt could choose to not defend it in court or fail to 
implement its rules, however. The plan is currently on hold pending the legal 
action.

This year is set to be the warmest on record, following a trend of rising 
temperates over the past century. Scientists have warned that the US faces 
unprecedented coastline inundation, extreme weather events, drought and 
displacement of people should climate change not be addressed.
 