
Douglas Hogg, whose claim for the cleaning of his moat was one of the most 
embarrassing of the expenses revelations to hit the Conservative party, 
yesterday became the first MP to announce he is leaving parliament in response 
to the public outcry.

Hogg, a former agriculture minister, who is also Viscount Hailsham, said he 
would stand down at the general election to allow his constituency party in 
Sleaford and North Hykeham, Lincolnshire, time to select a new candidate "to 
best represent local and national interests".

Hogg's £2,200 claim for the cleaning of the moat at his 13th-century Manor 
House was described as a turning point that prompted David Cameron to take 
swift and decisive action on expenses by one of the Tory leader's aides. The 
claim was widely ridiculed by detractors of the Conservative party who pointed 
to it as evidence that its MPs were stuck in old, elitist ways.

Yesterday, Hogg acknowledged the scale of the damage done to parliament by the 
furore surroundingMPs' expenses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses>.

"I entirely understand the public anger that has erupted over expenses. The 
current system is deeply flawed; we parliamentarians have got it wrong and I 
apologise for that failure which is both collective and personal," he said.

"In view of David Cameron's campaign for an early election – which I strongly 
support – I have decided that now is the time to tell the Sleaford and North 
Hykeham association that I will not be standing in the coming election."

Hogg initially argued that he had not actually claimed the £2,200 but he later 
agreed to pay back the money after accepting that it had not been "positively 
excluded" from paperwork he submitted to the Commons fees office in support of 
his allowances claim for upkeep of the estate. In his statement yesterday he 
stressed that in 2007/08 500 MPs had claimed more in expenses than he did and 
that all his claims had been agreed with the fees office.

"I shared with them all my expenditure on my Lincolnshire home to allow them 
to determine what was appropriate. While the previously agreed items more than 
exceeded the amount that I have claimed and therefore the cost of cleaning the 
moat was not a live issue, I didn't make it expressly plain that I was not 
requesting clearance for the cost of the moat."

Hogg's announcement came on a day when the threat of anti-corruption 
candidates mopping up support from the three main parties at a general election 
appeared to move a step closer. David Kirwan, a lawyer and independent 
councillor, announced that he would stand as an anti-sleaze candidate at the 
general election. Consumer campaigner Lynn Faulds Wood, a former BBC Watchdog 
presenter, said yesterday she was joining fellow broadcaster Esther Rantzen in 
considering standing for election because of the "awful" expenses scandal.
 