
The childhood thrill of an unexpected snow day is a memory that lingers long 
into adulthood. Exchanging a stuffy schoolroom for a sledging expedition is 
hard to beat. By the time you’ve grown up, however, the prospect of missing a 
day’s work or an essential appointment because of the winter weather is less 
appealing. There are times we need to drive, whatever the road conditions.

The 2015 Department for Transport report on road casualties 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/533293/rrcgb-main-results-2015.pdf>
[PDF] highlights that while weather changes the risk on the roads – with winter 
conditions making the surface more slippery – it also influences driver 
behaviour, often discouraging travel, for example.

Nevertheless, if you are considering travelling, there are some basic rules to 
follow in order to ensure that your journey is as safe as possible.


1. Only drive if necessary
Before venturing out on the roads, ask yourself how important the journey is. 
Could you find an alternative way of getting the children to school, for 
example, such as walking or using the bus? Will your employer be flexible over 
start time if you need to use public transport?

The emergency services will clearly publicise conditions where only essential 
driving is advised, so if you wake up to a snowy landscape, check online before 
venturing outside. Local travel news will give you an update on the route you 
are planning to take. If you decide to go ahead with the drive, stick to main 
roads that have been gritted and on which traffic will have helped clear snow.


Allow plenty of extra time to prepare your car and account for slower speeds 
(see below). Before setting off, let the school or employer know that you are 
on your way but will be late, so that you don’t feel the need to race against 
the clock.


2. Prepare your car in advance
Your car should be ready for winter weather before snow even hits. Tyres 
should be in good condition with well above the minimum tread left, or consider 
using winter tyres in snowy conditions. You should put winter additive into the 
screenwash to ensure it doesn’t freeze. The windscreen should be clean both 
inside and out, as even when it doesn’t snow, the low winter sun can create a 
dangerous dazzle.

Check that all the light bulbs in the car are working and that the lights are 
clear from dirt. Some cars, such as the SEAT Ateca, come with a winter package 
that includes spray nozzles to wash the headlights and a warning when the 
screenwash levels are low.


3. Clear the car before driving
Clear visibility is the key to safe winter driving; this means spending time 
to prepare your car before you set off on a journey in snow. De-icer and a 
scraper will help you to clear snow and ice from the windscreen, windows and 
mirrors. This may require elbow grease, but it is essential that you never use 
boiling water to try and thaw glass surfaces as it can cause cracks. You should 
also ensure that all snow is removed from the roof before setting off, as it 
can slide down and obstruct the windscreen – or blow off into the path of other 
cars.

Finally, once inside the car you must ensure that the windows are thoroughly 
de-misted before setting off. Use the car’s hot air blowers and air 
conditioning to quickly clear condensation. It may be tempting to use a cloth 
or sponge to quickly clear the windscreen, but that can leave smears that will 
amplify the dazzling effect of winter sunshine.


4. Adapt your driving to the conditions

Find out which driver-assist features your car already has and learn how to 
use them. For example, many modern cars are fitted with anti-lock braking 
systems (ABS), while all current SEAT models come equipped with electronic 
stability and traction controls, that will help drivers handle challenging road 
conditions.

Stopping distances are as much as 10 times longer in icy and snowy conditions 
than in normal weather, so be aware of your distance to the car in front and 
use gentle manoeuvres well in advance of stopping for junctions or turnings.

To avoid wheel-spin when setting off, pull away in second gear and ease your 
foot off the clutch slowly. If you are driving uphill, leave as much of a gap 
as possible to the car in front to avoid stopping on the incline, and choose 
the best gear before starting to climb so that you don’t have to change down 
while on the hill. Heading downhill, take it slowly and do not let the speed 
build up.


On the flat, keep an even speed, ensuring that you don’t travel so slowly that 
you lose momentum, but not so fast that you risk losing control.

Plan your route to take in busier roads that have been gritted. But if you do 
skid, take your feet off the pedals and steer; only use the brake if you cannot 
steer out of trouble. Consider investing in a car designed to deal with 
different conditions: the 4Drive four-wheel-drive system in the Ateca activates 
off-road and snow-driving functions that will help you safely tackle your 
journey.


5. Be prepared for getting stuck
The increase in road closures and extreme weather means that the potential for 
becoming stranded or suffering a breakdown is heightened in winter, so keeping 
a “winter kit” in your boot during freezing months is essential.

A winter driving kit should include:

 * De-icer, a scraper and windscreen guard. Carry at all times, rather than 
keeping at home in the garage.

 * Spare sets of warm clothes, blankets and snow boots or wellies to protect 
you if you need to leave your vehicle.

 * A torch and high-visibility jacket.

 * You should already be carrying a hazard-warning triangle and first-aid kit, 
but supplement these with a spade, de-icing salt and old sections of matting or 
carpet to place in front of wheels and help free your car if stuck.

 * For long journeys, food and a flask of hot drink should be packed.

If you find yourself stuck in a rural area, try to stay in the car, as the 
temperature outside will be much colder than inside your warm vehicle. You 
should not run the engine to keep warm if the exhaust pipe is covered with 
snow. Lastly, ensure you have details of your breakdown service provider and 
ensure your mobile is fully charged; vehicles with a wireless charging bay, 
such as the SEAT Ateca, will ensure you don’t get caught out.

 