
Drugs companies are facing renewed questions about the prices they charge the 
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> for life-saving medicines after a 
firm was accused of marking up a tablet by more than 12,000%.


A week after US giant Pfizer was slapped with a record fine of £84.2m for 
alleged unfair price hikes, theCompetition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission> accused another 
multinational, Actavis, of ramping up prices for life-saving hydrocortisone 
tablets from 70p a pack as of April 2008 to £88 by March 2016.

The treatment is prescribed to people whose adrenal glands do not produce 
enough steroid hormones, such as those suffering fromAddison’s disease 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Addison's_disease>. Almost 1m prescriptions were 
distributed over the last year.

The regulator’s senior responsible officer, Andrew Groves, said the price 
increase was unfair because it is the only available drug on the market. “This 
is a lifesaving drug relied on by thousands of patients, which the NHS has no 
choice but to continue purchasing,” he said.

“We allege that the company has taken advantage of this situation and the 
removal of the drug from price regulation, leaving the NHS – and ultimately the 
taxpayer – footing the bill for the substantial price rises,.”

Both cases, as well as a previous investigation involving GSK, are currently 
being challenged by the drugs firms, but a spokesperson for the CMA said three 
further investigations are under way into the pharmaceutical sector, one of 
which is looking at another case of unfair pricing.

But, he said, without conducting a sector-wide investigation of the pricing of 
generic drugs it was difficult to assess the extent of the problem. “There is 
legislation [being planned] to keep a closer eye on generics and that was 
partly [as a] result of some of the concerns that have come up from things we 
have been investigating,” he added.


Drug companies face price controls for as long as their products are protected 
by patents. As soon as patents expire, drugs go “off-brand” meaning any rivals 
can develop generic copies. Normally this reduces costs as other players enter 
the market.

But in these two cases, the lack of substitute products proved costly for the 
NHS, according to the regulator.

The Pfizer case resulted in the NHS paying about £50m a year extra for its 
epilepsy medicine over the past four years, according to the CMA, while the 
Actavis increase cost about £70m extra annually. With other cases pending, it 
is possible that the cash-strapped NHS has been overcharged several hundreds of 
millions of pounds altogether over the past few years.


Pfizer fined record £84.2m over NHS overcharging
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/pfizer-fined-nhs-anti-epilepsy-drug-cma>
Hydrocortisone tablets went off-brand of 2008. But according to the CMA, 
Actavis remained the only supplier until last year. Observers say there could 
be a number of reasons why.

“It is typically a mix of scientific and regulatory and commercial factors 
that will impact on a decision whether to develop a generic or not,” said 
Warwick Smith, director general of the British Generic Manufacturers 
Association (BGMA). He added that if a drug is complicated to make, or there 
are only a small number of patients taking the medication, companies may chose 
not to produce the drug.

If upheld, the Pfizer and Actavis cases would clearly show that the market for 
medicines falls down where the NHS has no alternatives for life-saving 
treatments.

A spokesperson for the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry, the 
trade body for major pharmaceutical companies condemned such practices saying: 
“The ABPI has repeatedly said that it does not in any way support or condone 
the practice of ‘price hikes’ to generic medicines. This position has not 
changed.”

Actavis was bought by the Israeli pharmaceutical company Teva earlier this 
year but it is now in the process of selling off the operation to Intas 
Pharmaceuticals to comply with EU rules. Tevas said it intended to defend the 
allegations although it said the pricing of the hydrocortisone product had 
never been under its control.


 