 Two police officers who claim they did not receive adequate counselling after 
the Dunblane tragedy are suing their police force for £800,000.
The unnamed officers, both women, are each claiming £400,000 damages from 
CentralScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> police for the pain 
caused by the severe psychological problems they say they have suffered since 
the 1996 shootings at Dunblane primary school.

 Ian Watson, solicitor for the officers, said both women played significant 
roles in the policing of the immediate aftermath of the tragedy which saw 16 
children and their teacher killed by gunman Thomas Hamilton.

 One constable stood guard at the gates of the primary school, meeting 
distressed and worried parents as news of the tragedy spread.

 Both women later went in to the gymnasium where the bodies of the children 
and their teacher were lying, and helped distraught families identify the dead 
children.

 But, according to Mr Watson, neither women received the psychological care 
needed to help them come to terms with what they had witnessed. 'The stress 
counselling received by both officers was totally inadequate,' he said. One 
women has since retired from the police force on medical grounds, while the 
other is on long-term sick leave.

 The constables, aged 26 and 30, are accusing the chief constable of Central 
Scotland, William Wilson, of negligence, alleging that the appropriate Critical 
Incident Stress Debriefing procedure was not made available to them.

 The legal action comes as unrest over compensation offered to those involved 
in the Dunblane massacre begins to mount. Last week Christine McSkimming, the 
grandmother and legal guardian of a schoolgirl who survived being shot twice by 
Hamilton, was awarded £4,500 by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority.

 Her granddaughter Aimie Adam, now aged eight, suffered a damaged sciatic 
nerve and a shattered foot in the shooting. Mrs McSkimming described the 
compensation offered as a 'slap in the face'.

 So far almost £3 million has been paid out to 139 claimants following the 
shootings, but 111 applications have yet to be dealt with by the authority. 
Other Dunblane parents have voiced their concerns over what they see as unfair 
compensation awards.

 Mr Watson said writs against the chief constable had been issued last week 
and the case would shortly be lodged at the Court of Session in Edinburgh.
 