 After more than three years of intense scrutiny, the trustees of the fund set 
up to help people affected by the Dunblane massacre yesterday sought to end the 
attention focused on the community to allow it to rebuild fully.
As the final audited accounts of the £5.2m fund, donated by well-wishers and 
the government after the fatal shooting of 16 primary school children and their 
teacher, were published on the internet, it was revealed that details of 
payments are to be destroyed.

No personal information recorded by the trustees will ever become public and 
even anonymous financial minutes will be held as closed records for 30 years.

The trustees are determined to ensure that no one finds out who received money 
from the fund and to what extent they benefited from its resources. It is hoped 
that the winding up of what became a focal point for worldwide generosity in 
the weeks after the shootings of March 13 1996 will allow Dunblane to become 
just another town again.

Although the trustees' report discloses no details of payments made, it 
reveals that those considered to be affected by the tragedy spread far beyond 
the families of the dead and injured. The Dunblane fund's remit was to ensure 
that those directly affected by the tragedy were given help to rebuild their 
lives. Trustees said this included teachers, school support staff and others 
who happened to be in the school when Thomas Hamilton fired his 106 bullets.

Yet, since so many people became involved, the trust set up narrow definitions 
of eligibility. It included those who were in the school at the start of the 
9.30am shooting, and those who were there until the emergency services wrestled 
things under control at 1.30pm.

The trustees made it clear that it did not believe police or firefighters 
called to the primary school should have benefited from the fund, believing it 
their professional responsibility to deal with this type of situation.

James Stirling, chairman of the trustees, said that throughout the whole 
difficult disbursement process the trustees had been driven by the single 
desire to be fair, and the issue of where to draw the line had been one of the 
most difficult decisions they had had to make.

There has been some squabbling over those awards that have become public 
knowledge, most notably by Charlie Clydesdale, who received £10,000 after 
losing his daughter Victoria in the shooting.

But the accounts reveal that 78% of the fund was distributed to the families 
and other individuals deemed to be directly involved; £296,000 was allocated 
for the future maintenance of the memorial garden at Dunblane cemetery; and the 
remaining 16% was used to a set up a youth centre in Dunblane.

Closing the fund, the trustees said they considered it an honour to have been 
given the opportunity to ease the suffering caused by Thomas Hamilton, who shot 
himself in the incident - but they now believed there was no more that they 
could do and it was time for Dunblane to slip into obscurity once more.
 