
It’s an idea whose adherents over the centuries have ranged from socialists to 
libertarians to far-right mavericks. It was first proposed by Thomas Paine in 
his 1797 pamphlet,Agrarian Justice, as a system in which at the “age of 
majority” everyone would receive an equal capital grant, a “basic income” 
<http://www.basicincome.org/basic-income/> handed over by the state to each and 
all, no questions asked, to do with what they wanted.

It might be thought that, in these austere times, no idea could be more 
politically toxic: literally, a policy of the state handing oversomething for 
nothing <http://news.sky.com/video/1428855/young-to-have-to-work-for-benefits>. 
But in Utrecht, one of the largest cities in the Netherlands, and 19 other 
Dutch municipalities, a tentative step towards realising the dream of many a 
marginal and disappointed political theorist is being made.

The politicians, well aware of a possible backlash, are rather shy of 
admitting it. “We had to delete mention of basic income from all the documents 
to get the policy signed off by the council,” confided Lisa Westerveld, a Green 
councillor for the city of Nijmegen, near the Dutch-German border.

“We don’t call it a basic income in Utrecht because people have an idea about 
it – that it is just free money and people will sit at home and watch TV,” said 
Heleen de Boer, a Green councillor in that city, which is half an hour south of 
Amsterdam.

Nevertheless, the municipalities are, in the words of de Boer, taking a “small 
step” towards a basic income for all by allowing small groups of benefit 
claimants to be paid £660 a month – and keep any earnings they make from work 
on top of that. Their monthly pay will not be means-tested. They will instead 
have the security of that cash every month, and the option to decide whether 
they want to add to that by finding work. The outcomes will be analysed by 
eminent economist Loek Groot, a professor at the University of Utrecht.

A start date for the scheme has yet to be settled – and only benefit claimants 
involved in the pilots will receive the cash – but there is no doubting the 
radical intent. The motivation behind the experiment in Utrecht, according to 
Nienke Horst, a senior policy adviser to the municipality’s Liberal Democrat 
leadership, is for claimants to avoid the “poverty trap” – the fact that if 
they earn, they will lose benefits, and potentially be worse off.

The idea also hopes to target “revolving door clients” – those who are forced 
into jobs by the system but repeatedly walk out of them. If given a basic 
income, the thinking goes, these people might find the time and space to look 
for long-term employment that suits them.

But the logic of basic income, according to people to the left of Horst, leads 
only one way – to the cash sum becoming a universal right. It would be 
unthinkable for those on benefits to be earning and receiving more than their 
counterparts off benefits. Horst admitted: “Some municipalities are very into 
the basic income thing.”

Indeed leftwing councillors in Utrecht believe this is an opportunity to prove 
to a sceptical public that people don’t just shirk and watch television if they 
are given a leg-up. “I think we need to have trust in people,” said de Boer.

Caroline Lucas, the Green party’s only MP in the House of Commons, agrees. A 
basic income – the Greens call it a “citizen’s wage” – has long been party 
policy. It did not make the cut for their manifesto because they couldn’t find 
a way to fund it.

But developments in the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>, and a parallel pilot in 
Finland, have bolstered Lucas’s belief that this idea’s time has come. The 
Royal Society of Arts has been examining the feasibility of the idea, as has 
campaign group Compass.

To those who say it is an unaffordable pipedream, Westerveld points out the 
huge costs that come with the increasinglytough benefits regimes being set up 
by western states, including policies that make people do community service to 
justify their handouts. “In Nijmegen we get £88m to give to people on welfare,” 
Westerveld said, “but it costs £15m a year for the civil servants running the 
bureaucracy of the current system. We will save money with a ‘basic income’.”

Horst adds: “If you receive benefits from the government [in Holland] now you 
have to do something in return. But most municipalities don’t have the people 
to manage that. We have 10,000 unemployed people in Utrecht, but if they all 
have to do something in return for welfare we just don’t have the people to see 
to that. It costs too much.”

Lucas says she will seek a parliamentary debate on the policy in the new year, 
and will ask the government to look into the feasibility of a “basic income” 
pilot here. “I think in Britain people have quite a puritanical idea of work,” 
she said. “But this is an urgently needed policy. With increased job 
insecurity, the idea of everyone working nine to five is outdated. People go in 
and out of work these days.” “People are increasingly working in what they call 
the gig economy. The current system is not fit for purpose.”

The idea faces a tough political headwind, of course, not least in the 
Netherlands. Last Tuesday, Johanna von Schaik-Vijfschaft, 41, could be found 
updating her CV on one of the computers made available to benefits claimants at 
the Utrecht council building. A cleaner at a local department store, she had 
been told by council officials to find more work than the 12 hours she 
currently does.

But she will be under even more pressure in a few years when her 19-year-old 
son turns 21 and leaves her care. Once she has no dependants, she will lose 
£150 of her £500 monthly benefit payment and come under the remit of the 
participation laws, legislation recently brought in by the rightwing central 
government to make benefits claimants work harder for their cash. Von 
Schaik-Vijfschaft could be ordered to do some community work for the council in 
return for her benefits, and will face the threat of losing more of her income 
if her application rate for jobs falls away. And if Von Schaik-Vijfschaft were 
to dress inappropriately for interviews or, worse still, miss an appointment, 
she will lose all her benefits for a month.

The country’s second city, Rotterdam, has even trialled a “work first” system, 
where aspiring benefits claimants must put on an orange jacket and spend two 
months clearing rubbish before they are handed any payments.

“Rules, always the rules,” von Schaik-Vijfschaft said. “But of course I want 
to work. I want to be busy – we all do.” If the experiment can prove that, 
maybe Tom Paine’s idea will have its day yet.

HOW IT WORKS

■ A “basic income”, first proposed by Thomas Paine is an income 
unconditionally granted to all on an individual basis, without any means test 
or requirement to work.

■ It is paid irrespective of any income from other sources.

■ It is paid without requiring the performance of any work or the willingness 
to accept a job.

■ Advocates say it will allow people to genuinely choose what sort of 
employment they take, and to retrain when they wish.

■ Its proponents also claim that a basic income scheme is one of the most 
simple benefits models, and will reduce all the bureaucracy surrounding the 
welfare state, making it less complex and much cheaper to administer.
 