
Forget fruit picking, working in a bar or even being a lifeguard. Britain's 
most sought after temp job is working as a film extra. According to Jobcentre 
Plus, which advertises a million short-term summer jobs, nothing attracts 
applicants more than appearing as an extra in the next Hollywood blockbuster.

Earlier this year, Jobcentres advertised for the next Batman movie, filming at 
Hatfield in Hertfordshire, and were inundated with hopefuls.

But can a job as an extra be taken seriously? What's the money like, and can 
it lead to anything more serious in the film industry?

Firstly, forget the word "extra". They are known in the industry as 
"supporting artists" or "SAs" and their job is to perform the non-speaking 
roles that make scenes in films and TV programmes look authentic: drinkers in a 
bar, passers-by in a street or soldiers in a battle scene.

Although it can be fun and varied, it is not as glamorous as some imagine: a 
whole day can be spent filming one short scene over and over again, requiring a 
great degree of patience.

Hours are also spent sitting around while costumes and sets are prepared, or 
other scenes are shot, and a good alarm clock is vital, too, as the most common 
start time is 7am.

Being an SA is not an automatic stepping stone to a fully-fledged acting 
career. Only occasionally are SAs given roles with dialogue.

While there are plenty of minor actors working as background artists for the 
extra income, many worry that getting spotted doing it may damage their 
reputation in the industry.

The best way to find background work is by joining a specialist casting 
agency. These provide SAs for TV productions, films and commercials.

However, places are limited and agencies usually recruit just once a year. You 
need to be available at short notice, have a flexible schedule, and access to 
early morning transport.

People of all ages, backgrounds, and physical appearances are needed, and you 
don't have to be good-looking. Many casting agents prefer applicants to have 
some SA or performing experience, but this isn't always necessary.

A professional approach is important, says Martin Brown of Equity, the union 
to which many SAs belong.

"This isn't something that people can do on their holidays, at weekends or 
when they have time off from their main job. No film or TV producer is going to 
risk the enormous costs involved of having amateurs on set ... it is for 
professionals who want to make it their living."

Stage actress Veronica Humphis was one of hundreds of zombie extras in last 
year's hit movie, Shaun of the Dead. She works part-time as a supporting artist 
for the extra money, and feels it is providing useful experience.

"Getting used to being around cameras and technical people means you wouldn't 
be so fazed if you landed an acting role.

"Being sociable is important. There are a lot of people you don't know, and it 
makes it much easier if you can talk to people," says Veronica. "You don't need 
to be a good actor or be attractive to get work - but you need to have a 
certain look they want."

But it can be very difficult to make a living out of being a supporting 
artist, according to SA Glen Leitch, because work can be sporadic. "You might 
have three of four days one week and be very busy, but at other times only get 
one day's work in a fortnight. Most extras also have other jobs or careers, as 
well."

And Glen is not his real name - the extras we spoke to didn't want their names 
to appear in print as it might compromise their ability to find work.

Typical basic pay for a nine or 10-hour day is about £80, or £55-60 after 
agency commission and national insurance are deducted, and you are, of course, 
liable for income tax.

The money increases if you are required to perform a "special action" - for 
example juggling or horse-riding, or if you are particularly featured in a 
scene.

Overtime boosts wages, but if you are asked to work longer, you are supposed 
to do it. That means for any day you are booked, you have to keep the evening 
free in case overtime is required.

A common grumble amongst experienced SAs is that the rate of pay has decreased 
in real terms over the years.

"Twenty years ago we would get £53 cash-in-hand for a basic day," says Ruth 
Dunbar. "On top of that, the bonuses for being featured are smaller than they 
used to be."

Casting agents take about 15% on whatever work they get you. No agent should 
charge an upfront joining fee, as in April the Conduct of Employment Agencies 
and Employment Businesses Regulations 2003 made this illegal.

But some take a fee out of the first day's work - and this is legal. 

It means that unless you get subsequent jobs from that agency, you have worked 
for next to nothing.

"There are a hell of a lot of people who only get one or two days a year," 
says Paul Kirby, chairman of the Film Artists Association. "It would be better 
to spread the cost over 10 days work. That way you would ensure that the 
artiste would not go below the minimum wage."

Each casting agency usually has a book listing its SAs, which it sends to 
producers. Industry directories and websites such as Contacts, Kays (kays.co.uk 
<http://www.kays.co.uk>) and The Knowledge (theknowledgeonline.com 
<http://www.theknowledgeonline.com>) list casting agents. 

However, inclusion in a directory does not guarantee the quality of the 
agency. In recent years, undercutting by producers and agents has led to SAs 
sometimes ending up working for less than the going rate.

To counter this, some of the more reputable agencies recently formed the 
National Association of Supporting Artistes Agents (nasaa.org.uk 
<http://www.nasaa.org.uk>). It has a strict code of conduct for members and 
aims to raise standards across the industry so that SAs get a better deal.

Stuart Thomell found out the hard way that you have to be wary of disrep 
utable casting agencies. Stuart answered an ad but was shocked when they asked 
for a £90 joining-fee.

A month later the agency called and asked Stuart to work half-a-day on a 
commercial, for £50, and he said OK.

But the job turned out to be a nightmare. "On the shoot there were 400 of us 
crammed together in a small space, and we had to jump up and down to a music 
track.

"It was a hot summer's day, but we weren't even given water for three or four 
hours. Between filming we were told to stay in a holding room with too few 
seats, so we had to sit on the floor.

"We also had to buy our own lunch. After lunch, we were told we wouldn't get 
paid unless we stayed until the evening, even though it was meant to be just a 
half-day's work.

"A lot of people left when they realised they had been misled about the hours 
and the fee. I stayed to the end - a total of 14 hours.

"However, I never heard from the agency again and didn't receive any payment." 

Swapping the blackboard for a clapperboard

One man who has made a successful career as a "support artist", having 
appeared in more than 50 films and TV programmes, is Phil Duffield.

The 54-year-old former teacher, who splits his time between London, Basildon 
and South Wales, first learned about being an extra following a chance meeting 
at an evening class. A man he was sitting next to told him about his extra work 
and suggested he apply.

"At the start it was difficult finding work. All the agencies I approached 
weren't taking on new people at the time, but I eventually spotted an ad in the 
Stage newspaper appealing for unpaid extras. I replied and got the part," he 
says.

His first job led him to a new agency that had just started taking on clients 
and after signing up he was launched straight into the big time.

"My first paid job was in the James Bond film The World Is Not Enough - a boat 
chase went straight through my fruit and veg stall. The only downside was the 
fact that the scene ended up on the cutting room floor and wasn't in the final 
film."

Since then Mr Duffield has gone on to appear in the background in a host of 
films, commercials and TV series including Midsomer Murders and Bad Girls.

"It can in no way be described as a normal job. One minute you're working with 
a big Hollywood name, the next you're doing something incredibly mundane. And 
you never know what you'll be asked to do next. On some jobs you spend all day 
sitting around, only for your scene to be dropped at the last minute, while on 
others it'll all be over very quickly. On some sets you get fed, on others you 
need to take sandwiches - the first thing you need to pack is a good book."

He is now signed on to six agencies, but the amount of work he gets varies 
enormously.

"It really depends on the state of the industry at that time. At the moment 
it's very quiet and I'm only getting one day a week. In the past I've worked 
four or five days a week - it really depends on how busy everyone is."

He also says that pay varies considerably depending on where the shoot is and 
what it's for. His rates are typically between £75 and £125 a day, but he says 
it averages out at around £100 a day - from which he has to pay tax (extras are 
generally self-employed) and the agency's 15% commission.

"We're no longer called extras - most people doing this work describe 
themselves as 'support artists'.

"I haven't applied for my Equity card but I think that I'm now entitled to, as 
I have had several speaking parts. I should stress that while it's fun at 
times, there is also a lot of hanging around - and you certainly couldn't rely 
on it as your main source of income."

First steps if you are looking for a walk-on part

Jobs & Money asked student Selina Thompson to see whether she could find work 
as a film extra. Here's how she got on:

With no acting credentials or wannabe friends to point me in the right 
direction, I found the internet a good place to start. There are hundreds of 
sites all claiming to be able help you. I foundhiddenextra.com 
<http://www.hiddenextra.com> and thestage.co.uk <http://www.thestage.co.uk> the 
best for giving me a clear breakdown of what to expect. The Hidden Extra claims 
to be the UK Film Extra's guide to getting into the Industry and here you will 
find a contact list for the top 10 casting agencies.

It turned out that a CV and covering letter was needed before there was any 
chance of being offered a face-to-face registration interview.

I also found that, typically, agencies fill up their books four to six months 
in advance. The FBI Agency, which has offices in Manchester, Leeds, Leicester 
and London, advised me to call back in March 2005 when it is starting the next 
round of recruitment.

At Casting Collective I was told: "We spend six weeks interviewing more than 
2,000 people for registration. We take photos and go through your covering 
letter and if we think you're suitable then you will be called for future 
projects."

I learned that standard rates for background artists (no-dialogue) working a 
nine-hour day start from £64.10 if you're working on an ITV production and £86 
as a walk-on with an unscripted line. The BBC pays higher rates - £91 as a walk 
on - but there's no guarantee who you will be working for. Flexibility is 
paramount in this job.

Wages can be increased if you're hired for night work (which increases by £10 
a shift) and overtime is paid at time and a half if you work up to 12 hours. 
However, this is often a negotiable fee on independent productions.

My advice from searching for work as an extra is to start now if you are 
interested in vacation work next summer.

Physical appearance is not a problem (none of the agencies I spoke to asked 
for a description), so basically all it requires is plenty of agency research - 
ask what previous work their extras have done - and an interesting mug shot.
 