
An 89-year-old has found a job after placing an advert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/joe-bartley-war-veteran-89-posts-job-ad-dying-boredom>
 in his local paper asking for part-time work to stop him “dying of boredom”. 
Joe Bartley, from Paignton, south Devon, is due to start work at a cafe in the 
town after the owners of the family-run business spotted his request.

“No matter what your age or your background, you deserve a chance,” said 
Cantina Bar and Kitchen’s co-owner Sarah Martin. “Most people have got 
something to offer and Joe is someone who is keen, who is putting himself out 
there. What is not to like about that?

“A lot of people who come here don’t just come for coffee, they come for a 
chat, so Joe is perfect.”

War veteran, 89, posts ad for job to stop him 'dying of boredom'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/joe-bartley-war-veteran-89-posts-job-ad-dying-boredom>
Bartley, who was a member of the 6th Airborne division and served in Palestine 
after the second world war, put an advert in the Herald Express twice last 
month. It read: “Senior citizen, 89, seeks employment in Paignton area. 20hrs+ 
per week. Still able to clean, light gardening, DIY and anything. I have 
references. Old soldier, airborne forces. Save me from dying of boredom!”


He said he had been overwhelmed by the response to the advert, which he 
described as “not unusual, just an old guy looking for work”, adding: “The 
owner phoned me and said she was interested, and asked me to come in. So I 
arrived at the cafe and we’ve had a bit of a chat with the owner, and shook 
hands.”

Bartley said he was amused at the fact that the advert had made him something 
of a local celebrity, and said he was looking forward to earning his own money 
to enable him to pay rent. “I can’t believe it really, I feel great about it,” 
he said.

He said he had lived alone since his wife, Cassandra, died two years ago, and 
had been lonely. “When you live on your own there is no one to speak to. Since 
she died I’ve moved into a flat and it’s a big block. Once you walk into that 
flat it’s like solitary confinement,” he said.

Canadian great-grandmother, 80, wins $50m lottery: 'I'm too old for this'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/canada-great-grandmother-lottery-lois-olsen>
His new hospitality role was not the only job offer he got after taking the 
initiative. Glenn Rodgers, an independent baker in Barnstable, north Devon, 
offered the pensioner a job after reading his story in the Guardian. “I’m a 
baker and even though it’s not complicated, it’s therapeutic, it’s quite a 
soulful thing to do – and I thought I’d offer him a job.”

But the bakery, The Ginger Breadman, being in Barnstaple, was too far for 
Bartley to travel. Rodgers said he wanted the pensioner to know he had been 
offered a job in the hope that it would put a “smile on his face”. More 
employers should think about taking on older staff, he added. “It’s unjust 
otherwise. Why not give him a chance? Also it works both ways, employers are 
getting experienced reliable staff who really want to work.”

Bartley will get a lift to work with his new employer on Sunday, but will take 
a bus the rest of the week. “He is delighted, and we are looking forward to 
it,” said Martin. “We think about these things all the time. We are never going 
to be rich, but we like to give something back, so when we saw the advert there 
was no question – the minute we saw it we knew we’d give him a job.”
 