
My husband was supposed to join me at a friend’s wedding in France on an 
easyJet <https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> flight to Toulouse. 

He never made it because the departure boards at Gatwick airport were not 
updated to show the flight was delayed. The new departure time was not posted 
and the flight was not called until after the gate had closed.

EasyJet has failed to respond to our request for a refund. EH, London

Your husband counted 10 other passengers left stranded and says the easyJet 
customer service rep in the terminal admitted that the single tannoy call for 
the flight had been made five minutes after the plane had taken off and only 
after other passengers had complained of the lack of information.

EasyJet insists that only two passengers missed the flight, but admits a 
blunder. “For any delayed flights the gate information has to be entered 
manually at the correct time,” says a spokesperson. “Unfortunately, this was 
not the case for this flight.”

It now promises to refund your husband “as a gesture of goodwill” five months 
after he first requested it.

 ■ I booked a flight from Rome to Gatwick and went to the gate displayed on 
the airport screens.

The area was deserted apart from two other passengers and an airport employee 
who confirmed this was the correct gate.

Worried, I asked another employee who said that our gate was, in fact, in a 
different terminal. By the time we got there the gate was closed and we were 
denied boarding.

I was told that I would have to pay €110 to be moved on to the next flight.

After six months of stalling easyJet claimed the problem had been caused by a 
delayed shuttle bus and that I had been transferred to a new flight free of 
charge. MP, Reigate, Surrey

EasyJet says it’s been unable to confirm whether the screens did show an 
incorrect gate and says all the other passengers went to the right place. But, 
five months on, it has agreed to refund your original ticket price and the 
transfer fee because of the confusion.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 