
People in Britain should eat meat less often, in order to help ease the food 
crises in the developing world, an influential committee of MPs has urged.

It could also help to mitigate the rampant food price inflation that has seen 
the cost of staple foods in the UK rise by close to one-third in the last five 
years.

The massive increase in meat consumption in rich countries in recent decades 
has led to spikes in the price of grain, used for animal feed, as well as 
leading to widespread deforestation and pressure on agricultural land, and has 
contributed to the obesity epidemic. By avoiding meat even for a day or two 
each week, people could help to ease some of these pressures.

The MPs' warning, in a report entitled Global Food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> Security, came as governments 
from around the world prepared to converge in London for a summit on nutrition 
and world hunger.

The international development select committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/indcom> said that the increase in meat eating was 
only one of many factors underlying the global food crises that have afflicted 
the developing world twice in the last five years, in 2008 and 2011, but going 
vegetarian even for just a few meals a week is something that most people could 
manage easily, and with positive health impacts. They called on the government 
to start a public health campaign to encourage people to change their behaviour.

A national campaign on reducing food waste should also be an urgent priority, 
according to the MPs, as well as tough targets for big retailers to cut the 
amount of food they throw away. Government agency Wrap already runsa Love Food 
Hate Waste campaign <http://england.lovefoodhatewaste.com/>.

Sir Michael Bruce, chairman of the committee, stressed that food crises and 
their effects are not limited to poor countries. "There is no room for 
complacency about food security over the coming decades if UK consumers are to 
enjoy stable supplies and reasonable food prices," he said.

"UK aid to help smallholders increase food production in the developing world 
is of direct benefit to UK consumers as rising world food prices will reduce 
living standards of hard-pressed UK consumers."

Intensive farms, favoured by some farmers as they make raising livestock 
cheaper by housing them in vast sheds instead of fields, also came under fire, 
because they require animals to be fed on grain instead of grass.

Sir Malcolm warned that the UK was "never more than a few days away from a 
significant food shortage" because of our reliance on imports.

The effect of biofuels, which compete with food crops for fertile land and 
water in some regions, came in for scrutiny, with MPs warning that EU targets – 
now partially relaxed –that 10% of liquid fuels should come from bio sources by 
2020 <http://ec.europa.eu/energy/renewables/biofuels/biofuels_en.htm> could 
lead to further food price hikes. The MPs said the UK should set its target, 
the renewable transport fuel obligation, to exclude agriculturally produced 
biofuels. This would still allow waste, including waste cooking oil, to be used.

The committee praised the Department for International Development's 
"significant efforts to meet the considerable unmet need for contraception in 
many developing nations" and urged the government to "maintain a keen focus on 
women's reproductive rights within its development assistance programmes" – an 
insistence that may cause unease among some religious conservatives. In the US, 
evangelical Christians succeeded in axing many such programmes under president 
George W Bush.

Another area of concern highlighted in the report was the increasing trend for 
big companies to buy up large areas of land in many developing countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/oct/29/land-deals-africa-wild-west-fao>
 previously farmed by smallholders. MPs recommend that UK-domiciled 
corporations be required to be transparent about land deals, with full 
implementation of the UN voluntary guidelines on the governance of tenure.
 