
I am receiving violent and abusive emails from an eBay member here in 
Australia, but eBay shows no interest in helping me. This person has not bought 
an item from me – the emails started coming from nowhere to all three of myeBay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ebay> accounts. 

I have sent 10 emails to eBay support about the user, but all it has done is 
restrict the number of messages that can be sent each day to three to each 
account. That’s nine obscene messages including rape threats. After my fifth 
desperate email to eBay a customer service operative just advised me to ignore 
the abuse.

I’m very upset about the messages, obviously, but I’m also upset that eBay has 
done so very little. It seems more worried about losing a possible sale by 
suspending a buyer then protecting a woman from rape threats.CM, Queensland, 
Australia

It is scandalous that eBay Australia has ignored your plight. Its bias in 
favour of buyers is a familiar source of grievance among sellers, although it 
insists its dispute resolution system is not automated. The first thing you 
should do is report the abuse to the police. Rape threats are a crime and, 
under the Australian Criminal Code Act 1995, the maximum penalty is three 
years’ imprisonment or a $30,000-plus fine.

Ebay tells me that the abuser’s accounts have now been suspended indefinitely. 
It adds: “We’d like to apologise – this behaviour is unacceptable and will not 
be tolerated.”

Except, of course, it was – until you contacted the press. A spokesperson 
admits the response was tardy and assures me it will “look to educate the 
agents involved in handling the case”.

The fact that staff need to be trained to take rape threats seriously is 
alarming in itself, as is the fact that it is likely your ordeal would still be 
ongoing if eBay hadn’t been shamed by the prospect of publicity.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.

 