
The Ecuadorian government was negotiating a secret $1bn deal with a Chinese 
bank to drill for oil under the Yasuni national park in the Amazon while 
pursuing a high-profile scheme to keep the oil under the ground in return for 
international donations,according to a government document 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/interactive/2014/feb/19/china-development-bank-credit-proposal-oil-drilling-ecuador1>
 seen by the Guardian.

The proposed behind-the-scenes deal, which traded drilling access in exchange 
for Chinese lending for Ecuadorian government projects, will dismay green and 
human rights groups who had praised Ecuador for its pioneeringYasuni-ITT 
Initiative <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yasun%C3%AD-ITT_Initiative> to protect 
the forest. Yasuni is one of the most biodiverse places in the world and home 
to indigenous peoples – some of whom are living in what Ecuador's constitution 
calls "voluntary isolation".

The initiative – which was abandoned by Ecuador's government last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/16/ecuador-approves-yasuni-amazon-oil-drilling>
 – is seen as a way to protect the Amazon, biodiversity and indigenous peoples' 
territories, as well as combat climate change, break Ecuador's dependency on 
oil and avoid causing the kind of social and environmental problems already 
caused by oil operations in the Ecuadorian rainforest.

"This raises serious doubts about whether the government was truly committed 
to keeping ITT oil in the ground," said Atossa Soltani, from NGO Amazon Watch 
and a former ambassador for the initiative. "While we were promoting the Yasuni 
initiative to donors, the government was offering ITT's crude toChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>."

The document, titled China Development Bank Credit Proposal, bears the name of 
Ecuador's Ministry of Economic Policy Co-ordination on every page. Under the 
heading Results of the 1st Negotiating Round: Preliminary agreements, which 
took place between 13-23 May 2009, it states: "Last minute clause: The 
Ecuadorian party has said it will do all it can to help PetroChina and Andes 
Petroleum explore ITT and Block 31."

ITT refers to the Ishpingo, Tambococha and Tiputini oil fields – the first two 
under Yasuni, the last partially – and Block 31 is an oil concession 
immediately to the ITT's west. PetroChina is a listed company controlled by 
China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC), owned by the Chinese state, and 
Andes Petroleum is a joint venture between CNPC and another state-run Chinese 
firm.

The objective of the Chinese negotiators was in part to "guarantee the supply 
of crude oil for PetroChina in the medium term", while the Ecuadorian 
government wanted to "obtain access to a favourable line of credit to finance 
priority projects," the document says.

The proposed deal was that the China Development Bank, would lend "no less 
than US$1bn in the first phase" to "Ecuador's Ministry of Finance or an entity 
designated by Ecuador's government".

But while these negotiations were taking place, Ecuador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador> was appealing to potential donors 
to support the Yasuni-ITT Initiative – a scheme that emerged from civil society 
and was adopted by president Rafael Correa's government in 2007, with a trust 
set up in 2008 to collect donations.

The details have changed over time, but the fundamental concept is to forgo 
exploiting the millions of barrels of oil in the ITT fields – estimated to be 
20% of Ecuador's total oil deposits –in return for financial compensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/23/yasuni-oil-ground-project>.

In August last year Correa abandoned his government's support for the 
initiative and announced he wanted oil operations to go ahead – triggering 
protests and other opposition in Ecuador and abroad, a government backlash, and 
fervent speculation about why it failed.

Correa laid most of the blame on the lack of donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/23/yasuni-oil-ground-project> 
– just over US$2m in the government trust and just under US$10m in another 
trust set up in 2010 and administered by the UN Development Programme (UNDP), 
despite an ultimate target of US$3.6bn.

However, others have pointed the finger at pressure from Ecuador's oil sector 
and the country's relationship with China, which has seen the former 
increasingly dependent on the latter for financing and Chinese companies' 
obtaining a near monopoly on Ecuador's oil and being linked to Yasuni in 
particular.

Correa himself has also been heavily criticised and accused of failing to 
convince potential donors he was serious about the initiative – especially 
given his refusal to abandon a "plan B" to exploit ITT and the fact that 
operations were permitted in Block 31 where deposits are so small that many see 
it as the first phase of an eventual move into ITT.

"The document shows that in 2009 Ecuador's government negotiated with China to 
do all it could so Chinese oil companies can explore in ITT and Block 31, 
contradicting the Yasuni-ITT Initiative that was in effect at the time," says 
Alexandra Almeida, from Ecuadorian NGO Acción Ecologica.

Last October it was agreed that donors to the UNDP trust could choose between 
having their donations returned or reinvested in other projects in Ecuador. To 
date, more than US$2m has been given back.

Ecuadorians who continue to support the Yasuni-ITT Initiative are aiming to 
force a referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/aug/23/ecuador-yasuni-national-park>
 and must collect 600,000 signatures by 12 April – a move countered by the 
government, that wants its own referendum in favour of oil operations.

Rafael Correa's office declined to comment.

• Following publication of this article, Dr Juan Falconi Puig, the Ecuadorian 
ambassador to the UK issued the following statement, which was appended on 25 
April 2014:

You claim the Ecuadorian government "was negotiating a secret $1bn deal with a 
Chinese bank to drill for oil under the Yasuni national park in the Amazon 
while pursuing a high-profile scheme to keep the oil under the ground in return 
for international donations according to a government document seen by the 
Guardian".
Yasuni was never up for negotiation. Your claim is totally baseless and was 
made without any credible evidence. The 2009 "government document" that you 
cite as proof for this claim is fraudulent.
It was with a heavy heart that Ecuador last year cancelled the Yasuni 
Initiative launched in 2007, a ground-breaking idea based on sharing 
responsibilities in the important battle against climate change. Under it, 
Ecuador would have forgone half of the oil revenues that it would have received 
for exploiting oil in this area of the Amazon if, as compensation, it received 
the other half through international donations placed in a UN administered 
trust.
As I wrote in The Guardian at the time: "Without international political will 
to give the financial support, the Yasuní initiative was never going to 
succeed. Tragically, it was the fundamental reason it did not. Despite 
strenuous efforts by the Ecuadorian government, including establishing a 
secretary of state devoted to this scheme, the financial backing fell way 
short… In fact, just 0.37% of the target was provided by international donors. 
This made the scheme unworkable."
The allegation that Ecuador was negotiating oil exploitation in Yasuni with a 
Chinese company whilst simultaneously pushing the Yasuni Initiative wrongly 
implies that Ecuador was never serious in making the scheme work. More widely, 
it is designed to portray the Ecuadorean government as duplicitous.
You allege as evidence for your claim a so-called "Last minute clause" in a 
document stating "the Ecuadorian party has said it will do all it can to help 
Petrochina and Andes Petroleum explore ITT and Block 31 [the Yasuni area]".
But Ecuador never agreed to such a clause. This was an idea proposed by the 
Chinese party during discussions on a development loan totally unrelated to 
Yasuni. Ecuador immediately rejected that idea. To emphasise this, Ecuador even 
included a reference to this unacceptable clause in documents with the words 
that you quote crossed out. In fact, it was over this difference that the 
talks, at that time, ended.
Evidence also suggests that the author of what we believe is a modified 
document is an opponent of Ecuador's government. Such distortions about Ecuador 
are increasingly stemming from powerful opponents – as we believe has this 
document – at home and abroad. They are designed to damage the reputation and 
undermine international support of both, Ecuador's Citizens Revolution and a 
government that has approval ratings of over 70%, the highest in Latin America.
 