
Mum and Dad always knew I was very determined. Mum would call it stubbornness. 
If somebody said I couldn’t do something, then I’d try to prove them wrong. I 
was like that from when I was a little boy, and if somebody dared me to do 
something, then I’d do it. She thought I would grow out of it, but I got worse. 
And as soon as I discovered skiing, I’d do daredevil stunts on skis. Mum and 
Dad never tried to stop me … I don’t think they could have!

My dad was a plasterer and he’d usually gone to work before I got up, and he 
would be just coming in when I went to bed. Sometimes he worked weekends as 
well. He had a mortgage to pay. I was closer to my mum than my dad, because I 
saw her more.

My brother is 18 months older than me and my sister is three years younger. 
I’m the middle one. I was born in Cheltenham and that’s where I grew up. When I 
was a child, my brother was always picking on me. Generally, he was the one who 
would start the fights, but I gave as good as I got.

My sister was very bossy as a child. Even though she’s three years younger 
than me, she would try to boss me about and tell me to stop fighting with my 
brother. She’d shout at us like my mum did. She hasn’t changed – she’s still 
like that now. She’s a school teacher, and she was born to be one.

The worst thing that happened to me as a child was seeing my brother get 
pushed into a cement mixer. I was about eight and he was 10. We were playing on 
the building site where my dad was working. We managed to start an old cement 
mixer, then another kid pushed my brother towards it. His T-shirt got caught in 
the crank shaft, and it started twisting it around. And then it started 
twisting his skin. He was in a right mess.

Social services came round to our house to speak to my mum once, because my 
brother, my sister and I were all in hospital at the same time. My brother had 
ridden his bike into the back of a car, I had a knee infection and my sister 
had hurt herself doing something else, and each of us was in a different 
hospital. I don’t know what social services actually said to my mum – she only 
told us about it quite a few years later.

My mum and dad were really supportive of my skiing. They took me over to the 
ski centre as much as they possibly could, and to racing competitions all over 
the UK. Dad didn’t know anything about skiing and didn’t want to put any 
pressure on me. I don’t think they quite understood what had happened with me 
competing in the Olympics until I went for a drink with them in a pub in 
Oxford, a couple of weeks later. When I walked in, the whole pub just erupted. 
They were quite shocked by it all.

I’ve got two daughters of my own, and I loved watching my children grow up. I 
tried to be a hands-on dad as much I could, but for a while, I was working too 
much – from 8am to 8pm, and at weekends as well. Then I realised I was doing 
just what my dad did.

I was gutted when my wife and I separated three years ago. I found it 
desperately hard. I missed reading my daughters stories when they went to bed, 
I missed cooking their tea and their bathtime. I missed just being with my 
girls, every day. It was a horrible situation and it’s still very, very 
difficult. I try to see them as much as I can, and I make sure the time I do 
have with them is quality time.

Becoming a dad has made me softer. I cry a lot easier now than I ever did, and 
I think that’s because of the kids. I don’t know why. I guess fatherhood has 
just brought out a softer side in me.
 