
Motorists in Edinburgh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh> were issued 
fines after an app wrongly told them they could park for free over the festive 
period.

The mistake was made by the RingGo payment system, which is managed by the 
City of Edinburgh council’s contractor NSL. The app allows drivers to pay for 
parking via their phones, but it mistakenly told users they could park for free 
on Tuesday because it was a public holiday.

However, when users returned to their cars at various sites across the 
capital, many had been issued with a £30 parking fine.

Parking was free in the city on Christmas Day and Boxing Day but it is 
understood the app had not updated in time for 27 December. The council has 
said those affected will have their parking tickets cancelled.

A council spokeswoman said: “Details relating to parking restrictions during 
the festive period are advertised very clearly through our website and social 
media and are provided on ticket machines throughout the city.

“We are aware, however, that there was an error for a time with the RingGo 
payment service managed by our contracted partner NSL. We are liaising with NSL 
to ensure that RingGo users who were issued with a parking ticket, due to the 
system failure on Tuesday, have their tickets cancelled.”

RingGo has sent a text message to users apologising for the error and 
reiterating that all fines will be cancelled.

An NSL spokesman said: “NSL has confirmed that parking restrictions and 
charges in the city of Edinburgh do apply on Tuesday 27 December and Monday 2 
January as stated on all pay and display machines and on the City of Edinburgh 
council’s website.

“Full enforcement procedures apply on both dates in order to maintain safe and 
fair access for anyone visiting the shops and facilities in and around the city 
centre. The company has confirmed that it has been made aware of an incorrect 
instruction on the RingGo app and RingGo website and has asked for the 
instructions to be amended as a matter of urgency.

“It has advised anyone who has received an incorrect penalty charge notice on 
27 December, as a result of the error, to appeal to have their ticket 
cancelled.”
 