
Fiona Millar (We need another Ruskin moment now, after 40 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/13/ruskin-speech-education-jim-callaghan-reforms>
, 13 December) identifies a vital need for a new, dynamic vision for education 
to be articulated. However, it would be nice to see such a vision addressing 
improvements in both compulsory and post-compulsory education. The new “great 
debate on education” has to address the whole population, embrace inclusive 
lifelong learning and ensure that it is not just vocational education that is 
available to a high standard, crucially important though that is.

Vocational education must be supported by liberal adult education that enables 
children and adults to be prepared to deal with the difficult problems related 
to both work and society. Jim Callaghan said in his address at Ruskin College: 
“There is no virtue in producing socially well-adjusted members of society who 
are unemployed because they do not have the skills. Nor at the other extreme 
must they be technically efficient robots.”

The new great debate should also look at different ways of providing 
education. This would include delivery in schools and colleges, of course, but 
should embrace provision provided, for example, through study circles, which 
were organised by the TUC in the 1980s; the University of the Third Age and the 
opportunities that organisation has provided for retired people; and 
opportunities that have been provided for older people who have no 
qualifications to gain them through organisations like theRansackers Association
 <http://www.ransackersassociation.org.uk>.

As Fiona Millar implies, we need some brave, bold and dynamic ideas to 
generate an education system that addresses the educational needs of the 21st 
century. I, for obvious reasons, would like to see another Ruskin moment as 
soon as possible.
Alan Shepherd
Vice-chair, Ruskin College governing executive

• The continuing PR campaign against any reduction in overseas students (
Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/20/folly-of-a-crackdown-on-international-students>
, 21 December) fails to address one vital matter. It is obvious that recruiting 
from the world rather than just the UK gives more chance of admitting excellent 
students, but British universities have become so dependent on the vast sums 
obtained in overseas student fees that it now requires little more than a 
regular pulse and the ability to pay the fee to be admitted to most 
universities. It is routine for educational agents in many countries to provide 
all of the qualifications required, something that is often included in their 
advertising. The universities know this but most make no attempt to check as 
they are terrified of losing the fees.

Not only does this damage the reputation of the universities but admitting 
students who, for example, have forged English language scores means that many 
are unable to benefit from the course. We used to get many of the best students 
from places such as Hong Kong and Singapore, but these now usually go to the US 
where the top universities do not bend their requirements. Tightening up on 
requirements can only be a good thing in the long term.
Robert Walls
Formerly head of international liaison, Royal Holloway, University of London

• There might be some doubt, as Laura McInerney says, about the “extent to 
which Wilshaw was responsible” for the alleged “improvement” in Ofsted, but 
there is none when it comes to his role in the demoralisation of the teaching 
profession (And so farewell Sir Michael Wilshaw, the Dirty Harry of Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/20/michael-wilshaw-ofsted-chief-inspector-schools>
, 20 December). Arrogantly attributing the improved rating of primary schools 
to “Ofsted’s hard work” is simply insulting to teachers, while his penchant for 
“forthright language” is sadly matched by his overuse of simplified and damning 
generalisations. For every school underachieving in the north of England there 
are others doing brilliantly; even in schools with below average performance, 
there are teachers achieving outstanding results.

Wilshaw would have done education in these areas better service by 
highlighting these facts, and stressing the difference in grant per pupil 
between areas, rather than constantly criticising.
Bernie Evans
Liverpool

• I do not recognise Laura McInerney’s picture of an Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> sorted, independent and clearer 
in its expectations than when Sir Michael Wilshaw became chief inspector. Nor, 
I suspect, would many school leaders. I also believe she fails to do justice to 
his pride verging on arrogance. The last paragraph of his latest annual report 
tells it all – or almost all: “I have been proud to serve as the head of an 
institution that has been such an influential contributor to the essential task 
of raising educational standards.”

But what about those working in schools? Have they also been “influential”, 
possibly more influential than Ofsted in raising standards? Somewhat 
patronisingly he does concede that those working in the system “have, on the 
whole, responded to these (his?) higher expectations”. Notice the qualified 
praise. Only a few weeks ago he described English education as “mediocre”. So 
has the progress trumpeted in the annual report simply moved the system on from 
being “inadequate” to being “mediocre”? Is that the real but hidden message of 
his self-congratulatory report?
Professor Colin Richards
Former senior HMI, Spark Bridge, Cumbria

• Laura McInerney in her assessment of the chief inspectorclaims that “a new 
framework (of inspection) makes it clearer what is expected of schools”.

Clearer, yes, but it is still excessive in size and complexity. Perhaps 
Wilshaw could explain the need for an inspection handbook that runs to 73 
pages, requires nine types of information before inspection and 14 at the 
start, and details the 18 criteria for judging leadership, nine for governance, 
nine for teaching, learning and assessment, nine for personal development, and 
three for the learning outcomes from 20 different groups of learners (boys, 
girls, ethnic groups etc).

Besides, Ofsted judges overall effectiveness by evaluating provision for 
pupils’ spiritual (four criteria), moral (three), social (three) and cultural 
(five) development. I have summarised above just the bare bones of Ofsted’s 
demands. Proportionate inspection based on dialogue and mutual trust could 
promote improvement but Ofsted is this year wasting about £150m of taxpayers’ 
money by creating a climate of fear in schools and colleges.

While he is at it, could he please respond to my invitation on this letters 
pageon 6 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/education-michael-wilshaw-ofsted-tertiary-colleges>
 to retract his infamous claim that an all-time low in staff morale is a sign 
of successful leadership. Does he still hold this view? Or was it a rash remark 
of the kind we have all made and instantly regretted? Or has he become ashamed 
of its psychological illiteracy? Or is it now an Ofsted criterion for assessing 
heads? Which is it? I think we should be told.
Emeritus Professor Frank Coffield
UCL Institute of Education

• The government has announced “crucial reforms that will tackle the 
historical postcode lottery in school funding” and that: “Currently, 
disparities in the current school funding system mean a school could get 50% 
more if it were situated in another part of the country.” Indeed some schools 
in London are receiving around £6,800 per pupil while schools in Cheshire East, 
where I live, are only receiving about £4,100 – a difference of about 66%. Yet 
the Department for Education then goes on to state that the plan is that some 
schools will see an increase in funding of 5.5% by 2020 and that no school will 
see a drop of more than 3% overall. This could mean that pupils in London will 
still be having more than 50% spent on them by the government.

While I accept there are some higher costs in London and that needs vary, 
there are children in Cheshire East who have significant needs and it cannot be 
justified that one child can have so much more spent on them just because of 
where they live. This proposal will not end the postcode lottery that the DofE 
states it is tackling. How can this lead to fair funding formula for children 
across the country?
Stuart Purves
Macclesfield, Cheshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 