
New guidelines, billed as putting pressure on governing bodies to limit the 
cost of school uniforms to parents, were unveiled at last week's Liberal 
Democrat party conference. What difference will they make? A close comparison 
of thenew guidance 
<http://media.education.gov.uk/assets/files/pdf/s/school%20uniform%20guidance%202013.pdf>
, published this month, with theMay 2012 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/175475/DFE-30004-2012.pdf>
 advice it replaces shows that, as of last year, schools were already being 
urged to "give high priority to cost considerations" when setting uniform 
policies. The May 2012 document added: "No school uniform should be so 
expensive as to leave pupils or their families feeling unable to apply to, or 
attend, a school of their choice, due to the cost of the uniform."

A very similar stipulation is included in the latest guidance. However, the 
new document does beef up the advice in two areas: saying schools should 
generally avoid forcing parents to buy uniform from a single named supplier and 
that "schools should keep compulsory branded items to a minimum".

Even back in 2007 Labour  
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20071204130638/asp.readspeaker.net/rsonecustomer/dfes/tmp/962493587.pdf>
had said that "uniforms should be widely available at high street shops".

The acid test, of course, will be whether schools feel compelled to pay any 
attention. One of possibly many that might want to have a new look at its 
policies is state-funded Langley Hall primary academy, one of England's first 
free schools.On its website <http://www.lhpa.co.uk/uniform/> it features a list 
of 21 compulsory uniform items for girls, including a kilt, summer blazer, felt 
winter hat, boater and cravat. A further three items – a "school woolly hat, 
scarf and gloves" – are listed as "optional but no other hat and gloves [ie not 
school-specific] to be worn".

For boys, there are 18 compulsory items, including a blazer and a summer 
waistcoat. A list of prices for 12 of the compulsory items for girls from the 
uniform supplier on the school's website, Recognition Express, comes to £181. 
For boys, prices quoted for 10 out of the 18 compulsory items add up to £132.50.

Sally Eaton, education director of the school, near Slough in Berkshire, says 
that parents only need to purchase five items for girls specifically through 
Recognition Express, and that these come to £101. For other items, parents are 
given the names of rival suppliers to get cheaper deals. The cost of compulsory 
Recognition Express kit is £70 for a "lower school" boy and £50.50 for an 
"upper school" boy.

Eaton says children entitled to free school meals can buy their uniforms at 
half price; that unclaimed lost property uniform items are offered to parents 
who are struggling with costs; and that there are second-hand uniform sales. 
Recognition Express was chosen after a competitive tender.

She adds: "Even if the cost of the girls' uniform, including the non-specific 
items, came to £150 you need to take into consideration that children are 
wearing these items for 190 days a year. The help that we give to parents on 
free school meals is very much appreciated by them and goes a long way towards 
making it very affordable." 

Meanwhile, the Harris academy chain may also find itself at odds with the new 
guidance. Some parents at the former Roke primary school in Kenley, Surrey, are 
unhappy about uniform stipulations at the school, which the Harris chain took 
over this month – in particular, that they were told pupils must wear a 
Harris-branded fleece top over their uniforms, rather than a coat of their 
parents' choosing.

One parent complains that the Harris fleeces – which have been provided free – 
are "flimsy", and that when parents asked for their children to be able to wear 
a thicker coat, they were told they could not. The same stipulation 
on Harris-branded coats is said to be the rule at another school transferred 
to the chain this term: the former Camden juniors in Carshalton, south London.

A parent at the former Roke school says: "It goes against my instinct to dress 
my child in a flimsy coat through winter. It's all about the Harris brand 
rather than the needs of the children for a warm coat that they can easily 
identify on their peg."

One parent says she was advised by a member of staff to buy thermal underwear 
for her child.

Harris's uniform requirements for the former Roke school include six 
compulsory Harris-branded items, including a Harris book bag, all of which are 
billed as available from a single supplier: Brigade Clothing, based in Coventry.

But a Harris spokesperson said that parents would be able to provide their own 
coat later in the year. "There is a school coat that is fine for the current 
weather," said the spokesperson. "If as it gets colder, parents want their 
children to wear a heavier coat, this will of course be allowed." A newsletter 
informing parents of this went out just as Education Guardian was going to 
press …

Doing the Labour shuffle

Is it a case of when, not if, for Stephen Twigg? Rumours continue to swirl 
about an impending move for the shadow education secretary, who is widely seen 
not to have landed many punches on his opposite number, Michael Gove. One 
source told us a Labour reshuffle, with Twigg leaving education, could be 
coming as swiftly as next week, during the Tory party conference. We shall see. 
One name being rumoured as in the frame for a shadow education job was Stella 
Creasy, MP for Walthamstow.

Primary lessons on forced academy status

Another week, another campaign against a seeming move to force academy status 
on a primary school. Parents at Snaresbrook primary in South Woodford, 
north-east London, protested last week as academy "brokers" from the Department 
for Education met governors to push for the school to leave the local authority.

The school was placed in special measures after an Ofsted inspection in June, 
but unofficial results of Sats tests taken by pupils in May show a marked 
improvement and the campaign says the school is being transformed under new 
leadership, supported by Redbridge council. The campaign claims the support of 
a clear majority of parents as well as the local Labour MP, John Cryer. We will 
be keeping a close eye on it.
 