
Sadly, your editorial (The outgoing Ofsted chief has ruffled a lot of the 
right feathers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/the-guardian-view-on-sir-michael-wilshaw-ruffling-the-right-feathers>
, 2 December) is right that “a preference for evidence over ideology … is too 
rare in the politics of education”. The dismantling of local authority 
oversight of schools and its replacement by cross-country academy chains is an 
example of ideological change with an absence of supporting evidence that it 
will improve our schools.

The decade timescale of real educational improvement clashes with ministers’ 
political need to be seen 'to do something'
Hugh Burkhardt 
Another is the burdening of primary education with testing. A booklet just 
published by the National Union of Teachers,The Mismeasurement of Learning 
<https://reclaimingschools.org/2016/11/28/the-mismeasurement-of-learning/>, 
gives 16 short essays of evidence on how tests are damaging children and 
primary education (seereclaimingschools.org <https://reclaimingschools.org/>). 
The authors are academic experts (disclaimer – I’m one) with extensive 
experience of different aspects of school assessment and give powerful support 
to the 90% of primary teachers in a recent NUT survey who identified 
fundamental problems with today’s assessment system.

Of course teachers need to assess the progress of their pupils: it is the 
current, standardised, high-stakes testing that is oppressive and damaging. 
Hopefully few MPs share Michael Gove’s rejection of expert advice.
Emeritus Professor Michael Bassey 
Newark, Nottinghamshire

• Sir Michael Wilshaw’s observation that “change sometimes has to be slow and 
incremental” is fundamental. Unfortunately, the decade timescale of real 
educational improvement clashes with ministers’ political need to be seen “to 
do something”. However idiosyncratic, it only needs to look plausible to their 
colleagues and the Daily Mail; they know that they will have moved away long 
before the effect is clear. So Liz Truss sent some teachers to China to learn 
how to teach maths. What does the inevitable failure to improve the practice of 
the hundreds of thousands who teach maths matter to her now she is the lord 
chancellor?

GCSE results are a thin gruel to feed developing minds when what is needed is 
a rich stew
Jeremy Cushing 
We won’t see real progress until politicians treat education more like 
medicine, supporting a coherent programme of gradual research-based 
improvements, creatively designed and carefully developed until they work well. 
It is being done in Singapore and around the world. It has been done here.
Hugh Burkhardt
Professor of mathematics education, University of Nottingham

• The key weakness with Michael Wilshaw’s Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> regime was his too ready 
acceptance of the framework provided by GCSE results as an analogue for school 
standards, yet this measure is a poor reflection of what a good education 
should provide. A more creative, less managerial chief inspector could have 
advocated a less narrow, more challenging curriculum with a broader range of 
objectives – intellectual, social, creative and moral – reflecting the whole 
range of student achievement. GCSE results are a thin gruel to feed developing 
minds when what is needed is a rich stew.
Roy Boffy
Former senior adviser for further education, Dudley LEA

• Before he retires I would like Michael Wilshaw to retract publicly his 
notorious claim:“If anyone says to you that staff morale is at an all-time low, 
you know you are doing something right.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/23/chief-inspector-schools-michael-wilshaw>
 Has it become part of the job description of the chief inspector to lower the 
morale of teachers as much as possible? Certainly, the burdensome and 
ever-changing demands that inspection imposes on teachers continue to play 
their part in lowering morale.
Frank Coffield
Emeritus professor of education, UCL Institute of Education

• Ofsted’s latest report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/ofsted-annual-report-201516> pays 
heed to the fact that in those secondary schools that have been found to have 
improved, investment had been made in the professional development of teachers 
and middle leaders. In our work with schools we regularly see the short- and 
long-term benefits of such investment in improving the resilience and wellbeing 
of teachers, in turn benefiting pupils. Now more than ever, this is needed to 
stem the growing recruitment and retention crisis and introduce a long-term 
vision and stability across the sector.
Julian Stanley
CEO, Education Support Partnership

Further education is woefully underfunded and that this is almost certainly 
the result of snobbery

• Sir Michael Wilshaw rightly draws attention to the huge contribution that 
further education can make (Retiring schools chief warns of skills gap’s cost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/01/england-faces-widening-skills-gap-says-outgoing-ofsted-chief>
, 2 December). The appalling fact is that this has gone unrecognised for such a 
long time.

While higher education receives all the plaudits and attention, further 
education is the mainstay of our vocational system and provides skills for the 
thousands who don’t go to university. It also provides a chance for many 
working-class kids to get on the ladder to higher education.

A great pity therefore that Sir Michael and others at the top of the education 
tree have not used their influence to do more.Further education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/further-education> needs more of a place 
in our national life and more support from ministers, and for the prime 
minister and the chancellor to recognise this by providing significant funding 
for colleges and student support. We are in a skills crisis and the way out is 
in our hands.
John Akker 
General secretary, National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher 
Education (NATFHE) 1994-97

• Well done, Sir Michael Wilshaw, for pointing out what everyone in the trade 
has known for years: that further education is woefully underfunded and that 
this is almost certainly the result of snobbery. At least, it’s the result of a 
system where no one with any influence on policy has been educated there.

What he might also have said is that FE comes in several flavours, of which 
one is the ideal form of schooling for our system. I refer to tertiary 
colleges, which combine a joint sixth form, with full array of “academic” 
courses, and a technical college, with access to vocational courses and 
apprenticeships. Students are able to choose across the whole range, so that it 
is the perfect form of comprehensive education for the age group 16-19. Such 
colleges also normally provide a range of adult, evening and day-release 
courses, and catch-up courses for students who did badly at GCSE.

Tertiary colleges suffer not only from the snobbery of the public-school elite 
but also from hostility from secondary schools, which naturally resent losing 
their sixth forms. They were nationalised by Ken Clarke along with other types 
of FE, and consequently also suffer from micro-mismanagement from Whitehall. A 
big investment in them would not only solve our skills crisis but also bridge 
the academic/vocational divide. All you would then need to do would be to 
abolish private schools and our education system could be as good as Finland’s.
Jeremy Cushing
Exeter

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 