
I was reading an article from 2013 highlighting how a couple almost missed out 
on their dream house due to a £10 debt to a mobile phone provider. This has 
happened to me.

I needed a mortgage and obtained a copy of my credit report. I was stunned to 
see a poor credit score due to a £10 default recorded by EE/Orange in 2011. I 
have never had an account withOrange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/orange>. I tried to explain this to EE 
which would not proceed without an EE mobile number … which I do not have!

EE agreed to search its systems but could not find an account relating to my 
postcode. It then advised me to raise a query with Experian. Experian said that 
it had contacted EE.EE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/everything-everywhere> told them I had to 
get in touch myself. Back to square one.

I emailed EE’s fraud department but no response. Back to customer services – 
they found an account relating to my address but could not pass on any 
information since I had no security details. I was advised to go into an EE 
store with my passport. I did so, but the store couldn’t help. And so it went 
on.

Eventually, EE said it had found the account and it was bona fide so the 
default notice would remain. I contacted head office again and was told it 
could not find the account.

After many more fruitless calls, EE told me it had deleted the default notice 
and apologised for the inconvenience. This has left a very bitter taste. I 
still do not know what the default was for, or indeed how, it came to be on my 
credit report.HG, Doncaster, South Yorks

It turns out that the account was, after all, fraudulent and EE says that it 
has now finally contacted you to explain.

It takes a rosy view of the time frames: “Once the inquiry was raised with 
EE’s fraud department the account was investigated and written off and the 
credit report updated within 24 hours. The customer let us know she is happy 
with the outcome.”

It took far longer than 24 hours and you are far from happy. Things only 
started moving after you wrote to The Observer and you have been offered no 
compensation for your time and expense chasing them over the three weeks it sat 
on your complaint.

The good news is that you should now be able to apply for a mortgage, but it 
would be wise to keep an eye on your credit record in future, especially if you 
have been the victim of identity fraud.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 