
A record label manager and her husband have been conned out of £25,000 after 
becoming the latest people to fall victim to a highly sophisticated email scam.

Their story involves a fraudster who posed as their builder, set up a copycat 
email address and even managed to mock up an incredibly realistic fake invoice. 
It shows the lengths criminals will go to, and will send a shiver down the 
spine of anyone about to have work done on their house or who are thinking 
about employing a tradesman.

And what will shock some people is Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay>, which operated the account that 
the fraudster used to accept their money, says it does not report such crimes 
to the police – on the grounds that “the bank is not the victim”.

So you think you’re safe doing internet banking?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/21/safe-internet-banking-cyber-security-online>
Barclays also, apparently, wouldn’t cooperate with the couple’s own bank, 
Lloyds, when it attempted to get their money back. Yet the onerous ID checks 
banks must carry out when someone opens an account mean Barclays, presumably, 
knows a huge amount of detail about the person who stole the cash – their name, 
address, date of birth, income and employment details etc.

Sarah and David Fisher told Guardian Money that even though this is a 
“life-changing” amount of money to lose, and clearly a criminal matter, no one 
seems to be interested in pursuing their case.

Sarah, who lives in north-west London, got in touch with us after reading our 
13 February report about aBristol woman duped into paying £1,500 to someone 
posing as her carpenter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/13/banks-current-account-fraud>.

She had received an email purporting to be from the carpenter and requesting 
that the money for the work be transferred to his bank account. It later 
emerged that his email had been hacked and the bank account into which she had 
paid the money wasn’t his.

The Fishers have a four-year-old daughter and a 22-month-old son, and are 
having an extension built, so have been in regular communication with their 
building company.

On 30 October last year the company’s accounts executive emailed an invoice 
for the work, in the form of a PDF attachment carrying the company’s logo. It 
was an invoice they were expecting and was 100% genuine. It gave the total due 
– £27,829 – plus an account name (the name of the building company), bank 
account number, sort code and reference number.

Then on 2 November they received what appeared to be a follow-up email from 
the same employee, written in the same style (“Dear Sarah & David” ...), and 
featuring all the same logos and formatting, and the same email signature. This 
stated: “We have changed who we bank with. I forgot to amend the changes on the 
invoice I sent 30/10. The attached invoice has our new banking details ... I’m 
sorry for any inconvenience these changes may have caused ...” Just like the 30 
October email, this one was signed “Kind regards”. This second invoice is 
identical in almost every way to the first – only the account number and sort 
code are different.

It’s such a horrific thing. It happened in a split second, yet it has changed 
what the next few years will bring 

The couple paid £25,000 – their account’s daily payment limit – so were 
surprised when, a few days later, they received an email from the company 
chasing payment. They told the accounts executive they had paid the bulk of the 
bill, but she emailed back to say that the second invoice had not come from 
her. The building company banks with NatWest, but the bank details given on the 
second invoice were for a Barclays account.

It was then the couple realised they had been scammed, with the most likely 
explanation being that either the building company, or the couple, unwittingly 
downloaded malicious software, which enabled the fraudster to intercept their 
emails. When the Fishers looked back at the emails, they noticed that the one 
received on 2 November was sent from an email address just one letter different 
to the genuine one (“development” instead of “developments” in the company 
name).

“Of course we were shocked and upset – two bright, professional but busy 
people coming to terms with being conned in such a sophisticated but simple 
way. But we had an underlying feeling that somehow we would recover our money. 
Unfortunately, this hasn’t been the case,” says Sarah, a general manager at 
Universal Music.

“This is a life-changing amount that is partly remortgage money and partly 
life savings. It’s such a horrific thing to happen, so the more people we can 
relay our story to, the more people can protect themselves against it happening 
to them. It happened in a split-second, yet it has changed what the next few 
years look like for us.”

Why do I let myself be conned? | Clare Allan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/02/why-passively-let-myself-be-conned>
The couple reported the matter to the police, which in turn referred it to 
Action Fraud, the UK’s national fraud and internet crime reporting centre. “The 
reason the police are citing for not pursuing an investigation is that this 
type of crime is so rife they haven’t got the resources – they say that 
compared to some of the cases they are dealing with, it’s small scale,” says 
Sarah.

Lloyds Bank declined to accept any responsibility on the grounds that the 
transfer was made by the Fishers and it was merely following their 
instructions. It told them it had been “unable to obtain a return of your funds 
from Barclays,” adding: “Barclays will not disclose their account opening 
documentation to us for confidentiality reasons.”

The Fishers then turned their attention to Barclays. “Our own questioning with 
the banks had traced our money to an account in the north owned by a man called 
‘Harry’. It, of course, had been immediately fully withdrawn and closed,” says 
Sarah.

Eventually the couple received a letter from Barclays saying it had finished 
its investigation. It said that by the time it was alerted, the couple’s 
£25,000 had been “utilised” by the account holder, so it was unable to return 
any of their cash. Its letter added: “We do not report scam claims to the 
police because the bank is not the victim.”

However, the bank did say it would cooperate with the police as part of a 
criminal investigation.

The case of the Bristol woman also involved a Barclays account, and Sarah says 
this seems to suggest “a weakness in their security at some point in the 
process”. She adds: “If someone stole £25,000 via other means, it would 
unquestionably be taken more seriously.” Barclays told Money that “appropriate 
documentation was presented when this account was opened, and we had no way of 
knowing that the account would be used for fraudulent purposes.

“When opening the account Barclays complied with all regulatory requirements 
and has robust identity and verification processes. Regrettably, by the time we 
were made aware of the fraud, no money remained and we were unable to return 
any funds.”

Banks must do more to end the scourge of current account fraud
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/13/banks-current-account-fraud> 
How to avoid being scammed

• If you receive an email asking you to make a bank transfer and it’s someone 
you haven’t previously made a payment to, or have paid before but they have 
changed their bank details, your default position should be suspicion – even if 
you were expecting the bill/invoice/demand. Phone the person and check they 
have asked for the money and that these are the correct bank details. If it’s a 
large sum, send a small amount first – £10, say – then check they have received 
it before paying the balance.

• There’s a simple way to reduce your risk of being fleeced: don’t bank 
online. In November 2015, we featured Ross Anderson, Professor of Security 
Engineering at the University of Cambridge’s Computer Laboratory, who has never 
banked online because of the risks of fraud.

• Regularly check all bank and card statements for suspicious transactions.

• Check your credit report – you can spot applications and spending that are 
nothing to do with you.

• Don’t use things such as names of your pets/partner/children as passwords.

• Ignore unsolicited phone calls, texts, emails and letters, particularly if 
they ask for account details, pins, passwords or personal information.

• Don’t store account names and passwords on your smartphone.

• Register to vote at your current address. If you don’t, fraudsters could use 
your previous address details to open new credit accounts and run up debts in 
your name.
 