
After the televised leaders’ debates before the 2015 general election, one of 
the most Googled queries was: “Can I vote for the SNP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/03/can-voters-outside-scotland-vote-snp>
?” And although that might have sounded like a straightforward enough question, 
most of those asking it were in England.

At the time, the Scottish first minister and SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon was 
asked if she might take advantage of that interest and field candidates south 
of the border and sensibly she dismissed it. But now – in the course of a 
rather fawning interview by the actor Alan Cumming –it seems she’s having 
second thoughts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/nicola-sturgeon-quips-she-could-let-snp-field-candidates-in-england>
.

And it’s not as wild a scenario as it might appear. In the general election of 
1885 a journalist called TP O’Connor was returned for bothGalway and the 
“Scotland division” of Liverpool 
<http://www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?page=gr&GRid=8490822>. An Irish Home 
Ruler, he opted to sit for Liverpool, which had a large Irish population and, 
remarkably, he continued to represent the city as an Irish nationalist until 
1929, seven years after most of Ireland had seceded from the United Kingdom.

Nicola Sturgeon quips she could field SNP candidates in England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/nicola-sturgeon-quips-she-could-let-snp-field-candidates-in-england>
That, however, was clearly down to constituency demographics and the 
candidate’s charisma. Sure, English cities such as London and Liverpool are 
full of Scots, but they aren’t concentrated (or indeed nationalist) enough to 
give the SNP any realistic chance of electoral success. Then there’s the old 
steel town of Corby, known for its large Scottish population, but inan informal 
referendum in July 2014 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-northamptonshire-28279790> “Little 
Scotland” decisively rejected independence.

Sturgeon’s rationale in her Big Issue interview 
<http://www.bigissue.com/features/interviews/7175/exclusive-alan-cumming-interviews-nicola-sturgeon-for-the-big-issue>
, meanwhile, was unintentionally revealing. She said a lot of English voters 
who contacted her felt “completely disenfranchised” because there was “nobody 
speaking up for them”. Now presumably the first minister didn’t mean Tories, 
Corbynistas or Brexiteers, and arguably Tim Farron’s Liberal Democrats are 
already “speaking up” for remainers.

So that leaves moderate Labourites without a political voice. I say 
“revealing” because this is the very constituency the SNP leader and many of 
her supporters have devoted considerable energy to denigrating over the past 
few years. Even before Iraq provided a (justified) basis for cynicism, Scottish 
nationalists denounced the former Labour leader as a pale imitation of Margaret 
Thatcher. To this day, the terms “Blairite” or “Red Tory” are used pejoratively 
by supporters of independence or the SNP.

Which is ironic, for the party that the contemporary SNP most closely 
resembles is New Labour, displaying the same professionalism, constant 
campaigning, ideological flexibility and elevation of newspaper headlines over 
substantive policy that gave Tony Blair three successive election victories. Of 
course that’s not how it appears to many of those who view the first minister 
as some sort of political saviour; from a distance all they hear is rhetoric 
about social justice and opposing “austerity”.

Drill a little deeper, however, and they might be disappointed. Next year the 
SNP will have been running Scotland’s devolved government for a decade without 
any transformational change to its credit, certainly nothing that could be 
described as redistribution of wealth. By contrast, after 10 years in power the 
much-derided Blair administrations had introduced tax credits, a minimum wage 
and reduced child and pensioner poverty.

The SNP’s standard defence is that it lacks all the “levers” necessary to 
affect substantive change, yet the more power is devolved to Holyrood, the more 
conservative the Scottish government seems to become. It recently delayed 
assuming responsibility for more welfare responsibilities, while prior to last 
May’s Scottish parliament elections Sturgeon adopted George Osborne-like 
arguments against restoring the 50p rate of income tax. There is a sizeable 
gulf, in other words, between rhetoric and reality.

Nicola Sturgeon has marched her party to the top of the hill. Where next? | 
Libby Brooks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/nicola-sturgeon-snp-referendum>
For deep down, the SNP is about as leftwing as Harold Wilson or Blair, ie not 
very. Fundamentally, it isn’t driven by ideology but by the pursuit of 
independence, and over the decades it has adopted whatever philosophical guise 
is necessary to achieve that goal. In the 1940s and 50s, for example, 
nationalists were suspicious of the NHS and welfare state; today they pose as 
its defenders. And the party’s fiscal thinking – such as it is – amounts to 
little more than trumped-up trickle-down economics.

The first minister should also be careful about reading too much into her 
email inbox. Two recent accounts of the European referendum, by Sir Craig 
Oliver and Tim Shipman, both allude to nervousness in the remain camp about how 
Sturgeon was likely to come across to English viewers in one televised debate. 
Although popular across the UK at the previous year’s general election, by the 
spring of 2016 the SNP leader had taken on a more Marmite quality, not least 
because many voters south of the border found her defence of one union (the EU) 
but rejection of another (the UK) understandably confusing.

So even if it was tongue in cheek, the idea of the SNP trying to emulate TP 
O’Connor’s nationalist success in England smacks of hubris, symptomatic of a 
party convinced of its own moral and political superiority. And hubris, of 
course, can mean pride before a fall.
 