
In East Antarctica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica>, 3,000km 
south of the West Australian town of Albany, an ice shelf the size of 
California is melting from below.

The concerning trend was confirmed by Australian scientists in December, who 
reported that warming ocean temperatures were causing the rapid melt of the end 
of the Totten glacier <http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/2/12/e1601610>, 
which is holding back enough ice to create a global sea rise of between 3.5 
metres and six metres.

On Saturday, a team of international scientists left Hobart aboard the 
Australianresearch ship Investigator 
<http://www.csiro.au/en/Research/Facilities/Marine-National-Facility/RV-Investigator>
 to map the seafloor ahead of the glacier to trace its history back to the last 
ice age, in the hopes of predicting its future melting patterns.

The 51-day mission is one of the longest ever voyages by Australian scientists 
to Antarctica and will involve mapping the unexplored Sabrina Coast seafloor 
and taking samples of piles of glacial sediment left behind by the retreating 
ice sheet.

It has been four years in the planning for the chief scientist Dr Leanne 
Armand, an associate professor with Sydney’s Macquarie University.

World's largest marine park created in Ross Sea in Antarctica in landmark deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/worlds-largest-marine-park-created-in-ross-sea-in-antarctica-in-landmark-deal>
The focus will be the area around the base of the Totten glacier, which is 
usually surrounded by ice. Reports from researchers aboard the Aurora 
Australis, which was in the area in December, show that fast ice has melted 
back.

“If that goes, then we’ll be able to get in and provide the very first 
seafloor maps on the continental shelf itself and that will be really critical 
to a whole bunch of different sciences,” Armand said.

She will head a team of 22 researchers from Australia, Italy, Spain and the 
United States. They will be assisted by 12 support staff from the Marine 
National Facility, a subdivision of theCSIRO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/csiro>, which operates the 
Investigator; a Tasmanian high school science teacher; and 20 crew.

Also on board is Dr Tara Martin, a CSIRO scientist who helped design the 
Investigator and will act on this mission as the ship’s geophysicist, 
monitoring the sonar and seismic equipment used to map the seafloor.

Martin said the seismic equipment, borrowed from the Istituto Nazionale di 
Oceanografia in Italy, would be used to examine the composition of the sediment 
layers to help researchers pinpoint the best locations for extracting rock 
cores, which will in turn be used to map past glacial melting patterns.

“One of the things we’re trying to understand here is, is this [glacial] 
retreat normal, has this kind of retreat happened before, and has this speed of 
retreat happened before,” Martin said. “If it’s not normal, how much of what 
we’re observing today can we isolate from what is normal, and therefore maybe 
see what could be an anthropogenic effect.”

Sea ice extent in Arctic and Antarctic reached record lows in November
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/arctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record>
The worst scenario, Martin said, was that the ice tongue of the glacier could 
disappear.

“If you remove that ice tongue, in theory you’re releasing the break on the 
rate of flow of the glacier,” she said. “So the concern is ... if the whole ice 
tongue melts away, potentially the whole glacier could rush out to sea over a 
geological timescale, and we don’t know what that timescale is. Losing an ice 
tongue and having it break off – it’s already in the water, that doesn’t add to 
sea level rise very much. But losing a glacier the size of California that’s 
currently on land and dumping that in the water – that’s going to change sea 
level rise estimates.”

The expedition is authorised to take a maximum of 15 cores, measuring 10cm in 
diameter and up to 24 metres long.

The cores will be cut into one metre lengths in an area known as the “wet and 
dirty lab”, capped at both ends, and placed in cold storage until they can be 
transported to Geoscience Australia, where interested researchers will hold a 
party to divide up the samples.

It is Armand’s ninth voyage to the Antarctic, and Martin’s 14th. Both have 
refined their list of items to bring to stave off boredom on the lengthy 
voyage, in the little downtime provided at the end of a 12-hour shift.

The ship is kitted out with a gym, a video and games room, and twin bunk rooms 
with en suites, as well as sophisticated scientific equipment and laboratories.

The bunk beds have curtains to help roommates on opposite shifts.

But even in those comparatively comfortable environments, Armand says, most 
people bring some form of creature comfort.

Armand’s must-have is natural raspberry cordial, followed by a box of her 
favourite muesli and her own mug. Martin’s is more extensive: a “a seriously 
embarrassing amount of books,” as well as a camera, binoculars and field guide 
for spotting wildlife. She also brings knitting.

Her list of books is eclectic: Dickens, Austen, a few popular science geology 
books recommended to her by a “geeked out” pack of geoscientists on her last 
sub-Antarctic voyage, the memoirs of Philip Law, who directed the Australian 
Antarctic Division in the 1950s, and a “standard range of fiction”.


On top of personal luxuries, and Martin’s small library, everyone on board is 
required to bring, at minimum: two pairs of gloves (one waterproof, one 
woollen); one beanie; two pairs of woollen or thermal pants, two woollen or 
thermal tops, three pairs of woollen socks; one polar fleece jacket; one pair 
of polar fleece pants; one pair of steel-toe boots; and one pair of polarised 
sunglasses.

A strap for said sunglasses, a balaclava, a snood, an insulated down jacket, 
and steel-toe gumboots are highly recommended.

Other safety gear, such as hard hats and high-visibility jackets, is provided.
 