
As the dust settled on an attempted coup in Turkey, a crackdown has ensued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/turkey-sacks-15000-education-workers-in-purge>
. Thousands of judges and soldiers have been detained and Turkish officials 
have vowed to “cleanse” a bureaucracy that they say has entrenched supporters 
of an exiled cleric, Fethullah Gülen, in positions of power.

Turkey sacks 15,000 education workers in purge after failed coup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/turkey-sacks-15000-education-workers-in-purge>
It is a hunt that the government fully expects the opposition in parliament to 
stand behind – now that their warnings and enduring paranoia over a coup by 
Gülenists have, they say, become manifest.

But how did it come to this? 

The Gülenists once found common cause with Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, supporting his 
conservative, Islamic-leaning Justice and Development (AK) party when it was 
founded on a pro-European and business-friendly platform in the wake of a 1997 
coup. They remained allies as Erdoğan initiated peace talks with the separatist 
insurgency of the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), and through the liberalisation 
of the economy and EU accession talks.

“There was an overlap [with] Erdogan’s political party,” said a journalist and 
sympathiser of the Gülenist movement, also called Hizmet, who said he opposed 
the coup attempt but requested anonymity amid the tense political situation in
Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>.

Gülen’s acolytes were allies of Erdoğan, partners in purges of the military 
over the last decade that turned into witch hunts, and ironically lead to the 
promotion of officers who would later take part in Friday’s attempted coup. 
Gülen’s supporters were instrumental in prosecuting two wide-ranging 
investigations and trials, known Ergenekon and Sledgehammer affairs, targeting 
“deep state” structures that were accused of planning to remove the AK party 
from power.

Military coup was well planned and very nearly succeeded, say Turkish officials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/18/military-coup-was-well-planned-and-very-nearly-succeeded-say-turkish-officials>
“Let me put it this way,” said one Turkish government official. “Nobody, I 
mean nobody, was aware at the time that the Gülen movement had a secret agenda. 
Let’s keep in mind that [in 2007] it was a very different situation, with the 
armed forces openly threatening to overthrow the government.”

Since then, the relationship has steadily declined. Both sides accused each 
other of wanting to consolidate control. Drawing on grassroots support, the 
Gülenists continued to stack the judiciary and police forces with followers 
loyal to the movement. Erdoğan also consolidated power, growing more powerful 
and populist as prime minister, and espousing a political view that saw a 
resurgent Turkey as a geopolitical leader in a troubled neighbourhood.

Various skirmishes erupted between the two camps. The Gülenists led an 
ultimately unsuccessful smear campaign against Hakan Fidan, the head of the 
Turkish intelligence agency MIT, with various accusations ranging from him 
being sympathetic to Iran to espousing the ideology of Sayyid Qutb, the 
godfather of modern jihadist movements, to a nationalist-centered attack 
claiming he was promoting too many Kurds to positions of authority because of 
his own family heritage.

Government officials claim the Gülenists were probably behind the leaking of 
footage showing MIT trucks that were carrying arms to rebels in Syria under the 
guise of humanitarian aid, in an effort to embarrass the agency’s chief.

After the 2011 elections, Hizmet supporters grew increasingly frustrated with 
what they saw as a pivot towards a more assertive political Islamist agenda – 
they felt Erdoğan had grown invulnerable, buoyed by landslide victories that 
meant he no longer needed his allies. In the autumn of 2013, Erdoğan ordered 
the closure of preparatory schools around the country – a significant source of 
income for the Gulenists, who operated about a quarter of them.

But the serious break came in December 2013, when a wide-ranging investigation 
into corruption in Erdoğan’s inner circle led to the resignations of several 
ministers and the arrest of many of their associates. The president declared 
the investigation was an outright attempt at a judicial “coup” by a parallel 
authority within the state. “That was the final nail in the coffin of the 
relations,” said the journalist who is sympathetic to Hizmet.

Erdoğan refuses to rule out execution of failed Turkey coup leaders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/18/erdogan-purge-fears-of-wider-crackdown-on-political-opponents-turkey>
Erdogan’s supporters insist the corruption investigations were an attempt to 
bring down the government, but others sympathetic to the Gülenists said the 
investigators were simply doing their jobs, and could not have turned a deaf 
ear to increasingly flagrant corruption and nepotism in the bureaucracy.

“Hizmet doesn’t have the means to execute a coup d’etat,” said another 
journalist linked to the movement who was interviewed before the coup attempt. 
“The corruption investigation was an important turning point, the government 
thought it was done by prosecutors and officers linked to Hizmet, and what they 
claim is correct. The question is whether there is corruption or not.”

Whether or not the Gülenists hoped to bring down the government with the 
corruption allegations, there was no going back. They were accused of 
orchestrating various conspiracies and setting up terror networks. Thousands of 
police officers were fired. TV stations and newspapers belonging to the 
movement were either shut down or prevented from distribution, including one of 
the country’s largest newspapers, Zaman, which was taken over by the government.

But despite repeated accusations against Gülen of masterminding terror 
operations from his exile in Pennsylvania, no formal extradition request was 
submitted to the US. But then the coup attempt was launched.

Turkish officials allege the putch was lead by a Gülenist core supported by 
other military officers. They say it was accelerated when members of the 
military faction that backed the coup became aware that authorities were 
investigating them as part of a broader effort against Gülen sympathisers in 
the military.

Since the coup, thousands of people have been fired from their positions in 
the bureaucracy. A senior counter-terrorism official said it had previously 
been difficult to root out alleged Gülenist cells because they operated across 
various government organisations. Now the challenge was to find what the 
official described as “sleeper cells” that hadn’t taken part in the coup.

I’m frightened by the nationalism that’s been unleashed in Turkey | Liz Cookman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/nationalism-turkey-coup-attempt-erdogan-supporters-democracy>
“Moving forward, no tolerance or compassion will be shown to supporters of 
Fethullah Gülen’s terrorist group or any other terrorist organisation,” Erdoğan 
said in a statement on Monday. “Without compromising democratic principles and 
the rule of law, we shall combat all terrorist organisations that place the 
future of our nation and the state at risk.”

The president’s crackdown on Gülen’s supporters will raise numerous concerns 
about the government’s efforts to consolidate its power. But his supporters say 
that their warnings have been fulfilled, even though the evidence of Gülenist 
orchestration has not yet been made public beyond the statements of officials, 
and the widespread detentions and arrests have meant that Hizmet is at least 
temporarily crippled in Turkey.

“They have lost their operational ability, their headquarters and their 
organising minds,” said one official close to the prime minister. “We will have 
to clear all the bureaucracy, whether those who supported the intervention or 
who are leaning towards intervention.”

Gülen himself has rejected all accusations against Hizmet, and suggested that 
the coup may have been staged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/fethullah-gulen-turkey-coup-erdogan>
, while some of his supporters say the putch was likely orchestrated by 
secularist military officers who were unhappy with the flare-up of tensions 
with the Kurds and the instability on the border with Syria and they question 
the extent of the purges.

“Shaaban Disli, an AKP member whose brother gave the order to begin the coup, 
has a right to distance himself from the coup,” said the journalist who is 
sympathetic to Hizmet. “But now you are dismissing thousands of civil servants 
and teachers and bureaucrats for a coup they have no relation to.”
 