
In any crisis, one key difficulty is to assess the full picture, and not just 
fragments of it. As events accelerate in the aftermath of the British vote to 
leave the EU, there is a risk that too much focus on domestic politics,
breathtaking as it now is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/01/michael-gove-treachery-conservative-leader-theresa-may>
, will blind people to the wider European dimension of what is at play. The 
picture is stark: unless Britain decides to ignore or reverse its referendum, 
Brexit will truly happen, and that means one country’s departure from the EU 
club.

The UK is in Brexistential crisis. Is there a way forward? | Andre Spicer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/01/uk-brexit-brexistential-vote-leave-eu-britain>
Imagining that Britain’s European partners will produce concessions to 
facilitate a U-turn is wishful thinking – the EU is too weak and too rattled by 
populist forces to be able to make that kind of manoeuvre without setting 
itself on a course to self-destruction. The EU will prefer to ensure its own 
survival as a project rather than risk suicide by handing Britain unprecedented 
exemptions from its founding principles, such as freedom of movement.

In the week following the referendum that shook Europe and pushed a country to 
the edge of chaos, many hoped, many even stated with confidence, that Brexit 
could somehow be averted. The notion that the leave vote could be fudged or 
reversed gained ground. EchoingJean Giraudoux’s play The Trojan War Will Not 
Take Place, <http://haroldpinter.org/directing/directing_trojan.shtml> many 
started thinking, “Brexit will not take place”. Britain’s political scene has 
now become so volatile that any prediction is difficult. But if you look at the 
wider state of European affairs, and not just one nation’s internal struggle 
with itself, there are more reasons to believe Brexit will indeed take place 
than there are to think it won’t.

Denmark and Ireland have had EU votes overturned, but what was possible then 
is not possible now

The logic of those who believe Brexit is a slogan rather than a reality has 
rested on two observations: first, there has been the reminder that in the past 
other EU countries held referendums whose outcomes were later corrected; 
second, there is the belief that because EU partners are supposedly so 
desperate to keep Britain in the club, they will come around and start 
preparing a new offer, especially on the immigration issue, which would make a 
British reversal much less difficult than it is now.

First, about previous referendum reruns. In 1992 Denmark rejected the 
Maastricht treaty with a 50.7% majority. That set its European partners 
scrambling for a solution: opt-outs were granted on economic and monetary 
issues, on common defence and security policy, on home and justice affairs, and 
on the question of European citizenship. The following year, after that package 
had been presented, another referendum was held, with this time a 56.7% yes 
answer. In 2001, Irish voters said no to the treaty of Nice (by 54%). EU 
statements were then made that Ireland needn’t join a common defence policy and 
could refrain from other enhanced cooperation. In 2002, a new Irish vote 
produced a 63% majority in favour. In 2008,again Ireland rejected (by 53%) a 
new European text <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jun/13/ireland>, the 
Lisbon treaty. A special document called “the Irish guarantees” was then 
produced, allowing for a rerun of the Irish referendum in 2009, with this time 
67% of the electorate approving. But what was possible then is not necessarily 
possible now.

One essential difference is that these previous referendums were not about 
national membership of the EU, but about plans to strengthen integration. They 
were about adding layers to the project – not subtracting a key member state 
from it. Nor was the Europe of 1993 or of 2008 facing the threat of destructive 
forces, both internal and external.

This points to the second reason why Brexit is really looming. In recent years 
Europe’s institutions have been shaken by the refugee crisis, its security 
challenged by jihadi terrorism and wars on its eastern and southern flanks, and 
its democratic values shaken by populist movements – many of which seek the 
dismantling of the whole EU project. The Brexit vote has galvanised many of 
these forces.

Angela Merkel and François Hollande, the leaders of Europe’s two largest and 
founding nations, cannot afford to give Britain opt-outs on freedom of movement 
without their own domestic scenarios being upended. Immigration is a theme that 
has been manipulated to such levels that any signal granting Britain exemptions 
would trigger a political unravelling. Remember that France and Germany face 
key elections next year.

The rise of destructive populism in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/28/brexit-europe-far-right-rightwing-extremists-politics-terrorism>
 is the backdrop to the messages that EU leaders have sent out to Britain this 
week. European partners have made clear there will be no “a la carte” proposal 
for the UK. Yes, Britain had a unique status in the club, but adding to its 
opt-outs is not on the table. A renegotiation with Britain has already been 
attempted, and the resulting agreement secured by David Cameron in February 
went as far as EU leaders could manage. To hope that more concessions might now 
be produced is to ignore the prevailing European political realities.

It’s true that no European government wanted Brexit, nor ever wished it would 
materialise. But there is a difference between not wanting something to happen 
and being able to prevent it. Freedom of movement is a structural pillar of 
Europe. Weakening it to any greater extent than was offered to Britain earlier 
this year (to no effect) would trigger a time-bomb from which the European 
project would not recover.

European partners are ready to give Britain some time to find a way out of its 
referendum result if that is possible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/30/politics-brexit-unlawful-eu-uk>
. But it is foolhardy to think the rest of Europe will save Britain from the 
quagmire into which it has sunk through its own actions. It simply has too much 
on its plate; preoccupied with the survival of a 60-year-old project. It will 
not preserve British membership at any cost.

 * This article was corrected on 2 July 2016. An earlier version mixed up the 
dates of Irish referendums on EU treaties. The second Irish referendum on the 
treaty of Nice was held in 2002, not 2009. The second Irish referendum on the 
Lisbon treaty was held in 2009, not 2002.  