
Clare Hollingworth  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/clare-hollingworth-obituary>
stayed on in Hong Kong after the 1997 handover – unlike many others – and would 
commute daily the short distance from her flat next to Government House to the 
Foreign Correspondents’ Club. Her eyesight had failed so badly that she could 
no longer read the menu and her memory was wavering, but over lunch she could 
still produce flashes of brilliant recall.

When her second husband, Geoffrey Hoare, moved from journalism to head the 
press service at the British embassy in Paris, she remembered, “The only thing 
they wanted me to do was to attend the parties, which I usually did – and took 
the Duke of Windsor around the rose garden.”

She much preferred to report on Algeria and later in Vietnam. “I had leftwing 
friends who were very rich,” she explained “and were very much in touch with 
the FLN [Algeria’s National Liberation Front].”

She was equally casual about her excellent contacts with the Chinese, though 
anxious to explain that she did not get her multiple visa to Beijing by “going 
to bed with the right person”.

“I think I was very correct with the Chinese, perhaps over-correct, and I 
think the Chinese appreciated it.”

Though Clare refused to be called a feminist, she was on the side of women in 
the mostly male-dominated world in which she had lived. “I drove all around the 
outskirts of Beijing,” she remembered on the eve of the 1989 Tiananmen 
massacre, “and talked to the girls who were charming the soldiers to stop them 
coming in. That was very good.”

Towards the end of lunch, an aspect of the early Clare emerged which I had not 
read in any of the long articles by her admirers. Her first husband, Vandeleur 
Robinson, had worked for a “not poor Labour peer” whose name she had forgotten. 
She joined the Labour party in Leicester and in 1935 stood as the Labour 
candidate for Melton Mowbray.

Then war came and she resigned from being a candidate and from the party too. 
She became a fearless war correspondent and friend of several Conservative 
prime ministers in later life.

Not many of them knew, perhaps, that she had once “organised the peace 
(pledge) ballot in Leicester” before the war.
 