
You’re on holiday and you hand over your card to pay for a restaurant meal, 
hotel bill, car hire or pricey souvenir, only to be told: “I’m sorry but your 
card has been declined.” Your account might be in good order, but your card 
issuer thinks it’s detected unusual spending patterns, so has swung into action.

This is something that has doubtless happened to many of us while on holiday, 
but a new initiative will hopefully put an end to the hassle and embarrassment 
of having genuine transactions declined or your card blocked.

Over the next few months, technology is set to be rolled out that allows an 
individual’s bank and mobile phone to “talk” to each other in an attempt to 
combat card fraud. In what is being described as a “world first”, mobile network
O2 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/o2> has teamed up with credit card 
provider MBNA to pilot the initiative with 3,000 of the card company’s UK 
customers.

Figures issued by Financial Fraud Action UK in October 
<http://www.financialfraudaction.org.uk/news-article.asp?genre=media&Article=3019&page=2>
 show that overseas fraud losses on UK cards is a growing problem, jumping 14% 
in 12 months to reach £82m during the first six months of 2015. Fuelled by 
criminals taking advantage of less secure payment systems in other countries, 
the figure is more than double the £39m racked up during the same period in 
2011.

To protect against this, banks put stringent security in place, which can 
result in legitimate transactions being declined or a block put on your card, 
particularly if you did not tell your bank or card issuer you were heading 
abroad.

But O2 has been trialling a system called Travel Alerts, which is set to be 
rolled out to all MBNA customers. When an individual travels to another 
country, O2 will send an alert to their card company to say that he or she has 
arrived. When the person uses their card, for example in a shop or restaurant, 
their card company sends an encrypted request to O2 to confirm whether the 
customer’s phone is in the same location as the transaction. O2’s systems 
decrypt the bank’s request and reply “yes” or “no”, before automatically 
deleting the request so that no data is held. If the answer comes back “no”, 
the card provider is likely to decline the transaction and contact the customer.

The service is free, works with all phone handsets and does not involve the 
customer downloading an app, says Robert Franks, managing director of O2’s 
digital commerce business. All that customers need to do is opt in to the 
service and leave their phone on.

Franks says the trial has resulted in a “significant” reduction in cards being 
incorrectly declined, and in fraud, as well as removing the hassle of having to 
contact a bank or card company before going abroad. He adds: “The bare minimum 
information is exchanged. This is governed by a very strict legal agreement 
between ourselves and the banks.”

O2 wants to extend the service to all its customers, and to all bank customers 
in the UK. It is also working on bringing other mobile networks such as 
Vodafone and EE on board. O2 already has a partnership with MasterCard, which 
is said to be pushing for the technology to be widely adopted. Franks says: 
“We’d like to get to a position where this becomes a bit like anti-virus 
software – it’s just what most of us do.”

Phil Weston, head of mobile and digital communications at MBNA, says the firm 
is delighted with the results from the trial: “By using their phone to update 
us in real time, customers no longer have to contact us each time they travel, 
and are less likely to be inconvenienced when using their card abroad. We look 
forward to rolling Travel Alerts out to all customers in the near future.”

Many banks and card companies advise customers to let them know if they are 
travelling abroad, as overseas transactions are one of the most common fraud 
indicators. More than 75% of holidaymakers who have had their credit card 
declined had failed to notify their bank that they would be going overseas, 
according to a survey published by TSB in 2014.

However, not all card issuers advise their customers to tell them about their 
travel plans. Barclaycard, with 10.5 million UK customers, says: “You don’t 
need to notify us. We have full confidence in our systems, and that we’ll be 
able to pick out anything that isn’t you.”

However, make sure a company has your up-to-date contact details, particularly 
if you’ve changed your mobile number during the past year or two. If it has any 
doubts about a transaction your card company will hopefully call or text to 
check it is genuine.
 