
I shouldn’t even have been there. Winter in Antarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica> means living with only 13 other 
people for eight months, including 103 days when the sun doesn’t rise. 
Everything is hostile and alien: the temperature, the darkness, the wind, the 
isolation. People rarely stay for more than one winter at a time. I was heading 
home in early 2014, but the person who was meant to replace me couldn’t stay, 
so I went back.

I was the base doctor, but I did little actual medical work, especially in 
winter, when there are so few people on base and everyone is pretty young and 
fit. I ended up doing everything from incinerating the rubbish to servicing 
vehicles. It’s important that everyone knows roughly how the base works, in 
case anything goes wrong.

And in that second winter it did. We’d already had a few minor power cuts 
lasting several minutes, when we lost power for nearly 24 hours with the 
temperature outside at -55.4C. We had no heating, lights, running water or 
sewage systems, and no link to the outside world other than a hand-held 
satellite phone; at one point the whole base dropped to almost -20C inside.

We split up into teams. While the plumber, mechanic and electrician focused on 
fixing the generator, and the science team worked to protect the IT systems and 
data they’d collected, I teamed up with two others to fetch the backup 
generator about 1km away. It was pitch black and took us six hours just to 
guide the bulldozer into place, slowly hauling the generator along in 
treacherous conditions. I was numbed by the cold and exhaustion, but fuelled by 
the urgent need to fix the situation. We were riding Ski-Doos; they’re not 
meant to run at less than -30C, so we had to stop every hour and drive them 
into the garage to warm up under hot air blowers (powered by another small 
generator normally used to defrost large machinery). Otherwise, they’d just 
stop working, as would we.

When we finally got the backup generator to the garage and started warming it 
up, the mechanic arrived and found that it was broken. That was the real low 
point for me. At moments like that, when everything felt desperate, I had to 
laugh. In fact, I don’t think I’ve laughed as much in my life, falling on my 
face on the frozen garage floor as we tried to move huge cables covered in ice, 
or when we had to sweep up freshly defrosted sewage spewing from the pipes 
after the power finally returned.

Experience: I was swept over a waterfall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/22/i-was-swept-over-a-waterfall-experience>
We knew we weren’t going to die. Although it was pretty hairy for a while, we 
had enough fuel and food to last until the next ship arrived. The field parties 
that go out in tents during the summer cope in pretty harsh conditions, so we 
knew that, as a last resort, we could manage with that basic equipment.

But the difference from the life we’d got used to on the base couldn’t be 
greater. Normally, you could walk around in shorts and a T-shirt, go to the 
gym, watch a DVD, send emails. Without power, we reverted to the things 
explorers relied on 100 years ago. There’s a great photo of us all sitting 
indoors, in these incredibly hi-tech surroundings, with all our outdoor gear 
on, crouched around lamps and stoves trying to keep warm.

The technical team worked wonders and after 24 hours got enough power back for 
some heat and light, but we were without toilets or showers for a few weeks; 
with power limited, we weren’t running the base as normal until the following 
summer. We had all been out of touch with family and friends for days – which 
wouldn’t have been unusual 10 years ago, but given the regular contact we’re 
used to today, some reassuring phone calls had to be made.

We barely slept for the first few days after the power cut, monitoring the 
systems as they came back online. The effort put in by the team was amazing. 
Dogged determination, some gallows humour and a genuine sense of duty both to 
each other and the base kept us going. We can survive an Antarctic winter 
because of technology and human spirit. One failed us then, but the other 
didn’t.

• As told to Katie Antoniou.

Got an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
 