
The lumps of human brain tissue that help us tell one face from another grow 
all the way into adulthood, according to scientists who made the surprise 
discovery.

Until now it was thought that brain tissue growth halted in early life, with 
the organ adapting in later life by tweaking the connections between its 
neurons.

MRI scans of children and adults found that parts of the brain involved in 
face recognition expanded from childhood to adolescence, unlike other brain 
regions which had already fully formed.


Major brain pathway rediscovered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2014/nov/17/major-brain-pathway-rediscovered>
The unexpected growth of face-spotting brain cells mirrors an improvement in 
the ability to recognise people that happens as children turn into adults. The 
skill seems to be honed at a time when people’s social groups become larger and 
more complex.


Kalanit Grill-Spector, a neuroscientist at Stanford University in California, 
said the finding will help scientists understand some aspects of the ageing 
process, but also what happens in disorders that make it hard for people to 
spot familiar faces.Autism <https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> can 
impair facial recognition, while one in 50 adults finds it so hard to recognise 
people that it affects their daily social interactions, she said.


The scientists ran a series of brain scans on 22 children aged five to 12 
years old, and 25 adults aged 22 to 28 years old. While the volunteers looked 
at various pictures, the researchers monitored their brain activity. The scans 
highlighted the size and location of brain regions used to recognise faces and 
other objects such as numbers, buildings and musical instruments.

When Grill-Spector compared the children’s scans with those from the adults, 
one brain region stood out. Found at the base of the brain, the fusiform gyrus 
is home to the neural tissue that helps distinguish one face from another. The 
scans showed that while this tissue grew throughout childhood and into 
adolescence, the brain regions used to identify other objects did not. From 
childhood to adulthood, there was a 12.6% increase in the amount of brain 
tissue devoted to face recognition the scans showed.


The Thatcher illusion: Are faces special?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2016/sep/19/the-thatcher-illusion-are-faces-special>
For the next step of the study, the participants took a test that required 
them to pick out a particular person from a group of faces. As expected, those 
who had more neural tissue for spotting faces scored the highest. Details of 
the study are reported in the journalScience 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.aag0311>.


The growth of the brain tissue is not due to the birth of fresh neurons, but 
instead comes from existing neurons growing into more complex patterns, and 
developing a thicker coating of material known as myelin. The fatty myelin 
sheaths around neurons make brain signals pass along them much faster.


Olivier Pascalis, who studies face recognition in children at the Grenoble 
Alpes University said the work was “remarkable” and showed that while basic 
face processing was in place in children, some parts of the brain still 
underwent major structural changes. While other brain regions change by 
altering the connections between brain cells, the face recognition tissue 
seemed to grow in a different way. “It is creating new tissue,” Pascalis said.
 