
Admiral has been forced to scrap plans to use Facebook posts to analyse the 
personalities of car owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/02/admiral-to-price-car-insurance-based-on-facebook-posts>
 and set the price of their insurance after the social media company said the 
scheme breached its privacy rules.

In an embarrassing U-turn, the insurance firm pulled the product less than two 
hours before it was due to officially launch on Wednesday. The product, called 
firstcarquote, was launched later with “reduced functionality”: users can log 
in to the product withFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>
 but it will no longer analyse their data.

Facebook said protecting the privacy of its users was of the “utmost 
importance” and that it had clear guidelines about how information obtained 
from the site should be used.

Section 3.15 of Facebook’s platform policy 
<https://developers.facebook.com/policy/> states that the site’s data should 
not be used to “make decisions about eligibility, including whether to approve 
or reject an application or how much interest to charge on a loan”.


Admiral <https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup> and Facebook 
remain in talks about trying to revive the product, with industry insiders 
arguing about who was to blame for the last-minute climbdown. Facebook is 
understood to have known about firstcarquote for months and the product has 
been operational on the internet for weeks in a test form.

Privacy campaigners welcomed Admiral’s reversal but said that it was only the 
start of other companies trying to use personal data in a similar way.

Simon Morrissey, head of data and privacy at law firm Lewis Silkin, said: 
“This is the tip of a very large iceberg that consumers and businesses are 
increasingly going to encounter. The challenge with these sorts of solutions is 
that users may find it increasingly difficult to avoid opting in as the 
financial disadvantage in doing so becomes so significant that users have no 
other option but to hand over access to their data.”

Admiral to price car insurance based on Facebook posts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/02/admiral-to-price-car-insurance-based-on-facebook-posts>
Admiral planned to analyse the Facebook accounts of first-time car drivers or 
owners to look for personality traits linked to safe driving. These drivers 
would be offered discounts of up to £350 a year.

Under the scheme, the company would identify personality traits through 
examining posts and likes by Facebook,although not photos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/18/facebook-hoax-private-photos-public-tomorrow>
, and looking for certain habits. Facebook users who write in short, concise 
sentences, use lists, and arrange to meet friends at a set time and place, 
rather than just “tonight”, would be identified as conscientious. In contrast, 
those who frequently use exclamation marks and phrases such as “always” or 
“never” rather than “maybe” could be overconfident.

The scheme would be voluntary and not apply price increases to drivers deemed 
to be more risky.

Firstcarquote has been in testing for months but Facebook insists on a final 
review of applications that use information from its site and the product fell 
at this hurdle.

Open Rights Group, the digital rights campaigning organisation, said Admiral’s 
scheme was “intrusive”.


Jim Killock, executive director of Open Rights, said: “We need to think about 
the wider consequences of allowing companies to make decisions that affect us 
financially or otherwise, based on what we have said on social media.

“Such intrusive practices could see decisions being made against certain 
groups based on biases about race, gender, religion or sexuality – or because 
their posts in some way mark them as unconventional. Ultimately, this could 
change how people use social media, encouraging self-censorship in anticipation 
of future decisions.

“Young people may feel pushed into such schemes because of financial 
constraints. The right to keep things private shouldn’t be the preserve of 
those who can afford it.”

Social media has us under surveillance – big business is the new Big Brother | 
Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/big-business-surveillance-admiral-insurance-facebook>
A Facebook spokesperson said: “Protecting the privacy of the people on 
Facebook is of utmost importance to us. We have clear guidelines that prevent 
information obtained from Facebook from being used to make decisions about 
eligibility.

“We have made sure anyone using this app is protected by our guidelines and 
that no Facebook user data is used to assess their eligibility. Facebook 
accounts will only be used for login and verification purposes.

“Our understanding is that Admiral will then ask users who sign up to answer 
questions which will be used to assess their eligibility.”

Admiral said that young car drivers will still receive a discount for signing 
up for insurance through firstcarquote. However, this will now be a flat amount 
across all customers and the company did not disclose how big the discount will 
be.

An Admiral spokesperson said: “Firstcarquote, which will allow first-time 
drivers to voluntarily share some social data with insurers for a simple and 
discounted quote, is currently a beta product.

“Admiral does not have access to customers’ Facebook data and does not hold 
social media data to set prices for its customers. Following discussions with 
Facebook the product is launching with reduced functionality, allowing 
first-time drivers to log in using Facebook and share some information to 
secure a faster, simpler and discounted quote.”
 