
Watching the child you once cradled in your arms walk out the door and into 
their own life always fills a parent with a sense of terror and loss. You raise 
them as best you can and hope that the adult you created will succeed.

When that child, however, will never truly be an adult in the typical sense of 
the word, it’s more complicated.

Tell us about a time you faced your fear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/25/tell-us-about-a-time-you-faced-your-fear>
Over 21 years ago, I gave birth to a beautiful, blue-eyed baby boy. At first, 
all went well. Evan, my son, initially met all his developmental milestones. 
But then, at 18 months, I realized something was horribly wrong.


While other children babbled, Evan was strangely silent. While other children 
played with each other, Evan played by himself, endlessly rolling toy cars back 
and forth.

We started making the rounds to doctors, and, after many evaluations and 
tests, got the diagnosis. Evan was on the autistic spectrum. Initially we were 
told that it was doubtful he would speak, or be self-sufficient.

Despite the dire prognosis, I threw myself into “curing” my son. After years 
of therapists, and hard work, Evan had limited, basic speech, could dress and 
take care of his toileting needs.

I knew I had to send my child, who was still effectively a toddler, away for 
his own good

Even with those gains, Evan never progressed mentally beyond toddlerhood. 
Physically, however, he continued to grow into an adult, eventually reaching 
5ft10in. He weighs over 200 pounds.

I began worrying about his future early on. I couldn’t expect him to grow up 
and support himself. I also couldn’t expect him to live without someone caring 
for him. I initially thought that relatives who loved him would be able to care 
for him should my husband and I become sick or die.

After my husband and I returned from trip to Ireland when Evan was 15, 
however, we knew that was not the case. We had left Evan with my mother. Within 
a day she realized she was not up to the task of caring for the very large, 
15-year-old toddler my son had become. Both of my sisters lived nearby, so 
every day they “passed” Evan between them, no one capable of caring for him for 
more than several hours at a time.


After we learned what happened, I knew other arrangements were needed for 
Evan’s future. I could not expect family members to take care of him – he 
needed professionals. To be honest, I was not sure either my husband or I could 
do it on our own either. I became increasingly nervous about Evan’s future, and 
often found myself lying awake at night wondering what would become of him.

I threw myself into researching what the potential arrangements could be for 
an adult with autism and eventually realized that it would be best for him to 
go to a residential school out of state. We live in Connecticut, and if a child 
lives with his or her parents when they “graduate” from school at 21, then that 
child will not be eligible for an adult residential placement until there is an 
“emergency” (like both parents dying).

If a child like Evan was in an out-of-state residential school, however, they 
automatically qualify for residential funding from the state when they turn 21. 
I knew I had to send my child, who was still effectively a toddler, away for 
his own good. It was the hardest decision I ever made, and I had to convince my 
husband that it was the right one as well.

Even after we decided what to do, making it happen was not easy. For him to go 
to an out-of-state residential school meant I had to get our local school 
district to agree, since they would be the ones actually paying for it. At over 
$200,000 a year, it was not something the district wanted to do. We could not 
pay any of the cost, because that would disqualify Evan from receiving state 
funding when he turned 21. We commenced on a two-year legal battle with the 
school district.

I feared my life lacked meaning. Cancer pushed me to find some | Bradford Frost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/26/cancer-diagnosis-existential-life-accomplishments-meaning>
In the course of all that, I was diagnosed with breast cancer and could not 
meet all of Evan’s needs when I myself was sick. My cancer was caught early, 
and my treatment was not overwhelmingly invasive, but it was enough to make me 
realize that I would not always be in perfect health. Evan needed the care of 
someone who was. I redoubled my efforts to place him in a residential 
out-of-state school, eventually gaining him a placement in New York when he was 
17.

Evan, now 21, lives in a state-run group home 40 minutes away from our home. 
He has friends – a social life with peers that are like him, something he did 
not have at home.

Most importantly, Evan is now somewhere that, should I die or become ill 
again, he will always be cared for. Giving up a child is the hardest thing for 
a mother to do, but it was the only way to ensure his future.
 