
At 3 am yesterday the centre of the small Sussex town of Uckfield was under 
several feet of water. After the drama of the flood 24 hours earlier there was 
an eerie calm, even a surreal beauty as the waves rippled in the moonlight 
against the walls of McDonald's, the bank and supermarkets.

Five hours later, the deep brown scummy waters had gurgled off towards the 
sea, leaving a grim reality.

Uckfield residents woke yesterday to find their town devastated. A vile smell 
of rotting carpets and floor tiles hung in the air. Tarmac and pavement had 
been ripped up. The foundations of houses had been exposed. Litter and 
packaging had spread itself all over the industrial estate and back a half mile 
on to the main roads.

The floor of Boots the chemist was a foot deep in shampoos and medicines, 
glass and shelving. Estate agents, health food shops and interior decorators 
were counting the cost of the worst floods in memory.

For Martin Stenning, a Sussex University ecologist who lives in the town, it 
was all predictable. "There has been increasing development in the town and all 
over the flood plain," he said. "The water is running off the new estates and 
fields faster than ever. This is an awful warning for people who want to build 
in inappropriate places."

If Uckfield was trying to get back to normal, for other towns the worst was by 
no means over yesterday. As the waters receded in some places they were 
mounting elsewhere downstream.

Emergency services spent all night evacuating the village of Yalding, near 
Tonbridge, only to find the waters still rising all yesterday and yet more 
people to be evacuated by boat or helicopter. "We've picked up 30 people so far 
," said a Kent fire brigade spokesman yesterday morning. " We've been up all 
night and there seems no end to it."

"We went to bed at 10pm and the water was just a few inches high," said Steve 
Boone, who lives near the village. "This morning it was five feet up the 
stairs. We got really worried when we saw the speed and force of the current. 
Thank God for the brigade, they were brilliant."

The hundred or more people in the nearby Hampstead Fields caravan park were 
evacuated through the night. "We lost absolutely everything. We've had two 
floods already this year but this was the big one," said Susan Pullen.

Her husband Mick had been out on a borrowed boat to see if he could find 
anything. He returned crestfallen: "We are still alive, girl, but it's start 
again time now. The fish is gone, the photographs too, but I've got the 
financial papers. I can hardly believe it. The waters are six feet deep now. 
Everybody's stuff is floating around, even the dustbins."

Yalding and many other Kent and Sussex villages were yesterday, in effect, 
islands in wide seas of floodwater. In Lewes, where hundreds of people spent 
the night in churches or community halls, the waters rose steadily until high 
tide at 1am. By morning ambulances, goalposts and telephone boxes and several 
hundred houses were still under five feet of water in the north and west of the 
town.

James French was keeping guard on his brother-in-law's house where water 
reached ceiling height, but by lunch time yesterday was only four feet deep. 
"They are on holiday. I don't dare tell them what's happened," he said.

"Lewes is a great big mess," said Jan Parker, a resident. "There are barrels 
of beer bobbing down the river, factories near the river have gone under, and 
part of the shopping centre is devastated."

The scale of the floods and intensity of the rainfall has shocked people as 
streams have turned into rivers, puddles into lakes and lakes into small seas 
in just a few hours.

With the floods have come traffic gridlock and eccentric driving. Yesterday 
the emergency services were infuriated by cars stuck while trying to turn round 
in deep puddles and many motorists ignoring warning signs.

"It's only October, the start of the rains and bad weather," said Jane 
Marsham, shopping yesterday in Lewes. "This isn't normal. We need to know what 
is happening."

"It's like after a hurricane here," says Martin Pebburt who farms organically 
between Lewes and Uckfield. "We've lost all our potatoes and some carrots but 
others have lost cattle and poultry. It will be the last straw for some. I am 
devastated."

Ten miles away in the village of Five Oak Green, the clear-up was starting for 
the third time in 10 months and recriminations were flying. Many residents 
believe that the floods have considerably wors ened since an estate of houses 
was built on the old village pond. "They've mucked around rotten with the 
drainage here," said one woman. "If we'd had some gelignite we'd blow the whole 
lot up. I don't know how much more of this we can take."

By lunchtime, Tonbridge was under threat with the river Medway reaching within 
15 centimetres of the top of the bank. The pressure was relieved only by the 
water board releasing some of the floods through a main sluice. Nevertheless 
school playing fields were under a metre of water, Sainsbury's supermarket car 
park was also flooded, and the shopping centre was best approached with 
wellington boots.

"Six inches of rain in 72 hours. That's more than we get in months. It makes 
you think," said one policeman, drafted in without so much as a raincoat.
 