
If you are one of the 8 million or so people to whom HM Revenue & Customs 
(HMRC) automatically sends a self-assessment tax return each year, you are 
required to fill it in.

Who needs to fill in a tax return?

You will definitely have to do so if you:
· are self-employed

· earn more than £2,500 a year from letting property or land

· have any other income that can't be taxed through the pay as you earn (PAYE) 
system

· get money from a trust or settlement

· receive taxable income from abroad

· are a company director, a Lloyd's Name or member, or a minister of religion

HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> will also need a completed 
tax return from employees or pensioners who have:
· a yearly income from savings and investments of more than £10,000 (before 
tax)

· a yearly income of more than £100,000 (regardless of its source)

· tax to pay that cannot be collected through PAYE

· annual claims for business expenses, such as business travel, of more than 
£2,500

· some entitlement to a higher personal allowance because they are over 65

Declaring gains

Anyone who has made capital gains (or losses) as a result of selling or giving 
away assets, such as property or shares, may also need to fill in a tax return.

This will apply if you:

· have made gains that are more than the annual exempt amount of £9,600

· have disposed of - through selling or giving away - assets that were worth 
more than four times the annual capital gains tax allowance. In 2008/09 this is 
£38,400

· want to claim an allowable capital loss, which can be used to reduce a 
future capital gains

Tax return deadlines
 You can either file your tax return on paper or online 
Self-assessment tax <https://www.theguardian.com/money/self-assessment-tax> 
forms are usually sent out shortly after the end of the tax year to which they 
relate. The tax return relating to income and gains made in the 2008/09 tax 
year, for example, will go out shortly after April 5 2009.

Taxpayers who have previously  filed a tax return online 
<https://online.hmrc.gov.uk/login?GAREASONCODE=-1&GARESOURCEID=Common&GAURI=https://online.hmrc.gov.uk/home&Reason=-1&APPID=Common&URI=https://online.hmrc.gov.uk/home>
 will simply get a reminder to file an online return rather than the full paper 
form and notes.

The advantage of filing a return online is that if you want the tax man to 
calculate your bill for you, you get longer to fill in your form: paper returns 
need to be filed by October 31 for HMRC to do the sums, but this is extended 
until January 31 for those filed online.

The ultimate deadline for filing a return, and paying half of the amount owed, 
is January 31. The deadline for the second payment is July 31.

If you are newly self-employed it is not enough simply to file a tax return by 
October 31 for the tax year in which you became self-employed. You must tell 
HMRC that you have started to work for yourself within three months of doing so 
- you face a fine of £100 if you don't. The easiest way to do this is to phone 
the helpline number for the newly self-employed on 08459 154515.

Information you'll need to give

The tax return doesn't ask for information on tax-free income or gains, such 
as interest paid on a cash Isa or the proceeds from selling your only or main 
home. However, you will need to give details of all taxable income and gains 
received or made in a particular tax year, which runs from April 6 to April 5, 
as well as how much tax you have already paid.

The main tax return asks for details of income from savings, investments and 
pensions. It also enables you to claim tax deductions, which reduce the amount 
of tax you pay, such as pension contributions and certain personal allowances.

In addition, you'll need to give details of other income in supplementary 
pages, which relate to the type of income you have. So if you are an employee 
with a buy-to-let property, for example, you'll have to fill in the employment 
pages for the earnings from your job, as well as the land and property pages 
for the rent you receive from letting property.

Similarly, if you have capital gains, you'll have to fill in the capital gains 
tax pages.

Do you need an accountant?
 You can get tax advice from an accountant. Photograph: Getty Images 
There is no requirement to use an accountant, and you probably don't need one 
if your tax affairs are straightforward and you'd be happy using the free help 
available from HMRC to fill in your tax return.

But if your tax affairs are complex and/or you want advice on tax planning, an 
accountant - or other tax adviser - could be a wise move. If you can't afford 
to pay for an accountant or tax adviser free advice is available from tax 
charity Tax Aid <http://www.taxaid.org.uk>.

Fines

If your circumstances mean you need to fill in a self-assessment form, failure 
to do so will result in a fine of £100 plus interest on any tax paid late. 
Fines and penalty interest will also be levied if you don't meet the deadlines 
for returning your form.
 