
When someone makes money selling assets other than their main home, for 
example by selling a buy-to-let property or shares, he or she may be liable to 
pay capital gains tax (CGT).

Allowance

Everyone has an allowance before becoming liable for CGT, even children. For 
the 2010/11 tax year this is worth £10,100. A couple will be able to make 
capital gains of £20,200 before they face a tax bill.

Any profits you make from a sale over and above your allowance (and after 
reliefs and exemptions are taken into account – see below) are now taxed at a 
flat rate of 18%. Previously the rate depended on what tax band the gains fell 
into and how long you had held the assets.

Reliefs and exemptions

There are many reliefs and exemptions available, which can reduce or 
completely wipe out any CGT bill.

Any gain you make when you sell your home is tax-exempt, unless you have let 
part of it or used it to run a business. In those circumstances, a proportion 
of the gain may be taxable, depending on a sliding scale.
 You won't have to pay capital gains tax when you sell your car. Photograph: 
Frank Baron 
There are other assets you can sell without having to pay CGT. These include 
your car; assets held in personal equity plans (Peps) or individual savings 
accounts (Isas); UK government gilts; or personal belongings sold for less than 
£6,000. You also do not have to pay tax on betting, lottery or pools winnings, 
as the tax is usually paid on the initial stake.

If you make losses from any sale, you can offset these against any gains to 
reduce your tax bill – but only if they are from the sale of assets that would 
have attracted CGT, so losses in an Isa, for example, don't qualify.

When calculating your taxable gain you will no longer be able to take 
inflation into account or use taper relief to reduce your bill. These reliefs 
were scrapped in April 2008 and the flat rate of tax introduced in their place.

Reduce your CGT bill

There are other ways to reduce the amount of CGT you need to pay. These 
include using your annual Isa allowance, where £10,200 can be sheltered 
tax-free.

Venture capital trusts (VCTs) and enterprise investment schemes (EISs) are 
other alternatives particularly aimed at those with substantial amounts to 
shelter.

HM Revenue & Customs allows up to £200,000 to be invested in VCTs tax-free. 
These trusts operate like conventional investment trusts, but invest in small, 
unquoted trading companies. The risk is therefore greater, but the tax 
advantages are better.

An EIS allows you to claim tax relief of 20% on investments of up to £500,000 
in shares in smaller quoted companies issued after January 1994. There is no 
CGT to be paid when the shares are first disposed of and any losses on disposal 
can be offset against an income or CGT bill.

An EIS allows tax on capital gains to be deferred by reinvesting the money in 
EIS shares. There is no limit to the amount of chargeable gains you can defer 
in this way.

Couples
 Your own home will not attract a tax bill, but a buy-to-let property will. 
Photograph: PA 
Spouses and people in civil partnerships are allowed to transfer assets 
between them without paying tax. Rather than one partner making a profit above 
his or her allowance and paying CGT, half of the assets could be transferred to 
his or her partner before being sold, so both allowances are used.

With so many ins and outs, a good accountant is best placed to advise on 
avoiding or reducing your CGT bill.

Paying CGT

If you have made gains you need to declare them to the taxman via special 
pages on the self-assessment form. If you don't tell your tax office you have a 
liability within six months of the end of the tax year, you may have to pay a 
penalty.

Getting help

If you feel you don't have the time or the confidence to handle your own tax 
affairs, then find a good tax return service or accountant. The best way to 
find a good tax adviser is through personal recommendation, but professional 
bodies such as theInstitute of Chartered Accountants 
<http://www.icaewfirms.co.uk/home.asp> and the Association of Chartered 
Certified Accountants <http://www.accaglobal.com/publicinterest/finding/> have 
lists of members on their websites.

Charges for using an accountant vary enormously so make sure the costs are not 
going to outweigh the savings. For a simple tax return service you can expect 
fees of at least £100-£200. The level of fees will, of course, depend on the 
complexity of your affairs. For the specialised help of an accountant with a 
top firm, the fee could easily be £300 or £400.
 