
Credit cards <https://www.theguardian.com/money/creditcards> are available 
from a wide range of providers, from supermarkets to airlines and even 
charities.

Applying for a card is simple – applications can be made in a bank branch, on 
the phone, online or by post. To qualify for a card you will need to give 
information about where you live, how much you earn and what other credit cards 
you might have.

The card provider will do a credit check before it offers you a card and the 
amount it allows you to spend – your credit limit – will be based on this and 
your other circumstances. Credit limits tend to be modest to begin with but are 
often increased by banks over time.

As well as putting a limit on your spending, the card provider will stipulate 
a minimum monthly repayment you need to make. This tends to be £5 or 2.5% of 
the outstanding balance on the card, whichever is greater, but some providers 
set lower limits.

You should beware of only paying the minimum your provider asks for each 
month, as outstanding balances will attract interest and your debt can quickly 
grow.

Interest rates

Interest rates vary from card to card and according to how you use your card – 
for example, you might pay a different rates for withdrawing cash, for 
purchases and for balance transfers. Rates typically range from less than 10% 
to as much as 34.9% APR, although they can be as much as 69.9% APR (depending 
on how risky the card provider decides it is to lend to you).

Cash withdrawals – from an ATM or using a credit card cheque – tend to be the 
most expensive way to borrow; as well as a high interest rate there is often a 
fee of at least 1.5% of the amount you take out. Most providers also charge 
this kind of fee if you use your credit card overseas.

Most cards offer an interest-free period on purchases – usually around 56 days 
– while cash advances tend to attract interest straight away. A number of 
providers run introductory offers, which include interest-free periods for as 
long as 20 months on purchases and 33 months on balance transfers.

As well as charging different rates, providers calculate interest from 
different times so it can be difficult to compare costs fairly.

Balance transfers

If you have a debt on a credit card you can often save money by transferring 
your balance to a new card with a low introductory rate. Many card providers 
offer interest-free balance transfers for a number of months, which could give 
you a chance to clear your debt without accruing more interest.

While the transfer is interest-free, there will be a fee to pay. This is 
generally around 2.5% of the total debt being transferred. This means for 
smaller debts that you expect to pay off within a few months it may not be 
worth making the switch.

Default fees

As well as transaction fees and interest, you may end up paying a fee if you 
miss a monthly repayment. Following a 2006 ruling by the Office of Fair Trading 
that card providers were charging unlawfully high default fees, most have now 
cut them to £12. Those that charge more generally insist on cardholders making 
monthly repayments by direct debit, which greatly reduces the chances of a 
payment being missed.

Insurance

Many cards have some form of insurance built into them, covering damage to 
goods purchased with the card or cancellation of a flight or holiday. This is 
free and can be useful if you have a problem with a bought item, but there are 
usually conditions attached so read the small print if you intend to rely on 
the cover.

Section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act 1974 offers another layer of cover. It 
protects purchases over £100 and under £30,000 made on credit cards provided by 
Visa or MasterCard. If you have problems with goods or flights and the retailer 
goes bust you will be able to reclaim a refund from your card provider.

Bear in mind that you don’t have to pay the full amount on your card to get 
protection – the key thing is the price of the product you are buying. For 
example, if you’re buying a £500 flight, even just paying £100 towards the 
purchase on a credit card will protect you for £500 if the airline cancels the 
flight, exactly the same as if you had paid for the flight in full on your card.

Choosing a card

The easiest option is to get a card from your bank, but it may not offer the 
best deal for your circumstances. Instead you should consider how you will use 
the card and look for one that suits your needs.

If you pay off your credit card bill in full every month, go for a card with a 
long interest-free period and avoid lenders that charge interest from the date 
of the transaction, rather than the statement date. You could also look for a 
card with a loyalty scheme, for instance one that offers cashback or airmiles 
on your purchases.

If you do not usually settle your account in full at the end of each month, 
opt for a card with a low interest rate on purchases. If you plan to make a 
big, one-off purchase it may be wise to look at cards with 0% introductory 
offers.

Store cards and affinity cards

Store cards are usually available at the point of sale and once a credit check 
and application form has been completed, which can take as little as 10 
minutes, can be used to make a purchase.

Retailers often offer incentives to sign up for their cards – these may 
include an introductory discount on goods, typically 10%, or extra money off 
during sales. You might also be invited to sale previews or be sent magazines, 
catalogues and details of special offers.

However, interest rates tend to be far higher than on normal credit cards. 
Signing up for a card to get a discount should not be a problem, but remember 
to pay off the balance within the interest-free period.

Affinity cards are credit cards with an organisation’s logo on them. Usually 
the organisation will receive a preset donation when you make your first 
purchase with the card, often around £5, then smaller donations based on your 
subsequent spending.

These don’t tend to add up to much, and if the card has an uncompetitive 
interest rate, you may be better off choosing a cheaper card and making 
donations separately.
 