
Amendment: Following the decision to axe child trust funds (CTFs), any babies 
born between 1 August 2010 and 1 January 2011 will still be entitled to a CTF 
voucher, but the £250 previously available has been cut to £50. Lower income 
households will now receive £100 down from £500. The government top-up to 
seven-year-old children has ended completely. HM Revenue & Customs will stop 
issuing new vouchers completely from 1 January 2011. The following information 
on how to invest a CTF voucher stands.


All children born on or after September 1 2002 receive money from the 
government that is put into an account and to which they can only gain access 
when they turn 18 – a child trust fund (CTF).

When a child is born, his or her parents will receive a voucher from the 
government to open a CTF. The voucher is worth £250, or £500 if the parents are 
on a low income and qualify for the full child tax credit.

At the age of seven, children receive another £250 payment, or £500 if the 
family qualifies for the full child tax credit.

Relatives and friends can pay extra money into the CTF, to a maximum of £1,200 
a year.

Parents must choose a CTF and invest their child's money within 12 months of 
receiving the voucher, as is explained in an information pack sent alongside 
the voucher.

Investment choices
 Parents must invest the CTF 12 months after receiving the voucher. 
Photograph: Sarah Lee 
There are several types of CTF. You can choose between investment funds linked 
to the stock market, basic deposit accounts and stakeholder CTF accounts.

A deposit account is like an ordinary cash savings account, a safehouse for 
the money – although the flipside is that it will have relatively little growth 
potential.

Stock market investments, alternatively, can be volatile, but history shows 
that over time they far exceed the returns of cash on deposit.

A stakeholder CTF invests in the stock market in early years, switching to 
lower-risk investments as the child reaches 18. This provision is designed to 
protect gains made in the early years from stock market falls later on.

There are ethical CTFs, which invest only in companies that meet certain 
ethical criteria, and sharia-compliant accounts.

Charges on stakeholder CTFs are capped at 1.5% a year, while there are no 
limits on charges for stock market linked CTFS. CTFs invested in deposit 
accounts attract no charges.

Not all the companies on the government's list of registered providers offer 
all three types of CTFs, though all must provide access, directly or through a 
partner, to a stakeholder kind.

If parents fail to open an account, the voucher will be invested in a default 
stakeholder account so the child does not miss out on possible investment 
growth. Parents are notified as to where the money has been invested and can, 
if they wish, move it to a new provider.

What happens next

CTF providers send out a performance statement each year detailing how much 
money has been added to the account, charges that have been applied and how 
much it is now worth.

If the CTF is not doing as well as hoped, parents can move it to a new 
provider at any point. Providers cannot charge for the transfer of an account, 
but if it is a CTF that invests in shares, the shares will have to be sold and 
the costs of stamp duty and dealing charges may be deducted. Before making a 
switch, it is wise to ask how much money would be lost in the transfer.
 The CTF is meant to give young adults a start in life, such as help with 
buying a first home. Photograph: Graham Turner 
At age 16, children can begin making decisions about how their CTF is managed, 
including taking over as the registered contact for their fund - annual 
performance statements will then be sent to them.

When children turn 18, their CTF matures and they can get their hands on the 
cash. There is no tax to pay on the money but nor will it accrue more 
investment gains or interest.

There is no restriction on the way the money is spent but the government hopes 
it will be used to provide a good financial start in life, such as providing a 
leg-up on to the property ladder.

Older children

Children born on or before August 31 2002 are not eligible for a voucher from 
the government or to have a CTF opened on their behalf.

However, there are other savings and investment options to give your child a 
head start in life. There are also many savings accounts specifically geared 
towards children.
 