
Not every employer runs a pension scheme, so if yours does it's well worth 
finding out what's on offer. There are two types of company pensions - final 
salary and money purchase schemes. If your employer is offering to contribute 
to either type of scheme, it is usually worth signing up.

Employer schemes also tend to have add-on benefits such as life insurance, 
also known as death-in-service benefits.

Most schemes are funded by contributions from the employer and employees. If 
you join the company scheme you will typically pay in a fixed percentage of 
your salary, which will be at least matched by your employer. You will receive 
tax relief on your contribution.

Your scheme booklet should explain how the pension plan works and what your 
entitlements are.

Final salary schemes 
 Final salary schemes guarantee a lump sum based on the number of years you 
have worked for a company. Photograph: Martin Godwin 
These are also known as defined benefit schemes as they guarantee a set level 
of pension when you retire. This is based on your final salary upon retirement 
and the number of years you've worked for the company.

Most commonly, these schemes pay one-60th of your final pay for each year of 
membership.

Final salary schemes are unfortunately a dying breed - they are expensive and 
risky for the employer, who has to invest to fund the sums promised to each 
employer. They are gradually being replaced by money purchase plans, which hold 
more risk for the employee.

It used to be the case that people who left final salary schemes before their 
set retirement date lost out on a significant part of their potential pension, 
due to the way benefits are calculated. There have recently been some 
improvements, but members who leave early still miss out on some potential 
benefits.

Money purchase schemes 

These are also known as defined contribution schemes as the only thing that is 
guaranteed is the amount going into the scheme - what comes out is subject to 
the performance of the investments bought by the pension fund manager.

Pension contributions made by you and, if you are lucky your employer, go into 
the fund each month. When you retire you can take a tax-free lump sum from the 
fund and use the rest to buy an annuity, which will provide a regular income 
for the rest of your life.

The disadvantage of this kind of scheme is that if the stock market sinks, the 
value of your fund falls along with it, and you risk receiving a poor pension 
pot.

You should be able to transfer your money purchase pension plan to a new 
employer's scheme, but it may be worth taking advice to see if this is the best 
option for you.

Contributions 
 You can now save as much as you like in any number of pension schemes. 
Photograph: Daniel Berehulak/Getty 
Following changes to pension rules in April 2006, you can now save as much as 
you like in any number and type of pensions, and get tax relief on 
contributions of up to 100% of your earnings each year. This means you can run 
a personal pension scheme alongside any scheme offered by your employer.

Drawing your pension

You no longer have to have finished working before you can start drawing your 
pension - some schemes will let you draw some or all of your pension before you 
retire. This is useful if, for example, you decide to phase your retirement, 
drawing some of your pension as you continue to work part time.

From April 2010, you will have to be 55 before you can draw on a company 
pension, unless you are in poor health.
 