
Income protection insurance - also known as permanent health insurance  - is 
designed to replace part of your lost earnings if you are unable to work 
because of illness or disability.

Depending on how much cover you chose to buy, income protection insurance 
provides a tax-free monthly payment of between 50 and 60% of your usual 
earnings. The monthly payment continues until you go back to work or you reach 
retirement age, although budget policies usually limit the payout to five years.

Income protection insurance is generally considered to be a must-have for the 
self-employed who would not have enough to live on if unable to work because of 
ill health or accident. If you are an employee, whether you need this sort of 
insurance depends on what your employer would provide in the way of sick pay 
and/or retirement benefits if you were too ill to carry on working.

What is covered

Income protection insurance pays out when you become ill or suffer an accident 
and, as a result, you are left unable to work.

But how "unable to work" is defined varies from policy to policy and can be 
any of the following:

· An inability to do your own job 

· An inability to do your own or a similar job for which you are qualified 

· An inability to do any kind of paid work

A policy which pays out simply if you cannot do your own job is clearly better 
than one which pays out only if you are unable to do any sort of paid work and 
as a result, this is the most expensive type of cover.
 Income protection policies pay out if you fall ill or have an accident. 
Photograph: Frank Baron  For a limited period, some policies also make a 
"partial" or "rehabilitation" payment if you are able to return to your old job 
but in a reduced capacity - part-time, for example.
Some policies also make a 'proportionate' payment which tops up earnings if 
you go back to work full-time but take a lower-paid job.

What is not covered

No policy will pay out while you continue to receive your full salary. Most 
policies will not pay out until you have been off work without pay for a 
"deferred period" of at least four weeks. You can choose a longer deferred 
period – of up to 52 weeks - which reduces the cost of insurance. If your 
employer offers sick pay for a set period, it may be wise to choose a deferred 
period of the same length.

To make sure that you don't profit from the insurance, all policies put a 
limit on the amount you can claim. Typically, the amount paid by the policy 
plus money from any other insurance that pays out when you are ill plus any 
sick pay or state benefits must not come to more than three quarters of your 
before-tax earnings over the past 12 months.

Policies do not cover you if you are unable to work as a result of: 

· Health problems you had before taking the policy out – called "pre-existing 
medical conditions"

· Taking part in dangerous sports or other activities which you failed to 
disclose when applying for the policy

· Self-inflicted injury

· Alcohol or drug abuse

· Pregnancy or childbirth



Buying income protection insurance

What you pay for income protection insurance depends on your age, sex, state 
of health and the kind of work you do. Women tend to face higher premiums as do 
people in jobs where there is high risk of physical injury.

When you buy income-protection insurance, you will need to decide: 

· How much you want the policy to pay out; 

· How long you want cover to last

· How long you are prepared to wait before payment is made

· Whether you want to build in increases to the cover - to keep up with 
inflation, for example
 The cost of cover depends on a wide range of factors, including your age and 
sex. Photograph: Roger Tooth  Because policies vary - and insurers differ in 
their attitude to the risks posed by different jobs - it is worth buying 
through an independent adviser or a broker who specialises in protection 
insurance.
An adviser will be able to trawl through all policies on the market and should 
be able to find the one offering the best cover for your particular 
circumstances.

Making a claim

Your policy document will tell you when you should tell your insurer that you 
are ill and are likely to claim. If you are still ill once the deferred period 
has ended, you should start to receive payment once you have completed your 
claim form and the insurer has checked things out with your doctor (if 
necessary).

While you are receiving payments under the policy, you will usually have to 
provide monthly medical certificates from your doctor as ongoing proof of your 
ill health.
 