
A personal pension is a savings scheme designed to pay out when you finish 
work. You may be able to survive on thestate pension 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2007/oct/25/state.pensions>, but if you want 
extra income a personal pension is one way to provide it.

Broadly speaking, there are three types of personal pension: stakeholder, 
standard and self-invested personal pensions (Sipps). Which type is suitable 
for you depends on how involved you want to be in your investment, your 
attitude to risk, and the amount you can afford to save.

Whichever you choose, you will make regular contributions into the scheme 
until you choose to retire. The money will be invested on your behalf, and your 
fund will grow in line with the performance of the investments.

When you reach retirement you will be able to take up to 25% of your fund as a 
tax-free lump sum, and use the rest to provide an income for the rest of your 
life.

Remember, the earlier you start paying into a pension, the longer it has to 
grow so you can retire on a comfortable income.

Maximum contributions
 Tax relief is available on your savings to help boost the amount you retire 
on. Photograph: Graeme Robertson/Getty 
You can pay up to £225,000 a year in total into all your personal and employer 
pension pots, with a lifetime limit on the fund of £1.6m. This is set to rise 
to £1.8m by 2010-11.

However, you only get tax relief on a sum equivalent to 100% of your earnings. 

If you are not earning, perhaps because you have taken a career break, you can 
still pay into a personal pension provider, but your contributions are limited 
to £3,600 a year, after tax-relief.

Tax-relief on personal pensions

To encourage you to save for retirement the government boosts your 
contributions to a personal pension by your highest rate of income tax. So, for 
example, if you are a basic-rate taxpayer and you want to make a £1,000 
contribution to a pension plan, it will only cost you £780 with the taxman 
topping up your contribution with the balance of £220.

For a higher-rate taxpayer the relief is worth 40%, but only 22% is paid 
straight into your pension. You have to reclaim the difference between basic 
and higher-rate tax relief through your annual tax return.

Stakeholder personal pensions

These are the simplest form of personal pension and are designed for people 
seeking a no-fuss retirement savings vehicle. The investment choice is limited, 
usually to the pension provider's in-house funds.

Stakeholder schemes are low-cost and provide easy access for savers. The rules 
state that providers must accept payments of just £20, and the maximum they can 
charge for the scheme is 1.5% a year.

The provider cannot charge members for transferring money into or out of a 
stakeholder scheme.

Standard personal pensions 
 You can seek advice to find out which pension is most suitable for you. 
Photograph: Ryan McVay/Getty 
These offer more investment choice than stakeholder plans, with between 40 and 
400 funds available from a range of managers.

Many personal pension providers have now brought their plans in line with the 
stakeholder model, capping charges at 1.5% a year for the first 10 years and 1% 
thereafter.

In the past, personal pensions were severely criticised for applying steep 
charges without limit. They were renowned for using a process called 'front-end 
loading', meaning they levied very high initial charges, sometimes equivalent 
to 80% of the first year's contributions.

Be aware there is still no limit on personal pension charges outside a 
stakeholder, so check what these are before you apply.

Self-invested personal pensions (Sipps)

These are a step on from standard personal pensions and give a wider 
investment choice, usually at a higher cost. For those wanting to pick and 
choose the funds in which their pension invests, a Sipp may be a suitable 
choice.

These benefit from the same tax relief as standard personal pensions, 
providing the investments are on HM Revenue & Custom's approved list. This 
includes life insurers, commercial property, unit and investment trusts, 
equities, cash deposits, and futures and options.

Dealing charges and management fees vary dramatically between providers, and 
can be hefty, making Sipps traditionally suited to high-net worth individuals.

As well as set-up charges of between £400 and £500, and annual charges of 
around the same sum, you face initial and annual charges for each investment 
made.

However, newer stakeholder-style contracts with lower charges are gradually 
being introduced,, giving Sipps wider appeal - although you can't invest in 
commercial property through these.

Sipps are available from independent financial advisers and stockbrokers, as 
well as from traditional pension providers.
 