
An Isa is a tax-efficient "wrapper" in which you can hold either stock 
market-based investments or a traditional savings account.

Any interest earned on savings or bonds and any capital gains made on 
investments within an Isa are tax free. This makesIsas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> particularly appealing to higher rate 
taxpayers, who usually have to hand over 40% of their returns to the tax man.

Isas replaced personal equity plans (Peps) and tax exempt special savings 
accounts (Tessas), which closed to new investors in April 1999. Two types of 
Isas are available: stocks and shares Isas and cash Isas.

Because of the associated tax breaks, the amount that can be invested in an 
Isa each tax year is limited.

How the money is divided depends on the kind of assets people want to hold.

Investment limits

You can invest your £11,280 in two ways:

• Put all £11,280 in stocks and shares, or

• Put up to £5,640 in cash and the balance in stocks and shares.

A cash Isa can be held with one provider and the remainder of the overall 
allowance in a stocks and shares Isa from another provider, or it can all be 
held with the same company.

Investors cannot pay in more than the annual limit, even if they have made a 
withdrawal. If, for example, someone pays in the full £11,280 but takes out 
£2,000 the next month, they cannot put that £2,000 back in an Isa in the same 
tax year. The Isa holding may be below the limit but they will be deemed to 
have used their annual allowance.

Cash Isas
 Cash Isas tend to offer higher rates of interest than conventional accounts. 
Photograph: PA 
 A cash Isa is a tax-free savings account, usually offered by a bank or 
building society. It keeps an initial investment intact, and usually offers a 
higher rate of interest than taxed accounts from the same bank or building 
society which is tax free.

Some Isa providers offer cash funds, which invest in the money markets and 
target a set return above the Bank of England base rate. In exchange for 
greater potential return investors will pay an annual management fee and may be 
locked into the investment for a set term.

Stocks and shares Isas

Also referred to as equity Isas, a stocks and shares Isa can hold an 
investment fund or funds, or individual stocks and shares. This type of Isa 
carries risks and should be regarded as a medium- to long-term investment.

An investor can put their full allowance in stocks and shares, but if they 
want to reduce their risk they may prefer to hold some of the allowance in cash.
 Equity Isas should be viewed as a medium- to long-term investment. 
Photograph: AP 
If they want instant access to their money, a cash Isa will probably suit them 
better. But if they are thinking of investing money they can afford to lock 
away, they should consider shares.

If they wish to invest in a range of funds from different providers – or to 
benefit from lower initial charges – they should consider a fund supermarket, 
either directly or through an independent financial adviser (IFA), or a 
discount broker. These will offer a menu of funds from which a selection is on 
offer, subject to minimum investment levels.

Self-select Isas

These are designed for investors who want to hold individual stocks and shares 
and are offered by stockbrokers and online share dealing sites.

An investor can buy up to £11,280 of shares through the Isa provider. As with 
share deals done outside the wrapper there will be costs associated with buying 
and selling stocks. These will be on top of any charge for the Isa wrapper.

Tax advantages

Basic rate taxpayers who are usually taxed at 20% on interest earned on 
savings accounts and bond funds do not pay a penny on interest earned on a cash 
Isa. Higher rate taxpayers make bigger tax savings, as they usually face 40% 
tax.

On stocks and shares Isas basic rate taxpayers are taxed at 10% – the same as 
on shares held outside the Isa wrapper.

Higher rate taxpayers do gain from holding dividend-producing shares in an Isa 
– they pay tax at 10% rather than the 32.5% that is deducted on non-Isa 
investments.

Profits from shares held in an Isa are not subject to capital gains tax, which 
means any growth on your investment is all yours. You don't even have to 
declare your Isa on your tax return.

Transferring money

Isas can be transferred from a previous tax year from one provider to another 
without having an impact on the current year's allowance.

However, most of the best-buy cash Isas do not accept transfers in, so 
investors shopping around for a new home for last year's cash Isa need to make 
sure they read the small print before comparing rates.

Money from a cash Isa can be transferred into a stocks and shares Isa. If the 
cash Isa was from a previous tax year, an investor can move as much or a little 
as they like.

If the cash Isa is from the current tax year, they must move all of it. They 
will, however, be free to invest up to £5,640 in another cash Isa, subject to 
the overall investment limit of £11,280.

Transfers from stocks to cash are not allowed.
 