
The state pension is a benefit paid by the government to people who have 
retired. To qualify you need to have paid national insurance (NI) contributions 
for a set number of years, or had them paid for you.

At present, the state pension age, after which you qualify for a payout, is 
65. The government announced in November 2011 that the state pension age will 
increase to 67 for both sexes between 2026 and 2028. This change is not yet law 
and will require the approval of parliament.

However, assuming the change is passed, the new state pension age is planned 
to increase as follows to:

• 66 between November 2018 and October 2020
• 67 between 2026 and 2028
• 68 between 2044 and 2046

In the 2010-11 tax year the full state pension for a single person was worth 
up to £102.15 a week; for a couple the full pension is worth up to £204.30.

Qualifying years
 How much pension you receive depends on the number of years you work. 
Photograph: Sarah Lee 
The state pension you receive will depend on how many qualifying years of NI 
contributions you have made. You can start building up qualifying years at the 
start of the tax year in which you turn 16, and finish at the end of the tax 
year before you reach the state pension age.

To get the full state pension you need to have built up a certain number of 
qualifying years depending on when you were born and whether you are male or 
female:

• Men born before 6 April 1945 usually need 44 qualifying years.
• Women born before 6 April 1950 usually need 39 qualifying years.
• Men born after 5 April 1945 need 30 qualifying years.
• Women born after 5 April 1950 need 30 qualifying years.

In some circumstances you may be credited with "qualifying years" even if you 
weren't working. This might occur if you are, or were, incapable of working due 
to illness, caring for children or someone sick, or in receipt of certain 
benefits.

You can opt to make up for a shortfall in your contributions to make sure you 
get a full state pension.

Over-80 pension

This is a non-contributory pension for people aged over 80 who are not 
entitled to a full state pension. To qualify you must live in England, Scotland 
or Wales and have done so for at least 10 years.

If you do not receive a state pension the over-80s portion is worth £61.20 a 
week; if you do receive some state pension you will receive the difference 
between this amount and £61.20 a week.

Checking your entitlement 

If you are coming up to retirement in the next few years, the best way to 
check your entitlement is to get a state pension forecast – this is available 
from your local benefits agency by filling in form BR19.
 You can check how much basic pension you are entitled to. Photograph: Daniel 
Berehulak/Getty 
You can also write to Retirement Pension Forecast and Advice Unit, Pensions 
and Overseas Directorate, Tyneview Park, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE98 1BA, or 
apply online atthe Pension Service <http://www.thepensionservice.gov.uk/>.

The forecast will tell you the amount of basic pension you have already 
earned, and what you can expect at retirement taking into account what you 
might earn before you retire. It will also tell you if there is anything you 
can do to improve your pension.

Pension credits 

The government introduced pension credits in 2003 to combat pensioner poverty, 
replacing a similar benefit called the minimum income guarantee.

It is a means-tested benefit that guarantees a minimum weekly income of 
£137.35 for single pensioners and £209.70 for couples in 2011-12.

Around 5 million of the UK's 11 million pensioners are entitled to claim 
pension credit, but only around 3 million do so. This is either because they 
are unaware of its existence, find the application forms too complex, or don't 
wish to disclose their financial details.

Collecting your pension

Your state pension, and any pension credits to which you are entitled, will be 
paid directly into your bank or building society account.

You don't have to claim it as soon as you reach state pension age, and may 
choose not to if you are still at work or have enough other income to live on. 
If you choose to defer your pension you will be entitled to a higher weekly 
amount later on, or a one-off lump sum payment.

All pension payments are taxable.
 