
If your furry friend needs medical care or surgery, the costs can mount up to 
thousands of pounds.Pet insurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pet-insurance> gives owners peace of mind 
that hefty vet's bills will be covered in the event of illness or accident.

Cats and dogs are the easiest pets for which to find insurance but most 
animals can be covered – even iguanas. However, you may have to approach a 
specialist provider if your pet is particularly exotic.

As well as medical expenses, cover also typically includes legal expenses if 
your pet causes injury to a third party – for example, should your dog bite the 
postman – the cost of advertising if you lose your pet and the cost of a reward 
for its return. Some of the most expensive policies will also offer a payout if 
you have to cancel your holiday because your pet is sick.

Expected costs, for example for vaccinations or for spaying or neutering your 
pet, won't be covered by a pet insurance policy.

Among a variety of providers, many big name insurers now offer pet insurance. 
You will even see leaflets advertising it in supermarkets and bank branches.

The cost

Most providers base their quotes on the age and breed of your pet and the area 
in which you live.
 Pedigree pets are generally more expensive to insure than mongrels and 
moggies. Photograph: Johnny Green/PA 
Pedigree animals are generally more expensive to insure than moggies or 
mongrels. This is partly because they are worth more – and many policies offer 
to payout the cost of a pet if it dies or is stolen – and partly because 
non-pedigree cats and dogs are generally healthier and longer-lived than 
pedigrees.

The cost of cover increases the older your pet is. Just like humans, older 
animals are more likely to need medical treatment.

Many companies will provide cover only for dogs less than eight or nine years 
old and cats younger than 10. If your pet is already insured and reaches this 
age, your insurer may agree to continue cover, although you could face a rise 
in premiums.

Pet insurance can cost as little as £5 a month but in some cases premiums can 
run into hundreds of pounds a year.

Things to look out for

Read the small print before you sign on a policy and make sure you are happy 
with the level of cover it provides.

Not all policies offer unlimited cover for vets' fees and some restrict the 
period for which they will pay out for any condition to one year. This means 
some owners are unable to provide their pet with veterinary care when this 
period expires.
 Some policies have a cut-off point for veterinary expenses. Photograph: 
Johnny Green/PA 
Remember to ask what the excess is. This is the first part of any insurance 
claim, which you pay yourself. Some insurers charge a percentage of the claim 
rather than a fixed amount of, say, £50 or £100.

As well as checking how much cover you are getting, if you are planning to 
take your pet overseas you must ensure your policy will provide emergency 
expenses abroad.

Making a claim

If your pet does need emergency treatment, make sure you get a receipt from 
the vet. To make a claim, call your insurer and ask for a claims form. You will 
need to fill this in and attach any receipts for treatment, usually within a 
stipulated time period. You may also need to ask your vet to sign the form – he 
or she is likely to be familiar with the process so it should not be a problem.

If your claim involves a third party, you should contact your insurance 
company before you do anything else, as it will deal directly with the third 
party.
 