
Conveyancing is the work that is done to enable the legal transfer of 
property, as well as all the work done in the run-up to the completion of the 
sale.

The process is complicated and includes drawing up contracts, understanding 
and carrying out searches, and looking after all post-completion paperwork.

Most buyers and sellers choose to hire a solicitor or licensed conveyancer to 
do the legal work. He or she will advise you if anything unexpected happens 
during the sale process, and will handle any negotiations over price or what 
fixtures and fittings are to be left in the property.

 Buying and conveyancing

A conveyancer will act on your behalf once you have found your new home, and 
will contact the seller's conveyancer. He or she will also make any 
pre-contract enquiries on issues such as alterations to the property.
 Once you have found your new home you need to appoint a conveyancer. 
Photograph: David Sillitoe 
Once everything is considered to be satisfactory, contracts and deeds are 
prepared and a date for completion is set.

The conveyancer will also arrange for you to pay stamp duty on the property. 
He or she will let you know how much you owe and make sure you fill in the 
correct forms for HM Revenue & Customs.

Selling and conveyancing

In England and Wales, any offer to buy that you receive will have been made 
subject to survey and contract. This means neither you or the buyer are legally 
bound to go through with the transaction, and each may withdraw without 
incurring a penalty up to the point of exchange of contracts.

Once you have agreed to sell your property you should instruct a conveyancer. 
Their first step will be to obtain your title deeds and land registry copies. 
You will be required to complete forms detailing information about your 
property and its fixtures and fittings. If the property is a leasehold you will 
be asked to provide a copy of the lease.

Your conveyancer will prepare draft documentation that should include a draft 
contract of sale and a copy of the lease if the property is a leasehold.

They will also arrange for the buyer to pay a deposit - usually at least 5% of 
the total sale price - on the day the contracts are exchanged.

On completion of the sale your conveyancer will receive the balance of the 
sale price and, in return, hand over the title deeds to the buyer's conveyancer.

Legal costs

Solicitors and conveyancers structure their costs in different ways: some 
charge a fixed fee while others charge a percentage of the property value. 
Either way, you should budget to spend at least £500 on conveyancing fees - 
more if you are buying a leasehold property.

There will also be fees for third parties, known as disbursements. These can 
include fees for transferring money to a buyer, stamp duty and land registry 
costs.
 