
There are three basic types of motor insurance: third party; third party, fire 
and theft; and fully comprehensive.

Third party is the minimum cover you need under the Road Traffic Act. If you 
cause an accident and damage another driver's car, or cause injury to a third 
party, the person or people concerned will receive a payout from your insurer. 
You will not, even if you car is a writeoff.

Third party, fire and theft insurance adds two useful extra pieces of cover to 
the legally required minimum: cover against fire damage and the theft of your 
car. Again, if you cause an accident and damage your car, you will not be able 
to claim on your policy.

Fully comprehensive cover includes third party, fire and theft as well as 
cover for any accidental damage to your car. Some fully comprehensive policies 
also give you third party cover when you drive other people's cars - useful if 
you borrow someone's car and their insurance does not automatically cover you.

Extras
 Recovery service membership is a common insurance extra. Photograph: Martin 
Argles 
On top of the three basic types of insurance there is a bewildering array of 
extras - some thrown in by the insurer as standard, some optional that carry a 
cost.

These could include a free or discount windscreen replacement service, 
courtesy car, legal cover, membership of a breakdown service, or limited cover 
for loss or damage to your possessions in the car.

Most of of these are offered only to policyholders with fully comprehensive 
cover, but some are available even to those with third party policies.

No claims bonuses

This discount can substantially reduce the cost of your motor insurance 
premiums and, as its name suggests, is given to drivers who haven't claimed on 
their policy for a certain number of years. In other words, it rewards you for 
being a careful driver. How much of a discount you are given depends on your 
insurer: one company might offer 50% after three years, another may reduce your 
premium by only 40%.

On average, you may reasonably expect to receive a one-year discount of 
25%-30% on the cost of your policy. But if you decide to switch insurers, you 
will need evidence to show you have not had any claims. If you have an accident 
that is not your fault, it may not affect your bonus if the insurer can claim 
the cost of the damage from another insurer.

Once you have built up a certain number of years' no claims bonus, your 
insurer may give you the option to protect it. This allows you to keep your 
discount, even if you do make a claim. You will, however, pay for this 
protection, so you need to weigh up the value of the discount against the cost 
of protecting your bonus.

What affects the cost of cover?

Each motor insurance provider will set a different premium rate for each car 
according to its own claims statistics.

Factors that affect what you pay include your age, what car you drive, how 
long you have been driving, where you live and where the car is kept.

It all comes down to risk, so a teenager with a first, flash car, who has just 
passed a driving test and lives in central London, may be stung by annual 
premiums of thousands of pounds, while an older driver living in a rural area 
will pay much less.

Cutting the cost

One simple method of lowering your premiums is to accept a higher voluntary 
excess – the sum of any claim you are liable to pay yourself before the 
insurance kicks in. While almost all policies require you to pay some money 
towards the cost of any claim, you can increase this from, say, £100 to £250.

You can also reduce your insurance costs by limiting the policy to specific 
named drivers, rather than fixing cover for anyone who drives the car with your 
permission. Other tips to cut costs include keeping your car in a garage when 
not in use, driving a low annual mileage and insuring more than one car with 
the same company.
 Limited cover for possessions stolen from your car is often included. 
Photograph: David Sillitoe 
Some insurers have recently introduced schemes to help young drivers cut their 
premiums by signing up not to drive at night, when most accidents happen. 
Drivers carry a black box in their car that includes details of their journeys; 
if they are recorded making a trip during the night they pay an extra charge.

Buying a policy

There are three main ways to buy motor cover: through a broker, by telephone 
and online. Which one is best depends on your circumstances, but it may be 
worth doing some research yourself even if you intend to get help from a broker 
before you choose a deal.

A multitude of online comparison tools is available, enabling you find out 
what you would pay with different insurers without having to call them 
separately. Be aware, though, that not all insurers have signed up to the 
comparison sites, so you may need to contact some directly to get a comparison 
quote.

Paying the cheapest price is not always the best option. If you have an 
accident, an excellent claims service can make a huge difference at a traumatic 
time. Similarly, some insurers will offer a courtesy car, which can also make 
life easier. Make sure you read the small print on the policy, think about your 
own car use and ensure you are comparing like with like when you choose a deal.
 