
There are two types of insurance you need to consider for your home - one 
covers the building and the other the contents.

Buildings insurance
 Buildings insurance typically covers flood, fire and other disasters. 
Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/PA 
This covers damage to the structure of your home as well as to permanent 
fixtures and fittings, for example the bathroom suite. The amount of cover you 
need depends on the cost of rebuilding your home rather than its market value.

When you take out a mortgage the lender will usually use the rebuilding cost 
shown in the valuation report to assess how much buildings insurance is needed. 
It will insist you have at least this much cover before it hands over the 
mortgage.

Buildings insurance policies usually offer cover for fire, flood, water damage 
and other hazards. Malicious acts, such as vandalism, may also be included. 
However, possible exclusions include damage from general wear and tear, and 
sometimes terrorism, so it is essential to read the small print.

Contents insurance

This type of policy covers all your belongings from clothing to kitchen 
equipment, works of art, furniture and electrical equipment. It also covers 
curtains, carpets and items in your garden. Most contents policies also cover 
the contents of your freezer.

A typical contents policy will pay out if your belongings are damaged by fire 
or flooding, or if they are stolen in a break in. Often, your cover will extend 
to items taken outside the property, but you may have to pay extra to cover 
expensive and high-risk items such as cameras and laptops. If you have 
expensive items it is worth considering insuring them individually. Most house 
contents policies also put a limit on the amount you can claim for a single 
item, which is often around £1,000.

Not all contents policies cover accidental damage as a matter or course. If 
you want peace of mind should you spill tea on the carpet or paint on the sofa, 
you may have to pay extra for such cover.

Calculating premiums

When working out how much to charge you for buildings or contents insurance, 
most insurers will start with your postcode. This enables them to determine 
whether, for example, you are in an area prone to subsidence as well as 
including their own experience of claims within your locality. The crime level 
in your neighbourhood may also determine premiums.

If you live in a flood prone area you will also probably face higher insurance 
payments. Unfortunately there is little you can do about this, although some 
insurers are offering discounts to homeowners who buy equipment to protect 
their homes from flooding.

Insurers will take your claims history into account when determining your 
premiums; people with the fewest claims will get the cheapest offers. Insurers 
will also ask whether the property is empty during the day or night and whether 
the homeowner takes long holidays. If you leave the property empty for a long 
period, say 30 days or more, you may find it hard to get cover or pay more for 
the privilege.

Cutting the cost

To reduce the cost of your cover, you could opt for a higher “excess” - the 
amount of any claim you must pay yourself.
 Installing a smoke alarm can reduce your premiums. Photograph: PA 
Another way to reduce your premiums is to increase security on your house: 
upgrading locks and buying burglar and smoke alarms make your home a lower risk 
for the insurer, resulting in cheaper insurance for you.

You may get a discount if you buy combined building and contents insurance. 
However, this isn’t always the case so it is worth getting separate quotes as 
well.

Buying cover

While it may seem obvious, it is worth shopping around to find the cheapest 
policy that suits your needs. Brokers and online comparison tools will help you 
to find the best deals.

It is worth comparing providers because the amount they charge for the same 
cover varies widely. Insurers focus their marketing money on offering cut-price 
deals to new customers, while largely relying on inertia to keep their existing 
policyholders.

While your bank will happily offer cover, it is unlikely to be the best value. 

Premiums will generally be lower for detached houses and higher for terraced 
houses and flats.

Making a claim

You must notify your insurance company as soon as possible when making a claim 
on your buildings or contents insurance. If you are making a claim after a 
burglary you will need to tell your insurance company the incident number 
assigned to your case by the police.

On any major claim, your insurance company will send a loss adjuster to 
investigate the extent of the loss or damage you have suffered and whether you 
are complying with the terms of your policy. You may want to employ a loss 
assessor to represent your interests.

You must make sure you do not give your insurance company any inaccurate or 
untrue information. You should also make sure you understand the small print of 
your policy to ensure it covers you for the risks you think you it does.

You can be prosecuted for fraud if you provide inaccurate information. 
Remember, any claim you make will have to be declared to other insurers, and 
you may pay more for premiums in the future as a result.
 