
A personal loan involves borrowing a lump sum from a lender - usually a bank, 
building society or other financial service provider - which you agree to pay 
back, with interest, over a fixed period, usually between six months and 10 
years.

Types of loans

There are two main types of personal loans: secured and unsecured. Unsecured 
loans are not tied to any of your assets, but secured loans are - usually to 
your property, which is why they are often calledhomeowner loans. If you 
default on a secured loan, your lender can force you to sell the asset to pay 
off your debt.Car loans are also secured loans, with the lender using the 
vehicle you are buying as security for the loan.
 Homeowner loans are tied to a property. Photograph: Frank Baron 
Most lenders offer unsecured loans of between £5,000 and £25,000, although 
some cap borrowing at £15,000. Smaller loans are available if you shop around, 
but if your borrowing requirement runs into hundreds of pounds rather than 
thousands there may be better ways to borrow the money.

If you want to borrow more than £25,000, you will need a secured loan. You 
will also need enough equity in your property to secure the loan.

Interest rates

The APR <http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2007/oct/25/debt.savings> (annual 
percentage rate) on a loan is the amount you will pay in interest each year. 
Most adverts for loans tend to quote a "typical APR"; you will not necessarily 
get the same rate of interest when you apply.

Unless you choose a lender with a "one-size-fits-all" interest rate, factors 
including how much you want to borrow, how long you want to borrow it for and 
your personal and financial circumstances will all have an influence on how 
much you pay.

A bank has to have offered its typical APR (or a better rate) to at least 66% 
of potential customers.

Interest rates can be fixed or variable, and it is important to know which you 
are signing up for. A fixed rate will remain the same for the term of the loan, 
which means your monthly repayments will remain the same.

A variable rate will be subject to change, usually in line with the Bank of 
England base rate. While this is good news when rates are falling, it can be 
worrying if rates go up and you need to find more money than expected to make 
your repayments.

Repaying your loan

Most loans are repaid in monthly instalments – usually by direct debit - over 
a period agreed before you get the money. The lender will tell you how much you 
need to pay each month when it agrees the loan.

The repayment period is usually fixed and you will have to pay a redemption 
penalty - for example, two months' interest - if you want to pay it off sooner. 
The longer the repayment period, the more interest you will be paying, so go 
for the shortest you can manage.

Flexible loans, which let you borrow and pay back at will, are becoming more 
common, but the interest rate charged is often significantly higher.

If you miss a payment the lender will record the default on your credit file. 
Any new lender may not be put off by one or two missed payments, but if you 
have missed several you may struggle to get credit elsewhere.



Where to get a loan

The list of organisations offering loans is long and ranges from high street 
banks, to those that operate only on the internet or telephone, to building 
societies, credit unions, specialist loan companies and even doorstep lenders.

Typically, cheaper deals are offered by the specialists and internet banks 
than are available on the high street, but this is not always the case so you 
should shop around, either online or by contacting lenders to get quotes.
 Doorstep loans have interest rates as high as 900%. Photograph: Garry Weaser 
Possibly the most expensive form of credit is offered by doorstep lenders. 
Unlike mainstream lenders, they will often offer sums of less than £50 - 
typically used to cover unexpected purchases - and collect payments weekly. 
However, APRs can be as high as 900% so borrowers who have a choice will tend 
to avoid them.

Credit unions are an alternative to mainstream lenders and can be an 
attractive option for some borrowers because they cannot charge more than 2% a 
month on the reducing balance of the loan (an APR of 26.8%), and most charge 
just 1% a month (12.7% APR).

Most credit unions offer unsecured loans for up to five years and secured 
loans for up to 10 years.

Getting into difficulty

Sometimes things go wrong and it is difficult to meet your monthly repayments. 
If this happens to you, do not ignore letters arriving through your front door.

The best course of action is to get in touch with your lender immediately. 
Banks and building societies <https://www.theguardian.com/money/banks> are 
often willing to help and might offer to freeze the loan temporarily or extend 
the repayment period.

Their ultimate aim is to recoup their money, but it is usually more 
advantageous, including cheaper, for them to reschedule your repayments than to 
take action against you.

It is particularly important to be upfront with your lender if you have a loan 
secured on your house or another asset, because if things go wrong you may have 
to sell up to pay back the loan.

Organisations providing advice

Consumer Credit Counselling Service <http://www.cccs.co.uk/>: a charity 
offering free, confidential advice for people in debt through its national 
telephone helpline - 0800 138 1111.

Citizens Advice Bureau 
<http://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/index/getadvice.htm#searchbox>: free, 
impartial, confidential and face-to-face advice available via more than 3,000 
outlets around the UK.

National Debtline <http://www.nationaldebtline.co.uk/>: telephone helpline on 
0808 808 4000 providing free, confidential and independent advice on tackling 
debt.
 