
The families of three Scottish soldiers murdered by the Provisional IRA at the 
beginning of the Troubles inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> have launched a campaign to 
expose their killers.

The Three Scottish Soldiers Campaign for Justice group wants three suspects it 
says are still living openly in the Irish Republic brought to justice.

The campaign will be seen as a case of “turning the tables” on recent moves by 
the families of republican activists shot dead by the security forces to bring 
soldiers and police officers through the courts over Troubles-related deaths.

Fusiliers Dougald McCaughey, 23, John McCaig, 17, and his brother Joseph, 18, 
were the first soldiers to be killed while off duty during the Troubles after 
the PIRA decided to escalate its armed campaign.

They were lured into a “honey trap” by women who befriended them in the centre 
of Belfast then took them to a house party in the north of the city, where anIRA
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> unit shot them dead. Their bodies were 
left on an isolated road overlooking Belfast and were found by children.

At the launch of the campaign in Glasgow on Tuesday, the group said the 
families of the soldiers had the right to know the identities of the suspects 
and see the British state attempt to have them extradited to the UK.

David McCaughey, a relative of Dougald McCaughey, said: “This is a scar in my 
family that has never healed. I made promises to family that are no longer 
living that I would never let these boys be forgotten, I will never break that 
promise. I suffer from ill health due to cancer. I now know that if my health 
took a turn for the worse that there are good people in this campaign working 
to fulfil my original promise.”

The campaign is backed by London-based law firm McCue & Partners, which has 
supported relatives of IRA victims killed and injured with Libyan-supplied 
weapons during the Troubles. The firm has provided support for their fight for 
compensation from the Libyan government over the late Colonel Muammar Gaddafi’s 
supply of arms and explosives to the PIRA.



Matthew Jury, a managing partner at the law firm, said: “It is a terrible 
injustice that, time and time again, UK veterans are singled out for 
prosecution while IRA terrorists walk free. In this case, the authorities know 
the names of the soldiers’ killers, but still nothing is done. All the while, 
their families and loved ones are kept in the dark. They have the right to know 
the truth and to see those responsible brought to justice.”

Last month it emerged that two former soldiers will be charged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/16/two-british-soldiers-charged-over-ira-leader-murder-1972-joe-mccann>
 with the killing of the Official IRA leader Joe McCann in Belfast in 1972.

They are known as Soldier A and Soldier C and are believed to have been 
paratroopers. The pair will be the first former members of the British military 
to be charged with murder during the NorthernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> conflict.

McCann’s family claim he was shot in the back by members of the Parachute 
Regiment at a time when he was one of the most wanted republican gunmen in 
Northern Ireland.

McCann sided with the Marxist Official IRA when the IRA split in 1969. He took 
part in the Official IRA gun battle with the British army in the Lower Falls 
district a year later.

In 1971, McCann led an Official IRA unit that temporarily held back 600 
British troops who had flooded into the Market district to arrest local men 
without trial when the late Edward Heath agreed to unionist demands for 
internment.
 