
The father of an accountant who died after struggling with a secret gambling 
addiction has called for a shakeup of the online betting industry so that 
people like his son could be permanently banned from using gambling websites.

Speaking after the inquest into the death of Joshua Jones, 23, who died after 
falling from the ninth-floor balcony of his employers, PricewaterhouseCoopers, 
Martin Jones said that there were “practical measures” that could be adopted to 
save other lives.

He said that websites could introduce the option for permanent exclusion, 
instead of time-limited exclusions that eventually allow users to return and 
gamble again.

“The betting and gambling industry could introduce effective cooperation to 
permit self-exclusion from one site to be applied to all sites,” Jones told the 
Evening Standard.

“Payday lenders could adopt equivalent provisions for self-exclusion, instead 
of merely waiting for a borrower to run up a debt and default. How many more 
deaths are needed beforegambling addiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/09/gambling-regulators-new-rules-problem-addicts>
 is taken more seriously?”

His son had been working as a graduate associate at the headquarters of 
PricewaterhouseCoopers on the South Bank in London. He died from multiple 
injuries on 30 July last year, after jumping from the building’s ninth-floor 
balcony.

Jones told the inquest that his son had “died of shame” after taking out 
payday loans at “silly interest rates” to pay off his gambling loans and had 
led a double life.

At the time of his death, Joshua Jones was believed to have owed a total of 
£30,000 to banks, loan companies and others, but had given no indication to his 
family that he was suicidal.

A verdict of suicide was reached by the deputy coroner, Shanta Deonarine, who 
said there were no drugs in Joshua’s system or any significant traces of 
alcohol.

“Joshua Jones suffered from a gambling addiction, he had a number of financial 
problems. I am sure that he took his own life,” she added.

PricewaterhouseCoopers said in a statement: “Josh was a wonderful young man. 
Those colleagues who were fortunate enough to work alongside him feel a great 
loss.”
 