
The City watchdog has issued a warning 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/news/self-certified-mortgages-from-firms-not-based-in-the-uk-warning-to-consumers>
 to people considering taking out a self-certification mortgage from a company 
based outside the UK.


Days after a new lender based in the Czech Republic started touting for 
business in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/20/self-cert-mortgage-lender-borrowers>
, attracting interest from thousands of self-employed borrowers, the Financial 
Conduct Authority has stepped in.

It warned that anyone who took out a mortgage from a firm based overseas would 
have “no UK regulatory protection” if anything went wrong.


The new lender, Selfcert.co.uk, launched on 18 January, but has stopped taking 
new applications until further notice while it works through a “severe backlog” 
of people who have registered an interest.


Self-cert mortgages – dubbed “liar loans” – were aimed at self-employed 
workers who had trouble proving their income to lenders. They were popular 
before the credit crisis and controversial, amid evidence that many firms let 
borrowers inflate their salaries to obtain bigger home loans.

The loans were banned by the FCA in 2014, so those behind Selfcert.co.uk have 
set up the company in Prague, where, it said, “We are not subject to UK 
regulation ... We decide who we lend to”.


The firm is offering one mortgage rate to all customers – 2% above the Bank of 
England base rate – and is prepared to lend up to £500,000 with a minimum 
deposit of 15%. However, it only has up to £50m to lend, which it said would 
fund a maximum of 250-300 mortgages.


The firm added that it did not lend within the M25 area as it was “concerned 
about possible bubbles in the London property market”.


In its warning notice, the FCA said that “because of the harm caused to 
consumers in the past” self-certification of income was no longer permitted in 
the UK, with lenders now required to check a customer could afford a mortgage, 
including verifying their income in every case.


It added that from 21 March 2016, all companies offering mortgages in the UK, 
including those based in European Economic Area countries, would have to comply 
with a European credit directive (ECD) requiring a thorough affordability 
assessment based on information that had been verified by the lender.


“If you take out a mortgage offered from outside the UK under the ECD, you 
will lose important UK consumer protection benefits, such as the right to refer 
complaints to the UK’s Financial Ombudsman Service and to be treated fairly 
when facing payment difficulties,” said the FCA.

 