 Today is the 300th anniversary of the Act of Union between Scotland and 
England taking effect - but there will be few celebrations to mark the occasion.
Instead, a coffin draped in the flag of St George will be paraded past Downing 
Street to protest at "anti-English discrimination".

A hearse pulled by two horses will bring the coffin with groups taking part 
including the English Democrats party, the Campaign for an English Parliament, 
and the English Constitution Convention.

In Downing Street the protesters will hand in a 20,000-address petition 
demanding an English parliament.

The union, which came into effect on May 1 1707, appears to be going through 
troubled times.

On Thursday, Scots will go to voting stations to elect a new parliament in 
Edinburgh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh>.

If opinion polls are right, Labour will lose power in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> for the first time in a generation 
and the Scottish National party will be installed instead.

The machinery of government in Scotland - including the parliament - is in a 
state of suspended animation until the election is over, so the protest at 
Downing Street is one of the few public events to mark the anniversary.

The protest is being organised by English campaign groups to commemorate the 
300th anniversary of what they regard as "the death of England's identity, 
independence, and the English parliament".

Until fairly recently, a complaint of this type would have been unheard of in 
England.

But in both countries, the onset of devolution in 1999 changed notions of what 
it means to be British.

In one sense, the union is under greater strain than it has endured in years, 
although Labour figures expected that devolution would kill Scottish 
nationalism stone dead.

But now Alex Salmond's party is presenting itself as an alternative 
administration, ready to buckle down to the task of running Scotland better 
than Labour.

Yes, the party wants independence, but it claims it is happy to wait until it 
has built up a track record of administrative competence and then put its case 
to the public in a referendum in 2010.

Labour can paint dire warnings of the economic cost of independence, but 
cannot yet seem to find a compelling answer to the voter who says: "Yes, I'll 
give the SNP a try at running the show but, when the referendum comes, I won't 
back independence." One factor in this must be a diminishing sense of 
Britishness, both north and south of the border.

In England, Britain was almost synonymous with a Greater England, but, in 
Scotland, the sense of partnership and common purpose was deeper.

But this diminished with the decline of empire, a more mobile society, and as 
memories of the second world war faded.

Bright young Scots who, generations ago, might have carved out a career in the 
colonies now have other, more comfortable, options.

The tensions that devolution could bring were first highlighted by Tam 
Dalyell, then a Labour MP, who argued it was a step on the slippery slope to 
independence.

It was he who pointed out the "West Lothian question", which asked why 
Scottish MPs could vote at Westminster on matters like hospitals and education 
in England when they had no say on these matters in Scotland?

This came to the fore in the matter of university tuition top-up fees.

Upfront fees had been scrapped in Scotland in one of the first acts of the 
Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition, but top-up fees in England were pushed 
through at Westminster, with the help of Scottish MPs.

But it was football, not politics, that showed the way the wind was blowing.

In the 2006 World Cup, England fans showed a new enthusiasm not for the union 
flag but for the cross of St George, while in Scotland the issue of which team 
the first minister should support became a major talking point.

Key dates in the union

· 1603: King James VI of Scotland becomes King James I of England, in the 
Union of the Crowns

· 1695-9: Scotland suffers a huge financial and psychological blow through the 
failure of its attempt to colonise Darien in what is now Panama

· January 16 1707: Scottish parliament, meeting in Edinburgh, ratifies the 
Treaty of Union by 110 votes to 69

· March 19 1707: The English parliament ratifies the treaty

· May 1 1707: Act of Union comes into effect. The bells of St Giles cathedral 
in Edinburgh play an old song, Why Should I Be So Sad on my Wedding Day?

· April 1746: At Culloden, the last battle on mainland Britain, Bonnie Prince 
Charlie's forces are routed by William, Duke of Cumberland. Grateful English 
name a flower after the victor, Sweet William. Scots call it Stinking Billy.

· 1967: Winnie Ewing triumphs in historic by-election at Hamilton for the 
Scottish National party, declaring: "Stop the world; Scotland wants to get on."

· 1997: The election of a Labour government in May is followed by a devolution 
referendum on September 11, in which Scots endorse a parliament by 74%, with 
63% approving its having tax-raising powers.

· May 7 1999: First elections to the 129-member parliament under a voting 
system which makes it hard for any party to win a majority. Labour wins 56 
seats and strikes coalition deal with the Liberal Democrats.

· 2006: The World Cup prompts fresh agonising about Scots' views of England. 
The chancellor, Gordon Brown, says: "Two thirds of all Scots want England to 
win." But the Scottish first minister, Jack McConnell, sparks controversy by 
stating he will not be supporting England.
 