
Only a handful of multi-academy trusts are up to the job of improving 
England’s schools,Ofsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> chief 
inspector Sir Michael Wilshaw has told MPs, before accusing the Department for 
Education of being too slow to intervene in struggling schools.

Speaking to the education select committee, the outgoing chief inspector of 
schools criticised the government’s flagship school improvement programme, 
which involves multi-academy trusts (Mats) taking over schools formerly 
maintained by local authorities.

Wilshaw claimed the government had allowed too many schools to be taken over 
by Mats with weak or uneven records and which lacked the capacity to improve 
the schools under their control.

“We undertook a survey of good Mats and we were really struggling to find 
them. We have established that there are about half a dozen, but there are a 
lot of mediocre trusts out there,” Wilshaw said.

Government drops plan to make all schools in England academies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/06/government-backs-down-over-plan-to-make-all-schools-academies>
Wilshaw and Sir David Carter, who was appointed to the post of national 
schools commissioner by education secretary Nicky Morgan in February, were 
giving evidence to the education committee on the growth of multi-academy 
trusts, with 973 now running schools in England and an estimated 1,000 more 
required if all schools become academies.

At one point, Wilshaw compared Mats to the US supermarket chain Walmart, 
accusing them of being more interested in rapid expansion than quality.

“Some multi-academy trusts have been allowed to grow too quickly,” Wilshaw 
said. “Executive head teachers wanted to show how many schools they had rather 
than how good they were.”

Wilshaw said Ofsted had identified seven multi-academy chains that were too 
concerned with expanding: “When we looked at these seven failing ones, they had 
what I called a Walmart philosophy: pile ’em high and sell ’em cheap. It was 
empire-building rather than having the capacity to improve schools.”

But Carter assured MPs that poorly performing Mats would not be given approval 
to take over schools in the future and that a “health check” was being 
developed to assess a Mat’s track record.

“I do think there is evidence Mats are working, but this is an evolution: they 
are the new beasts on the block,” Carter said, claiming that the best Mats, 
such as the Ark academy chain, did some of the best work in improving the 
education of disadvantaged pupils.

Carter is a former chief executive of a multi-academy trust, the Cabot 
Learning Federation, and was one of the DfE’s first regional schools 
commissioners, the middle layer of management created to oversee academies and 
trusts.

When Wilshaw steps down at the end of the year, his replacement, announced by 
the DfE last week, is to be Amanda Spielman, one of the founders of the Ark 
chain.


Return to grammar school selection would be disaster, says Ofsted chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/29/grammar-school-selection-disaster-ofsted-chief-sir-michael-wilshaw>
Wilshaw criticised the network of regional schools commissioners for failing 
to intervene promptly when schools were identified as requiring improvement. 
“The big concern I have about regional schools commissioners is, are they being 
pro-active enough?”

Questioned about the benefits of autonomy offered to those running academies, 
Wilshaw said he had just as much freedom running maintained secondary schools 
in 1992. “I was master of my own destiny. When I became head of an academy, my 
life didn’t really change,” he said.

Wilshaw said local authorities were failing to tackle unregistered schools 
“operating in the shadows” in their areas, leaving children in danger of 
exposure to extremism – although he admitted under questioning from MPs that no 
children had been found to be directly radicalised.
 