
We’ve all heard the saying “play to your strengths”. It’s common wisdom 
spouted by motivational speakers. But what do we really mean when we use this 
adage? As parents, how can we help our kids play to their strengths? And do we 
really need to do this at all?

We live in a success-obsessed society that narrowly defines strengths as 
things we are good at. This focus on high performance leaves many young people 
feeling like they don’t have strengths. I’m always saddened at the vast number 
of students I work with who cannot answer my simple question “Tell me about 
your strengths?” Some actively tell me: “I don’t have any.” Many mumble 
something about being “OK” or “not bad” at a certain skill.

We have not taught our children how to see their own strengths and, even for 
those who know they have strengths, we have not given them a language to 
articulate their strengths. This means we have missed an important opportunity 
to help them achieve the full potential andboost their wellbeing 
<http://scholarpublishing.org/index.php/ASSRJ/article/view/1651>.

A letter to … All of the permissive parents today
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/31/a-letter-to-all-of-the-premissive-parents-today>
Psychology researchers have been scientifically studying strengths for the 
past three decades and have categorised hundreds of different strengths into 
two broad categories: talent-based strengths (eg sporting prowess or being a 
wiz with technology) and character-based strengths (eg capacity for kindness or 
being uncommonly brave).

Many of us unwittingly focus on talent, because this is easier to see than 
character, but character strengths are vital component of a life well lived and 
are important forovercoming adversity 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17439760500372739>. Character 
expands the arena of strengths. You may not have a son or daughter who makes 
the cut for a gifted program at school, but you’re sure to find aspects of 
their character that are virtuous and strong.

The more that you, their parent, value these strengths, the more that they 
will see that they have strengths.

One key thing that these researchers tell us that a strength is something we 
perform well, perform often and get energised by 
<https://www.amazon.com/Strengths-Book-Confident-Successful-Relationships/dp/1906366098>
. For purposes of strength-based parenting then, we need to look out for the 
three elements of a strength in our kids: performance (being good at 
something); energy (feeling good doing it) and high use (choosing to do it). 
Being good at singing is not the same as being a superstar. It’s showing 
promise or skill as well as consistent outcomes in a certain area.

My daughter, Emily, is good at tennis. She won’t make Wimbledon and, truth be 
told, probably won’t even be selected for the talent squad. But she’s good at 
tennis. She can reliably serve and she has a decent volley and forehand. So, 
she has the performance element ticked. Yet I know tennis is not a true 
strength of hers because she never finishes her practice. The “energy” and 
“use” elements are missing.

On the other hand, I can’t get her to stop practising soccer. She’s out in the 
backyard practising her footwork whenever she gets a spare minute (use), she 
has abundant energy to practice (energy) and she’s good at it (performance).

Knowing the three elements helps you to see what a true strength is in your 
child. In my case, it helps me know that I’m better to help Emily invest more 
of her time and energy in soccer than tennis. It prevent you from falling into 
the trap of thinking that because your child is good at something, this is a 
strength, and you must push them to continue with it.

Carry on sexting? That’s no way to help your kids… | Barbara Ellen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/sexting-ban-jeremy-hunt-kate-bush-fiver-vegan>
The tri-archy of strengths doesn’t only apply for talent-based strengths such 
as sport, it also applies to the second bucket of strengths – our character 
strengths.

Every child has character strengths and you’ll notice that your child has some 
aspects of their character that they perform well, such as the child who has 
emotional intelligence above and beyond her years or who has the 
self-regulation of an adult. In addition to the performance element, the 
character strength will evoke high levels of energy when used and the child 
will naturally use that strength over and over. You won’t need to remind your 
child to be kind or be brave, because if it’s a strength, it will come 
naturally to them.

When you see your child do something well, do it with energy, and do it a lot, 
you’ll know you’ve unearthed a strength and this is when you can feel confident 
to help them “play to their strengths”.
 