
The vast majority of first-time buyers are priced out of the housing market in 
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, an economist for one of the 
UK's biggest lenders has warned.

The house price-to-earnings ratio for someone securing their first home in the 
capital has risen from 6.82 in the last three months of 2011 to 7.44 in the 
first quarter of 2012, according to analysis by the RBS Group.

Mortgage payments for these buyers now takes up 79% of their income after the 
deduction of tax, national insurance and other essential living costs, compared 
to 67% a year ago.

Fionnuala Earley, RBS Group UK consumer economist, said that although it was 
still cheaper to rent than to buy, escalating rental charges were making it 
virtually impossible to save a deposit. "The average Londoner trying to save 
for their first home has to spend around three-quarters of their income on 
rent, leaving precious little for savings. This compares to around half [of 
their income] for the rest of the UK," she said.

While it takes an average of 37 months to save a 10% deposit in the whole of 
the UK, it takes those living and working in London 51 months. The situation is 
likely to get even worse as a result of the Greek and Spanish economic crises, 
which are making lenders increasingly nervous about lending at high 
loan-to-values: Santander has already announced it will scale back lending in 
2012.
 Ability to buy a first house graphic Photograph: Graphic 
Elsewhere in the country, falling house prices have eased the situation for 
first-time buyers, with the average price of a typical first home in the UK 
falling by 1.2% in the first three months of 2012 compared to the first quarter 
of 2011, and expected to drop by about 2.5% during the whole of 2012.

But the average house price hides wide variations in first-timers' ability to 
buy, which is also determined by the size of their earnings and inflationary 
pressures on essential spending including food, utilities and transport.

Affordability improved by 15% in Northern Ireland in the first quarter of 
2012, and 11% in the east of England, thanks to house prices falling. The 
Council of Mortgage Lenders says first-time buyers have been quick to take 
advantage of the lower prices in Northern Ireland, accounting for almost 
two-thirds of the house purchase loans taken out in the first three months of 
the year. They borrowed an average of £73,350, down 40% on the £122,000 
borrowed in the third quarter of 2007.

Scotland is the most affordable place to buy, where the house 
price-to-earnings ratio is 3.69, mortgage payments take up just 41% of 
discretionary income, and it takes 29 months to save a 10% deposit.

Colin Duff, a 29-year-old innovation consultant, moved to London from Scotland 
five years ago and has saved hard ever since. He now has a deposit of £63,000 
and is looking for a two-bed apartment in north-west London costing in the 
region of £350,000. He intends to rent the second room out to help with costs.

"My sister, who is 31, has a glorious three-storey house in Glasgow with 
stained glass windows. It is worth about the same amount that I will pay for my 
two-bed flat in London," he says.

"It doesn't matter what they say – there is nowhere cheap in London unless you 
are prepared to buy in a really rough area or somewhere very far out."
 