
Good news: figures issued this week revealed that mortgages are more 
affordable than they have ever been. Bad news: Donald Trump’s US election win 
is set to push up the cost of new fixed-rate mortgages on this side of the pond.

So if you are thinking about signing up for one of the cheap fixed-rate deals 
on offer, act now to avoid paying more than you need to.

According to the Council of Mortgage Lenders, home loan affordability has 
reached a “historic low” 
<https://www.cml.org.uk/news/press-releases/september-house-purchase-lending-up-11-compared-to-a-year-ago/>
 for both first-time buyers and home movers.

In statistics that the “priced out” generation may find hard to believe, the 
CML says that in September first-time buyers spent an average of just 17.8% of 
their monthly household income on mortgage repayments – partly reflecting 
August’s interest rate cut from 0.5% to 0.25%.

Meanwhile, the average five-year fix has fallen below 3% for the first time on 
record, and now stands at 2.98% compared with 3.93% in November 2014 and 4.68% 
in November 2011, according to the financial data website Moneyfacts.co.uk.

But Trump’s win looks set to trigger price rises for some UK borrowers, with 
mortgage broker John Charcol predicting that longer-term fixed-rate deals will 
be the first to be withdrawn or repriced upwards.

The advice to borrowers who have their eye on a cheap rate is to secure it 
while they can

The US president-elect is promising tax cuts and a $550bn boost to 
infrastructure spending 
<https://www.greatagain.gov/policy/transportation-infrastructure.html> that 
will see the US “build the roads, highways, bridges, tunnels, airports, and 
railways of tomorrow”.

Economists reckon this will force the Federal Reserve, the US central bank, to 
raise interest rates more rapidly than had been expected, and all of thishas 
sent shock waves through the world’s financial markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/14/bonds-trump-prompts-inflation-tax-cuts-interest-rates>
.

Swap rates – what the banks pay to borrow from each other, which play a big 
part in determining the pricing of fixed-rate mortgages and savings bonds – 
have increased sharply in the past few weeks, and this has accelerated since 
Trump’s win.

John Charcol reckons five- and 10-year fixes will be the first to see prices 
go up. Simon Collins at the firm says: “There’s definitely some upwards 
pressure ... it’s something that, if it happens, will happen quite quickly. A 
couple of the biggies will go, and others will follow.” He adds: “I can’t see 
them getting any cheaper. Is there any benefit to waiting? Probably not.”

Mark Harris at rival broker SPF Private Clients echoes this, saying: “The 
advice to borrowers who have their eye on a cheap rate is to secure it while 
they can.

“They are so low anyway, it is unlikely to be a move you will regret.”

Five-year fixed-rate mortgages have enjoyed a big increase in popularity, 
according to a survey by conveyancing firm LMS. This partly reflects the price 
drop highlighted above.

However, Andy Knee, chief executive of LMS, says economic and political 
uncertainty has also affected people’s priorities: “More people are looking for 
long-term security. They want to ensure they know exactly what they will owe 
and when while the terms of Brexit are battled out.”

Those with a big deposit or equity stake can get a five-year fixed-rate for 
under 2%.

What’s available 


At the time of writing, Coventry building society was arguably leading the 
pack with a five-year fix at just 1.84%. With this, the maximum loan is 50% of 
the property’s value, there’s a £999 product fee (which can be added to the 
mortgage), and you get a free valuation.

Tesco Bank – recently in the news because of the cyber attack it suffered – is 
offering a five-year fix at 1.89%, available where the maximum loan is 60%. 
There is a £995 product fee.

Meanwhile, Leeds building society has a five-year deal at 1.99% available up 
to 75% loan-to-value, which comes with a decent freebie: £1,000 cashback, plus 
a free valuation. But this carries a £1,499 completion fee.

The Coventry also has a deal whereby your monthly payments are fixed for seven 
years – ie, until the end of 2023 – at 1.99%. Again, the maximum is 50%.

Borrowers can opt for the security of a longer-term fix at little extra cost 
to their monthly repayments

It’s not just brokers and the like who are suggesting that now might be the 
time to act. Charlotte Nelson at Moneyfacts.co.uk says that with the gap 
between the average two-year and five-year fixed rate standing at just 0.63%, 
borrowers can opt for the security of a longer-term fix at little extra cost to 
their monthly repayments.

She adds: “Borrowers coming to the end of their fixed deal, or those sitting 
on their standard variable rate, should seriously consider opting for a new 
fixed rate now as there is no way of telling how low these deals can go.”

Collins points out that with many banks and building societies, their mortgage 
offers are valid for three months. This means you could apply for the mortgage 
now and, if the lender then brings out a cheaper deal a few weeks later, it may 
well let you switch (obviously check you would be allowed to do this). Tesco 
Bank recently extended the validity period of its formal mortgage offers for 
new customers from three to six months.

The bad news for savers hoping for interest rate rises is that there is little 
evidence of these being increased. When the Bank of England cut the base rate 
to a record low of 0.25%, it introduced a funding scheme for banks so they 
could pass on the reduction to borrowers without damaging their margins.

Senior bankers say this so-called “term lending scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-all-action-response-brexit-qe-interest-rate-cut>
” means savings rates for customers are unlikely to rise much, despite what is 
happening in the money markets.
 