
Limiting the numbers of overseas students would see us pulling up the 
drawbridge not just on our overseas visitors but also on our own prosperity (
Secret plans to slash overseas students by almost half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/12/uk-halve-international-student-visa-tougher-rules>
, 13 December). By its very nature, higher education is international and 
people want to come to the UK to study because they are attracted by the 
quality of higher education available. As highly skilled people, those who stay 
also make an invaluable contribution to our economy, paying taxes which support 
public spending.

Of course students should be removed from the net migration target rather than 
targeted in this way, but government must also show it actually values the 
contribution those from abroad make rather than viewing them as a political 
problem. When one considers these latest plans alongside the disastrous higher 
education and research bill, which would expand for-profit education and 
undermine university autonomy, it is almost as if this government is determined 
to destroy one of the few world-beating sectors this country still has.
Sally Hunt
General secretary, University and College Union

• Rumours regarding international education are harmful; the latest ONS 
statistics reveal the number of people immigrating to study fell by 15.5% this 
year to 163,000, the lowest estimate since 2007, over which period the global 
market demand has grown by 60% – a massive missed opportunity for the UK that 
is the result of damaging policy and rhetoric.International students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/internationalstudents> not only support 
our universities, they also contribute to our soft power: one in seven 
countries has a leader who studied in the UK.

It would be utter folly for the Home Office to pursue an unjustified and 
arbitrary crackdown on student visas: an unpublished Home Office report 
allegedly revealed that only 1% of international students overstay their visas, 
rather than the 100,000 suggested by ONS data, so it seems likely that they are 
net neutral to net migration numbers and certainly not the “immigrants” that 
certain elements of the government seem to like to portray them as.
James Pitman
Managing director, HE – UK and Europe, Study Group

• For some years, while taking student lodgers, we have encountered a number 
of interesting, industrious and very friendly graduate students – several from 
Thailand and occasional ones from Taiwan, China, Japan, Iraq and even 
Kazakhstan. The young women have studied astrophysics, tax harmonisation, the 
influence of family firms, intellectual property law but also the social 
context of Taiwanese pop music. The men, education skills, Thai xylophone 
bands, but also landslides. A lot of the time the house has smelled like a 
superior Thai restaurant.

We are sad that Amber Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd> 
thinks this country would be a better place if half of these people (who 
incidentally pay far higher fees than native students) could be kept away by 
erecting quotas, persuading them that they would be better off studying at 
home, or inventing questionnaires with trick questions. (She could always send 
vans around with threatening inscriptions.) Does she think foreign tourists 
should be discouraged? Certainly, the more closely we approximate to North 
Korea, the more in control we shall feel.
Joyce and George Schlesinger
Durham

• Courses offering opportunities to UK students would not run without the 
presence of international students, especially at postgraduate level. The 
current policy reflects a totally uncoordinated approach on the part of 
government. Why spend millions on marketing UK education overseas at the same 
time as attempting to drive down the number of student visas? The solution to 
reduce overall immigration figures is so simple: remove students from the 
migration statistics and place them in a separate classification in the same 
way that many of our competitors do. Net migration figures would be reduced at 
a stroke at the same time as preserving a major contributor to the UK’s economy.
David Cronin
Stockport, Cheshire

• What the government should be doing is to evaluate Britain’s economic 
strengths in order to provide a Brexit parachute, and three obvious areas are 
education, research and the arts. In 2008-09, tuition fee income to the UK from 
foreign students was worth over £4bn, and 18% of the £26.4bn spent on research 
and development in the UK in 2010 came from overseas (£4.8bn). The UK’s 
creative industries are now worth £84.1bn per year to the UK economy, or almost 
£10m per hour. Why therefore limit the number of foreign students who can come 
to the UK and cut back on arts education in schools and colleges? We need a 
quick and entirely objective reappraisal of government policy in these areas, 
for purely economic reasons if nothing else.
Dr Richard Turner
Harrogate, North Yorkshire

• Surely the typical overseas student comes to the UK to study for three or 
four years and then goes home again. I do not see therefore why slashing their 
numbers would make any difference (other than temporary and cosmetic) to net 
immigration figures, for in any given year new students coming are cancelled 
out by old students going.
Tony Ridge
York

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 