
In the course of his heartbreaking account of the abuse he suffered at the 
hands of a paedophile football coach the former Tottenham and Liverpool player 
Paul Stewart mentioned that he had watchedSpotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/31/spotlight-review-boston-globe-catholic-child-abuse-scandal>
, the film about the Boston Globe’s investigation of institutionalised sexual 
abuse with the city’s Catholic church. As Stewart put it, the revelations in 
that case started relatively small, but the airing of them caused survivor 
accounts to snowball. That way, he judged, “the enormity of it became clear”.

No young footballer should have to endure sexual abuse again | Graeme Le Saux
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/young-footballer-sexual-abuse-nspcc-spot-warning-signs>
Though it may seem the tiniest thing in an interview which contained such 
unimaginable horrors, I am glad he mentioned Spotlight. It was a movie whose 
success at this year’s Oscars caused many journalists to indulge in a 
preposterous round of self-congratulation about their trade. This predictable 
outbreak of self-regard was fanned by the film, which ends with a scrolling 
roll call of scandals in other national churches, and the tacit, naughty 
implication that it was the Boston Globe wot started it all. It wasn’t.

By the time the newspaper got around to running the investigation properly, 
plenty of these church abuse stories appended in the credits had already been 
big news. Furthermore, the city of Boston had several vocal victim support 
groups by this stage, some represented by lawyers, and a number of survivor 
accounts had been published as books.

In fact, as even the movie cannot but note, the Boston Globe had itself, a few 
years before, run a story about20 paedophile priests as a News in Brief item 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/columnists/article4704286.ece>. 20! At 
the time of the Oscars win,I observed in passing  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/mar/04/hurrah-for-spotlight-and-glory-journalism-clapping>
that the latter News in Brief item was of similar length to the two paragraphs 
the New York Times ran in June 1942 – merely tacked on to another story – which 
mentioned that “probably the greatest slaughter in history” had claimed the 
lives of 700,000 Jews in Poland. When I eventually get around to delving into 
the microfiche, I will be intrigued to see what the NYT decided to splash on 
that day.

Spotlight 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/culture/article1661154.ece#commentsStart> 
contains the ghastly line “If it takes a village to raise a child, it takes a 
village to abuse one”, and despite moments of self-reflection, the village 
newspaper gets off more than lightly. It was ever thus. Historically, many 
journalists have always delighted in inserting themselves approvingly into the 
nobler tales of how stories are brought to the world. But we must not flinch 
from putting our trade at the centre of stories of institutional failure either.

Why did we collectively fail to follow up broadcast investigations into 
allegations of sexual abuse in football? What was it about crimes of the most 
serious kind in the national game that didn’t make the media cut? What do we 
ignore in the current era that will seem an unfathomably shameful oversight a 
mere couple of decades from now?

The abuse scandal currently snowballing began its belated journey toward 
enormity when Andy Woodward waived his anonymity to speak to Daniel Taylor. 
That was an act of immense courage and immense significance. One of the 
unpleasantly enduring facts about our profession is that without a face to the 
horror, the horror is just the horror, and very often seems too inconveniently 
faceless to be properly reported. Over the past few years, progress in the way 
the media handles highly sensitive narratives has been made, but we kid 
ourselves if we imagine this tendency toward a certain template for 
storytelling is not still resulting in other terrible silences.

It already seems almost incomprehensible that the former Newsnight editor 
Peter Rippon shelved the programme’s Jimmy Savile investigation unbroadcast on 
the basis that all they had to go on was the testimony of some of the late 
presenter’s victims – “just the women”, as hememorably put it in an email 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-20028560> that subsequently came to light. But it 
happened, and some other version of it will inevitably be happening in all 
sorts of newsrooms now. It very rarely happens out of malevolence but is down 
to various degrees of human error. Yet those errors always need the most 
unsparing examination. A media bruised from having to constantly defend its 
priorities in an era of hugely diminished budgets and so on must still leave 
time for extensive thoughts on the lessons to take from its own deafening 
silence around the issue.

Of course it is vital to play our part now in reporting the developing 
scandal, holding the FA and the growing list of football clubs accountable for 
the still-emerging failings on their part, and in bringing the stories of 
survivors to the audience they deserve. But the stories of why some stories 
were never stories … well, those are some of the most uncomfortably important 
stories of all.

• The NSPCC’s hotline is 0800 023 2642 and ChildLine for children and young 
people can be contacted on 0800 1111.

• The National Association for People Abused in Childhood can be contacted on 
0808 801 0331.

• In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 