
Now that all the world has gone to hell, it can be a little tricky to seek out 
scraps of positivity. But they’re there, if you look hard enough. For example, 
now that we’ve all unanimously decided to grease ourselves from top to bottom 
and flush ourselves down the cruddy U-bend to oblivion, you don’t see quiteas 
many Keep Calm and Carry On posters around 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/08/keep-calm-and-carry-on-posters-austerity-ubiquity-sinister-implications>
, do you?

That’s something, isn’t it? We live in such a scorched disaster zone of 
genuinely inevitable doom that Keep Calm and Carry On has now been utterly 
refuted as a workable motto for British living. There was a referendum, and we 
rejected both Keeping Calm and Carrying On in Favour of Going Nuts and Plunging 
into a Terrifying Unknown.

And this has left us with a void to fill. Without those five words cooing at 
us from every poster and gift card and mug, Britain no longer has a simple 
phrase with which to define itself. Or at least it didn’t, untilDame Louise 
Casey took the plunge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/migrants-should-be-told-when-to-put-rubbish-out-and-when-to-queue>
 and offered up an alternative: Be Nice, Queue Up and Put the Bins Out.

Those, Casey suggests, are the three tenets of British living. As immigration 
tsar, Caseysays that these are “the rules of the game” 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2017/01/louise-casey-says-integration-isnt-two-way-street-her-definition-any>
, the holy trinity of ideals that new residents of this country most sorely 
need to learn if they want to integrate. “It was interesting to go round the 
country and hear that nobody had talked to them about our way of life here and 
when to put out the rubbish, nobody had told them when to queue or be nice,” 
Casey told the Commons communities and local government committee.

Now, obviously you could argue that none of these things need to be taught to 
immigrants, because none of them are exclusively British. Although it’s 
pleasant to imagine that the UK is the only place in the entire world where you 
can find order and hygiene and politeness, it’s a fact that many countries now 
frown upon the idea of residents keeping their household waste piled up in the 
middle of their kitchen for ever.

As for queueing, did Casey not see Nigel Farage’s Breaking Point Brexit ad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
? Full of queueing immigrants, it was. Those people are already world-class 
queuers. They’re so good at queueing that Farage basically pinned his entire 
political career to the notion of stopping them queueing. It’s extraordinary to 
think but most of the world in 2017 already observes Be Nice, Queue Up and Put 
the Bins Out.

And even if they weren’t aware of these practices, immigrants could surely 
work out when to queue up (whenever they’re separated from something they want 
by a line of people), when to put the bins out (whenever they see their 
neighbours putting the bins out) and when to be nice (all the time, because 
they are human beings and human beings are nice) by themselves, just by looking 
around.

Perhaps Casey needs to refine her masterplan. The UK is still an 
extraordinarily peculiar little country, filled with conventions that are 
utterly lost on new arrivals. Instead of patronising immigrants with a leaflet 
about what a dustbin is, why not invite them to a two-day seminar about the 
thousands of secret meanings we hide inside the word “sorry”? I know that if I 
was, say, a Syrian refugee who had escaped a life of unknowable horror to set 
up sticks somewhere new, I would be very interested to learn that a subtle 
bending of inflection can change “I want to apologise” to “I want you to 
apologise” to “I’m about to say something genuinely awful on Channel 5’s The 
Wright Stuff and want you to be prepared.”

Similarly, where is Casey’s recommendation that immigrants are taught the 
difference between “dinner”, “tea” and “supper” in the region they are planning 
to move to? That in itself would lubricate their integration beyond measure. I 
have become so confused by these various terms since moving out of London that 
I’ve settled on the term “night food” as an uneasy catch-all compromise. I 
would sign up for that class in a heartbeat.

The list goes on. Which side of the escalator is for standing and which side 
is for walking. How to tell by a bus driver’s demeanour whether you can get 
away with asking him to break a tenner. An explanation of the 5p plastic bag 
charge.Why Ben Mitchell from EastEnders keeps getting recast 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/ben-mitchell-returns-eastenders-see-4307606>
. A reminder that the greeting “How are you?” is not necessarily a request for 
emotional honesty. A short lecture, delivered at the point of arrival, entitled 
Are You Really Sure You Want to Live Here: Most People Are Awful and Blame You 
For Not Having Blue Passports Any More, Plus Katie Hopkins Lives Here. That 
sort of thing.

Integration is tricky. Finding the balance between rich individualism and 
aggressive monoculture demands a deft hand. Judging by her comments, Louise 
Casey might not be quite there yet. Asking newcomers to be nice, as if it’s an 
alien custom, seems unnecessarily rude. But,Louise Casey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/louisecasey>, I believe in you. You can 
get there, so long as you keep calm and carry on.
 