
Frances Graham, who has died of cancer aged 64, was chief executive of 
Workbase Training <http://www.workbase.org.uk> from 1980 until 2015. Set up by 
Nupe, the National Union of Public Employees, to tackle illiteracy among union 
members, over those 35 years Workbase trained thousands of low-paid workers for 
hundreds of employers, and Frances was its driving force.

She was born in Johannesburg, South Africa, to parents from European immigrant 
families, Edie and Max Rosengarten, who both worked as shopkeepers. As a 
teenager, Frances was a leader in Habonim South Africa, a Jewish socialist 
youth movement. She went to the University of the Witwatersrand, gaining a BA 
in English and French, and then a teaching qualification. She met Bing Graham 
there. Both were active in the South Africa Freedom Movement and leftSouth 
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> clandestinely in 1974 to 
live on an Israeli kibbutz to try out socialist life. They married in 1976. In 
1978 they moved to London and never left.

In 1979 we were looking for tutors for the Workbase project and by happy 
accident we found Frances. Within 10 minutes of meeting her we knew she was the 
right person. We had only three months’ money and could not offer job security 
but she agreed to take the risk. We won funding from the InnerLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Education Authority and more union 
support.

The project uniquely taught in the workplace, using materials that employees 
had to use on a daily basis. It proved its benefit to students and employers 
alike in skills and efficiency at work and spread from the public to the 
private sector, winning support from both the TUC and CBI. Under Frances’s 
leadership, it provided the inspiration for Nupe’s Return to Learn and the 
TUC’s Union Learn.

Frances was a great strategic thinker, reinventing the organisation whenever 
government changed employment or education policy. She became a leader in
Investors in People <https://www.investorsinpeople.com/>.

Whenever we celebrated the success of Workbase students, previously illiterate 
adults read the stories and letters they had written and the world felt like a 
kinder and less cynical place.

Frances dedicated her life to overcoming illiteracy. She was a kind, gentle 
person of huge integrity who kept a steady gaze on her goals and had a will 
that would not be denied.

She is survived by Bing, their three daughters, Lisa, Beth and Manda, and four 
grandchildren.
 