
Just four years ago, the plunging pound forced thousands of Brits to abandon 
their dream of a new life inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>. 
But with the euro falling to new lows against the pound, and the French 
property market showing signs of recession, the tide is turning.

Rarely do the main players in the property market agree on predictions, but 
2012 will see a downturn even if they can't all agree to what extent.

The association of estate agents, FNAIM, predicts a fall of 5% on average, and 
the French notary association sees a drop of between 5%-10%, while Crédit 
Agricole, one of France's largest banks, puts the falls at 5%-6%.

They are quick to emphasise the situation is nowhere near that of the bursting 
of the property bubble in 2008-2009 and cautiously talk of an "adjustment" 
rather than "a crash".

Like London, property in Paris is considered to be some of the most overvalued 
in the country with an increase over the last decade of a whopping 184%. Since 
the end of 2011, prices in some areas have started to drop – down 4.6% in the 
5th arrondissement around Place d'Italie and 4% in the 10th, home to Gare de 
Nord and Gare de l'Est.

Brighton-based PR executive Mark Cotton has seen a definite change. He 
recently put his two-bedroom, 45-sq-m apartment in the 10th arrondissement, 
with balcony views of the Sacré Coeur, up for sale for €420,000 (£340,000). 
"After around six viewings and no offers, we realised, quite quickly, the price 
was too high," he explains. "There had been a tentative offer of ¤395,000, 
which was withdrawn at the last moment."

Cotton dropped the price. "Fortunately," he says, "the estate agent had a 
client looking for a flat at around that price. He snapped it up immediately, 
offering me ¤393,000."

Outside Paris, prices have also fallen in areas popular with British buyers – 
4.6% on average in Brittany, 6% in Lower Normandy, 9,7% in Burgundy and between 
3%-4% in the Dordogne. According to the property website seloger.com, Albi in 
the south-west Tarn region takes the prize for France's biggest price drop – a 
massive 18%.

The trend is likely to be relatively long term. According to the Bank of 
France, the number of mortgages issued dropped a dramatic 41% between January 
and February this year, the lowest for nearly three years, as financial 
institutions tightened lending criteria and insisted on higher deposits.

Simon Malster of Investors in Property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> says buying in the French Alps is 
a different story. "It is a special market and not as volatile. Values are also 
holding up in ski resorts in Austria and Switzerland."

Negotiation is the key in France. Sellers are having to accept some hard 
bargaining – which could mean that dream cottage in Carcassonne is closer to 
becoming reality.
 