
The heady days of buying holiday homes abroad using equity from soaring house 
values in Britain have long gone, yet France remains a favourite for the few 
still buying overseas.

No authoritative data exists on international holiday home sales but websites 
such as Primelocation and FindaProperty say listings for classic French 
cottages and renovation projects receive heavy numbers of hits, despite the 
economic malaise.

Britons typically buy near airports served by budget airlines, in four main 
regions – the south west, from Normandy down to the Spanish border; the 
Mediterranean coast, along the Cote d'Azur and provence and into Languedoc; the 
Alps; and a smaller number of generally wealthier purchasers look to Paris.

Britons who choose France for a holiday home are typically better off than 
those who buy in Spain and have had to weather a much gentler downturn. Price 
falls of 10% to 15% have been common over the past five years but many owners – 
such as Andrew and Jill Ness, accountants from Birmingham – have easily 
recouped that by improving their homes.

"We bought a bergerie, a country house about 30 minutes from Bordeaux. It was 
only €108,000 (then about £73,450) back in 2005 because it needed structural 
work and rewiring," says Jill. "The villagers were helpful and welcoming and 
recommended workmen. The hard part was supervising and controlling costs.

"It sounds contradictory but the rate of work would slow, yet the scope of the 
project would expand, because we weren't there, day to day, to see what was 
happening," says Jill.

The couple spent €55,000 but have now had the home valued at €240,000, giving 
them a profit of well over £80,000. But other British buyers, hoping to fund 
their purchase with lucrative rental income, have been less successful.

Richard Dale, a Briton who moved to run an estate agency in western France in 
2003, writes about his own gîtes rental business onblog.rhf-international.com 
<http://blog.rhf-international.com/>.

He says: "In 1998 in Charente-Maritime there were just a handful of complexes 
— three or more gîtes on a single site, typically sharing a pool. Now there are 
literally dozens, with seemingly yet another opening each month. Some complexes 
have 20 or more. The number of tourists has risen, but nothing like as quick as 
the amount of accommodation."

Lanisha Butterfield of travel website HolidayLettings.co.uk, which advertises 
more than 5,500 French holiday homes, says: "If there are 20 gîtes in an area 
an owner needs to make theirs stand out. It can be very tough."

Rental income is modest even for those who do find takers. Butterfield says 
many owners have been running discounted offers for summer 2011 since the 
autumn, and tourists can easily find that hiring a cottage for a week in France 
in high season can be cheaper – even including ferry costs – than a comparable 
property in Cornwall.

As a result of the vast over-supply of holiday homes, Britons looking to buy 
are more discerning. Graham Downie, who runsCognac Property 
<http://www.cognacproperty.com/> in western France, says: "In the area around 
Cognac I've seen a move away from the seemingly obligatory gîte complex. Most 
of my searches now are either for family homes in good condition, with views 
over the vineyards, priced between €250,000 (£217,418) and €400,000 (£347,767), 
or for townhouses with a small garden or courtyard between €200,000 (£173,883) 
and €300,000 (£260,825)."

The biggest victims of the French downturn, however, may be those who bought 
new-build. Figures from estate agencyHumbert 
<http://www.chestertonhumberts.com/> show that prices of some in 
Champagne-Ardenne fell by more than 20% in 2009 and have not yet recovered from 
that slump. "Even in the prime locations, asking prices [for new homes] have 
fallen back by between 10% and 20% since pre-recession levels," says a report 
from the agency.

Few buyers have had to cut their losses, however. Estate agents say there has 
been no discernible rise in "distressed sales". Instead, some believe canny 
Britons, who bought when sterling was strong, are waiting to see if the 
exchange rate shifts further in favour of the euro – in which case a quick sale 
could see them net a good profit.

Signs of le recovery

After years of gentle decline and sometimes sharp falls, the French housing 
market appears to be picking up.

"Interest from international buyers dropped substantially at the end of 2008 
but transaction numbers are rising once more," says Graham Downie.

The Fédération National de l'immobilier <http://www.fnaim.fr/>, the French 
estate agents' body, says average prices of all homes rose 6% in 2010 and 
property purchases exceeded 700,000 – a 15% rise on 2009. "Prices, after having 
fallen quite significantly – approximately 10% if we look at the end of 2009 – 
have regained a certain strength," says FNAIM president René Pallincourt.

The average price of a home in Burgundy is now €148,400 (£129,000), while in 
Languedoc the figure is €208,800 (£182,000) rising to €384,200 (£334,000) in 
Provence. The federation and lenders, such asCredit Agricole 
<http://www.credit-agricole.fr/>, predict rises of about 3% this year, with 
larger increases in cities.

It is a hard slog for British purchasers. "The days when homeowners released 
equity from their UK properties to pay for a dream house in Provence are a 
distant memory," says John Busby ofAthena Mortgages 
<http://www.athenamortgages.com/>. He says more Britons who cannot afford to 
buy outright are seeking French mortgages, which require deposits of between 
10% and 30%. Borrowing in euros avoids exchange rate complications and may be 
cheaper to pay off if sterling eventually rallies. But Busby warns there is a 
possible hitch. "French mortgages work on the basis that the total of all 
[payments on] mortgages and loans held by the borrower do not exceed one-third 
of their income. This means monthly repayments on a UK mortgage will be taken 
into consideration."
 