
Travel not only broadens the mind, it reveals the soul. With The Iliad, Homer 
probably wrote the first road trip story, but, like a fool, he wrote it about 
2,500 years before the development of the internal combustion engine. Still, he 
was on to something: put two – or better, three – people in a car and magic 
just happens.

The Grand Tour <https://www.theguardian.com/the-grand-tour-amazon> is a road 
trip writ large. In it, those good companions Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Hammond 
and James May drive from place to place, find interesting people and 
interesting vehicles, and test them to the limit and beyond – the cars that is, 
not the people.

Clarkson, Hammond And May return in Amazon’s The Grand Tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-grand-tour-amazon/2016/nov/18/clarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour>
It’s the car that gives road trips their irresistible quality – perhaps that’s 
why the 20th century gave us our most beloved road stories.

But road trips have proven a demanding and destructive experience for some 
people. Jack Kerouac’s On The Road, perhaps the ultimate road story, is a 
loosely fictionalised account of five American road trips undertaken in the 
late 1940s and early 1950s, when life was cheap and petrol was cheaper.

No one wore seatbelts and no one thought anything of setting off on a 
directionless trip on America’s still largely empty highways in search of 
nothing in particular. It’s perhaps a slight spoiler to say that the 
misadventures rather outweigh the laughs.

Unlike Clarkson and co, Kerouac didn’t even have a tent full of petrolheads 
waiting for him at the end of his journey. “What I accomplished by coming to 
Frisco,” he confesses at one point, “I don’t know.” A road trip doesn’t need to 
have a clear end in sight. The point of a road trip is to be in the space 
between point A and point B.

Free of day-to-day concerns, such as work, laundry and whether you are allowed 
to make slightly close-to-the-nail remarks about vegetarians, the road trip is 
a unique space in which the driver – or trio of drivers – can discover their 
true self (or selves).

The 1960s were in a lot of ways the golden age of the road trip. Before the 
oil shock of the 1970s, but crucially after the development of a lot of in-car 
conveniences such as air conditioning and nice radios, you could have a lot of 
fun on the road in the Summer of Love.

Which is why it’s such a perverse decision to make the ultimate 60s road trip 
movie about two blokes on motorbikes.

Easy Rider is an iconic film of the era but there’s not a lot of scope for 
on-the-road banter with bikes, plus, given the absence of a glove box, there’s 
nowhere to stash certain important items which – again, slight spoiler – leads 
to things being put in petrol tanks that don’t belong there. Schoolboy error.

The 70s was the age of the GTO. The Gran Turismo Omologato was the ultimate 
muscle car, turning up in films as bleakly existential as Two-Lane Blacktop and 
as gleefully demented as The Cannonball Run.

With petrol prices soaring, the open road acquired a new, unattainable 
mystery. Even TV tried to get in on the act, with Knight Rider and The Dukes of 
Hazzard embarking on small-scale road trips every week.

But the ultimate 70s road trip story is Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. No 
one’s quite sure what might be happening at any given moment, but when the dust 
settles, hotel rooms are wrecked, people are in a pickle and cars are spavined 
beyond all realistic driveability.

There’s promise of similar levels of property damage in The Grand Tour, 
although without the illicit substances. In fact, nobody involved in the new 
Amazon Prime show is likely to have consumed anything stronger than some roast 
beef Monster Munch.

The 80s – elsewhere a decade of wild excess – gave rise to one of the most 
thoughtful road trip books ever – William Least Heat-Moon’s evocative Blue 
Highways: A Journey into America. It’s a rare reader who finishes that book 
without wanting to fire up the motor and drive until they run out of road.

Oh, and the 80s was also the decade of Mad Max. The first film ends, and the 
second begins, with PTSD superman Max staring blankly, mindlessly, through his 
windscreen as his ’73 Ford Falcon chews up the endless highways. And who hasn’t 
donethat on their way to a camping holiday in Cornwall?

And now the road trip evolves again: The Grand Tour may be, at root, three 
chaps in cars but there’s a colossal infrastructure behind it. In fact it’s one 
of the most expensive factual shows ever. Budgets in excess of $200m have been 
mentioned.

The production team has, uncharacteristically, been quiet about the exact 
stunts it’ll be pulling this time, but there are whispers of an opening 
sequence for the series that would make even Mad Max’s eyebrows shoot skyward 
with its scope and carnage.

The series has been described as “three middle-aged men in poor condition, 
falling over and catching fire – and occasionally a car goes past”. It’s a 
“peripatetic tent-based, car-themed adventure”, says Clarkson. What he means 
is, it’s one enormous road trip. As immortalised in a zillion books and films 
and songs about people cooped up in tiny metal boxes zipping around the great 
outdoors and broadening their minds. Beat that, Homer.
 