
Yesterday was the hundredth anniversary of the storming of the Bastille by the 
people of Paris, and for many reasons the day was the most memorable of the 
many which found places in the calendar of the French Revolution. The 
assembling of the States General, the triumph of the Third Estate, and the oath 
of the Tennis Court were all immeasurably significant facts, but they had been 
victories for the people rather than by the people. But when the populace armed 
itself and rushed in its thousands to take and demolish the grim old stronghold 
of tyranny, the people for the first time revealed the immensity of their 
power, and feudalism was smitten hip and thigh by a mob acting almost 
instinctively.

It is perhaps not easy for us in England to understand the intensity of French 
popular feeling at the time against the fortress-prison. There was never 
anything quite like it in England. It is true that gloomy associations and dark 
traditions were connected with the Tower; when Shakspeare makes the young 
Edward V. say, "I do not like the Tower, of any place," he no doubt gave 
expression to a popular feeling. But secret imprisonment even there was the 
exception and not the rule, and in the darkest days of tyranny the forms of law 
were generally respected.

In France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> it was not so; a letter 
signed by the King was sufficient to incarcerate a man for life. The frowning 
towers and massive walls of the Bastille had been for centuries the embodiment 
of brutal tyranny for the Parisians, to whom it was a tomb into which their 
best men were at any time liable to be suddenly and silently cast. The 
vengeance and hatred of generations were concentrated in the movement which led 
the people to besiege the Bastille, and from the day of its fall until Napoleon 
fired his grapeshot from the steps of St. Boch every Government had to take 
into account the passionate energy of the victorious Parisians.

Unhappily the victors marred their triumph by hateful excesses; but no 
impartial student of history would venture now to say that the lesson of the 
14th of July, 1789, was not necessary and that the world has not gained by it. 
The French nation had been enslaved for centuries, law and force had been 
perverted to crush the rights of the people, and a privileged few had enriched 
themselves by reaping the fruits of the labour of their despised 
fellow-countrymen; but the thunder of the musketry at the fall of the Bastille 
was not only the knell of despotism, but a signal that thenceforth in no 
civilised nation could a corrupt and unscrupulous minority permanently hold in 
check the aspirations of an enlightened people.
 