
A £50m fund to ease the pressure of immigration on public services has been 
scrapped by the government without any publicity.

The migration impacts fund was set up Gordon Brown in response to local 
government claims that they needed central help to deal with unexpected 
pressure on housing, schools and hospitals.

It was funded by a £50 levy on the visas of non-EU migrants. The scheme was 
announced in February 2008, and funds could be sought by councils, police, 
primary care trusts and voluntary bodies.

The money – some of which was used to ease tension through appointing outreach 
workers after sudden increases in migration – was axed by the communities 
secretary, Eric Pickles. The decision has not been officially announced.

Officials at the Department of Communities and Local Government have described 
the fund as ineffective, but said they intend to continue with the visa levy. 
It is not clear how the cash will now be deployed.

A spokesman said: "Ending the ineffective migration impacts fund will save 
£16.25m this year. We believe the impacts of migration are better addressed 
though controlling immigration, which is why the government will reduce the 
level of net migration back down to the levels of the 1990s – tens of thousands 
each year, not hundreds of thousands."

The cancellation was announced in a written answer by Lady Hanham, a junior 
communities minister, which stated: "The purpose of the migration impacts fund 
was to alleviate the impacts of immigration on local public services, rather 
than to support migrants.

"In the light of the overall fiscal position the government concluded that it 
was not a priority funding stream."

Labour's shadow communities secretary, John Denham, said: "The fund helped 
areas which saw rapid changes in population from migration.

"Every penny was funded by a levy on migrants themselves, not the taxpayer. It 
is high risk to take away support which could prevent the stresses of migration 
boiling over into real community tension."

The fund was set up following pressure from police chiefs, local government 
heads and NHS executives concerned about immigration placing unexpected strain 
on schools and other services.

Funding went to a huge array of small-scale projects such as multilingual 
police community support officers and citizens advice bureaux.

Brown seized on the issue early in his premiership, pledging that newcomers 
would be made to pay into the fund to help local communities deal with changes 
in population. In its election manifesto Labour pledged to expand the scheme. 
Coalition ministers have now decided to cut it from next month.

The Local Government Association said it was aware of the decision, but did 
not wish to comment.
 