
The pressures affecting social care described by John Harris (If austerity is 
over, why can’t we afford proper social care? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/austerity-over-britain-afford-social-care>
 2 December) and manifested in the lack of operational complementarity between 
the NHS and local authority social care are caused not only by the needs of an 
increasing elderly population, but also by a fundamental funding cleavage 
between the two structures. Thus budgets can never be properly integrated but 
only pooled under restrictive controls. A smooth continuum of care based on 
clinical, therapeutic and social care need remains a pipe dream, despite the 
rhetoric and exhortation demanding it.

There is also another factor impeding integration and the full meeting of 
“eligible needs” (a creative way of reducing the scale of services to 
individuals by redefining upwards what is meant by “eligible”, and eliminating 
those previously eligible, even though their needs remain unchanged).Social care
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care> has been an experiment in 
progress for 30 years – a prototype for the wider privatisation of care – which 
is mostly provided by the private sector and paid for by private (means-tested) 
payers. It is largely unplanned, subject to abrupt market exit (if profits 
aren’t sufficient) and often hampered by poor pay and conditions for staff. 
True integration is impossible.

Further, little is known of the private payers (apart from the fact that their 
payments often subsidise local authority-funded social care by paying higher 
fees than local authority-funded clients) such as the appropriateness of their 
care, and their individual circumstances. CQC inspections of care services are 
not interested in them as individuals, only the general quality of the service 
provided. As long as they pay up, everyone is happy (apart from the individual 
and perhaps those families concerned that their inheritance is being eaten up 
in paying for social care – but that’s another story).
Gillian Dalley
London

• Whatever happened to convalescent homes which were used for the transition 
from hospital to home? It seems some hospitals are to close for lack of staff 
but surely the space freed up could be used for convalescence, which I would 
have thought requires less intensive nursing care than that required for 
seriously ill patients.
Mary Conn
Newcastle upon Tyne

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 