
Restrictive practices by the trade body representing owners of fairground 
rides has left funfairs with fewer new attractions, the competition regulator 
has claimed.

The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) said on Wednesday that the law may 
have been breached by rules enforced by a trade body in the travelling fair 
sector 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/funfair-body-alleged-to-have-broken-competition-law>
, the Showmen’s Guild of Great Britain.

Ann Pope, a senior antitrust director at the CMA, said: “These allegations 
concern the use of restrictive rules which could limit competition between 
funfairs and effectively prevent non-guild members from being able to compete.

“Fair-goers may lose out if new fairs can’t take place or if existing fairs 
are under less competitive pressure to provide different or new attractions.”

The CMA said guild members made up 90% of the travelling fairs sector in the 
UK, a market estimated to be worth £100m a year. The regulator claims that the 
body’s rules and practices prevent competition in organising or attending 
fairs, and may also stop members from starting new fairs in competition with 
existing events.

Fairs tend to be staged at the request of local authorities, who ask an 
organiser to arrange to supply the attractions. The organisers tend to be guild 
members, who then widely use guild members to provide the rides.

The CMA alleges that even in cases where local authorities try to alter or 
improve a fair without the consent of the guild, “its members can boycott the 
whole fair as a result of the rulesas happened in Newcastle in 2013 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-tyne-26349671> which meant the Hoppings 
Fair did not go ahead, leading to around half a million fair-goers who usually 
attend missing out”.

The Showmen’s Guild of Great Britain declined to comment on the CMA’s 
statement or explain what it does to look after its members’ interests.


However, the body’s website <http://www.showmensguild.co.uk/home> says it 
protects “the interests of its members ... by its code of rules for members and 
through the legal and constitutional processes of the land.

“Through its parliamentary agent, the guild contests any proposed legislation 
that discriminates against its members; or seeks concessions when legislation 
threatens their ability to make a living. In matters involving local 
authorities a delegation of officers will usually be called upon to represent 
member’s interests.”

The CMA added: “These are provisional findings only and no conclusion can be 
drawn at this stage that there has been a breach of competition law. We will 
carefully consider any representations before deciding whether the law has been 
broken.”

The 1998 Competition Act prohibits “agreements, practices and conduct that may 
have a damaging effect on competition” in the UK and covers “anti-competitive 
agreements, decisions by associations and concerted practices between 
businesses which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or 
distortion of competition within the UK and which may affect trade within the 
UK”.

Any business found to have infringed that section of the legislation can be 
fined up to 10% of its annual worldwide group turnover, the CMA said.
 