
I really want to live in the future. I don’t want to be one of the 
left-behinds. Oh, no, I want to be out there, going places in my driverless car 
while being massaged by robots to a perfect soundtrack that has been chosen for 
me by a microchip just under my skin. All of it done unthinkingly, in some 
algorithmic purr. The promised land of technology, we are warned, is really 
about surveillance andpsy-ops 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psychological_Operations_(United_States)> and 
fake news andblack mirroring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/black-mirror>, the touch-button 
dystopia we are told may be right here, right now. And then there is the Argos 
catalogue, and my feeling that I would simply like things to work at the touch 
of a button.

There is such a huge gap between philosophical conversations about the 
revolution of technology and the actuality of going to the phone fixer in the 
kiosk because you have somehow melted your own battery. That gap is where a lot 
of us live. What will save us from robots is that, when they become exactly 
like us, they won’t know where they put their chargers.

The internet of things gives you a lived experience that is remotely 
controlled: the “oldcyber physical systems” that noted tweeter Jeremy Corbyn 
referred to recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2016/nov/22/what-are-cyber-physical-systems-and-why-does-jeremy-corbyn-care>
 are here already. But not in my house, unfortunately. I dream of 
hyperconnectivity, because what is the alternative? To turn into someone who 
thinks a cash machine can bite you, who is perpetually having to be pulled out 
of the ePassport gates, who wails on about self–service tills, who is not quite 
sure of the value of Instagram, who uses a phone to phone people. How terrible 
to be like that. Old, unconnected, unmodern. I can barely contemplate it.

Imagine your fridge not being able to commune with your television or not 
having music streamed into your bathroom and a screen by the oven? How would 
any of us manage?

This technological aspiration – where we basically try to turn our homes into 
upmarket hotel rooms – is why a lot of us will buy a lot of stuff right now. We 
will do so in the name of streamlining, but this is the great myth about 
everyday technology. It is why I now have three remotes: one each for the TV, 
DVD player and cable box. My place is full of different chargers for phones, 
cameras and laptops. We shrug our shoulders and go on helplines when the latest 
thing won’t work. “Oh, I see, you need that cable.” “Yes, we have switched it 
off and on again.” “Your router needs boosting, madam.” “Have you backed this 
up?”

I survey the wreckage on my bedside table. A dead Fitbit, which became too 
needy, flashing away and demanding way too much from the relationship. How is 
anyone supposed not to lose the weird little charger, anyway? There is a Sonos 
speaker – recently acquired – again part of my fantasy of making my life 
“better”. The speaker is connected to the wireless and one phone, but it won’t 
connect to my computer. No one else has been able to make it work, either. When 
a man from Vodafone called and offered me a free tablet, I thought that might 
help (a new thing to make another thing work), but it involved sorting out two 
different sim cards. All these devices, then, require more personal information 
from me than I have given to people with whom I have had children.

Obviously, I could be more tech-savvy, but then I might as well learn how to 
mend my washing machine. The fact is that my memory is getting full and I 
choose to fill the rest of it with something other than reading manuals.

As designers insist on touchscreens and minimal designs – just one tiny hidden 
switch! – they become the opposite of user-friendly. As my friend said the 
other day, we basically need more knobs, with clear instructions about what 
they do.

In some parallel world, AI is happening, synths walks among us, and everyone 
can see our every mood. In reality, no one can make their printer work. Most 
devices have way more functions than we will ever use. Some of us are 
personally affronted by being told all our passwords are “weak”.

Some of this is about overload and some is about using poor, but competing, 
designs. Everywhere we are offered incompatible systems, so these products 
breed with each other, producing all the peripherals: cables, chargers, 
batteries. There is a point where you have to ask: “Is this thing making my 
life easier or more complicated?” Do you need an app to tell you that you have 
not had the right kind of sleep? Do you need to know the exact temperature of 
your freezer? Do you need different music in every room? Do you want your 
leisure time fully automated?

We got rid of physical products such as CDs and videos in exchange for the 
efficiency of streaming. But nostalgia may be driving the early adopters back 
to materiality, the enchantment of the needle on the vinyl, the romance of the 
mix tape, the ping of a typewriter, the actual printed page. There is something 
else, too: a reaction to the glut of shiny machines that promise to work all by 
themselves, but never really do.
 