
As former lecturers at London Metropolitan University, and the former 
negotiators for the University and College Union there, we are not remotely 
surprised to see that our old institution makes greater use of compromise 
agreements in order, we feel, to gag former staff than any other university (
Universities under fire over ‘gag clauses’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/30/universities-gagging-former-employees-lib-dems-compromise-agreements>
, 30 December). We are also not surprised, though nonetheless dismayed, to read 
the disingenuous nonsense trotted out by London Met’s management in order to 
justify their use of gagging orders, in which they conflate legality with 
morality. Their wish to silence former staff has absolutely nothing to do with 
access to private student data and everything to do with protecting the 
university’s reputation against potentially damaging disclosures from a large 
number of disgruntled former employees.

The reasons for staff unhappiness are not unique to London Met, and the 
Guardian has previously reported on the sector’s problems with issues such as
bullying (16 December 2014) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/dec/16/research-excellence-framework-bullying-university-staff>
, excessive workloads and the resultingmental health problems (8 May 2014) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/08/work-pressure-fuels-academic-mental-illness-guardian-study-health>
. The level of disgruntlement is evidenced by the fact that London Met 
management makes a large number of payouts to staff – with attendant gagging 
clauses – as a way of avoiding embarrassing employment tribunal outcomes (as 
revealed by academicfoi.com).

The 2014-15 sickness absence data for London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Met showed them to exceed the sector 
average for absence due to mental health reasons. Surveys at the university by 
both management and the University and College Union showed that the incidence 
of bullying was about twice the national average reported by the TUC.

We ourselves campaigned at London Met against excessive workloads and the 
resultant staff stress, but our own redundancies in July were swiftly followed 
by the management’s abandonment of the agreed workload allocation model and a 
further increase in workloads for those who have so far managed to avoid 
redundancy. London Met also continues to be an enthusiastic user of zero-hours 
contracts.

We are only able to write this letter because we refused to sign a compromise 
agreement, which means of course that we have also suffered financially.
Dr David Hardman Chair of UCU London Region 
Mark Campbell Chair of UCU London Region Higher Education Committee

• I would like to thank the Lib Dems for bringing to light the issue of 
“gagging clauses” in universities. I was an academic reader in an arts subject, 
and was made redundant in 2016 by a university near the bottom of the league 
tables, which is heading towards exclusively technical training and abandoning 
the critical and creative thinking that should be indispensable to higher 
education.

Because I signed a settlement agreement, I am unable to draw attention to 
these changes or to the incompetent and destructive management which has turned 
my course from one that led the way in the UK, to one that is now struggling 
and at risk.

Bad management, poor resourcing, cronyism and a mindless, target-driven 
culture – slavish adherence to the NSS figures, REF, TEF, employability and 
recruitment targets – may now be endemic in the university system. Academics 
are powerless to fight the university management from within, and gagging 
clauses are preventing them from speaking out when they leave.

I am sad that my skills, developed over 30 years, are being wasted through 
redundancy, as I will find it difficult to find another suitable job. How many 
other academics are in my situation? Academic cleansing is indeed doing 
irreparable harm to university, cultural and political life in this country.
Name and address supplied

• Your article outlines some of the ways in which universities attempt to 
silence academic staff who may have views not to their liking. I experienced a 
variant of this last summer when my contract was unexpectedly, and at short 
notice, not renewed at a leading university. I had been working with academics 
at the other four north-east universities and not surprisingly felt it 
incumbent on me to warn my colleagues that I might no longer be available to 
work with them. The pro-vice-chancellor at that university then threatened that 
if I continued to talk to others outside the institution about my situation, he 
would decline to recommend that I be given the title of visiting professor.

It would be instructive to require universities to provide data on the numbers 
of academic staff gagged to protect the reputation of universities as bastions 
of “free speech”.
Gary Craig
York

• Universities are indeed using gagging clauses in compromise agreements much 
too freely, and they seem to be able to get away with it. Yet there are 
well-established points of principle discouraging this practice.

Recommendation 8 of the Second Report of the Committee on Standards in Public 
Life (then the Nolan Committee), published in 1997, said that in the case of 
universities: “Where it is absolutely necessary to include confidentiality 
clauses in service and severance contracts, they should expressly remind staff 
that legitimate concerns about malpractice may be raised with the appropriate 
authority … if this is done in the public interest.” This principle was soon to 
be embodied in the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998.

The Higher Education Funding Council for England spelled out its own advice in 
a circular of 2003: “Institutions must not agree to confidentiality clauses 
within any severance agreements except where it is necessary to protect 
commercially sensitive information. Commercially sensitive information does not 
include information on the details of the severance package itself, nor 
generalized clauses whereby individuals undertake not to make statements that 
might damage the reputation of an institution. However, there may be 
exceptional cases not covered by commercial considerations, where it is in the 
public interest to include a confidentiality clause. In these circumstances the 
institution must consult with [the] HEFCE chief executive, in [his or her] 
capacity as Accounting Officer, before agreeing to such a clause.”

A 2009 HEFCE update notes that “there can be no absolute certainty that a 
confidentiality agreement would prove legally binding in the judgement of the 
Information Commissioner”. It also stresses that any confidentiality clause 
should “not prevent the wider public interest being served”, expressly 
referring to the Nolan Committee’s Second Report.

There is also the practical consideration that a university is hardly likely 
to take a former employee to court to recover a severance payment if a gagging 
clause is broken. The headlines would do its reputation no good.
Professor GR Evans
Improving Dispute Resolution Advisory Service

• In your report about the number of university staff required to sign 
“gagging clauses” when they retire or resign, a Department for Education 
official is quoted as saying that these are a matter for “universities as 
businesses”. When exactly did Britain’s universities cease to be public 
institutions devoted to the pursuit of learning and scholarship?
Pete Dorey
Bath, Somerset 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 