
‘I earn more and have more self respect as an escort’

I worked at the head office of a building society for several years. I started 
off on the usual starting wage and by the time I finished I had progressed to 
just under £17,000. However a male colleague of mine was on £21,000. When I 
asked why I wasn’t paid the same I was given so many different excuses. I 
promised my line manager that if I wasn’t offered a pay increase at my end of 
year review I’d leave. I wasn’t so I left. I’ve since become a self-employed 
escort, earn more and have more self respect.Anonymous

‘You are harming the feminist movement’

People get the wage they negotiate during the hiring process, or a set hourly 
rate. There is no pay gap for people doing the same work. You are doing so much 
harm to the feminist movement.Anonymous 

‘I get paid less than my female colleagues’

I’m a man who gets paid less than my female colleagues. We are all around the 
same age, have similar experience and education. My boss has openly dropped 
hints and joked about “bucking the trend” when it comes to gender.Ed, 40, 
scientific management 

Code like a girl: if you can learn to read music, you can learn to program
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/08/code-like-a-girl-if-you-can-learn-to-read-music-you-can-learn-to-program>
‘I had to “mansplain” it to him’

I work at a university for a health research unit. When [my colleague and I] 
discussed wages once, we found that while we work in the same position, I 
happen to have about five years more experience, as well as a more advanced 
degree, both of which lead to my having more responsibility at work in the same 
position. However, he earns nearly $4 [£3.30] per hour more than I do, ie over 
$7k [£5,800] more per year. For doing less in the same job. At first, he didn’t 
get that this was a gender issue so I had to “mansplain” it to him.Anonymous

‘All female editors made less’

We started a union in the newsroom and they opened the books, revealing that 
all female editors made less than the male editors. Same job, same workload, 
side-by-side, exact same duties every day. Our boss, the editor-in-chief, was a 
woman. This was about six or seven years ago now, not decades ago. The union 
upped all the female editors’ salaries to match the male editors’.Nina, 33, 
writer and editor

‘Sexism can be a two way street’

I spent most of my youth in menial jobs being paid the same as my female 
colleagues but was expected to do any heavy lifting or physical work as I was a 
man. Sexism can be a two way street.Barry, 48, software developer 

‘My manager said male waiters deserved more tips’


I worked as a waitress during my degree. In one restaurant all staff were on 
minimum wage, and tips were pooled and supposedly divided equally on a weekly 
basis. It took a few weeks to find out that although we all worked the same 
hours, male staff were being given at least double the tips – female staff were 
making around £60 per week compared to the £120-150 male staff were making. 
When challenged, the (male) manager said that male staff were better for custom 
and deserved more tips. I didn’t stay there long.Evelyn, 28, former waitress 

‘A pay rise was more than forthcoming once I resigned’

I found out that a male colleague at exactly the same level and doing 
precisely the same job was paid £2,000 a year more than me (and had a larger 
bonus), despite the fact that I had qualified as an actuary quicker than he 
had. Needless to say, I was furious and challenged it. Eventually I was 
promised that the difference would be corrected “over time”. I subsequently 
found out that my male colleague was then explicitly told by his manager not to 
speak to me about pay again. After that I decided to leave and it was the best 
thing I’ve ever done – a business that treats its women in such an appalling 
way is not a place to build a career. Ironically, a pay rise was more than 
forthcoming once I handed in my resignation and it was quite satisfying to be 
able to say that no amount of money would make me stay.Dawn, 30, actuarial 
consultant 

The women working in Indonesia’s palm oil sector - in pictures 
#InternationalWomensDay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2016/mar/08/women-working-indonesia-palm-oil-in-pictures>
‘I was told I could not expect to earn the same as my husband’


My husband and I are both lawyers and we worked as a team in one of the firm’s 
foreign offices. At the time of the pay review I was told that as a woman I 
could not expect to earn the same as my husband because I was the second salary 
earner in our relationship. This was despite me having higher billable hours 
than him that year.Anonymous 

‘How can you prove it’s gender bias?’


My husband and I both retrained as teachers following successful previous 
careers and actually secured jobs at the same school once we qualified, 
although he did this eight years before I did. He was offered a salary grade 
two points higher than me. The problem with these things is, how can you prove 
it’s gender bias? Did I enter teaching in a time of greater financial 
pressures? Was the headteacher who hired me less generous than the one who 
hired him? Was he actually just better at teaching? There’s no way to know. 
What I do know is that that jump up the pay scale is equivalent to an extra 
£25,000 over the course of our careers.Anonymous

‘Being a guy got me this promotion’

I’m a guy but I’ve seen the inequalities at play and it annoys me too. To my 
surprise, a month after [two of my female colleagues resigned] I was 
effectively promoted, or rather a new supervisor role was created for me and I 
was given a 15% salary increase. I know I’m a valuable asset but I don’t think 
I’m better than either of the two who left. I reckon being a guy got me this 
promotion, but it came at the expense of a poorer office environment and the 
upheaval that always comes with replacing new staff. I’d rather have the salary 
increase shared between the three of us than take it all for myself, and it 
won’t surprise you to learn that I’m thinking about looking for new work too.
Anonymous

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 