
Britain’s retailers are hanging out the tinsel and looking forward to a bumper 
Christmas, with unemployment down, living standards finally climbing and house 
prices on the rise. But if everything is set fair for a festive blowout, why 
does theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> still think it’s 
too soon to raise interest rates?

Part of the answer is that, as governor Mark Carney made clear at his 
quarterly inflation report briefing last week, the shaky state of global 
economies, including China’s, means they have to balance the strength of 
domestic demand against over headwinds from overseas. But it’s more than that: 
the Bank is acutely conscious that the recovery remains fragile, unbalanced and 
vulnerable to external shocks.

Four pieces of evidence. First, there has been precious little “deleveraging”, 
or unwinding of debt, among Britain’s households, many of which struggled to 
keep their heads above water in the lean years that followed the recession.

Real wages have recently started to rise, and with luck they should continue 
to do so; but it will take a long time to unwind the after-effects of a 
protracted period during which consumers have turned to payday lenders in their 
droves, maxed out their credit cards and dipped deep into their overdrafts to 
make ends meet.

As the Bank of England pointed out in its inflation report, the average 
household owes debts worth about 130% of a year’s income. That’s less alarming 
than the 150% peak before the crisis, but it still tells a story of fragility 
and stress: and it’s a key reason the Bank has so far fought shy of raising 
interest rates from emergency levels.

Second, the sheer size and openness of our financial sector means we tend to 
catch a heavy dose of any market contagion going. The assets of the UK’s 
banking sector are worth four years’ GDP, with “non-bank financial 
institutions” such as insurers and fund managers worth as much again – making 
our financial sector far larger, relative to the rest of the economy, than any 
other major country bar Switzerland.

As the Bank of England put it in its recent assessment of the economic impact 
of Brexit, “greater openness to the EU, like openness more generally, has 
probably increased the external challenges to UK monetary and financial 
stability, as seen in the recent euro-area crisis”. There is no reason to think 
that would be any less true in a future crisis, whatever form it takes.

Third, bubbles are a sure sign of economic fragility, and the housing market, 
particularly in London, is well into frothy territory. Prices nationwide are 
increasing at an annual rate of 10%, and the average property in the capital is 
now worth almost eight times the average income.

That has dire social consequences, as the grim tales of first-time buyers 
queuing around the block to secure an affordable flat in Hounslow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/05/homebuyers-camp-out-overnight-for-chance-to-buy-affordable-flat>
attest.

But it has economic consequences too. Unaffordable housing silts up social 
mobility, exacerbates inequality and makes it hard for firms in expensive areas 
to hire the staff they need.

But like any bubble, it is also inherently unstable, kept intact by cheap debt 
and confidence. Lower house prices would bring benefits; but an abrupt crash 
would be catastrophic, which is one of the reasons the Bank has so far used 
extreme caution in exercising its new “macroprudential” powers to rein in the 
market.

And fourth, our current account deficit with the rest of the world – often 
seen as one of the best indicators of whether a country can pay its way – stood 
at 5.1% of GDP last year, the highest level since records began in 1948.

The reasons are complicated: as well as the trade balance, the current account 
deficit includes the returns we make on overseas investments – which have 
declined recently – compared with the returns earned by foreign investors in 
Britain.

One potential explanation for this shift could be large-scale tax avoidance 
showing up as investment offshore, rather than a fundamental deterioration in 
our ability to make good returns abroad. That would be an indicator of a global 
tax system gone mad rather than economic weakness.

But there’s no easy way to explain away the stubborn persistence of the trade 
deficit, which was £8.5bn in the latest quarter and will continue to drag on 
economic growth.

Much of this pattern is depressingly familiar. In some ways the credit crisis 
may have changed everything, but as long ago as 2002, Mark Carney’s 
predecessor-but-one, Eddie George, was already saying “a two-speed economy is 
better than a no-speed economy” – with a rampant services sector and buoyant 
consumer spending compensating for the weakness of manufacturing and trade.

With luck, recent evidence that productivity is starting to pick up, 
validating rising wages, should continue to underpin living standards, helping 
to offset the impact of a fresh round of public spending cuts.

But Carney and his colleagues are wise to be cautious. Gordon Brown’s 
catchphrase, “the economic fundamentals are sound”, soon looked absurd when the 
Lehman collapse exposed the lopsidedness of Britain’s economy. And as Catherine 
Colebrook, chief economist at the Institute for Public Policy Research, puts 
it: “Since the crisis, we haven’t done enough to change what we produce and how 
we produce; and on a fundamental level, we still have the same vulnerabilities 
that we had five or 10 years ago.”
 