
Pressure on mental health services for young people is increasing (“Care for 
children with mental health problems is woeful, say GPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/14/children-mental-health-care-woeful-gps>
”, News, last week). But it is no good calling for more money for services 
without attending to the causes. Widespread social insecurity is bad for health 
– mental and physical.

The canary in the mine is the phenomenal explosion of despair among teenage 
girls, who are turning up to hospital emergency departments, self-harming and 
suicidal. As community child and adolescent mental health clinics turn patients 
away, more of them are admitted in crisis to general hospital wards, with 
patchy mental health expertise to call on. Norman Lamb MP was a coalition 
government mental health minister when these trends began, so it is rather weak 
of him now to complain that “rationing of care in such a vital area of care is 
scandalous”. While most political pressure will be on community funding, what 
is urgently required is specially skilled mental health and social service 
professionals in hospital paediatric departments.

Though tax havens, state terrorism, migration, global warming and inequality 
may be far from their minds, these young people are warning us of the danger we 
all face: the vicious cycle in which people across the social spectrum become 
less interested in the public good that they are expected to pay for in taxes, 
because they can see nothing good in it for them. The poison in the social 
atmosphere that is hitting teenagers is their unprecedented lack of prospects 
in education, employment and housing.
Dr Sebastian Kraemer
NHS consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist, 1980-2015
London SW2

A quick swipe can stop touts


Secondary sale of tickets for big events has been set up to facilitate the 
tout industry (“How ticket touts are bleeding fans dry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts>
”, Special Report, last week). It makes no difference to performers, as they 
get the same cut from the original ticket price whether or not touts are 
involved. If performers care about fans they should insist that ticketing for 
any gigs mirror the simple and transparent system for buying cinema tickets 
online. Payment is taken from the credit card, then the ticket is collected 
when your credit card is swiped at the venue. There is no possibility of ticket 
transfer unless you trust a friend to use your credit card. Buyer beware.
Alison Hackett
Dublin

Win-win of crosscultural bonds


As psychotherapist Reenee Singh observes, there is “an added layer of 
potential conflict from the minute intercultural couples meet” (“Now loving 
couples can rely on help to cross a troubled cultural divide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/14/love-not-always-enough-for-mixed-race-couples>
”, In Focus, last week). My Mexican wife and I have survived 40 such years. The 
upside is that, like travel, cross-cultural marriage broadens the mind, and the 
children, ideally bilingual, learn to function across cultures as cosmopolitan 
world citizens.
Joseph Palley
Richmond, Surrey

High value of online petitions


Catherine’s Bennett’s criticism of online petitions as clickbait is unjust (“
People power can be toxic: sign here if you agree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/14/e-petitions-laura-kuenssberg-bbc-political-editor-female-jeremy-corbyn-38-degrees?CMP=share_btn_gp>
”, Comment, last week). Organisations such as 38 Degrees have achieved some 
remarkable results by informing, encouraging and mobilising vast numbers of 
people who would otherwise succumb to apathy in the face of toxic corporate and 
rightwing self-interest. It is a sad fact of modern-day life that only a small 
minority of people take an active and regular part in campaigns that promote a 
fair and compassionate society. Online petitions make ordinary people feel as 
if they have a voice, so it’s at least one step better than indolence.

I don’t like the tone or purpose of the petition to sack Laura Kuenssberg, but 
unfortunately there are always going to be some, like “Joe”, who use (misuse?) 
petitions in this way and the websites cannot easily prevent them without 
losing their valuable impartiality. I would have gladly signed a petition to 
sack the odious Jeremy Clarkson and felt justified in doing so. Would that 
campaign have been “unfair and ugly”?
Michael Pollard
Wareham, Dorset

BA’s i360 boon to Brighton


The letter “Council spending on towers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/07/uk-life-sciences-health-wealth-would-benefit-from-staying-in-eu>
” (8 May), contains misleading information. First, the public funding referred 
to comes from the Public Works Loan Board, which funds projects that generate a 
commercial return. It is not local taxpayers’ money, nor was it a case of the 
council choosing to fund British Airways i360 instead of paying for local 
services.

The statement that this arrangement will cost residents £1.4m a year is false; 
in fact, quite the opposite is true. Brighton and Hove city council will earn 
about £1m a year from brokering the loan, which will be reinvested back into 
the city at a time of public cuts. In addition, 1% of British Airways i360’s 
ticket sales will be paid to the council in perpetuity, even after the loan has 
been repaid.

We also estimate that the attraction will bring £25m per year in economic 
benefit to the city; it will support local businesses and generate hundreds of 
new jobs that pay the living wage.
David Marks
Chairman, Brighton i360

Age does not dictate politics


I will be 72 by the date of the EU referendum and am getting tired of reading 
articles that seem to portray everyone of my age as a reactionary isolationist 
(“‘Our grandparents should not be deciding our future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/14/eu-referendum-youth-vote-registration-countdown?CMP=twt_a-politics_b-gdnukpolitics>
’”, News, last week). I am not. I firmly believe that the days when Britain 
achieved dominance by exploiting half the world and fighting the other half 
have long gone and our only hope for the future is through cooperation with out 
nearest neighbours. And I couldn’t support a cause backed by Duncan Smith, 
Gove, Farage and Johnson. If you want to make your voices heard, get off your 
apathetic arses and do something about it.
Mike Garley
Leeds
 