
North Kelvin Meadow – or Children’s Wood, as it has been renamed by 
campaigners – has been saved from housing developers after a hard-fought five 
year battle, some two decades on from when locals first sowed grass seed on the 
abandoned sports ground.

In contrast to the city’s nearby Botanic Gardens, the three acre Children’s 
Wood is a ramshackle affair, offering a very different kind of natural resource 
to local residents who have gradually transformed the meadow from a derelict 
site into a thriving civic space, close to the fashionable West End.

 Having been declared “surplus” in the mid-1990s, there have since been a 
number of attempts to develop the area, most recently the plans first proposed 
by developers New City Vision in 2011 to build ninety upmarket flats on the 
site.

After a lengthy dispute, which saw cash-strapped Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> city council arguing that a negative 
outcome would deprive it of funds to deliver crucial facilities across the 
city, the decision was referred up to an independent ‘reporter’, and then to 
the Scottish government itself, whose decision last month emphasised the 
importance of open space and biodiversity in the heart of the city.

Now campaigners hope this outcome could set a precedent for other areas and 
help mould policy around land and community empowerment. Children’s Wood 
campaigners now plan to ask the council to lease or sell them the land, 
pursuing their community right to buy ‘abandoned or neglected land’ that was 
created in 2015 under one of Scotland’s most potentially progressive pieces of 
legislation in recent times.

How Scottish villagers bought their harbour – and saved their future | 
Hazel Sheffield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/28/how-scottish-villagers-bought-portpatrick-harbour-saved-future>
“What we need is a fundamental shift in understanding that green space within 
cities is important,” says Emily Cutts, a researcher who has been involved with 
the campaign since its inception. “The fact that the government rejected these 
plans is great, and we hope it may result in a change in planning policy, so 
that other communities don’t have to go to a public inquiry, or have 
independent reporters involved.”

While Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> has seen a 
groundswell of local activism around land use in recent years, it has mainly 
revolved around rural settings – like the £500,000 community buyout of an 
ancient Caledonian pine forest in the Highlands announced in December. Cutts 
hopes this success will motivate people in urban areas, adding simply: 
“Councils still don’t value green space over housing”.

Children’s Wood has attracted a cross-section of community support, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/scotland-blog/2016/jan/26/battle-over-glasgows-north-kelvin-meadow-continues-after-council-vote>
 but Cutts is aware of accusations that the campaign has been dominated by 
middle class residents able to corral the support of the likes of children’s 
author Julia Donaldson, comedian Frankie Boyle and Game of Thrones actress Kate 
Dickie.


In response that this charge, Cutts said: “It’s about meeting 21st century 
needs, and its not nimbyist. We’re always looking at the bigger picture, and 
specific problems in the area. For example, with food poverty, we’re growing 
vegetables for an outdoor food bank.”

The wood has also been used in projects that have targeted obesity in young 
people, loneliness in older residents, and most recently provided refugee 
newcomers to Glasgow a different means of learning about the city.

Children’s Wood has even offered itself as a research resource, linking up 
with Glasgow University’s psychology department on a project that compared 
children’s attention spans after spending time in a variety of locations: the 
conclusion was that concentration was best after spending time in a natural 
environment.

Outdoor education has been a huge part of the Children’s Wood ethos, based on 
the principle that urban children should not require money to have access to 
nature.

“Five years ago, we really wanted to build something for the whole community: 
now we have relationships with 20 schools, both in the West End and Maryhill, 
and two employees working on outdoor learning,” Cutts said.

Declaring himself “thrilled” at the decision, Scottish Greens co-convenor and 
MSP for Glasgow Patrick Harvie, a long-standing supporter of the North Kelvin 
meadow campaign, sounded a word of warning around community buy-outs more 
generally.

“Transferring a piece of land into community ownership is in many ways 
positive but it shouldn’t be necessary. We obviously need housing investment, 
but the point is to be building for a social purpose, not speculative 
investment. There are plenty of brownfield sites in Glasgow that developers 
don’t look at with eager eyes because they aren’t as profitable. When the 
community is making good use of land like this they should be left alone,” he 
said.


With a newly expanded cohort of Green MSPs in Holyrood since May’s elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/scotland-blog/2016/may/04/patrick-harvie-scottish-greens-will-push-the-snp-beyond-their-comfort-zone>
 – includingveteran land reform campaigner Andy Wightman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/25/scottish-land-reform-bill>
 – there have been high hopes for them pushing the Scottish government towards 
some truly transformative reform of land and planning legislation.

Current Scottish land reform legislation, which has been criticised for its 
timidity, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/30/scotland-land-reform-national-parks>
 had its final passage in March, just before the Scottish parliament elections. 
During the vote, a ground-breaking Green amendment to tax vacant and derelict 
land was voted down, despite research indicating it would have raised £250m a 
year and forced developers to make better use of the land they had.
 