 The death rate for people of all ages living in Glasgow is more than twice as 
high compared to that for their contemporaries in east Dorset, the government 
said yesterday in the most comprehensive analysis so far of UK mortality trends.
The male death rate in Glasgow was the highest in Britain at 1,420 per 100,000.

The area of Dorset around Wimborne had the lowest death rate, at 700 per 
100,000, according to a survey in Health Statistics Quarterly.

The two places also achieved the highest and lowest scores for deaths among 
women over the period from 1991 to 1997. In Glasgow the female death rate was 
860 and in east Dorset 440 per 100,000.

The figures - adjusted to eliminate differences in the age profile of people 
in each local authority - showed a clear north-south divide.

Wales, Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and North ern 
Ireland have higher mortality rates than England and the northern English 
regions have higher rates than the south outside London.

Most of the high mortality districts are classified as manufacturing centres, 
coalfields or ports.

But the highest death rate for men aged between 15 and 44 was the London 
borough of Hammersmith and Fulham with 220 per 100,000.

This compared with 70 in Hertsmere, Hertfordshire; Melton, Leicestershire; and 
Wokingham, Berkshire. A spokeswoman for the Department of Health said action to 
tackle health inequalities across England was set out last month in the NHS 
national plan.

To ensure more equal distribution of GPs around the country, there would be 
200 new personal medical schemes, mainly in disadvantaged communities, by 2004. 
And health centres in the most deprived communities would be modernised, among 
other measures.

In a separate study, the government said that sudden infant death was five 
times higher for babies born outside marriage where only the mother registered 
the birth, compared to babies born inside marriage.

In all age groups the rate was highest for children of mothers aged under 20. 
Peter Goldblatt, editor of the report, said a mother being the sole parent to 
register the birth did not necessarily mean she was a single parent.

"But often single mothers are also young mothers so those factors combine." A 
variety of social circumstances, including deprivation, led to the high rates 
for specific groups, he said.

Ron Robinson, of the Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths, said it was 
important that the figures should not be seen as an attack on the parenting 
skills of either single or younger mothers.
 