
Two police officers are in a serious condition after being hit by a car in an 
attack that is being treated as attempted murder.


The officers had stopped the car to speak to its occupants after they were 
called out to Banner Drive in Drumchapel,Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow>, at about 11.15pm on Sunday. The car 
then deliberately reversed and struck both officers. Emergency services were 
called to the scene and the officers were taken to hospital.

Police Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> said the 30-year-old 
policewoman was in intensive care, while her 31-year-old male colleague also 
remains in hospital.

DI Ian Hylands said: “Two police officers, in responding to an incident to 
help protect the public, have been badly injured. Help us find those 
responsible.

“Our inquiries so far have revealed that a blue Nissan Qashqai was seen at the 
location around the time of the incident. A vehicle matching that description 
has been found badly damaged by fire in Lennox Gardens, Scotstoun.

“However, we have yet to confirm if that is the same vehicle. Despite the 
damage, forensic officers will carry out a comprehensive examination of the car.


“Everything that can be done to locate the suspects is being done, but I would 
like to appeal to anyone who may have seen the incident last night or who has 
any knowledge of the vehicle or the suspects to contact us.”

Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> taped off the only entrance to 
Banner Drive, with officers standing at the end of the street while the scene 
was investigated on Monday afternoon. A police car with damage to the driver 
side was loaded on to a recovery vehicle and removed from the scene at about 
3pm.

Brian Docherty, chairman of the Scottish Police Federation, said: “Our 
colleagues were simply doing their damnedest to keep the public safe and faced 
an unconscionable attack on their lives as a consequence.

“This is a despicable and cowardly act and there can be no doubt that those 
who drove a vehicle at police officers did so with the intention of taking 
their lives. Police officers put themselves in harm’s way so others don’t have 
to but we should never come to accept that violence is an occupational hazard.”

He said Police Scotland did not inform the federation of the incident until 
almost 12 hours later and said he plans to question why a media appeal was not 
released more quickly. He said the federation is supporting the injured 
officers, their families and colleagues.

Asst Ch Con Wayne Mawson said: “The Scottish Police Federation was notified of 
the incident before 9am this morning. The welfare and wellbeing of the officers 
are of paramount importance to Police Scotland and a senior officer visited 
both officers in hospital today.

“It is important to ensure that the facts are fully established around any 
incident so we can provide accurate information for an appeal to the public. As 
soon as we were notified of the incident an investigation was launched by 
detectives in Glasgow and efforts were made to inform next of kin.

“An appeal to the public was part of the investigative strategy. The facts 
were established and a release was drawn up and issued to media outlets 
following clearance processes. Police Scotland will continue to liaise with the 
Scottish Police Federation.”

Police can be contacted on 101.
 