 In store rooms across the city, the careful touch of the Renaissance masters 
is flaking. Cracks appear on 15th century canvas, and first aid maintenance is 
the best that can be applied. Alongside lie other works, gradually 
deteriorating.
No one is certain of the extent of the malaise. Only one point is irrefutable: 
it cannot continue like this.

The wealth that once made Glasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> the 
second city of the empire has slipped away. Its legacy, however, remains: one 
of the great city collections of Europe, with eight main museums and galleries 
bulging with 1.5m objects. But from Old Masters to rusting armour the problem 
is constant: how to preserve and utilise the collection when inadequate funding 
has brought it to crisis point.

"Of all the cities in Europe, Glasgow was the one that led the way in changing 
its international standing and perception through tourism based on museums," 
said Neil McGregor, director of the National Gallery in London. "If Glasgow is 
in crisis now, what does this bode for the rest of Britain's municipal museums 
- and tourism?"

Polly Smith, the city's senior conservator, admits she has no idea what state 
many of the 3,500 canvases are in. The results of a survey now under way may 
make uncomfortable reading. Ms Smith is Glasgow's only fine art conservator, 
and she does what she euphemistically calls "prioritising". A blunter phrase is 
fire-fighting.

Renaissance works by Montagna, Pessellino and Dossi are deteriorating. It 
takes weeks, sometimes months, to conserve a painting. The decay of other 
paintings comes to light from time to time. When the Tate in London asked to 
borrow three paintings by William Blake, staff were shocked by their condition.

"With a reduced staff, the quantity of work we carry out has to be reduced," 
said Ms Smith. "I can prioritise and save important paintings, with first aid 
treatment, from deteriorating irrevocably. But say if a painting is on display 
with a discoloured varnish, the public is not seeing what the artist intended.

"There are also problems with maintenance. With more resources we could 
properly assess and deal with the needs of the collection."

The problem does not lie merely with conservation. A report by city 
councillors on council museums has shown that Glasgow spends only 10% of what 
it should on museum education; staffing levels are less than half those in 
national museums; and curatorial work has been cut to the bone.

There is little appetite for blaming the council, however. With huge problems 
in housing, education and social work to be tackled, it is no surprise that the 
museum budget is squeezed.

"If we go on for another couple of years like this, we will be in very grave 
danger of losing some of the collection," said John Lynch, vice convenor of 
Glasgow's culture and leisure committee.

The councillors' report can see only three ways out of problem: to ask the 
Scottish executive for an extra £2.2m; to transfer some museums - notably the 
Burrell collection, jewel in the city's year of culture crown - to a trust, 
although this would still leave a big hole in funding; or to seek national 
help, developing a partnership between central and local government.

"It's something that has to be addressed imminently," said Chris Mason, the 
councillor who chaired the report group.

In 1986, when Liverpool reached the depths of its troubles and Margaret 
Thatcher abolished Merseyside council, the new Liverpool city council gave its 
museums up to national control, and they have thrived. Liverpool has a 
collection on a par with Glasgow's, but it has 40 conservators compared with 
Glasgow's 13. The National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside is about to 
spend £34m improving three museums; Glasgow's entire budget for the year is 
£16m.

But this is unlikely to be the solution for Glasgow. "It would be washing our 
hands of the situation," said Mr Lynch. "Glaswegians feel an affinity with 
their art collection; there is little to be gained from breaking that bond. 
What we want to do is encourage the socially excluded to use the museums by 
making them aware of their ownership."

The Scottish executive, too, has no desire to take responsibility for 
Glasgow's problems.

Ministers are aware of the crisis, but money will not flow in immediately. The 
national cultural strategy was published last week, and an audit of all 
Scotland's museums has been ordered.

The city council has requested an urgent meeting with the Scottish executive. 

Dr McGregor said: "In Germany, France and Italy, museums are funded by 
arrangements between local and national governments. Perhaps that is the model 
for Glasgow.

"What we have to realise, though, is that we cannot continue to be so blasé 
with our national heritage. We need to decide now how we are going to maintain 
it - and how we are going to pay for it."
 