
A loan for consumers with poor credit records who can find someone able to 
guarantee their borrowing has been launched by specialist lender Provident. 
Glo, short for guarantor loan option, is aimed at people locked out of 
mainstream borrowing who need cash to make a big purchase, like buying a car, 
or to consolidate other debt. Loans from £1,000 to £7,000 are available over a 
period of one to five years at a typical APR of 49.5%.

The firm said the APR reflected the high cost of offering the loan, which is 
manually underwritten and only granted after discussions with both the borrower 
and the guarantor to make sure that they realise what they are signing up to. 
If the borrower is unable to make repayments, the guarantor could be called on 
to settle the debt, but Provident said this was “the last resort” and that it 
would first work with a borrower on a new payment schedule. Guarantors do not 
have to sign up to a direct debit or a continuous payment authority (CPA) at 
the outset, and will only have to give payment details if the borrower has 
defaulted and is unable to arrange an alternative. They will, however, be told 
of any missed payments straight away.

Tim Anson, commercial director at Provident, said: “We understand that over 
recent years many UK borrowers have found themselves unable to access credit 
due to the impact of the tough economic climate and because many mainstream 
credit providers are not structured to meet the particular needs of 
non-standard credit market customers.”

The firm, which has traditionally offered instalment loans in people’s homes, 
and has one other loan, Satsuma, which offers borrowing over 13 or 26 weeks, 
said its Glo loan was different to other guarantee loans in the market. Mark 
Stevens, head of Provident’s Consumer Credit Division, said existing lenders in 
the market “don’t seem to be working with borrowers when things go wrong. The 
real different between us and incumbents in the market is this forbearance.”

Probably the best known provider of guarantor loans, Amigo Loans, offers 
borrowing of up to £5,000 over periods between one and five years. Its interest 
rate is similar, at 49.9%.

Andrew Hagger, a personal finance expert at Moneycomms, said: “Guarantor loans 
can be a great stepping stone for people with below average credit scores or no 
history of credit and with rates at around 49% APR are a far cheaper 
alternative than payday loans.

“Every time you make a repayment on the guarantor loan the info is passed to 
the credit reference agencies, so over a period of time you can repair your 
rating and at some stage borrow from mainstream lenders again.”

However, he added: “People who are asked to be a guarantor need to think very 
carefully about the potential liability they are taking on – if the borrower 
can’t or won’t pay, then the lender will seek repayment from you. A good 
yardstick is if you wouldn’t lend the person your own money, then don’t act as 
guarantor.”
 