
The numbers of people being declared bankrupt could fall sharply after the 
government announced a seven-fold increase in the minimum amount of debt 
necessary to trigger this form of insolvency.

Ministers are hiking the amount of debt over which an individual can be made 
bankrupt from £750 to £5,000 – the first increase for three decades.

Many campaigners welcomed the move, saying it would prevent creditors making 
people bankrupt for “unreasonably small debts”. However, others say the change 
will make it more difficult for consumers to pursue tradespeople, landlords or 
others who are steadfastly refusing to pay what they owe.

At the same time, the government has effectively given a boost to one of the 
less drastic alternatives to bankruptcy by loosening the restrictions on who is 
eligible for a debt relief order (DRO).

At the moment, if an individual is owed more than £750, they can apply to make 
that person bankrupt <https://www.gov.uk/bankruptcy/overview> using a 
bankruptcy petition. A court may then make a bankruptcy order. But Jo Swinson, 
the business minister, said the government wanted to ensure this form of 
insolvency, which can have serious implications, was “reserved for those with 
sizeable debts”.

The Insolvency Service said that when it asked for views, many respondents 
said the amount of debt that could trigger bankruptcy was disproportionate, “as 
people can be put through the most serious of debt recovery action for a debt 
as small as £750”. It added: “There are also other ways for those owed money to 
recover their debts, such as action in the small claims court or attachment to 
salaries.”

As a result, the bankruptcy “creditor petition level” will be increased from 
£750 to £5,000. This is a much higher figure than most in the industry were 
anticipating – it is understood that at one point the Insolvency Service was 
suggesting it be set at £2,000.

The government also announced it was widening the eligibility criteria for 
DROs, which were introduced in England in Wales in 2009 as low-cost alternative 
to bankruptcy for people struggling with debts.

At the moment DROs are an option only for those who owe less than £15,000 and 
have less than £300 worth of assets.Some experts had said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/aug/02/government-review-debt-relief-orders-insolvency-bankruptcy>
 the restrictions on who could use a DRO meant many people were unable to 
access this type of formal insolvency procedure.

In response to this, the government is increasing the maximum amount of debt 
that can be covered by an order to £20,000, and more than tripling the asset 
limit to £1,000, plus a vehicle (worth not more than £1,000). The maximum 
surplus income a person can have to qualify for a DRO will remain at £50 a 
month.

Giles Frampton, president of insolvency trade body R3, said the changes would 
make it much easier for people with debts to deal with these effectively. But 
he added: “The rise in the petition threshold will require creditors to look at 
other options for the pursuit of low-value debts. While a bankruptcy petition 
is not always the most proportionate tool for this, it’s very important that 
the insolvency regime maintains a balance between protecting the interests of 
both debtors and creditors.”

Debt charity StepChange said: “An increase in the DRO maximum debt threshold 
and a higher creditor petition limit for bankruptcy is welcome news for people 
struggling with debt.”
 