
The importation of green prawns into Australia will be suspended after an 
outbreak of white spot disease in Queensland, the federal agriculture minister,
Barnaby Joyce <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce>, has 
announced.

The federal government had taken action against a major prawn importer on 
Friday after the disease was detected inQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>, Joyce said. The virus 
is highly contagious and lethal, killing prawns quickly. It has the potential 
to devastate the industry but does not pose a risk to humans.

Queensland prawn farmers face huge losses over white spot disease outbreak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/13/queensland-prawn-farmers-face-huge-losses-over-white-spot-disease-outbreak>
In December it was revealed that wild prawns taken from the Logan river south 
ofBrisbane <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane> in November, 
had tested positive to the disease, along with prawns from three of the 
region’s eight land-based farms.

It was a blow to the industry before the Christmas sales period. Bans on prawn 
and crab fishing in the Logan river were put in place while eradication efforts 
occurred.

On Friday Joyce said white spot disease had now been detected in imported 
green prawns being sold in shops for human consumption. “That, for me, is a 
huge concern,” he told ABC News 24.

“People have a tendency to use them as bait. It means they get into the 
waterways, it means it can infect prawn farms.”

The government had suspended the importation of green prawns into Australia to 
try to get on top of the outbreak, he said, and the rights of one major prawn 
business to import had been revoked.

“We are also investigating a number of other prawn importers because there is 
the suspicion that they have not followed the proper protocols, which is the 
law of the land on how you import prawns into this country.

“We are making sure all and sundry are aware of the process, and now we are 
doing everything in our power to make sure we deal with this and try and nip 
this in the bud.”

Infected farms are being chlorinated. An outbreak of white spot disease in 
Darwin in 2000 was successfully overcome using similar measures. Dragging of 
rivers in Darwin during the current outbreak had revealed the virus there in 
four out of 6,000 prawns tested, Joyce said, but the numbers were too small for 
its spread to be viable there. “Nonetheless, it is a major concern,” he said.

He urged those buying prawns not to put them in a waterway or use them as 
bait. Cooking the prawns killed the white spot, he said. Those farms affected 
in Queensland represented a significant, $25m chunk of Australia’s prawn 
industry. Joyce would not speculate how long those farms might be quarantined 
for.

“It has the capacity to devastate the industry,” he said. “You can lose up to 
half your prawns. We don’t want that.”

The president of the Queensland Seafood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/seafood> Industry Association, Kevin 
Reibel, said the importation of green prawns should have been banned long ago. 
The industry had been calling for a ban before the current white spot outbreak 
because of the risk the disease posed.

Synthetic prawns: a bid to make ‘seafood’ that’s sustainable and slavery-free
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/world-on-a-plate/2016/aug/26/synthetic-prawns-a-bid-to-make-seafood-thats-sustainable-and-slavery-free>
While it was too early to say what had led to the outbreak in Queensland 
farms, he said – and he did not want to get involved in a “blame game” –Reibel 
questioned why a ban had not been placed on imports as a precaution from the 
moment the disease was detected locally.

He said the virus was devastating for those farmers affected. “When you 
consider the money spent getting them to harvest size and stage and now they’ll 
have to destroy them,” he said.

But Reibel stopped short of calling on the government to compensate farmers. 
“Commercial fishermen get no compensation due to floods and bad weather if they 
can’t go out, and so if there is compensation it should be applied across the 
board,” he said.

“If there is an issue in cane, bananas or pineapples governments seem to look 
after them, but when it comes to fishing, there is a reluctance to compensate. 
I’m not saying they shouldn’t compensate prawn farmers, but what about others 
in the fishing sector when they are affected?”

 