
Do you know who’s looking at your credit report – and are they entitled to be 
nosing around in your affairs? A businessman is calling for an investigation 
after discovering that some of the other parties in a commercial dispute he was 
embroiled in, had managed to get access to information about him from two of 
Britain’s credit reference agencies.

A large law firm and a team of private investigators acquired information 
about Bev Oates from the files of Callcredit and Equifax, even though he had 
not given his permission. The law firm and the investigators had been hired by 
other people involved in the dispute, and were delving into Oates’s background.

The credit reference agencies store data on the financial activities of 
millions of Britons, and say they have strict controls to prevent improper 
searches of their databases by their clients – but admit they are unable to 
verify at the time that each search has been carried out legitimately.

Oates is calling for an in-depth probe as he believes what has happened to him 
is not unique. In January this year, Guardian Money featured the case of Gary 
Gadston, who had discovered that, unbeknown to him, private detectives had 
accessed his credit report to get the lowdown on his finances.

Gadston had been immersed in a legal row with NatWest, and was shocked to see 
on his Experian credit report that a firm of private investigators had carried 
out a search of his file on behalf of Royal Bank of Scotland, NatWest’s parent 
group.

Oates discovered that law firm Weightmans and Manchester-based investigators 
BTG, who had been hired by separate parties in the property dispute, acquired 
information about him from the credit reference agencies.

Equifax, Experian and Callcredit gather data from a number of sources to 
compile detailed financial files on members of the public. They make money by 
charging companies to search these files when people apply for loans, credit 
cards, mortgages and so on.

These searches are often done online so they can be completed quickly, and are 
sometimes carried out by investigators and lawyers on behalf of the client 
companies.

Crucially, the agencies say that none of their clients can search their 
databases for information about an individual unless that person gives their 
permission on each occasion. Individuals are typically deemed to have given 
their consent for such searches when they apply for products from banks and 
other firms.

Callcredit says Weightmans obtained “very high-level information, most of 
which is also available from other publicly available sources”. However, it 
adds that none of the information was “highly-sensitive financial” data.

Weightmans says: “Any information obtained by Weightmans LLP was in the public 
domain and Mr Oates has not suffered any loss as a result.”

However, Oates had previously complained to Weightmans, which accepted in a 
letter to him that “you were not a client of this firm and that you did not 
give Weightmans permission to access your credit reference file” held by 
Callcredit. Weightmans also wrote that it was “acting in the best interests of 
our clients in accessing your credit file”, as they wanted to establish if he 
had enough money to pay their clients’ legal costs if he lost the dispute.

It has emerged that BTG – the private investigators hired by Oates’s opponents 
in the dispute – conducted four searches of the Equifax database for 
information about him. According to Equifax’s records, three of these searches 
were done to trace Oates, and the other one for “debt collection”. Equifax says 
BTG has had “direct access to our systems”.

Oates had not given BTG permission for these searches. BTG says it was 
permitted to conduct the searches under a legal exemption that did not require 
it to obtain his permission, as the matter related to legal proceedings.

Intriguingly, however, Equifax says BTG did not cite this exemption when it 
carried out the searches. Equifax says the private investigators made an error 
as they had indicated they did have his consent when they conducted the 
searches. Equifax and BTG say the investigators only obtained information about 
Oates that was publicly available. They say this related to the register of 
voters, court judgments and his current and previous addresses.

BTG, part of insolvency specialist Begbies Traynor, says: “Mr Oates’s credit 
information was never accessed by BTG. BTG did not, and does not, have the 
ability to access an individual’s full credit report through Equifax.”

Oates only found out about the searches after applying to see the files held 
on him by the credit reference agencies. However, he believes that relatively 
few members of the public check their files, and so other intrusions are going 
undetected. “These databases hold more personal, confidential, financial data 
and other information about the lives of the UK’s adult population than any 
other databases outside of government,” he adds.

Callcredit told us: “As a responsible credit reference agency, we are fully 
committed to upholding the security of the data with which we are entrusted.”

It also says it does not require clients to confirm they are acting in line 
with the rules every time they conduct a search. Instead their clients 
confirmed they would follow the rules when they signed a contract with the 
agency.

Equifax, meanwhile, says the need to give its customers swift access to its 
database and the volume of searches conducted would make it impossible to check 
every inquiry.

The agency adds that its clients are required to sign a contract stipulating 
that they “should ensure searches are carried out in accordance with our terms 
and conditions and the Data Protection Act”. It added that it did “regular spot 
checks on the information accessed by its customers” and “takes the security of 
its data and how it can be accessed very seriously”. Equifax says it has “taken 
action against customers that have not adhered to the rules of data access and 
supply. It cannot confirm exact numbers because this is commercially sensitive 
information”.
 