
Greenhouse gas emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/carbon-emissions> from agriculture 
would be cut by 25-40% if Europeans cut their meat and dairy consumption by 
half, according to a UN report.

Scientists from the UN Economic Commission for Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> say that as well as cutting air 
and water pollution, adopting a "demitarian diet" – cutting meat and dairy 
consumption in half – would lead to a 40% cut in Europeans' intake of saturated 
fats.

The vast majority of saturated fats come from animal products that can lead to 
cholesterol problems and obesity 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/Goodfood/Pages/Eat-less-saturated-fat.aspx>, and 
such a cut would bring levels to within a range recommended by the World Health 
Organisation.

Prof Mark Sutton, one of the authors who coined the term demitarian and is one 
himself, said despite powerful farming lobbies it was not "pie in the sky" to 
envisage such a cut in meat consumption. But he said the team was not taking a 
position on how best to encourage people to change their food habits.

"When we've seen people urged to be vegetarians I've personally seen that that 
can lead to a backlash because many people want to eat meat. From the 
environmental point of view, it's not about whether you eat meat or dairy, it's 
about how much," he said in London on Thursday.

The report, Nitrogen on the Table, examined the impacts that changes in 
consumer food habits would have on nitrogen emissions from livestock. It said a 
50% cut in meat and dairy intake would cut greenhouse gas emissions by 25-40% 
depending on what the freed-up land was used for. The amount of imported 
soybeans, mostly used to feed livestock, would fall by 75%.

The taskforce concluded that the amount of nitrogen lost into the wider 
environment – into the air and into water – was 25 times higher per unit of 
food protein from beef than for cereals.

Nitrous oxide is one of the most powerful greenhouse gases, far more potent 
than carbon dioxide. Nitrogen releases from agriculture have other negative 
environmental effects, mixing with emissions from cars to create tiny 
particulate pollution that is harmful to humans. When it runs off farmland into 
rivers it can end up in the sea and cause algal blooms.

A dramatic reduction in meat and dairy farming – which would meet strong 
opposition from farming bodies in the UK – would also free up land either for 
growing cereals or biofuels, the UN team said.

"The EU could become a major exporter of food products, instead of a major 
importer of, for example, soybeans," said Henk Westhoek, the report's lead 
author and programme manager at the Netherlands Environment Assessment Agency.

But he admitted that dramatically reducing cattle farming would not in all 
cases free-up land suitable for growing cereal crops instead. "It would not be 
favourable to take out all the beef production because then we cannot use all 
our natural and semi-natural grasslands," he said.

Dr Diane Mitchell, chief environment adviser at the National Farmers Union, 
said: "Farmers and land managers have already taken great steps to reducing its 
use through better management and efficiency – in fact, its use is down 
significantly over the past 20 years.

"Eating less meat is a simplistic solution to what is a highly complex 
situation. Agricultural production in the UK is currently responsible for 
around 10% of total UK greenhouse gas emissions and the British livestock and 
dairy sectors are already doing much to tackle their greenhouse gas footprint. 
And it mustn't be forgotten that meat and dairy products are an important 
component of a healthy, balanced diet.

She added: "Further, the view that agricultural land should be taken away from 
livestock for other produce is nonsensical – some of this land can only be used 
for pasture and at the same time goes some way to protecting our wonderful 
countryside."

Sutton also speculated on the cultural influence that such a move by Europe 
would have elsewhere around the world, where meat consumption is rising rapidly.
One-third of the world's meat now comes from China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2014/mar/03/us-intensive-farming-chinas-meat-problem>
, where meat consumption per person is headed towards US and European levels.

"I would posit a hypothesis that if Europe were to make such a change that 
would have such cultural ripples that it would have interactions with other 
parts of the world. Nobody can tell the Chinese or anybody else what they 
should be doing but if we were to change our culture, that would have a ripple, 
it would be an incredible sea change," he said.

The executive summary of the report was published on Friday, with the full 
report following next month. It followsa major assessment in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/apr/10/nitrogen-footprint-europe-warning>
 by the same team, which concluded that the annual cost of nitrogen pollution 
was in the region of £62bn-£282bn.

A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> and Rural Affairs said: "We're 
working with farmers to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and we recently 
launched a £4.5m initiative to help farmers become more environmentally 
sustainable. We're also four years into an ambitious £12m research programme to 
improve our understanding of how we can reduce the impact of agriculture on 
emissions."
 