
Clinical psychologists have raised the alarm over a controversial piece of 
research led by a Labour peer, with one saying it “lets austerity off the hook” 
as a cause of mental health problems.

The London School of Economics study led by Lord Richard Layard, published in 
early December, found that failed relationships and physical and mental illness 
were bigger causes of misery than poverty.

The study, headlined the “Origins of happiness” 
<http://voxeu.org/article/origins-happiness>, made the claim that eliminating 
depression and anxiety would reduce misery by 20%, while eliminating poverty 
would only reduce it by 5%.

But psychologists who spoke to the Guardian said that the findings ran in the 
face of decades of evidence showing that an individual’s social circumstances 
had a big impact on mental health.

Mental illness and poverty: you can't tackle one without the other | Dean 
Burnett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/dec/13/mental-illness-and-poverty-you-cant-tackle-one-without-the-other>
“It lets politicians off the hook, it lets austerity off the hook, it says 
that all that doesn’t matter, making a better society doesn’t matter, just 
offering technical treatments,” said Dr Anne Cook, director of clinical 
psychology at Canterbury Christ Church University.

“I am one of the people that offers technical treatments and I think they can 
be extremely helpful to some people but that argument is being stretched beyond 
the point at which it applies.”

Dr Peter Kinderman, president of the British Psychological Society, said he 
welcomed Layard’s call for a focus on national wellbeing through investment in 
mental health services. But he had misgivings about how the study had treated 
mental illness as a distinct variable from human misery.

“I’m not sure that is quite the same as saying that our wellbeing … would be 
better off if we were to tackle mental illness, because it suggests that the 
one variable is the cause of the other where I would see them as the same,” 
Kinderman said.

It is understood that the LSE study has caused widespread unease among 
clinical psychologists, particularly as Layard is highly influential with 
policymakers.

Layard’s work has previously led to David Cameron’s adoption of national 
wellbeing statistics, and he was also a driving force behind the adoption of 
the Improving Access to Psychological Therapies to increase access to “talking 
therapies” on the NHS.

That latter policy was particularly controversial because it established 
finding work as an outcome of psychological treatment, which critics said may 
not be a suitable outcome for some and encouraged a policy of forcing people 
into work which may not be appropriate for them.

Now Layard, an economist by training, is calling for a “new role for the 
state” that swaps wealth creation for wellbeing creation through targeted 
mental health interventions. Dr Jay Watts, a clinical psychologist, said his 
call “negates decades worth of data linking mental health to poverty”.

Study finds 7m Britons in poverty despite being from working families
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/study-finds-7m-britons-in-poverty-despite-being-from-working-families>
“It’s ripe for misuse … in the current political climate,” she added.

Sarah Carr, vice-chair of the National Survivor User Network, said that 
Layard’s findings failed to reflect the realities of people who have 
experienced mental health problems.

“We’ve got people who are now known as the precariat,” Carr said. “We have 
in-work poverty, we have people who need to rely on welfare benefits, we have 
people who are in debt, and these have massive effects on people’s mental 
health anyway.

“Even if they didn’t have a pre-existing condition they can exacerbate 
pre-existing conditions, and they affect people’s relationships. It’s a 
problematic piece of research to use to make such a high-level, universal 
policy proposal.”

Cook said that rather than focusing on mental health interventions, as Layard 
suggested, a better way to improve people’s wellbeing on a societal level would 
be to take a public health approach. “Cholera wasn’t eradicated by developing 
new treatments, it was eradicated by improving drains back in pre-Victorian 
times,” she said.

“What [Layard] neglects is the people at the bottom of the pile who are 
really, really struggling, and in current circumstances there are a lot of 
them. People who you see at food banks for example, who are in incredible 
distress and certainly would – most of them or a lot of them – meet the 
criteria for an anxiety disorder or depression.

“But it’s largely a response to their circumstances. If we do something about 
that, rates of mental illness in the population are going to come down a lot 
more effectively than providing a lot more therapy.”


 