
Nicole Newman, a mother-of-one from Tottenham, north London, was recently 
forced to prove her identity to a bailiff after a court order named her 
property as the address of a council tax absconder.

Letters started arriving three months after she bought her house, until one 
day she received an already-opened letter which stated that the following week 
an enforcement agent would be coming “for the purpose of taking control of 
goods and transporting such controlled goods to a place of sale”. A previous 
occupant with a very different name owed more than £7,000 in council tax at 
another address, which was given on the enforcement notice.

Newman contacted the local council, which told her she had to call the 
enforcement agent directly. “I spoke to the bailiff, who was really horrible 
and aggressive,” Newman says. “I was reluctant to give my details to them, but 
I felt they would come and break down the door if I didn’t prove who I was.”

Newman’s experience is not unique. Other homeowners have found themselves 
being chased for debts incurred by people who previously lived at their 
address. In the most extreme cases a court may order that bailiffs are sent to 
the property to remove goods, which can be intimidating and frightening for the 
tenant or homeowner who has nothing to do with the money owed.

Industry guidelines state that debt collection agencies must take reasonable 
steps to ensure that the person traced is in fact the customer, but their data 
can be inaccurate, meaning the new occupant has no choice but to prove their 
identity to stop the debt collectors wrongfully pursuing them.

The code of practice 
<http://www.csa-uk.com/assets/documents/compliance-and-guidance/code_of_practice.pdf>
 of UK debt collection trade body theCredit Services Association 
<http://www.csa-uk.com> (CSA) says members should “take prompt steps to correct 
data, both internally and with the credit reference agencies, where it is aware 
that the data is out of date or inaccurate”, and must also take reasonable 
steps to ensure the person traced is in fact the customer.

I explained the debt was nothing to do with me – but was told they'd keep 
sending letters if I didn’t prove who I was

Sean Feast, spokesman for the CSA, says no agency wants to pursue a debt from 
a party who is not the rightful debtor. “They have been given the address 
details by the original creditor and are pursuing that debt in good faith based 
on this information,” he says. But he adds that it is not practical to trace 
every single contact. “Cases of mistaken identity will occur, but members do 
all they can to keep these to a minimum.”

Such mistaken identifications can result in innocent residents feeling 
harassed. For model maker Jennie Heppenstall, 40, it was a “pretty scary 
experience” when “two large guys” arrived at her Bromley doorstep asking for 
the previous homeowner. “I didn’t know my rights so I had to prove who I was. 
My daughter was a few months old, so it was quite intimidating for me,” she 
says.

Feast says that if a householder is contacted about a debt that is not theirs 
they shouldn’t panic – but they should not do nothing either. “You may feel it 
is wrong that you have to prove you are an innocent party, but sadly up to a 
quarter of all letters marked as ‘gone away’ are done so by people who have not 
gone away at all,” he says. “If the debt is sufficiently large to warrant it, 
then some form of personal visit may be of benefit in verifying an address or 
opening a dialogue with the customer where one did not previously exist.”

Thirty-eight-year-old Marie Smith [not her real name] is still being pursued 
for penalty charge notices in someone else’s name 18 months after moving into 
her property in Northampton. Within a year of buying the home she began 
receiving a large quantity of letters for one person. Marie initially marked 
them “return to sender”, but one day accidentally opened one while going 
through her own mail. It was a penalty charge notice for a traffic offence in 
London.

Smith contacted the council in question and was told her information would be 
passed on to the traffic department. But the letters kept coming, and then 
began arriving from a debt collection agency. “I opened one of the debt 
collector letters, contacted them and was told I had to prove who I was. I 
explained it was nothing to do with me and that I was pretty sure it was 
harassment – but was told they would just keep sending the letters if I didn’t 
prove who I was.

“I Googled the debtor and found out where she worked, and told the debt 
collector. I felt like I was doing their job for them. I also contacted the 
DVLA as she obviously hadn’t changed her licence details, but they said they 
couldn’t do anything about it.”

A quarter of all letters marked ‘gone away’ are done so by people who have not 
gone away at all
Sean Feast, Credit Services Association 
Smith eventually emailed the debt agency a copy of a utility bill in the hope 
it would resolve the issue, but at the end of January she received another 
penalty charge notice for the previous occupant, which she is still trying to 
resolve.

Meanwhile, the letters to Nicole Newman finally stopped once the debtor was 
tracked down – but were replaced by receipts for his subsequent repayments. “He 
even came to the house once he’d started paying the debt off to get his 
receipts to prove he’d paid,” she says.

What frustrated her most was having to prove her innocence. “They could have 
used the Land Registry or tracing software to confirm who lived at the address. 
I looked myself and found the person they were looking for lived here eight 
years ago for just a few months. But the onus was on me and, as the innocent 
party, that’s quite galling.”

Know your rights

Is it illegal to open someone else’s post? 
Under the Postal Services Act 2000 it is an offence to open post incorrectly 
delivered to you if by doing so you intend to act to a person’s detriment. 
However, opening debt collection demand letters to resolve the situation would 
not arguably be an offence.

Will receiving debt collection letters at my address affect my credit rating? 
No. Credit checks are done on people, not addresses. There is no such thing as 
an address blacklist.

Is there a difference between a debt collector and a bailiff?
Yes. A bailiff or enforcement officer is a court-appointed officer who has the 
power to recover goods to the value of a debt owed. A debt collection agency is 
a business that represents the creditor and collects the debt on their behalf. 
They may come to an address to verify who lives there but they can’t seize 
goods.

Can a bailiff enter a property by force? 
Power to enter premises by force only exists for the execution of warrants to 
enforce criminal penalties. This power should only be used after the debtor has 
been warned that the power exists and of the consequences of a wilful refusal 
to cooperate.

Who should I contact to stop receiving debt collection letters? 
First, contact whoever is sending the letters and ask to be taken off their 
records. You may have to do this several times if there are several debts. If 
the letters or calls persist you have several routes of complaint. If it is a 
debt collection agency that belongs to theCredit Services Association 
<http://www.csa-uk.com/> (you can check on its website), you can raise a formal 
complaint with the CSA. Or alternatively you can contact theInformation 
Commissioner’s Office <https://ico.org.uk/>, which oversees companies’ 
compliance with the Data Protection Act 1998. As such it can investigate 
complaints relating to any misuse of your personal data.

If the debt collection has moved on to a civil enforcement officer (or court 
bailiff) then contact theCivil Enforcement Association <http://www.civea.co.uk>
. But if it is a debt collection in relation to a credit agreement such as hire 
purchase, payday lending or credit cards, you need to contact theFinancial 
Ombudsman Service <http://www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk/>.
 