
A Spanish court has sentenced the head of an animal shelter to three years and 
nine months in jail for killing hundreds of healthy dogs and cats in a way that 
provoked “prolonged agony”.

The court in the southern city of Málaga also fined Carmen Marín Aguilar, 72, 
€19,800 (£17,200) after finding her guilty of animal cruelty and the 
falsification of documents.

Felipe Barco Gómez, 55, a caretaker at the Parque Animal shelter in 
Torremolinos on the Costa del Sol, was jailed for a year and ordered to pay a 
fine of €3,600 for his role in the deaths.

Cat people are single, dog people are popular (according to Facebook)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/08/cat-people-versus-dog-people-facebook-study>
The court said Aguilar injected healthy animals of different breeds, mainly 
dogs and cats, with euthanising drugs without sedation while Gómez held them 
down.

Aguilar used a smaller dose of the euthanising drug than is advised in order 
to save money and injected it directly into muscle tissue instead of 
intravenously as recommended, it added.

This caused a “slow death with a painful and prolonged agony”, the court said 
in its ruling.

Prosecutors accused the pair of having killed 2,183 animals between January 
2009 and October 2010, when the alleged slaughter came to light during an 
inspection of the facilities.

They believe the pair killed the animals to reduce costs and make room for the 
centre’s for-profit activities.

The shelter for abandoned animals also provides paid-for grooming services 
runs private animal clinic, though the director did not have a veterinary 
diploma.

Prosecutors said the pair disconnected security cameras when they killed the 
animals and would play music over a megaphone to mask the ensuing howls.

Aguilar and Gómez denied killing the animals.

Aguilar told the court during her trial that she loved animals and could not 
have injected them because she has a needle phobia. “I don’t even dare to cut 
their nails,” she said.
 