
Consumers have been warned of the high cost of using “buy now, pay later” 
deals offered by catalogues and online retailers, some of which charge almost 
three times as much interest as major credit cards.


Debt charity StepChange said that a third of the clients it helped in 2015 had 
catalogue debts, and that they owed an average of just under £2,000.

Websites including Very.co.uk and SimplyBe.co.uk allow shoppers to spread the 
cost of goods, but once 0% deals are over the interest rates charged are far 
higher than those on normal credit cards.

Very, which sells everything from clothes and toys to home and electrical 
items, offers shoppers an interest-free deal on purchases over £50, where the 
balance must be paid off after a set period of time. Alternatively, people can 
take a “spread the cost” payment option. “Take as long as you like,” it says. 
“Pay at least £5 or 7% of the balance each month, whichever is highest. 
Interest will be charged at your account rate.”

But with a typical APR of 39.9%, a customer borrowing £300 and spreading the 
cost this way would take four and a half years to repay the debt, repaying a 
total of £478 – £178 in interest.

Clothing retailers Jacamo, JD Williams and SimplyBe – all owned by N Brown 
group – typically charge an APR of 58.7%. The Bank of England puts the average 
credit card rate at 17.95%.

Andrew Hagger, from financial website MoneyComms.co.uk, said: “The comment 
‘Take as long as you like’ to repay may sound like a generous gesture but it’s 
far from it – the customer ends up paying through the nose due to higher 
interest costs while the catalogue company rubs its hands at the thought of 
that extra profit.”


Joanna Elson, chief executive of the Money Advice Trust, the charity that runs 
National Debtline, said the wording was “unfortunate” and suggested Very 
reviewed it.

Very refused to comment on the deal, but said two-thirds of the credit it 
provided was on some form of interest-free basis. “The relationship we have 
with our credit customers is important to us as we want that relationship to be 
long-term one, where the customer continues to shop with us,” said a 
spokesperson for Very’s parent company, Shop Direct. “It is therefore not in 
our best interests to offer credit to customers that they cannot afford to 
repay. As a responsible lender we actually reject two-thirds of all credit 
applications received.”

Other online retailers offer incentives for customers opening store accounts 
rather than paying for their shopping with a credit or debit card. SimplyBe 
offers customers 10% off their first credit order.

Ed Watson, spokesman for JD Williams, said the company was a responsible and 
inclusive lender. “It’s important to us that our customers don’t get into too 
much debt and have a balance that is easy to manage from a responsible lending 
perspective,” he said.


“Through our more inclusive approach we are providing an option for many who 
wouldn’t ordinarily receive credit. Naturally, there is an element of risk 
associated with this and it is for this reason the APR is at the level that it 
is.”

Watson added that a “significant proportion” of JD Williams’ customers settle 
their account each month, meaning no interest is charged.

“The initial credit limit is typically lower than credit cards and is £100 to 
£250 depending on the customer’s personal credit position,” he said. “This 
increases through responsible lending and repayment, with the average balance 
being £450 – so a manageable amount. We also proactively remind people that 
they will shortly occur interest via postal statements and also send reminder 
text prompts to pay.”

Research by the Money Advice Trust found that 1.9 million people used 
catalogue credit to pay for Christmas presents in 2015, down from 2.6 million 
the year before. About 10% of calls to National Debtline are about catalogue 
debt.


“A temporary 0% interest deal or an initial discount from an online catalogue 
can be tempting – but this is an expensive way to borrow in the long run,” said 
Elson. “Last Christmas we saw a 61% jump in calls to National Debtline after 
the holidays and all the signs are that we will see the same or higher again 
this year.”

A spokesman for StepChange said the payment plans could become an “expensive 
way to shop if people take on too much or miss payments”.

He added: “Regardless of which form credit takes, it is a significant 
commitment. People should always ask themselves whether they really need 
something, whether credit is the right option, whether they can afford it and 
how much it will cost them long term.”

Hagger said some people resorted to costly finance deals catalogue firms 
because they had struggled to get credit from mainstream providers in the past.


“While you can understand people borrowing at high rates of interest to help 
in emergency situations, impulse shoppers may later regret accruing expensive 
debt just to replenish their wardrobe,” he said. “If the finance costs were 
added to the cost of the goods at the point of sale, many shoppers simply 
wouldn’t make these non-essential purchases.”
 