 A Scottish academic told a seminar last year that Scotland would wake up one 
morning and find it was independent. There would be no dramatic vote or 
political upheaval: it would just happen gradually, bit by bit.
It is easy to see how this would come about. Already, those living in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> can go through day after day without 
any reference to London.

They can be educated in the Scottish school system, read Scottish papers, 
watch Scottish football, listen to Scottish music, drink Scottish beer and, if 
the worst happens, be tried in the Scottish legal system.

These differences between Scotland and England have long been there but have 
become more pronounced over the last decade, as Scots become more confident and 
comfortable with their own identity.

This sense of separateness was be reinforced yesterday when the Scottish 
electorate voted for its own Parliament.

The Scottish National Party hope is that by the time of the next Scottish 
election in 2003 or the one after that in 2007, friction between Westminster 
and the Scottish parliament and disillusionment with Labour will have increased 
and its high poll ratings vanished.

By then too, Westminster could almost be irrelevant, especially if Britain has 
by then joined the European single currency. Independence beckons?

But there is another, more sophisticated option, one Scotland is more likely 
to take. Hard as it is to believe at present, it is one that both Labour and 
the SNP, the party of the union and the party of secession, could eventually 
agree on.

Over the next decade, the straight choice between remaining in the union or 
breaking away will become blurred as the Scottish parliament establishes itself.

The SNP is not a monolithic organisation committed solely to independence. 
There are the fundamentalists who want all the trappings of a 19th-century 
nation state: own defence force, embassies, and Scotland taking its place in 
the United Nations between Saudi Arabia and Senegal.

But there are others in the SNP, a younger generation and possibly even its 
leader, Alex Salmond, though he would never admit it, who would settle for 
something different.

Their thinking is broadly in line with that of the former Welsh nationalist 
leader, now in the Lords, Dafyd Elis Thomas, who angered his own party more 
than a decade ago by describing himself as a post- nationalist: he said the 
idea of the 19th-century nation state was dead and advocated more complex and 
imaginative solutions.

Just as there are SNP members prepared to compromise, prepared to settle for 
something less, so too is there a new generation of Scottish Labour politicians 
who owe little allegiance to Westminster and see Scotland as the main focus of 
their political lives.

It is from this generation that the leader most likely to replace Donald Dewar 
will come.

This new generation will continue, as they have been doing for the last 
decade, to push for greater autonomy of the Scottish Labour Party from London. 
And with the Scottish parliament in being, they will push for an expansion of 
its powers.

Their model is a beefed-up version of the devolved Spanish region of 
Catalonia. They can see a Scotland that is much more autonomous than Downing 
Street is at present prepared to concede.

It will be a Scotland that operates under lots of umbrellas: that of the 
European Union, the Commonwealth, and probably Nato (SNP policy at present is 
to withdraw).

The union with England would just be one more umbrella. The Scottish 
parliament will have relations direct with Brussels, Belfast, Cardiff and 
Dublin, which last year opened a consulate in Edinburgh.

There are many younger members of the SNP prepared to accept something along 
those lines, especially if Westminster's omnipotence continues to be eroded by 
adoption of a European single currency and, possibly in the longer term, by a 
common European defence and foreign policy.

The views of some of the young SNP members who will be sitting in the Scottish 
parliament are virtually interchangeable with their contemporaries on the 
Labour side.

What divides them will be nuances and the different historical backgrounds of 
their parties, in much the same way as Fine Gael and Fianna Fail in Dublin.

Up until a few weeks ago, I believed independence in the old-fashioned sense 
was inevitable. But after criss-crossing Scotland, canvassing with candidates 
and chatting with the new generation of Scottish politicians, there is a 
different prospect on offer, a much more sophisticated and mature one.

It is evolution, rather than the dramatic break with England. The old idea of 
formal independence would be buried. But then so too would the union in its 
existing form, replaced by a much looser arrangement.
 