
Ongoing uncertainty over the manner of the UK’s departure from the EU is 
likely to weigh down the property market in 2017, say experts, who predict 
little or no growth in prices amid a slowdown in sales. The Brexit referendum 
result and government measures to cool the buy-to-let market have hit the 
property market in 2016, and are expected to keep the lid on house prices next 
year too.

In the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote, the Royal Institution of 
Chartered Surveyors reported that large numbers of buyers and sellers had 
withdrawn from the market. Its most recent reportshowed the number of homes on 
estate agents’ books remaining low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/homebuyers-return-but-struggle-to-find-suitable-properties-says-rics-october-survey>
. Figures from HM Revenue & Customs show transactions surging in March before 
higher stamp duty rates were imposed on second homes, but these have now fallen 
to lower than in 2015. In August, for example, 96,720 sales were registered, 
compared with 104,280 a year earlier.

Tom Sharman, head of real estate finance at NatWest, said he expected sales to 
be slow going into 2017 as potential buyers and sellers awaited clarity on the 
EU negotiations. But he added: “High employment, tight supply and a healthy 
mortgage market mean a widespread decline in prices seems unlikely.”

Richard Donnell of property consultancy Hometrack expects transaction numbers 
to fall by more than 8% in some parts of the UK, including London. He said the 
capital had lost its status as property powerhouse over the past year. “There 
has been a noticeable pick-up in large cities such as Birmingham and 
Manchester, where prices are rising well ahead of earnings – at close to the 
national average of 8%,” he said. “The outlook for house-price growth in 2017 
will depend on how much growth is sustained in regional markets, and the scale 
of the slowdown acrossLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.”

Property <https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> firm Knight Frank said 
London and the wider UK market had exceeded expectations since June’s vote, but 
thought economic uncertainty would lead to weaker growth in 2017. Forecasting a 
1% rise in prices across the UK in 2017, and a 1% fall in London, it said 
consumer confidence would be hit when the UK formally served notice to quit the 
EU, which it is set to do within the first three months of next year.

Outside the capital, according to Knight Frank, prices in Wales were expected 
to flatline, while all other regions would see growth, although the biggest 
rise in prices would be of just 2% – in the south-west of England.

Savills, the upmarket estate agency, has predicted that the property market as 
a whole will flatline in 2017, although that headline forecast disguises 
variations around Britain. In the south of England, prices are expected to 
continue to rise, with the east of England seeing the highest growth, of 2.5% 
over the year. London and the East Midlands would be static, it said, but in 
the north of England, Wales andScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> there would be falls.

Unveiling the forecasts earlier this month, Lucian Cook, head of residential 
research at Savills, said Brexit was “complicating a natural shift towards the 
later stages of the housing market cycle, when the strongest growth is seen 
beyond London and the south-east. What is clear is that the housing market does 
not like political and economic uncertainty, and this points to a lower-growth, 
lower-transaction market across the board.”

Prices in London’s most expensive neighbourhoods have been falling since late 
2014, when new stamp duty increased the cost of the most expensive properties. 
The higher stamp duty on second homes knocked buyers’ appetite further, and the 
referendum has led to even more uncertainty. By Knight Frank’s reckoning, 
prices in Notting Hill, Kensington, Chelsea and other parts of what it calls 
prime west London have fallen by 7% this year.

Henry Pryor, a buying agent for wealthy clients, said that since the 
referendum his inbox had been full of emails offering properties at a reduced 
prices. “In 30 years of buying and selling, I have never witnessed such a good 
time to negotiate a great deal,” he said.

Pryor said he expected the slowdown in London would “ripple out along the M4 
and up the M1. It may not reach Norfolk and Shropshire until next summer, but 
the sellers’ market is turning into a buyer’s market.”

Another buying agent, Tracy Kellett, said she had seen an increase in estate 
agents offering sales behind the scenes. “I think this is to test the market, 
without the properties getting stale,” she said. “It’s a strong indication that 
agents don’t know where the market is.”

Kellett said she did not thinkers sellers in prime London were desperate, “but 
those who want to sell are aware that they may not get what they would have 
done two months ago – and will get even less in another two months.”

High-end building firm Berkeley Homes said last week that between May and 
October demand for its upmarket homes in London and the south-east was 20% down 
on the same period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/02/berkeley-group-profits-brexit-buy-to-let>
 in 2015. The firm’s chief executive said the fall in volume was due to higher 
stamp duty – “an extraordinary attack on buy-to-let landlords” – and the 
uncertainty caused by the Brexit vote.

Islay Robinson, of Enness Private Clients, a mortgage broker with offices in 
Mayfair and Hampstead, said 2017 “could be the year in which we call the bottom 
of the market”. There had been a slowdown in the market, he said, particularly 
at the top end, and activity was unlikely to pick up until confidence returned. 
“This is what happened in 2008: after a short period, experts recognised the 
bottom of the market and activity started to return as buyers who were holding 
off began to transact again. Agents are beginning to speak of glimmers of life 
in prime central London, so we hope that in 2017 people will realise that the 
market has no further to fall, and they will be driven to invest in London.”

Robinson said elections in France and Germany in 2017 could have an impact on 
the London market. “We have seen large amounts of French investment in London 
in recent years and could see more in the event of [Marine] Le Pen’s – 
nicknamed ‘Madame Frexit’ – success.”

One thing is certain about the UK housing market: it will go on being vexed by 
events in the EU next year.

HOT PROPERTY

Two private islands, a six-bedroom bungalow and 12.5 acres with majestic views 
of sea and mountains, all for £300,000. With a home like that selling for less 
than a small flat in a grotty part of London, it’s not hard to see how Orkney 
became Britain’s hottest property market in 2016.

House prices <https://www.theguardian.com/money/houseprices> in Orkney rose by 
20.6% in the year to September, according to Land Registry data, faster than 
anywhere else in the country. Its capital Kirkwall (population 9,000), 530 
miles from London (population nearly 9 million) topped the price rise table, 
while the London Borough of Westminster flopped towards the bottom.

At £143,839, the average property price on the islands is still well below the 
UK average of £217,888, never mind Westminster’s £961,686. But your money 
stretches a tad further. Around £200,000 buys a detached period home with beams 
and stone floors, while just £70,000 bags a rustic cottage close to an idyllic 
sandy beach.

Andrew Bonner of estate agent Low attributes the mini-boom to a bounce in 
confidence since the independence referendum in 2014 – plus an influx of 
southerners seeking a life change.

“Before the referendum, people were holding back, maybe nervous about the 
outcome. But once the result was clear, the market recovered. We also have a 
lot of people who have come from south of the border, looking for a change in 
lifestyle.”

He adds that the ONS figures for Orkney should also be taken with a pinch of 
salt, as the number of transactions in any one year is low and the sale of just 
one or two high-price properties can distort the averages. Between 25 and 30 
properties a month usually change hands across the 70 islands that make up 
Orkney, compared with more than 1,000 a month in large local authorities such 
as Birmingham.

How robust the Orkney market is is another question. The downturn in North Sea 
oil– which has hit the city of Aberdeen hard – has had a spillover effect, and 
farmers and fishermen worry about what will happen to subsidies when Britain 
leaves the EU.Patrick Collinson
 