
When I moved in 2015 I took out a HomeServe contract for gas central heating 
breakdown, having used them for many years at my previous home.

They were offering a two-year deal: £72 for the first year and £180 for the 
following year. My boiler and system were only four or five years old.

In the first year I made no claim, but in March 2016, shortly after a service, 
there was a noise from the boiler that occurred randomly and sounded like a 
scream. I asked for a call-out, assuming something was wrong with the boiler, 
and agreed to pay the excess of £95. An engineer looked at the system and said 
the noise was normal. A month later the noise had stopped but the pressure 
started dropping, so I had a second call-out. This was when the engineer 
actually looked at the boiler and determined that the seal had not been 
replaced properly, and put it right.

When I received the renewal documents the cost of the contract had increased 
to £358 a year. HomeServe says the price reflects the “two” call-outs.

Should I go ahead with the renewal? One of my friends said that, in the long 
run, it is cheaper to have a boiler serviced once a year for about £80 and 
repaired on an ad hoc basis.

NL, London

Your friend is absolutely right, and in your shoes I would cancel immediately. 
The quoted £358 is an absurd amount to charge to cover a boiler – especially 
with a £95 excess. Find a local trusted plumber and put the money in a savings 
account and pay for any repairs that come along.

NL noted that his HomeServe policies used to be underwritten by AXA but were 
recently switched to Aviva. Any other readers using the company take note, and 
scrutinise renewal notices carefully. These companies like to quote the monthly 
sum as £29.80 a month doesn’t sound too bad – but £358 a year is ridiculous in 
our opinion.

HomeServe tells us that the increase was “absolutely” not related to the 
call-outs, but that as a gesture of goodwill it would reduce the third year 
price to £257 and refund the original £95 excess fee – which is better but 
still overpriced.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <> or write to Consumer Champions, Money, 
the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 