
House price growth came to a standstill in October, suggesting the housing 
market may have gone off the boil, and fuelling concerns that developers may be 
less willing to build much-needed homes.

The latest figures from Nationwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationwide>, the UK’s largest building 
society, showed that after 15 successive months of increase, prices did not 
move during the month, once seasonal factors were taken into account.

Without seasonal adjustments, the average price of a UK home dropped by £111 
to £205,904. The annual rate of price growth dropped to 4.6% – its lowest level 
since January.

Since the Brexit vote in June, estate agents have reported a slowdown in the 
number of homes coming on to the market. This was initally matched by a fall in 
buyer demand, butrecently there have been signs that this has started to 
increase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/08/confidence-housing-market-house-prices-rising-brexit-vote-rics-surveyors>
.



Cut stamp duty to revive housing market, says estate agency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/11/cut-stamp-duty-revive-housing-market-estate-agents-property-prices-haart>
However, despite mortgage rates being at a record low, high house prices are 
curbing affordability. Nationwide’s chief economist, Robert Gardner, said 
though house price growth had been stable over the past 18 months at about 5%, 
this was “well in excess of average wage growth”.

Over the past three years house prices have increased by about 20% and wages 
have risen by about 6%, he said. As a result, the typical house costs six times 
average earnings, up from 5.3 times earnings in 2013.

“Even though mortgage interest rates are close to all-time lows, the cost of 
servicing the typical mortgage as a share of take home pay is above its 2007 
peak in London and above its long-run average in the outer metropolitan and 
outer south-east regions,” he said.


Hansen Lu, a property economist at Capital Economics, said there were signs 
the housing market was stabilising after the introduction of the higher rate of 
stamp duty on second homes and uncertainty after the referendum.


“A gentle recovery in demand, combined with the tight supply of homes for 
sale, might provide some support to prices,” he said. “But set against that, 
house prices are still very high compared to past norms. What’s more, the 
slowdown in real earnings growth, driven by rising inflation, may also act as a 
gentle brake on prices.”

On Tuesday, the property firm JLL said it expected house prices to rise by 
just 0.5% in 2017. It warned that uncertainty over the terms of Brexit would be 
likely to result in slower delivery of new homes, despite policies designed to 
encourage development.

Neil Chegwidden, director of residential research at JLL, said: “Though levels 
of new housing delivery were still woefully low prior to the referendum at 
least the direction of travel was positive and encouraging. This will now fall 
back again. We are predicting England starts to drop to 134,000 units next 
year.”

The housebuilder Persimmon said trading had been “encouraging” since the 
referendum and activity had risen in autumn, in line with traditional seasonal 
trends. Sales were up 19% on 2015, and Persimmon said it had secured £757m 
worth of forward sales beyond 2016, 4% higher than the same period last year.

However, the housebuilder said uncertainty after the Brexit vote had made it 
cautious about purchasing new land. “We will probably replace the land that 
we’ve utilised this year … so not quite as strong as we’ve done in the last few 
years, where we’ve been replacing at 150-200%,”the chief executive, Jeff 
Fairburn, told Reuters 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-eu-persimmon-idUKKBN12X0MK>.

IHS Markit’s latest survey of purchasing managers in the construction industry 
showed that activity rose in October, driven by housebuilding. However, growth 
in new orders fell, and the proportion of firms expecting activity to increase 
over the next 12 months dropped to its second lowest level since May 2013.

At the top end of the housing market, there has been a sharp fall in activity, 
with Brexit uncertainty combining with changes to stamp duty to deter buyers in 
the most expensive parts of the country.

Strutt & Parker estate agency said the number of sales of homes in prime 
central London had almost halved in the third quarter of the year compared with 
the same period of 2015. It said between July and September just 384 properties 
had changed hands in the capital’s most expensive neighbourhoods, down from 720 
a year earlier.


Charlie Willis, head of London residential at Strutt & Parker, said the low 
number of transactions was “indicative of a market where only properties at 
realistic prices with motivated sellers are completing”. He said sales were 
happening “where sellers have been realistic and adjusted asking prices 
according to market sentiment”.
 