
It started with a call from someone pretending to be from the bank, and ended 
with a retired headmaster losing everything.

Peter and Sarah Holmes, both in their 80s and from Yorkshire, have become the 
latest victims of one of the fastest growing and most pernicious scams – which 
has cost them their life savings of £134,000.

The fraudsters called them, posing as investigators from TSB, telling them 
that they were carrying out a probe into staff at their local TSB branch, and 
that they needed their help to catch them. Over several weeks the scammers 
managed to convince the couple to make a series of payments into accounts in 
their names and those of other family members – but in fact were into current 
accounts atBarclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> bank 
branches dotted around the country.

Banking scams push up UK financial fraud 'by more than 25%'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/17/banking-scams-uk-financial-fraud>
All along, the fraudsters insisted that the couple tell no one – including any 
family members.

Their case should send a shiver down the spine of those with elderly parents 
or other trusting relatives. Last week, the Office for National Statistics said 
there were a staggering 5.8m incidents of cybercrime in the UK in the past year 
– and that one in 10 adults had lost money as a result.

Police are so concerned that cyber-fraudsters are running so out of control 
that they have called for a public awareness campaign to be launched, similar 
to that introduced in the 1970s and 80s to combat drink driving.

The Holmes’s children, who have since been trying to make sense of what 
happened, claim – like other previous victims – that they have been let down by 
a banking system that makes it easy for fraudsters to move money around with 
apparent impunity.

Both TSB <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tsb> and Barclays have absolved 
themselves of any blame, while calling into question the behaviour of the 
other. Only after Guardian Money investigated their case did it emerge that 
£65,000 of their money may be reclaimable, but nothing had been done to restore 
it to the rightful owner.

Banks must do more to end the scourge of current account fraud
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/13/banks-current-account-fraud> 
The Holmes’s nightmare started on a Sunday afternoon in April when Peter took 
a call from a man with a strong Scottish accent who said he was calling from 
his bank to ask whether he a had made a series of unusual purchases that day. 
Peter said he hadn’t, and he was told that bank staff at his local TSB would 
investigate and be in touch.

The next day he was called back by the same man, who said there was a police 
investigation involving both staff at TSB and the firm of financial advisers 
that the couple had used for years. A former employee of the adviser firm was 
now employed in the bank, the fraudster said, and it was he whom the police 
were trying to catch.

To give the scam credibility, fraudsters twice moved several large sums into 
the Holmes’s current account, claiming that they had come from an elderly woman 
with dementia – money that it is now thought came from another victim of the 
same gang. The couple were told repeatedly that utter secrecy was required to 
help catch the criminals.

Eventually, Holmes was persuaded to visit his local branch, where he proceeded 
to move £47,000 to an account in his name – but which was in reality a Barclays 
account in Slough.

TSB has told Money that the cashier repeatedly asked why he was moving the 
money and warned him that others had been scammed by similar tales, but he was 
stonewalled, as Holmes stuck to the line that the cashier might have been the 
suspect – and said “no comment”.

TSB said the cashier was so concerned that this was a possible fraud that he 
rang the Slough branch of Barclays to raise his fears. However, despite the 
call, nothing was done to halt the fraud.

In subsequent weeks, Holmes was persuaded by the fraudsters to sign up for 
online banking for the first time. In the end he was instructed to move a total 
of at least £187,000 from his account and possibly more, as the details are 
still emerging. This sum was likely to have included many thousands paid into 
the Holmes’s account by other victims of the same gang. The fraudsters even 
managed to take out a £2,000 overdraft on his account, which they also stole.

In June, the couple then took a call from the Metropolitan police, which 
revealed that whole thing had been a scam. North Yorkshire police have 
confirmed that an investigation is under way, and that the couple are one of a 
number who have been caught in a hugely complex and highly sophisticated scam.

The couple’s daughter, Amy, says the effect on the whole family has been 
devastating; she is surprised that the arrival of large sums of money into the 
account didn’t trigger some kind of inquiry.

“We feel incredibly let down by TSB. My parents have held an account there for 
many years and the balance has typically been around £3,000 in credit, and 
transactions have been limited to normal household and family expenditure. But 
in the five weeks during which the fraud was conducted the balance increased to 
a maximum of £47,000 and thousands of pounds were washed through the account.

“Why did this not ring alarm bells at TSB? It appears that the bank has a very 
high level of fraud protection in place where the money at risk is its own, 
but, on the basis of this incident, little or nothing in place to protect money 
that belongs to its customers. It has been devastating for my parents, and they 
have had little or no help in dealing with the fallout,” she says.

Both the banks in the this case have denied that they should have spotted the 
unusual transactions. It remains unclear why, when the TSB cashier spotted that 
Holmes was being defrauded, and called the Barclays’ Slough branch, nothing was 
done.

Barclays has questioned what the bank would have been able to do, given the 
constraints of the data protection act, and asks why he didn’t raise it with 
the TSB fraud department. For its part, TSB has said there was little the bank 
could do given Holmes’s insistence that he wanted to move his money.

Following the Guardian’s intervention, Barclays has at least found £65,657 
that was sent by Holmes, which is being sent back to TSB for distribution.

Barclays told Money that “appropriate documentation” was presented when the 
“receiving” accounts were opened, and that “Barclays had no way of knowing that 
the accounts would be used for fraudulent purposes”. All its regulatory 
requirements had been met throughout, and the accounts had now been closed.

TSB said: “The cashier tried to prevent him from losing his money but he 
continued to issue instructions to proceed and we were obliged to follow his 
instructions. Fraudsters are becoming increasingly sophisticated in the ways in 
which they scam people out of their money. TSB takes this issue very seriously.”

Peter and Sarah Holmes are not their real names.
 