
What makes 2016 a disaster for Democrats is not merely the party’s epic 
wipeout in Washington and the state capitals, but that the contest was fought 
out on a terrain that should have been favorable to them. This was an election 
about social class –about class-based grievances – and yet the Party of the 
People blew it. How that happened is the question of the year, just as it has 
been the question of other disastrous election years before. And just like 
before, I suspect theDemocrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> 
will find all manner of convenient reasons to take no corrective action.

But first let us focus on the good news. Donald Trump has smashed the 
consensus factions of both parties. Along the way, he has destroyed the core 
doctrine of Clintonism: that all elections are decided by money and that 
therefore Democrats must match Republican fundraising dollar for dollar. This 
is the doctrine on which progressive hopes have been sacrificed for decades, 
and now it is dead. Clinton outspent Trump two-to-one and it still wasn’t 
enough.

Neither were any of the other patented maneuvers of Clintonism. With Hillary 
carrying their banner, the Democrats triangulated themselves in every way 
imaginable. They partied with the Wall Street guys during the convention in 
Philadelphia, they got cozy with the national security set, they reached out to 
disaffected Republicans, they reminisced about the days of the balanced federal 
budget, they evenencouraged  
<http://thehill.com/policy/technology/286994-uber-to-partner-with-dnc-unable-to-reach-deal-with-rnc>
Democratic delegates to take Ubers back and forth from the convention to show 
how strongly Democrats approved of what Silicon Valley was doing to America. 
And still they lost.

This is important because winning is supposed to be the raison d’etre of 
centrism. Over the years, the centrists have betrayed the Democratic party’s 
liberal base in all sorts of ways – deregulating banks, securing free trade 
deals, signing off on Wall Street bailouts and the Iraq war. Those who bridled 
at all this were instructed to sit down and shut up because the Clintons and 
their triangulating ilk were the practical ones who would bring us victory.

Except that they don’t. This year the Republicans chose an honest-to-god scary 
candidate, a man who really ought to have been kept out of the White House, and 
the party’s centrists choked. Instead of winning, the pragmatists delivered 
Democrats to the worst situation they’ve been in for many decades, with control 
of no branch of the federal government and only a handful of state 
legislatures. Over the years, and at the behest of this faction, Democrats gave 
up what they stood for piece by piece and what they have to show for it now is 
nothing.

Another shibboleth that went down with the Hillary Titanic is the myth of the 
moderate swing voter, the sensible suburbanite who stands somewhere between the 
two parties and whose views determine all elections. These swing voters are 
usually supposed to be liberal on social issues and conservative on economic 
ones, and their existence gives a kind ofpseudoscientific 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Median_voter_theorem> imprimatur to Democratic 
centrism.

The TPP wasn't killed by Donald Trump – our protests worked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/tpp-protests-mass-opposition-worked-trump-presidency>
For years people have pointed out 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2000/06/americas-forgotten-majority/378242/>
 that this tidy geometry doesn’t really make sense, and today it is undeniable: 
the real swing voters are the working people who over the years have switched 
their loyalty from the Democrats to Trump’s Republicans. Their views are pretty 
much the reverse of the standard model. On certain matters they are open to 
conservative blandishments; on economic issues, however, they are pretty far to 
the left. They don’tadmire free trade or balanced budgets or entitlement reform 
– the signature issues of centrism – they hate those things. And if Democrats 
want to reach them, they will have to turn away from the so-called center and 
back to the economic left.

There are some indications that Democrats have finally understood this. 
Elizabeth Warren’s star is on the rise. Bernie Sanders is touring the country 
and reminding people that class politics are back whether we like it or not.
Keith Ellison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/keith-ellison-democratic-national-committee-chair-candidacy>
 is running for chairman of the Democratic National Committee.

•••

But the media and political establishments, I suspect, will have none of it. 
They may hate Donald Trump, but they hate economic populism much more. If 
history is a guide, they will embrace any sophistry to ensure that the 
Democrats do not take the steps required to broaden their appeal to 
working-class voters. They will remind everyone that Clinton didn’t really 
lose. Alternately, they will blame Sanders for her loss. They will decide that 
working-class people cannot be reasoned with and so it is pointless to try. 
They will declare – are already declaring – that any Democratic effort to win 
over working-class voters is a capitulation to racism. Better to lose future 
elections than to compete for the votes of those who spurned their beloved 
Clinton.

Trump changed everything. Now everything counts | Barbara Kingsolver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/trump-changed-everything-now-everything-counts>
I suspect this will happen because this has been happening for decades; 
because Democratsalways find a reason to put off doing what they need to do to 
win back the white working class. The example that springs immediately to mind 
is the election of 2004, when the Bush-Rove team used a variety of ingenious 
culture-war offensives to beat a different centrist Democrat. For several 
months after that debacle, Democrats contorted themselves in self-examination. 
They wondered about what had happened with the white working class, how they 
had managed to lose so many of those voters, and so on. It was especially 
memorable for me becausemy book <http://whatsthematterwithkansas.com/> about 
blue-collar conservatism in Kansas was often part of the conversation.

But before very long, the self-examination ceased. Democrats were reassured by 
their friends in political science that theyreally had no problem with the 
working class 
<http://www.dailyprincetonian.com/article/2005/10/bartels-attacks-book-on-red-states>
 and that they needn’t be concerned. With a fewstatistical sleights of hand 
<http://www.tcfrank.com/media/TCFRANK_Class_Dismissed_2005.pdf> and enormous 
heaps of professional contempt for the laity 
<http://andrewgelman.com/2012/06/08/stop-me-before-i-aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa/>
, academics helped to shut down that debate.

And here we are again. Today Democrats are wondering what went wrong, but 
before too many fundraising dinners have been digested they will have concluded 
they don’t need to worry, that demographics will bail them out sooner or later, 
and that the right and noble course of action is to proceed as before.

This will happen because what leading liberals cannot understand – what they 
are psychologically blocked from understanding – is that the problem isn’t 
really the white working class. The problem is them.

Let me explain what I mean by reminding you what this form of liberalism looks 
like. Somewhere in a sunny corner of the country, either right now or very 
shortly, a group of tech tycoons or well-meaning private equity investors will 
meet to discuss what went wrong in this election cycle. They will consider many 
things: the sexism and racism of Trump voters, the fundamental foreignness of 
the flyover, the problems one encounters when dealing with evangelicals. They 
will celebrate some activist they learned about from NPR, they will enjoy some 
certified artisanal cuisine, they will hand out prizes to the same people that 
got prizes at the last event they attended, and they will go back to their 
comfortable rooms at the resort and sleep ever so soundly.

These people think they know what liberalism includes and what it doesn’t 
include. And in the latter category fall the concerns that made up the heart 
and soul of liberal politics a few decades ago: labor and work and exploitation 
and economic equality.

To dedicate your life to concerns like these today is to sign up for obscurity 
and frustration. It’s to enter a world without foundation grants, without 
appearances on MSNBC, and without much job security. Nothing about this sphere 
of liberal activism is fashionable or attractive. Books on its subjects go 
unreviewed and unread. Strikes drag on for weeks before they are noticed by the 
national media. Labor organizers are some of the hardest-working but 
least-thanked people I know. Labor reporters are just about extinct. Promises 
to labor unions are voided almost as soon as they leave a politician’s lips.

If rich liberals had listened to such people, Donald Trump might not have been 
able to lure away so many millions of working-class voters. Maybe they will 
change their ways now? Perhaps the well-meaning folks at those Florida resorts 
will finally close ranks with working people and their representatives?

Put the question slightly differently: will the Washington Post or the New 
York Times take the sad fate of Democratic centrism as a signal to bring a 
whole new vision to their op-ed pages? Will NPR finally say to its cast of 
well-graduated tastemakers: you missed it just one time too many? Will the 
thinktanks and pressure groups of Washington finally be told by their donors: 
we’re shifting your grant money to people who care about deindustrialization?

I doubt it. Liberalism today is an expression of an enlightened professional 
class, and their core economic interests simply do not align with those of 
working people. One thing we know about professionalism is that it exists to 
shield insiders from public accountability. If coming up with a solution to 
what ails liberalism means listening to people who aren’t part of the existing 
nonprofit/journalistic in-group, then there will be no solution. Liberals would 
rather lose than do that.

If the unreconstructed Democratic party is to be saved, I suspect, what will 
save it is what always saves it: the colossal incompetence of the Republicans. 
This, too, we can already see coming down the rails. Donald Trump is getting 
the wrecking crew back together, and before too long, I suspect, he will have 
the country pining for Hillary Clinton.
 