
Before Christmas I took a young relative to a jazz concert. The thought of it 
ruined his whole day. He scuffed around the house like an alt-right voter at a 
refugee camp.

In the event, even he acknowledged that we had a fine time. But neither of us 
would ever get back the dreadful hours that preceded it. He’d fallen prey to a 
cardinal paradox – poisoning the present by agonising over a future hardship 
that never materialised.

I, narcissist – vanity, social media, and the human condition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/i-narcissist-vanity-social-media-and-the-human-condition>
We’ve all done that. The homo sapiens is so damn clever, and yet sometimes so 
stupid with it. We are the only species that can really think “offline” – 
wrapped up in things that haven’t yet happened or things that are long gone but 
can never be changed. This makes us excellent problem solvers, but appalling 
worriers at the same time.

Thinking is what gave humans ascendancy. But overthinking is threatening to 
bring us down. Critical thinking has undoubtedly advanced our cause and become 
one of the essential assets of being so brilliantly human, but introspective 
thinking – our near constant self-evaluation, who we are, where we fit, how we 
compare – is becoming one of the most destructive aspects of modern life. We 
must purge it.

We are in thrall to the rigid, judgmental thoughts we think about ourselves, 
prisoners of the sinewy web of cogitation that tells us we are strong, clever, 
important, unassertive, patriotic, hopeless, old, fat, hard done by, forgotten 
– when actually we may be many of these things rolled into one. This narrow 
view of ourselves shapes impossible expectations that can only lead to 
disappointment. It ripples outwards into our emotions and our behaviour. The 
results are to be seen daily on our front pages. A father thinks he is the 
ultimate authority in his family. When his daughter challenges him,he has her 
killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/samia-shahid-father-alleged-hoped-to-use-blood-money-laws-to-get-away-with>
. A young man thinks he is strong, identifies through his supposed manliness; it
directs his violent behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/30/jazzie-watson-jailed-life-killing-younger-brother-shamus-mcnama>
.

Our obsessive thinking about ourselves even informs the air of political 
revolt that made 2016 such a big turning point. In the richest, healthiest, 
most prosperous era we have ever known, people punish themselves by ruminating 
and finding that their lives don’t match up to those they think others are 
leading. It’s a short step from disappointment to blame, and a protest vote.

Too much of our behaviour is determined not by how things are, but how we 
think things are

But this overthinking tendency is not limited to politics. It embeds personal 
misery 
<https://medium.com/@vincentmccarty/destroying-yourself-psychologically-e43f3d76dcc0#.pjolj05et>
 in an era in which we are tempted, even encouraged, to compare ourselves with 
other people: theteenager who feels low because of what her Instagram feed 
makes her think 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/i-narcissist-vanity-social-media-and-the-human-condition>
; the thwarted youngster, demoralised by the success of others; the employee 
who feels insecure because she thinks the boss blanked her on the stairwell; 
the hypochondriac who thinks he is dying of everything. Think bad, feel bad. 
Compare and despair. It’s no wonder there is amental illness epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/young-women-ptsd-mental-health>
 out there. Time to wake up, people. The voice in your head is not who you are. 
It’s just an excitable commentator. You are the game.

Too much of our behaviour is determined not by how things are, but how we 
think things are. But this thinking is not worth paying too much attention to, 
for two reasons. First, it is probably incorrect. Let’s face it: we are hardly 
objective in evaluating ourselves. We overexaggerate both our talents and 
failings. This is the original fake news.

And second, whether right or wrong, these self-evaluations simply are not 
helpful. They just make us feel worse.

We need a completely new relationship with our thoughts. Instead of viewing 
the world and our experience as we think they ought to be, we need to treat 
them as they actually are. We need to recognise when we are ruining a day, a 
week, a moment or a relationship with catastrophic thoughts and judgments, and 
understand that often it is the thought itself that makes us feel bad, not the 
experience itself.

But how to cultivate that sense of detachment from a poisonous, unhelpful or 
just plain wrong stream of thinking? Visual clues can help: a post-it on a 
computer screen (mine just says “thinking …”) or a screensaver on a phone. I 
wear a black wristband to remind me why I do this. A discreet tattoo might do 
the same, if that’s your thing.

This is modern Britain – no wonder young women have PTSD | Rhiannon Lucy 
Cosslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/young-women-ptsd-mental-health>
Habit is even better: get used to observing, say, the first three thoughts you 
have upon waking every day – were they functional, workaday, banal; or were 
they judgmental, apprehensive, punishing? Some people like to use motifs – 
thoughts as a torrent of traffic, cars driving past, and you don’t have to get 
in the passenger seat. And that same recurring, corrosive notion can be an ugly 
polluting SUV that comes, stays and moves on again, without really affecting 
you. Or else thoughts are a busy stream, chattering away in front of you, often 
pulling you under. But each time you are submerged, eventually you notice and 
pull yourself out and sit undisturbed, again and again until it starts to 
become habit to notice the thought rather than believe it.

Happily, some schools are starting to teach this important element of 
psychological flexibility. It should be compulsory in secondary schools.The 
myriad apps that teach the practice of being present in the now are another 
entry point, helping us cultivate our observing selves, rather than our 
thinking selves.

Instead of obsessing, fuming, curdling about things we don’t have, we need to 
accept and celebrate what we do. Instead of worrying about things we can’t 
control – people’s opinion of us, for example – we need to direct our 
attentions to things we can influence, and leave the rest be. Instead of 
judging each other, and – worse – ourselves, let us simply take as we find. 
Instead of ruining our short time alive by setting expectations of how we think 
everything should be, from our jobs to our love lives, our children to our 
prospects, let us accept that some things will not always go as we wish.

You’re not who you think you are. You’re so much more than that.
 