
You’ve got a mountain of books, you’ve watched every episode of Silk and 
you’ve already started thinking about what sharp suits to wear once you’ve 
qualified as a lawyer. Law school has begun and you’re a bright-eyed, 
bushy-tailed future legal hotshot – with months and even years of hard graft in 
front of you.

Despite your (totally justified) excitement about your career, it’s easy to 
feel daunted in the first month or two of law school. That’s understandable – 
but there’s no need to panic. Try the following techniques to make a success 
out of your studies from day one:

Keep networking 

You’ll be super busy with work as soon as term begins, but don’t neglect the 
social life that law school offers you. Joshua Sanderson-Kirk studied the 
graduate diploma in law (GDL) at the University of Law in Manchester. He says 
that making buddies is just as important as hitting the books – so if you’re 
only on your course for a year or two, you need to start socialising quick 
smart. He says: “Be prepared to work hard but make sure you find time to 
socialise. In law, it’s all about networking.”

Apply your studies

Aspiring lawyers need to place their studies in a practical context from the 
start. This is especially important for GDL and legal practice course (LPC) 
students working towards their first job in law. Make the first few months of 
your course really count by thinking like a lawyer – not just a student – and 
you’ll take your work to the next level. Amelia Hayden studied the LPC at the 
University of Law in Manchester and advises: “From day one, focus on the 
procedure you need to go through to find the answer for your ‘client’ rather 
than the different legal arguments surrounding your client’s problem.”

Make time for outside interests

Among the piles of reading and assessments, you could lose sight of anything 
going on outside of your studies. Now’s not the time to give up your hobbies, 
though. It doesn’t matter whether it’s doing your favourite sport, volunteering 
for a local charity or appearing on TV quiz shows like the University of Law 
alumnus and University Challenge supremo Ted Loveday. Keep something going 
outside of your course that relaxes and refreshes you. It will also give you 
something interesting to talk about in job interviews.

Talk regularly with your tutors

No matter how well you’re doing, there will be times at law school, especially 
in the first few months, when you’ll need a little help. Here’s something 
important to remember: your tutors want you to succeed. If you’re feeling stuck 
or confused and you need pointing in the right direction, your tutors will be 
only too happy to set you on the right course. Don’t be shy or embarrassed to 
ask for assistance, whether it’s about a point of law, study techniques or how 
best to tackle that mountain of reading.

Think about careers advice

It’s never too early to start using your law school’s career service. Your 
careers service can help you to find out what firms are looking for, what areas 
of law might interest you, and how best to fill out vac scheme, training 
contact, and job application forms. Start early, and reap the rewards, says 
John Watkins, Director of Employability at the University of Law. He says: 
“Using professional support is so important that at the University of Law our 
employability service offers career development days to all of our 
undergraduates within the first two weeks of their arrival on the course. The 
emphasis is around the importance of starting to plan your career early and 
focuses on enhancing vital workplace skills such as managing stakeholders and 
networking, all introduced in an innovative, supportive and engaging manner.”
 