
When their father, Geoff, was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes at the age of 50, 
brothers Ian and Anthony Whitington were not hugely surprised, and for 10 
years, they drifted along and watched from the sidelines.

“Dad had always been the ‘big man’,” says Anthony, 39. “As kids, we thought it 
was funny. Dad could drink more than anyone, he could eat more than anyone. It 
was his identity. That’s our dad and that’s what he does.”

“As we got older, of course we worried,” adds Ian, 37. “But everyone around us 
would say, ‘If he doesn’t want to change, you can’t change him. He has to do it 
himself.’” So nothing much was done – and Geoff joined the 3.5m adults in the 
UK who manage their diabetes with ever-greater doses of medication and regular 
check-ups.

“We were all resigned to our family roles,” says Anthony. “I was a busy 
financial adviser with four kids of my own. Ian was a busy cameraman with jobs 
all over the world. Dad was a funny fat guy who drank too much.”

The wake-up calls were different for both of them. For Anthony, it was a 
family trip to Chessington zoo in 2013. By then, Geoff weighed 127kg (20 
stone), had high blood pressure, atrial fibrillation (abnormal heart rhythm), 
plus everything diabetes could throw at him – a swollen prostate, poor 
circulation, ulcers on one foot and a bone deformity on the other.

“We were walking around this theme park when the bones collapsed through his 
foot,” says Anthony. “I remember him grabbing a railing, the blood in his sock, 
getting him back to the car. Suddenly, this thing that the doctor was managing 
was very clearly something that wasn’t being managed. Dad was seeing people at 
the foot clinic who had had a limb removed – and the average lifespan after 
amputation for a diabetic is two years. We were losing him.”

When Anthony called his brother to say time was running out, Ian needed no 
convincing.

“The rock bottom for me had been my wedding,” says Ian. “Dad stayed up longer 
than everyone else – he was always the last one in the room, sitting there with 
a bottle of brandy. I remember looking at him and it was just horrendous. He 
was crumpled. He couldn’t get up and dance because of his feet, but he was 
quite emotional. He said something along the lines of: ‘I’ve done my job. 
You’re my greatest achievement.’ It was as if that was it. He didn’t need to 
exist any more.”

In 2014, when Geoff was 62, his sons stepped in with their own special 
intervention that included a complete lifestyle overhaul, multiple health 
consultations, family holidays and heart-to-hearts, pacts, promises and pretty 
much constant rows. Two years later and 45kg (seven stone) lighter, Geoff raced 
through a 100-mile cycle ride from London to Surrey. He has now been taken off 
all his diabetes medication as well as his blood pressure pills. He says his 
sons saved his life – and it’s no exaggeration.

As a professional cameraman, Ian filmed most of the journey, and their 
documentary,Fixing Dad <http://www.fixingdad.com/watch-the-film>, aired on BBC2 
last summer. Anthony’s wife, Jen, a fitness trainer, co-produced the film. 
There’s alsoan app for those wishing to do the same 
<http://www.fixingdad.com/fix-a-loved-one>, and a book, written by Jen, that 
includes a meal and exercise programme, plus advice on the mental leaps needed 
to fix a stubborn family member. The “fixing” terminology couldn’t be more apt 
for a man like Geoff – who has spent most of his life fixing things for others.

“Everyone described Dad as ‘generous to a fault’,” says Anthony. “He’d pay the 
parking fines of complete strangers. As kids, we saw him stop the car in the 
street to chase after muggers. I remember when my wife, Jen, was having a bad 
day after our first child was born. I was at work so she phoned my dad. We were 
living in Surrey at the time and Dad said: ‘I’ll come over now. Is there 
anything you need?’ It turned out he was 100 miles away, but he told Jen he was 
just down the road.”

“We owed Dad a lot,” Ian agrees. The boys had grown up in Bromley and their 
parents divorced when they were eight and 10 years old. “It changed the dynamic 
massively. We were with Mum in the week and Dad at the weekend – and we got 
into this pattern of Dad not being able to do enough for us. We didn’t miss 
holidays that richer kids were going on because Dad put it on a credit card. If 
we wanted to do something, he let us. He was spoiling us, really, and by the 
time we were adults, his debts were so bad, he was a BT engineer in the day and 
working nights on the Underground and as a security guard. We felt a lot of 
guilt about that.”

So why was Geoff so good at looking after others, but hopeless looking after 
himself? Perhaps, with busy, grown children, he felt a bit redundant. “I think 
I’d reached the point in my life where my children were happy, they had their 
jobs, they were OK. I’d worked all my life, I’d done my job and I wasn’t 
needed,” says Geoff, who has been married to Marilyn, the boy’s stepmother, for 
20 years.

“My wife was going to be the one to suffer if anything did happen to me, but I 
suppose I didn’t give it much thought. My life involved working very long 
hours, which meant a lot of driving around, and a lot of stopping and eating.” 
(His sons claim Geoff couldn’t pass a McDonald’s without pulling in, and there 
was always a can of Coke rolling round the floor of his van.)

So what made him agree to this project? Was it to save himself or to please 
his sons? “I suppose a little bit of both,” he says. “I certainly didn’t think 
it could help or change anything – I didn’t know anyone who had reversed 
diabetes. As far as the filming part was concerned, I ignored it, as that was 
never going to make it on to the TV. It was another of their little projects 
that was never going to go anywhere! But they asked me to go along with it for 
a period of time, like a contract, and I agreed.”

They kicked off with a roadtrip to the Pyrenees. “Dad’s surroundings weren’t 
helping him, so we wanted to get him away from his takeaways, his TV dinners 
and fridge full of cellophane,” says Anthony. “The old, fun Dad was 
disappearing, and we wanted to find that sense of adventure. We got him 
cooking, cycling, tombstoning. I’m not sure jumping into ice-cold water in the 
Pyrenees in February is the best thing for someone with atrial fibrillation, 
but I’ve never seen him as elated as when he got out of that plunge pool.”

While they were away, they talked about Geoff’s mother – a shop worker who 
would do anything for anyone, and who died from septicemia at 69, when her 
stomach ulcers went undetected.

“It needn’t have happened and that upsets me more than anything else. I didn’t 
want my sons to feel like that about me,” says Geoff. On the last night, they 
went through photo albums and looked at old family pictures, as well as 
pictures of his grandchildren. “We said: ‘This is all about your family, who 
don’t want you to be dead in two years,’” says Anthony. “We made a pact and Dad 
promised to commit to this – we made him swear on the only book he has ever 
read – Shadow the Sheepdog.”

Back in the UK, the brothers dug out Geoff’s bike and got him back on it – at 
first with Anthony running behind pushing him up the hills. “After just three 
weeks, he was at his foot clinic and they said, ‘My God, we’re not having to 
scrape the ulcers as much. The bloodflow is there – what have you been 
doing?’,” says Anthony. “That gave Dad hope. It kept him going.”

Discovering a very low-calorie diet that was having some success in reversing 
diabetes 
<https://www.diabetes.org.uk/Research/Research-round-up/Research-spotlight/Research-spotlight-low-calorie-liquid-diet/>
 was another breakthrough. The Diabetes UK-funded study by Professor Roy Taylor 
at Newcastle University put patients on an eight-weeks 800 calories per day 
diet. This was followed by a long-term, low-carb regime, as close monitoring of 
Geoff’s blood sugar levels showed that carbs were causing significant spikes.

It wasn’t easy. There were a lot of rows. “We were turning our relationship on 
its head and it got to the part where we were very obviously being the parents 
and Dad resisted that,” says Anthony.

“It almost felt like bullying at times, with both of them firing at me 
together,” agrees Geoff. A typical example is early on when the two were coming 
to Geoff’s so he bought a Chinese takeaway. “It was a treat and I’d tried to 
pick foods that were ‘compliant’,” says Geoff.

“But he’d bought enough for 20 people,” says Ian. “The whole table was covered 
and so we had a go at him. He wouldn’t talk to us for two days!”

This, says Ian, is why families are in a stronger position than health 
professionals. “The way you eat is incredibly emotional and if you criticise 
somebody around food, you can upset them very quickly. You need to get over 
that a bit. Families can cross the line and go where professionals are never 
going to be able to go. We could say things that a doctor could never dream of 
saying. You can’t be nicey-nicey all the time. You’ve got to challenge each 
other. Something we’d say to anybody is don’t be afraid of that conflict.”

When we meet, they are still bickering over a toffee bonbon that Geoff had 
eaten the previous day while babysitting for Ava, Anthony’s seven-year-old 
daughter. (Ava had a bag full of them.) Ava promptly told her dad. A series of 
angry messages were exchanged, with Geoff telling Anthony to find another 
babysitter. (“He’s not the finished article,” sighs Anthony. “But he’s in 
reverse gear.”)

Despite the odd slip, everyone appears to be glowing with good health. Anthony 
and Ian also lost 32kg (five stone) between them – they didn’t ask Geoff to do 
anything they couldn’t do themselves – while Marilyn has lost 19kg (three 
stone). The couple cycle together, cook together, and they have ditched the 
takeaways and TV dinners. “We sit at the table and eat now and we talk about 
food,” says Geoff. “We really enjoy it.”

With the new book out, the father-and-son team are about to mentor four new 
families through a similar health overhaul, and are travelling the world as 
speakers at medical conferences. Anthony has resigned from his career in 
finance and Geoff has been able to say goodbye to his punishing night shifts.

And in between this, Geoff is back fixing things again. “I just renovated 
Ian’s shed, rebuilt the roof and I did Anthony’s garage, too. I’ve put shelves 
up for him. Before all this, I couldn’t have got on a ladder. It has been the 
best three years of my life – and I just feel terrific.”

• Fixing Dad by Jen Whitington (Short Books), £8.99. To order a copy for 
£7.64, go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fixing-dad.html> or call the Guardian 
Bookshop on 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone 
orders min. p&p of £1.99.

fixingdad.com <http://www.fixingdad.com/> 
 