
Name: Vishing.

Age: Sorry, I’m not going to tell you that.

Why not? It’s none of your business.

Oh, come on: Far too dangerous to bandy personal info about these days.

Appearance: Increasingly common.

What is? Look, I know your game. You’re not getting anything out of me.

But we do this every day. Yes, but I don’t feel I can trust you any more.

Why not? There has been a surge in “vishing” scams.

Vishing? Voice phishing, apparently – all these terms are ridiculous. Crooks 
purporting to be from the police or your bank call you to tell you there has 
been fraudulent activity in your account, and give you a phone number to ring. 
You ring and an automated message asks you for …

Let me guess – bank details, pin, password. Indeed, everything fraudsters need 
to dip into your account. Some victims have transferred money into bogus 
accounts set up by fraudsters.

Who is being targeted? It’s often the elderly and the vulnerable. According to 
recent reports, Tunbridge Wells is a particular favourite 
<http://www.courier.co.uk/Victims-Tunbridge-Wells-bank-telephone-scam-lose/story-24585082-detail/story.html>
. Four people there have been defrauded by a man using the name Stephen 
Montgomery and claiming to be from their bank’s fraud department –a retired 
bank manager fell for the scam last November 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/uk/crime/article4327216.ece>.

Is vishing a new problem? It was largely unknown before 2013, but the 
financial services ombudsman has had more than 200 complaints since then, 
possibly because banks are taking a harder line on reimbursement if the victim 
is deemed to be in some way culpable. Some people have lost their life savings 
to fraudsters.

How do they fall for it? The vishers are very clever. They sometimes tell you 
to call your bank on what looks like its usual number, but leave the line open 
and intercept the call, so all the information you think you’re giving to your 
bank is actually going to the fraudster.

Thanks for the warning. No problem. What did you say your name was?

Montgomery. Bye. Hello … hello?

Not to be confused with: Phishing (obtaining sensitive information via dodgy 
emails); smishing (dodgy texts); pharming (dodgy websites); old-fashioned 
banking where you knew your bank manager and they knew you.

Do say: “I’m calling the police. The real police.”

Don’t say: Anything else.
 