
In the Campbell household, Saturdays are David Lloyd days. We look forward to 
it all week and it has been our weekend routine for four years. And we can 
pretty much guarantee that all the other families we’ve become friends with 
over those years will be doing exactly the same – hanging out or swimming the 
lanes in the pool while all our kids of varying ages do their All Stars 
swimming lessons.

The solution for keeping kids entertained was on my doorstep
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/david-lloyd-clubs/2016/sep/21/the-solution-for-keeping-kids-entertained-was-on-my-doorstep>
The pool at our local David Lloyd Club on a Saturday morning is a hive of 
activity. Evie and Isla have been bobbing around in that pool since Evie 
started her lessons at age three. Three years on she is at stage four and Isla 
is snapping at her heels in a stage-three class. When they have their classes 
simultaneously I can power up and down the lane beside their lessons to notch 
up a few lengths, stopping every so often to see my girls progress through a 
variety of strokes. Every week I’m impressed by the dedication of the swimming 
instructors to get children of three and over to learn the basics of every 
stroke – breaststroke, crawl (front and back) and butterfly. I am 40 and I have 
still not mastered the butterfly, yet it’s my six-year-old’s stroke of choice 
whenever she’s in the water.

The swimming coordinator at the club is always aware how much of a treat it is 
for me to have the girls in simultaneous classes for that half an hour on a 
Saturday morning so will always try to arrange it. It doesn’t always work out, 
as the girls change All Stars stages, but that’s OK. Either Isla and I or Evie 
and I, depending on who’s in a class, get some quality time together being 
mermaids or having underwater tea parties. Also, on Saturday mornings, the pool 
is full of so many familiar faces as well as a host of the club’s flotation 
toys. A swimming noodle is not simply a swimming noodle on Saturday at 10.15am 
in Edinburgh’s David Lloyd Club. It can be a train carriage that holds up to 
six unruly, noisy passengers while parents take it in turns to tire themselves 
out dragging the kids around the pool.

On a sunny day after their classes my girls like a dip in the outside pool 
with its view of the Pentland hills. When you brace yourself to go from indoor 
to outdoor temperatures in your swimwear and jump into that outside heated pool 
it feels that you’ve not just simply travelled 10 minutes in a car to get there 
but you’ve gone on some elaborate holiday. We don’t do it every week, but when 
we do it has a very special feel to it.

After the swimming lessons we’re more likely to head to the tropical warmth of 
the baby pool. The girls reconvene with their swimming club friends, while the 
adults discuss whether they’ll be staying in the club for lunch. More often 
than not we do exactly that.

After a mass exodus from the pool – it’s easier to get all the kids to agree 
to leaving the pool if you make it a “let’s all go together” moment – and a lot 
of fun getting washed, dressed and hair-dried, we find a table large enough to 
hold four or five families to sit, lunch, and enjoy some downtime.

The David Lloyd Clubs kids team know how much families enjoy this Saturday 
haven in the club and they’ve created a Saturday event list that has the kids 
campaigning to stay the whole day. In recent months, the girls have met Elsa 
from Frozen, had their faces painted – repeatedly – and their photo taken with 
Mickey Mouse. There is never a dull moment, and it seems that next weekend 
Batman is making an appearance – so that’s our Saturday ticked off then.
 