
There was a time when seatbelts weren’t mandatory and kids would happily cram 
into a family estate car after football training, team-mates arguing over who 
would squash into the boot. Fast forward 30 years and we are facing a 
driverless future, with fully autonomous vehicles predicted to make our roads 
void of all risk. Before – and if – this happens, we can rest assured that we 
are driving in an era when passenger and pedestrian safety is a key factor at 
every stage of new car development.

The EU lays down mandatory safety requirements that every manufacturer must 
meet in order to release a car to market. However, these provide the minimum 
level of safety. Consumer testing organisations, such asEuro NCAP 
<http://www.euroncap.com/en>, then rate cars against their own much stricter 
standards, so that you canuse safety to help distinguish between the hundreds 
of models for sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/aug/15/how-safe-is-your-car-active-passive-safety-collision-avoidance-euro-ncap-rating>
.

It’s an easy mistake for buyers to assume that all new cars have the highest 
of safety levels, but as the five-star Euro NCAP safety rating shows, there can 
be large discrepancies between similar styles of cars from different 
manufacturers.

Spanish car manufacturer SEAT places the highest importance upon consumer 
testing, praising Euro NCAP’s key contribution to raising safety levels year 
after year. Every SEAT model currently in production has achieved the maximum 
five-star Euro NCAP award; by contrast, a vehicle that only achieves the 
minimum legal requirement would receive no stars.


Driving safety has come a long way since we zipped around roads without seat 
belts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/jul/06/driving-safety-has-come-a-long-way-since-we-zipped-around-roads-without-seat-belts>
At the heart of SEAT’s safety programme, overseen by Javier Rodriguez, is the 
range of incredibly demanding tests that cars such as the new Ateca are put 
through during their development. These form the core of “passive safety”: 
measures that limit damage and injury after an accident has happened.

“We carry out 80 separate crash tests,” says Rodriguez, “covering front, 
lateral and rear crashes. They are divided over the product development phase 
and all end with validation. This enables us to discover what’s going to happen 
to the structure if we put it through a high level of intrusion, for example.”


The best insight is to walk around the crash test bays at SEAT’s Martorell 
factory: bare car chassis are covered in sensors, dummies worth thousands of 
pounds (and dressed in grey SEAT overalls and boots) are carried around. Every 
test is calculated down to the last millimetre using ultra-precise technical 
calibration and advanced instrumentation. The result is that SEAT has greatly 
reduced the probability of serious injury in its cars.

Its passive safety developments in the Ateca include the standard fitting of 
pre-tension rear outer seatbelts, which are commonly only found in front seats. 
At the moment of impact, these seatbelts receive a signal that acts on a device 
to reduce the width of the belt webbing, with the pressure altered to hold the 
occupant more tightly and reduce injury. It also features multiple air bags, 
with three in the front, as well as side and curtain air bags.


It is reassuring to know that as much emphasis is placed on the safety of 
pedestrians as it is on passengers. Advanced materials and new manufacturing 
techniques are employed to ensure vehicles reduce the risk of serious injury to 
those on foot. An energy-absorption zone is located behind the front bumper and 
bonnet, featuring a range of foams of different densities to help reduce the 
force of an impact.


In the future, SEAT hopes that features such as accident detection systems 
will predict collisions and change the speed and direction of a car without 
input from the driver, making it much less likely for pedestrian and vehicle 
collisions to happen in the first case.

Detection systems form part of “active safety measures”, which are 
increasingly being developed to prevent, rather than react to, accidents. “They 
are driving forward the very high improvement in safety,” says Rodriguez. A 
standard feature of the Ateca is autonomous emergency braking, a system that 
detects an imminent head-on collision and applies the brakes, which has been 
proved to cut accidents by as much as 38%. Optional active safety features 
include lane-keeping assistance and blind-spot detection.


“In the next 10 years, these kind of systems are supposed to become 
mandatory,” says Rodriguez. “A decade ago our work was mainly passive safety 
issues and testing and the only active safety was electronic stability control 
and speed limiting. Now we have developments such as lane-keeping across all 
segments of cars, not just high-end vehicles. The most important challenge for 
the next decade is to make active safety systems and driver assistance as 
standard as possible in all models.”
 