
When Hyeon arrived in England, aged 15, she felt like a stranger. She was 
alone and spoke no English. “I couldn’t understand what was going on,” she 
says. “I didn’t even know the basic stuff such as how to use a computer or 
phone.”

Hyeon is now 18 and studying at Harris Westminster sixth form. She was one of 
the thousands of children arriving in Britain to seek asylum each year. In 
2015, 3,000 children arrived unaccompanied, while a further 5,000 dependants – 
who are mostly children – also came to the UK.

Clearly, teachers have an important role to play – many children will have 
missed out on at least some education, and their experiences in school or 
college will contribute to how well they settle into the UK. So how are schools 
supporting these children?

Spires Academy in Oxford is well versed in schooling refugee and asylum seeker 
children – and is often approached by other schools for advice. In a secondary 
school of about 1,000 students, there are currently 28 refugee or asylum seeker 
children between the ages of 11 and 18 on the roll; 13 of these were 
unaccompanied.

If they’re coming in at 15, 16 or 17 with no English at all, you’re giving 
them a mountain to climb
Melanie Tuck, Spires Academy 
Spires assesses children on arrival to judge what support they might need, and 
those without any English language are put on a beginners’ programme.

Melanie Tuck, head of EAL at the school, explains: “They get three lessons a 
day for six weeks. We have a real push on basic language skills, so that when 
they go into mainstream classes they’re at least on their feet.”


The programme is run throughout the year and also caters for other migrant 
children. After the six weeks, children join the usual timetabled classes but 
continue to get additional support from teaching staff.

All teachers receive in-house training on working with students who have 
limited English, and children who may be struggling are given extra lessons 
outside the classroom. For older children, there is a full-time EAL sixth-form 
course, which gives them a grounding in English alongside a small amount of 
maths, science and humanities before they go on to their GCSEs.

“If they’re coming in at 15, 16 or 17 with no English at all, you’re just 
giving them a mountain to climb,” explains Tuck. “If they come in as young as 
12 or 13 we can put them in mainstream education and support them there because 
they’ve got time.”

But helping these young people to settle, integrate and learn is about more 
than just academic support. Some of their needs are similar to those of migrant 
children – language and cultural differences, unfamiliarity with UK systems – 
but they may also have mental health difficulties.

“We find that insomnia is very common, which has an obvious effect on a 
child’s ability to concentrate in school or college and may well affect their 
attendance,” explains Katie Pedder, senior programmes officer at the Refugee 
Support Network. “If their asylum claim has not been resolved, that is likely 
to cause a deep anxiety which will also affect their performance at school.”

The College of North West London has built partnerships with charities to 
provide additional mental health support to its refugee and asylum seeker 
children. Staff always gettraining 
<http://www.refugeesupportnetwork.org/training>, run by the Refugee Support 
Network, about issues affecting refugees and asylum seekers, as well as 
initiatives to improve integration.

Laura Armstrong, head of ESOL at the college, explains: “We work very closely 
with three charities – the Refugee Support Network, Young Roots and Paiwand – 
which help us to put on activities and events to encourage students to mix with 
each other.”

The college doesn’t receive funding for this, but the partnerships work 
because they are mutually beneficial. When Paiwand had funding to run a girls’ 
group, for instance, the college was able to provide the students.

For Hyeon, support initially came from the safeguarding department and now 
through regular meetings with a welfare officer. It was in this way that the 
sixth form was able to identify that she needed help with tasks such as buying 
food and cooking with British ingredients. Thanks to the help she’s had 
settling in, Hyeon has made strong progress academically and is studying for 
A-levels in maths, biology and chemistry. She hopes to become a doctor.


Although we have all these services and support systems in place, they're not 
picked out as a special group
Laura Armstrong, the College of North West London 
Educating the whole school population about refugees, to foster a welcoming 
and tolerant community, is also helpful, says Pedder. Some schools and colleges 
are going further, helping students to play an active role in supporting their 
classmates. At Hammersmith and West London College, pupils have formed a 
Student Action for Refugees group, and are in the process of setting up 
conversation and homework clubs to support refugee and asylum seekers at the 
college. Oxford Spires Academy, meanwhile, is using volunteers from its sixth 
form to welcome new starters and offer mentoring – spending time together at 
lunchtime, doing homework together, or helping with English.

For teachers looking to improve understanding of refugees and asylum seekers 
in their school, some help can be found online. The Refugee Support Network has 
links to useful websites, and Pedder also recommends theRefugee Week website, 
<http://refugeeweek.org.uk/info-centre/educational-resources/> which provides 
materials useful for assemblies and lessons. TheRefugee Welcome Schools 
initiative <http://www.citizensuk.org/refugee_welcome_schools> is also a way 
that schools can educate pupils on the topic while also offering practical 
assistance to refugees and asylum seekers in the local area (see@Leics_refugees 
<https://twitter.com/Leics_refugees> on Twitter for a group of schools active 
in this).NALDIC offers guidance 
<https://www.naldic.org.uk/eal-initial-teacher-education/resources/refugees/> 
on areas such as welcoming children to the school, peer support and supporting 
emotional needs.

It’s also a good idea for teachers to familiarise themselves not just with the 
general issues surrounding refugees and asylum seekers but the complications 
that an individual may be experiencing. This can be made more difficult because 
of tensions between the education system’s focus on targets and attendance and 
the fact that asylum seekers often have a lot of appointments – such as court 
dates or with social workers.

“Teachers need to know this may be an issue and be proactive in talking about 
it,” she says. “Otherwise it can be easy for the teacher to think the student 
is missing college because they’re lazy, or for the student to miss important 
appointments.”

But this requires a careful approach – not just because of what some of these 
children have been through, but because ultimately they don’t necessarily want 
to be singled out as different. “One things we’ve noticed it that they just 
want to feel that they are normal students and progress,” says Armstrong. “And 
I think that’s really important, so although we do have all these services and 
support systems in place, they’re not picked out as a special group – and they 
can just get on with their lives.”

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 