
Properties that generate fierce competition between buyers can achieve much 
higher prices than the value suggested by your estate agent. The following sale 
methods can help you to achieve the optimum price without gazumping anyone.

Sealed bids

A non-binding method for finding the best price subject to contract. The agent 
sends out a letter to all interested parties, asking them to submit their best 
offer in writing by a certain time and date (usually subject to survey), 
stating also how they intend to finance the purchase.

 The agent's letter may also ask for references, stipulate a completion date 
and state that the seller is not obliged to accept the highest - or any - bid.

 In Scotland, a system similar to sealed bids is used, but the winning bid is 
usually treated as legally binding. The buyer conducts all the checks and 
commissions a survey before making his bid. The seller may then decide to 
accept on condition that certain details - such as the price paid for carpets 
and curtains - are changed. The negotiation can take two or three weeks, ending 
with concluding missives, the equivalent of exchanging contracts in England.

Japanese Position

A less common version of the sealed bid. Each bidder is invited to submit five 
bids, so only the bid required to beat the second-highest bidder is accepted. 
For example, if one buyer offers bids of £210,000, £220,000, £230,000, £240,000 
and £250,000, and the highest bid from any competitor is £220,000, the bid of 
£230,000 will be accepted.

Tender

A version of sealed bids that is more commonly used for commercial property. 
The bids are not subject to contract, or any other condition - if a buyer's bid 
is accepted, he is legally bound to buy.

Offers in the region

Often used on country properties, where the lack of a direct comparison makes 
it difficult to value a property accurately. Agents often pitch the figure 
quite low to create wide interest, allowing competition to drive up the final 
price.

Telephone auction

This can speed up a process that would otherwise take days or weeks if there 
are several interested purchasers. The agent fixes a time and day for the 
auction, and takes a contact number from all interested parties for that time. 
He then gives all the potential buyers a chance to outbid each other until the 
top price with acceptable conditions attached is reached. All bids are subject 
to contract.
 