
Some of us are stressed. Others are overworked, struggling with the new 
responsibilities of parenthood, or moving from one flawed relationship to 
another. Whatever it is, whatever you are going through, there is wisdom from 
the Stoics that can help.

Followers of this ancient and inscrutable philosophy have found themselves at 
the centre of some of history’s most trying ordeals, from the French Revolution 
to the American Civil War to the prison camps of Vietnam. Bill Clinton 
reportedly reads Roman Emperor and stoic Marcus Aurelius’sMeditations 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/meditations-18.html> once a year, and one can 
imagine him handing a copy to Hillary after her heart-wrenching loss in the US 
presidential election.

Stoicism is a school of philosophy which was founded in Athens in the early 
3rd century and then progressed to Rome, where it became a pragmatic way of 
addressing life’s problems. The central message is, we don’t control what 
happens to us; we control how we respond.

The Stoics were really writing and thinking about one thing: how to live. The 
questions they asked were not arcane or academic but practical and real. “What 
do I do about my anger?” “What do I do if someone insults me?” “I’m afraid to 
die; why is that?” “How can I deal with the difficult situations I face?” “How 
can I deal with the success or power I hold?”

Bill Clinton reads the Meditations of Roman emperor and stoic Marcus Aurelius 
every year

There also happens to be a decent amount of advice on how to live under the 
looming threat of a tyrant (“I may wish to be free from torture, but if the 
time comes for me to endure it, I’ll wish to bear it courageously with bravery 
and honour,” wrote the Roman philosopherSeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/15/seneca-a-life-emily-wilson-absorbing-account>
). All of which makes Stoic philosophy particularly well-suited to the world we 
live in.

While it would be hard to find a word dealt a greater injustice at the hands 
of the English language than “stoicism”— with its mistaken connotations of 
austerity and lack of emotion — in fact, nothing could be more necessary for 
our times than a good dose of Stoic philosophy.

When the news media provokes us with overwhelming amounts of information, 
Epictetus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/nov/18/healthandwellbeing.features1>
, another Roman philosopher, cuts through the noise: “If you wish to improve, 
be content to appear clueless or stupid in extraneous matters.” When it feels 
like people are ruder and more selfish than ever, Marcus Aurelius urges us to 
ask when we ourselves have behaved the same way – and says that the best 
revenge is simply “to not be like that”.

When the natural inclination is to focus on achievement and money, Seneca’s 
reminder to his father-in-law, who had just been removed from a prominent 
position, rings true: “Believe me, it’s better to produce the balance sheet of 
your own life than that of the grain market.”

In their writings – often private letters or diaries – and in their lectures, 
the Stoics struggled to come up with real, actionable answers. They held duty 
and honour as sacred obligations and they believed that every obstacle they 
faced was simply an opportunity – to test themselves and be better.

Now Stoicism is finding resonance with new followers. Just last month in New 
York, a conference calledStoicon <https://howtobeastoic.wordpress.com/stoicon/> 
was declared to be the largest gathering of Stoics in history.

This kind of philosophy is not an idle pursuit but a crucial tool. As Seneca 
said, “Where then do I look for good and evil? Not to uncontrollable externals, 
but within myself to the choices that are my own.”

Ryan Holiday is the author of The Daily Stoic: 366 Meditations on Wisdom, 
Perseverance, and the Art of Living(Profile Books, £9.99). To order a copy for 
£8.19, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/daily-stoic.html>
 