
Our attachment to trees goes far beyond their beauty and our physical need for 
fresh air, fruit and timber. A tree can serve as a meeting place, it can be 
something that helps bind communities together. For many, trees also offer 
ideological meaning or a link to a belief system.


Why the UK needs 64 million new trees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/woodland-trust-64-million-trees/ng-interactive/2016/sep/23/why-the-uk-needs-64-million-new-trees>
From the Garden of Eden’s fruit-bearing tree of knowledge to Islam’s heavenly 
Ṭūbā, which could shade a horse rider for a journey of 100 years, paradise is 
lacking without trees. Even the cosmos needs their support. Norse legends have 
the nine realms held together by the ‘World Tree’ Yggdrasil. Turkic and 
Mongolian myths describe a mighty tree linking the upper world of the creator 
Ülgan with the human world and the underworld of Erlik. Similarly, Hindu 
mythology has the eternal sacred fig, Ashvatta, with roots reaching to the 
stars, and branches spreading downwards to create the basis for all life.


In Hindu beliefs, the bodhi tree is said to be a form of Vishnu and, by 
offering water, prayers and tying threads to it, women may become blessed with 
children. In Ireland, rags adorn hawthorn trees as wishes. Often the rag is a 
piece of clothing worn by someone who is ill or has a problem. The belief is 
that, once the rag rots away, so too will the dilemma disappear.


Oak trees were celebrated by both Celtic druids and German pagans. The legend 
of eighth-century Saint Boniface has him topple a German oak dedicated to Thor, 
to replace it with a fir. The triangular shape of the evergreen is said to have 
reminded the saint of the holy trinity pointing to Heaven, and led to its 
adoption as a symbol of Christianity, and the Christmas tree.


For faith and freedom
While trees are brought into homes during Yuletide, in West Papua the tree is 
the home. Treehouses are the permanent dwellings for the Korowai people of West 
Papua. Set on banyan stilts, the lodgings are constructed with sago-palm bark 
and rattan, well above flooding levels and mosquitoes. Some tower 35 metres off 
the ground.

A treehouse of a different kind invites pilgrims to Normandy, France. In the 
commune of Allouville-Bellefosse stands an ancient, now hollow, oak tree, which 
was converted into two chapels in 1669. The quirky Chêne Chapelle is reached by 
a spiral staircase, and is still used for mass twice a year.


Oaks were also the timber of choice for nation building. British forests were 
planted and cut down for timber as a patriotic duty, to build a naval fleet for 
war in the 18th century while, on the other side of the Channel, Napoleon is 
credited with ordering the planting of trees along major roads to shade his 
marching troops.

 Trees have also become political symbols. Prior to the US War of 
Independence, Bostonians rallied against British tax rules under a large elm 
tree where they hung an effigy of the lieutenant governor, Andrew Oliver. The 
elm became known as the Liberty Tree, and inspired similar ‘Arbres de la 
liberté’ during the French Revolution, which now appears on French euro coins.

 Trees also help define national identities, having been incorporated on a 
number of national flags, including the cedar of the Lebanon, the kapok of 
Equatorial Guinea, the mahogany on the flag of Belize and the leaf of the maple 
tree for Canada.

 Long may we recognise the importance of trees for all of their benefits, both 
physical and philosophical, as a link to our past, vital to the present and a 
gift for future generations.

Find out more about enjoying the UK’s woodland with a Woodland Trust autumn 
discovery pack 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/autumnpack/?utm_source=theguardian.com&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=autumn2016&utm_content=text>
. As well as telling you what’s important about woods and trees, there’s advice 
on 10 of the best woods for an autumn walk, along with ID guides and autumn 
activities to keep you occupied along the way.
 