
When a therapist friend told Allison Havey that her then 13-year-old son was 
almost certainly viewing online pornography, she felt angry. “I was offended 
because I thought, why would he be doing that? It’s deviant behaviour and he’s 
not deviant.”

What Allison now knows is that it’s natural for boys to want to look at sexual 
imagery. In fact, the average age for first exposure to online pornography in 
the UK is 11. For slightly older boys, it’s completely normal – of 3,000 boys 
aged 13-18 surveyed, 81% said they looked at it.

Allison – who with Deana Puccio has written a book dealing with this and other 
issues for parents in the digital age – says that there are two major 
consequences. First, this suggests that conversations about sexual behaviour 
have to happen much sooner, and within the family.

Second, the conversation is now much more important because of the 
proliferation of online pornography, which boys are looking at on their mobile 
phones.

There is a risk to this generation, say Allison and Deana, that online 
pornography could damage the sexual sensitivities of boys and their future 
relationships. Girls, who are far less likely to be interested in pornography 
at this stage in their lives, are at risk too, from their partners and future 
partners who could mistake the fiction of online pornography for the “norms” of 
satisfying sex.

This has far-reaching consequences, and it’s something most parents don’t know 
enough about. But if you go online and look at what today’s young people are 
viewing, it’s a world away from the type of pornography a generation who grew 
up in the 70s and 80s might be familiar with. We’re not even talking about 
hardcore images; it’s the relatively tame videos that focus, obsessively, on 
male pleasure, particularly oral sex. The vast majority of women have 
surgically enhanced breasts and female pubic hair is almost entirely absent. By 
normalising such things, pornography could be conditioning boys to have 
unrealistic expectations of the women with whom they will have sex.

It’s not only the images. The language on pornographic sites is very 
particular too: verbs such as “nailed”, “hammered”, “screwed”, “pummelled”.

“Anyone would think it was an advert for a DIY store,” says Allison.

According to a 2014 IPPR study 
<http://www.ippr.org/read/young-people-sex-and-relationships-the-new-norms#>, 
77% of young women say that they feel pornography pressurises girls or young 
women to look a certain way and 75% say it has led them to act in a certain 
way. Anal sex is just one of the sexual acts increasingly regarded as normal. 
“But the truth is that anal sex is a sophisticated, intimate act, not something 
14-year-olds should be regarding as ‘normal’ teen behaviour,” says Allison, 
whose own children, a son and a daughter, are 19 and 14.

Researching the book, Allison and Deana realised that laddism – which they 
refer to as “lad-itude” – far from being a phenomenon of sixth form and 
university years, is actually prevalent among boys from as early as year 8 – in 
other words, 12 to 13-year-olds.

“We have spoken to teenage girls who describe their guy friends as real 
Casanovas, collecting girlfriends like stamps and loudly bragging,” says 
Allison.

Sexist, misogynistic, homophobic and racist language and attitudes are also 
common. In the book, Allison and Deana list the kinds of everyday sexism boys 
use and girls overhear: “Would you?” “I would.” (Boys discussing girls as they 
walk past.); “On her knees, that’s where she belongs”; “I would destroy her”; 
“She’s a fuck and chuck.”

So what are the messages parents should be giving children – and how should 
they do it? Allison, who with Deana runs schools workshops as part of a project 
calledRap (Raising Awareness and Prevention) <http://therapproject.co.uk/>, 
says that when she asks groups of pupils how many have ever discussed online 
pornography at home, only a tiny fraction put up their hands. She’s convinced, 
though, that opening discussions with children at the start of adolescence, 
perhaps as young as 10, is vital. “The thing you need to get across to your 
kids is that the sex they see online is far removed from real-life experience,” 
she says. “What’s almost always missing are the very things a real relationship 
thrives on: kisses, hugs and sensuality.”

When parents are brave enough to have the conversation, there’s no doubt their 
words carry weight. The quotes in Allison’s book from boys whose parents have 
talked to them about pornography show that they remember what they have been 
told. “My dad told me not to ram women like they do in porn … that women don’t 
like it that hard,” a year 11 boy said; a year 12 boy said: “Dad told me that 
real men don’t watch porn. They have confidence with women and know how to take 
care of them.”

The fact is, Allison says, all parents want to protect their children: and 
online pornography is making victims out of teenage boys, as much as teenage 
girls because both sexes are extremely vulnerable and are all too often looking 
at these images and videos alone. And, of course, as Allison says, material 
designed for older men will deliver a quite different message to a 14-year-old 
in his bedroom.

The good news is that teenage boys, when asked “Do you want a close, intimate, 
fulfilling and happy sex life?” still say yes. So here’s the essential 
ingredient to get across: if that’s what you want, you need to think about more 
than online pornography and smutty playground humour.

“We say, if you want to have a great sex life, follow the age-old formula,” 
says Allison. “What you need to do is talk to girls, if you’re going to find 
out what you both want. We tell them, you need to think about three things – 
the three things any good sexual relationship is based on. Friendship, romance 
and intimacy.”

One big problem for parents and educators like Allison and Deana is “lad 
culture” and the difficulty for teenage boys, in particular, in stepping out of 
line and questioning friends who tell rape or sexist jokes; or making them 
understand that distasteful jokes about women and sexual behaviour is having an 
adverse effect on behaviour and expectations.

“We need young people to know that when you stay silent when a friend delivers 
a rape joke, you’re being complicit and therefore supporting this behaviour,” 
says Allison.

Anyone who plays sexist video games or watches degrading music videos and 
hardcore pornography online is supporting a sexist, misogynist culture. 
Parents, in other words, have to play their part. The online threat is real but 
parents are far from powerless.

• Sex, Likes and Social Media: Talking to Our Teens in the Digital Age by 
Allison Havey and Deana Puccio (Vermilion, £12.99). To order a copy for £10.65, 
go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sex-likes-and-social-media.html> or call the 
Guardian Bookshop on 0330 333 6846.

therapproject.co.uk <http://therapproject.co.uk/>

 * The photo on this article was changed on 12 September 2016 to better 
reflect the article.
 <http://therapproject.co.uk/>  