
Paul Greenwood, managing director of Stacks Relocation, an agency that 
specialises in finding properties and negotiating for clients, says buyers 
should compare the price of their prospective purchase to those of other 
comparable properties to make sure it's not overpriced.

They should keep their eyes open for problems that might prove expensive to 
put right - missing roof slates, old-fashioned wiring, damp walls - and use 
them as negotiating points. Curtains and carpets can cost a small fortune to 
buy new, at a time when money is usually scarce. Those already in the house are 
unlikely to suit the seller's next home and are worth very little to him or 
her. Ask for them to be included in the price you offer. Likewise, you may be 
able to negotiate on electrical equipment - dishwashers, cookers, washing 
machines and fridge-freezers - particularly if built into kitchen units.

If you have become caught in a bidding situation against a competitor, try not 
to increase your offers by too large an amount. If possible limit any increases 
to £500 or £1000.

With sealed bids, you face the danger of paying substantially more than 
necessary to secure the purchase. Greenwood suggests submitting an unusual 
figure, such as £201,502, to avoid a tie with competitors. Finally, keep your 
nerve. Even if you lose one property, there is always another just around the 
corner!

Gazumping

When you are selling your property, reneging on your acceptance of an offer in 
favour of a higher bid may seem perfectly sensible. If you are the buyer, it is 
a pernicious, morally reprehensible act.

Gazumping is particularly damaging when the buyer has already paid for a 
survey and instructed a solicitor to start the checks needed prior to exchange. 
Barrister Jonathan Ferris was so outraged at being allegedly gazumped by the 
publisher-cum-philanthropist Paul Hamlyn last year that he is suing the Labour 
peer and trustees of the Paul Hamlyn Foundation for damages of up to £50,000. 
Ferris believed his offer of £765,000 for Sussex House, a Grade II listed 
property in Hammersmith, had been accepted by Hamlyn but he and his wife lost 
out to a bidder offering £200,000 more.

The couple claim they incurred heavy costs in paying for a valuation, a 
solicitor's search, putting their own flat up for sale and raising money 
quickly by cashing in Peps and removing money from a 60-day notice account.

The Government has outlined proposals to shift the costs of conveyancing and 
surveys to sellers, which should go a long way to cut out the cost of 
gazumping. Until then, buyers may want to consider two methods of protecting 
themselves against loss.

The lock-in

The lock-in or exclusivity agreement is a formal agreement that allows the 
buyer a limited period before the seller considers other offers. The idea is 
that the buyer can rush the survey and conveyancing through to reach exchange 
before the agreement expires. The scheme is not failsafe - the seller may 
decide to accept a higher offer and delay the supply of necessary documentation 
until the deadline is reached. However, it does enable the buyer to reclaim any 
costs incurred up to that point.

Greenwood says: 'Purchasers must remember that it is meaningless in law if an 
agent or vendor verbally guarantees not to deal with anyone else. The 
reassurance must be in writing. The buyers should also insist that the lock-in 
period (generally 10 working days) runs from the moment their solicitors 
receive the draft contract, not from the moment the offer is accepted.'

Insurance

Alternatively you might prefer to buy anti-gazumping insurance. Like the 
lock-in agreement, this protects the buyer against loss. Legal & General sells 
buyer's and seller's anti-gazumping policies through its mortgage 
intermediaries and estate agents. Both policies cost £15 and provide six 
months' cover. Buyers receive a £400 voucher to cover legal and valuation fees 
incurred if their purchase fails through the seller withdrawing, an adverse 
survey or the buyer losing his job or being relocated by his employer. Sellers 
receive a £300 voucher to cover legal fees on the collapse of their sale if the 
buyer is refused a mortgage, finds another property or simply changes his mind.

General Accident Property <https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> 
Services sells similar cover, at £36 for three months or £66 for six months.
 