
Michael Howard put asylum and immigration firmly at the heart of the general 
election campaign today, pledging to introduce Australia's model of a points 
system for economic migrants and an annual quota for refugees - even if that 
meant opting out of the UN convention.

Sounding an ominous tone, the Conservative leader told a pre-election press 
conference, "Britain has reached a turning point. The pace of change is too 
great."

Mr Howard insisted: "It's not racist, as some people claim, to talk about 
controlling immigration - far from it. It is plain common sense - a vastly 
underrated quality in British politics today.

Joining the party leader on the platform, the shadow home secretary, David 
Davis, called the 1951 UN convention on refugees "an outdated product of the 
cold war".

The detail of the policies would see parliament set an annual quota for 
refugees, economic migrants and family reunions, with a points system based on 
education and skills for those coming to Britain to work.

Mr Davis said that the most controversial element - pulling out of the UN 
convention and parts of the European convention on human rights - could even 
see more genuine refugees accepted by Britain.

He said that currently only 8,000 out of 40,000 applicants a year were 
genuine, so that a new quota would be set at a level to make it "very unlikely" 
the UK would send home real refugees.

Mr Davis outlined new restrictions on asylum seekers, saying the Tories would 
bar any who had passed through a "safe" third country, or claimed asylum only 
when challenged by officials, or destroyed their documents, or were being 
persecuted by other bodies than the state, or those who committed a serious 
crime after arrival.

He would seek new powers to deport failed asylum seekers immediately and all 
would be detained within detention centres.

There was also talk of negotiations with foreign governments for "offshore 
processing centres" - something derided as "fantasy island" politics when 
Oliver Letwin raised it as shadow home secretary last year.

Mr Howard's joint speech and advertising campaign in yesterday's Sunday 
Telegraph has already attracted strong criticism, with Liberty calling the 
proposals to limit refugees "obscene", and the Commission for Racial Equality 
pointing out that most migrants to the UK come from the EU, Australia, New 
Zealand or America.

The proposals in today's speech were in fact unveiled in David Davis' address 
to the Tory party conference in Bournemouth last autumn, but their reprisal 
today signals the Tories' determination to make asylum and immigration a key 
election battleground.

Significantly, neither Labour nor the Liberal Democrats have yet attacked Mr 
Howard for "playing the race card", a oft-thrown accusation during election 
campaigning, instead preferring to mock the party's ability to fund its 
proposals in Labour's case, or calling the move "desperate" in the Lib Dems'.

The prime minister's official spokesman said Mr Blair recognised "this is an 
issue on which people not only need reassurance but to see us keep making 
progress."

He added: "What's important in terms of asylum is to recognise the two-thirds 
drop there has been since October 2002 and in terms of managed migration also 
to recognise the tough controls that have already been introduced."

Liberal Democrat party chair Matthew Taylor commented: "The Tories seem to 
think you can set down rigid quotas for people fleeing persecution."

The genesis of a points-system for economic migrants and an annual limit for 
refugees comes from Australia, where centre-right leader John Howard was 
successfully reelected before Christmas. His election strategist is now 
advising the Tories.

Speaking on the radio this morning, Mr Howard angrily rejected suggestions of 
racism today as he defended the plans to limit asylum and immigration.

CRE chairman Trevor Phillips voiced concerns about the language used by the 
Conservative leader and questioned who he wanted to keep out. "The largest 
single group of migrants into this country are from the EU, Australia, New 
Zealand and the United States," he told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme.

However, Mr Howard said any implication that the proposals were about skin 
colour were "a disgraceful allegation which I wholly reject".

"This is not to do with race. This is to do with having an honest and open 
debate about the level of immigration," he said. "We have to be able to debate 
this matter without having the kind of accusation which you have just put to 
me."

An advert taken out in a Sunday paper to announce the new policy used the 
language of the government's own Community Cohesion Panel, he said.

The panel, set up to draw lessons from the Bradford race riots, had concluded 
the pace of change was too great, Mr Howard said.

"I always have believed that if you want to have good community relations in 
this country - and there are few things more important than that - you have to 
have firm but fair immigration controls."

CRE chairman Mr Phillips warned Mr Howard's announcement left the way open for 
racists to put the "worst construction" on his message.

"The difficulty is if you are going to raise this issue then it mustn't be in 
a way that allows people who want to turn this in to a race issue to do so," he 
told Today.

But he said he did not believe the Tory leader's proposals were made "on the 
basis of race".

However, the CRE chairman suggested the announcement "gives space to people 
who will be saying on the doorstep 'nudge, nudge, wink, wink, we know what 
Michael Howard is saying. This isn't really about other Europeans. It is about 
keeping out people who are of a different colour or different culture.'"

Mr Phillips also questioned the timing of Mr Howard's announcement, which 
comes as asylum applications are down by 40% and immigration applications have 
fallen by 10%.

The people who would be worst hit by Mr Howard's proposals to pull out of 
international agreements would be Britons wanting to work in France, he said.

Habib Rahman, chief executive of the Joint Council for the Welfare of 
Immigrants, condemned the Tory proposals. He said in a statement: "We are 
utterly shocked to hear that the Conservative party is determined to ditch 
Britain's longstanding humanitarian commitment to the Geneva convention.

"We believe that such a focus helps to create an unwarranted fear of 
immigration in some sections of the UK population which is not helpful to an 
informed debate in the run-up to a general election."

Shami Chakrabarti, director of civil rights group Liberty, criticised Mr 
Howard's proposals as "obscene".

She said: "Quotas are for cod fishing, not humanitarian protection. The 
refugee convention is one of the proudest legacies of the second world war. It 
is a little obscene to denigrate it as we approach Holocaust Memorial Day."
 