
I’m going to be honest with you: this Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> I just wanted to wallow.

My country appears to be on the verge of inaugurating a dangerous, emotionally 
unstable ignoramus to the highest office in the land. And last month, my friend 
who washanging by a thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/22/losing-online-friends-same-as-real-life-relationships>
 in an ICU in Texas passed away. His death has ripped open a whole host of 
wounds I still have aboutmy mother’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/03/we-dont-lose-our-mothers-reality-more-violent-that-that>
 in 2014. Oh, also, I have a persistent sinus infection and a booming cough, 
and my back hurts.

This year I didn’t want to deal with a tree. I didn’t want to bake and cook 
and bond with my friends, go anywhere or see anyone. I wanted to hole up in my 
house and succumb to my sadness and listen to Joni Mitchell singing River over 
and over while I ate cans of Almond Roca and fretted endlessly about the 
prospect of life under fascism.

But I’m celebrating Christmas anyway. As we move through this darkest part of 
the year with its short days and winter storms and the parade of horrific news 
of violence, terror attacks and uncertainty, it is an act of defiance to be 
joyous and hopeful.

My late friend would have been 40 on 23 December, and it’s for the sake of his 
and my mother’s memory most of all that, this year, I’m going for broke – bows, 
wrapping paper, ostentatious tree. Maybe in going through the motions, the 
spark of joy will catch and begin to blaze.

Many Americans are facing dark times right now. My immigrant boyfriend, my 
friends of color, my trans friends and my Muslim friends are looking at the 
next four to eight years with a mixture of dread and a kind of grim acceptance 
that things could only ever get so good in this messed-up, racist country 
before the old white guys brought the boot back down.

Now we’re going to have to learn to generate hope ourselves rather than 
through faith in our leaders, and to care for and guide one another through the 
dark days ahead. We are going to have to be brave and loving and wary and 
vigilant. This makes it even more important to me to blaze up the lights and 
the joy this Christmas.

And when I find that my mind is racing in helpless frantic circles and my 
years-long battle with depression and anxiety is starting to feel like 
Waterloo, nothing helps like immersing myself in making something, creating 
something or doing something kind for someone else. It’s a lot harder for my 
fears and anxiousness to seize the wheel when I’m chopping onions and frying 
them in butter or inhaling the resin-y, cool green aroma of a freshly cut 
Christmas tree.

Something LGBTQ people learned a long time ago is that when the world is 
against you, nothing is as powerful as flamboyant joy – singing, dancing, 
creating or just nurturing our “found families” of fellow misfits and outcasts.

If you go and look at rightwing Twitter right now – and I don’t recommend that 
you do – the racists, white nationalists, neo-Nazis and angry white 
conservatives are rejoicing in the pain and sadness of “snowflake”, “cry-baby” 
liberals.

So my Christmas wish for all of us is that we don’t give them any tears to 
gloat about. They can take the White House; they can occupy both houses of 
Congress. But they can’t occupy my house. And at my house, this year, come hell 
or high water, we’re celebrating love, and new beginnings and hope. Even if – 
at first – I have to fake it.
 