
It felt satisfying to certify myself as a "sophisticated investor" to take 
advantage of what appeared an opportunity of a lifetime back in October 2005. 
After writing up a talk about Bulgarian property for a newsletter, my 20 years' 
experience in the financial services industry assured me it was a suitable home 
for some of the proceeds of my recent flat sale.

Jonty Crossick, director of property managers Ready2invest, had proved a 
highly persuasive speaker. Although he paid due attention to the risks, the 
returns he had made previous investors were mind-boggling and many seemed to 
come back for more. Bulgarian property prices had increased by 22% during the 
last year and by 49% in hotspots, and EU membership was beckoning.

A few days' later my wife, Helen, and I excitedly thumbed through the 
prospectus for Crossick's R2R BulgariaProperty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> Fund, a Jersey regulated 
closed-ended umbrella unit trust. We reasoned that it was well worth chancing 
our arm with the minimum investment of £21,000 – only 10% of our available 
capital. It could make a significant difference to us if it lived up to 
expectations, whereas no investment opportunities regulated by the UK Financial 
Services Authority (FSA) seemed to offer any real potential.

Nearly six tortuous years later I am not feeling so sophisticated. Barclays 
Wealth, the current managers and trustees of the fund, has finally stated that 
it no longer views our selected Arkoutino sub-fund as viable and estimates that 
its net assets are worth around 8% of the money originally invested. As the 
winding up process is complex and expensive we could receive back nothing at 
all.

The problems began soon after launch as it became clear that Ready2invest did 
not get on with Equity Trust, which acted as the fund's managers and trustees 
through different subsidiaries divided by a Chinese wall. After only a year, 
Ready2invest had been removed as property managers by Equity Trust. After 
another year the Jersey Financial Services Commission had commenced proceedings 
to replace Equity Trust because of concerns ranging from serious conflicts of 
interests to failure to produce audited accounts.

The in-fighting and general chaos has been almost beyond belief, and it would 
be hard to imagine this could have occurred with an FSA-regulated fund. The 
Jersey Financial Services Commission, however, merely invited us to consult a 
lawyer – which we couldn't afford to do.

Ready2invest's Jonty Crossick says: "It was at the higher end of the risk 
scale but before the credit crunch there was no reason to suppose it was 
underfunded as it was not unreasonable to expect us to get loans. Culturally we 
didn't get on with Equity Trust and I didn't appreciate how much control they'd 
have when we brought them in as trustees and fund managers."

Nevertheless, my experience seems to give weight to many of the warnings by 
investment experts about the perils of investing in non-FSA regulated 
investment vehicles, whether in property, wine, stamps or foreign exchange 
funds.

Kelly Wheble, partner at national independent financial adviser (IFA) Positive 
Solutions, says: "With an FSA-regulated fund there should be far less scope for 
the various parties running a scheme to fall out, as there is already a 
well-established structure governing how they interact. FSA regulated funds are 
also far more transparent and afford less scope for conflicts of interest."

With the benefit of hindsight, I could perhaps have paid more attention to 
another danger. Because these funds start off by being relatively obscure, they 
tend to come to the attention of most investors only once they have built up 
the track records capable of generating them publicity. This can mean that 
people pile in at exactly the wrong time, in a similar way to which they can 
buy shares at the height of a bull market.

Chris Cole, senior client partner at national private client wealth advisers 
Towry, says: "Historically investors may have had particularly good returns but 
you tend to only see the marketing hype when the clever people have made their 
money and got out. If someone does choose to invest they should make sure it's 
a small piece of their overall wealth, something to have fun with but which 
isn't going to ruin their future."
 