
I don’t remember the first time I purged. I remember it being a habit, a 
nightly ritual. I remember the pattern of the bathroom tiles in my parents’ 
house. White, diamond-shaped tiles, grout, the smell of toilet water – I spent 
a lot of time in there.

The anorexia and bulimia set in during my junior year of high school. But I 
didn’t have a name for it back then. Back then, it was the primal urge to be 
thin, to run as many miles as I could, to skip meals, to punish my body for 
eating.

It was my brain’s way of coping with the psychological trauma of growing up 
fat, a “never again” complex born of abuse, of being picked on and made to feel 
less than human. It was a mental illness. Though, again, I didn’t call it that. 
It stayed with me all the way up to my college years.

I felt compelled to maintain my masculinity, and that meant I couldn’t be weak

Today, I’m the heaviest (and happiest) I’ve been in a long time thanks to 
therapy and medication. When I think back to how drastic my condition was, it 
seems like a chapter from someone else’s life, like they’re someone else’s 
memories.

They all came flooding back when I read Wentworth Miller’s moving post 
<https://www.facebook.com/wentworthmilleractorwriter/photos/a.1496071870605750.1073741827.1496070023939268/1713822728830662/?type=3>
 on his depression and being body-shamed by a meme making fun of his weight.

“First and foremost, I was suicidal,” he wrote. “This is a subject I’ve since 
written about, spoken about, shared about. But at the time I suffered in 
silence. As many do.”

He recalled a time when he went hiking with a friend and the paparazzi snapped 
him. The pictures were published next to photos of him from his Prison Break 
days with headlines like “Hunk to Chunk” and “Fit to Flab”.

Miller wrote that when he saw the photos, it hurt to breathe. I can only 
imagine how I would have reacted at the height of my anorexia.

Anorexia: you don’t just grow out of it | Carrie Arnold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/29/anorexia-you-dont-just-grow-out-of-it>
Reading his story made me sad. But it also gave me hope. This was a man 
opening up about body issues and mental illness. It’s important because many 
people (many of whom are men) think that men don’t have body issues and that 
mental illnesses are a sign of weakness.

In high school, I wasn’t anorexic. I was “manorexic”. The joke was that I was 
a man suffering from a woman’s condition. In college I didn’t seek help because 
I didn’t want to admit that I had a problem. I was also closeted at the time, 
and I feared that telling anyone I had an eating disorder would “out” me.

I, like so many other men, was trapped. I felt compelled to maintain my 
masculinity, and that meant I couldn’t be weak. At the time, preserving this 
sense of masculinity took precedence over my own health.

But pretending that I was too strong to have a mental illness is not what 
saved me from my eating disorder. Forcing myself to adhere to the strict rules 
of masculinity, a system of belief that told me I couldn’t possibly be anorexic 
because I was a man, is not what saved me either.

What saved me was swallowing my pride and checking myself into therapy. What 
saved me was unpacking my preconceived notions on mental illness and taking a 
critical eye not to my body, but to the society that had conditioned me to hate 
it, to the messages I was being inundated with, and to the stigmas that had 
prevented me from seeking help in the first place. These practices are 
consistent with the values of feminism, and that’s why I continue to advocate 
that feminism holds benefits for men as well.

In opening up about his struggles with depression and with his body, Wentworth 
Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/wentworth-miller> set an 
example for men everywhere. He overcame the stigma. I know there are men 
everywhere who are suffering but too afraid to admit it. I was one of them. I’m 
sure Wentworth’s words helped countless people.

My hope is that if more of us men speak candidly about our experiences, we can 
create a future where seeking treatment for a mental illness will be as common 
as seeking treatment for a broken bone.

 * In the US and Canada, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 
1-800-273-8255 <>. In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 08457 90 90 
90. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines 
in other countriescan be found here 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.
 