
It began with an incident on campus. A man whose advances I had turned down 
showed up at a university event I was hosting and verbally assaulted me. I 
reported him to the police.

'I was so traumatised': accounts of sexual harassment in UK universities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/07/i-was-so-traumatised-accounts-of-sexual-harassment-in-uk-universities>
Enraged by this, he told me that he had the power to destroy my life. He said 
he would report me for gross professional misconduct. I told my head of 
department, who assured me that I had done nothing wrong, and that the 
university would take care of it.

Then things got far, far worse. He contacted the university authorites and 
made all kinds of accusations against me, about my professional and sexual life.

I thought the university would protect me. After all, this wasn’t an episode 
of Call the Midwife, this was modern-day Britain – surely discrediting a woman 
by casting doubt on her sexual behaviour wouldn’t work?

How wrong I was. I was belittled and ridiculed by the police, who, in the 
absence of official support for me from the university, believed my stalker’s 
version of events.

Character assassination

I pleaded for the university to set the record straight, but they refused to 
get involved. They said it was a personal issue, rather than one relating to my 
work. Presumably this was because of the fabricated details about my personal 
life. No one stood up to state the obvious: that harassing a woman at her place 
of work, no matter what the “root cause”, is wrong.

Harassing a woman at her place of work, no matter what the "root cause" may 
be, is wrong

His attacks intensified to a full character assassination on the university’s 
social media accounts. Not knowing what my colleagues and students had heard 
about me, and what they believed, I felt too humiliated to come to campus. 
Finally, I hired a lawyer. The cease and desist letter stopped the direct 
harassment – it also cost me, a low-paid early career researcher, well over 
£1,000.


It was costing me my health, too. I had palpitations, felt out of breath all 
the time and couldn’t sleep. I lost a stone in weight and my hair was falling 
out. I barely left the house for months. I was finally signed off on sick leave 
for an extended period, with a diagnosis of severe anxiety, depression and 
post-traumatic stress disorder.

Shamed into silence

The accusations continued. I asked the university for a statement to clarify 
the situation. At one point the HR manager insisted to know, “off the record”, 
whether the claims about my sex life were true. I felt victimised and unwelcome 
at work.

I eventually received a letter from the university confirming that that there 
was no reason to suspect me of wrongdoing – they hoped I was now able move on. 
It was watered-down support, but the police told me it helped them, as it was 
no longer just my word against my stalker’s.

Scale of sexual abuse in UK universities likened to Savile and Catholic 
scandals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/07/scale-of-sexual-abuse-in-uk-universities-likened-to-savile-and-catholic-scandals>
I went back to work, but I didn’t feel like I belonged to the community any 
more. Listening to the hype about the culture of dignity and respect and 
supporting women made me sick.

I just wanted to get out of there. The missed publications and collaborations 
from that period meant that I probably wouldn’t have the career I wanted 
anyway. And so one more woman falls off the competitive academic ladder.

A big part of the problem is that universities don’t have the mechanisms or 
even the desire to combat these problems. Policies to protect us are 
non-existent. Most concern seems to be about keeping the institution’s name 
clean. All of my correspondence with the university has gone through its legal 
team, which I initially thought would protect me, but actually seems designed 
to intimidate me and keep the university out of it.

Being an early career researcher on the lookout for my next job, I can’t talk 
about this publicly. I was actively warned against it at my institution. Yet it 
kills me that other women are fighting the same battles. As we are shamed into 
silence, nothing changes.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 