
For any student, moving away from home can be daunting. But I didn’t expect 
student life in Scotland to be all that different from my home of the 
Netherlands. After all, we get the same news and TV shows online.


However, when I moved from Amsterdam to study at the University of Stirling, I 
began to realise that a few small things were catching me off balance. I was 
suffering a minor cultural shock.

In my first year, I quickly found out my English was not as good as I’d 
assumed. Most of my flatmates were born and raised in Scotland, and I 
constantly found myself having to ask people to repeat themselves. Their 
Scottish accents didn’t help and I was mispronouncing names and places all the 
time.


I also got confused about small cultural things. Much to my flatmates’ 
amusement, it took me two Christmases to figure out that mince pies are not 
actually filled with minced beef.

The language barrier meant that public transport was tricky at first. I found 
the lack of information about bus prices and how and where to get tickets 
really surprising. It turned a simple 15-minute journey into a daunting task.

Ayumi Cristoph, from Munich, is studying psychology at the University of 
Stirling. She says she also struggled with public transport when she first 
arrived: “There was so little information about public transport. I didn’t even 
know how to buy a bus ticket.”

Caught between two cultures, I'm a not-quite-international student
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/24/caught-between-two-cultures-not-quite-international-student>
Then I had to adjust to a new social life. I was surprised by the campus 
culture in the UK – in the Netherlands, most universities don’t have one main 
campus where you can attend university, as well as live and exercise all in the 
same place. But here, you never have to leave campus if you don’t want to. I 
had to get used to everyone being so close to each other all the time.

Nights out are different here too. In the Netherlands, the less effort you put 
into getting ready, the better. I’d normally slip on my trusty Converse shoes, 
along with some clothes I could get away with wearing to class tomorrow, and 
wear minimal make-up. But, in my experience, clubbing is more formal in the UK. 
Your make-up needs to be flawless and your hair needs to be immaculate. You’ll 
preferably be wearing a dress and heels, too. I was constantly having to borrow 
clothes off my friends just to fit in.

Eva Kriechbaum, also a psychology student at the University of Stirling, and 
from Tübingen in Germany, was surprised that in the UK a night out ends so 
early. “Clubs close at three and everyone just wanders off, whereas in Germany 
that would be the time I’d leave the house,” she says. “I’m used to places 
closing at six or seven.”

But it’s not all early closing times and strange pastries. I’ve found lots of 
pleasant surprises in the UK too – and so have many other international 
students I know. Agnes Dybeck, studying psychology in Stirling, and from 
Sweden, was taken aback by how sociable people are. “I was shocked when 
complete strangers started talking to me at the bus stop,” she says.

Travel broadens the mind, but can it alter the brain?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/18/travel-broadens-the-mind-but-can-it-alter-the-brain>
Eimear McCarthy, studying sport psychology in Stirling, and originally from 
Ireland, says she has been surprised by how smartly male students dress in 
Stirling. “The way guys dress is very smart compared to my friends at home,” 
she says.


However, on the downside, she was dissappointed to find that Scottish shops 
don’t sell her favourite Irish corn snack. “The UK doesn’t haveMeanies 
<http://media.collegetimes.com/uploads/2014/01/Mega-Meanies-Corn-Snack-Pickled-Onion-Flavour.jpg>
, which is just horrible,” she told me. “Meanies are my life.”

Culture shock can knock your confidence in the beginning. But you’re not alone 
in taking time to adapt, and soon you start to get used to all the differences. 
Looking back, most of the shocks I experienced made good stories to tell my 
friends.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 