
While in the early stages of my PhD fieldwork, I was sexually assaulted by a 
member of the community where I was conducting my work. I had just met this man 
while making contacts to do my research, and thought he seemed friendly. He 
took advantage of my vulnerability as a lone female student, and when we next 
met, he pursued me after I made clear I was not interested. I struggled against 
him until he decided I was not worth the trouble, and resorted to calling me a 
lesbian. He let me go – but not before reminding me that he knew where I was 
staying.

How should we cope with sexism? That's the wrong question
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/15/how-should-we-cope-with-sexism-thats-the-wrong-question>
I did not have a full sense of how alone I was until this happened. I was in a 
remote town, thousands of miles and several days from home. It does not matter 
exactly where; it could have been anywhere. I had good working relationships 
there, but I did not know where to turn.

Shortly after it happened, a neighbour told me that this man had a history of 
violence and was someone to avoid. I was afraid that saying anything to anyone 
would escalate the situation and spell the end of my research. Besides, 
everything I’d been taught about fieldwork – that it should be tough and I’d 
better know how to handle myself – told me to forget it had ever happened. I 
felt ashamed.

So I found a new place to stay, and got on with my work. I also stopped 
sleeping, afraid this man would seek me out and hurt me; afraid he would tell 
others that I had led him on and turned him down. When I ran into his friends 
or relatives in town, I searched their faces for signs of knowing. I avoided 
events he might attend. I had a month left on the trip, and completed it 
without seeing him again. I made plans to return to complete my work.


Once home though, the paralysing weight of fear lifted, and in its place was a 
sense of dread at the thought of going back. Returning to my data left a bad 
taste in my mouth. I avoided my department and classmates. I went through the 
motions but my heart was no longer in it. I became angry with myself for 
getting stuck here, for not bouncing back, for not knowing how to proceed.


I could see my life unravelling right in front of me and was powerless to stop 
it. I sought out my university’s sexual assault centre to see if they could 
offer any resources. A kind student volunteer made me a mug of tea, but I left 
feeling like I was the only one to have experienced this problem.

Managing an anxiety disorder in academia is a full-time job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/29/managing-an-anxiety-disorder-in-academia-is-a-full-time-job>
It was months before I finally walked into my supervisor’s office and said I 
couldn’t go back. I was afraid my concerns were too trivial. Would I sound 
incompetent? Would he think I’d handled myself badly, or that I should 
persevere for the sake of the work? Mostly, I was afraid of feeling embarrassed 
afterwards, and at times I did.

I was fortunate. My supervisor helped me strategise a tactful exit, and 
offered support to start over elsewhere. My other committee members accepted 
the decision without pressing for justification when I explained that I had 
encountered “safety issues” as a woman working alone (they seemed as 
uncomfortable talking about it as I was). It could have been much worse.

Yet deciding not to return was only the start of moving on academically. I 
lost months of work. I left behind research partners and could not bring myself 
to explain why. I fell foul of academic timelines and expectations. Most of 
all, the experience cratered my confidence. I am still struggling. The pressure 
to complete in a timely manner and remain competitive has only intensified as I 
lag behind classmates. I have wavered in and out of a commitment to finish.

I feel acutely alone – but of course, I am not. A 2014 study 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0102172> led 
by anthropologist Kathryn Clancy at the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign found that 26% of female scientists had experienced sexual 
assault while doing fieldwork – most frequently at the hands of senior 
researchers. Usually they were trainees, and chose not to report. I can’t help 
but wonder how many simply drop out. I very nearly did, and I had the luxury of 
walking away.

As women, we are socialised to keep these experiences quiet. Our training 
rarely covers such issues, and we fear raising them will be perceived as 
alarmist by peers and superiors. If we do speak openly, we fear having our 
professional competence called into question, and our careers derailed (all the 
more if the perpetrator is a superior). Meanwhile, our male colleagues remain 
largely oblivious to the added barriers we face.

New rules to 'protect' women researchers abroad are sexist and dangerous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/aug/19/new-rules-to-protect-women-researchers-abroad-are-sexist-and-dangerous>
This is my decision to speak out instead. As an academic community, we need to 
do better by the thousands of students like me, not just to prevent sexual 
violence in the first place, but to stop it from ending our careers. 
Universities ought to adopt clear policies against sexual violence, and 
allocate resources for support services and prevention efforts (including 
training for students and academic staff).

But policy changes are not enough, and we all have a role to play in 
confronting the problem. We can start by teaching our students that they have 
every right to put their safety ahead of their data – and by working to foster 
an academic culture within which this is possible.

The onus for confronting sexual violence should not rest on its victims. Help 
us not to be alone in fighting for change.

This article was amended on 10 January 2017 to correct Kathryn Clancy’s name – 
a previous version referred to her as Karen Clancy.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 