
Lenin once said: “The capitalists will sell us the rope with which we will 
hang them.” Vladimir Putin is no Lenin, nor can his regime – run by an elite 
that enjoys offshore accounts and oligarchic privileges – quite be described as 
anti-capitalist. Yet in Russia’s new confrontation with the west, the Kremlin’s 
strategy is to exploit western weaknesses and confusion as much as it is geared 
towards showing a bellicose face, whether in Ukraine, Syria or cyberspace. 
Perhaps this is why the head of MI5 has warned of the need tofend off Russia’s 
hostile interference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-parker-increasingly-aggressive-russia-a-growing-threat-to-uk-says-mi5-head>
.

Lenin is not Putin’s ideological guru. Foreigners, whether public officials or 
investors, who have at length met with Putin sometimes point to his particular 
brand of pragmatism (even if Angela Merkel once said he “lives in another 
world”). If he senses strong pushback, he adapts. If he detects gaps, he 
strikes at the Achilles heel.

There is little doubt Russian power is on the offensive. Since 2014, when it 
deployed its troops in Ukraine and annexed territory there, and since its 
policies in Syria have been analysed as overtly hostile to western endeavours, 
“Russian aggressiveness” has become a mainstay of the west’s official political 
discourse. But beyond boasting about Russia’s nuclear forces, demonstrating its 
new conventional military capacities and activating an army of internet 
trollers (none of which should be minimised), Putin’s regime is banking on the 
hope that western democracies will falter and be unable to offer up genuine 
resistance.

MI5 head: ‘increasingly aggressive’ Russia a growing threat to UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-parker-increasingly-aggressive-russia-a-growing-threat-to-uk-says-mi5-head>
He’s essentially waiting for that rope to be handed over. Brexit is one 
section of it, because in Russian eyes it has the potential to divide the west. 
The growth ofnational-populist movements in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/the-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right>
 and elsewhere is another, because it echoes the Kremlin’s illiberal narrative 
and produces useful allies. Radical leftwing anti-Americanism also fits handily 
into the picture, as it did decades ago when pacifists demonstrated in the west 
while missiles were being deployed by the eastern bloc during the cold war.

As paradoxical as it is, the far right and the far left in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> today join forces when it comes 
to Russia. The far right sees virtues in Putin; they are fascinated by his 
strong-man image, the ultra-conservative Christian values he espouses, and by a 
hostility they share towards Muslims. The far left sees a leader unfairly 
demonised, an underdog able to counter the greater evil of “western 
neo-imperialism” – whatever Russia’s behaviour in its own former empire. The 
failure of politicians such as Jeremy Corbyn and Jean-Luc Melanchon (the Labour 
leader’s closest equivalent on the French left) to clearly denounce Russia’s 
massacring of civilians in Aleppo points to the kind of complacency, or 
silence, that Moscow is keen to capitalise on.

For a decade and a half, the west had its eyes set solely on the threat of 
international terrorism. Now it finds itself having to focus on a state threat 
also.Identifying the exact nature and extent of the Russian threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/15/what-should-we-do-about-russia-aleppo-ukraine-cyber-baltic-vladimir-putin>
, and what should be done about it, are issues still being debated in Europe 
and during the US election. But to claim that Nato and western security 
agencies are deliberately exaggerating the danger coming from Russia for 
self-serving purposes (such as pumping up their budgets) is simply 
side-stepping a problem that cannot be denied.

If anyone needs to be convinced of this, travelling to the Baltic region might 
offer valuable insights. At a recent international conference I attended in 
Latvia’s capital, Riga, much of the talk centred understandably on the 
strengthening of western defence guarantees (Nato countries are set to deploy 
four battalions in Poland and the three Baltic states by June 2017). It might 
be tempting to cast this move as open “provocation” towardsRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, but it is less so if you visit 
Riga’s Museum of Occupations, where one small nation’s history of being invaded 
and persecuted by large powers (Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union) is vividly 
recounted.

Why is MI5 making such a fuss about Russia? | Mary Dejevsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/mi5-russia-putin-andrew-parker>
Yet what I found most striking was Latvian officials saying that in Russia’s 
reported attempts to interfere with this US election there were echoes of the 
Kremlin meddling in their own elections over the years. “We might have useful 
experiences to share on that account,” is the comment. Baltic governments are 
making strong efforts to counter Russian propaganda. The reasoning is that the 
challenge is as much about making their societies more resilient as it is about 
Putin’s posturing. With that logic, it hardly even matters whether or not Putin 
is actually pulling strings in the US campaign – the fact that he is widely 
perceived to be doing so is a victory in itself.

Likewise, when public confidence in western institutions is eroded (the 
suspicion that elections can be rigged, or that elites always lie and plot 
against the people), one clear beneficiary is the man who sits in the Kremlin. 
Russian propaganda is more effective if democracy is seen as tainted and 
perverted everywhere.

This is not to say that the rope Lenin mentioned is at the ready. In fact, 
Putin’s strategy might actually be backfiring. Russia’s actions and antics have 
arguably done more for Ukrainian national self-awareness, Baltic security 
efforts and Nato’s renewed sense of mission (territorial defence in Europe) 
than any other development since the break-up of the Soviet Union. What remains 
to be seen is whether loss of confidence within the west, over the very 
functioning of liberal democracy, threatens to encourage Putin’s worst 
instincts. That perhaps is worth pondering, before we dismiss MI5’s warnings as 
needlessly alarming, or even unjustified.
 