
When it comes to a day out, I don’t do spontaneous. I’m an organisational 
bore. Booking a cab, looking up train times, finding a restaurant.

This obsessive planning isn’t out of choice but circumstance. I was born with 
spinal muscular atrophy 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/spinal-muscular-atrophy/Pages/Introduction.aspx>, 
a genetic muscle-wasting condition, and I’ve used an electric wheelchair since 
I was a toddler. Like many other disabled people, I find the stresses of 
planning a day out are exacerbated when everyday activities, such as catching a 
train or finding a public toilet, are an obstacle.

In my lifetime the UK has become a more accessible place for disabled people, 
with efforts to adapt facilities and transport going some way to improving the 
ease of independence. But the mission isn’t complete. The concept of 
accessibility is an inconsistent and unreliable one that can leave even the 
most rigorous plan in tatters.

Paralympian forced to wet herself on train without accessible toilet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
A few years ago I met friends at a restaurant that had been getting great 
reviews. I triple-checked that they had wheelchair access (their website made 
no mention of access) and was assured that they did.Google Street View 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google-street-view> – I’d checked – 
showed a mammoth step, but they promised me a ramp. The ramp, as I found when I 
arrived, was a hastily arranged plank of wood, which they were hoping to shunt 
me up. Failing that, the chef and waiters would carry me – Cleopatra-style, but 
without the dignity. “Don’t worry,” the manager said. “The chef is very 
strong.” Options limited, I reluctantly agreed.

That wasn’t the first time I’ve been carried into a restaurant that failed to 
deliver on accessibility, and I doubt it’ll be the last. When access for some 
buildings is as simple as buying a portable ramp, why isn’t this enforced?

None of this will read as shocking to any disabled person, just as Anne Wafula 
Strike’s degrading train experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
 is a familiar scenario for those of us who need accessible toilets and either 
find none or that they don’t live up to the “accessible” name.

If I travel to London for the day, something I enjoy doing regularly, I can be 
forced to go 13 hours without the use of a toilet. I’ve got the reputation of 
having a steel bladder, but this struggle also means anything more than three 
glasses of wine is a no-go and coffee is definitely out of the question. My 
days out are a constant calculation of “Can I risk having a cup of tea?” and 
“How long until I get home and use the loo?” It’s as stressful as it sounds.

So-called accessible toilets often feel like a box-ticking exercise, a list of 
features which meet “accessible” requirements. For a disabled person like me, 
who can’t stand at all, adding a grab rail and an adjustable sink doesn’t mean 
I can use it.

This hasn’t gone unnoticed. An initiative called Changing Places 
<http://www.changing-places.org/> seeks to improve this by creating toilets 
that cater for needs like mine and provide facilities such as ceiling hoists 
and changing tables. These facilities are life-changing, but not the norm. 
Currently there are 900 of these fully accessible toilets in the UK. But you 
need to be in the right place at the right time if you’re out and need the loo.

Of course the issue of facilities is a problem only if you can reach them in 
the first place. Public transport is another headache for disabled people, and 
one that never allows for spontaneity. We rely on extortionate local accessible 
cabs (and don’t even think about trying to book one during school-run hours). 
We pray that spaces on buses aren’t crammed with buggies and suitcases. And we 
suffer the panic of hoping there’s help available at the railway station.

'I worry I'll be forgotten on the train': our readers' experiences of 
accessible facilities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/as-the-train-empties-i-worry-ill-be-forgotten-uk-disability-facilities>
Train companies often ask disabled passengers to book their travel in advance 
so that the right assistance is given. But booking doesn’t guarantee help, and 
you can still end up stranded on an empty platform or carriage. I’ve been in 
that situation too many times to count, and the worry that I’ll be left alone, 
looking for that elusive staff member, would make me stay at home if it wasn’t 
for my determination to enjoy a social life.

For years, instead of making pleading eyes at the train guard or asking a 
member of the public to find someone with a ramp, I’ve longed for a call button 
on board the train that would alert the station of my need for help, but it’s 
adjustments such as this that aren’t being made, as companies believe they’ve 
done their job in catering for disabled people.

Not enough is being changed to make the UK fully accessible. Until disabled 
people’s voices are heard, attitudes towards accessibility will remain 
complacent. Getting out into the world and having fun shouldn’t be a struggle 
of organisational hell – but until accessibility is redefined, this is the 
reality for many disabled people.
 