
George Orwell wrote: “We have now sunk to a depth at which the restatement of 
the obvious is the first duty of intelligent men.” He was talking about 
politics but it also applies to domestic life, where it is terrifyingly easy to 
lose grasp of the basics – to cease to see the wood for the trees. This being 
the first column of the year, I’m going to try to state what, to me at least, 
are the most simple and enduring truths about living as part of a family.

First, and perhaps most easily forgotten as a parent, you are less powerful 
than you think you are. Children are not blank slates. They arrive with a 
number of genetic proclivities and if these are strong enough, they are likely 
to come out – whatever you do, within limits, to suppress or encourage them 
(obviously, abuse can make a mess of anyone).

They are their own people, not your guinea pigs. They make their own decisions 
from a very early age – not only about how they behave, but also how they 
interpret events. One sibling may draw very different conclusions from exactly 
the same parental action as another. Which is not to suggest you throw your 
hands up and say, “why bother trying then?” but to understand that whatever you 
do, it’s never anything better than your best guess and merely part of a wider 
process.

Quite apart from the wild card of how your children process your behaviour, 
parental actions can have unpredictable consequences out there in the physical 
world. You may want them to take regular exercise, and buy them a bike, but 
then find they get knocked off it and break a leg, or worse. So don’t waste 
your time beating yourself up when things go wrong – because sometimes they 
will, and you can’t stop it.

Don’t think you are investing in your children’s future. They are not an 
investment. They are an act of love. When you become a parent, nothing should 
be expected in return through the workings of natural justice. This giving – so 
long and so much – without any promise of reward isn’t easy. All too often I 
have felt that treacherous whinge tickling the back of my throat – “after all 
I’ve done for you!”. In response, your children will inform you that they 
didn’t ask to be born, and there is, I’m afraid to say, no answer to that.

As for that other element of family life – adult relationships – the dynamics 
are as oblique as those that exist between parents and children. In marriage, 
as in life generally, you are winging it all the time. Who knows why some 
unlikely couples thrive while others who are seemingly well suited head for the 
divorce courts?

I would go only this far – if you can master the skills of respect and 
communication, you are on the best available path. Passion, “fun”, shared 
interests, even perhaps love itself must all take a second seat to these 
fundamentals. For love comes and goes, whereas respect and communication are 
enduring.

However, honest communication in a close adult relationship is often 
dauntingly complex given the inadequacies of language, the machinery of denial, 
the workings of the unconscious and the distortions of emotional need. And 
respect is not given easily, because it requires a critical measure of 
self-respect to offer it, even when it is due.

Family <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> life is a shot in the 
dark. If you get it right – and everyone gets it right some of the time – the 
payoff is better than gold. Even if you get it wrong, it’s still far better 
than if you never had it at all. One could sum up my conclusions in the phrase 
“be realistic” – but that would imply that the reality is easily grasped. “Be a 
grownup” is probably better advice. I only wish I were better at following it.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 