
Inheritance tax <https://www.theguardian.com/money/inheritancetax> (IHT) 
becomes an issue when someone dies. It is a one-off tax paid on the value of 
the deceased's estate above a set threshold – currently £325,000.

The tax is set at 40% of any value over that threshold, reduced to 36% if more 
than 10% of the estate is given to charity. To work out how much IHT, if any, 
needs to be paid, the executors of the estate need to add up the value of all 
of the assets, then subtract any debts, bills and funeral expenses.

There are lots of ways to reduce the amount of IHT your family will pay after 
you have gone.

Couples

If you are married or have a civil partner, he or she can inherit your entire 
estate without facing any IHT bill. So if your half of the house is worth 
£200,000 and you have another £200,000 in assets of any other kind, the whole 
lot can go to your spouse or civil partner without a charge.

He or she also inherits any part of your IHT allowance not used on your death. 
So if you left them everything, they can now leave up to £650,000 without any 
tax being payable. But if, for example, you left £150,000 to other family 
members, he or she can only leave up to £500,000 before there is any IHT to pay.

The allowance from the first partner to die is transferred to the second 
partner only after the second partner's death. There arefurther details and 
links to the relevant forms here 
<https://www.gov.uk/inheritance-tax/transferring-inheritance-tax-thresholds>.

Gifts

Rather than wait until you are dead to pass on your assets, you might decide 
to dispose of some of them while you are still alive. There are lots of gifts 
you can make which can reduce the value of your estate.

You can hand over as much as you want, to anyone you want, in the form of 
"potentially exempt transfers". As their name suggests, these are only 
potentially exempt from IHT. Under the rules, if you live for seven years after 
making them they are exempt; if you die within seven years they will be added 
to your estate and, if the estate is worth over £325,000, the gift will attract 
some IHT:

• Within three years – the full amount of IHT is due

• Within three to four years – 80% of the IHT is due

• Within four to five years – 60% of the IHT is due

• Within five to six years – 40% of the IHT is due

• Within six to seven years – 20% of the IHT is due

This is worth bearing in mind if you are giving away a large sum of money to 
help someone with a purchase, like a house. You need to think about whether 
there is enough money to foot the IHT bill in more liquid assets so your 
offspring does not end up having to sell the property to pay the tax.

You can also give away up to £3,000 in each tax year without it being included 
in your estate when you die. That annual allowance can be carried forward to 
the next tax year, allowing you to give away up to £6,000 in one year.

There are other gifts which are completely exempt, however quickly after 
making them you die. These are:

• Gifts to your spouse or civil partner

• Gifts to charity and some other organisations, including musuems and amateur 
sports clubs

• Gifts of up to £250 a year to as many people as you want

When a couple marries, people are allowed to give them the following without 
the money being included in the giver's estate (the gift has to be made, or 
promised, near the date of the wedding or civil partnership):

• Parents can give them cash or gifts worth up to £5,000

• Grandparents can each give up to £2,500

• Anyone else can give up to £1,000

Avoiding IHT

The gifts outlined above can help reduce your bill, but there are other things 
which will not have an impact.

You cannot, for example, give away your property to your children and continue 
to live there free of charge to avoid the tax. If you give away the property 
and move out, it will become exempt after seven years; but if you give away the 
property and live there, you will be expected to pay a market rent – and the 
owner will need to pay income tax on that rent. Otherwise, the property will be 
considered a "gift with reservation of benefit" and may still be subject to IHT.

A good financial adviser should be able to help you organise your cash in a 
way that will mean your relatives do not end up paying more IHT than they need 
to after you have gone.

Paying IHT

The tax owed on an estate is calculated by the executors of the will. They 
must include all of the assets – including relevant gifts made within the last 
seven years – when they do their sums.

It is their responsibility to pay what is owed within six months of the end of 
the month in which the person died.

Raising the money to pay the bill may mean cashing in any savings accounts 
held by the deceased, and/or selling some of the assets in the estate. If money 
is tied up in property you can arrange for the IHT to be paid in monthly 
instalments over 10 years – however, there will be interest to pay on top of 
the IHT.

If you are keen to reduce what needs to be sold, you could consider taking out 
a life insurance policy to cover it. You will need to have the policy written 
"under trust" or it will be added to your estate and your relatives will end up 
paying IHT on the pay out. Speak to a financial adviser or insurer to find out 
how to do this.
 