
In the summer of 2007, just before the house price bubble burst, buy-to-let 
seminar firm Inside Track claimed it sold one in every 12 new-build properties 
in the UK, in association with sister company Instant Access Properties.

Its customers for these flats, and others in Spain and the US, were investors 
who had signed up with the two companies whose promotional literature 
confidently told buyers they could become "property millionaires".

Guardian Money has been warning against these firms since August 2002. And in 
2008 they went spectacularly bust, leaving many would-be landlords nursing 
losses ranging from about £50,000 to more than £500,000.

In the years since, many of these investors have thrown in the towel, some 
ruefully putting down their losses to experience. But one, Tamsin Barks from 
West Sussex, did not. She has waged a lonely and often acrimonious battle 
against those she considers responsible for advice that has led to personal 
losses that could top £400,000. Facing opponents with huge legal resources, she 
has fought a one-woman war through the courts, often representing herself 
against top barristers.

But now it appears she is no longer alone. For hundreds of other Inside 
Track/Instant Access Properties victims could join her in the fight for 
compensation. They have pledged to look into a potential group legal action 
against those they hold responsible for their plight. If the concept proves 
viable, they could have the firepower of an £800,000 legal fighting fund.

From 2002, Inside Track advertised free "workshops" in newspapers, on the 
radio and via a mailshot campaign. Thousands signed up, sometimes handing over 
nearly £10,000 in seminar and membership fees to its sister company Instant 
Access Properties for "education" and "expertise" before they bought anything.

Once hooked by the promise of property wealth, the twin companies stoked the 
speculative frenzy even further, promising a fast road to riches via sales of 
flats bought "off-plan" in Spain and Florida, as well as the UK. These 
properties were often little more than a developer's intention for the future.

After the firms went bust, thousands of property owners were left with assets 
worth far less than they had paid for them. Some had title to, or had paid 
deposits on, properties which remain unfinished or not even started. Others 
were not worth the buying price. Many investors eventually handed back the keys 
to lenders.

We first reported on Barks's fight in February 2008. She had bought seven 
properties on Instant Access Properties' recommendations – four in the US, two 
in Spain and one in the UK. She says all have lost her money, despite the 
firm's claims of superior market knowledge and advice.

"I thought it was too good to be true. And I wish I had stuck to my instincts. 
But I was on my own and vulnerable.Property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> investment seemed sensible – it 
was bricks and mortar, not some fly-by-night financial deal, and I could 
understand it," she told us at the time.

Prepared to risk what little she had left to gain "justice", she has spent the 
past three years in a lone legal battle. Barks has already launched challenges 
in court against founder Jim Moore, who no longer lives in the UK, former 
company secretary and director Maria Gifford, and former executives Brad Rosser 
and Anthony McKay.

Some of those associated with the two companies as directors, shareholders or 
senior managers have done very well. Moore, formerly the promoter of failed 
perfume pyramid sales scheme L'Arome, had accumulated so much that ex-wife Kim 
Moore could negotiate a reported £16m divorce settlement in 2008.

Barks, with 200 others, recently consulted specialist litigation lawyers Coyle 
White Devine to explore the possibility of bringing a group action to try to 
recover their losses. According to Barks, the private consultation, at an 
undisclosed London location, was held amid tight security due to fears a public 
meeting could be infiltrated by agents working for defendants in any future 
legal action. There was also concern that an open meeting could be targeted for 
defamation actions by potential defendants, preventing victims openly relating 
their experiences.

Barks says so many victims have similar stories that only a group or class 
action would make sense. "It's simple arithmetic. Our group of Instant Access 
victims has grown from a handful to over 600 in under two months, although we 
reckon there are at least 2,000 more who might join us if they knew about it," 
she says. "But if only 400 join and each puts in £2,000, then we have a very 
serious £800,000 fighting fund. Nothing has been decided yet about any 
potential action, so there is no need for cash now – it will depend on the 
views of leading counsel and legal expenses insurers. Even if I only recovered 
a fraction of my losses I would have some satisfaction, and it would be better 
than nothing."

Inside Track/Instant Access Properties victims complain of:

• Failing to get mortgages when they were told they were available

• Misdescriptions – one property "200m from the beach" was in fact 5km from 
the sea

• Properties that were never started or left unfinished

• Hidden commissions of up to 15% on property sales – on top of "membership 
fees" and 3% "finder's fees"

• Deposits paid to developers in Spain who have disappeared

• Over-valuation of properties and poor quality surveyor reports

Although Brad Rosser was listed as the group's vice-chairman in an Inside 
Track press release in 2006, he says he was not a director of the company. And 
although a November 2004 Sunday Times report said he was a "co-owner" (along 
with Jim Moore) of the companies, and the 2006 Sunday Times Rich List stated 
that he "runs" Inside Track and Instant Access Properties, "with a stake worth 
about £70m", he says that was wrong and he never owned any shares.

Asked who did own the shares, he says: "I was not a director. At any rate, a 
director does not need to have the full disclosure of shareholders, 
particularly if the shareholders do not want to disclose themselves. So I have 
no comment on the shareholders to make."

Rosser and fellow Inside Track executive Tony McKay dismiss Barks's claim as 
being without merit. In a statement they said: "We refute any allegation that 
we have been involved in any wrongdoing. We will robustly defend Ms Barks's 
case and any other litigation, including a group class action. We believe any 
litigation is utterly misconceived."

Guardian Money was unable to contact Jim Moore.

Those interested in the potential legal action should email 
classactioniap@gmail.com <mailto:classactioniap@gmail.com>
 