
An investigation has been launched into the death of a 27-year-old detainee in 
an immigration detention centre, the third such death in a matter of weeks.

Home office officials confirmed that the man, a Polish detainee, died at 
Morton Hall immigration removal centre in Lincoln on Wednesday. The Prisons and 
Probation Ombudsman is carrying out the investigation.


There were two deaths last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/07/investigation-second-death-immigrant-centre-morton-hall-week>
 in UK detention centres, one of them also in Morton Hall and the other in 
Colnbrook IRC near Heathrow.

According to other detainees, the man who died this week is thought to have 
killed himself after being refused bail just before Christmas. His partner, 
whose pregnancy was too advanced to attend the bail hearing, gave birth to the 
couple’s son on the same day he died.

The detainees said the man who died was “young and quiet, never causing any 
trouble. He spent his time watching TV, playing games and at the gym.” They 
added that the mood at the centre was very low after his death.

Detainees said the man had not committed any crime in the UK and that he had 
sought medical help for mental health problems.

A spokesperson for the Unity Centre in Glasgow <http://unitycentreglasgow.org/>
, which supports asylum seekers and other migrants including those in 
detention, said: “While centres like Morton Hall exist, with indefinite periods 
of detention in place and among the increasingly hostile environment 
manufactured towards migrants within the UK, preventable deaths will continue.”

Emma Ginn, director of the charity Medical Justice 
<http://www.medicaljustice.org.uk/>, which assists sick immigration detainees, 
many of whom have significant mental health issues, said: “We are deeply 
disturbed to hear of a third death in a matter of weeks, bringing the death 
toll since 2000 to 39 who died in immigration detention or shortly after 
release. Year after year, investigations into these deaths reveal ongoing 
systemic healthcare failings. We fear that as long as these failings continue 
to go unaddressed there will be more deaths. We call for urgent action.”

IRC Morton Hall is a 392-bed unit run by the Prison Service on behalf of the 
Home Office. It was previously a women’s prison.

A Home Office spokesman said: “We can confirm that a 27-year-old Polish man 
who was detained at Morton Hall immigration removal centre was found dead on 
Wednesday 11 January. Our thoughts are with the individual’s family at this 
very sad time. As is the case with any death in detention, the police have been 
informed and a full independent investigation will be conducted by the Prisons 
and Probation Ombudsman.”

The Centre for Mental Health 
<https://www.centreformentalhealth.org.uk/immigration-removal-centres> was 
commissioned by NHS England to conduct a rapid mental health needs assessment 
into people held in detention centres across England. While their report 
identified some examples of good practice, the authors found that most 
detainees felt as if they were not being listened to and were treated as if 
they were lying, and that detention had a significant impact on wellbeing. The 
report calls for more effort to ensure that those with marked vulnerabilities 
are not detained and 24/7 access to crisis care.

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries can be 
foundhere <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>
 