


The Irish property crash was one of the biggest in history and has proved the 
ruin of many as the country tries to shake off the effects of the collapse and 
subsequent bank bailout.

But Dylan Cullen, a 35-year-old property entrepreneur, plans to be on the side 
of the winners by orchestrating the firesale of properties to rich Russian 
buyers and by enticing Irish buyers back into the rock bottom market at home.

The sales of properties – principally on the Bulgarian Black Sea coast – range 
from the cheapest at €15,000 (£11,764) to the most expensive at €135,000. So 
far, Appreciating Assets, his company, has sold 400 Irish- or British-owned 
properties. Cullen estimates there may be thousands more out there waiting to 
be sold and he believes his business can help revive the devastated Irish 
market.

When the Irish economy hit the buffers, he and his partners shifted their 
focus from obtaining foreign properties for Irish investors to off-loading them 
to the Russian nouveau riche.

But now the genial and chatty Cullen, son of a leftwing councillor, says his 
clients are no longer distressed sellers; instead, they are looking to sell 
abroad to fund new purchases at home.

"We have noted a real sea change in the reasons [for selling] over the last 
year. A lot of Irish and British people are saying 'I think there is great 
value in the market at home now. I bought in Bulgaria as an investment because 
I couldn't enter the property market inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.' For them, €50,000 wasn't even a 
deposit here in Dublin during the boom whereas, for the same money, they could 
have bought a two- bedroom apartment on the Black Sea."

"It's time to bring the Irish money home, although I always tell our clients 
both here and in the UK that they may not get back the same as they paid for 
their Bulgarian property. The only advantage is that at least they will have 
spare cash, either to clear those debts on the domestic front or make some 
seriously sound investments at home."

He cites a client from Bolton who sold his Bulgarian apartment and used the 
proceeds to buy a property at home. "He can drive to it. He does not depend on 
management companies to look after tenants, as he had to do on the Black Sea. 
If someone tells him the washing machine is broken or needs lick of paint, he 
can jump in his car and get the problem sorted for his tenants. He has bought 
to rent and can guarantee a better rate of return from his rental. He would be 
very typical of the new client keen to sell their overseas investment."

Cullen claims that his company will eventually help the property market 
recovery by bringing back hundreds of millions of euros from the Black Sea and 
beyond. Later this year, Appreciating Assets intends to entice Russian 
investors to buy Spanish properties at knock-down prices that the Irish and 
British are keen to sell.

"I've been saying for a number of years that I think it's time to bring our 
money home. You've got value in this country right now, and you certainly have 
in the UK.

In between sips of coffee on an unseasonably sunny Irish summer's day, Cullen 
concludes by saying something few observers of the Republic's mixed fortunes 
expected to hear again.

"I love the property business because there are very few assets that you can 
buy that you can honestly put your hand on your heart and say 'It doesn't 
matter, it will always be worth something.' Unlike stocks and shares, it will 
never go to zero."

His upbeat message sounds positively Gramscian and brings to mind the Italian 
Marxist's most famous quote about the necessity to have "optimism of the will, 
pessimism of the intellect". Cullen sides with the former and deploys a 
culinary metaphor to justify his faith in a recovery.

"If you go out and you over-indulge on a particular meal and you feel ill 
afterwards, it doesn't mean you won't ever eat again; it just means the next 
time you eat out you are not going to gorge. "

The cost of the Celtic Tiger boom 

House prices in Ireland fell by 43 per cent in four years from 2007. In that 
boom year, up to 90,000 new homes were built compared to 180,000 in the UK — 
even though Britain's population is 13 times higher than Ireland's. A measure 
of how the Irish property bubble burst can be seen in terms of the cost to the 
taxpayer. The International Monetary Fund estimated that in 2011 the budgetary 
cost of paying for the collapse – in terms of bailing out debt-ridden banks, 
for instance – amounted to 40 per cent of gross domestic income; by comparison, 
in the US, the comparable figure was 3%.
 