
A small independent energy firm has launched the UK’s first variable 
electricity tariff, promising households significantly lower bills if they 
avoid using power at peak hours and run their appliances overnight.

For years energy experts have suggested that smart tariffs, which price 
electricity according to the time of day, are the future, as they could help 
smooth out the peaks in demand currently faced by the National Grid. This week, 
Hertfordshire-basedGreen Energy UK <http://www.greenenergyuk.com/> launched its 
Tide tariff which offers exactly that. Initially only available to households 
in England, the Tide dual-fuel tariff offers three different prices of 
electricity depending on the time of day.

Most standard households pay the same for their electricity whether they use 
it at 3am or 6pm – around 10p-14p per kWh. But if the price for electricity was 
just 5p at night but 25p during the peak hours of 4pm-7pm, would you change 
your behaviour? Tide will charge users 4.99p per kWh from 11pm-6am, 11.99p from 
6am-4pm, 24.99p from 4pm-7pm, and 11.99p from 7pm-11pm.

So-called “time-of-use” tariffs are expected to become widespread as 
households are fitted with smart meters, which for the first time allow power 
companies to bill customers at different rates depending on the time of day.

Happy new year? 2017 rings in more commuter misery and higher bills
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/02/new-year-2017-commuter-misery-higher-bills-national-living-wage-lifetime-isa>
Many readers will already be familiar with the Economy 7 tariff, which offers 
cut-price electricity at night. British Gas last year launched a simpler 
version of this, the FreeTime tariff, which offers free energy between 9am and 
5pm on Saturday or Sunday. Early indications show consumers have saved £60 a 
year by taking advantage of this.

The time-of-use tariffs will particularly favour those with an electric car 
who charge it overnight, shift workers and insomniacs. Those with electric 
cookers who prepare peak-time meals should look elsewhere.

Crucially, you’ll need a free smart meter installed if you want to sign up. If 
you don’t already have a compatible one, Green Energy will send someone to 
install one. You also have to take the company’s 100% green gas supply which is 
charged at one rate irrespective of the time the gas is consumed.

Doug Stewart, Green Energy UK’s chief executive, says: “Our tariff is the 
smart way customers can bring down their bill, not trying to find the cheapest 
deal with a new-on-the-block supplier. The introduction of a time-of-day tariff 
is the first step into a new world of energy infrastructure; a step which lets 
customers decide when they use energy and what that means to their bill.”

The company, which has been supplying green energy for more than 15 years but 
only has 20,000 customers, claims consumers will be able to save £60 a year 
with moderate behavioural changes. But the big question is how much consumers 
can do this. Are you (or your neighbours if the walls are thin) happy to run 
your washing machine or dishwasher at night? Can you put off the ironing until 
11pm? Could you really vac your house in the early hours?

Mark Todd of comparison website Energyhelpline.com 
<https://energyhelpline.com/fri/> agrees, saying it will be very difficult for 
consumers to work out whether the tariff will save them money. This is because 
the final bill will depend on so many variables – not least how much the user 
is prepared to change their habits. “My gut reaction is that it may be cheaper 
than the big six supplier’s standard tariffs, but it is unlikely to beat the 
very cheapest deals – unless, that is, you are prepared to spend all night 
washing your clothes, and running the dishwasher. It is also a variable tariff, 
which sounds alarm bells as you could get hit by a price rise soon.”

Green Energy UK hopes that people will be swayed by the fact its electricity 
comes from greener combined heat and power (CHP) units, meaning it produces 
around a third of the CO2 per kWh of standard electricity. This makes it 
greener than most, but not the 100% renewable power offered by some rivals. Its 
green gas, which costs 3.59p per unit and is sourced from anaerobic digestion 
plants, is cheaper than British Gas’s standard tariff (3.79p), but more 
expensive than the cheapest non-green suppliers that top the tables (typical 
2.8p).

Npower goes down in my estimation over bill readings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/23/npower-estimated-bill-readings-ignored-final-readings>
Martin Lewis of Money Saving Expert says: “If you are a medium to heavy user 
who uses far more electricity than gas, and you could shift your usage 
overnight, then this will be a winner.”

What you can save

Before you set the alarm to start the ironing at 5am, you might want to 
consider the relative costs.

An hour’s ironing typically uses 1 kWh of electricity, which will cost around 
5p on Green Energy’s night-time price, 11p during the day or 25p during the 
4pm-6pm peak. Those opting to run a standard older model washing machine on 
this tariff will bring the cost down from 22p during the day to 10p a cycle if 
they run it after 11pm. A dishwasher cycle at 65C will cost around 7.5p at 
night, 16.5p at midday or 37p if run at the peak time.

Running an older dishwasher every night for 50 weeks would save £31.50 a year 
compared to running it during the day on this tariff. An older washing machine 
run three times a week at night would save £15 a year. However, if you have one 
of the latest A+++ rated washing or dishwashing machines that use much less 
power, you reduce those savings by half.

The biggest savings come when charging an electric car. A 30kW recharge will 
cost £1.50 at night or £3.30 during the day – a £40 annual saving.

‘Safety first’ says the fire brigade

Is it safe – and/or fair on the neighbours – to run a dishwasher and other 
appliances at night? Many people admit to putting on the dishwasher before 
going to bed, and who hasn’t left the house while the washing machine runs? But 
a spate of tumble drier fires has pushed the matter centre stage in recent 
months. The London Fire Brigade told the Guardian that it attends a fire that 
can be traced to white goods of some sort on a daily basis. As a result it 
advises people not to leave them unattended overnight.

If a fire breaks out during the night, whatever the cause, the risk to life is 
always greater

“We understand a balance needs to be struck between energy use, green issues 
and fuel costs, but in our view you can’t put a price on fire safety. If a fire 
breaks out during the night, whatever the cause, the risk to life is always 
greater as it is very likely people will be asleep and have less time to react 
and escape,” an LFB spokesman says.

Dave Green, Fire Brigades Union national officer, says: “Fires in the home at 
night can go unnoticed for far longer, and can therefore spread more rapidly. 
We always advise the public to turn off electrical products that are not being 
used. In particular tumble dryers that have been blamed for a number of fatal 
fires over the past few years.”

The most recent assessment of fire statistics was published by the government 
in June 2014, and shows that the most common time for fires to be reported is 
8pm-9pm (the one-hour period accounting for 9% of all fires). While only 11% of 
fires occurred in the five hours between midnight and 5am, these caused a fifth 
of all deaths in Great Britain in 2013-14. In that period, fire brigades were 
called to 39,600 dwelling fires. Smokers caused the largest share of deaths in 
accidental dwelling fires (37%), while cooking appliances are the source of 
more than half of accidental fires. Electrical appliances account for 12% of 
fires in homes.
 