
In one corner of the large, light room a two-year-old carefully dollops red 
paint on to an egg box. Elsewhere kids play together, or chat to one of the 
several adults present, and occasionally a young girl in a long yellow dress 
sweeps past.

This is Grasshoppers in the Park, an east London nursery where professional 
staff and parents work together to create childcare that is cheaper than a 
private nursery while having more adults on hand to help. In the UK, childcare 
eats up27% <http://b.3cdn.net/nefoundation/c142e402b391ed2097_z7m6ibzpa.pdf> 
(pdf) of family income (more than double the 12% OECD average) and in London 
average costs are more thana third higher 
<http://www.familyandchildcaretrust.org/sites/default/files/Childcare%20cost%20survey%202016%20FINAL%20VERSION.pdf>
 (pdf) than in the rest of England.

By getting involved at Grasshoppers parents can reduce fees. All 30 families 
are expected to contribute in some way, from DIY to helping with the daily walk 
to the park. They also help with the finances, fundraising and admin (much of 
which can be done out of office hours) or simply by taking home a bag of 
laundry over the weekend.

Parents able to take on a bigger role are invited to help in the classroom for 
a regular day a week. Like other larger roles, “parent days” attract a monthly 
discount of £120 off the fees, which are already banded according to household 
income. That might be less than most mums and dads could earn in that time, but 
it is not solely about the money.

Katya (at Grasshoppers, everyone goes by their first name), whose son attends 
the nursery, helps out one day a week. Sitting on a child-sized chair as the 
kids munch their mid-morning snack, she tells me she values her parent days as 
she knows what her son does and gets to meet the other children. “Parents and 
staff learn from each other,” she adds.
 Katya with her son, who goes to Grasshoppers four days a week. Photograph: 
Orlando Gili 
Dafydd, a primary school teacher and parent director of Grasshoppers, agrees. 
“It is a real community,” he says. “We pay over the odds, in a very low paying 
sector, and our staff are fantastic.” Four out of five of them have degrees, 
two are (unusually) men, and only one role has required recruitment, albeit 
twice, in the last four years.

The co-production model of childcare is well-established in countries such as 
Sweden, New Zealand, Canada and the US. In the UK, however, it is rare, says 
Lucie Stephens, head of co-production at the New Economics Foundation (NEF). 
Stephens has found just a handful of such nurseries in the UK, almost all in
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. Most started with a few 
families getting together to share childcare before becoming formalised over 
time, in Grasshoppers’ case as a not-for-profit limited company.

Existing structures are largely failing all but the wealthiest

NEF is now working towards providing a structure for the creation of more 
co-produced nurseries in Britain, particularly in low-income urban areas. 
Working with the Family andChildcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/childcare> Trust, which campaigns to reduce 
pressures on family life in the UK, they hope to start the first pilot in 
London in the spring.

Innovation in the provision of childcare is essential, Stephens insists, 
particularly in London where existing structures are largely failing all but 
the wealthiest. She also believes being non-profit making is key: “Parents 
giving their time and effort want to feel it is to benefit their children, not 
faceless shareholders.” This has additional potential benefits when trying to 
get support from other organisations. NEF hopes to work with housing 
associations and local authorities, which may be able to provide low-rent 
premises for a service that would benefit their tenants.

Private nurseries

So can private nurseries learn anything from the Grasshoppers model? While the 
private sector is always looking for innovative ways to remain sustainable, 
says Claire Schofield, director of membership, policy and communications at 
National Day Nurseries Association, early years practitioners are dedicated 
specialists in their field.

“Having too many unqualified parents, however enthusiastic, may dilute this 
quality of provision for children,” says Schofield. “Creative solutions like 
co-production can be part of the picture to solve our childcare challenges, but 
can’t be a substitute for the major reforms to our childcare policy and funding 
needed to provide the volume of high-quality, affordable places that parents 
need.”

 In terms of the practicalities for working parents, Schofield adds that “most 
parents who choose childcare do work and may not be time-rich in this way.”
 Bruce, who has worked at Grasshoppers for four years, puts his acting 
background to good use during storytelling time. Photograph: Orlando Gili 
Luciana, the acknowledged linchpin of Grasshoppers, worked in more typical 
nurseries (“where they can’t wait for parents to leave”) before she came to 
Grasshoppers but prefers her current workplace, despite the challenges. 
Finances can be insecure, she admits, and there is some concern about the
government’s move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/23/poorest-families-losing-free-childcare-to-working-parents>
 to raise “free” childcare for three- and four-year-olds from 15 hours per week 
to 30 since Grasshoppers (like most private nurseries) makes a loss on the 
government-funded hours.

Another key challenge is trying to widen access to the nursery. Despite moving 
into the heart of a Hackney estate a year ago, and providing three free days 
for two-year-olds entitled to the government’s 15-hour low-income families’ 
scheme, the nursery remains predominantly middle class. Many parents may be on 
quite low incomes but most are well educated and only one child comes from the 
estate.

Grasshoppers does everything it can to reach out: advertising, talking to 
people and running free open music and play sessions every Friday. “Even if 
parents could find the time,” says Dafydd, “some seem intimidated by the idea 
of getting involved,” though he insists they needn’t be. Like Luciana, he 
thinks NEF’s plans for co-produced nurseries in deprived areas will be 
difficult to implement but both agree that the benefits make it worth 
persevering.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 