
The Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> dossier, 
and his response to it, dominated media coverage yesterday, thus eclipsing the 
farewell speech by President Barack Obama.

It also meant that there has been relatively little analysis of the claims 
made by Obama about his achievements during his eight years in office.


Among those who did, the thumbs were largely down. The speech “underlined how 
little he has to brag about” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-4111550/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Patients-betrayed-time-GPs.html>
, said the Daily Mail.

Conceding that the expectations raised by his election slogan (“Yes we can!”) 
were “always going to be hard to live up to”, the paper argued that his parting 
claim - “Yes, we did!” - rang “bitterly hollow.”

Why? Because he failed to carry out his pledge to close Guantanamo Bay, which 
remains “an ugly stain on America’s reputation.”

Obama was also “ineffectual” in “issuing empty threats against Syria, 
interfering disgracefully in our Brexit referendum and concluding a highly 
perilous nuclear deal with Iran.”

Inside the US, he did “nothing to ease racial tensions, while his welfare 
reforms have been at best a mixed success, at worst a costly failure. As for 
the economic recovery, most of the credit belongs to George W Bush.”

The Mail concluded that his most lasting legacy is “likely to be America’s 
disenchantment with its liberal elite - and the triumph of Mr Trump.”

Trevor Kavanagh, writing in the Sun 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2593374/barack-obamas-legacy-rated-as-he-vacates-the-oval-office-ahead-of-donald-trumps-arrival/>
, saw his legacy in similar terms. It is Obama’s fault that the US now has 
Trump. The “cool dude” president was a representative of “the metropolitan 
American elite” who “showed lofty disdain for millions of ordinary, 
working-class Americans.”
 Trevor Kavanagh’s take Photograph: The Sun 
He has also left the once-mighty Democratic Party in ruins with his Republican 
foes now dominating Capitol Hill and giving them the power to unravel 
everything he stood for in office — including Obamacare.

In fact, Kavanagh did believe that Obama “can claim some successes on welfare 
and health care.”

But, having “presided over a resurgent economy, a soaring stock market and a 
boom in jobs”, US voters were enraged “to see the very rich get very much 
richer while they barely trod water.”

As for race relations, “Obama’s record is at best patchy, with millions of 
black Americans turning their backs on the Democrats who took them for granted.”

Turning to the international stage, Kavangah argued that “Obama was a failure” 
by preferring “to take a back seat and hope for the best.”

In the Middle East, “Obama shifted from timidity to shambles” and “his 
reputation for dithering grew as events in Iraq, Libya and Syria left hundreds 
of thousands dead, the region in chaos and the western way of life under threat 
from an unparalleled migration crisis.”

His “inactivity served to encourage bullyboy Russia to exert its influence in 
the region, giving it its first foothold for the first time in 40 years.”

By contrast, Simon Jenkins, writing in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/ignore-prohecies-trump-obama-much-in-common-america-ability-to-stay-same>
, thought Obama’s achievements “not inconsiderable”. He “pulled the American 
economy back from the brink of recession, saved the auto industry, prevented a 
bank collapse and put his country on the road back towards full employment.”

He also “introduced a health plan that may be flawed, but should be too 
entrenched for its enemies to destroy” while, at the global level, “he pulled 
off deals with Iran and Cuba, and tried to bring an end to the wars in 
Afghanistan and Iraq.”

Obama regime was also scandal-free with an admirable family. “He brought 
dignity, noble intent and a clear intelligence to the job”, said Jenkins.

But he recognised failures too. He did not “discipline Israel or define a new 
relationship with Russia.” At home, he and his Democrat colleagues “left it 
open to Trump... to attack Wall Street and Washington’s beltway bubble... to 
appear on the side of the small guy.”

In some ways, this argument echoed the views of the Mail and Kavanagh. Trump, 
it would appear, is Obama’s legacy. That seems very unfair to me. But are they 
correct?
 