
We all need to go. And however we need to do this, we should have privacy as 
well as access to fulfil this most basic biological need freely and with 
dignity.

I ached with sympathy on hearing about Anne Wafula Strike’s experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
. The award-winning Paralympic athlete and disabilities campaigner says she was 
“robbed of her dignity” after a train company failed to provide an accessible 
toilet on a three-hour journey. And I felt an old, weary anger. You might 
believe the Paralympian’s distressing experience is an unusual occurrence, but 
sadly it isn’t. The reality for many disabled people is it’s a muddle and a 
minefield to have an easy pee.

While situations such as Wafula Strike’s are unacceptable and degrading, 
sometimes they can be horribly funny.

Another irritant is when the accessible loo is used as a storage room. Pubs 
and clubs are particularly guilty of this

A few years ago I went to New York with Virgin. The cabin crew were charming, 
but I ended up about as far away from the appropriate toilet as I could be. And 
what with the faffing about that occurs before and after you board as a 
disabled person, this meant at least a seven-hour wait. Luckily my personal 
assistant, Janet, was undaunted. We made it to the general toilet, only to 
discover that the cubicle was so small it looked unlikely we would fit in it 
together and so we did what has now gone down in our personal history as the 
belly dance. We manoeuvred: left a bit, right a bit, belly shift sideways. 
Somehow she got me on that tiny bog. And goodness, did I enjoy my comedy-length 
wee.

I’ve had run-ins with Virgin train lavatories too. Take many journeys west, 
and there’s a doomed inevitability that the multipurpose toilet will break 
down. The wheelchair space is very close to the toilet. That’s good – but not 
when it fails, and is emitting the stench of a medieval cesspit. Even when the 
train toilets work, many are just too small if you need a PA or carer, and to 
take your wheelchair into the cubicle. This has been true for me on every 
Eurostar trip I’ve made. Maybe I’ll need to get creative and wear triple 
Pampers when I am next en route to Marseille.

Like Wafula Strike, in her unpleasant situation, I’ve wet myself (or worse) 
due to any number of avoidable toilet obstacles. Many disabled people are 
familiar with parents wanting to use the often dual-purpose accessible toilet 
to change a child’s nappy. In my case, a young woman “nipping in” with a 
grizzling toddler once meant that I found myself forlorn and embarrassed, 
sitting in soggy knickers and left with a rank chair cushion.

Another irritant is when the accessible loo is used as a storage room. Pubs 
and clubs are particularly guilty of this habit, and roll out a tired argument 
when challenged: we don’t get many disabled people in here. Really, I ask. I 
wonder why. Sometimes there are obstacles plonked in front of the door: 
anything from high chairs, bikes and toilet rolls to – I remember once – three 
woebegone dogs. And no one responsible for moving any of them.

There’s controversy about who is disabled “enough” to use an accessible 
toilet. As a wheelchair user, I try to withhold judgment, not least because not 
all people in need of an accessible loo will look disabled. I have friends with 
IBS, stoma bags and long-term medical conditions who all need the space as much 
as I do. Thesupermarket Asda 
<http://your.asda.com/news-and-blogs/we-re-introducing-accessible-toilets-in-more-than-400-asda-stores>
 has made good efforts to address this situation. But for every genuine case 
there is always the young guy dashing out of my local M&S loo in smart new 
trainers – box left inside.

Paralympian forced to wet herself on train without accessible toilet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
The Radar key scheme, to get into more than 9,000 accessible toilets, was set 
up in 1981 
<http://ot-magazine.co.uk/blue-badge-company-promotes-accessibility-with-new-radar-disability-toilet-key/>
 by the organisation that morphed into Disability Rights UK. You can still buy 
the keys from them, and even on eBay. This may explain another unpalatable 
experience for the disabled visitor in need: the leftover paraphernalia of drug 
use. Last year in a Radar accessible toilet I discovered a dirty syringe in the 
bowl.

There has been an effort to improve access to toilets for people needing a 
hoist and a bench with theChanging Places campaign 
<http://www.changing-places.org/>. I’ve used a few of these, and while I don’t 
need a hoist I do appreciate the provision of a space where I can fit – with my 
PA. Still, these are relatively few in number compared with standard accessible 
toilets.

There is, of course, another use for the accessible toilet: it’s a good space 
for a shag. And I can hardly complain about that, as I’m as guilty as anyone.

But there is a serious point here. Even this week, in a store at the sales, I 
found myself facing yet another out-of-order sign on the accessible toilet, as 
I watched everyone else doing what they needed to without a thought. I’m still 
angry every time this happens – we have to be. And I wish – as non-disabled 
people wish – to have a toilet available wherever I am when nature calls.
 