
A woman who was told in 2010 that she had paid off her student loan in full 
has become the latest person to fall foul of the “shambolic” Student Loans 
Company. Six years after apparently making her final repayment the 
government-owned organisation has, out of the blue, claimed that Louise Winmill 
still owes £1,112 – plus interest.

Winmill thought she had seen the last of the SLC back in November 2010 when 
she used a work bonus to pay off her outstanding student debt of £3,394. At the 
time her employer was sent a note by HM Revenue & Customs instructing it to 
cease loan repayments. She was also sent a letter by the SLC confirming that 
the loan had been repaid in full.

Winmill, who attended University College London and now works in 
communications, says she heard nothing from the organisation for almost six 
years – until she opened her pay slip last month to see a £273 student loan 
deduction.

“My first reaction was that this had to be a mistake. I’d had two letters 
confirming it was paid off. But when I called up I was told that it had made an 
error, and as a result I still owed more than £1,100 – and that it had been 
accruing interest for six years. Apparently the SLC wrote to me in October 2015 
to explain, though it of course sent this to a previous student address, so I 
never received the letter. I just couldn’t believe it,” says the economics 
graduate.

The SLC told Guardian Money that back in the 2007-08 tax year, a “human error” 
had led to Winmill’s account being wrongly credited twice with £1,100, and that 
the problem had only recently come to light.

She is just the latest graduate to fall foul of the SLC’s apparent inability 
to consistently calculate who owes what, and is not the first to face a demand 
years after the loan was repaid. Last August the Guardian’s sister paper, the 
Observer, reported on astudent who was told he owed £83 from a debt he had been 
told was cleared in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/27/student-loans-company-debt>. 
Other students havesince found they have massively overpaid their loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/08/student-loans-company-taking-money>
, leading to accusations that the organisation doesn’t know what it is doing.

Graduates have no control over the repayments as they are taken directly from 
pay packets by HMRC, which then hands them over to the SLC. Those having 
problems report difficulties in getting information out of the latter 
organisation.

Not only is it taking money without notice, it also wanted to charge interest, 
despite the error being its own
Louise Winmill 
Winmill says she has spent hours trying to get the proper figures. She has now 
asked HMRC to confirm what she has repaid because she “has no faith” in the 
SLC’s figures. “It has been a nightmare trying to sort this out – dealing with 
the SLC is incredibly difficult – and it was only when I asked the Guardian for 
help that it even sent me a statement,” she says. “It claims some payments were 
mistakenly credited to my account twice, but has provided no proof of this and 
I’ve no way of verifying it. Not only is it taking money from my pay packet 
without prior notice or my permission, it initially wanted to charge me 
interest on the balance, too, despite the fact that any error was clearly its 
own. The whole thing has been a shambles and I wonder how many other students 
past and present have been faced with similar challenges as a result of these 
errors and inefficiency?”

A spokesperson for the SLC has apologised and it has agreed to waive the £169 
interest her account accrued. “We are sorry for the difficulty experienced by 
Ms Winmill and for any inconvenience this has caused. Unfortunately, due to a 
human error the repayment was posted against her balance twice, so it appeared 
that she had repaid in full. This error was subsequently identified and the 
account balance was corrected, which resulted in a balance still to be repaid.”

Since its inception in 1989 the not-for-profit SLC has often been in the 
headlines. It is 85% owned by the UK government, with the rest shared between 
the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish governments. It says on its website that 
its mission “is to enable our customers to invest in their futures by 
delivering secure, accurate and efficient assessment, payment and repayment 
services”.

In July 2014 it was accused of using controversial tactics akin to those of 
payday loan company Wonga after the Daily Mail revealed it had been sending out 
letters from what appeared to be an independent debt collection agency called 
Smith Lawson & Company. At the time the SLC said it was suspending the use of 
the letters, which had used its “secondary brand”. In 2010 both the SLC’s chief 
executive and chairman resigned over criticism of chaos in the student finance 
system. Thousands of students in England were left without grants or loans 
after administration problems.

While most debts are unenforceable after six years, the Student Loans Company 
has an exemption from this, and is allowed to chase debts that other loan 
providers would be forced to write off.

Power of the petition

The retrospective rise in the cost of student loans will be debated in 
parliament on Monday afternoon after a petition opposing the changes obtained 
130,000 signatures. Campaigners are urging students and their parents to lobby 
their MPs over the weekend.

The petition, started by Alex True while he was doing his finals at Durham 
University, focuses on a promise made by the government in 2010 that from April 
2017 the student loans repayment threshold of £21,000 would be upped each year 
with average earnings.

But last October George Osborne said he was freezing the threshold until at 
least 2021. According to government estimates, this will leave more than 2 
million graduates paying £306 more a year by 2020-21 if they earn in excess of 
£21,000 at that point.

Martin Lewis, founder of MoneySavingExpert and the former head of an 
independent taskforce on student finance, opposes the move. He is calling on 
those affected to make their feelings known to their MPs ahead of the debate. 
“No commercial company would be allowed to change a loan contract in this way … 
and the government shouldn’t be allowed to either,” he says. “It’s against all 
forms of natural justice. The government, without asking parliament, has 
changed the terms of loans long after many signed up – indeed, some had already 
graduated. It will cost many thousands.”
 