
South Africa’s president, Jacob Zuma <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zuma>, 
has said the ruling ANC party is ready for its first female leader, days after 
his former wife was named by the party’s influential women’s league as its 
choice to succeed him.


Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, who has four children with President Zuma, is the head 
of theAfrican Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> Commission 
and a leading candidate to succeed her ex-husband after the 2019 general 
election.

Zuma is expected to step down as African National Congress leader at the end 
of this year, and whoever takes over will be the frontrunner for the presidency.

Has Africa had its fill of ‘strongmen’?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/africa-strongmen-angola-dos-santos-zimbabwe-mugabe-uganda-sudan>
Dlamini-Zuma, 67, has not declared her candidacy, but the ANC women’s league 
gave her a major fillip last weekend with a public declaration of support.

“It is no longer a discussion in the ANC whether a woman can take a high 
leadership position or not,” Zuma said. “The ANC is ready for that. In fact the 
party has been ready for some time.

“It will depend on the integrity that she possesses and whether members see 
her fit for the position.”

Zuma, 74, has been engulfed by corruption scandals and a sluggish economy 
since he came to power in 2009, but is on course to serve a full second term 
until the general election in 2019.

In August, the ANC – which assumed power in 1994 under Nelson Mandela after 
the end of apartheid – recorded its worst-ever local election results.

Among Zuma’s other possible successors are the deputy president, Cyril 
Ramaphosa, and the ANC treasurer-general, Zweli Mkhize. Zuma survived an 
attempt by ANC rivals to oust him in November, shrugging off criticism of his 
conduct by the official anti-corruption watchdog and constitutional court.

Dlamini-Zuma is not seeking a second mandate at the African Union, a move that 
has increased speculation that she has ambitions to succeed her ex-husband at 
the ANC. She has held a string of ministerial posts under South African 
presidents, including the foreign affairs and home minister portfolios. Her 
four years at the head of the AU have also given her an international profile.
 