
There is a peculiar thrill to hearing your city described in terms less than 
conventional, more so when the talk is salacious, bordering on risqué. For all 
the respect you wish accorded to the weight of its history, the joy of its 
music, the singularity of its people and character – you also want it to speak 
for itself, ie to reveal itself with all its grey zones, its convolutions, the 
breadth of its unadvertised parts. Deep down there is a will for it to have a 
few tricks up its sleeves, to possess of certain quirks. You will it, for want 
of a better term, to have a secret subterranean world of sweet and shady 
dealings, just as the human psyche craves, seeks out, even needs its hidden 
life.


This was how I reacted when a friend declared, out of the blue, that Jakarta – 
capital city of the world’s largest Muslim majority country – is “the capital 
city of sex”. He is a businessman, notably reserved, sparing with words. Yet 
that evening, a little past midnight, sitting at the bar of one of the city’s 
most stylish establishments, all around was giddy, shaking, unfiltered lust. I 
could see how even he couldn’t look away. Through an accident of history, he 
became the reluctant observer par excellence of the city’s collective sexual 
behaviour.

“Just look at these people,” he said, when I asked him to elaborate on his 
earlier statement. “Where do you think they go as the night wears on? This is 
not their last stop.”

It’s not just sexual innuendo, it’s pure sex talk.

The next morning I am in Pilates class. We are a group of eight, ranging in 
age between 22 and 55; and even if I can’t see myself socialising with any of 
them, there is a natural camaraderie between women in groups. By the end of the 
first session, you’ll know what sexual positions A’s husband prefers; the way B 
loves to stretch her toes beyond her husband’s toes when they make love; which 
specialist, after almost 45 years of marriage, C’s near-senile father gets 
dragged to by his wife in order to “get it up” again.

Outside the class are modest, soft-spoken mothers, wives, daughters, 
homemakers, breadwinners. Inside the class, it’s not just sexual innuendo, it’s 
pure sex talk. And a lot of pelvic workouts. Everybody loves these because they 
strengthen the pelvic floor, help “tighten the grip” on your partner’s member. 
The women talk about this too, often in sweltering detail.

Today, one woman badly wants to talk to me. She’s approaching 50, but her body 
– lithe, toned to the hilt – is the envy of the group. She’s had work done on 
her face, but ever so subtly: some Botox on the lips, a little smoothening in 
the areas around the eyes, brow and eyelash extensions. And suddenly she comes 
out with it: “You know, the whole scene my husband puts me through? It’s really 
degrading,” she says. “What scene?” I ask her. She looks at me incredulously. 
“Why, the swinging scene, of course.” As if I should know.

We are impervious to information until we are ready for it.

It is surprisingly easy to be inducted into the swinging scene: the procedures 
are pretty straightforward. The key is knowing someone on the inside. I type 
“Jakarta swinging scene” into Google and in two seconds I am staring at links 
to several websites with physical addresses and email addresses of who to 
contact. There are several swinging clubs around town, with varying degrees of 
discretion, my Pilates friend informs me. But “the safest way”, she adds, is to 
join an official group online. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjakarta-the-unlikely-capital-city-of-sex-and-swinging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50665144b6fe9901b81c2874122b2317baf75441%2F0_0_2268_1512%2F2268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta%3A%20the%20unlikely%20capital%20city%20of%20sex%20and%20swinging&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjakarta-the-unlikely-capital-city-of-sex-and-swinging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%3A%20the%20unlikely%20capital%20city%20of%20sex%20and%20swinging&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjakarta-the-unlikely-capital-city-of-sex-and-swinging%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50665144b6fe9901b81c2874122b2317baf75441%2F0_0_2268_1512%2F2268.jpg>
 ‘In some cases, women like my friend, for instance, prefer to be pleasured by 
two or three men including her husband, but refuse to have their husbands 
pleasured by other women.’ Photograph: Marvi Lacar/Getty Images 
The other avenue is word of mouth. A swinger like my Pilates friend, for 
instance, can ask a married friend, or a married colleague, who looks like they 
may be open to such arrangements, and find out whether they are interested. 
When interest is confirmed, she can show the couple’s photos to her husband and 
ask him if he is interested. The next stage is known as “getting to know you”. 
This can be anything from a coffee hookup to dinner for four, and once mutual 
trust is established, the couples can go straight to the main event – in a 
private house, apartment, or hotel room.

The rules of engagement will be spelled out: how many couples, how many men, 
how many women. In some cases, women like my friend, for instance, prefer to be 
pleasured by two or three men including her husband, but refuse to have their 
husbands pleasured by other women.

Whichever configuration you go for, two governing principles remain. One is 
the partner’s consent. If a husband or a wife seeks the company of one of their 
swinging partners behind the other’s back, then the deal is off. He or she has 
committed adultery. The other principle is absolute discretion. Identities are 
kept in the strictest confidence.

It is on those two key principles that the entire viability of the practice 
rests, both as a form of collective “rush” – a wild, euphoric, almost 
irrational sensation accessible only through furtive, backstairs channels – and 
as a means of escape from the stultifying conventions of formal life. For in my 
home city, there is much to escape from: so much more than just the nauseating 
tedium of urban and suburban middle-class marriages – so often empty, hopeless, 
like something out of Conrad. There is also the mounting ugliness of Indonesian 
politics, the unfathomable speed at which religious intolerance is on the rise 
and moderate voices undermined, the steady mainstreaming of the fascist right 
and how it has redefined conservatism, the maddening routine of Jakarta traffic 
jams.

As long as they err together, consensually, with eyes wide open so to speak, 
it is not errant behaviour.

The average married person is, to varying degrees, both an escapist and a 
conventional pragmatist. He or she may not care to join anti-LGBT rallies; he 
or she may not overtly show anti-Chinese and anti-Christian sentiments by 
baying for the blood of Jakarta governor Basuki “Ahok” Tjahaja Purnama who is 
currently standing trial for “blasphemy law”; he or she may be appalled by 
paedophiles but doesn’t support President Joko Widodo’s advocacy of chemical 
castration; he or she may find the conservative Islamic group Family Love 
Alliance (AILA)’s motto of “strengthening family values” quite appealing but 
won’t rule out the occasional fun nights at orgies. But what men and women 
alike are doing is to lay claim to twin rights that are jarringly mismatched – 
wanting both escape and stability.

While some have adulterous Emma Bovary-style affairs, others more sexually 
liberated, such as my Pilates friend and her insatiable husband, sign a pact. 
It is the fiendishly clever thing to do, the genius being that it gives the 
other party at once the right to err and keep their honour: as long as they err 
together, consensually, with eyes wide open so to speak, it is not errant 
behaviour. Opting for this choice is arguably more honourable than polygyny, 
the right still exercised by Indonesian men, permitted under Islamic marital 
jurisprudence, to have four wives at the same time.

The true feat of this “whole scene” is not its conforming to a larger 
class-based historical tradition – of libertinism among France’s bourgeois 
society, for instance, the roots of which have existed much longer but the 
practice of which, since the dawn of Aids, has only enjoyed a revival since the 
beginning of the new millennium, with the publication of such books as The 
Sexual Life of Catherine M. and Atomised, and the proliferation of heterosexual 
échangiste (swinging) clubs around France.

It is, rather, that the “whole scene” is both mainstream and progressive. Even 
if the Islam that is supposed to make up the 90% of Indonesia’s majority is 
mostly of the moderate and syncretic kind, Indonesian society on the whole is 
still pretty conservative. Morality is almost always linked to sexual 
behaviour, not corruption, say, or mendacity in public office. So what the 
“whole scene” offers is a way to buck the system: to deviate from the norm, to 
create an island for yourself, but to do so in a way that is also legitimate. 
The marriage pact is indeed a powerful thing: as long as it stays intact.

In all this, the most tactile and transforming part of the triumph, is, of 
course, the experience of the rush itself. At 48, my friend’s desire for sex, 
which has seen a steady increase since she hit the big Four Oh, is at an all 
time high. Meanwhile, her husband, who first introduced the swinging idea to 
her five years ago, is, in her own words, “hypersexed.” “He can never get 
enough,” she tells me.

As time progressed, he was experiencing a decline in professional and social 
confidence. He grew sullen and bitter; she suspected him of having an affair. 
With two teenage children they both love deeply, divorce is not an option. So 
she said yes to their first foray into sexual adventurism.

“Doesn’t it upset you a bit, the idea of being offered to other men as though 
you’re like some possession?” I ask her as we go to the reformer machine for 
some butt exercise.

“In the beginning, yes,” my friend says, as she prepares herself for a 
“spider” – an intricate movement that requires the widest plié – “Also the idea 
that my husband desired me only when he saw me being desired by other men. It 
was humiliating.”

“It got better after two years. I began to love the riskiness of it all; the 
constant flirting with danger.” She says as she seizes the belts for a little 
arm exercise, “And the variations! Nothing like entering a room, not knowing 
how it will be – my own ravishment in the hands of sometimes strangers. I 
became addicted to these … these myriad levels of bliss.”

There is a buoyant, almost touching quality to her expression as she looks for 
the right words. “It really turns me on, being desired by many men,” she tells 
me. “And nowadays I love it that my husband desires me more because of it.” In 
some perverse way, she feels liberated, more in control of her body. She also 
finds herself fantasising about some of the men she’s encountered, wondering 
what it would be like to see them on the sly, having them savour her in her own 
terms, not her husband’s.

“What if you fall in love with one of them?” I ask.

“I just don’t,” she says, haltingly. “The minute I feel it, it’s goodbye. If 
you can’t separate sex and emotions, forget it.”

I’m not convinced.

When I ask her what has changed, she replies, “Time.” The rush changes, the 
body changes, the pleasure changes. It is not anymore merely about the ecstasy 
of engaging in something mysteriously forbidden, testing the nebulous line 
between power and powerlessness, about feeling richly fulfilled and groaningly 
hollow, about seizing control and being humiliated. It is, rather, about the 
“joy of being surprised.” A quasi-religious experience, then: Saint Teresa by 
way of Bernini?

“But isn’t that what being high does?” My friend says. “To me sex often feels 
like the highest truth, a gift from heaven. Because the body doesn’t lie. And 
good sex is like this limitless thing, you know. You discover new things every 
time.”

Does it change your feeling sexually towards your husband? I ask her. On this 
she was less than categorical: in some ways, she feels she has come to 
understand his needs better, and consequently their lovemaking is more 
inventive than ever. At other times, it is the secret fantasies she harbours 
while making love to her husband that give her the real rush to the head, and 
are the real flames of her intoxication. “Monogamy is so passé,” she says with 
a somewhat studied conviction, “Surely we’re not designed for it.”

What about the “degrading” aspects she mentioned earlier? “Oh,” she says with 
a dismissive wave of the hand. “I didn’t mean it. I was in a bad mood.” But 
when the group has dispersed, she half-whispers, “Actually, nowadays my husband 
is insisting that I watch him being serviced by other women. I hate it. But he 
may leave me if I don’t allow him what he needs.” For a fleeting moment she 
looks genuinely pained, and no amount of poise and valour can mask it.

Indonesian women are as irreducible to stereotypes as Indonesia

But are such contradictions so surprising, wonders this Indonesian of Javanese 
and West Sumatranese extraction, schooled both in grace, modesty, and 
low-keyness and in a take-charge, matrilineal kinship assertiveness? We 
Indonesians have long lived with stories of emancipation. The Javanese have 
lived with the Book of Centhini, an encyclopaedia of life that tells of 
frenzied orgies, sex with animals, all kinds of sexual escapades and illicit 
pleasure – for more than 200 years. They have lived even longer with old 
village rituals such as Tayub parade, where provocatively dressed women dancers 
playfully seduce men. This is understood, uncontested, even celebrated by women 
as part of folk culture. And yet, there are so many stories of repression, 
injustice, and misogyny – just a few weeks ago, two prominent women rights 
activists were sexually harassed on the streets of Jakarta – and of the art of 
dealing with them with dignity.

Indonesian women are as irreducible to stereotypes as Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>, with its fabled 17,000 islands, 
is reducible to a single country. For every sequestered and powerless victim, 
there is the sexually autonomous and powerful agent.

The next time I see my friend, she is going away with her husband to 
Singapore. They are planning to hook up with two couples they know intimately. 
The airport is teeming with people going on the mini-pilgrimage to Mecca; she 
pulls me aside and tells me that some of her friends are among them. “Everyone 
I know is going on some kind of religious pilgrimage,” she says. “I mean, 
should I?”

 I point out to her that a rush is a rush; everyone has his or her own kick. 
Not everybody has the money, or the lack of inhibition to do what she does. Not 
that they won’t find a way. It is certainly odd, the want of your own wicked 
story.

“I just love sex,” she sighs, even if her eyes tell a more complicated story. 
“If only more people were like me.”

Changes have been made to this article to protect identities.

This is an edited version of an article published in the January 2017 issue of 
the quarterly literary magazine Kulturaustausch.
 