
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> pleaded with the world’s 
whaling watchdog Wednesday to allow small hunts by coastal communities, arguing 
that for three decades these groups had been unjustly barred from a traditional 
source of food.

The issue of “small type coastal hunting” is a key dispute between pro- and 
anti-whaling nations gathered in Slovenia for the 66th meeting of the 
InternationalWhaling <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> 
Commission (IWC).

As in other years that the issue has come up, Japan’s ambitions were backed by 
fellow whalers Norway and Iceland, and vehemently opposed by the US, Europe, 
Australia and others.

All whaling other than for aboriginal subsistence or for scientific research 
is banned under an IWC moratorium introduced 30 years ago.

Japan to face criticism at international summit for flouting whaling ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/20/japan-to-face-criticism-at-international-summit-for-flouting-whaling-ban-iwc>
“There is this perception that we are asking (for the) total lifting of the 
moratorium, that is not the case,” Japan’s commissioner to the IWC, Joji 
Morishita told delegates.

“We are just asking for a small quota based on science, and of particular 
species in particular water. That’s it.”

Japan seeks a quota for minke whales in the West Pacific, and argues that 
stock numbers can sustain small hunts.

The takings would be “exclusively for local consumption” by four coastal 
communities, it said.

“I’m not asking other countries to change their basic positions,” said 
Morishita, nor “to eat whale meat.”

He urged other nations to look beyond their “principled position against 
whaling under any circumstances” in the quest for a compromise on this and 
other deeply divisive whaling questions.

“It’s not like one side is bad and one side is good. This is not a dichotomy 
or a black and white situation,” the commissioner said.

Along with Denmark and Iceland, which argued the IWC was “held hostage” by 
anti-whalers, Japan’s position was also supported by Russia.

“I think that we all have to remember that those four communities in Japan 
that have been asking for quota, they have a 5,000-year history of whaling,” 
said Russia’s deputy IWC commissioner, Valentin Ilyashenko.

“Our task is not only to conserve biodiversity but also to conserve culture 
and traditions.”

The European Union and US spoke out strongly against the proposal.

“We can only reiterate our strong support for the maintenance of the global 
moratorium on commercial whaling and our serious concerns about the impact of 
small type coastal whaling on whales,” the Dutch commissioner Roel Feringa, 
said on behalf of the EU bloc.

For the US, commissioner Russell Smith said it was also an issue of values.

“Those values for the US include ensuring that our subsistence farmers have 
their right, have the access to the whales that they need, but they also 
include the value that we at this time should not be engaged in commercial 
whaling.”

The disagreement sets Japan up for an even bigger clash later this week, about 
its annualwhale killings in the name of scientific research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/20/japan-to-face-criticism-at-international-summit-for-flouting-whaling-ban-iwc>
 – which other nations claim is a cover-up for commercial hunting for meat.

New Zealand and Australia have submitted a proposal to the IWC for scientific 
hunts, which are allowed under a loophole in the moratorium, to be much more 
closely scrutinised.

If countries cannot agree on a compromise on the proposal, a vote will be 
held, probably on Thursday.

Norway, too, came under fire on Wednesday – from conservation groups which 
accuse the IWC of giving the world’s biggest whale hunter, a free ride.

Norway, which conducts commercial hunts under a formal objection it had lodged 
to the moratorium, took 736 minke whales in 2014, according to IWC numbers, 
compared to Japan’s 196 – 81 minke, 25 Bryde’s whales and 90 sei whales.

With a dwindling appetite for whale meat in Norway, as in Iceland, much of the 
Norwegian catch is exported to Japan, and some used as animal feed, said Sandra 
Altherr of Pro Wildlife.

“Commercial whaling and trade is ongoing, and Norway is a huge part of that,” 
she said. “But we don’t see any diplomatic measures on Norway.”
 