
We’ve heard the entreaties not to confirm Jeff Sessions as America’s Attorney 
General from civil rights advocates and immigrant rights advocates. But as women
prepare to march 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/27/womens-march-on-washington-dc-guide>
 on Washington in the first major protest against the incoming Trump 
administration, we heard the plea from someone different: a survivor of sexual 
assault.

In a compelling and deeply personal testimony, Amita Swadhin 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2017/01/sexual-assault-survivor-urges-senate-not-to-confirm-sessions.html>
 – herself a victim of child rape – explained why Session’s record on women, 
minorities and LGBTQ rights makes him an “incredibly worrisome” pick to head 
the Department of Justice. She also described her own hardship at the hands of 
a sexually abusive parent.

“My father raped me at least once a week from age 4 to age 12,” she told 
members of the Senate Judiciary Committee on Wednesday. “I endured 
psychological, physical, and verbal abuse from him for years.” When she finally 
did find the courage to tell her mother about what was going on and her mother 
called state authorities, she tells us they failed to take her claims seriously 
or connect her with victim advocates or support services.

So she was deeply unnerved this fall to hear Session’s downplaying of Donald 
Trump’s boastful admission of grabbing women by the genitals. After the 
then-Republican nominee’s comments became public, Sessions told Fox News: “This 
thing is overblown. Everybody knows that Trump likes women.” Swadhin’s lived 
experience, as well as the advocacy work she’s gone on to do in the intervening 
20-plus years, has given her a visceral understanding of exactly how harmful 
such dismissive rhetoric can be.

Sessions appears to have altered his stance; in his testimony before the 
committee this week he allowed that yes, groping women without their consent 
does constitute sexual assault. But that doesn’t comfort Swadhin: “It directly 
and negatively impacts me when people minimize sexual assault,” she told me in 
an interview after the hearing. “To hear Senator Sessions initially say Trump’s 
comments do not constitute sexual assault and to consider him leading the 
Department of Justice has been incredibly worrisome. I am unfortunately far 
from alone in my experience.”

Far from it: 320,000 Americans over age 12 are raped or sexually assaulted 
each year, according to the US Department of Justice National Crime 
Victimization Survey. And given Sessions’ voting record on matters of social 
justice, there’s little reason to believe he would be a great defender of the 
populations most at risk.

Though he supported the Violence Against Women Act back in the 1990s, he 
opposed an expansion in 2013 to include protections for LGBTQ, immigrant and 
tribal populations. Before that, in 2009, Sessions voted against hate crime 
legislation because, in his words, “I’m not sure women or people with different 
sexual orientations face that kind of discrimination. I just don’t see it.”

That kind of blindness is a big problem in the person tasked with 
administrating justice in America. And as a queer woman of color, a sexual 
violence survivor and the daughter of immigrants, it’s not hard for Swadhin to 
articulate why. “National data shows LGBT people ... are disproportionately 
victimized by rape and sexual assault, intimate partner violence and homicide,” 
Swadhin noted in her testimony. And one in two transgender people will be raped 
or sexually assaulted in their lifetime. Such crimes are already grossly 
underreported. Under an Attorney General Sessions – and he will, by every 
prediction, be confirmed – there are even fewer assurances for victims thinking 
about coming forward with their stories.

“The point I was trying to make in my testimony is that most victims of 
violent crime, particularly in cases of rape, sexual assault and domestic 
violence, are violated and abused by people we know and trust,” Swadhin told 
me. “For us to come forward and report incidents to the state, we have to be 
able to put our trust in strangers – police officers, social workers, 
prosecutors – who we’ve never met before and speak out against people we know 
very very well, who have hurt us. Even with the best attorney general in power, 
that’s very hard to do.”

As Jamelle Bouie points out 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2017/01/jeff_sessions_fights_for_racist_outcomes_who_care_what_s_in_his_heart.html>
, we can’t know what’s in Sessions heart, but we can know his record. We can 
know, for instance, that as a prosecutor in the 1980s he presided over a voter 
fraud case against black activists working to register voters who were too old 
or illiterate to vote without help. We can know, as Pema Levy has documented 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2017/01/jeff-sessions-blocked-black-judges-alabama>
, that in the 1990s he played a pivotal role keeping black judges off the 
federal bench. And we can know, given a political reality in which it’s 
impossible for the Department of Justice to enforce every law on the books, 
that Sessions’ actions will come to be determined by his values. As Swadhin 
puts it in our interview: “We know Senator Sessions personal beliefs and voting 
record are going to be a predictable measure by which we can anticipate his own 
law enforcement agenda,” she said. “And that agenda is very disturbing.”
 