
A hundred days on and the talk around Brexit is as delusional as ever. This 
week it fell to Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, who is not allowed 
to negotiate international trade – that’s Brussels’ job until Britain leaves – 
to add to the already thick fog of fantasy.Fox declared that 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/29/liam-fox-signals-britain-will-leave-the-single-market-in-hard-br/>
, after the UK had left the EU, it would enjoy terms of commerce with Europe 
“at least as free” as those we had when we were still in. That makes perfect 
sense – if you think the EU’s remaining 27 members are itching to show that 
exiting the EU exacts no cost, staying brings no benefits and others should 
start following us out the door.


Where there is not magical thinking, there is vagueness and opacity. The prime 
minister might allow us a glimpse of her preferred degree of Brexit when she 
addresses the Tory party conference on Wednesday, but so far the only clues 
have come from theserial slapdowns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/27/brexit-weekly-briefing-theresa-may-3-three-brexiteers-0>
 she has delivered to her ministers when they have supplied hints of their own.

In this haze of obfuscation, Jeremy Corbyn shines bright as a beacon of 
clarity. Admittedly, he too has sent conflicting signals on the hardness or 
softness of his ideal Brexit, but on the intimately related issue of free 
movementhe made his position crystal clear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/27/jeremy-corbyn-rules-out-pledge-cut-immigration>
this week. In so doing, he confirmed that immigration has emerged as the 
defining dividing line in his fractious party.

Corbyn’s stance is admirable and principled. “It isn’t migrants who drive down 
wages,” he said on Wednesday, blaming instead “exploitative employers” and the 
politicians who had both loosened the labour market and weakened trade unions. 
In the same way, it wasn’t migrants who were putting strain on the NHS or 
causing a housing crisis. That was the fault of governments that had failed to 
invest in the health service or build new homes. And so, there would no “false 
promises” to bring down immigration. Indeed,Corbyn’s aides briefed that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/28/corbyn-defence-of-immigration-splits-shadow-cabinet-labour>
 he was “not concerned about numbers” at all.

It is a noble case, a rare defence of migrants, a group routinely maligned. 
The trouble is, Corbyn’s stance is directly at odds with large swaths of his 
own party: those who would think of themselves as Labour realists. They are not 
all the usual suspects. Yes, they include the likes of shadow cabinet resigner 
Rachel Reeves, whospoke of her fear that “bubbling tensions” could “explode” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/27/jeremy-corbyn-rules-out-pledge-cut-immigration>
 if the kind of angst over immigration she encounters in her Leeds constituency 
is not assuaged. Andy Burnham, Chuka Umunna, Stephen Kinnock, Emma Reynolds and 
others have made a similar argument for controls. But so too has Angela Rayner, 
whose loyalty to Corbyn led her to take the shadow education portfolio after 
the summer rebellion. They are united in believing that the verdict of the 
electorate is now unmistakable. The voters want immigration controlled, they 
declared that loud and clear on 23 June and they can be ignored no longer.

Labour urged to make immigration controls a key Brexit demand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/19/labour-urged-to-make-immigration-controls-a-key-brexit-demand>
I confess I find myself deeply torn on this most radioactive of topics. My 
every instinct is to stand with those who defend migrants and migration. Like 
so many others, I am the son of a mother born outside this country. A mere 
glance at my family tree shows the earliest roots were planted in soil far away 
from here. When I hear anti-immigration rhetoric I know that, 100 years ago, 
the target of such talk would have been me.

And yet, I cannot ignore what Rayner, Reeves and the rest are saying. None of 
them is a racist. None hates migrants. None of them would, I believe, be 
calling for increased controls on immigration if they could see another option. 
But they are simply listening to what has become the settled will of the people 
they represent.

This divide goes deeper than just immigration. It touches on class and 
geography too. For it is often a clash of the middle-class Labour of the big 
cities against the blue-collar Labour of the towns; London, metropolitan Labour 
– the Corbyn-McDonnell Labour that is relaxed about diversity – against the
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> of the post-industrial 
north, Midlands and east.

More deeply still, it is a battle over what Labour should be. For many, 
especially among the idealists of Momentum who held their own, much livelier 
conference this week, Labour has to be a social movement that works to change 
public attitudes on migration and much else – even if that takes a generation. 
Ranged against them are those who see Labour as a political party that has to 
meet the voters where they are now, not where they would like them to be.

There could be a pragmatic way to straddle this divide, revealed so vividly in 
the referendum. You could try to appeal to that part of the Labour coalition 
that overwhelmingly voted remain by promising to fight to retain British 
membership of the single market. At the same time, you’d try to placate 
pro-leave Labour voters by aiming to modify or restrict the free movement of 
people. Some would call it cynical, but you might just about hold the Labour 
tribe together that way.

Archbishop of York says EU countries are 'shunting migrants' towards UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/30/archbishop-of-york-says-eu-countries-are-shunting-migrants-towards-uk>
Corbyn is doing the exact opposite. He and his shadow chancellor have 
signalled their readiness to jettison single market membership 
<http://www.politics.co.uk/blogs/2016/09/26/does-john-mcdonnell-even-know-what-his-brexit-strategy-is>
 – to be replaced by mere “access” – but they are holding firm on free 
movement. For many, free movement is the price that has to be paid for the 
prize of single market membership. Corbyn’s position is: let’s give up the 
prize, but keep paying the price. At a stroke, he angers both Labour’s 
remainers and its leavers, depriving both of what they cherish most. Whatever 
the opposite of a political sweet spot is, Corbyn has found it.

To his credit, Corbyn did promise action to mitigate the impact of 
immigration. Rightly he said he’d revive Gordon Brown’s fund to pay for extra 
school places or housing in those areas that have taken in newcomers, and 
promised steps to prevent migrants undercutting the wages of workers already 
here. This way, he said, Labour would deal with “the real issues of 
immigration”.

But what if those are not the only real issues? What if it’s not just the 
strain on services and pressure on pay that makes people fear immigration? What 
if it’s actually more nebulous, and more toxic, questions of culture and 
identity that lie at the heart of this matter?


Easing the shortage of homes or GP appointments and boosting wages would 
certainly draw some of the sting from the immigration question. Government 
should take those steps. But it’s optimistic to imagine that such action would 
dispel all the rage MPs such as Reeves are encountering every day. It amounts 
to telling voters that they don’t understand their own feelings, that their 
concern over the changing face of their communities is simply an error, a case 
of false consciousness that will recede with a sufficient injection of public 
cash.

Corbyn himself said there should be no “lecturing or patronising” of those who 
voted leave, that “we have to hear their concerns,” including on immigration. 
That goes for him too – but he may not like what he hears.
 