
Sir Jimmy Young, the veteran Radio 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> broadcaster, has finally succumbed 
to months pressure to step down from his show and make way for fresh blood.

The 80-year-old broadcaster, who has presented the show for 28 years, will 
move to a new weekend slot in 2003. He will host his last Jimmy Young show at 
the end of the year.

Sir Jimmy has become a radio institution for his long-running programme, which 
saw him switching from interviewing the prime minister to discussing the price 
of everyday items.

But last year it emerged that BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
bosses had been planning to oust him after Radio 5's Nicky Campbell boasted how 
he had been offered the job.

To add insult to injury Campbell derided the show as too trivial - it was 
still a "bit about the price of lamb chops," he said.

Last November, when it emerged that the controller of Radio 2, Jim Moir, was 
casting around for successors, Sir Jimmy's supporters immediately leapt to his 
support.

They said they were baffled by attempts to dislodge him from his perch - not 
because he has become a national institution but because he is still pulling in 
listeners.

"Most people are appraised by their results and in this case it is listener 
figures," said one colleague.

"They say they want to bring in younger listeners. But surely the point is not 
about young presenters but about presenters who can bring in younger listeners, 
which he does."

But there had been debate about how long Young could continue to do the show 
with suggestions that a younger presenter could step in.

Nicky Campbell has already ruled himself out but BBC2's Newsnight presenter, 
Jeremy Vine, who recently filled in while Sir Jimmy was away, is being tipped 
as his successor.

"Jimmy is one of Britain's most popular and respected broadcasters and I am 
pleased that his expert contribution to the debate on the issues of the day has 
been secured for the future," said Mr Moir.

"A weekend news and current affairs programme hosted by Jimmy will be an 
appointment to listen and a landmark series for the network. I'm glad that 
Jimmy will continue to play an important role as Radio 2 evolves."

Sir Jimmy added: "I've thoroughly enjoyed 28 years of presenting 'the Prog' 
and I'm looking forward to one more year. A high profile news and current 
affairs programme at the weekend will be a new challenge for me and I'm 
confident that it will play a key role in helping set the news agenda."

The presenter's two-hour show, which draws 5.3m listeners, began when he 
joined the station on July 2 1973, after moving from Radio 1 where he was one 
of the launch DJs in 1967.

Sir Jimmy, from Cinderford, Gloucestershire, spent seven years in the RAF 
before turning to broadcasting. He had a successful career as a crooner - with 
two number ones - before he became a broadcaster.
 