
The Labour MP Jo Cox, who has died aged 41 after being shot and stabbed in her 
constituency of Batley and Spen, in West Yorkshire, was a woman who in many 
ways represented the character and style of the modern Labour party. She was 
widely viewed as someone who could have been a serious player in the party in 
the years to come.

Cox combined academic achievement with political experience, but she threw 
into the mix an understanding of the Labour movement, a profound concern for 
the issues that affected the country and a personal heritage that qualified her 
for a career on the frontbench.

Elected to the House of Commons last year, she was inordinately proud of 
winning in her birthplace. She was born Jo Leadbeater in Batley, one of two 
daughters of Gordon, a cosmetics factory worker, and his wife, Jean, who was a 
school secretary. Jo herself worked in the same factory as her father, 
packaging toothpaste during the holidays, having gained a place at Pembroke 
College, Cambridge, where she took a degree in social and political studies.

In an interview she suggested that her experience at Heckmondwike grammar 
school had not prepared her for life as an undergraduate at Cambridge 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/analysis/jo-cox-speaks-to-the-yorkshire-post-about-her-life-and-about-working-in-the-world-s-most-dangerous-war-zones-1-7968087>
. She readily acknowledged that she had not grown up in a political tradition 
and she had no understanding of how her birthplace and background would be 
viewed. “I didn’t really speak right or know the right people,” she said. The 
experience was quite startling for her, but it equipped her for her future: she 
would say later that joining the Commons was like “a walk in the park” in 
comparison.

On graduating in 1995 she took the course of many future MPs by becoming a 
political adviser. She worked for the former Labour MP Joan Walley, and then 
after spells as head of key campaigns with Britain in Europe and for Glenys 
Kinnock, then a member of the European parliament, she joined Oxfam in 2002. 
There she worked as head of the EU office until 2005, of policy and advocacy 
until 2007, and of humanitarian campaigning until 2009. In these posts she 
acquired a view of international politics that would inform the rest of her 
life and she always spoke powerfully about the experiences she had undergone 
and the scenes she had witnessed.

Then she became director of the Maternal Mortality Campaign (2009-11), and 
worked closely with Sarah Brown, the wife of the former Labour prime minister 
Gordon Brown, another campaigner on that issue. Subsequently she worked for 
Save The Children and the NSPCC, and was founder and chief executive of UK 
Women (2013-14).

In the Commons she had established a reputation as an outspoken critic of the 
lack of a strategic policy in Syria. She believed in the need for a credible 
policy that protected the civilian population and abstained in the vote on air 
strikes against Islamic State. She believed that there was a lack of what she 
called a “moral compass” in British policy. She described the British approach 
as “a masterclass in how not to do foreign policy” and argued strongly in 
favour of allowing more refugees into the UK.

Cox was a modern Labour party feminist. She was selected for her seat from an 
all-woman shortlist and from 2010 to 2014 chaired the Labour Women’s Network. 
She campaigned tirelessly for women’s rights around the world and was an 
adviser to the Freedom Fund on slavery (2014) and to the Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation (2014-15). In the Commons she was recognised as a woman who could 
make a difference to other people’s lives and who wanted to change the world to 
make it a better place.

She nominated Jeremy Corbyn for the leadership last year – one of 36 Labour 
MPs to do so – but subsequently herself voted for Liz Kendall, who came fourth 
in the election. She was later criticised foran article in which she explained 
why she had nominated Corbyn, but not voted for him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/jeremy-corbyn-leadership-labour-mps-elections>
. It did not damage her reputation in parliament, where she was held to be one 
of the most popular and potentially successful members of last year’s intake 
and a beacon for the Labour party’s future.

In the way of people who have mountains to climb, she had pursued such a sport 
herself. When elected to Westminster, however, her primary sporting activity 
was cycling to work along the river Thames from the barge on which she lived 
with her husband, Brendan Cox, and their two children, Lejla and Cuillin. She 
also leaves her sister, Kim, and her parents.

• Helen Joanne “Jo” Cox, politician, born 22 June 1974; died 16 June 2016
 