
High-earning BBC top brass have come under fire from writer Joanna Trollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/joanna-trollope> for paying themselves money 
that should be invested in its arts coverage and staff. The bestselling author 
voiced her criticism as it was announced she will chair the panel of judges for 
the BBC national short story award.

Trollope, who took the judging role because she is “a great supporter of the 
BBC”, told the Guardian: “I think theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>
 has not been terribly well run, it seems to me a great weight of money has 
gone to top management that should have gone to people lower down the scale.”

Expressing her support for BBC arts staff, the writer who until 2001 was 
married to television dramatist and director Ian Curteis, said: “They work 
incredibly hard … on really slender budgets” and criticised the use of 
short-term contracts for staff. “These contracts make everyone incredibly 
anxious.”

Her opinions were made public the morning after Sir David Clementi, a former 
banker with no broadcasting experience, was confirmed as the new chair of the 
corporation, charged with helping to implement cost savings of £800m by 2020.

Though she described herself as terrible at writing short stories, Trollope 
said she agreed to chair this year’s judges because she was an “enormous fan” 
of the genre and lamented a failure among publishers to promote them more 
aggressively: “They haven’t been promoted commercially by publishers as a 
genre, so I hope that this prize and the Sunday Times short story award, which 
I also judged, will help raise their profile.”

The author, who has a new novel – City of Friends – out in February, praised 
the art of precis displayed in short stories. Describing the form as a “kind of 
corset”, she added: “They condense a novel’s worth of dilemma and agony into 
3,000 to 5,000 words. It’s an extraordinary skill.”

She admitted she had “staggered” to the end of Hanya Yanagihara’s 900-page A 
Little Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/26/hanya-yanagihara-i-wanted-everything-turned-up-a-little-too-high-interview-a-little-life>
, and blamed over-powerful writers for the fashion in “long-read” novels, such 
as Donna Tartt’s The Goldfinch and Eleanor Catton’s Man Booker winner The 
Luminaries. “Now if you are commercially successful, people are anxious about 
saying to you that this is absolute rubbish and you should lose these 94 
pages,” she said. “I love to be edited. There isn’t a book that wouldn’t 
benefit from editing.”

Trollope, whose novels include The Choir, which was adapted by the BBC for 
television in 1995, A Village Affair and a modern update of Jane Austen’s Sense 
and Sensibility, will be joined on the judging panel by Baileys prize winner 
Eimear McBride; Impac award winner and short story writer Jon McGregor; Encore 
award winner Sunjeev Sahota; and returning judge Di Speirs, books editor at BBC 
Radio.

The £15,000 prize, open to to UK residents or nationals “with a history of 
publication in creative writing”, has an illustrious pedigree, with past 
winners including Lionel Shriver, William Trevor and Hilary Mantel.

Submissions open on 26 January  <http://www.bbc.co.uk/nssa>and close on 6 
March. The shortlist will be announced on 15 September, with each shortlisted 
story read on BBC Radio 4 before the winner is announced on 3 October.
 