
My friend Joan Court, the animal and human rights activist, who has died aged 
97, was driven by a powerful impulse to expose and remedy injustice and 
cruelty. She was also, as she put it, a “born sensualist”, her tastes running 
to strong colours, perfumes and “exciting action”. This, and her desire to do 
good, underpinned her many adventures.

Her start in life was hard: her father, Cecil Court, a solicitor, took his own 
life, and her mother, Muriel (nee Gibson), was an alcoholic. She had an older 
brother, Peter.

Joan’s schooling ended when she was 12, after her father’s death. She and her 
mother moved from their London home to work in domestic service in Cornwall and 
then Cape Town, South Africa. Returning to London in 1936, she went on to 
qualify as a nurse and midwife at St Thomas’ hospital, and as a social worker 
in Bristol. She practised as a midwife and, funded initially by the Friends 
Service Council (FSC) and later as a World Health Organisation employee, worked 
in impoverished regions of India and Turkey, and the Appalachian mountains of 
North America.

In the 1960s, she was appointed director of the NSPCC battered child research 
unit, and was influential in gaining acceptance of a then unfamiliar concept in 
the UK.

In 1946, when she was working for the FSC, organising midwifery services in 
the slums of Calcutta (Kolkata), she met and got to know Mahatma Gandhi. Joan, 
a lifelong vegetarian, developed a profound respect for his commitment, 
compassion and determination to achieve change through non-violent means. She 
tried to emulate these goals, campaigning first for children and, for the last 
38 years, for animals.

In 1978, after seeing a poster describing the horrors of animal research, she 
took part in an Animal Aid anti-vivisection march in Cambridge. The next day 
she founded a new Cambridge group, which was soon involved in all 
animal-related issues, including live exports, hunting, shooting, whaling and 
the meat and dairy industries.

Her advanced age made her attention-grabbing stunts also irresistible to the 
media. Her animal campaigning began just before she was 60 – when she gained a 
social anthropology degree from Cambridge. There were banner-hangs, public 
hunger strikes and sit-downs in inconvenient places. She locked herself in a 
cage and chained herself to railings. In speeches and interviews she refused to 
apologise for radical direct action, although she was opposed to violence.

Her most lasting triumph was, with Pat Griffin and Sue Hughes, as one of three 
Cambridge “granarchists” who initiated what became a national campaign of 
opposition to Cambridge University’s plans for a massive new research facility 
that would have specialised in invasive neurological experiments on monkeys.The 
university abandoned the project in January 2004 
<http://www.animalaid.org.uk/h/n/CAMPAIGNS/experiments/ALL/727/>.

At the age of 85, she joined the Sea Shepherd flagship, Farley Mowat, on a 
hunt for illegal fishing vessels in the South Atlantic.

Joan could be self-absorbed, cantankerous, bossy and infuriating, but her 
friends were friends for life.

 
 