
With the change in weather coming, I’ve been doing bits and pieces to prepare 
for winter, such as driving around picking up horse feed and dog food. Taking 
care of business and a household is always a balancing act with my duties as a 
mum; I find myself hopping into the Ateca to go to parents’ evening, coming 
back home, and then going out again to buy things for the chickens. Basically, 
I’m doing all these big, lumpy chores, so having an SUV is perfect.


Jodie Kidd on the SEAT Ateca: ‘This car gets eyes’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/nov/21/jodie-kidd-on-the-seat-ateca-this-car-gets-eyes>
It’s impossible to keep the car clean in the countryside, especially with a 
five-year-old, four dogs and a dirt driveway. When it gets to the point I 
cannot even see the floor – maybe once a week – it goes for a clean. As anyone 
with a family car will know, it just magically accumulates “stuff”. Somehow, 
I’d managed to leave the horse feed in the back for a week without noticing. 
That horse feed did a couple of trips to London and back.


The Ateca is such an immensely practical car. I’ve been driving it to meetings 
in London, as well as using it for all my country living, and it does it all so 
easily. The capital is not the most pleasant place to drive, but I have found 
that in the Ateca I can relax a little.

The seating position is high, and there’s a fantastic glass roof that goes all 
the way to the back seats, so all-round visibility is excellent. This makes for 
a much calmer drive on city streets – and even though the Ateca has the latest 
driver assistance, such as blind spot detection in the wing mirrors, it has not 
kicked in yet because I can see so well.

Jodie Kidd: ‘It’s a family ritual to drive down Oxford Street and see the 
festive displays’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/dec/16/jodie-kidd-its-a-family-ritual-to-drive-down-oxford-street-and-see-the-festive-displays>
When I put the Ateca into eco mode it is really pleasant to drive. It’s a 
manual, which I much prefer, because it means I’m in control and can whizz off 
quickly. Other people find it tiring driving through traffic, but with the 
Ateca, the gears are easy to go in, the steering is light and you’re not having 
to heave the clutch down. It’s not at all strenuous and that light touch makes 
driving it very agreeable.

As it is a large car you do not feel bullied, so I have found it much nicer to 
pilot in heavy traffic than any of my other cars; I feel more like an observer 
than a participant. It means you are not bothered by the hustle and bustle when 
driving on congested city roads – you just swoop in and swoop out, which is 
just what I need when I have to dash off home.

 