
When it comes to food shopping, I’m pretty old fashioned. I do all my shopping 
by hand – I’ve never placed an order for online delivery. In 2014 I was a 
finalist in Celebrity Masterchef, so I do get inspired by going to a 
supermarket and seeing all the produce close up. I really enjoy cooking. I’ll 
wake up in the morning, look through a cookery book and think: “I fancy fish 
for dinner tonight” and go and choose it. My latest thing is making soup using 
a whole chicken.

Jodie Kidd: ‘It’s a family ritual to drive down Oxford Street and see the 
festive displays’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/dec/16/jodie-kidd-its-a-family-ritual-to-drive-down-oxford-street-and-see-the-festive-displays>
 I’m not fazed at all by the thought of driving down to the supermarket for 
the big Christmas shop, although, as I have lots of guests coming this year, it 
does mean I have to be a little more organised than I usually am. One thing I 
never remember to buy is Christmas crackers – usually, by the time I get around 
to it, there’s not much of a selection, so I started looking early this year.

 Thankfully, since I live in the countryside, the local shops probably won’t 
be too busy on the last shopping day, although I’m sure some supermarket off 
the M4 wouldn’t be so nice. Tackling a hectic car park doesn’t bother me, 
though, as my mum taught me a great trick. Basically, as you approach the car 
park you just envisage a space and, I swear to God, it appears. I promise you, 
it’s there.

 Because I like driving, I don’t care if I have to wait for a space and even 
if it’s a really tiny slot that everyone else has ignored, I will attempt it, 
whether or not I can open the door to get out! The cameras on the Ateca really 
help, because you get an all-round view, so you don’t just rely on the mirrors. 
I’m really starting to trust the cameras, because when I’m in a really tight 
space I use them to judge how close a step would be, or see a kerb poking out 
that I wouldn’t notice if I was just using the mirrors.

 The camera view pops up on the touchscreen display, just to the left of the 
steering wheel. I have it set to split screen, so one view is from above and 
the other is looking behind. It even has guidelines to help you steer, and an 
alert to tell you if you’re getting too close to an object. Then you can touch 
the screen and scroll through the different camera views and see how tight you 
are to other cars: perfect for that busy Christmas Eve shopping expedition.
 