
The boss of John Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> and 
Waitrose has said the introduction of the “national living wage” could already 
be boosting productivity in Britain, despite criticism of the policy by senior 
retail figures.

Sir Charlie Mayfield, chairman of the John Lewis Partnership and a government 
adviser on productivity, told the Guardian that the national living wage could 
be a “spur to productivity” because it could encourage more use of automation 
in workplaces. That could lead to fewer jobs in some industries, Mayfield 
admitted, but would also spur stronger economic growth.

“I think we will see automation happening faster. It would be wrong to say 
that the national living wage is going to create a great increase in automation 
in sectors like retail, but it will be a contributing factor to an acceleration 
of automation in some sectors and it will have impact on employment levels,” he 
said.

The national living wage came into force in April and means companies must pay 
staff aged 25 at least £7.20 an hour. However, retailers warned it could lead 
to job losses, withDave Lewis, the boss of Tesco, saying it was part of a 
“potentially lethal cocktail” of costs facing the industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/09/national-living-wage-business-rates-lethal-cocktail-says-tesco>
. Mayfield warned last year that it would lead to a rise in unemployment if 
productivity did not improve in Britain.

Mayfield is now leading an initiative, which received £13m in government 
funding this year 
<http://www.personneltoday.com/hr/government-pledges-13m-boost-management-skills-productivity/>
, to try to improve productivity by boosting management skills. He said 
regulation was a “blunt instrument” for improving productivity but that the 
national living wage could lead to automation being introduced earlier. The 
John Lewis chairman added that greater use of technology would ultimately boost 
the economy.

“You can’t really generalise and say this is a recipe for fewer jobs across 
the country. I think what you can say is that over time if the country is more 
productive we will create more employment and higher paid employment than the 
alternative, which is that our competitiveness declines.”

Mayfield added that, as well as being a spur to productivity, the policy 
should be welcomed for attempting to address the UK’s low wage economy.

“I think the national living wage will be a spur to productivity. I think that 
will already be happening,” he said. “I do agree with one of the underlying 
intents of the national living wage which is to say: ‘We can’t afford as a 
country to be a low wage economy.’”

Mayfield said the threat of job losses from automation would vary from sector 
to sector.


“Different sectors will be affected differently, so the consequence of the 
Nissan plant in Sunderland being one of the most productive in the world is 
they are going to be making more cars and more jobs,” he said.

“Equally, there will be sectors and companies that are more in a remedial 
situation. Or indeed where the technology that is available to them has shifted 
so significantly that they can re-engineer in a much more dramatic way how they 
carry out current operations. There will be instances where that will lead to 
fewer jobs.”

Mayfield’s productivity council will work on sharing information between 
businesses and developing tools that allow bosses to measure the health of 
their company. The John Lewis boss is now looking to make key appointments to 
the council and roll out an app called “How good is your business really?” 
which allows businesses to conduct self-assessments.

Britain’s productivity problem is dragging down pay and living standards, but 
Mayfield says it is an issue that is discussed in the “Westminster bubble” 
rather than businesses themselves. One of the main challenges for his new 
productivity council will be to transform productivity into a relevant and 
aspirational target for businesses by linking it to key financial metrics such 
as sales, profits and cash flow.


“As a retailer we measure everything so we have a number of different ways of 
measuring productivity, but the one we are focusing on much more now is profit 
per partner,” Mayfield says of the John Lewis Partnership, which is owned by 
its employees.

“What we recognise is that we need to improve our profit per partner to make 
our business successful in the future. We are actually by most measures a very 
productive retail business, however the sector is facing some structural and 
significant challenges, which means even a very good performing business in the 
retail sector has to improve its productivity in order to thrive and prosper.


“Technology is clearly integral to this and the way that we are investing in 
technology is going to be hugely important.”

Philip Hammond, the chancellor, outlined Britain’s productivity problem in 
stark terms in the autumn statement by saying it took a British worker five 
days to produce something that their German counterpart could do in four.

Mayfield said the management skills he would be encouraging, which were used 
at John Lewis, were “not rocket science”.


“It is having clear objectives, measuring them, doing appraisals, giving 
feedback – these things. It is surprising how the incidence of businesses 
exhibiting those practices is relatively low,” he said.


“This is a constant focus for us [at John Lewis] and we spend a lot of time 
actually thinking about how we enhance performance and how we enhance 
productivity. If you looked at our strategy documents you would find those 
kinds of things would feature pretty prominently within them, because it is not 
a question of being in the slightest bit complacent; it’s about constantly 
looking for improvement.”


 