
They call it the millionaires' ghost town; dozens of brightly coloured houses 
in mock-19th-century style positioned elegantly in a ravine in the historical 
heart of Kiev.

By day, Vozdvyzhenka is popular for city walkers, wedding photo sessions and 
music clip shoots. But by night, the 17-hectare (42-acre) development falls 
quiet, its buildings dark, its street all but deserted.

Despite its prime location and agreeable facades, hardly anyone lives here. It 
was conceived 10 years ago as a desirable neighbourhood for the great and the 
good of the Ukrainian capital. But after a deep economic downturn withered Kiev 
in 2008 and 2009, the £85m development has lain fallow, a headache for its 
developers and a monument to the folly of grand designs in fragile economies.

"We were knocked down in 2008," says Taras Ziabkin, deputy head of 
Kievgorstroy-1, the company that developed the project. "I will not hide that 
the demand dropped drastically then."

Ziabkin remembers that at the peak of sales in summer 2008 an average price of 
a 120 sq m apartment was more than £533,000. Now the same flat costs only 
£228,000. Ziabkin rejects descriptions by locals of Vozdvyzhenka as a "dead 
town", saying that 50 of its 250 apartments have residents and that repairmen 
are working on a further 50 for new tenants.

"You should understand that many of our buyers live abroad and did the 
purchases as an investment," explains Ziabkin, adding that he hopes to sell the 
remaining apartments by the end of 2014.

But Georgy Duchovychniy, a prominent Kiev architect, thinks modern 
Vozdvyzhenka will never be inhabited, blaming its developers for ruining one of 
the most beautiful areas of the city.

"There are building rules, common sense and there is also a greed which 
destroys them," he says.

Sitting in his studio, Duchovychniy looks at photos of old Vozdvyzhenka that 
was for centuries inhabited by the craftsmen – potters and skinners – after 
whom the local streets received their names. Vozdvyzhenka is named after the 
local Khrestovozdvyzhenska church, known as a place of baptism of the Soviet 
Russian writer Mikhail Bulgakov.

The new plan of reconstruction emerged in the early 2000s and works started in 
2003. Duchovychniy says the developers wanted to echo past-Soviet plans, but in 
the pursuit of profit they increased the number of floors, ignoring the need to 
expand the foundations and develop building communications.

Complaints about cracks in the walls, water in the basement, and heating 
problems at Vozdvyzhenka have been reported in the local media since 2010, when 
its first few residents tried to start living there. Ziabkin claims all of 
these issues have been solved, adding that a number of top politicians, 
sportsmen and pop stars have homes in this district.

But for now only construction workers and passers-by are seen at Vozdvyzhenka. 
One of them, a student, Oleksiy Vasylevsky, says he likes to walk along this 
"nice, spacious and deserted" area.

He believes its homes are empty because of their cost. "People, who have money 
for such apartments, probably may find better places to live," he says.
 