
I'm a qualified accountant, I work in Croydon at the Home Office, and people 
there call me Ash but at the Hare Krishna temple I'm Acyuta.

I got involved with the Hare Krishna movement in my last year of uni about 10 
years ago. A few monks came down, and gave a class on karma and why bad things 
happen to good people, and I found answers I had been looking for. I was 
initiated in 2007, and given a baptism name: Acyuta Charan Das.

Around the same time, my wife Dipti introduced me to the Food For Life 
project, and I started volunteering. It was started by the founder of the Hare 
Krishna movement,AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A._C._Bhaktivedanta_Swami_Prabhupada>, in the 70s,
 after he saw poor children fighting with dogs over scraps of food in the 
street during his time in India. His vision was that anyone within a 10-mile 
radius of a Hare Krishna temple should not go hungry, so he sent his devotees 
out to feed the needy.

We sanctify the food, offering it to God, and that spiritualised food is called
prasadam, which means the mercy of the Lord. We believe that prasad helps you 
materially – by satisfying your hunger with nutritious food – but also brings 
you spiritual benefit. It's a worldwide project, with volunteers distributing 
food in cities everywhere.

The service we provide runs from Monday to Thursday, out of the temple in 
central London on Soho Street. We need more volunteers, especially someone with 
a driving licence, so we can expand to Fridays. The main dish we serve is called
kitchari, which the kitchen staff at Govinda's, the restaurant next to the 
temple, prepare. It is made with rice, lentils, veg and lots of spices. The 
beauty ofkitchari – which means "mixture" – is that any leftover veg can be 
added. So the chefs use whatever they have to hand and it's different every 
day. They also make a wholemeal cake with fruit.

I arrive with the other volunteers at about 6:15pm, after work. We make the 
evening's drink – in the winter, it's usually hot masala tea, and in the 
summer, a fruit juice. Once we've made the foodprasad, we load the temple van 
up with the food and drink, recyclable plates and cutlery and a table, and set 
out for Lincoln's Inn Fields, just outside Holborn station. We give out 200-250 
plates every day. The food is made entirely with produce donated to the temple, 
and sometimes we receive other things too – the other day CoYo donated 12 
crates of their vegan coconut yoghurt, which we distributed alongside the 
prasad. One of the people who came said that her personal trainer had been 
telling her to eat CoYo, and she'd been buying pots of it for £3 a pop … The 
homeless guys were loving it, filling up their bags.

Over the years I've got to know a few of the people who come – it's a real 
mix: homeless people, immigrants who might not be on the streets but who live 
well below the poverty line. And then others come for the social interaction. 
The other day we had to get in the van at the end of the night and tell this 
one poor chap that we needed to leave – he just wanted to keep talking.

On a personal level, it's a very rewarding experience. Sometimes I've had 
people come who haven't eaten for a few days, and have three or four platefuls. 
I used to taste the food, but once a guy came after I'd eaten the last plate 
and wanted food, and I felt sobad that now I don't eat or drink anything in 
case someone comes at the last minute.
 