
Bill Clinton disparagingly referred to Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> as being selected for 
Labour leader because he was “the maddest person in the room”, according to a 
leaked transcript of a campaign speech he made last year.

The former US president spoke mockingly of Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> responding to its 2015 general 
election defeat by moving further to the left and having “practically got a guy 
off the street to be the leader” in the shape of Corbyn.

Clinton was speaking at a presidential fundraiser for his wife, Hillary, in 
Maryland in October last year, according to the transcript ofhis remarks, 
leaked by WikiLeaks <https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/49501> as 
part of the group’s release of a wider cache of emails from Hillary Clinton’s 
campaign director, John Podesta.

This was the period when Hillary Clinton was battling Bernie Sanders for the 
Democratic presidential nomination, a subject that ledBill Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clinton> to discuss the changes in the 
Labour party at the time.


Clinton told his audience that Sanders’ response to economic questions was 
“just go get the money from the millionaires”, according to the leaked 
transcript.

Such a view “sounds good” to a lot of people around the world, Clinton argued. 
“The British Labour party disposed of its most [inaudible] leader, David 
Miliband, because they were mad at him for being part of Tony Blair’s 
government in the Iraq war,” Clinton said.

“And they moved to the left and put his brother in as leader because the 
British labour movement wanted it. When David Cameron thumped him in the 
election, they reached the interesting conclusion that they lost because they 
hadn’t moved far left enough, and so they went out and practically got a guy 
off the street to be the leader of the British Labour party.”

Clinton continued: “But what that is reflective of – the same thing happened 
in the Greek election – when people feel they’ve been shafted and they don’t 
expect anything to happen anyway, they just want the maddest person in the room 
to represent them.”

While he does not make it explicit, it seems Clinton is likely to be using 
“maddest” in the US context of “angriest”.


Such a political reaction was “perfectly psychologically understandable and 
predictable”, Clinton argued in the speech, delivered at the home of a local 
real estate developer and his wife.

“Most people in America haven’t had a raise in 15 years,” he said. “Eight-six 
per cent of the American people, adjusted for inflation, have an income today 
lower than it was the day before the crash. The median income of American 
families, adjusted for inflation, is lower than it was the day I left office.”

The rest of the speech made no mention of UK politics, instead covering a 
range of areas including the US economy, gun control and the rise of Islamic 
State, and talking up Hillary Clinton’s qualifications to be president.

A spokesman for Corbyn said he had no response to Clinton’s remarks. 

 