
One in five 31 to 44-year-olds who don't have children are delaying starting a 
family because of the lack of affordable housing, according to a report by 
Shelter this week.

The housing charity found than one in four (26%) of those who decided to wait 
say they have been doing so for five years or more. The figures, revealed in a 
YouGov survey commissioned by Shelter, represent a 63% increase since 2009.

High house prices and the large deposits required mean one in three first-time 
buyers are over the age of 35.

Meanwhile, many are trapped in small rental apartments that are unsuitable for 
raising a family – but rising rents mean few are able to put aside enough cash 
to save for a deposit on a house.

Rents demanded by landlords are hitting record highs, said LSL Property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> Services, which owns the UK's 
largest lettings agent network, including Your Move and Reeds Rains. It found 
that the average rent in July hit a record high of £725 a month in England and 
Wales. It added that four in 10 landlords expect to increase rents in the 
coming 12 months by an average of 4.5%, with just one in 100 investors likely 
to reduce them .

It also emerged this week that an influx of foreign investors is driving a 
revival in Britain's buy-to-let market, threatening to push up rents and crowd 
out first-time buyers. The Bank of England said: "Foreign investors have 
branched out of commercial property and begun to invest in London residential 
lettings."

Shelter is now calling on the government to take radical action to stop an 
entire generation being held back by the desperate shortage of affordable homes.

Kay Boycott, director of communications at Shelter, said: "It's heartbreaking 
that so many people are being forced to put their lives on hold in this way. 
The government has a responsibility to act now to ensure that today's young 
people, and the generation after, aren't denied something as basic as a proper 
home to raise their children in."

Netmums founder Sally Russell added: "One of the most basic requirements is to 
have a family home, yet this is becoming increasingly unattainable for many. 
Sadly, leaving it too late means they may never be able to have children. For 
others, it could mean both parents forced to work full time when their baby is 
tiny just to keep a roof over their heads."
 