
US Navy-trained dolphins and their handlers will participate in a last-ditch 
effort to catch the last few dozen of Mexico’s vaquita porpoises to save them 
from extinction.

The trained animals will use their sonar to locate the extremely elusive 
vaquitas, then surface and advise their handlers.

The number of vaquitas, the world’s smallest and most endangered porpoise 
species, has been devastated by illegal fishing for the swim bladder of the 
totoaba, a fish which is a prized delicacy in China.

According to rough estimates, with the vaquita population falling by 40% a 
year, and only 60 alive a year ago, there could be as few as three dozen left.

World's smallest porpoise 'at edge of extinction' as illegal gillnets take toll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/14/worlds-smallest-porpoise-vaquita-marina-edge-of-extinction-illegal-gillnets>
Although the vaquita has never been held successfully in captivity, experts 
hope to put the remaining porpoises in floating pens in a safe bay in the Gulf 
of California, also known as the Sea of Cortez, where they can be protected and 
hopefully breed.

International experts confirmed the participation of the navy marine mammal 
program in the effort, which is expected to start in the spring. Jim Fallin of 
the US Navy Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center Pacific said on Tuesday the 
dolphins’ participation was still in the planning stage.

“Their specific task is to locate” vaquitas, which live only in the Gulf of 
California, Fallin said. “They would signal that by surfacing and returning to 
the boat from which they were launched.”

The dolphins have been trained by the navy for tasks such as locating sea 
mines.

Lorenzo Rojas-Bracho, the chairman of the International Committee for the 
Recovery of the Vaquita, wrote that “an international group of experts, 
including navy personnel, have been working on two primary goals: determining 
the feasibility of locating and catching vaquitas, as a phase one. And as a 
second phase, to determine the feasibility of temporarily housing vaquitas in 
the Gulf of California.”

Rojas-Bracho said the effort by the international team of experts “would 
involve locating them, capturing them and putting them in some kind of 
protective area”, probably a floating enclosure or pen in a protected bay where 
they would not be endangered by fishing nets. Mexico hasbanned gillnets that 
often trap vaquitas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/14/worlds-smallest-porpoise-vaquita-marina-edge-of-extinction-illegal-gillnets>
 in the area, but has had trouble enforcing it because the totoaba draws very 
high prices on the black market.

“At the current rate of loss, the vaquita will likely decline to extinction by 
2022 unless the current gillnet ban is maintained and effectively enforced,” 
Rojas-Bracho wrote.

Some experts, like Omar Vidal, Mexico’s director of the World Wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Fund, oppose the capture 
plan, which could risk killing the few remaining vaquitas and open up a 
free-for-all of illegal fishing once they are removed from their natural 
habitat. “We must strive to save this porpoise where it belongs: in a healthy 
Upper Gulf of California,” he said.

Catch-and-enclose is risky. The few remaining females could die during 
capture, dooming the species. Breeding in captivity has successfully saved 
species such as the red wolf and California condor, but the vaquita has only 
been scientifically described since the 1950s and has never been bred or even 
held in captivity.

Experts including Rojas-Bracho; Barbara Taylor, leader of Marine Mammal 
Genetics Program at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; and 
Sarah Mesnick of the NOAA’s Southwest Fisheries Science Center, emphasized that 
the capture program “should not divert effort and resources away from extension 
and enforcement of the gillnet ban, which remains the highest-priority 
conservation actions for the species”.

Veterinarians would evaluate vaquitas’ reactions and release stressed 
individuals, they wrote. Should a death occur, the team would re-evaluate the 
sanctuary strategy. “It is important to stress that the recovery team goal is 
to return vaquita from the temporary sanctuary into a gillnet-free 
environment,” they wrote.
 