
There are only three days left to apply for what could be the most coveted job 
in education: the Lego professor of play <http://www.jobs.cam.ac.uk/job/12374/>
, development and learning at the University of Cambridge.

The closing date for applications for the brand new, permanent post is this 
Friday, 20 January. The successful candidate will not only enjoy all the perks 
of a typical Cambridge professor – including a job that commands an average 
salary of £83,981 – he or she will also lead Cambridge’s newly established
Centre for Research on Play in Education 
<https://www.educ.cam.ac.uk/centres/pedal/>, Development and Learning (Pedal).

“The value of play is relatively under-researched,” says Prof Anna Vignoles, 
interim director of Pedal and a member of Cambridge University’s faculty of 
education. “You have people who are claiming that it enhances learning, that 
it’s important, that it’s good for children’s wellbeing. All of that might be 
true, but actually there’s remarkably little evidence for that. The aim of the 
Pedal centre is to conduct rigorous research into the importance of play and 
how playful learning can be used to improve students’ outcomes.”

Although the Lego Foundation, which owns 25% of the Lego 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lego> business, will have no say over 
who is appointed, it is committed to funding the role in perpetuity and has 
already made a £4m endowment to the university. Of this, £2.5m has been put 
aside for the professorship. The remaining £1.5m is going to the Pedal centre, 
whose agenda will, in the future, be determined by the interests of the new 
professor.

The university is planning to offer the role to an academic who specialises in 
educational psychology, to enable the centre to step up its research 
capabilities in this field. “Children are now increasingly accessing 
early-years provision at very young ages,” says Vignoles. “There are a number 
of scholars who are working on interesting aspects of that in developmental 
psychology. We’re confident that we’ll attract an outstanding scholar.”

The Lego Foundation is hoping for a candidate with a “childlike mindset”: “an 
academic who is playful, extremely curious, open-minded, imaginative and 
creative – someone who can think of new ways of doing research and work across 
different disciplines,” says Bo Stjerne Thomsen, global head of research for 
the Lego Foundation.
 Lego’s global head of research, Bo Stjerne Thomsen, says the foundation wants 
to ‘encourage more playful learning in schools, rather than testing’. 
Photograph: Jonas Fotografi 
The foundation believes play has a critical role for children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/children-learn-play-age-eight-lego>
, particularly in high-quality learning. “Play should be part of education,” 
says Stjerne Thomsen. “What we want is to get the UK government to encourage 
more playful learning in schools, rather than testing. If children are being 
taught with standardised assessments and results, those children will expect to 
receive assignments and be led towards pre-defined goals for the rest of their 
lives.

“But the skills you need now as an adult are collaboration, problem solving 
and coming up with ideas. In that sense, play is critical. You use your 
imagination to plan things, to predict outcomes, to understand how to solve a 
problem by looking at it from different perspectives.

“For us, this is a unique opportunity to build research and interventions that 
can inform government policy, and also teachers – who are very good at 
teaching, but need other perspectives on the curriculum.”

Vignoles, though, emphasises that the professor will not be expected to become 
an advocate for play to policymakers. “This is a research and teaching role, 
not an advocacy role. We don’t know what the impact of play is on particular 
outcomes. We’re going into this to investigate it.”

And Stjerne Thomsen says: “We hope the Lego professor will speak to the needs 
that exist in education right now – and we can point to what the attitudes to 
play are, how teachers teach and what parents expect from education. New 
research studies may fulfill gaps in academia, but we help our academic 
partners to address the question of how it would make sense for a government or 
teacher to use that research.”

The Lego Foundation chose Cambridge because of its interdisciplinary approach 
to play research and its expertise and credibility when communicating research 
to policymakers and practitioners, he says. “There is no department of play at 
any university and no institution takes responsibility for following the play 
literature and looking at interventions and outcomes in education. There is a 
lot of work even at the baseline for an academic institution to say what 
studies already exist and it’s very difficult to set up good studies.”

Academics have under-researched the potential value of play because the line 
between play, teaching and learning is hard to pin down, Vignoles says. “Using 
the latest technology to carry out research and collect data will be important. 
One of the most exciting projects the centre is working on at the moment is 
looking at outdoor play using GPS technology. The aim is to understand how 
children interact with their peers when they’re left in a playground situation, 
and how they congregate in groups and play. It’s an innovative way of studying 
what children are doing.”

It is the first professor of play in the world. “It needed to be a 
professorship because we have high expectations with regard to the standard of 
the research agenda,” says Stjerne Thomsen. “We wanted to attract someone who 
will build a whole team around him or her that can define studies in this area, 
someone who will be world-renowned for play.”

Applicants do not need to already hold a professorship. “There may be people 
applying for this post for whom this will be their first chair – it’s more 
about what they can bring in terms of their research,” says Vignoles. 
Applications close on 20 January.
 