
A leopard shark in an Australian aquarium has reproduced asexually after being 
separated from her mate.

It is the first reported case of a shark switching from sexual to asexual or 
parthenogenetic reproduction and only the third reported case among all 
vertebrate species.

The leopard shark, Leonie, was captured in the wild in 1999 and introduced to 
a male shark at the Reef HQ aquarium in Townsville, Queensland, in 2006. 
Leopard sharks are also known as zebra sharks.

She began laying eggs in 2008 and had several litters of viable, sexually 
produced offspring before being separated from her mate in 2012, because the 
aquarium decided to scale back its breeding program.

Related: Mysterious ghost shark caught on film for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/19/mysterious-ghost-shark-caught-on-film-for-the-first-time>

One of the offspring was Lolly, a female shark who has shared a tank with her 
mother since 2013. Lolly has not shared a tank with a male shark since she 
reached sexual maturity.

In 2014, both Leonie and Lolly laid eggs.

According to Dr Christine Dudgeon, a biologist with the University of 
Queensland who has studied the two sharks andpublished a report on Leonie’s 
unusual reproductive shift in Scientific Reports this week 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep40537>, laying eggs without a male around 
was not in itself unusual.

“Much like a chicken, they will lay eggs if the conditions are good, whether 
they are fertile or infertile,” Dudgeon told Guardian Australia.

However, staff at the aquarium noticed that some of Leonie’s eggs contained 
embryos. They attempted to incubate them but none of the eggs hatched.

The next year, both Leonie and Lolly produced eggs that contained embryos. 
Together they produced five live hatchlings, of which two, Leonie’s hatchling 
Cleo and Lolly’s hatchling Kitkat, remain on display at the aquarium.

Genetic testing of Leonie’s hatchlings revealed elevated homozygosity, 
indicating they were the result of asexual reproduction and not the result of 
stored sperm. Female sharks have been known to store sperm for up to four years.

Dudgeon said asexual reproduction among female sharks that had never 
reproduced sexually, like Lolly, was not unusual, but Leonie’s case was a world 
first.

“The onset of asexual reproduction with the onset of maturity has been 
documented before with sharks, and rays, and particularly with reptiles, but 
what we have shown for the first time is the switch,” she said.

Genetically, she said, it is like “a severe case of inbreeding.” The offspring 
are not clones of the mother and only have half of her genetic material, which 
makes them less hardy.

“The idea behind sexual reproduction is you keep mixing up the gene pool to 
give these animals the biggest set of traits to combat pathogens and other 
environmental factors that change very rapidly,” she said.
 Leonie, the world’s first shark known to have switched from sexual to asexual 
reproduction, at Reef HQ aquarium in Townsville. Photograph: Tourism and Events 
Queensland 
The only other documented cases of a female switching from sexual to asexual 
reproduction involved an eagle ray, which reproduced asexually after being 
separated from her mate for year, and a boa constrictor, which reproduced 
asexually despite being caged with a male boa constrictor.

Dudgeon said it was not clear what triggered the switch, but said it appeared 
to be a short-term evolutionary response to extend the reproductive life of a 
female in response to a scarcity of mates.

However it’s success as a long-term strategy is unclear. There have been no 
reported cases of an offspring that was the product of asexual reproduction 
going on to reproduce sexually.

Dudgeon will be monitoring the reproductive habits of Cleo and Kitkat, when 
they reach sexual maturity at the age of seven.

Related: Sharks fascinate us - but are we prepared to protect them from 
extinction? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/sep/29/sharks-fascinate-us-but-are-we-prepared-to-protect-them-from-extinction>

Zebra sharks, or stegostoma fasciatum, are named for the zebra-like stripes 
they display as babies. Mature zebra sharks have spots, meaning they are 
commonly also known as leopard sharks, not to be confused with the different 
species of leopard sharks off the coast of California.

They are listed as endangered on the International Union for Conservation of 
Nature red list.

Hamish Tristram, a senior aquarist with Reef HQ, said he hoped the unusual 
case of Leonie would bring greater attention to the struggling species.

Tristram said Leonie and Lolly’s ability to reproduce asexually had somewhat 
stymied the aquarium’s attempts to slow down its breeding program.

“We really were trying to scale back our breeding program and as a result we 
have divested from having any male sharks,” he said. “That’s the irony in the 
fact that they have gone on to reproduce anyway.”
 