
“You don’t teach, you instruct.”

Has anyone said that to you after one your lectures? No? It’s happened to me. 
In fact, if I had a pound for every time I’ve heard that statement, I would be 
well on the way to bridging the pay gap between academic and technical teaching 
staff.

I am a technical instructor. It’s all about pushing buttons and pulling 
levers, isn’t it? I couldn’t even pronounce pedagogy, let alone deliver it.

Many higher education institutes running practice-oriented degrees employ 
technical instructors to teach the areas not covered by the theory in the 
lecture rooms. My particular group of instructors is made up of people who have 
award-winning skills and real-world experience. We are not recent graduates. We 
are industry professionals who want to pass on our skills so that students are 
equipped for the workplace when they graduate.

Practice makes perfect: how to become a vocational lecturer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/20/practice-makes-perfect-how-to-become-a-vocational-lecturer>
But technical instructors get paid significantly less than academics. Research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/research>, scholarly 
activity, promotion opportunities and ridiculously long annual leave are not 
part of our contracts. We are placed in the same union as nurses, cleaners, 
call centre workers and security staff. We are in a lower social class than our 
“elite” academic colleagues.


Did I mention that we have a different management structure from the entire 
academic team? This means that we don’t get shown the qualitative data from the 
National Student Survey, which points to the technical team as the strength of 
the course, year after year. Once, when I asked the academic manager to see the 
report, I was told it would “need a lot of editing” before I could see it.

The thing is, we do see it, as we have ways to circumnavigate the system. We 
understand that “editing” really means trying to withhold negative comments 
about some of their staff. Plus it’s a bit awkward if it points to our 
technical team as a strength in the teaching and learning, as we are paid 
significantly less than academics.

“Technical instructor” does sound a bit like “technician” and some people 
clearly don’t know the difference between the two. I am referred to as a 
technician on a daily basis. I can only assume this word association is why we 
are the first port of call whenever there is a technical problem with something 
menial, like PowerPoint slides.

They don’t call on us with teaching problems, of course, although this would 
actually be more appropriate. After all, a lot of us are fellows of the Higher 
Education Academy and have far more teaching experience than a lot of academics.

I am usually the first person through the door in the morning and the last to 
leave in the evening – that is what happens when your non-teaching hours are 
automatically technical support hours. Students know where we are based and we 
spend a lot of time talking them through course-based queries. At the end of my 
teaching sessions, I have a queue of students waiting at the door to ask 
questions.


Students! Your lecturers are on strike because they are struggling to survive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/26/students-your-lecturers-are-on-strike-because-they-are-struggling-to-survive>
All of these sessions are written by me, with no input from any course 
academic. They are steeped in context, theory, psychology and practice. But 
still, apparently, this is not teaching.

I wonder about the elephant in the room. You wouldn’t find surgery being 
taught to medical students by someone who had never worked as a surgeon. But 
you do get academics who have never worked a day outside of HE teaching 
practice-oriented subjects. I’ve got a huge amount of respect for many of my 
academic colleagues who work tirelessly. But I also see the ones that let the 
side down.

There are plenty of new training courses offering three-month diplomas in the 
same subjects as our degrees. They have partnerships with industry as well. 
They are busy and oversubscribed, even though they charge more than us. Their 
technical instructors, significantly, are called lecturers.

There is a massive challenge ahead of us regarding the traditional models of 
courses and accreditation. The sector needs to appropriately recognise and 
reward the those who make a difference in the classroom.


“Technical” is not a dirty word in industry and it should not be in higher 
education. Having two disjointed teaching teams is unhelpful and creates 
another political minefield that students have to navigate.

There should be one equal teaching team made up of different skills: 
professors, academic theorists, researchers, technical lecturers, industry 
practitioners and talented classroom teachers. Students would have one port of 
call, leading to better communication and a better overall experience. If we 
sort this one out, we will be able to trump any other new training institution. 
How could they compete with that breadth of expertise?

The recently deceased futurist writer, Alvin Toffler, said: “The illiterate of 
the 21st century will not be those who cannot read and write, but those who 
cannot learn, unlearn, and relearn.”

It is about time universities do a bit of unlearning and let everyone relearn 
together, as a team.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 