
Even though my protocol droid is fluent in more than six million forms of 
communication, it has drawn a blank with some of the utterancesLindsay Lohan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lindsay-lohan> made on the steps of her new 
Athens nightclub, LOHAN.

But so what? Lost in Showbiz is excited that Lindsay that should have followed 
former England manager Steve McClaren into the muddy waters of cod-European 
accents <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xhtq1ObGHy8> – and, heaven knows, 
we’ve all ended up being able to speak only broken English on nightclub 
pavements. Usually on the way out, rather than the way in, but still.

By way of a recap, Lindsay has put her name, and supposedly some investment, 
to a fancy new nightclub in the Greek capital, and used an appearance there 
this week to explain – with the smiling staccato of someone feeling their
heavily accented way in the unfamiliar American tongue 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3896028/Lindsay-Lohan-breaks-silence-reveals-new-accent.html>
 – how this was just the start of the brand rollout. “There’s bigger things to 
be done with the LOHAN club,” she told reporters. “There is spas, there is 
refugee camps.”

Well, quite. Actually, hang on – what?

I’m afraid the answer to that question is slightly unclear. According to 
Lindsay, an unspecified percentage of profits from the club may be going to 
charity – at least, she says haltingly “we can make it a good purpose”, and “we 
can create charity from the club”. The nature of the charity in question is 
also fairly broadbrush – Lindsay claims it will fix “bad things in the world”, 
seemingly focused on refugees from Syria. An energy-drink brand ambassador, she 
recently talked abouthanding out cans of the stuff to refugees after her visit 
to a camp in Turkey 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/10/28/entertainment/lindsay-lohan-refugees/>. “We 
have to help people,” she goes on, “and if we can do it with a nightclub, or 
with a spa, or with refugee camps, or with containers …”

Maybe the Rosetta Stone to all this is in one of the containers? Until we 
locate it, however, we have only Lindsay’s business plan/wellness-driven 
moodboard. “We create peaceful locations where we can all be happy,” she goes 
on. “And we start with the refugees, and then we open nice places, and maybe 
one of the refugees will open a place with us … I want LOHAN to be a 
celebration of everybody coming together, in the European nations.”

It is a hell of an ask of a nightclub, in the circumstances. But certainly 
worth a shot. Certainly a shot of the aforementioned energy drink, which is 
sold at the bar.

Meanwhile, Lohan completists will know that has she long aspired to use her 
celebrity to the generalised benefit of troubled regions. In 2006, Lindsay 
announced plans to visit Iraq. “I’ve been trying to go to Iraq with Hillary 
Clinton for so long,”she explained 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/actress-lohan-wants-to-visit-iraq-with-sen-clinton.aspx?pageID=438&n=actress-lohan-wants-to-visit-iraq-with-sen.-clinton-2006-08-10>
, with the apparent failure to be able to synchronise diaries likely to have 
been of equal if not greater frustration to the current Democratic nominee for 
the US presidency.

“Hillary was trying to work it out, but it seemed too dangerous.” Or as 
Hillary’s spokesman put it: “It was suggested to her that if she wanted to go, 
she could pursue doing so through theUSO <https://www.uso.org/>.” Look, 
whatever. Lindsay had a clear plan: “I wanted to do what Marilyn Monroe did, 
when she went and just set up a stage and did a concert for the troops all by 
herself. It’s so inspiring seeing that one woman just going somewhere, this 
beautiful sex kitten, who is basically a pin-up, which is what I’ve always 
aspired to be.”

Still, God love Lindsay, who has added to the gaiety of various nations since 
her horrendous parents pushed her on stage far too young. If, as entertainment 
cliche holds, you are frozen in development at the age at which you become 
famous, then Lindsay will for ever be preserved at the age of 11, when she made 
her name in Disney’s The Parent Trap remake. Looked at this way, her latest 
venture is no more sweetly clueless than a child being admonished for not 
eating its egg at breakfast on the basis that there are people starving across 
the world, and asking worriedly if it can post the remains of the egg to them.

As for her accent, the extensive WTF-ery that has attended its debut has 
caused Lindsay to respond with details of its genesis. “It’s a mixture of the 
languages I can understand or am trying to learn,” she revealed. “I’ve been 
learning different languages since I was a child. I’m fluent in English and 
French, can understand Russian and am learning Turkish, Italian and Arabic.” As 
for what this pending creole should be called, Lindsay declared: “We should let 
the people decide.”

Odd to see her coming round to the idea of referendums. After all, she was 
less enamoured during a lengthy series of tweets posted in conjunction with the 
BBC’s coverage on the night of the European referendum itself, at one point 
issuing the dismissive inquiry: “Sorry Kettering but where are you?” (I think 
they’re south of the river somewhere, but probably best to get them to come to 
you). Following a defensive mention of this in the House of Commons by the 
local MP, Philip Hollobone, Lindsay later apologised to the town, and agreed to 
switch on its Christmas lights. Thereafter, it all went a bit quiet.

Indeed, last week Hollobone was raising the spectre of a no-show, telling the 
BBC: “She said she would come and switch on the Christmas lights at Kettering 
but, despite everyone’s best efforts, it’s simply not been possible to track 
her down.” Yet since then some progress appears to have been made. On Thursday, 
a spokesman for Kettering borough council revealed: “We have made direct 
contact with Lindsay’s publicist. We get the impression she is genuinely really 
interested. It just depends on whether or not she can fit it in.”

Surely it all flows together? Energy drink, exclusive nightclub, spas, refugee 
camps, containers, Kettering … I’ll let you know when I guess the next one in 
the sequence. In the meantime, let’s just accept that Lindsay’s new accent 
would be the most eye-catching festive curiosity in Kettering since Neil and 
Christine Hamilton gave us their Fairy Godmother and Baron Hardup in the town 
panto in 2011, and cross our fingers accordingly.
 