
High street banks were under intense pressure to give up their fight against 
paying out claims for mis-selling payment protection insurance, after Lloyds
Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group's surprise £3.2bn 
provision to cover claims by millions of customers.

The dramatic capitulation by the new Lloyds chief executive António 
Horta-Osório <https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio> caught 
his rivals – who have been fighting the Financial Services Authority in the 
courts – on the hop and left the bailed-out bank reporting a pre-tax loss of 
£3.4bn for the first quarter of 2011.

Barely three months ago, the former Lloyds boss Eric Daniels unveiled a first 
full-year profit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/feb/25/lloyds-returns-to-profit-high-street-booms>
 since the crisis and was awarded a £1.45m bonus for his endeavours. Lloyds 
said on Thursday that its remuneration committee would consider the payment of 
any bonuses in light of the PPI provision "in due course".

Shares in the bank slumped 8% to 53p, leaving the taxpayer nursing a £5.5bn 
loss on its 41% stake.

Horta-Osório, who took the helm on 1 March after running the UK arm of 
Santander, signalled a truce with the City regulator over the seven-year PPI 
saga, saying: "It is appropriate to take a provision now and move on."

Horta-Osório, who on his arrival at Lloyds demanded a thorough assessment of 
the PPI bill, conceded that the £3.2bn provision "feels a significantly bigger 
number than I would have expected".

"It is the sensible, prudent and right thing to do," he said of the U-turn. 
"We believe it draws a line under this issue."

The British Bankers Association had expected to appeal against a judgment last 
month which upheld a ruling by the FSA that banks should compensate customers 
retrospectively for PPI. But Horta-Osório made it clear that Lloyds no longer 
intended to back any legal action and rivals at Barclays, HSBC and Royal Bank 
of Scotland – due to report on Friday – were in talks to decide their next step.

Citizens Advice urged the banks to follow Lloyds and settle claims, as did 
Adam Phillips, chair of the Consumer Panel.

Which? executive director Richard Lloyd said: "The rest of the UK's banks must 
follow suit and draw a line under the great PPI mis-selling scandal by 
withdrawing their legal challenge of the FSA and proactively reimbursing the 
millions of customers who were mis-sold PPI."

He added: "We don't think Lloyds should have kept its shareholders in the dark 
for so long about its PPI liability. This should serve as a wake-up call to 
shareholders of other banks that treating customers fairly cannot be ignored. 
Instead of trying to claw back these losses from its customers, Lloyds should 
instead look at the bonuses of the senior managers who presided over this 
systemic mis-selling."

Other banks are yet to make provisions for the cost of paying claims for PPI 
mis-selling, which the FSA had estimated could cost £4.5bn. That estimate is 
now regarded as too low, and while RBS is not expected to reveal the size of 
any provision when it reports on Friday, many believe it is a matter of time 
before rivals follow Lloyds and spell out the bills they face. Their shares of 
PPI sales, according to Deutsche Bank, are 40% for Lloyds, 14% for Barclays, 
13% for RBS and 8% for HSBC 8%.

The BBA said it was "considering whether to make an application to appeal" 
before the 10 May deadline.

Horta-Osório, facing accusations that he was "kitchen-sinking" as the bank 
also upped the charge for bad loans by £500m more than expected, said he was 
trying to address the problems facing the bank.

The total group impairment charge reached £2bn for the first quarter after the 
extra Irish provision. The bank had made a pre-tax profit of £1.1bn in the same 
three months a year ago and insisted its performance was satisfactory on what 
it calls a combined business basis, which strips out the costs associated with 
the integration. On this measure, profits were £284m. But Horta-Osório said: 
"These are not good numbers and I'm not pleased about them."

Analysts agreed the first-quarter numbers were gloomy as the cost of replacing 
taxpayer support in the money markets with £13.5bn of more expensive private 
money was hitting margins, which fell to 2.07% from 2.12% the previous quarter. 
First-quarter income had fallen to £5.2bn while losses knocked the crucial 
tier-one capital ratio to 10% from 10.2%.

Ian Gordon, banks analyst at Exane BNP Paribas, said: "The underlying picture 
is poor. It makes any rose-tinted class view appear more tinted. Even if you 
ignore the one-off items, the worrying thing is the poor level of 
profitability".

 