
For busy teachers with heavy workloads, the autumn term can feel long, dark 
and stressful. But the Christmas holidays are in sight and that should mean a 
break from work, whether it’s spending time with family, or sitting in front of 
the television in your pyjamas scoffing chocolate.

But, even with the best intentions, letting go of work stress over the 
holidays can be easier said than done. So here’s our guide to giving yourself a 
well-deserved rest.

Switch off from work completely 

It can be tempting to use the extra time over the holidays to catch up with 
marking, but you must mentally check out of work. “You need to give your brain 
a break,” says Dr Sandi Mann, a senior psychology lecturer at the University of 
Central Lancashire. “That means switching off emails and work-related social 
media, and not doing that marking. If you don’t, you’ll burn out.”

And that means stopping thinking about work too. “When you talk about 
stressful aspects of your job, your heart rate and blood pressure increase, as 
if you’re experiencing them again,” says Gail Kinman, a professor of 
occupational health psychology at the University of Bedfordshire. “So it isn’t 
enough just to stop working, you’ve got to stop thinking about it.”

Is this the solution to the teacher workload crisis?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/sep/16/is-this-the-solution-to-the-teacher-workload-crisis>
Face your fear of falling behind

Perhaps you know you need a break, but find it difficult to switch off in 
spite of yourself. There are a number of reasons that make it hard for teachers 
to let work go, says Mann. “The most common is the fear that everything will be 
worse if you don’t keep on top of emails. It’s finding a balance between stress 
when you go back or more constant stress during the holiday. But remember; 
you’re better able to cope if you have some stress-free time,” she says.

Many people feel they can’t let go because they won’t be able to get going 
again, says Kinman. “You think that once you get off the bus, and let yourself 
relax, it’ll be hard to get back on again.” While Mann says that if you’re used 
to being busy it can be hard to stop. “Adults feel like they should be doing 
something all the time and that can be a difficult habit to break.”

Create a ‘buffer zone’

If you find it difficult to let go of work during the holidays, what do 
psychologists recommend doing? First it’s important to mentally switch from 
work to home mode, says Kinman. “Most people can’t just click out of it. 
Particularly if they’re working like mad up until the last minute. So you need 
what I call ‘buffer zones’ – some sort of buffer to help you physically and 
mentally switch back into home life and leave work behind you.” For example, 
you could spend the first day of the holidays reviewing the term, before 
letting it go, says Kinman. “Put work in a box metaphorically and bring it back 
out in January.”

Eleanor Perkins teaches at Les Beaucamps High School in Guernsey, along with 
her husband. To switch from work to home mode they discuss work on the drive 
home on the last day of term – and then park it in the driveway along with the 
car. “We get all the school chat out of the way in the car and then get home 
and focus on family,” she says.

Plan ahead

Next, plan when you’ll do the work you feel you simply can’t avoid. Jon 
Rogers, a teacher at Finham Park 2 School in Coventry, says pre-planning his 
time and setting boundaries helps. “I’ve got two young children, so it’s not 
fair for me to end up disappearing. At the beginning of the holiday I block out 
time when I plan to work really hard and then the rest of the holiday I can 
take the kids to see Santa, or whatever. Sometimes you get the most genius 
lesson idea when you’re doing that, and if that happens I make a note, but let 
the development of it happen another time.”

To avoid working at unscheduled times, some teachers go as far as hiding their 
work things. “I put all of my work in one room and shut the door until I feel 
able to look at it,” says Freya Odell, a teacher at the Wellington Academy in 
Wiltshire.

Perkins hides her laptop under the stairs: “Then I can’t see it and I’m not 
tempted to check emails,” she says. “But my husband, who finds it harder to 
switch off, will leave his on the dining room table.”

Celebrate the end of term

School leaders can help by rounding off the term in a celebratory way and with 
no loose ends, says Julian Stanley, chief executive ofEducation Support 
Partnership <https://www.educationsupportpartnership.org.uk>. “It’s how people 
go into the break that matters. It should be celebratory, not just for the 
kids, but for the staff as well.” This also helps to curb negative thinking 
patterns. “It’s important to spot unhelpful thinking,” says Kinman. “Where you 
start to say to yourself, ‘I should have done this or that.’”

Eight ways teachers can reduce their marking mountain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/may/15/eight-ways-teachers-can-reduce-their-marking-mountain>
Headteachers should encourage staff to let go. “Leaders have a very strong and 
important role to play in encouraging staff to switch off,” says Kinman. “But 
first they have to lead by example.” We have a culture of praising people for 
working late, says Mann. “But it’s good if managers don’t expect emails, or 
even say; ‘You need a break, go and be with your family’.”

Occupy your mind

Once you’ve put work to one side, stop thinking about it. “To enjoy time 
vegging out in front of the television, you have to be present,” says Kinman. 
“There’s nothing worse than trying to watch a film when work is going round in 
your head.” Kinman says meditation helps. Exercise also works for some people, 
says Mann, but others find it just lets their minds wander. “You need to do 
something that fills the cognitive load in your brain so there’s no room for 
your work worries,” she says. “Whether that’s talking, watching a film, or 
whatever works for you.”

Have fun!

Finally, when you’ve removed distractions and planned your working hours, it’s 
time to indulge yourself. “Teachers tend to prioritise other people a lot and 
not think about their own wellbeing,” says Mann. “But it’s not selfish to 
prioritise that.” So whether you want to spend time playing games with your 
children, visiting Christmas markets – or eating those chocolate Father 
Christmases – do it, psychologists say. “Do the things you enjoy,” says 
Stanley. “Because teachers are human beings and need to indulge themselves a 
little bit too.”

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 