
Is the London property market finally about to crack? The 
country-within-a-country that isLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
has for years defied the house price falls seen elsewhere in Britain, and as 
recently as early May surveyors were reporting a "mini boom" in parts of the 
capital.

But the Office of National Statistics (ONS) reports that London, far from 
defying price falls,is actually leading the way 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2012/may/22/house-prices-fell-past-year-ons>. 
The ONS, whose data is regarded asmore robust than many of the figures put out 
by the commercial organisations 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2012/may/03/house-prices-different-indices>, 
says prices in London fell by 0.2% in the 12 months to March 2012.

"The annual decrease in England was driven by decreases in London, the 
south-east and the north-east," the ONS says. Meanwhile, Wales and the 
south-west are seeing price rises over the past year, while Northern Ireland 
continues to plummet.

Contrast that with the Halifax, which says house prices in the capital were 
3.4% higher at the end of the first quarter of 2012 compared with a year 
earlier, and Nationwide, which says prices were ahead 2.5%. The Royal 
Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Rics), whose members value houses on behalf 
of mortgage companies, said earlier this month that "London continues to be the 
only region recording price rises."

So who is right?

The ONS obtains its data from mortgage completions from the Regulated Mortgage 
Survey, as collected by the Council of Mortgage Lenders. It says its sample 
covers 65%-70% of all UK mortgage completions.

Halifax and Nationwide's indices are based only on their own mortgage 
approvals, and the ONS accepts they are more timely – they are in-house figures 
and are not dependent on data from other lenders.

The Rics figures are more of an opinion survey, which gives a picture of 
sentiment and the direction of prices. But do the ONS figures now reveal that 
sentiment in the capital has been skewed by some extraordinary prices paid in 
prime districts, but which haven't actually radiated out across London?

The very thin number of transactions may be making the direction of prices 
difficult to read. Sales of £2m+ houses have rocketed by 86% since 2009, but in 
the real world prices for standard homes have dropped dramatically since the 
onset of the financial crisis.

Figures published by HMRC show that just 72,000 homes were sold in April 2012 
across the UK, compared to 88,000 in March and 70,000 in April 2011. In April 
2006, 137,000 sales were recorded across the United Kingdom.

In the fancier bits of London there is still some evidence that properties are 
shifting fast, and at asking price or even above. But rationality appears to be 
taking hold in the more mundane parts of the capital, where rich foreign buyers 
do not tread.

In the past, the property market cycle began in London then radiated around 
the country. This time around the reverse cycle is at work: price falls began 
elsewhere in the country but are now finally reaching the capital.
 