
A government scheme offering homebuyers in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> loans of up to £240,000 to help them 
buy new-build properties will go live on 1 February.

Help to buy London is an extension of the equity loan scheme that has been 
available to buyers around the country since April 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/mar/20/help-to-buy-scheme-how-it-works>
, which doubles the amount of money being offered from 20% of a property’s 
purchase price to 40%.

While mortgage rates are still at record lows and lenders are increasingly 
willing to offer loans to first-time buyers, high house prices in the capital 
have locked many out of the market.

To meet affordability checks and qualify for mortgages, borrowers have had to 
raise increasingly large deposits.

Data from Halifax published on Monday showed the average first-time buyer in 
London spent £367,990 in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/11/uk-first-time-buyer-numbers-fall-for-first-time-in-four-years>
, while the average deposit was £91,409. To spend the same amount with a 40% 
loan the same buyer would need a deposit of just£18,399.

Help to buy London: what you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/12/help-to-buy-london-what-you-need-to-know>
The extension, which was announced in the chancellor’s autumn statement, will 
be available to buyers of new properties in Greater London costing up to 
£600,000. As under the existing scheme, borrowers will need to be able to raise 
a deposit of at least 5%, and to qualify for a normal mortgage.

They will also have to show that they can afford interest payments on the 
government loan when the five-year interest-free period ends.

Although the interest starts at 1.75%, lenders are checking that repayments 
can be met at up to 4%, meaning that someone borrowing the maximum £240,000 
would have to show that they could afford to pay £800 a month on top of their 
mortgage and other outgoings.

At the launch of the scheme mortgages will be available from Leeds and 
Nationwide building societies and Lloyds bank.

The housing minister, Brandon Lewis, said: “We’re determined to help people 
enjoy the security that comes with owning a home and have already helped over 
130,000 people into home ownership with help to buy.

“The scheme is helping people buy a home with a fraction of a deposit they 
would normally require, and the new London scheme will help even more people 
follow in their footsteps.”

Funding for the scheme comes from the £8.6bn budget set aside to extend the 
help to buy equity loan scheme from April 2016, when it was originally due to 
end, to March 2021.

By the end of September 3,548 households had used an equity loan to buy 
properties in the capital, and the government said more than 10,000 more could 
benefit from the new scheme.

Developers have been among the biggest beneficiaries of the help-to-buy 
scheme, reporting big demand for homes through it.


Ray Boulger of mortgage brokers John Charcol said the scheme was “a massive 
benefit to people who want to buy in London”.


Boulger said buyers who were able to raise large enough deposits would 
effectively be able to double the amount that they could spend, while keeping 
their monthly repayments at the same level.

But he said there would be borrowers who were unable to clear the loan at the 
end of the five-year period, and that people may not be able to afford to move 
up the housing ladder at that point.

“People who use the scheme will stay in the property a lot longer – this is 
likely to happen with the existing scheme too,” he said. “A lot of people will 
find that their ability to move is limited unless they want to downsize, but if 
they are buying a bigger property at the outset that shouldn’t be a problem.”

The scheme does have its critics. Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> expert Henry Pryor said it would 
stoke demand and house prices in London. “First introduced as a measure to 
encourage house builders to take off the tarpaulins off their moth-balled sites 
and get building again after the 2007-8 crash the initiative has worked well 
with more homes being built but the byproduct is toxic - higher prices that 
require even more help to buy,” he said.

“Results from the quoted developers illustrates who is really being helped and 
a London version of the scheme is wrong both from a moral and practical 
perspective. There are no work-shy builders in the capital, in fact we need 
more sites to satisfy demand. Giving people help to afford what they otherwise 
could not is potty and will end in tears.”

Campbell Robb, the chief executive of housing charity Shelter, said: “What we 
need to tackle the housing crisis in London isn’t more gimmicky schemes that 
are only available to higher earners, but investment in genuinely affordable 
homes.


“Without this, millions of Londoners on ordinary incomes will continue to be 
stuck in unstable, expensive private renting.”


 He added: “To solve the housing crisis for the long term, both central 
government and the mayor need to prioritise building homes that people on low 
or average incomes can actually afford to rent or buy.”



 