
Michel Roux Jr <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/michel-roux-jr>, born 
into chef aristocracy and trained under his father, Albert, and his uncle 
Michel, has a sense of dynasty – its entitlements, its myopias, its burdens, 
its scars – that is palpable in almost all he says.

“I knew it was going to be interesting working for my father and uncle,” he 
once told the Financial Times. “It was more difficult for me than for other 
youngsters, because I had a point to prove.”


It is fascinating as a psychological portrait made of food, a trompe l’oeil 
effect of the anxiety of privilege, bruised perfectionism carved into foie gras.

Michel Roux Jr apologises for paying chefs less than minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/13/michel-roux-jr-apologises-paying-chefs-minimum-wage-le-gavroche>
Yet the microscope is currently on the more prosaic matter of his books. 
Chastised by this newspaper last month for paying below the minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/17/tv-chef-michel-roux-jr-paid-kitchen-staff-below-minimum-wage>
, he released a statement on Thursday with the unforced revelation thathe 
treats the service charge as “revenue” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/15/michel-roux-jr-restaurant-staff-no-share-service-charge-le-gavroche>
, that is to say, the 13% added to the bill does not go directly to the staff.

He said the next day that he intended to scrap the charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/16/michel-roux-jr-scrap-service-charge-increase-menu-prices-le-gavroche>
. But commenting broadly on the wage issue, he added three riders: the first, 
that he was no different from anyone else in the industry; the second that, in 
his own training in Paris in the 1970s, he slept on his grandmother’s couch and 
“never once looked at his payslip”; and the third: “The work conditions are 
unbelievable and the benefits of working at Le Gavroche and for the Roux 
family. But they are intangible. You can’t put a worth on it.”

Working conditions in the catering industry are harsh. At the bottom end, it’s 
low wages, zero-hours, interchangeability and precariousness. At the top end, 
there’s all of that, plus eye-boggling overwork, the kind of hours chefs will 
only talk about anonymously and in retrospect (a former pastry chef forMarco 
Pierre White <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/marcopierrewhite> once 
told me he’d lived for three years on four hours of sleep a night).

There is an amortised resentment, common to a lot of chefs aged over 50 (Roux 
is 56), exacting servitude from future generations who dare to want better 
conditions than they had.

Roux trained under maître patissier Henri Hellegouarch in Paris from 1976 to 
1979 and, even coming from a culture that admits no whining, he calls this 
period “challenging”. He spent his military service cooking at the Elysée 
between Giscard d’Estaing and François Mitterrand.

Into this very recognisable trope – that money and leisure are not just 
insignificant but abhorrent to the grafter, the true poet – feeds another macho 
tributary: perfectionists have tantrums.

“Street angel, kitchen devil” is the winsome term for it, but it’s basically 
bullying and there are vanishingly few chefs of standing whom nobody has seen 
behave tyrannically to their staff.

Roux is not one of them. It would be astonishing if he were, but it does bear 
consideration, the medieval volatility of these workplaces which, coupled with 
the low pay, amount to serf-like conditions.

He is right about Le Gavroche: these underpaid chefs could undoubtedly all be 
replaced tomorrow by chefs who would bite his hand off to do a stage with him 
for free. Ambitious chefs routinely make pilgrimages to prestigious kitchens, 
working for nothing for a couple of months. These are not the ideal conditions 
to hone a strong sense of social justice and equal opportunity.

In 2013, Roux said on Andrew Neil’s This Week TV programme that young people, 
generally, needed to take whatever unpaid work experience they were offered.

It’s a worldview to pauperise a generation, while simultaneously expecting 
gratitude, but you can see how normal the idea would seem to a person bred in 
elite kitchens.

He is not without philanthropic interests and, in 2015, made a programme for 
Channel 4 about mentoring young disabled people into catering. Nor is he 
unworldly; when he left MasterChef in 2014, after six years, it was because 
they had fallen out over an endorsement deal that he had with a potato company.

The chef took over at Le Gavroche in 1991 and lost its third Michelin star two 
years later, to which he responded graciously: “Certainly, I would love three 
stars. I believe in the system and the recognition would be wonderful. But I am 
not cooking that style of food. There are dishes that are worthy of it but my 
style really doesn’t suit that status.”

Technically, the food is faultless; the atmosphere reverent; the decor like a 
grand theme park. Michelin never give details on why they’ve stripped a star. In
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, people have said the cooking 
was so pristine that it lacked a sense of adventure, but his Parisian peers 
were mystified by the decision.

Michel Roux Jr, here’s a recipe for tipping | Deborah Orr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/michel-roux-jr-recipe-tipping-service-charges>
The typical price for a meal is £212 per head. On the matter of the service 
charge, Roux’s friends have argued that to hand the charge to staff would 
require radically higher prices.

“For me, tipping and service charge are two different things but by removing 
the service charge and incorporating it into the cost of the menu then it is 
clear, clean and unambiguous,” Roux said.

“And then if diners wish to leave a tip on top of that it is up to them. I 
think this is something we should do in the restaurant industry.

“It is not clear for the customer whether or not they should leave extra on 
the table or whether or not it is going to all the staff or how it is being 
distributed. I daresay some restaurateurs have been abusing that.”

It rings a bit tinny; spending a fortune is part of the point of Le Gavroche 
and it is a tough sell that waiters ought to subsidise the dining experience of 
people who have just swallowed almost a week’s minimum wage in three hours.

However, the nub of his defence – he’s just a person who “ballsed up” in an 
industry built on worse – is one with which most of his colleagues will 
sympathise.

Normal, regular shifts with talented but amenable, respectful head chefs are 
so unusual that you could count the restaurants on one hand.

It would take a scandal, not worse so much as of an entirely different nature, 
to land a blow on this reputation.
 