
In a 20-year career, I’ve jumped ship a few times. Sometimes it’s for good 
reasons (a cabin upgrade), sometimes for not such good reasons (the captain’s 
acting like he’s been at the rum rations).

However, while you can know what you’re leaving, it is almost impossible to 
know what you’re joining. Committing yourself to a school you don’t know much 
about is a big gamble and, come September, you don’t want to look down and 
discover that you’ve just bought a return ticket for the Titanic. Believe me, I 
know that feeling.


Five alternative careers for teachers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/10/five-alternative-careers-for-teachers>
On one memorable occasion, two days into a new post, I found myself around the 
conference table with seven senior leadership team colleagues. Within five 
minutes it was clear that the only voice that would be heard was the head’s; 
our job was to sit and nod as the interminable monologue rolled itself out like 
a one-act, modernist play.

There is hope, however. Following some hideous experiences, I have learned a 
thing or two about spotting dysfunctional organisations. Take heart: this is 
far less complex than it sounds as, in reality, there is only one type of 
dysfunctional organisation – all the others are mutations of the same virus.

The diagnosis

On visiting a prospective employer, I now look for small details that are 
likely to be symptoms of a toxic working environment. The greater the number of 
symptoms, the more likely my diagnosis is accurate.

Start with a school’s website, building, playground, lobby and correspondence. 
They can tell you a lot about how it functions – after all, these features 
constitute the public face of the institution and, if you are planning to look 
at that face on a daily basis, it should be well scrutinised.

Look for signs of twitching, uncontrollable gurning or the blank, 
thousand-yard stare of corporate culture. If the overall impression is chaotic 
or cold, it is likely this is how you will feel working there.

Standing outside a playground and analysing the type of noise generated by it 
can also be useful as it can tell you about the quality of behaviour and social 
interaction that is acceptable in the school. If the games seem dangerous and 
the adults are shouting, you can draw some easy conclusions.

Fact or fiction? The reasons teachers choose the job – and quit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/oct/23/fact-or-fiction-the-reasons-teachers-choose-the-job-and-quit>
Spending 10 minutes in the school’s reception area can also provide clues as 
to how adults and children deal with each other once inside. It is also worth 
noting how adults relate to each other, especially school management. If you 
don’t feel any warmth, pay very close attention to any other interactions you 
come across as you take the pre-application tour.


On any walkabout, you will get good opportunities to see how “the suits” deal 
with the school staff and pupils. On one such visit I made, it was clear that 
there was absolutely no rapport between the headteacher and the children – we 
walked and talked as the children passed by like dull weather. The only 
exchange initiated by the adult was a reprimand about school uniform.

On entering a classroom with this head, the poor teacher’s face adopted a look 
that I last saw in Evil Dead II: a spasm of horror that slumped back into 
ground-down despair. This told me as much as I needed to know about 
communication, culture and, more precisely, who the school had been set up to 
serve. If the sole purpose of a school is to anoint the ego of the headteacher, 
there is no need to inform anyone else of a walk round with a prospective 
employee.

These are the schools where you will find that reduced teaching hours are a 
signifier of importance and increased teaching hours are a punishment. If you 
are ambitious and not interested in your profession, this is perfect for you.


Downton divide

In these non-collaborative environments, you are also likely to hear the word 
“staff” used in a way reminiscent of Maggie Smith in Downton Abbey, and there 
will be an equally clear divide between upstairs and downstairs. Such a 
“top-down” approach will ensure that any stakeholder consultation, including 
those undertaken with “staff”, will be viewed with disdain. This cannot fail to 
lead to an exploitative culture. In such an environment, you are likely to end 
up working with those who value data over humanity.


Job hunting tips for teachers: how to ace the presentation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jun/04/job-hunting-tips-teachers-how-to-ace-presentation>
It is also likely that you will be treated as a Job Description whose aim is 
to Add Value to the business by having Structured Conversations with another 
Job Description. If you are really lucky and do exactly what the policies tell 
you to, you could fast-track your way to having no contact with children 
whatsoever.


Unsurprisingly, these cultures are more common in larger schools and 
multi-academy trusts because posturing grandeur is laughable when placed on the 
small stage. However, the size of the organisation is only one indicator of 
possible dysfunction. Others to look out for are: an excess of logos, Xeroxed 
classroom environments, joyless or fearful pupils, a general lack of character 
and an abundance of personnel who conduct themselves with clipped efficiency or 
a corporate swagger in the Clarkson vein. If you are a creative or intellectual 
type, avoid these schools at all costs – they will destroy you.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 