
Tony Snowdon was a talented, modest and ingenious man who bore his royal 
connections with dignity and managed to escape from them intact. His polio may 
have contributed to the feeling that he was alone, even among a crowd of 
friendly people, and to his modesty, the false but sincerely meant description 
of himself as an “unimportant person”, and his lifelong interest in inventing 
devices for, and helping, disabled people.

At Eton he perfected a gadget, made of an electric wire and a piece of slate, 
to help fags make toast for the older boys – and was beaten for saving the fags 
trouble. In later life he produced devices for wheelchairs and hearing aids.

His interest in photography came, he said, from his liking for gadgets. Thanks 
to £100 from his father, he became an apprentice of the society photographer 
Baron, who later paid him £2.15 a week as an assistant. Baron’s clients would 
be seated on a small gilt chair and lit with a Hollywood-1930s arrangement of 
spots. Sometimes, when feeling especially “artistic”, Baron would say, “Let’s 
give her the Rembrandt treatment,” which meant moving the main light a little 
to the side so a dramatic shadow fell across the client’s face. It was all a 
far cry from the truthful, living images that Tony would be aiming for.

So he avoided cumbersome equipment and tripods and used small cameras to take 
casual shots of weddings, photographing the uninvited guests as well as the 
invited. He got a £30 scoop of Peter Hall’s wedding to Lesley Caron. He wore a 
dinner jacket to take photographs in the old Café de Paris , snapped Marlene 
Dietrich (who gave him faultless technical advice on how to print her pictures) 
and then moved into the theatre.

In Tony’s time the front-of-house stills had been static shots taken with a 
plate camera of frozen moments in the play. But he innovatively took his shots 
at dress rehearsals or while a play was in progress.

By 1957 Tony was taking royal photographs, and made a sketch, based on 
18th-century romantic paintings, of the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh looking 
down from a rustic bridge at their two elder children playing by the river. By 
now he was famous, making, he said, a lot of money, a great friend of Peter 
Sellers and John Cranko, the choreographer and deviser of the revue Cranks and 
Keep Your Hair On, a less successful show for which Tony designed photographic 
scenery. He also made a lifelong friend of the theatre designerCarl Toms 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/obituary-carl-toms-1111098.html>
, who described Tony’s camera as like his way of looking at a new acquaintance, 
“his x-ray eyes stripping away whatever facade they have chosen to present, 
trying to discover what makes them tick”. At the time of the 1959 general 
election he got himself into 10 Downing Street and took a photograph of Harold 
Macmillan that won wide acclaim.

When he married Princess Margaret, he was a well-known, if modest, ornament to 
the life of swinging London. She had always been more interested in the arts 
than other members of the royal family; both of them were keen mimics, and she 
had been a regular at his studio parties in Chelsea.

I remember his father saying, when the engagement was announced, “My Tony is 
now a part of history.” Being a part of history must have a sobering effect on 
anyone. He was an unchanged, hard-working figure in Kensington Palace, making 
such successful documentaries for television as Don’t Count the Candles (1968), 
a film about old age, which won two Emmies.

Tony’s studio photographs achieved great beauty when blinds on the windows 
regulated the light and shade and not electricity. He was a very nervous 
photographer, and sitters had to spend a considerable time putting him at his 
ease. Although he took some of the best pictures of his age, he was 
characteristically modest about his talent, called all his photographs “snaps”, 
and never confused photography with high art.

Although usually quiet and laid back, he could have more relaxed moments. I 
remember a party given by Jeremy Fry in a hotel in Bath at which Tony danced 
with Wayne Sleep in a cloud of dry ice. As neither of them was tall, they only 
appeared above the clouds when one lifted the other into the air. At his 60th 
birthday we were all given plates, on which Queen Victoria was surrounded by 
the legend “60 glorious years”. A closer inspection of the royal face revealed 
the features of Tony Snowdon.

He was surprised when his children did well at school. An early school report 
of his own had said that Tony was “no doubt good at something, but it’s not 
anything we teach here”. He was good at a great number of things, among them 
friendship.

• Sir John Mortimer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jan/16/mortimer-rumpole-dies-obituary>
 died in 2009
 