In January, Gwyneth Paltrow’s ­website, Goop, offered its best advice 
for curing a hangover. Was it:  Look into not drinking in the first place. Not 
to be judgy or anything.  Look into a four-hour workout. The best medicine!  
Look into the emergency room-like service available through the IV ­Doctor – 
they’ll send a nurse ­practitioner to your house to ­administer an IV cocktail. 
 Look into a beer and an Egg McMuffin. Also in January, renaissance plonker 
Noel Edmonds had to abandon a car journey because he “could not move”. To what 
did the former master of ­Crinkly Bottom attribute the traffic?  His failure to 
use his famed “cosmic ordering” technique to pre-request smooth passage.  
Electrosmog.  Britain being “full”.  Rush hour. Parsimonious parents David 
Furnish and Elton John revealed in March that they plan to give their children 
just “the basic”. According to further ­elaboration, which of the following is 
not included in the parenting package?  A house.  A car.  All their basic needs 
being cared for so they never need to worry.  A Picasso. Let’s see it in 
action. “If they want a Picasso,” judged David, “they have to go out and earn 
it.” What was Richard Madeley ­talking about in April when he said: “I thought 
about fetching my .22 air rifle and shooting down the nasty ­little intruder. 
It would have been an easy one-shot snipe”?  An owl in his airspace.  A Russian 
MiG coming at him out of the sun.  Santa’s sleigh.  A drone that hovered above 
his ­garden while he cut his toenails in nothing but surfer shorts. According 
to actorvists Tom Conti and Peter Egan, the word “luvvie” is as offensive as 
which other epithet?  "Yid”.  "Charlie" (as a reference to the Viet Cong).  The 
N-word.  "Resting".  The first three. Just before the Duke and Duchess of 
Cambridge entertained Barack and Michelle Obama in their Kensington Palace 
drawing room, courtiers noticed the nameplate on one of the paintings on the 
wall and strategically placed a plant in front of it. What was its title?  The 
Negro Page.  The History of Art Graduates.  The Casual Racists.  The People Who 
Match Their Art to Their Chintz. In the small hours of 24 June, as the Brexit 
result became clear, who took to Twitter to inquire furiously: “Sorry, but 
#KETTERING where are you”?  Lindsay Lohan.  Andrew Neil.  John Curtice.  Neil 
Hamilton, who had ­forgotten he had played Baron Hardup in ­Cinderella there in 
2011. As shooting on the latest edition of the Fast and Furious franchise 
wrapped in August, The Rock used ­social media to vent his anger at the conduct 
of some of his co-stars. What did he call these unnamed ­individuals, who were 
widely ­assumed to be Vin Diesel?  Pussy butts.  Sugar tits.  Candy asses.  
Mallow abs. How old was Kardashian pretender Dream Kardashian when she made 
her Snapchat debut?  One day.  One hour.  One minute.  Still in the womb. Which 
of the following celebrities insisted they would leave the US in the event of 
Donald Trump winning the presidency?  Miley Cyrus.  Chelsea Handler.  Lena 
Dunham.  Barbra Streisand.  All of the above. Which of the following stars have 
suggested a 2020 presidential run?  Kanye West.  Ron Perlman.  Chris Rock.  The 
Rock.  All of the above. What was Princess Beatrice trying to do when she 
accidentally sliced Ed Sheeran’s cheek open at a party?  Cut her birthday cake. 
 Knight James Blunt.  Perform rhinoplasty on Joss Stone.  Cry for help.  You 
got…  Terrible.  Oh.  Bad.  Poor.  Not great.  Middling.  OK.  Decent.  Not bad.
 Good job.  Nice.  Impressive.  Stupendous.  Challenge your friends Submit 
answers  