
My wife has had an M&S Bank credit card for more than 12 years and I am the 
second card holder. This week she received a letter asking me to provide 
photocopies of documents such as my passport, driving licence and tax details. 
Two had to include a photo, and they had to be notarised by a list of approved 
people.

I rang M&S Bank to see if this was some sort of scam as the prepaid return 
envelope did not contain M&S in the address. I was assured it was officially an 
M&S request. I was also told that it had been getting a large number of calls 
questioning the request.

I asked why this information was needed – I was told me it was to make the 
account more secure. I expressed my fears that sending such sensitive 
information through the post to what looks like a third party would reduce my 
security and I asked what would happen if I did not send it. I was told nothing 
would change and that the account would continue as before.

Any chance of asking someone at M&S what is going on – it makes no sense to me.
PDW, by email

You were quite right to question the validity of this request – sending out 
those documents to an unnamed company would have been foolhardy in the extreme. 
We asked M&S Bank for an explanation and it has confirmed the request was 
legitimate. “In order to protect our customers from financial crime it’s 
important that the information we hold is as up to date as possible. This means 
that, from time to time, we may ask existing customers to update the 
information we hold.”

It went on to say that this “helps protect customers and the financial system 
from financial crime”. We could understand this request if you were the main 
account holder, but this seems to be rather overzealous as you pay off your 
card in full by direct debit every month and have been customers for 12 years.

M&S Bank services are provided by HSBC, which has been in all sorts of bother 
with the authorities over money laundering. This is most likely part of the 
resulting clean-up.

Although M&S says it is looking to change the address on its return envelopes 
to make it clearer it really is M&S, my advice is to take the documents into 
your nearest branch. M&S has confirmed customers can do this.

I suspect it won’t be long before fraudsters really do start sending out fake 
letters like this to get personal details.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 