
With much fanfare, I am pleased to unveil the Lost in Showbiz Christmas Gift 
Guide. This year it runs to a single amazing item: a new celebrity, from me to 
you. He is the incoming Thai king, and he waspictured in May 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3835977/Thailand-s-crop-wearing-Playboy-Prince-Colourful-past-womanising-new-king-wife-sang-happy-birthday-G-string-DOG.html>
 arriving with his poodle-toting wife at an airport. His now-majesty was 
drenched in fake tattoos and wearing a vanishingly small white crop top. I was 
in heaven at the expression of the two officials standing to attention to him 
on the Tarmac, which came with a thought bubble reading “I’m salutingwhat now?”

For those instantly moved to establish a shrine to King Maha Vajiralongkorn 
somewhere in their home, there is a wealth of other gems out there. You may 
care to add the 2007 footage of his third wife topless and in a thong at the 
party to celebrate the birthday of his pet poodleFufu 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fufu_(dog)>. Fufu is sadly no longer with us, 
but during his life rose to the rank of air chief marshal in the Royal Thai Air 
Force. According to the then US ambassador to Thailand, Fufu appeared at one 
official function dressed in black tie, with paw mitts. He hopped on to the 
table at the state banquet and drank from various water glasses, including that 
of the ambassador.

Of course, it is a sadness that Fufu isn’t now in charge of the secret police 
or something, but the new king has nonetheless made an eye-catching start. 
A promptly launched investigation into the BBC’s local language service for a 
profile it ran of Vajiralongkorn has already seenonline access to the article 
blocked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/thailand-investigation-bbc-alleged-insult-new-king>
 by the Thai authorities. Shortly afterwards, 10 police officers visited the 
corporation’s Bangkok bureau, only to find it closed. According to reports, 
they drank some of the Yakult delivery they found on the doorstep, but will 
doubtless be back to discuss the matter more fully – and in better intestinal 
heath than ever.

In the meantime, his majesty is formally recognised as a person of interest to 
this column’s inquiries, and we look forward to featuring his eccentricities 
many times in the year ahead.
 