
Open days are your chance to get behind the cleverly angled photos on 
university websites and get a feel for the place. They are usually tightly 
structured, so it helps to work out in advance what you want to see and the 
sessions you plan to attend.

Parents and friends are welcome to accompany applicants and most universities 
put on separate sessions for parents while their children take part in other 
activities, such as mock lectures and subject talks. Accommodation tours are 
always very popular, so book one in advance or as soon as you get there. 
Subject talks are very important and provide a chance to find out such things 
as the number of teaching hours, seminar sizes and the weighting of marks given 
to exams, project work, timed essays or presentations.

Early arrival gives you the opportunity to snoop around before you are herded 
into the reception area. Open days held in term time give the truest 
impression, but even those held in vacations will give applicants a chance to 
meet current students. Ambassador students are volunteers and are not usually 
handpicked, so take every opportunity to grill them.

Time and travel costs are the only limits on the number of open days you can 
attend

Some universities, such as Edinburgh, run weekly student-run tours for 
applicants unable to attend open days. The University of Buckingham offers 
guided walking tours on demand and will arrange for applicants to speak to an 
academic in their chosen fields. “Our guided tours are very popular and many 
students then go on to attend our open days to find out as much as possible,” 
says James Seymour, director of admissions and recruitment.

Time and travel costs are the only limits on the number of open days you can 
attend. Keele University student Hayley Sacks was so determined to pick the 
right place, she attended seven. “I wanted a campus rather than a city 
university,” she says. “I was very keen on one place until I got there and saw 
their photographs had not shown a main road bisecting the campus, which was 
split in two halves with a long way to walk between. When I got to Keele, the 
campus was even better than the pictures.”

Her mother accompanied her on all visits. “My mum knows me better than I know 
myself and it was really important to have her there with me. She pointed out 
things I may not have noticed and she helped me plan the days and research the 
modules I was interested in so I could ask the right questions to find out 
more.”

The moment of truth

Subject talks are the most important “moments of truth” for prospective 
students when visiting a university says Sam Uzzell, head of market insight and 
data at the University of Surrey. An analysis of applicant feedback found that 
a third of visitors chose Surrey during the subject talk delivered by academics 
and current students.

Hold a conversation in advance with your child to find out what they want from 
university and what they would like you to do on the day, says Gareth Hughes, 
psychotherapist and researcher at the University of Derby. “Most students want 
their parents with them but it’s important that you do not take over. This is 
the beginning of them being independent and making decisions for themselves so 
they need to get used to it,” he says.

“Ask yourself if you could be driving your child down a particular route that 
might not suit them: thinking it makes sense to do business studies at x 
university rather than arts at y university. We see students arrive who are not 
committed to the course – they have been on a conveyor belt of school and 
parents deciding things for them and when they get here they realise it wasn’t 
what they really wanted to do.”

Open days are the start of the process and most universities follow up with 
applicant days for students who have been offered a place. These are smaller 
and more focused on courses to help students decide their firm and insurance 
choices.
 