
The government is pushing for new laws that could result in senior corporate 
executives being prosecuted for offences including fraud and money laundering 
carried out by staff, under an expansion of laws targeting white-collar crime 
first proposed by David Cameron.

The attorney general, Jeremy Wright, said the government was continuing the 
plan to consult on expanding “failure to prevent” offences – which currently 
cover only bribery and tax evasion – to a wider range of economic crimes 
committed by employees, including money laundering and false accounting.

In May, Cameron announced a consultation for a new law to widen the scope for 
executive responsibility at an anti-corruption summit in London in May.

Writing in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/11/fight-against-corruption-begins-with-political-will>
, Cameron said the new laws would mean “in addition to prosecuting companies 
that fail to prevent bribery and tax evasion, we will consult on extending the 
criminal offence of ‘failure to prevent’ to other economic crimes such as fraud 
and money laundering so that firms are properly held to account for criminal 
activity that takes place within them.”

David Cameron: The fight against corruption begins with political will
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/11/fight-against-corruption-begins-with-political-will>
Speaking to the Cambridge Symposium on Economic Crime last month, Wright said: 
“When considering the question: where does the buck stop and who is responsible 
for economic crime?, it is clear that the answer is to be found at every level, 
from the boardroom down. Both corporations and individuals are responsible.

“The intention of the government actions I have described is not only to 
prosecute and to fine for breaches of the law, but to promote a culture of 
corporate responsibility so that we are addressing the threat earlier on and 
not just reacting to it through investigation and prosecution.

“A change in culture is something that will take time but the results, as we 
are already starting to see, will be worth the effort.”

Barry Vitou, partner in fraud and white-collar crime at law firm Pinsent 
Masons, told the Times: “The present regime makes it practically impossible to 
hold corporate boards to account for corporate misconduct because evidence of 
that misconduct must be found at the highest level.

“In practice the evidence trail usually dries much lower down the corporate 
tree. There is no responsibility for the damage caused by failing to prevent 
economic crime nor incentives offered which motivate people to do the wrong 
thing.”

May pledged to challenge corporate culture during her leadership campaign, 
saying: “It is not anti-business to suggest that big business needs to change.”

May’s other reforms are also expected to include workers’ representatives on 
company boards and increased transparency on pay, including the publication of 
“pay multiple” statistics, which show the gap between the pay of the chief 
executive and the salaries of ordinary employees.
 