
Many football clubs in the UK have liability insurance that covers them for 
claims from victims of child sex abuse, which has resulted in payouts. As the 
scandal continues to engulf the sport, insurers have pledged to improve the 
compensation process.

Police say 350 people have come forward to report child sex abuse in football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/fa-punish-clubs-cover-up-martin-glenn>
Police reported on Thursday that 350 people have now come forward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/fa-punish-clubs-cover-up-martin-glenn>
 to report attacks and, as the scope of inquiries grows, the role of insurance 
companies has come under the spotlight.

The Association of British Insurers (ABI) said: “Recent revelations regarding 
abuse in football are very distressing and at the heart of it are the victims 
and survivors who have been abused.

“The insurance industry is fully engaged with the current independent inquiry 
and has submitted constructive suggestions about how the civil justice 
compensation process could be improved.”

Patrick Collinson, the editor of Guardian Money, notes that major clubs take 
out combined employers’ and public liability policies, which collectively 
covers a huge range of eventualities, including allegations of sexual assault.

He says: “The public liability part covers the club for claims when, say, a 
fan is hurt in the stadium. The employers’ element covers claims relating to 
members of staff. One major insurer said there were circumstances, such as the 
allegations of sexual assault, in which claims could possibly be made against 
the employer’s liability, and a payment be made, and such a payment could be 
subject to a non-disclosure agreement.”

Police 'opted against action' over ex-Chelsea player's sex abuse claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/police-opted-against-action-over-chelsea-ex-players-sex-abuse-claim>
On Wednesday it emerged that Chelsea sanctioned a compensation payment at 
boardroom level to a former youth team player who approached the club to 
complain about abuse at the hands of the club’s former chief scout, Eddie 
Heath, who worked at the club between 1968 and 1979. Heath died in the late 
1980s. The compensation was offered without an acceptance of liability.

Collinson added: “Legally speaking, any employer, such as a football club, can 
be held liable for personal injuries inflicted by a member of their staff, 
where the employee’s actions have been carried out during the course of their 
employment.

“Ultimately, if the employer is held to be liable, then the victim can make a 
personal injury claim which will then be covered by the club’s employer’s 
liability insurance.”

The ABI statement continued: “Compensation paid by an organisation to a victim 
could be covered by liability insurance. As part of the settlement process, 
confidentiality clauses are sometimes requested by victims or the organisation 
insured. They are not part of the insurance contract and we are not aware of 
any insurers who currently request them.”
 