
Last week the writer Mark Fisher 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/capitalist-realism-author-mark-fishers-dies-aged-48-470541>
 took his own life. His on/offstruggle with depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jul/16/mental-health-political-issue>
 was something he wrote about with courageous candour in articles and in his 
landmark book Capitalist Realism: is There No Alternative? Fisher argued that 
the pandemic of mental anguish that afflicts our time cannot be properly 
understood, or healed, if viewed as a private problem suffered by damaged 
individuals. Rather, it was the symptom of a heartless and hopeless politics: 
precarious employment and flexible work patterns, the erosion of class 
solidarity and its institutions such as unions, and the relentless message from 
mainstream political parties and media alike that “there is no alternative” to 
managerial capitalism. That this is as good as it gets – so deal with it.

Finally the depression that Fisher, 48, had dissected acutely and fought 
against doggedly got the better of him. He left behind a wife and young son, a 
close-knit network of friends, allies, colleagues and students, and an 
ever-widening readership, all of whom were waiting always to hear what he had 
to say next.

Waiting for what Fisher had to say is a sensation I recall only too vividly. I 
remember the electric anticipation of those early-to-mid 2000s mornings when 
the first thing I would do after making some tea was check whetherK-punk  
<http://k-punk.org/>had posted. K-punk, Fisher’s online alter-ego, was the hub 
of a blog circuit in which I took part, and which for a glorious moment brought 
back the intellectual fervour of the postpunk music press.

“It wasn’t only about music and music wasn’t only about music,” Fisher once 
said of weekly papers such as the NME. “It was a medium that made demands on 
you.” More than any other blog of that time, K-punk reanimated the polymath, 
autodidact spirit of the golden-age rock press, where music held a privileged 
status – but film, TV, fiction and politics were in the mix too.
 ‘Fisher wrote obsessively, and with unparalleled penetration, about his 
totems.’ Roxy Music in 2002. Photograph: Glenn A Baker/Redferns 
At the time, I commented that K-punk was a one-man magazine superior to most 
magazines in Britain. The elegance and reach of Fisher’s writing, the 
evangelical urgency and caustic critique that seared through his rapid-fire 
communiques, demanded a response. And just as fellow bloggers picked up his 
baton, Fisher was always building on other writers’ arguments, pushing things 
further than you’d thought possible.

K-punk had its canon. Fisher wrote obsessively, and with unparalleled 
penetration, about his totems: Kubrick’s films; the glam artpop of Roxy Music, 
Japan, and Grace Jones; the eldritch visions of Joy Division and the Fall; 
darkside jungle pioneers such as Rufige Kru and more recent post-rave 
touchstones including ghostly dubstep genius Burial. But Fisher could always 
surprise you. K-punk fans fondly recall his unexpected glowing appreciation of 
Dido. Drawn to the bleak and uncompromising, Fisher was too sharp to fall into 
knee-jerk opposition to pop, and celebrated Rihanna, Girls Aloud, Róisín Murphy 
and other chart stars.

K-punk actually doubled as the hub of two separate blog circuits: the 
music-focused constellation to which I belonged and another network of 
philosophy blogs. That connection came from Fisher’s late-90s involvement in 
the Cybernetic Culture Research Unit. Nominally attached to Warwick University 
but increasingly rogue in its research, the CCRU’s ideas were pretty far out. 
Even then, music – specifically jungle – was a core mind-fuel for Fisher and 
comrades. Among the CCRU’s legacy is the accelerationist school of political 
philosophy (nutshell: things will only get better after they’ve got worse, so 
let’s make things worse).

Back in the 90s, Fisher shared the CCRU’s exultant exaltation of the 
border-dissolving flows of capital and scorned socialism as a decrepit early 
20th-century relic. But by the time he launched K-punk, he’d drifted back 
leftwards and for a while identified as a communist. More recently, Fisher 
sounded pragmatic notes, talking about working within existing institutions 
such as Labour (a prescient notion that arguably came true with Corbynism). 
Running through everything that Fisher did from the 90s onwards was his passion 
for the collective. CCRU had a commune-like intensity, while K-punk hosted an 
exuberant and frequently fractious comments box, whose participants generated 
many times more heated words than Fisher’s own often lengthy essays.

One byproduct of this collaborative and communal impulse was Fisher’s 
co-founding of the message board Dissensus. Another wasZero Books 
<http://www.zero-books.net/>, for which Fisher worked as commissioning editor 
alongside founderTariq Goddard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/17/radical-alternatives-conventional-publishing>
, and which was conceived as a way of nurturing the talent that had emerged on 
the popcult and theory blogs that encircled K-punk. The result was a spate of 
sharply designed monographs that introduced the wider world to writers likeOwen 
Hatherley <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/owen-hatherley>, Nina Power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nina-power>, Laurie Penny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/laurie-penny> and others. The work 
continued with the breakaway successor imprint Repeater.

Fisher’s 2009 debut, Capitalist Realism, was Zero’s smash hit. It was followed 
by Ghosts of My Life, a collection themed around the concept of hauntology: a 
rubric for analysing syndromes of cultural entropy and retroparalysis, notions 
of “lost futures” and the uncanny. A third book, The Weird and the Eerie, 
published this month, builds on these preoccupations.

At the time of his death, Fisher was working on the intriguingly titled Acid 
Communism. Judging by its introduction, the book would have involved a 
reckoning with the countercultural ideas of the Sixties, a decade that 
glam-fanatic Fisher had rather disdained in the K-punk days for its 
stranglehold on popular memory.

A new appreciation of the lost potentials of the 60s would make sense, though. 
From formative passions such as Roxy and the Jam, through to his later 
enthusiasms for The Hunger Games and Russell Brand, Fisher was always drawn to 
those moments when radical ideas broke through into mass consciousness via pop 
culture. He filed many of the things he loved – likeSapphire & Steel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ld30EDY-hxM>, a TV series he could convince 
you was mindblowingly innovative and profound – under the concept “pulp 
modernism”.

He loved unsettling television and disruptive pop because these – along with 
the music press – had served as his education as a working-class boy cut off 
from high culture. Fisher’s enduring faith was that irruptions of the 
culturally new and alien could instil the confidence that change was possible 
in other areas of life. Such disturbances proved that the structures and 
strictures of the status quo were not immutable. Possibly overestimating 
slightly, in his characteristic and endearing way, Fisher hailedBrand’s Messiah 
Complex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/09/russell-brand-birmingham-symphony-hall-review>
 performances as a tour de force showcase of politics as “the psychedelic 
dismantling of reality”.

Building a bridge between aesthetics and politics, critique and activism, with 
incomparable rigour and eloquence, Fisher was an exemplary engaged 
intellectual, a sort of post-raveJohn Berger  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/john-berger-obituary>perhaps. In 
recent years he settled into his role as a public figure, a charismatic speaker 
at countless events. His books, journalism and recorded appearances are one 
lasting legacy.

Less measurable but just as vital and fertile is his work as teacher (most 
recently at Goldsmiths) and as mentor to young writers. After years of waiting 
to hear what Fisher had to say on anything and everything, it hurts that what 
follows now is silence. The current crisis-time needs his mind, for its clear 
vision and for the optimism of the will that sought and found cracks of 
possibility in the seemingly impregnable wall of a deadlocked present. A 
consoling thought is that young minds influenced and inspired by his work will 
soon fill that silence.

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123.

In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255.

In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 