
The federal government’s same-sex marriage bill contains a loophole that could 
see florists and bakers refuse to serve gay weddings by claiming to be 
religious organisations, theNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> 
Anti-Discrimination Board has warned.

The board, part of the state’s justice department, made the warning in 
submissions to the Senate committee looking at the federal government’s 
same-sex marriage bill exposure draft.

The bill, released before the Senate vote blocking the government’s proposed 
plebiscite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/07/marriage-equality-plebiscite-bill-set-to-fail-as-nxt-vows-to-block-it-in-senate>
, contains exemptions to discrimination law that would allow not only civil 
celebrants and ministers of religion to refuse to officiate gay weddings but
also religious bodies or organisations to refuse to provide goods or services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/discrimination-law-changes-would-entrench-second-tier-status-for-same-sex-weddings>
.

The board, which administers the Anti-Discrimination Act in NSW, warned that 
marriage law does not define a “religious body” or “religious organisation”, 
raising the possibility that anybody could claim discrimination law did not 
apply to them.

Marriage equality will lead to gender confusion, Australian Christian Lobby 
claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/15/marriage-equality-will-lead-to-gender-confusion-australian-christian-lobby-claims>
It said that nothing in the exposure draft “appears to limit [the exemption’s] 
operation to religious bodies or organisations that have been formally 
recognised as such”.

“Accordingly an organisation with no recognised religious connection could 
claim to be a religious organisation based on the beliefs of its owners or 
members” and refuse goods or services incidental to gay weddings, it said.

The loophole identified suggests that, in practice, florists and bakers and 
all other wedding service providers could claim to be exempt from 
discrimination law on the basis of their individual faith.

In its submissions the Australian Christian Lobby called for the bill to 
explicitly exempt such providers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/15/marriage-equality-will-lead-to-gender-confusion-australian-christian-lobby-claims>
 from discrimination law, arguing that freedom of religion is a fundamental 
right that protects both individuals’ beliefs and practices based on those 
beliefs.


That call was echoed the Australian Catholic Bishops Conference, who also want 
a guarantee religious organisations and faith-based schools can discriminate by 
only hiring people who believe marriage is between a man and a woman.

The board called for the discrimination law exemption to be clarified “so that 
only recognised religious bodies and organisations can rely on it”.

“In this way a church hall could seek to rely on the exemption to refuse a 
venue booking but a civic function centre could not, regardless of the 
religious beliefs of its owners.”

The submissions were signed by the acting president of the Anti-Discrimination 
Board, Elizabeth Wing.

Veteran LGBTI rights campaigner Rodney Croome told Guardian Australia the NSW 
Anti-Discrimination Board had “confirmed our worst fears about the government’s 
provisions allowing refusal of service to same-sex couples”.

“They go beyond what most people would understand a religious body to be and 
could include any business – a baker, a florist, a reception centre – where the 
owner or manager has a religious or conscientious objection to serving same-sex 
couples.”

“Australians would abhor businesses putting up shopfront signs declaring ‘No 
Blacks’ or ‘No Asians’, and in the same way we shouldn’t allow businesses to 
stop serving LGBTIQ people.”

In its submission the Australian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-capital-territory> 
government opposed exemptions allowing civil celebrants, religious bodies and 
religious organisations to refuse gay weddings.

It said the exemptions appear “to formalise existing institutional prejudices 
and discrimination into law rather than remove them”.

The ACT accused the federal government of designing amendments that “appear to 
be intentionally designed to undermine the protection afforded to LBGTIQ 
people”.

The ACT said there was “no rational basis” to allow civil celebrants to refuse 
weddings to discriminate where the marriage was not between a man and woman.

It said the exemption for religious bodies and organisations went 
“significantly beyond” what was needed for freedom of religion and allowing the 
refusal of goods and services was inconsistent with state and territory 
discrimination law.

How Australia's political parties fell out of love with the marriage equality 
plebiscite
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/how-australias-political-parties-fell-out-of-love-with-the-marriage-equality-plebiscite>
It suggested instead that ministers of religion should not be required to make 
a place of worship available for a wedding.

In its submission the NSW cross-party parliamentary working group on marriage 
equality, which includes Liberal MP Bruce Notley-Smith and National Trevor 
Khan, opposed the bill’s exemptions for civil celebrants, religious 
organisations and bodies.

The group said ministers of religion could already refuse weddings, and a new 
exemption did not need to be added “singling out same-sex marriages”.

Tasmania’s anti-discrimination commissioner, Robin Banks, opposed exemptions 
for civil celebrants, religious organisations and bodies because they would 
“maintain inappropriately discriminatory provisions” in the marriage law.

In separate submissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/15/marriage-equality-will-lead-to-gender-confusion-australian-christian-lobby-claims>
 to the Senate inquiry, Australian Marriage Equality and Just Equal argued that 
religious freedom was adequately protected by the draft bill’s provision, 
allowing ministers of religion to refuse to perform weddings.

AME said the new exemptions for “religious organisations or bodies” to refuse 
to provide services to gay weddings should be removed or at least more clearly 
defined.

Just Equal similarly argued against discrimination law exemptions for 
religious organisations that provide commercial services, warning that gay 
couples in rural and regional areas may struggle to find service providers as a 
result.
 