
MasterCard is facing a claim of up to £19bn in damages in a UK collective 
action over card charges that were passed on to shoppers.


The claim, led by former financial services ombudsman Walter Merricks – who 
has instructed US-based law firm Quinn Emanuel, is to be filed under the 
Consumer Rights Act 2015, which allows for collective damages claims.

It claims MasterCard set unlawfully high interchange fees – charged to stores 
when shoppers swipe their debit or credit cards – for 16 years, which were 
passed on to consumers in the form of inflated prices for good and services.

In 2014 the European court of justice declared that such fees were a violation 
of EU antitrust rules.

On 29 April last year, the European parliament and the council of the European 
Union adopted the interchange fee regulation, and caps of 0.2% for debit cards 
and 0.3% for credit cards came into effect on 9 December.

MasterCard said it “firmly disagrees” with the basis of the claim.

Merricks claimed the total damage caused to UK consumers could be as much as 
£19bn, equating to hundreds of pounds for each shopper.

He said: “To be clear, there is no question that MasterCard acted illegally in 
the way it conducted its business, a business that affects all of us. All of us 
overpaid to the tune of up to £19bn during a period lasting 16 years.

“Although most of us did not know this, experts who study the retail economy 
knew it was happening – and so did MasterCard.

“My aim is to get the redress to which UK consumers are entitled and to ensure 
that MasterCard cannot hold on to the illegal profits it made.

“This case should send a signal to companies that break competition laws at 
the expense of UK consumers that they do so at their financial peril.”

Boris Bronfentrinker, lead partner at Quinn Emanuel, said: “This is precisely 
the type of claim for which the new collective action regime was established. 
This is a landmark case where unlawful anti-competitive conduct has harmed UK 
consumers.

“That harm, likely to be in the hundreds of pounds, is not large enough for 
any individual consumer to bring their own claim. But by aggregating the claims 
and bringing them on a collective basis, all UK consumers who lost out will get 
the compensation they are owed.”

MasterCard said in a statement: “Electronic payments deliver real value to 
people online, in-store and everywhere.

“MasterCard is committed to providing ever more convenient, safe and secure 
payments to all our customers, including consumers, retailers, governments and 
banks.”
 