
Matthew Wade’s maiden ODI century has steered Australia to a 92-run victory 
over Pakistan in Friday’s series opener at the Gabba. Wade’s unbeaten 100 was 
the backbone of Australia’s innings as they posted a competitive 268-9, which 
the tourists never looked likely to haul down.

After the early blow of losing skipper Azhar Ali – who retired hurt with a 
hamstring strain when he’d reached 12 – wickets tumbled at a steady rate for 
Pakistan and they were dismissed for 176 in the 43rd over. Azhar returned to 
the crease late in the innings but struggled to move freely and when he was 
caught out by a running David Warner for 24, Pakistan’s hopes of victory went 
with him.

Ben McDermott steals the Big Bash spotlight with blistering century
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/ben-mcdermott-steals-the-big-bash-spotlight-with-blistering-century>
Babar Azam top-scored with just 33 while all-rounder James Faulkner was the 
pick of Australia’s bowlers with 4-32 off seven overs. Australia won the toss 
and chose to bat in scorching conditions amid talk their stacked line-up - 
including Big Bash League sensation Chris Lynn at number four - would lead to a 
T20-style encounter.

However, they were reduced to 78-5 after just 17 overs. Mohammad Amir 
clean-bowled Warner (7) and then handed captain Steve Smith his first ODI 
golden duck in successive deliveries, meaning Lynn faced a hat-trick ball on 
debut. He survived, but not for long – two overs after sending Hasan Ali into 
the grandstands, he totally misread a slow ball and skied one behind to 
Mohammad Rizwan.

It was left to Wade and Glenn Maxwell (60) to rescue the innings with a 
crucial sixth-wicket partnership of 82, scoring at nearly a run a ball. Maxwell 
was making his return to the Australian side after he was controversially 
dropped and fined last month for saying it was “painful” having to bat below 
Wade in the Sheffield Shield.

This time he batted above him, and if there were any residual problems between 
the pair, they weren’t showing. Wade was more than happy to turn the strike 
over to Maxwell, who smacked seven boundaries and injected some much-needed 
life into the Australian charge before holing out to Mohammad Hafeez.

One-day cricket the victim of the mid-summer sporting pile-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/one-day-cricket-the-victim-of-the-mid-summer-sporting-pile-up>
Still, it was a timely knock from the 28-year-old ahead of Sunday’s 
announcement of the squad that will embark on a four-Test tour of India next 
month. Wade eventually brought up his century with the final ball of 
Australia’s innings, and only after some comical running between the wickets 
with Australia’s tail-enders.

Australia’s other debutant, Billy Stanlake, finished on 1 not out but bowled 
only three overs and spent most of the evening off the ground due to sickness.

Wade said he was “absolutely cooked” by the time he finished batting but paid 
credit to Maxwell for helping him reach his ton. “It feels great. They bowled 
quite well and got some swing and seam around,” he said. “We found ourselves in 
a little bit of trouble but Maxy took the pressure off me. I could just keep 
him on strike and we built an innings around that.”

Azhar, meanwhile, admitted he might be in doubt for Sunday’s second ODI in 
Melbourne because of his hamstring strain. “It’s a bit sore but, hopefully, it 
will recover soon,” he said. “The physio will have a better look and assessment 
tomorrow and see how far I can get. Hopefully, I can take part in that game.”
 