 Henry McLeish will this week be installed as First Minister of Scotland after 
narrowly winning the election yesterday to succeed Donald Dewar as Scottish 
Labour leader.
After 10 days of speculation following Dewar's death from a brain haemorrhage, 
McLeish only just managed to beat off a challenge from Finance Minister Jack 
McConnell at a special meeting of MSPs and the party's executive in Stirling.

The result destroyed confident earlier predictions from the McLeish camp that 
victory for their man was a formality. He secured only 44 of the 80 votes in 
the party's electoral college yesterday to McConnell's 36. McLeish supporters 
had claimed only 24 hours earlier that at least 50 votes were in the bag.

More significantly, it is likely that McConnell won the support of at least 
half of the 54 MSPs, leaving Labour open to the Opposition's accusations that 
McLeish failed to secure a mandate to lead.

Both camps sought to dispel any suggestion that the contest had left a lasting 
rift. With both men insisting the contest had strengthened the party, McConnell 
threw his support behind McLeish, while the new leader made it clear that there 
will be a job for the Finance Minister in the Executive.

After the result was announced, McLeish, 52, said: 'We have tragedy behind us, 
but ahead of us this party has a tremendous future. My belief is that we can do 
that by working ahead as a team. It is a team that can deliver forScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>.'

He committed himself to taking forward Dewar's legacy by combating social 
exclusion, in particular child poverty and unemployment. He also promised to 
work more closely with Scottish Secretary John Reid and to fight Scotland's 
corner more forcefully in London. But the biggest challenge will be to pull the 
party together to fight the UK general election.

McLeish, who was Enterprise Minister before yesterday's result, was the hot 
favourite to succeed Dewar with strong backing from the Chancellor, Gordon 
Brown. After serving for 13 years as an MP at Westminster, he is regarded by 
the Labour leadership in London as a safe pair of hands.

But this close association with the London leadership may have damaged his 
support yesterday. In the aftermath of Dewar's death, it was suggested - with 
prompting from Downing Street - that McLeish should be installed unopposed as 
the new leader. This prompted a furious backlash from MSPs determined not to 
have the choice of leader dictated from London.

McLeish will officially serve as interim leader until the full electoral 
college of the Scottish party has its say later in the year. But he is almost 
certain to be unopposed in that contest, with McConnell making clear yesterday 
that he will not stand again, despite the closeness of the result. He also 
ruled himself out of the deputy leadership because he wanted to continue as 
Finance Minister.

'I said a week past Wednesday that Donald Dewar was irreplaceable,' he said. 
'We have elected today a fine leader of the Labour Party in the Scottish 
Parliament and somebody who will be a very fine First Minister.'

McConnell, who had spent the previous 48 hours on a gruelling whirlwind tour 
of Scotland, meeting MSPs and Executive members to drum up support, added: 'I 
thought it was vitally important that the party was given a democratic choice. 
I think the Labour Party and Scotland are stronger and I think the First 
Minister is stronger as a result.'

Reid also dismissed claims the contest had divided the party. 'The fact that 
we have two such excellent candidates and such an open contest, far from in any 
way weakening the party, I believe strengthens Henry's position as leader of 
the Labour Party in the Scottish Parliament.'

But John Swinney, the SNP's new leader, said: 'This is a disastrous result for 
Labour, and shows that they are split right down the middle. If only five 
people had voted the other way, Labour would be proposing a different First 
Minister next week, an absurd state of affairs.'

The result is unlikely to have any impact on the coalition between Labour and 
the Liberal Democrats on the Executive. Jim Wallace, the Scottish Lib Dem 
leader and current Acting First Minister, congratulated McLeish on his victory.
 