
A mortgage lender has added a clause to its home loans that allows borrowers 
to let out their property throughAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> without asking its permission.

Generally lenders expect customers to ask permission before offering their 
homes for short-term lets, and some will charge a fee to give consent. A survey 
by the Guardian in April foundsome refused short-term lets completely, while 
others asked up to £295 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/02/airbnb-guests-cost-you-your-home-breach-mortgage-terms>
 in consent fees.

Metro Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/metro-bank> said its mortgage 
customers could now let their homes on Airbnb or similar sites for up to 90 
days a year without contacting it for prior approval.


The change will apply to existing customers as well as new borrowers, and 
there are no restrictions on the size of the mortgage they need or type of deal 
they are on.

The bank, which was set up as a challenger to the main high street banks, said 
it was “a pioneering move to support the sharing economy”. It has previously 
joined forces with peer-to-peer lender Zopa to offer loans through its platform.


Paul Riseborough, chief commercial officer at Metro Bank, said: “Our focus is 
on making our customers’ lives as straightforward and convenient as possible, 
and we therefore hope today’s news will give our customers the reassurance they 
need to jump in and take advantage of everything the dynamic sharing economy 
has to offer.”


Airbnb allows homeowners to rent out rooms or entire properties for as long as 
they want, but in London there are rules restricting lets to 90 nights in a 
calendar year.

 In practice, many may not alert their lender, but if a bank or building 
society was to find out a that customer had breached its terms, it could choose 
to demand early repayment of their mortgage.

Andrew Montlake, director of mortgage broker Coreco, said Metro Bank had taken 
an unusual but welcome stance.

“More people have begun to mention the possibility of utilising services such 
as Airbnb but most lenders will not allow you to rent out your property without 
consent to let from them,” he said.


“It is important, however, to also check with your buildings and contents 
insurance provider whether you will still be covered if something happens while 
a third party is occupying the property even for a short time.”



 