
A wave of hatred is sweeping Britain, with migrants blamed for a range of 
social ills. But migrants have not run down our public services, it’s not them 
that failed to build the houses our economy needs and they don’t cause a race 
to the bottom on wages or conditions. These are the results of political 
choices made by governments and corporations.

In fact, the free movement of people can build our collective power and 
creativity in the face of attempts by the super-rich to turn the world into a 
gigantic marketplace in which we are all isolated individuals competing against 
one another. Fear and hate further drives this isolation and undermines our 
ability to cooperate. It allows the already rich and powerful who have done so 
much damage to our country to win.

We are therefore alarmed by the way more MPs are now also turning their 
firepower on immigration. While we cannot ignore the concerns of anyone 
struggling and feeling insecure in a country that still has huge but 
concentrated wealth, we cannot pander to anti-immigrant sentiment in a race we 
cannot win and should never want to.

A democracy must defend the most vulnerable in society – all of them. And we 
must provide the services and homes for people who come to this country who add 
to its economy and its culture. Positive movements for change have always 
looked outwards, with humanity.
Kevin Courtney NUT general secretary, Manuel Cortes TSSA general secretary, 
Malia BouattiaNUS national president, Caroline Lucas MP Green party, 
David Lammy MP Labour, Rhea Wolfson, Christine Shawcroft, Ann Black and Darren 
WilliamsLabour party NEC members, Neal Lawson Compass, Michael Chessum Momentum,
Hugh LanningAlliance for Free Movement, Nick Dearden Global Justice Now, Luke 
CooperAnother Europe is Possible, Fizza Qureshi Migrants Rights Network, Paul 
MackneyFormer UCU general secretary, Kate Hudson CND, Matt Carr One Day Without 
Us,Andrew Burgin Left Unity, Jenny Killin National Campaign Against Fees and 
Cuts,Pete Campbell Chair, BMA junior doctors committee 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 