
My friend and colleague Mike Waldren, who has died of post-operative 
complications aged 69, joined D11, theMetropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> firearms wing, in 1977 and 
in 23 years there rose to become its chief superintendent.

Initially a firearms instructor, team leader, sniper and tactical adviser 
based at Old Street police station in centralLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, he also worked at the Purfleet and 
Lippitts Hill ranges in Essex. Here he trained the 2,000 or so “authorised 
shots” – the police officers drawn from the uniformed and detective branches of 
the Met who had applied and been selected for firearms training.

As chief inspector he took charge of all police firearms training; as 
superintendent, of all police armed operations; as chief superintendent, he was 
responsible for all police firearms and training in London. He was selected to 
join the Home Office committee on the police use of firearms, and the 
Association of Chief Police Officers (now the NationalPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Chiefs’ Council) committee on firearms. 
He also set policy for the Met. Few firearms incidents in recent decades were 
not touched by him in some way.

Mike was born to a retired army captain, Alfred Waldren, and his wife, Hilda 
(nee Hutson), who owned a childrenswear shop in Pinner, Middlesex. From the age 
of 11 he boarded at Framlingham college, Suffolk, and on leaving school was 
apprenticed as an electrical engineer at SGE Signals in Wembley, north-west 
London. There he met Sue Payton, a draughtswoman. They married in 1966 and made 
their home in Pinner, where they had a son, Robert.

In 1967 Mike joined the Met and was posted to West Ham, London. The couple 
initially lived in married quarters before buying a house in Kenton, Middlesex, 
when he was transferred to Kilburn. When Mike was promoted to the firearms 
branch he was thrilled. He had started shooting at school and had already 
represented the Metropolitan Police Athletic Association in clay shooting.

Throughout his police service, Mike made himself available to support and 
assist police officers being investigated for defending members of the public 
and colleagues. A keen listener, he would devote himself to helping any 
colleague who needed advice and guidance.

After 33 years in the police, he retired in 2000. However, those in authority, 
including government ministers and chief constables, still needed his knowledge 
and experience and he was immediately re-employed as a consultant.

He is survived by Sue and Robert.
 