
World strife and starvation are regrettable, but they are not the issues that 
provoke from us Brits the loudest howl of pain. No, our ire and anguish is 
roused by an injustice that dispossesses the needy, suppresses protest and 
invades the peace of our daily lives. In other words, corporate customer 
service.

Last month, I dispensed awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/19/2016-awards-worst-customer-service>
 to companies that had excelled in strategies to extract money from readers, 
then rebuff them when they expected goods and services in return. I invited 
readers to nominate organisations that merit a gong and the response has been 
phenomenal. Candidates have ranged from the US Senate to, er, Guardian 
subscriptions. One man nominated his entire high street. I heard about a dead 
man being charged an early termination fee when his son cancelled his phone 
contract and a woman who could not receive a refund due unless she could give 
the answer to a secret question – a question so secret the call centre was not 
allowed to ask it.

The sectors may differ, but the offences are broadly the same. When something 
goes wrong, the blighters go to ground. The canniest companies don’t provide 
contact details on their website. A startling number of high street names claim 
that crucial departments or personnel don’t have a telephone number. Others 
turn complaints into profits by keeping customers captive in an automated 
queue. One woman claims she cooked an entire roast while on hold to Sky.


The problem, as diagnosed by one reader, is the delusion that we paying public 
are customers at all, or that retailers exist to serve us. Instead, we are the 
raw material from which corporations extract money for the real customers – 
shareholders.

What is generally agreed is that it’s not the mistakes that rile, but the 
refusal to acknowledge or rectify them. Companies can turn a cock-up into a PR 
coup if they handle it gracefully, as one reader found when his 3kg chicken 
from the organic food box firm Abel & Cole turned out to weigh 2kg. “Abel and 
Cole explained that the birds hadn’t eaten as much as expected,” he said, 
having digested the stingy meat, “and they refunded me in full.” Which goes to 
show that even the beleaguered British can sometimes have their chicken and eat 
it.


And now raise a glass to the Observer reader nominations for memorable 
customer experience in 2016:

The most profitable inertia

TalkTalk, nominated by HL, London
 Missing broadband from TalkTalk. Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
“I’ve just completed a six-week battle of wills with TalkTalk. We’ve had no 
broadband signal in all that time, while my direct debit of £54 per month kept 
being paid. After taking three mornings off work to wait in for three 
engineers, I asked to cancel my contract and was told I’d have to pay a £250 
early termination fee. On the plus side it offered me £16.50 in compensation!”

TalkTalk said: “We are sorry that Mr L had a problem with his TalkTalk 
service. As a result of these issues, he was able to cancel our service and 
move to another provider without penalty.”

‘Computer says no’ award

British Gas, nominated by JW, Bristol

“I was transferring supplier and asked British Gas to refund the £700 credit 
on my dual-fuel account at the beginning of December. I was told it would take 
two weeks. It never materialised. I was informed that it was ‘stuck in the 
computer’ (strange that my direct debits never got stuck). I was then advised 
to my dismay that a cheque had been issued. Knowing it would be delayed over 
Christmas I spent 10 minutes on hold while they tried to cancel it, only to be 
told that there was no cheque after all.”

British Gas apologised for the delay and added £50 in compensation to the 
refund, which has now been paid.

The best example of corporate logic

Npower, nominated by GK, Swansea
 Billing trauma from Npower. Photograph: Andy Hepburn/PA 
“I moved house 12 months ago and sent final meter readings to Npower. I 
received a final demand for £130, which seemed steep, but I paid it. I then got 
a demand for a £230 gas bill and was eventually told that there was an error 
with my new meter and it would be sorted. Then I was informed the ‘debt’ had 
been passed to a debt collections agency. Eight months passed and I was told 
that Npower had offered to settle for a £170 payment. However, I was billed 
£570. Three months later I received a demand for £650. I complained to the 
ombudsman and Npower realised that instead of me owing £650, it owed me £18 and 
sent a cheque. The ombudsman reckoned I was due £75 in compensation but that I 
would only get £40 because Npower claimed it had deducted £35 from a £235 gas 
bill. No such bill – or sum – ever existed.”


Npower contacted GK after the Observer raised his complaint and has authorised 
an extra £50 in “goodwill”.

Invisible service accolade


Hermes, nominated by FW, Derbyshire

“My parcel was left in my wheelie bin, with no card through the door notifying 
me of this. I only found it when the bin man alerted me. Signed-for deliveries 
go to God knows where. Recently, £100 worth of jewellery was delivered to a 
house seven miles away. Then the coffee machine I ordered was delivered to 
Coventry. I live in Derby. A third package containing two books was left in the 
pouring rain under my garden table while I was in the house. A fourth, ordered 
10 days ago, was last scanned five days ago in Nottingham and no sign of it 
since then. When, recently, I was informed that the driver had been unable to 
gain entry to the property, I call Hermes to find out why. It said he couldn’t 
get through the gate. I don’t have a gate. Then it asked if I had a dog. I told 
them I owned a chihuahua. ‘That could be it then,’ said the operative. ‘Big 
dogs are considered a hazard.’”

Hermes replied: FW’s comments don’t reflect the level of service that we are 
committed to providing to our customers. We apologise to her for any 
inconvenience caused and will ensure that this will not happen in the future.

Runner up: Yodel, nominated by GC, London
 Damaged delivery from Yodel. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
“I bought a bookcase from Habitat. Yodel delivered it broken in half. After 
returning it and receiving a refund, I waited for months until it was back in 
stock to buy it again. Yodel texted me to announce the delivery for nine 
consecutive days, but the delivery never came. On five of those days it claimed 
it left a card as I wasn’t home, neither of which was true. It is now day 10 of 
the ordeal and I now learn that Yodel has returned the bookcase to Habitat, 
which now has to reorder it.”

Yodel said: “We would like to apologise for the delay to her delivery, which 
was due to difficulty finding the address. The driver concerned is being given 
additional training on procedures in situations such as this.” Habitat also 
apologised and said it would offer compensation. The bookcase arrived the day 
after the Observer intervened.

The most brazen vanishing act

RAC, nominated by BG, Cambridge
 No help from the RAC. Photograph: Jack Sullivan/Alamy 
“I ripped a front tyre after driving over debris on the A14 on a stormy night. 
I replaced it with the spare wheel on the hard shoulder. Attempting to resume 
my journey I realised the other front tyre was also punctured. I have full RAC 
cover debited directly from my account and pay extra for the ‘get you home’ 
service. After a three-hour wait on a slip road, an RAC fitter arrived. He 
could not change the tyre because the spare wheel was in use and he refused to 
take me home because, he said, the policy terms required me to have a usable 
spare wheel at all times. I’m 78 and was drenched and freezing. He drove off 
into the night leaving me to get home by public transport, arriving home 10 
hours after the punctures.”

The RAC said: “We were unaware of the customer’s dissatisfaction before the 
Observer contacted us. After investigating, we can see that we did not deliver 
the service he expected once a patrol had arrived. For this we would like to 
apologise. We very much value his membership and would therefore like to offer 
to refund his policy premium.”
 