
Montenegro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/montenegro> has defended its 
decision to allow an island fortress and wartime concentration camp to be 
transformed into a luxury resort, a move that has sparked anger among relatives 
of former prisoners.

Situated on the island Mamula, in the popular bay of Kotor in the Adriatic 
Sea, the 19th-century fort was run by fascist Italian forces during the second 
world war as a concentration camp. Dozens of inmates are believed to have died 
there.

Now the Balkan country has granted a 49-year lease to Orascom, a 
Swiss-Egyptian company, to invest €15m euros (£11.4m) to build a high-end hotel 
with a spa and marina jetty.

“We were facing two options: to leave the site to fall into ruin or find 
investors who would be willing to restore it and make it accessible to 
visitors,” Olivera Brajovic, head of Montenegro’s national directorate for 
tourism development, told AFP.

Brajovic said plans for the conversion included a memorial room to former 
inmates. Relatives of some of those detained at Mamula during the war have come 
together to oppose the project, which they say is inappropriate given the 
island’s dark past.

“To build a luxury hotel dedicated to entertainment at this place where so 
many people perished and suffered is a blatant example of lack of seriousness 
towards history,” campaigner Olivera Doklestic told AFP.

The 54-year-old woman, whose grandfather, father and uncle were imprisoned on 
Mamula, said the fortress should be renovated and opened to visitors as a 
historic site. “No concentration camp in the world has been transformed into a 
hotel,” she said.

According to the local war veterans’ association, Mamula had more than 2,000 
prisoners, 80 of whom were executed while 50 others died from hunger amid the 
grim conditions.

While prisoners’ relatives oppose the hotel plan, the PR agency Magna, which 
represents Orascom, said the local war veterans’ group had given approval for 
the project, which includes plans to conserve the fortress.

Salt and Water, the Serbian studio designing the resort, said in an emailed 
statement that it was “of the utmost importance to keep the original structure 
of the fortress intact” because Mamula was of “great historical value”.

“The biggest challenge was to design a completely new and somewhat extravagant 
hospitality object on the already existing building while preserving Mamula’s 
unique facade,” the company said. “Therefore, all the potential intervention on 
the fortress’s exterior had to be minimised.”
 