
A mortgage is a loan taken out to buy a property. Because homes are expensive, 
the loan is repaid over a long period – typically your first mortgage will be 
arranged over 25 years, but the period can be shorter or longer depending on 
your circumstances.

When you take on a new mortgage you will be given a number of options. Among 
the things you need to decide are what kind of rate you want, how you will pay 
off the loan and how much you need to borrow.

The rate

One of the most important things to anyone choosing a new mortgage is the 
interest rate: how much it is going to cost you to borrow the money. Most 
lenders offer a range of special offer interest rates to attract new customers. 
These usually fall into one of the following categories:

Fixed rates As the name suggest, the interest rate is set at a certain level 
for a set period – this is usually two, three or five years, although 
occasionally longer-term fixed rates are available. During that period your 
rate is guaranteed not to change. When it comes to an end you will usually move 
on to your lender's standard variable rate (SVR) – see below.

Tracker rates The rate you pay is attached to another rate, usually the Bank 
of England base rate. It is a set margin below or above that rate for a set 
period – for example, 1% above base rate for five years. During that time it 
moves up and down if the other rate changes.

Discount rates The interest rate is a set margin below the lender's SVR for a 
set period, and during that time it moves up and down as the SVR changes.

When the special offer period ends the interest rate you pay will usually 
revert to the lender's SVR. This is a rate which the lender sets itself – in 
most cases it has free rein to change it as and when it wants, although most 
banks will give you several weeks' notice of any change.

During the special offer period you will usually be locked in to the mortgage, 
and if you want to pay it all off you will face early redemption charges – 
typically a set percentage of the value of your loan. The charges can easily 
add up to thousands of pounds.

How to repay the loan

Mortgages <https://www.theguardian.com/money/mortgages> come in two types: 
interest-only or repayment. Choose a repayment mortgage and the money you hand 
over each month will go towards paying the interest on the loan and repaying 
the loan itself – the capital. By the end of the mortgage you will have cleared 
your entire debt.

Choose an interest-only mortgage and, as the name suggests, your monthly 
payment is only paying off the interest. The monthly payment will be lower as a 
result, but you will need to work out how to pay off the capital at the end of 
the loan period.

Lenders used to be very relaxed about interest-only mortgages, but some have 
stopped offering them altogether, and others have tightened their criteria. If 
you want to take one out you may find the maximum loan you are offered is lower 
than if you went for a repayment mortgage, and you may have to provide evidence 
of a repayment vehicle – that is, your plan to cover the capital.

You may be able to put some of your mortgage on a repayment basis and some on 
an interest-only basis. This will be your only option if you want to increase 
your mortgage but your lender no longer offers interest-only mortgages.

How much you need to borrow

When they advertise, mortgages lenders quote a maximum loan-to-value (LTV). 
This is the maximum amount they will consider lending you at that rate, 
expressed as a percentage of the value of the property you are buying. You will 
have to provide the rest of the price – the deposit – from savings or help from 
a family member.

Most of the lowest interest rates are available on mortgages that are 
available only up to 60% LTV – that is, to people who can afford a deposit 
equal to 40% of the price of the property.

Fortunately, it is possible to borrow more. Some lenders are doing loans of up 
95% LTV to new buyers, but you will get a better choice of deal if you can 
afford a deposit of at least 10%.

The maximum amount being advertised is the maximum the lender will consider – 
it is not a guarantee you will be offered that percentage of the property 
price. The loan the lender is willing to offer you will depend on how much you 
can afford to repay each month. This will be based on a number of factors 
including your income and outgoings, whether it is an interest-only or 
repayment loan (see above), and the type of property you are buying – for 
example, some restrict LTVs on new-build flats.

Charges and fees

Most mortgages come with fees. Typically you will pay an arrangement fee and a 
product fee upfront (although these can have different names). Sometimes a 
lender will offer a range of deals with different fees and different interest 
rates, with the largest fees payable on the mortgages with the lowest rates. 
Generally, it will be worth paying a large fee for a low interest rate if you 
are taking on a big mortgage, as you will recoup the money from lower monthly 
repayments, and worth seeking out a loan with no fee and a higher rate if you 
are only borrowing a small amount.

You are also likely to pay for the lender to have your chosen property valued.

If you miss payments you will face fees, and if you try to repay the loan 
during a special offer period you will usually face an early repayment charge. 
Even if the mortgage is at the end of its life you will probably face a small 
charge to clear it completely. Make sure you understand all these fees and 
check how much they are before you sign up.

A secured loan

One important thing about a mortgage is that it is a loan secured on the 
property you are buying. This means if you fail to make repayments the lender 
can ultimately repossess your home in order to sell it and recoup its cash.

If you do find you are struggling to make your monthly payments, contact your 
lender as soon as possible to let it know. It is in everyone's best interests 
for it to try to help you to find a way to get back on track.
 