
Mortgage lending surged dramatically in March, returning to the peak levels 
last seen before the financial crash, as buy-to-let speculators and second home 
buyers rushed to beat the stamp duty tax deadline.

Total lending rose to £17.1bn, 64% higher than the same month a year ago, and 
the highest figure since April 2008,according to the British Bankers Association
 
<https://www.bba.org.uk/news/press-releases/march-2016-figures-for-the-high-street-banks/#.Vx89YnqHr7I>
.

Buyers frantically closed property deals ahead of the introduction of a 3% 
hike in stamp duty forbuy-to-let and second homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/buying-to-let> that began in April. 

Remortgaging by existing home owners also leapt, with households taking 
advantage of cheap mortgage deal amid the widespread belief that interest rates 
will stay low for an extended period of time.

The average mortgage loan taken out reached a record high, hitting £184,200, 
compared to £158,000 at the peak of the previous lending cycle in April 2008.

But the bank lending figures reveal an increasingly lop-sided financial 
picture, with borrowing by manufacturers for investment falling sharply while 
borrowing for buy-to-let speculation has boomed.

Lending to manufacturing companies, which had been growing at an annual rate 
of 12% in 2014, has fallen back to zero, while in construction it is falling.

Meanwhile, personal borrowing on credit cards continues to rise. British 
households made 223m purchases on their credit cards in March, with a total 
value of £12.6bn. But while the volume of purchases increased by 2%, the value 
fell by 1% compared to the same month last year.

Mortgage brokers said they are preparing for a steep decline in lending during 
April. Adrian Anderson of Anderson Harris, said: “As expected, March was a 
bumper month for mortgages. Investors and second homeowners alike rushed to 
beat the hike in stamp duty at the start of April but expect April and May’s 
lending figures to be more subdued as transactions that would normally have 
happened then were brought forward.”

“The mortgage market is far from racing away with itself. The flood of buyers 
we saw in March will not necessarily be replaced in the short term while for 
many borrowers, tougher affordability criteria is still a barrier to getting a 
mortgage or remortgaging.”
Others reckon that the EU referendum may help first-time buyers, with many 
predicting a softening in the market.

Jeremy Leaf, a former RICS chairman and north London estate agent, said: “This 
month we have still seen plenty of first-time buyers as the withdrawal from the 
market of investors has presented them with an opportunity.

“Prices are softening generally but not by a huge amount yet. It is not 
unreasonable to suggest that prices will soften further with the Mayoral 
election and Brexit having an impact on confidence.”

First-time buyers <https://www.theguardian.com/money/firsttimebuyers> can take 
advantage of loans at historically low levels, said data provider Moneyfacts. 
“The average two-year fixed mortgage rate has decreased from 2.97% to 2.55% in 
just 12 months, while the average five-year fixed rate has dropped from 3.53% 
to 3.19% over the same period.”
 