
Thousands of women every week feel pressured to go home from hospital before 
they are ready to after giving birth, the president of the Australian Medical 
Association, Dr Michael Gannon, said.

Gannon, an obstetrician, said although some new mothers were happy to go home 
as soon as possible, others would benefit from more time in hospital to get 
used to breastfeeding, bond with their baby and ask questions.

Market failure: private health insurance only worth it for 'the pregnant, the 
rich and the sick'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/market-failure-private-health-insurance-only-worth-it-for-the-pregnant-the-rich-and-the-sick>
“It’s extremely important that hospitals have discharge protocols and this is 
not at all an argument against sensible discharge times,” Gannon told Guardian 
Australia.

“But we have seen a reduction in length of stay in public hospitals and even 
private maternity units over the years. As someone who has delivered thousands 
of babies over the years I have great sympathy and compassion for the 
difficulties that can occur once returning home.”

There are protocols in place that mean healthy women who have experienced 
uncomplicated vaginal births can go home six hours after delivery. Women with 
uncomplicated caesarean procedures could be discharged after 72 hours. Although 
this was appropriate for many, Gannon said some would benefit from a longer 
stay.

“There are women in our community who are assertive enough to make sure they 
see the doctor and stay in hospital longer if they need to, but it doesn’t 
serve those without a voice,” Gannon said.

“There are women who might not speak English at all or well, and they are 
already a vulnerable group and they already have adverse obstetric outcomes and 
they are vulnerable when they go home as well.”

He said it was more common for women to live in different cities or states 
from their families and that might mean women had fewer people to draw on for 
support upon returning home. It made it all the more crucial for women to feel 
comfortable and confident upon leaving hospital.

And ensuring mothers were supported to breastfeed and that any signs of 
postnatal depression were detected early would benefit both the mother and 
child down the track.

“We know looking after women during pregnancy is without any exaggeration an 
investment in the health of the child for its entire life,” Gannon said.

“We can say similar for the first few days or weeks in the life of a child, 
and women are being discharged every week who aren’t prepared for the journey 
ahead of them. I think a wealthy country like ours can be a bit more 
compassionate and humane in the way we approach postnatal care.”

But professor of midwifery at the Western Sydney University, Hannah Dahlen, 
said keeping women in hospital longer was not the answer.Hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> did not push new mothers out.

“As long as women get postnatal follow-up at home, then home is the best place 
for them to be, because their risk of infection is so much lower at home, and 
you don’t have to listen to the noise of the hospital and have people coming in 
and out of your hospital room, sometimes offering different advice,” she said.

Low-risk pregnant women urged to avoid hospital births
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/dec/03/low-risk-pregnant-women-urged-avoid-hospital-births>
“It’s not about going home as soon as possible being good or bad, it’s about 
ensuring women have the best ongoing support once they do get home. That’s 
where society fails.”

Most major tertiary hospitals had a continuity of care model that meant a 
woman had access to the same midwife throughout her pregnancy, who would do 
at-home calls and check ups for at least a week after a woman was discharged 
and link her with community services.

Ideally, a woman should get six weeks of postnatal care from her midwife after 
being discharged from hospital, Dahlen said, which is what she provides to her 
patients. However, most received about one week of follow-up care.

“This problem is only about eight per cent of women have access to the 
continuity of care model, and the programs that do exist are often booked out,” 
Dahlen said.

“Women in the program have an opportunity to debrief about the birth, the 
emotions they are going through, and to ask questions about breastfeeding. 
Enjoyment of motherhood is also so much higher.”

While women receive regular scans and check-ups throughout pregnancy, too 
often this support simply dropped off after birth, Dahlen said.

“People expect that once women have a baby they are immediately competent and 
able to do it, and some women believe that asking for help is a sign of 
failure. It’s not.

“There is the saying that it takes a village to raise a child, and we need 
that village involved and helping out right from the beginning.”
 