
A petition opposing a retrospective rise in the cost of student loans is to be 
debated in parliament afterobtaining 120,000 signatures in just a few days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/04/government-under-pressure-over-student-loans>
.

However the chance of a U-turn by the government is low, as it has already set 
out its objections to the petition and its justification for the changes. The 
debate will take place on 18 July at 4.30pm.

The campaign was begun by Alex True, who started the petition while doing his 
finals at Durham University. Thepetition 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/131167> focused on a promise made in 
2010 that from April 2017 the student loans repayment threshold of £21,000 
would be upped each year with average earnings.

It argued that “the government has now backtracked on this promise, freezing 
the threshold at £21,000. Graduates will now pay more on their student loans”.

True said he was “delighted” that the issue will be debated in parliament.


“I am hoping as a minimum that the threshold freeze will only apply to new 
applicants. At least this would go some way to restoring trust in the student 
loans system as it would be unfair (and possibly illegal) to change a loan 
agreement retrospectively without the consent of both parties.

“Hopefully this will prevent any further attempts at retrospective changes to 
the student loans agreement.”

Martin Lewis, founder of MoneySavingExpert.com and former head of the 
independent taskforce on student finance information, has also campaigned 
against the retrospective change.


“No commercial company would be allowed to change a loan contract in this way 
after people had signed it – and the government shouldn’t be allowed to 
either,” he said.

“Yet don’t be surprised that in response to over 130,000 concerned students, 
parents and other members of the public signing a petition, the government just 
trotted out the same old trite excuses. After all, it consulted on this and 84% 
of responses told them not to do it, but they ignored that and went ahead 
anyway.”


But he added that with a new prime minister and cabinet coming in September, 
there is still a chance for a U-turn. “I for one will be pushing as hard and 
loudly as possible for that to happen.”

The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills said in a statement posted 
on the petition site: “Freezing the repayment threshold ensures that the 
student support system remains affordable to the taxpayer and all students can 
access a university education, irrespective of their ability to pay.


“This government is ensuring higher education is open to more people than ever 
before, and application rates from disadvantaged young people seeking to go to 
university are currently at record levels. But higher education and further 
education must remain affordable to the taxpayer.”
 