
A man has been murdered in a late-night shooting in front of members of the 
public as he sat in his car at a red traffic light.

Ewan Johnston, 26, was taken to hospital but later died after the shooting at 
the junction in Shields Road,Glasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow>, 
just before midnight on Tuesday.

Police Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> said the attack was 
targeted and carried out in front of some members of the public when Johnston 
stopped at a pedestrian crossing in his car, a black Audi RS4 estate.

He was shot by someone travelling in a dark Audi Q5 that had pulled up beside 
him before speeding off. No one else was injured.

Detectives launched a murder inquiry and forensic teams have been scouring the 
scene of the attack on Wednesday.

The attack occurred at about 11.45pm on Tuesday and Johnston was treated at 
the Queen Elizabeth University hospital before he died at 2.50am on Wednesday.

Det Supt Jim Kerr said: “The man had just stopped at a pedestrian crossing on 
Shields Road, just south of its junction with Scotland Street, when he was 
approached by the Audi Q5.

“Someone from that vehicle shot him and then the car sped off in a northerly 
direction on Shields Road and turned east into Scotland Street towards the 
Kingston Bridge.

“This was obviously a targeted attack. Although it was quite late at night, 
this can be a busy area and there could have been a number of people walking by 
or in vehicles.

“Thankfully, no one else was injured but the incident was witnessed by members 
of the public. This is a shocking incident and something that no one should 
have to witness.”

Police have no descriptions of anyone in the Audi Q5 but are checking CCTV 
from the area.

Kerr added: “Additional officers are on patrol in the area and I would urge 
anyone with information or any concerns at all to speak to them there. A major 
inquiry has been set up by Greater Glasgow division and the major 
investigations team and other specialist resources from across the country.”

The street has been closed to all traffic following the incident while 
passengers for the subway were not allowed access to the Shields Road station.

Operators SPT advised passengers to use the West Street, Kinning Park or 
Bridge Street stations instead and the multi-storey car park near the station 
was also shut.


 