
I bought tickets for the Wireless festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/wireless-festival> in London on Friday 8 
July, through a flash sale which I spotted via an email marketing push by 
Ticketmaster.

I purchased two “two for one” tickets online. However, on arrival at the venue 
we were denied entry as we were told that it was one such ticket per attendee, 
so we had to buy two additional full-priced tickets. This was an extra £134 
that we had not accounted for, but were forced to spend to avoid disappointment 
on a day when we had all booked time off work.

Once I originally booked the tickets I had an email confirmation that clearly 
stated I had purchased “x2 ‘two for one’ tickets”. My understanding of the 
concept of “two for one” – and, I think, that of most rational people – is that 
you receive two tickets for the price of one ticket. I’m seeking a full refund 
for the tickets as I believe I was deceived by this offer.DB, London

We are sympathetic, but unfortunately Ticketmaster won’t budge. It said that 
on the online drop-down menu you needed to select “four” tickets (not two) in 
order to receive four tickets at the two-for-one price. You had only selected 
two tickets at this point, it says.

It claims there are points in the process when you might have been able to 
realise you had only purchased two tickets, and you received a confirmation 
email tuat stated you only had two tickets, while you would also have received 
only two tickets in the mail.

Ticketmaster said: “Thousands of tickets were booked via this particular 
promotion, and no other complaints have been received. All of our two-for-one 
offers are set up in this way and our teams have not come across similar 
confusion from customers.”

We went on to the Ticketmaster site ourselves to book a two-for-one promotion 
on another concert. Like you, we are not regular buyers on the site and we 
could see where confusion might arise over whether two two-for-ones were 
actually two tickets or four. We feel Ticketmaster could go further in making 
its site more precise – and in helping out when things go wrong, such as in 
your case. Over to you, Ticketmaster.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 