
The dilemma My boyfriend and I have been together for three years, we rarely 
fight and have planned our future lives together. Recently I found out he has 
been havingSkype <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/skype> sex with other 
women (I think only porn stars). Am I right to be upset about this? I 
confronted him and he said he considers it as porn, but I don’t, as it is an 
interaction with another woman who also sees him. I also pointed out the double 
standards, as he wouldn’t be happy with this behaviour from me, which he 
accepted. He has apologised, promised to stop and I have forgiven him. But I am 
scared that he won’t stop. We are in our 20s and I’m worried this pattern of 
behaviour will end up with him cheating on me in the future.

Mariella replies Too right. The bad news is he’s already cheating on you. Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> with someone else, even in a 
virtual scenario, is sex with someone else. If your boyfriend wants to engage 
in a second life online he can’t really expect it to run concurrent with the 
one in which you two are dating. He may like to cast himself as an avatar, out 
there on a great big solo cyber adventure, but it’s his real brain and his real 
body that are engaged in these acts of infidelity.

Even “meaningless sex”, is an activity our mind has chosen. Any denial of that 
connection insinuates that we are guided only by impulse, like the rest of the 
animal kingdom, with no ability to see beyond the behavioural patterns we’ve 
been programmed with for millennia. I’d rather believe in our ability to evolve 
and adapt even if it means taking personal responsibility for our actions. We 
can’t have it both ways.

As for his excuse that it’s 'only pornography', it’s hardly worth the breath 
it took him to offer it

Although the internet offers us all far greater opportunities for expanding 
our sexual horizons, it doesn’t absolve us of our accountability. Your 
boyfriend is making a choice when it comes to his sexual activities that is as 
real as if he were having sex with some woman living down the road. He can’t 
expect to continue with with one foot wedged in your front door and his 
genitalia tangled up elsewhere.

As for his excuse that it’s “only pornography”, as though these partners in 
passion, making their meagre living performing for his sexual gratification are 
somehow not people at all, it’s hardly worth the breath it took him to offer 
it. It’s a mistake you also seem to be making by dismissing sex workers as 
“only porn stars” as though their engagement in the centuries old occupation of 
the downtrodden, supplying sexual stimulation for money, makes them less than 
human.

Just three years into what you are clearly hoping will be a long-term 
partnership, this man is already dividing his loyalties, gleaning emotional 
support from you and physical gratification from a host of others. Admittedly, 
falling in love creates a cloud of amnesia that can be problematic when we are 
trying to make rational assessments. It can obscure us from truth and convince 
us that relationships are unique and imperative to our wellbeing long after 
they should rightfully have been concluded. Such oblivion may assist in 
encouraging us to attempt enduring relationships but it’s definitely not 
helpful when we’re confronting the reality of our romantic liaisons. When it 
comes to a partnership, the one you are in is the one you are meant for; until 
you split up and find that life, after the agony, continues as before and new 
lovers turn up for whom you will feel equal passion.

You’re no doubt imagining that moving into the future without him will be a 
life half lived, even though what he’s offering you is slim pickings when it 
comes to a relationship.

Skype is a fantastic invention for bringing us closer to those we love, 
ignoring borders, crossing continents and making working from any and every 
corner of the globe a possibility. Its potential for expanding the market in 
commercialised sex are equally apparent and broadly utilised.

There are advantages for those desperate to make a living, but there’s nothing 
imaginary about a real person, in a real location, generally in the developing 
world, keeping her kids quiet in another room while she tries to pay for their 
sustenance acting out sexual fantasies for men like your boyfriend.

It’s amazing that we’ve got to the 21st century and are still struggling to 
accept that there is nothing impersonal about getting intimate with other human 
beings. Pretending cyberspace is a different universe, populated by people who 
matter less, is a misnomer and a flagrant abandonment of our individual 
responsibility.

For today let’s just say that you’ve got an issue in your relationship that 
warrants a wider-ranging discussion. Only you and your boyfriend can decide the 
parameters of your partnership, but you’re right that ignoring such 
transgressions won’t avert problems later – it will only exacerbate them.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 