
I have a bill of £9,000 because I have been lumbered with responsibility for 
my ex-husband’s house, which is worth less than the mortgage.

I jointly owned the property until we divorced in 2012. The divorce settlement 
awarded it to my ex-husband and stipulated that he should seek to release me 
from the mortgage obligations and indemnify me against any future liabilities. 
Despite the court ruling, he refused to remove my name from the mortgage or the 
deeds. He declared himself bankrupt in February 2015 and since March I have had 
to take over the mortgage payments of £329.51 a month.

I had hoped to sell it and pay off the loan, but the only offer I’ve had is 
£9,000 less than the value of the mortgage. My ex neglected the property so it 
also needs around £15,000 spent on repairs. The divorce court order says the 
property isn’t mine and I should not be liable, but the mortgage company says I 
am liable for the shortfall. I have let my lender know about the offer on the 
property and have received their “shortfall” pack to complete and return. 
Please can you advise me of my rights or steps or action I can take to prevent 
me from having to pay?LG, Buxton

Unfortunately, the terms of the divorce do not affect the terms of the 
mortgage, and as you are still named on it you remain “jointly and severally 
liable” for the debt. This means the lender has the right to pursue you for any 
shortfall.

At the heart of this problem is that your ex-partner refused to remove your 
name from the mortgage – the only recourse would have been to apply for a court 
order to force the property’s sale, but this would be expensive.

According to the charity Money Advice Trust you have two choices: sell for the 
current offer, or opt for “voluntary repossession” by handing the keys to the 
lender for auction. The current offer, however disappointing, is likely to be 
the better option. “No statutory powers exist to limit or reduce the resulting 
shortfall, and the only course of action left is to explore repayment options 
with the lender,” says a spokesperson for the charity.

“You have done the right thing by talking to the mortgage company. Repayment 
options might include negotiating a repayment plan, offering a one-off lump sum 
in ‘full and final settlement’ or remortgaging your home to absorb this debt. 
All have advantages and disadvantages, and I would recommend you seek free, 
expert advice from National Debtline on 0808 808 4000 ornationaldebtline.org 
<https://www.nationaldebtline.org/>.”

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk  
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk>or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 