
Q I am in my 70s and have five children and several grandchildren and great 
grandchildren. I have had a joint mortgage with a close male friend for almost 
25 years. We are not a couple. We are both disabled – me more so – and the 
house has been adapted to our needs.

Our joint interest-only mortgage ends in December 2017 when we will need to 
repay £48,000. We currently jointly own the property. My friend has no partner, 
an estranged sibling and cousins who do not keep in touch with him. He is 
younger than me.


He is my closest friend and has cared for me, laughed with me, cried with me, 
for all those years. However, I am concerned that when I die his family may 
suddenly decide that they want to contest any will he makes in my favour.

 In a rather long-winded way, I am asking whether I should change from a joint 
mortgage to a tenancy in common, so that I can be sure my family would at some 
point have some money? And, by so doing, is there a clause that when I die my 
friend would be entitled to live in the property, or vice versa?

We currently have our house on the market but we cannot find a decent property 
with the money we would be left with after the sale.PM

A At the moment, because you own your house as joint tenants – rather than as 
tenants in common – when one of you dies, the other will automatically take 
over ownership of the whole property, so you would not need to worry about 
either of you being able to carry on living there.


If you became tenants in common, by severing the joint tenancy, you would each 
own a distinct share of the house, which you could leave to whoever you liked 
by making a will. To make sure that your friend could live in the house after 
your death, it would be possible to draw up a will leaving your share to your 
family but giving your friend a life interest in the property, which would give 
him the right to live there until his death, when your family would be able to 
sell the house. If you were tenants in common, your friend would be free either 
to leave his share of the house to you or anyone else, but also give you a life 
interest so that you didn’t lose your home.

It is extremely unlikely that your friend’s family would succeed in contesting 
such a will as they are not financially dependent on him.

As far as your joint mortgage goes, if you haven’t managed to sell your house 
to repay the £48,000 you owe, one option available to you might be to convert 
it to a lifetime mortgage, which is a form of equity release. This would mean 
that you could stay in your house and not have to make monthly interest 
payments (unless you wanted to) as interest could be added to the mortgage and 
repaid on the sale of the house after your deaths.


Remortgaging to a conventional mortgage isn’t an option because of your age. 
The maximum age you can be at the end of a mortgage term is 85 with the 
Nationwide building society, 83 with the Teachers building society, 80 with the 
Halifax and 75 with many other lenders.
 