
Tell us about your life in the red: how do you survive with debt?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/06/tell-us-about-your-life-in-the-red-how-do-you-survive-with-debt>
Debt: $80,000+

Source: College


Estimated years until debt-free: Unknown

Like many of my friends, I remember the evening I told my parents I wanted to 
go to college. We all have different stories about the moment we took control 
of our lives. But what we share is this: by signing on a dotted line to 
incomprehensible terms, we risked everything. We chose education, no matter the 
cost. In some cases, we alienated ourselves from our families and communities.

By spending money we didn’t have to attend schools we couldn’t afford, we 
joined an elite class we’d never truly fit into. We are, in a way, without 
community. As a result of pursuing higher education, I am highly educated and 
deeply in debt. If you don’t have a similar story of adversity – and you’re not 
in debt – you’re probably not my friend.

I grew up in a working-class neighborhood outside Cleveland, Ohio, where I was 
taught that if only I followed the rules, I could succeed. I was so good a 
student that a guidance counselor suggested Antioch College, a prestigious yet 
expensive liberal arts school. My mom made it her mission that I attend. She 
saw that I entered every high school essay contest and applied for every 
merit-based scholarship that I could. That same year, my father had skipped out 
on us; I was now 18, and he was legally absolved of all financial 
responsibility.

With my mother’s help, I paid for my entire first year with scholarships and 
other merit-based aid. Then, I began living off a credit card.


My 'treat yourself' mentality landed me with $15,000 of debt | Samantha Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/my-treat-yourself-mentality-15000-of-debt>
Horace Mann, the founder of my alma mater, called education “the great 
equalizer”. In some ways, it’s true. For the poor and working-class student who 
finds themselves let into a wealthy institution, every part of being there can 
be an education that helps level the field. At the same time, I felt markedly 
different than my peers in ways I couldn’t articulate. Before I came to Antioch 
– where it seemed like half the campus was either vegetarian or vegan – I’d 
never met anyone who offered political reasons to refuse food.

By the end of my first year, I knew better than to think that people got ahead 
just by following the rules. My elite peers had something I didn’t, something I 
might never have, something that was no result of hard work. In high school I’d 
worked minimum wage jobs just so I could afford to dress like everyone else, 
scouring discount stores for deals on the latest fashions. At Antioch, people 
wore “thrift store finds” and lived in intentional squalor, swearing off 
hygienic and other consumer products that I didn’t have the money to buy.

I was bitter, envious. I felt entitled to what they had – no more, but no 
less. I was tired of working two or three jobs at a time while going to school 
and still not having enough. When my second year of college came and the 
scholarships stopped, I started working as a stripper. As a sex worker I was 
rolling in cash, but still lacking in financial literacy.


Poor people make choices that wealthier people wouldn’t. We are in debt for 
reasons those who aren’t can’t comprehend. Rather than explain myself, I 
gravitate toward those with similar experiences.


Loan forgiveness was meant to help me get out of debt. It did the opposite | 
Andrea Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/loan-forgiveness-debt-restructing-program-problems>
After college, I lost my job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/28/lost-job-teacher-call-girl>
 as a public school teacher when it was revealed that I had worked in the sex 
industry. The fact that I was a competent teacher made no difference to my 
critics. It took years to re-establish myself in a new career as a writer. In 
the meantime, I hemorrhaged debt.

Now, five or so years later, I’ve paid off most my credit cards, but I don’t 
expect I’ll ever pay off my student loans. With three degrees, and after years 
of deferment, the amount due hovers somewhere around $80,000. Some people don’t 
get why. They ask: why did you go to a college you couldn’t afford? Why did you 
pursue a second and then a third degree if you couldn’t pay off the first one? 
Why did you pursue degrees in fields that will never pay off? I used to feel 
ashamed. Then I learned to tell my story, and surrounded myself with people who 
understood.

People in debt are some of the brightest, most resilient people there are. 
Today I have no regrets. Coming from little made me the woman I am.

 