
The idea of spending a year in a hot, beautiful country is an alluring option 
for any 20-year-old university student, and record numbers of students now take 
a year out to study or work abroad throughErasmus 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-821_en.htm>. Two years ago, I 
joined them.

It often feels like you can’t criticise your own year abroad – no one wants to 
hear that, actually, it was terrible. Perhaps that’s why all my friends 
returned saying they “had suuuch an amazing time”.

Maybe they’re pretending, I don’t know. But I do know that my year wasn’t what 
I’d had in mind.

I didn’t meet life-changing and inspiring people, I didn’t learn how to make 
jokes in a foreign language, I didn’t sit in a mountainous cave smoking an 
obscure plant and chanting meditation hymns, and I certainly didn’t “find 
myself” – or anyone else for that matter.

What nobody tells you about studying abroad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/17/what-nobody-tells-students-about-studying-abroad>
My reality was long days teaching in Spain for less than one euro an hour. 
Despite my best efforts, I barely spoke Spanish and made just one friend. I 
couldn’t wait for it to end and come June, after nine long months, I boarded 
the plane home crying tears of happiness.

However, it’s taken me a while to realise that I wouldn’t have it any other 
way. I wouldn’t do it all over again, but I certainly wouldn’t change it. It 
was tough, but I learned some serious life lessons.

I had to grow up and learn how to rely on myself. I learned that things don’t 
always go the way you expect or want. I had time to think about what I was 
doing with my life and what I wanted to get out of my degree.

For many others, too, a terrible year abroad can turn into a positive, 
character-building experience.

One student, who wanted to remain anonymous, spent the year in France in a 
freezing room teaching a group of disruptive children. “But the other language 
assistants were fab,” she says. “We banded together in the face of the school’s 
indifference to us.” She says she became more empathetic and that she’d “do it 
all over again, absolument”.

Banding together is something I can relate to, as it’s what I did with my 
fellow Leeds student Anna Dell’aglio. For Dell’aglio though, the year was 
always going to be much harder. It was her first time moving away from home and 
it wasn’t the easiest transition.

“I definitely learned more from having a tough time than I would have if it 
had all been easy,” she says. “We both had to learn fast and grow up quickly. 
It was hard but I’m a better person for it now.”

The year abroad 2.0: how technology is changing foreign study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/28/the-year-abroad-20-how-technology-is-changing-foreign-study>
Another student, who also wanted to remain anonymous, moved to Saudi Arabia on 
her year abroad and the culture shock and language barrier soon became too 
much. “Loneliness sunk in and with the loneliness came my depression. It was 
the deepest, darkest depression I’d ever felt.”

She sought help from online resources and forced herself to eat and sleep as 
normal, demonstrating how the isolation and loneliness of being alone in a 
foreign country can make you realise your own capabilities and strengths.

For me, this was the greatest thing I took from my year – realising that no 
matter how bad it got, I had the strength to pick myself up.

I’m not saying that if you have a great year then you don’t learn anything. 
I’m still jealous of all the adventures and travelling my friends reminisce 
about.

But a disastrous year abroad gave me the boost I needed to stop taking the 
opportunities I have for granted. I spent a long time feeling like I’d wasted 
what was supposed to be one of the best years of my life, until I realised that 
was only because I was comparing it to other people’s experiences.

That year was the best thing that could have happened to me. So if you’ve 
recently started your year abroad, remember to take it as it comes – appreciate 
the experienceyou’re having, without comparing it everyone else’s.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 