
The mystery of why hundreds of thousands of fish were found washed up on a 
Cornish beach over the weekend has been solved: they were dumped by a fishing 
vessel that caught too many sardines in shallow water.

After a photographer happened on the huge shoal of dead fish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/hundreds-of-thousands-of-fish-wash-up-on-cornish-beach>
 on Marazion at St Michael’s Mount beach, various explanations were offered for 
her eerie discovery – just two weeks after a similar sighting on another 
Cornish beach. Bad weather out at sea and attempts by the fish to escape large 
predators were both suggested as explanations.

However, according to Gus Caslake, the chairman of the Cornish Sardine 
Management Association, one of its member vessels was responsible. It had been 
following shoals of fish that were closer to the shoreline than normal this 
winter, and was forced to release large numbers after it caught too many to 
safely pull aboard.

The Cornwall <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/cornwall> Inshore Fisheries 
and Conservation Authority (Cifca) and the UK government regulator, the Marine 
Management Organisation (MMO), have launched investigations into the two 
incidents.

Simon Cadman, Cifca’s principal enforcement officer, told the Guardian that 
“it’s likely that the fishing in that area has been the cause of the problem” 
in both cases.

Cadman said he was aware of several boats that were operating in the area on 
Saturday evening, targeting the shoals of sardines that return to the Cornish 
coast each winter.

Caslake said that the first incident at Pentewan Sands was likely caused by 
fishing vessels driving the sardines on to the beach as they tried to escape 
the nets. It had previously been reported that the dead fish included mackerel, 
but Prof Heather Koldewey, head of marine and freshwater conservation 
programmes at the Zoological Society of London, confirmed the fish were 
sardines after visiting the site on Monday.

Dumping sardines is legal because the species are not covered by the European 
Union’s landing obligation laws.

Number of England's marine conservation zones nearly doubles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/17/englands-23-new-marine-conservation-zones-branded-useless-by-expert>
Debbie Crockard, the Marine Conservation Society’s fisheries policy officer, 
said: “If they are discarding that amount of sardines then [the MMO] should be 
looking into that, because that is a ridiculous amount to be throwing back into 
the sea ... If this is happening on a regular basis then the law should be 
looked at.”

However, Cadman said that public embarrassment may drive behavioural change 
within the fishing industry.

“We will be speaking to these guys. It is for the industry itself to actually 
put its operations straight in terms of how they conduct their fishing,” he 
said. Cadman would not say which boats or companies he was investigating.

Cornish sardine fishermen plan to put boats on standby to assist others that 
catch too much too close to shore, Caslake said. That would allow them to 
offload fish and make it back to port safely.

A spokesman for Ocean Fish, one of the companies that operates boats in the 
sardine fishery, said that none of their boats had been involved. He confirmed 
that the MMO had contacted the company on Monday morning seeking information.

A spokeswoman for the MMO said: “We are looking at the activity of vessels in 
the area but it is too early to say what the cause [of the beached fish] might 
be.”

The Marine Stewardship Council (MSC), which certifies sardines caught off the 
coast of Cornwall as sustainable, said it had also launched an investigation 
into the event.

James Simpson, the MSC communication officer, appealed for more information. 
The body’s auditors would be looking closely at the incident when they next 
assess the fishery’s accreditation, Simpson said.
 