
The annual season of goodwill already looks fragile at one Worcester primary 
school. Parents and carers at St Joseph’s Catholic primary areapparently 
dismayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/28/row-worcester-primary-school-st-josephs-nativity-play-charge>
 at being asked to pay £1 a ticket to watch their child in this year’s nativity 
play. Offering an explanation for the decision, headteacher Louise Bury, said: 
“With ever-tightening budgets and growing numbers, we saw this as an 
opportunity to be able to invest in some valuable reading and learning 
resources for key stage 1 and early years.” It is a bleak but not unexpected 
sign of how desperate the financial landscape is looking for England’s schools 
and colleges.

In some ways there’s nothing new about parents being expected to stump up 
cash. Many of us have spent long hours hoping not to win dubious bottles of 
cheap wine at school raffles. We’ve shuffled unenthusiastically around windy 
playgrounds peering into car boots. We may even, in the sanctuary of flickering 
darkness, have strut our self-conscious stuff to dodgy soundtracks at school 
discos.

Row at Worcester primary school over £1 nativity play charge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/28/row-worcester-primary-school-st-josephs-nativity-play-charge>
This, after all, is what parents and grandparents do. We go to things we don’t 
want to go to with people we don’t know and pay money for things we don’t want. 
And we do this in the name of raising funds for our children’s schools. It used 
to be part of the once marginal world of parent teacher associations. Now it 
seems that such relatively paltry sums are needed to fund something as 
fundamental to the primary curriculum as literacy. How on earth did it come to 
this?

And we know that the situation is about to get much worse. Malcolm Trobe, the 
interim general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, 
commented earlier this month that 8% real-term cuts in school budgets would 
make small schools unviable. Some,he warned 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-37860682>, “are going to fall off a cliff 
financially”.

I have been headteacher for more than 14 years in a rural comprehensive of 
1,650 students, with a budget of more than £6m. Working with a brilliant 
business manager and governors, we are bracing ourselves for tough times. As 
staff leave, we look to avoid replacing them. We’ve reduced the curriculum 
because we know that in all schools something like 80% of the costs are the 
people we employ. We know that it’s only by cutting the number of teachers and 
increasing class sizes that we’ll be able to avoid compulsory redundancies and 
sustain anything like the currently quality of provision.

No school leader will be able to make the savings needed simply by postponing 
a decision to repaint the corridors. Hard choices are the new norm. And too 
often such options focus on people who cost the least – the teaching assistants 
who work with our most vulnerable children, the administrative staff who free 
up teachers to focus on the classroom, the sports coaches and peripatetic music 
staff who enrich the cultural and emotional lives of children.

Tory councils warn of £600m black hole after demise of education bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/30/tory-councils-600m-black-hole-demise-education-bill-grant-england>
So I certainly wouldn’t criticise the head of St Joseph’s Catholic primary 
school for doing everything she can to protect children by charging parents. 
Nor do I trivialise the anger of parents. But all of us – teachers, school 
leaders and parents alike – need to direct our frustrations where they are 
deserved. We are facing huge, unsustainable staffing costs, the effects of a 
juggernaut of curriculum reform entailing new resources for every course at 
every level, plus in deprived and rural areas the burgeoning costs of supply 
agency fees as the teacher recruitment crisis bites.

Meanwhile the government pays us scant regard. Union leaders couldn’t have 
been clearer in their pleas to chancellor Philip Hammond to act in his autumn 
statement. Yet all we saw was a £150m rabbit dragged from a threadbare hat to 
fund the vanity project of increased grammar school places – money for a 
proposal that hasn’t yet even reached the end of its official consultation 
period. It feels as if ideology trumped fairness.

That fury of those Worcester parents now needs to translate into a collective 
voice across the teaching profession. We all know that education matters 
hugely. But it comes at a cost that the government needs to fairly fund. As the 
season of goodwill shimmers before us, it’s clear that once the nativity 
costumes are packed away, this education financial crisis isn’t going to 
disappear.
 