
I am in an incredibly frustrating and long-winded dispute with Nationwide over 
a faulty bridesmaid dress that I bought online in April from Aisle Style UK. 
The dress was faulty, but when I tried to return it the company would not 
provide a returns address or offer a full refund. When I tried to file a 
section 75 claim throughNationwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationwide> (having paid by credit card) 
it turned into a ridiculous series of letters with its disputes department. It 
has rejected my claim because it says I paid a firm called CNF, and not the 
company itself.

As far I am concerned I paid Aisle Style – there was no choice of payee and I 
simply put in my credit card details as requested on the website. In my opinion 
this is ethically questionable customer service from Nationwide.CZ, Bristol

You did exactly the right thing when using an unknown website to buy something 
costing more than £100 – you paid by credit card. This allows you to hold the 
card provider jointly liable if the items turn out to be faulty. The problem, 
as you have found, is that the banks seem to hate these claims and do 
everything to avoid paying them. In this case, Nationwide told us you had 
originally tried to get your money via a “chargeback”, but this was refused 
because the website refused to take back the dress.

Aisle Style UK is another online firm that takes an interesting view of its 
responsibilities to UK consumers. It refuses to take items back after three 
days, although that may be because it appears to be in China.

Following our intervention, the building society has taken a second look at 
the matter and has accepted that your claim should have been paid.

“A section 75 claim was declined because no link could be established between 
Aisle Style and CNF. However, when reviewing the customer’s complaint, a 
connection was eventually established and we have now re-credited the money. In 
recognition of the delay we have offered her £100 compensation,” a spokeswoman 
says .

It’s time the Financial Conduct Authority looked as this whole area and 
clarifies when and how it expects card providers to meet these claims. At the 
moment, too many are going unpaid.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto: consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 