
In a hot and sweaty auction room, some people are fighting to see what is 
going on while others are spilling out into surrounding rooms. Bids have been 
coming fast and furious but are at last slowing down. The auctioneer makes sure 
no one else wants to bid and slams down his gavel.

He has just sold a dilapidated mid-terrace property in Tooting for £175,000 - 
£100,000 more than the guide price in the catalogue.

This story is reminiscent of the housing boom of the late Eighties, when 
buyers were prepared to pay extortionate amounts for anything with walls, a 
roof and a front door. But the Tooting frenzy actually happened at an auction 
held by FPD Savills in London last month. Auctioneer Chris Coleman-Smith says: 
'It's a long time since we've seen an auction room like that. There were a lot 
of people wanting to buy - developers, speculators, owner-occupiers and rental 
buyers.'

Demand at the auction reflected a surge in interest from buyers across the 
South of England and in particular London. According to the Royal Institution 
of Chartered Surveyors, 34 per cent of surveyors countrywide reported house 
price increases in February, and only 7 per cent reported falls. Demand is 
outstripping supply and in some areas competition for property is so strong 
that gazumping has returned.

The institution says: 'Confidence has been quick to pick up in the capital, 
and is rippling out across the rest of the country, with a large rise in 
confidence also evident in the South East.'

However, there is no need at present to worry about another Eighties-style 
house price bubble. According to estate agents and housing market economists, 
the UK housing market is set to enjoy steady but moderate price increases.

Barry Naisbitt, chief economist at Abbey National, points out that although 
house prices are rising, the average increase for the last year (quoted by the 
Nationwide) of 6.8 per cent is much smaller than in the late Eighties, when 
increases of 20 per cent a year were not unusual. The number of housing 
transactions is also lower - 1.35 million last year compared to more than 2 
million in 1988. He believes this is partly because people's attitude to house 
buying has changed. 'A house is principally your home, not something you buy to 
make money. People want to nest rather than invest.'

The average figures hide the fact that some properties are gaining more 
quickly in value than others. Colchester estate agent David Sherwood says his 
firm, Fenn Wright, has enjoyed a good February, with as many sales as would be 
expected during May, June and July.Property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> prices have increased by 10 per 
cent on average. Special properties - in the right areas with original features 
- have gone up by as much as 15 per cent. Likewise, Norwich estate agent Ken 
Shipman says: 'The asking price is still going up for the right property in the 
right place. On some city-centre properties we've seen a 15 per cent increase. 
On others it's more like 5 per cent.'

Halifax statistics show that house prices actually fell by 0.5 per cent in 
February, by 0.1 per cent in December and 0.7 per cent in November. However, 
Halifax economist Martin Ellis says increases in the South of England have been 
masked by larger falls in the North. 'Much of our manufacturing sector is based 
in the northern regions, and this has been going through a difficult period. 
Confidence was on the wane and this was reflected in house prices,' he says.

Ellis believes worries of recession and unemployment, which were on the 
increase before Christmas, will be balanced by cuts in interest rates, and he 
expects modest growth of about 4 per cent year on year. 'We expect the economy 
to behave in a more controlled fashion, and the housing market generally 
follows the economy. A more stable housing market has got to be good news for 
homeowners and buyers - fewer repossessions, more predictability and more 
affordable property.'

David Miles, professor of finance at Imperial College, London, says the one 
factor that could upset the apple cart is European monetary union. Thanks to 
the recent interest rate cuts, the average (joint-income) buyer is believed to 
be spending just £14.30 of every £100 in take-home pay on his mortgage at the 
moment, compared to £19.30 in September. Many people believe UK interest rates 
could fall by another 2 per cent to come in line with other members of the EU, 
making it even cheaper to borrow. Whether this actually happens or not, the 
belief could spark off another house-buying frenzy.

Miles says: 'If I weren't a homeowner now, I think I would be out there 
looking.'
 