
Never go to bed angry, the old saying goes, or bad feeling will harden into 
resentment. Now scientists have found evidence to support the idea that 
negative emotional memories are harder to reverse after a night’s sleep.

The study, published in the journal Nature Communications 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/ncomms13375>, suggests that during 
sleep, the brain reorganises the way negative memories are stored, making these 
associations harder to suppress in the future.

“In our opinion, yes, there is certain merit in this age-old advice,” said 
Yunzhe Liu, who led the research at Beijing Normal University and is now based 
at University College London. “We would suggest to first resolve argument 
before going to bed; don’t sleep on your anger.”

The findings could also have implications for the treatment of conditions such 
aspost-traumatic stress disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/post-traumatic-stress-disorder> (PTSD), 
the authors said.

Tests raise hopes for radical new therapy for phobias and PTSD
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/21/tests-raise-hopes-for-radical-new-therapy-for-phobias-and-ptsd>
The study, conducted over two days, used a psychological technique known as 
the “think/no-think” task to test how successfully 73 male students suppressed 
memories.

First, the men learnt to associate pairs of neutral faces and unsettling 
images, such as injured people, crying children or corpses. Next, they were 
shown the faces again and told to either actively think of the associated 
picture or to consciously avoid thinking of it. When this session was conducted 
just 30 minutes after the initial learning, the participants were 9% less 
likely to remember the images that they had avoided thinking about compared to 
control image pairs – the suppression had been effective.

However, when the suppression session was carried out 24 hours after the 
initial learning, after a good night’s sleep, they were only 3% less likely to 
recall the image.

Brain scans offered a clue to why memories may be more difficult to unpick 
once they have been consolidated by sleep. Functional MRI scans of the 
participants revealed that newly acquired memories were represented by brain 
activity tightly centred on the hippocampus, the brain’s memory centre, but the 
overnight memories had become more distributed across the cortex.

The authors caution that the findings were in healthy participants and are not 
immediately applicable to conditions like PTSD – and expecting people who have 
undergone a traumatic experience to start working on suppressing the memory on 
the same day is “probably not realistic advice”, Liu said. However the research 
could help design evidence-based treatments for PTSD in the future, he said.

“We think the “re-consolidation” technique may be useful, so that we first 
evoke this piece of memory, and then try to suppress that,” Liu said, referring 
to a treatment strategy in which old information is called to mind with the aim 
of modifying the memory either with drugs or through behavioural interventions.
 