
The collapse in global oil prices has sent house prices tumbling in areas 
reliant on the UK’s North Sea oil industry, according to a new official house 
price index.

By contrast, well-off residents of the City of London, who include the 
flat-dwellers of the Barbican estate, have seen their properties soar in value 
by more than 27% in the space of 12 months, with gentrifying east London 
neighbourhoods such as Walthamstow not far behind.

The new government-published house price index 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/inflationandpriceindices/bulletins/housepriceindex/april2016>
 replaces the previous indices published by the Land Registry and the Office 
for National Statistics (ONS). It shows that the average cost of a UK home 
nudged up by 0.6%, or £1,300, in April to reach £209,000.


However, for many observers what will stand out are the huge variations in 
prices across the country. The index reveals the local authority areas that 
have seen the biggest price increases and falls – and the “bottom five” 
includes three locations whose fortunes are closely linked to the North Sea oil 
industry. These are the city of Aberdeen, where the average house price fell by 
10.4% in the year to 30 April, to reach £173,761; the Orkney islands (a 6.9% 
annual fall to £122,033); and Aberdeenshire (a 6.3 fall to £189,796). The 
bottom five table was headed by Merthyr Tydfil, where prices fell by 11.1%, 
while in the mid-Wales county of Ceredigion prices were down by 7.4%.

When it comes to the “top five”, the City of London topped the table, with 
annual price growth of 27.3%. The average property price there in April was 
£928,217. The City of London has a resident population of about 7,000, around 
4,000 of whom live on the Barbican estate.


Slough in Berkshire was in second place with annual growth of 25.2%. Slough is 
said to be one of the chief beneficiaries of “the Crossrail effect”, in 
reference to the new rail link for London and the south-east that will be known 
as the Elizabeth line when services begin in 2018.

The London borough of Waltham Forest, which includes Walthamstow, located at 
the north-east end of the Victoria line, was in third place with annual growth 
of 25%.

In March, London-based estate agency Foxtons said it expected Walthamstow to 
become as important for its business as affluent Pimlico, located at the other 
end of the London Underground line. In fourth and fifth place respectively were 
Thurrock in Essex (22.4% annual growth) and the London Borough of Barking and 
Dagenham (22.3% annual growth).


When it comes to London as a whole, some homeowners might be in for a shock. 
It suggests property values in the capital have fallen dramatically – though 
this is more likely due to a different way of crunching the numbers.

The index puts the average price of a home in London at £470,025, which it 
said was 14.5% higher than a year earlier. But this figure bears little 
relation to the most recent average-price data issued by the two government 
agencies.


According to the most recent Land Registry report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/520083/HPIReport20160429.pdf>
, which covers March, the average cost of a home in the capital was £534,785, 
while the most recent ONS figures, also for March, put the figure at £552,000.


House prices measured: what the different indices show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/14/house-prices-measured-what-different-indices-show-official-index>
The apparent discrepancy is not directly addressed by those behind the new 
index, though the ONS said: “The introduction of improved methodology and data 
sources has led to differences in published prices when comparing the new UK 
house price index with the previous house price indices. However, when 
comparing the respective trends over time, the three series show very similar 
trends.” It added that the formula used by the old ONS index was “sensitive to 
extreme property values, and as a result the prices can be skewed upwards by 
high-value property”.

The new index, simply called the UK House Price Index, has been produced 
jointly by the ONS and the Land Registry, and aims to offer a more accurate 
picture of prices across the UK.


It states that average UK prices rose by 0.6% in April, taking the typical 
property value to £209,054. Annual house price inflation was said to be running 
at 8.2%, though this rises to 9.1% in England.

The Land Registry and the ONS have traditionally calculated their indices in 
different ways, which may explain why their conclusions have often been very 
different. The ONS said the average cost of a UK home in March was £291,820, 
while the Land Registry reported that the average house price in England and 
Wales was £189,901.


“Work has been taking place over the past two years to develop a single, 
official HPI that reflects the final transaction price for sales of residential 
property in the UK,” said a Land Registry spokeswoman.

 