
Scientists have confirmed that a mysterious, unnamed species of beaked whale 
roams the northern Pacific Ocean. Sightings of the creature, which has a 
bulbous head and a beak like a porpoise, had been reported by Japanese 
fishermen, who call themkarasu or ravens, but it was previously unknown to 
science. It has yet to be given a formal scientific name.

“Clearly this species is very rare and reminds us how much we have to learn 
about the ocean and even some of its largest inhabitants,” said Phillip Morin, 
a research molecular biologist at the US National Oceanographic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA). His team revealed the existence of the new species in a 
paper published in the journal Marine Mammal Science last week.

Japanese researchers sampled three black-beaked whales that had been washed up 
on the north coast of Hokkaido in 2013 and suggested they could be a new 
species. Morin and his team at NOAA’s Southwest Fisheries Research Center in 
San Diego decided to investigate and seek specimens from a wider area for 
testing, and to try to match genetic samples to prove the Japanese claim.

“My first idea was to go to our collection, where we have the largest 
collection of cetacean samples in the world,” he said last week. In the end, 
the group analysed 178 beaked whale specimens from around the Pacific Rim and 
found five that matched the whales found by the Japanese team. Crucially, the 
finds came from sites that ranged across the Pacific.

One skull was found in the Smithsonian Institution after being recovered from 
the Aleutian Islands in 1948. Another specimen discovered in Alaska was spotted 
in the collection of the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, and a 
further sample was obtained from tissue taken from a whale stranded on Unalaska 
Island in the Aleutians in 2004. Local teachers and students had photographed 
and measured the animal before putting its skeleton on display at Unalaska high 
school.

Morin said scientists had more questions than answers about the new species, 
which is about two-thirds of the size of a Baird’s beaked whale, the cetacean 
species that the newly identified creature most closely resembles. The largest 
beaked whales can reach 40 feet (12 metres) and spend up to 90 minutes at a 
time hunting squid in deep water.

They are hard to research because they may spend only a few minutes at the 
surface. They rarely breach, travel in small numbers and blend into their 
surroundings. “They’re hard to see, especially if the water is anything but 
perfectly calm,” Morin said, adding that acoustic research could help find them 
so they can be studied.

Japanese researchers are in the formal process of describing the species. This 
will include giving the whale a Latin and common name and formally defining its 
measurements and how it differs from other beaked whales.
 