
Oxfam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam>, one of the UK’s biggest 
charities, plans to harness the power of the smartphone to bring donors closer 
to its work.

The global poverty reduction charity is launching an app, My Oxfam, that it 
says will make donating easy and rewarding. The app will also bring supporters 
closer to the charity’s projects, offer a new level of transparency around its 
work, and aims to help regain donors’ trust after a rocky couple of years for 
the charity sector.

Trust in charities fell last year to the lowest level since records began in 
2005,a Populus survey of 1,000 people conducted for the Charity Commission found
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/28/trust-in-charities-at-record-low-after-scandals>
, after a series of scandals including stratospheric executive salaries, the 
collapse of Kids Company, and the suicide of Olive Cooke, who died after 
receiving 3,000 mailings from charities, prompting questions about data-sharing 
and fundraising techniques. The commission’s director called the findings a 
“call to action” for the sector.

International aid and development has also seen damaging headlines around 
wasteful spending, high salaries and questionable initiatives. An Oxfam 
spokesman told the Guardian: “People want more transparency from humanitarian 
agencies about where their money’s going.”
 MyOxfam smartphone app Photograph: MyOxfam 
The app aims to build trust among supporters by giving them an insight into 
the charity’s work and the way funds are spent, through video diaries from 
Oxfam staff on the ground, stories about the people the charity is supporting, 
and live updates on emergencies.

Oxfam’s head of fundraising, Paul Vanags, said: “Charities are striving to 
meet the public’s demand for a closer, more modern and responsive relationship 
with the charities they support … My Oxfam provides a window on to the lives 
changed by our supporters’ generosity and allows users to control their giving 
from the palm of their hand.”

Users can track how much they have donated through sponsorship, items donated 
to shops, or cash payments, and can adjust their monthly donations. When there 
is a humanitarian emergency, Oxfam can issue an appeal through the app, and 
then allow donors to follow the charity’s work on the issue long after the 
initial crisis is over.

Oxfam says the app is the first of its kind. Previous charity apps have 
focused more heavily on fundraising, such as theUN World Food Programme’s 
ShareTheMeal app <https://sharethemeal.org/en/>, which encourages people to 
make an on-the-spot donation of 50¢ through their phone to feed a child. The 
app recently passed 10m donations.
 