
A lender offering controversial self-certification mortgages – a type of home 
loan banned by the City regulator – claims more than 4,000 potential borrowers 
have registered their interest following its launch on 18 January.


But there are question marks over whether the lender, Selfcert.co.uk, will be 
able to cope with the demand it has created.

On Wednesday afternoon its website was offline <https://www.selfcert.co.uk>, 
with a holding message stating that it “won’t be able to satisfy demand for the 
vast majority of those that have already contacted us”, while its phone 
helpline carried a recorded message telling callers that “this mailbox is full”.


Self-cert mortgages – dubbed “liar loans” – were aimed at self-employed 
workers who had trouble proving their income to lenders. They were hugely 
popular before the credit crisis and hugely controversial, amid evidence that 
many firms let borrowers inflate their salaries to obtain bigger home loans.


These loans were banned by the Financial Conduct Authority 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/> in 2014, following a review of the mortgage market 
that was launched in 2009 by then then regulator, the Financial Services 
Authority.

However, those behind Selfcert.co.uk have got round the rules by setting up a 
companyreportedly based in the Czech Republic 
<http://www.mortgagestrategy.co.uk/4000-borrowers-contact-controversial-self-cert-lender-in-48-hours/>
.


The firm was said to be offering a tracker mortgage set at 2% above the base 
rate, and was prepared to lend up to £500,000 with a minimum deposit of 15%, 
though it has not been possible to confirm these details because the website is 
out of action.


A message on the website stated: “Offline. We will be back shortly. Due to 
demand we are having a few issues with our new site at the moment. The site 
will be live today, Wednesday 20th of January.”


It added: “We do apologise but we won’t be able to satisfy demand for the vast 
majority of those that have already contacted us. We are very very sorry but if 
you haven’t already emailed or called us, we won’t be able to provide any 
assistance this time. We are working with others to try and increase capacity. 
We’ve had over 4,000 people contact us in the first two days and register an 
interest with us. We are working through these and will contact all of these 
people within the next 72 hours.”


The Selfcert.co.uk domain name was bought by a company called Quick Loans, 
based in Barnsley, South Yorkshire, whose founder is Graeme Wingate.

A message on the Quick Loans website 
<https://www.quickloans.co.uk/quick-news/quick-loans-to-bring-back-self-cert-in-january-2016>
 by Wingate in November 2015 said: “We aren’t technically moving, there will be 
a brand new company formed offshore not linked to any UK company. The UK 
company will cease to operate and hand back its licence/permission to the FCA. 
The new entity won’t have a UK location, so will be 100% located in that 
country. We intend to offer mortgages to other EU countries, so it won’t just 
be the UK.”

 