
The new 12-sided £1 coin will enter circulation on 28 March and the old-style 
coin will be defunct by mid-October, the Treasury has announced.

The government is launching a campaign to encourage the public to return the 
round coins. The Treasury estimates that £1.3bn of coins are being stored in 
savings jars, with £1 coins accounting for almost a third of these. They must 
be exchanged before 15 October when they will cease to be legal tender.

The first new £1 coin since 1983 is an attempt to end counterfeiting. It is 
estimated that 3% of the current coins in circulation are fake. The new coin 
will be the most secure in the world, it is claimed, with several security 
features, including a hologram.

David Gauke, the chief secretary to the Treasury, said: “28 March should be an 
important date in everybody’s calendar – as we will have a new quid on the 
block. Our message is clear: if you have a round £1 coin you need to spend it 
or return it to your bank before 15 October.”

Ultra-rare Jane Austen £5 note found in Christmas card in Scottish Borders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/30/jane-austen-5-notes-found-in-christmas-card-in-scottish-borders>
About 40% of vending and other cash-receiving machines will have to be 
upgraded. The British Parking Association says each meter change will cost 
£90-£130 for the simplest software upgrade and considerably more if they are to 
issue change. The Royal Mint has put the cost of changing all the UK’s machines 
at £15m-£20m, although many experts believe this is optimistic.

Helen Dickinson, chief executive of the British Retail Consortium, said she 
believed businesses would be ready. “While there will be a natural transition 
period where some vending systems may only be able to accept the existing coin, 
our industry is committed to ensuring we’re fully prepared ahead of the launch.”

The Royal Mint has produced more than 2.2bn round £1 coins since 1983, when it 
replaced the note. This was withdrawn in March 1988, but is still redeemable at 
the Bank of England.

The Royal Mint will make more than 1.5bn of the new coins, whose design is 
based on the threepenny bit, which went out of circulation in 1971.
 