
More than 40% of hospitals had to declare an alert in the first week of 
January because they were experiencing major problems caused by having too many 
patients and too few spare beds.


Figures released by NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England on 
Friday also show that 32 people have died from flu so far this winter and 
scores of others had to be treated in intensive care last week alone.

The data reveals that hospitals in England came under huge pressure in the 
first week of the new year. Serious levels of overcrowding worsened to levels 
generally regarded as dangerously high.

Overall, 95% of hospital beds were full from 2-8 January, up from 91% the week 
before.

A&E units became so busy they had to divert patients to other emergency 
departments 39 times, slightly fewer than the 42 a week earlier.

Bed shortages were exacerbated by outbreaks of norovirus, the diarrhoea and 
vomiting bug, forcing hospital managers to close 933 beds that were occupied 
and another 164 that were empty, making a total of 1,197 – almost one in 100 of 
the NHS’s total supply of 130,000 beds.

In that week, 58 of England’s 153 acute hospital trusts had to go on to what 
NHS England calls an Opel 3 alert and eight on to the highest form of alert, 
Opel 4. Both mean trusts are struggling to cope with the weight of demand.

Both take their name from NHS England’s Operating Pressures Escalation Levels 
framework. It sets out what steps trusts should take to manage the large 
numbers of patients.

The 58 trusts that went on Opel 3 alert did so because, according to guidance 
form NHS England, they were “experiencing major pressures compromising patient 
flow” – their ability to get patients in and out quickly enough – and needed to 
take “urgent actions” to keep functioning.

Eight went on Opel 4, also known as black alert, after becoming so stretched 
they were “unable to deliver comprehensive care” and there was “increased 
potential for patient care and safety to be compromised”.

A total of 375,687 people sought help at an A&E unit in the first week of 
January, up from 371,599 the week before. However, the number of people who 
needed to be admitted as an emergency fell from 92,480 to 89,712.

The Guardian reported this week that close to 30 trusts had been forced to 
declare a black alert since Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-crisis-20-hospitals-declare-black-alert-as-patient-safety-no-longer-assured>
, suggesting that already severe pressure on the NHS intensified this week.

NHS England has warned that the current spell of freezing weather could 
trigger a rise in the number of people falling seriously ill and also interfere 
with the running of services.

“This weather could increase the health risks to vulnerable patients and 
disrupt the delivery of services,” it said.

Prof Paul Cosford, Public Health England’s director for health protection and 
medical director, said people should keep their homes heated to at least 18C 
(64F), wear lots of thin layers rather than fewer thicker ones, and wear 
footwear with a good grip to cope with thesnow and ice in many parts of the 
country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/12/storms-bring-snow-high-winds-and-flood-warnings-to-britain>
.
 