
Hospitals <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> are running out of 
beds and are being forced to treat adult patients on children’s wards in a 
frantic effort to keep up with what NHS bosses say is an unprecedented demand 
for care.

Croydon University hospital in south London has begun looking after adult 
patients on a ward that is usually used for children who have had surgery. It 
has moved the people it normally cares for there into extra beds it has opened 
up on one of its children’s wards.

I'm a junior doctor in the NHS, and I'm terrified for this winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/nhs-crisis-winter-deaths-worcestershire-private-sector>
It made the switch “temporarily” last week in response to the huge 
difficulties hospitals are having finding enough beds for patients who are so 
sick that they need to be admitted for treatment.


Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, will make a statement on the current state 
of the NHS in the Commons on Monday afternoon. He has rejected the British Red 
Cross’s description of ahumanitarian crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
 in emergency NHS care, arguing that most hospitals are coping better this 
winter than they did last year.

Theresa May has denied there is any crisis within the health service, 
insisting the difficulties were similar to those experienced every year.

Lewisham hospital, also in south London, had to take similar action to Croydon 
on Monday. It is now using one of its children’s short-stay beds to care for 
one of the 25 adults who needed to be admitted on Monday morning as an 
emergency but whom it faced serious difficulties accommodating.

Hospitals sometimes open up extra beds as an emergency response to high 
demand, especially in winter, under what theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> calls its “escalation” procedures. 
But it is unusual for children’s wards to be pressed into service in this way.

A spokesman for Croydon University hospital said children and adults were not 
being treated on the same ward as a result of the steps it had taken. He said: 
“Like all hospitals, we are currently extremely busy. We have opened extra 
surgical beds on one of our children’s wards to care for our younger patients. 
This has allowed us to temporarily switch what would routinely be used as a 
children’s surgical ward to treat only adult patients before and after their 
operations.”

Lewisham and Greenwich NHS trust, which runs Lewisham hospital, emailed its 
staff on Monday morning to tell them it was taking several unusual steps as it 
had to declare “an internal incident” because it had started the day in a 
critical situation after “another difficult weekend managing emergency care 
across London and the south-east”.

Over the weekend, Lewisham hospital saw “very high numbers of people attending 
the emergency department and requiring admission”. As a result, on Monday 
morning it had 25 “decisions to admit patients needing to be transferred to a 
ward”. Of those, 20 were in the A&E unit, four were in the Riverside recovery 
ward and one was in a paediatric short-stay ward.

In addition, staff were told that its resuscitation unitwas “over capacity 
with nowhere to offload the next blue light London ambulance service patient”. 
Besides that, Hawthorn ward – an escalation ward – had been opened and already 
had 16 patients in it. Its critical care unit was over capacity and urgently 
needing to transfer or discharge patients.
 