
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> has 
urged Donald Trump to prove that he can act for all US citizens regardless of 
their heritage after his surprise victory in the US presidential elections.


The US presidential result has particular resonance in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, where Trump’s heaviest overseas 
spending has taken place on two prominent golf resorts, in Aberdeenshire and in 
Ayrshire, where he bought the Turnberry Open championship venue in 2014.

Echoing other Scottish party leaders’ misgivings about the result, the first 
minister said many US voters and others around the world would feel “a real 
sense of anxiety” which went beyond the normal disappointment of defeat.

“I hope the president-elect will take the opportunity to reach out to those 
who felt marginalised by his campaign and make clear – in deeds as well as 
words – that he will be a president for everyone in modern, multicultural 
America,” Sturgeon said.

“Today must also be a moment for those who share progressive values – all of 
us who believe in tolerance and diversity – to speak up loudly and clearly for 
the values we hold dear.”

Trump found himself embroiled in his most intense conflicts with a foreign 
government in Scotland after immersing himself in a bitter feud with Alex 
Salmond, his former ally and Sturgeon’s predecessor as first minister,over 
Scotland’s heavy investments in renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/16/donald-trump-loses-appeal-windfarms-scottish-golf-course>
.

Offering Trump qualified congratulations on his win, Sturgeon joined with 
Kezia Dugdale, the Scottish Labour leader, and Willie Rennie, the Scottish 
Liberal Democrat leader, in paying tribute to the defeated Democratic 
candidate, Hillary Clinton.


“Her candidacy represented a major step forward for women in America and 
across the world – for that, as well as for her many years of public service, 
she is owed a deep debt of gratitude,” Sturgeon said.

Dugdale, who last week spent several days in the US campaigning for Clinton, 
went further than Sturgeon, attacking Trump for his conduct and behaviour. 
“Today is a dark day for those of us who believe in compassion, tolerance and 
equality,” she said.

Salmond gave his personal blessing to Trump’s Aberdeenshire course despite 
widespread opposition and hostility because of its impact on a legally 
protected coastal nature reserve.

After promising to invest £1bn by building a substantial sports and holiday 
resort, the tycoon has spent £30m there and clashed repeatedly with his 
neighbours. He fell out with Salmond after lodging repeated legal challenges to 
an offshore windfarm backed by the former SNP leader, and a major onshore 
project in Shetland.

Both Sturgeon and Salmond have since lambasted Trump. After he attacked 
Mexicans and Muslims last year, Sturgeon rescinded his honorary role as a 
Scottish business ambassador and described his rhetoric as “obnoxious and 
offensive”. Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen has rescinded his honorary 
doctorate.

And in September, Salmond described Trump as an emotionally stunted manchild 
who presented “a real and present danger to the security of the American 
republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/07/donald-trump-is-real-danger-to-security-of-america-alex-salmond>
”. Salmond and other SNP MPs also signed a petition started by Scottish 
campaigners to ban Trump from entering the UK.

 