
Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, has said she is tempted 
to field SNP candidates in England to represent people who “feel 
disenfranchised”.

In an interview for the Big Issue with X-Men star Alan Cumming, a longtime 
supporter of the SNP who joined Sturgeon on the independence referendum 
campaign trail in 2014, she said: “There are a lot [of people] in England – a 
lot who contact me – who feel completely disenfranchised, that there is nobody 
speaking up for them.”

The SNP leader then quipped: “Our London branch is booming at the moment.” 

Party insiders, rather bemused at the attention attracted by a remark they 
interpreted as tongue-in-cheek, were similarly impish in pointing out that 
“anything is possible” if Theresa May’s government continued on its disastrous 
road towards Brexit. But joking aside, they made clear that there were no such 
plans.

An official spokesperson said: “While it is no surprise that many people in 
England and Wales would welcome the chance of voting for the SNP, we remain 
firmly focused on working forScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> 
and have no plans to field candidates anywhere else in the UK.”

But there have been plenty of people who took the first minister’s offer very 
seriously indeed, including Andrew Marr who responded with a welcoming 
“Finally!” on Twitter.

This is not the first time that the issue has been raised. The question of 
whether non-residents of Scotland can vote for the SNP featured in a list of 
most searched-for terms provided by Google after Sturgeon impressed voters 
across the UK in the first leaders’ debate of the 2015 general election 
campaign.

The short answer, of course, is no: the nationalist party, whose primary aim 
is Scottish independence, has only ever fielded candidates in Scotland.

But Sturgeon was not unaware of the usefulness of appealing to voters 
elsewhere: the question of whether former Labour leader Ed Miliband would make 
a post-election pact with the SNP became one of the key debates of last year’s 
general election, and is also believed to have pushed many voters towards David 
Cameron’s Conservatives.

Indeed, this was reflected in her opening remarks at that first debate, during 
which she insisted: “I know it’s not just people in Scotland who feel let down 
by Westminster politics. My message to the people of England, Wales and 
Scotland is one of friendship,” she said.

In the Big Issue interview, which was conducted before US president-elect 
Donald Trump’s telephone call to Sturgeon last Friday, the first minister also 
said that she would happily meet the tycoon on his next visit to Scotland.

Sturgeon said: “Obviously he spends time in Scotland, he has Scottish ancestry 
and if he comes – as I’m sure he will – he’s the president of America and if 
the opportunity is there, I’d meet him.

“I’ve written to him to congratulate him. I don’t think it’s any secret that I 
would rather that he hadn’t been elected. But he has, and so I’m going to 
respect that, but I’m not going to abandon my own values, just as I’m sure he’s 
not going to abandon the things he believes in. Hopefully we can have a 
relationship based on values, although I do hope he does abandon some of the 
values that he campaigned on.”

Sturgeon stripped Trump of his honorary role as a Scottish business ambassador 
last year, after his attack on Mexicans and Muslims, describing his rhetoric as 
“obnoxious and offensive”.

Asked by Cumming for her hopes for 2017, Sturgeon said: “That it is slightly 
calmer than 2016.”
 