
On a dreich November evening in Gourock, a red-coated mongrel is wandering 
between the seats in a room above a pub, pausing to sniff handbags for hidden 
treats.

The owner of the Wee Ginger Dug <https://weegingerdug.wordpress.com/> is Paul 
Kavanagh, whose popular blog of that title propelled him into the midst of the 
alt-commentariat that sprang up around the campaign for Scottish independence 
in 2014. As Kavanagh delivers an entertaining disquisition to the roomful of 
dedicated souls who have braved the wintry chill, one could be forgiven for 
thinking this was another example of the phenomenon that many argue contributed 
to the loss of the independence referendum: yes supporters talking to 
themselves.

But here in Inverclyde, where locals opted to remain in the UK by 50.1% to 
49.9% – the narrowest margin in the whole ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> – these activists are all too 
familiar with the feel-good, unrigorous self-referencing that led many 
independence supporters to believe that more of the country was of their view 
in the final giddy weeks before the September vote.

“We’ll need more local focus and a more grown-up campaign, so we’re not caught 
in the bubble we were last time,” says Mary McGlashan, as the discussion after 
Kavanagh’s talk turns to strategy for a second referendum campaign.

SNP members are far less gung-ho about independence than their leadership fears

“It’s got to be about education, and giving people the proper information,” 
insists Diane Lewis, who heads the cross-party group Inverclyde for 
Independence, and organised the meeting with that in mind. “I feel there are 
certain questions, on currency for example, that are going to be asked [in the 
next campaign] that we don’t have the answers to yet.”

Supporters of Scottish independence have never stopped wanting to talk about 
it to anyone willing to listen. So why has aNational Survey 
<http://www.snp.org/survey> – billed by First Minister Nicola Sturgeon herself 
as “the biggest listening exercise in our party’s history” – been such a muted 
affair, barely mentioned at last month’s annual conference, curiously devoid of 
the usual social media blaring. And what does that reveal about the state of 
the independence movement, as well as those willing to vote for the prospect?

In the most significant mass mobilisation of the party’s hugely expanded 
membership since the first independence referendum, Sturgeon challenged 
activists to reach everyone living in Scotland in 90 days through online 
surveys, doorstep discussions and town hall meetings. Launching it at the 
beginning of September, the SNP leader argued that the changed circumstances 
brought about by the Brexit vote justified a new debate on the union.

Around 300,000 people responded online within the first week, though it would 
be fascinating to know how many of those had previously voted against 
independence. Not many, one suspects. The Scottish Conservatives and Labour 
never tire of pointing out that no voters would be far happier if their 
decision on 18 September 2014, were taken as their final answer. Local branches 
attest to many hundreds more survey leaflets – notably devoid of heavy SNP 
branding – being hand-delivered across the country by an indefatigable core of 
activists which remains the envy of every other political party.

The final results – which the SNP does not intend to share publicly – may well 
provide party number-crunchers with useful data, not least about the third of 
SNP supporters who voted for Brexit, and how many of them are likely to support 
the SNP government’s ultimate preference for independence in Europe.

But it is difficult not to conclude that the survey, which ends on St Andrew’s 
day, 30 November, has been something of a fools errand for those loyal 
driveway-trampers. Privately, they are the first to admit that the exercise has 
drawn a mixed response, with many refusing to speak to them at all. Those most 
willing to engage, they say, are previous no voters whose position has changed 
since Brexit. But polls suggest that only around a tenth of those who opposed 
independence in 2014 have switched sides, and almost as many have moved in the 
opposite direction.

These anecdotal findings only reinforce the sense that Sturgeon’s prediction 
on the morning following the EU referendum result thata second independence 
poll was “highly likely” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-36621030> was made in 
haste – not least if by “highly likely” she meant “highly winnable”.

And they reflect a broader exhaustion: after two referendums and two national 
elections within 18 months, Scottish voters have minimal appetite for further 
upheaval. YouGov’s latest polling found limited backing for asecond 
independence referendum before the UK leaves the EU, at 37% 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2016/09/01/davidson-now-more-popular-sturgeon-scotland/>
, with the projected results almost identical to last time – 54% voting against 
independence and 46% in favour. These are the unyielding numbers staring down 
Sturgeon as she weighs up when and whether to call a second referendum.

What, then, did she hope to achieve with this, beyond busying the troops for a 
few short months? Cynics would say just that: the idea was first announced at 
the party’s spring conference, well before Brexit, as the SNP leadership sought 
to quell calls for a speedy second referendum. Several senior advisers have 
since acknowledged that the throwaway notion had not been expected to receive 
such a positive response from members and independence activists – not always, 
though very often, the same people.

As the SNP’s membership grew like Alice after her Eat Me cake, there was much 
glee from some quarters about how the disciplinaire SNP would cope with this 
rabble of lefties, and conspiracy theorists, madly straining at their reins 
towards a second vote, and there has been a tendency ever since to treat them 
like toddlers in need of constant stimulus.

The SNP has forgotten how to fight for social justice | Kevin McKenna
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/30/snp-has-forgotten-to-fight-for-justice>
Yet the majority of new members, rather like the old, have revealed themselves 
to be profoundly pragmatic, just like those activists in Inverclyde. They have 
been waiting patiently to dissect the failures of the 2014 campaign in a formal 
party setting. Indeed, some warned when the survey was announced that any 
initiative focused on the 55% of Scots who voted to remain within the UK would 
undermine the far more pressing internal audit.

While it is axiomatic that SNP members want independence, they are far less 
gung-ho than their leadership fears. When veterans of Scotland’s independence 
movementstaged an alternative fringe festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/snp-old-politics-ideaspace-independence-vote>
 to run concurrently with the SNP’s annual conference in Glasgow last month, it 
ended up being complimentary and not the Momentum-esque insurgency that some 
had predicted.

But it did reflect many independence activists’ frustrations: at the way 
grassroots energy has been co-opted into winning elections for the SNP; at the 
lack of consensus or strategy on big questions like the economy; at the failure 
to establish a forum to dissect and build up the failed arguments of 2014.

Those arguments were always loosely divisible into those appealing to heart – 
that bubble mentality now met with such caution by experienced campaigners – 
and those to head. Perhaps more significant to the SNP than Brexit itself has 
been the political response to it in Westminster. At a point when the case for 
independence – in the context of plummeting oil prices, and Scottish government 
deficit – was looking distinctly headachey, Tory xenophobia has been a gift for 
Sturgeon who is once again able to ramp up the emotional appeal of separating 
from the nastily populist south.

Uniting against Westminster-anchored intolerance and greed is familiar 
territory for the SNP, and it paid significant dividends during the 2015 
general election. But the situation now is more complicated. The party 
leadership harboured strong fears about members’ unthinking desire for a second 
referendum.

But now those members, marched to the top of the hill yet again for the 
National Survey – and up to the doorsteps where they have encountered solid no 
voters – might be best placed to explain to Sturgeon why disdain for 
Westminster will only take them so far at the next referendum ballot box.
 