
Prepare upfront. If possible, prepare young children for the inevitable. Talk 
about how your pet is getting old or poorly: a book such as Goodbye Mog is a 
good, gentle way in to the subject. Older kids know, intellectually at least, 
that pets won’t last for ever, but still struggle to imagine losing a long-time 
companion. A bit of upfront discussion can be helpful for them too.

Consider the practicalities. You rarely get much notice of these things, but 
if you do, use the time to plan the best way to say goodbye. If you need to 
have your pet put down, do you want to forewarn your children or is it better 
to tell them afterwards? Will you need some time alone to grieve before you can 
comfort them? Enlist a friend or family member to help out if you think 
you’ll struggle.

Think about what to do about, ah, disposal. Work out your options. If burial 
isn’t possible, consider cremation (from about £30 for a very small pet). Don’t 
end up like the friend of mine who found herself roaming the streets after dark 
with a stiff guinea pig in a carrier bag, looking for a place to fly tip the 
family pet.

Top 10 children's books on death and bereavement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/feb/05/top-10-childrens-books-on-death-bereavement-holly-webb>
Expect some big questions. For many children – the lucky ones – the demise of 
a pet is their first encounter with death, so prepare to get philosophical. 
Children may worry that if you get sick, you might die too or if a pet has had 
an accident, they may need reassurance about how rare that is. Think about your 
take on a pet afterlife, if any. Raised by an alliance of hippies and 
scientists, I talk vaguely about pets living on in our memories when 
questioned. For our rabbit they are chiefly memories of him methodically 
beheading every flower in the yard and assaulting the guinea pig, but at least 
he remains vivid.

Check it’s really dead. It sounds ridiculous, but owners are frequently 
wrong-footed by the uncanny phenomenon that is a hibernating hamster, the fact 
that fish play dead and tortoises can take hours to emerge from hibernation and 
appear unresponsive. Just take a minute to make absolutely certain.

Don’t be alarmed if kids react unexpectedly. It’s perfectly normal for your 
children to react in different ways or with differing degrees of intensity to a 
pet’s death. You may have spent years with a cat or dog that your child has 
barely started to notice, while they may be devastated to lose a gerbil whose 
sparkling personality has not made a lasting impression on you. I admit my 
son’s glee as he fetched a kitchen sieve to dispose of his dead fish unnerved 
me briefly, but it doesn’t mean he’s a sociopath. We hope.

Treat it with ceremony. It is important, so don’t feel embarrassed at giving 
this death its due and devising a family ritual. We bury our pets like Egyptian 
pharaohs, surrounded by the trappings of their life: favourite toys or treats, 
a model Leaning Tower of Pisa from our fish’s tank. One friend laid out her 
deceased greyhound in the sitting room for a full day surrounded by candles. 
Another asked family members to write condolence cards for her children when 
their dog died, a gesture they found hugely comforting. Whatever works for you.

Six reasons not to get a family pet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/16/six-reasons-not-to-get-a-family-pet>
Laugh. If you haven’t got the giggles at a hamster interment, you’re doing it 
wrong. “Cry, because relationships with pets are real,” says Jane of the 
greyhound state funeral. “But laugh at the absurdity of it all.” As I agonised 
over a lingering, hideously sick rat recently, my friends buoyed me up with 
irreverent messages. “Can you flush it?” pondered one.

“No, they can tread water for three days. A pillow, lovingly wrapped around a 
brick?”

“I can’t believe you’re spending money on vet bills for a rat!” emailed 
another US-based friend. “I could have got you one from the subway. You could 
have called him ‘C-Train!’” It helped enormously.

A memory book can help. Children’s grief can surface later, as realisation 
dawns gradually. Create a scrapbook with some photographs and anecdotes about 
your pet – include happy memories and the funny or naughty stuff – then when 
your child is feeling sad, you can encourage them to look through the book and 
add their own drawings, thoughts or feelings.
 