
Sanctions on welfare payments <https://www.theguardian.com/society/benefits> 
which have allegedly caused thousands of claimants to fall into hardship and 
depression are being handed out without evidence that they actually work, 
Whitehall’s official spending watchdog has found.

The Department for Work and Pensions is also failing to monitor thousands of 
people whose benefits are being cut or withheld while many are being pushed 
outside the benefits system, said theNational Audit Office 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/>. 

Auditors concluded there has been a failure to measure whether the government 
is saving money while the application of the sanctions regime varies across the 
country and from job centre to job centre.


The report, issued on Wednesday 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/benefit-sanctions/>, has been seized upon by 
critics of the government’s sanctions regime who say it is punitive, wasteful 
and not aimed at finding people work.


Why sanction benefits when there’s no proof the harsh approach works? | Anne 
Perkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/benefits-sanctions-imposed-proof-work-welfare-nao-jobcentres>
The report was compiled before Theresa May’s government lowered the benefit 
cap by up to £6,000 earlier this month – another change which will hit many of 
those claiming benefits. The cap is now £20,000.

The findings could cause difficulties for Damian Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/damian-green>, the welfare secretary, who 
insisted this week that the sanctions contributed to a fairer society and were 
an important part of the benefits system.

Labour MP Meg Hillier, who chairs the public accounts committee, said: 
“Benefit sanctions punish some of the poorest people in the country. But 
despite the anxiety and misery they cause, it seems to be pot luck who gets 
sanctioned.


“While studies suggest sanctions do encourage some people back into work, 
other people stop claiming but do not start working and the Department for Work 
and Pensions has no record of them. If vulnerable people fall through the 
safety net, what happens to them?”

More than 1 million unemployed benefits claimants have to meet certain 
conditions, such as showing they are looking for work, to receive jobseeker’s 
allowance, employment and support allowance, universal credit and income 
support.

Almost a quarter of claimants (24%) between 2010 and 2015 received a sanction, 
the report said. A four-week penalty can mean a claimant over-25 losing £300.


In 2015, 800,000 claimants were referred to the DWP for possible sanctions, 
the report said. Of those, half were then sanctioned across at least one of 
four benefits.

Auditors were asked to find out whether the sanctions represented value for 
money by assessing whether they were consistent, accurate and based on evidence.


They concluded that the DWP does not track the costs and benefits of 
sanctions, but only estimates the costs and benefits.


The NAO estimates the DWP withheld £132m from claimants through sanctions in 
2015, and paid them £35m in hardship payments.


But the costs of administering the system was up to £50m in 2015 while the 
impact on wider public spending through additional support or savings had not 
been calculated at all by the DWP, auditors said.

Ministers have argued that international studies have shown that sanctions 
work. But the NAO concluded there was no evidence that they were value for 
money for British taxpayers.


“[The government] cannot simply rely on international evidence … Until the 
Department can show greater consistency in its use of sanctions and demonstrate 
that their effectiveness is proportionate to their costs we cannot conclude 
that the Department is achieving value for money,” the report said.


 Auditors examined empirical studies and concluded that people who received 
sanctions were more likely to get work, the effect could be short-lived, lead 
to lower wages and increase the number of people moving off benefits into 
inactivity.

The report found the use of penalties differs across job centres and 
employment schemes. Some work programme providers make more than twice as many 
sanction referrals as others dealing with similar groups in the same area, it 
said.


More than a quarter of work programme claimants hit by sanctions last year had 
their decisions overturned compared with 11% of job centre penalties, the 
report added.

“Our review of the available evidence suggests the department’s use of 
sanctions is linked as much to management priorities and local staff discretion 
as it is to claimants’ behaviour,” it said.


 Auditors expressed surprise that the overall impact of sanctions on public 
spending remained unknown within Whitehall. The report said the DWP needed to 
do more than react to problems and said: “[We] cannot conclude that the 
department is achieving value for money.”

While the government was meeting its target timescales for most sanction 
decisions, auditors found it was missing its credits on universal credit, which 
bundles six current benefits into a single payment. In August 2016, 42% of 
decisions about universal credit sanctions took longer than 28 working days, 
the report said.

The DWP signed off the report but said the NAO had made notable omissions 
which should be taken in to account when assessing the sanctions regime.

“Sanctions are an important part of our benefits system and it is right that 
there is a system in place for tackling those few who do not fulfil their 
commitment to find work,” said a spokesman.

“This report fails to recognise the improvements we have made to sanctions, 
particularly to help those who are vulnerable. The number of sanctions has 
fallen, and they are only ever used as a last resort after people fail to do 
what is asked of them in return for benefits,.”

Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, has criticised May’s stance on benefit 
sanctions and has called upon ministers to see the Palm D’Or-winning Ken Loach 
film “I, Daniel Blake” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
, which portrays a joiner facing fit-to-work tests.

Green told MPs the film was “monstrously unfair” but admitted that he had not 
seen it.

Pressure groups and campaigners called for the government to take note and act 
upon the NAO’s recommendations.

Alison Garnham, chief executive of Child Poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> Action Group, said: “As today’s 
NAO report makes clear, the DWP has little idea what impact sanctions have on 
individuals and, with some areas imposing twice as many sanctions as others, 
appears to have little concern for consistency.

“Sanctions create destitution but the DWP is operating almost blind.” 

The Joseph Rowntree Foundation suggested the government should use the 
opportunity to soften the sanctions regime to ensure that sanctions were less 
severe and no longer forced claimants into destitution.

Debbie Abrahams, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said: “Labour has 
repeatedly called on the government to have an independent review of benefit 
sanctions and the NAO also makes this recommendation.


“It’s time the government looks again at their sanctions regimes and ensures 
fairness and financial sustainability for both claimants and the government.”

Labour MP Frank Field, who chairs the work and pensions committee, said: “We 
do not know how many people are being pushed permanently outside the benefits 
system, for example, leading to some being totally disconnected from both work 
and welfare, and left destitute.”

 