
Consumer debt has raised its ugly head again. According to the latest figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-credit-cards-borrowing-debt-economic-crash-fears>
, the total has soared back to a level last seen just before the 2008 financial 
crash. To the untrained eye, the dramatic increase in spending using credit 
cards and loans might appear to prefigure a disaster of epic proportions.

Excessive consumer debt played a big part in the collapse of Northern Rock, 
and looking back, this landmark banking disaster appears to have been the 
harbinger of an even bigger catastrophe when, a year later, Lehman Brothers 
fell over.

This is not a view shared by the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, which says it 
need only keep a watching brief. Its complacency is born of forecasts of the 
ratio between household debt and GDP made by the Office for Budget 
Responsibility. At the moment, the household debt to GDP ratio is around 140%, 
compared with almost 170% in 2008. The OBR’s latest analysis predicts that, 
over the next five years, the combination of consumer and mortgage debt will 
rise only gradually and fall well short of its pre-crisis peak.

There is nothing wrong with judging household debt as a proportion of annual 
national income to gauge sustainability and the likelihood that borrowers can 
afford to pay it back. There is nothing wrong with it as long as you assume 
that GDP has been evenly shared out since the crash and that the people doing 
the borrowing have higher incomes, thanks to the higher GDP, to cope with 
repayments.

Except that the Bank of England knows most people’s incomes have flatlined for 
years. It need look no further than official figures, which make it clear that 
the vast majority have missed out on the gains from GDP growth. Incomes per 
head have barely recovered since 2008 and are only marginally ahead.

Figures put together by the TUC last year 
<http://touchstoneblog.org.uk/2016/10/real-wages-are-still-down-everywhere-and-by-nearly-10-per-cent-in-the-east-midlands/>
 from the official annual survey of hours and earnings paint an even gloomier 
picture. If they are only half right, the capacity of workers on low and 
average pay to manage debt payments is significantly diminished. It has 
estimated that, nationally, workers are more than £2,000 a year worse off after 
inflation is taken into account than they were in 2008 and more than £4,000 
worse off in London.

This should tell the central bank and the Treasury that a rise to £192bn in 
unsecured consumer debt in November – only a little short of the £208bn peak –is
 most definitely a cause for concern.

And it therefore makes no sense to brush aside fears about rising debt levels 
by pointing to higher GDP. A debt-to-GDP figure is just not that relevant when 
the incomes of the people taking on the debt are stagnant.

Threadneedle Street has a second point to make, which is that banks can cope 
with the debts after years spent shoring up reserves, and a third line of 
defence, which highlights the lower cost of servicing outstanding debts.

Also, the most recent figures show the stock of unsecured credit equalled 
around 15% of households’ disposable incomes in the third quarter, well below 
the peak of 21.2% in 2005. And it might also be suggested that the 10.8% growth 
in consumer credit in November remains below the peak of 21.5% in 1988.

All this is true, except that using a growth-rate figure from the 1980s is 
akin to charting electric car production today – the percentage growth rate is 
accelerating from a low base.

And figures for the stock of unsecured lending would be more relevant were it 
not for the fact that the economy is now more divided than ever before, and 
especially between young and old. Baby boomers who have excessive savings and 
low debts have very different concerns to young families who struggle with low 
savings and excessive debts.

The situation is also likely to get worse. Disposable incomes are going to be 
squeezed next year as wages rise at a slower rate than prices in the shops, 
putting even more pressure on consumers to rely on credit. A downturn in the 
savings ratio has already pointed to weaker household finances.

Banks, credit card companies and car loan providers are all offering 
mouthwatering rates to attract customers. Some, like Lloyds Bank, which wants 
to buy the credit card firm MBNA, are striving to gain market share and hoover 
up even more debt-laden customers than the competition.

You might think that low interest rates, which undoubtedly keep millions of 
families afloat, also serve to push many families deeper into debt. You would 
be right. You might also question who is going to call time on them. The Bank 
of England is compromised now it has added the role of the chief financial 
regulator to its interest-rate-setting job. Why would it allow criticism by a 
regulator it controls of its own interest-rate policy?

The Treasury is unlikely to step in when it needs spending on credit to 
continue or risk a recession. Brexit and the uncertainty it creates means 
ministers must feed the credit monster, whatever the longer-term consequences.
 