
Devolution and power-sharing in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> were expected to collapse on 
Monday after its first minister refused to temporarily stand down from her post 
over a bungled green energy scheme.

After an acrimonious row over the “cash for ash” scandal, Sinn Féin is 
expected to refuse to nominate a new deputy first minister in the Stormont 
parliament later and sotrigger an election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/16/election-looms-for-northern-ireland-amid-stormont-disarray>
.


Under the complex rules of power-sharing in Northern Ireland, a government 
cannot survive if one section of the community refuses to participate in the 
administration.


Martin McGuinness, who is in ill health and being treated for a rare condition 
that attacks the heart and other vital organs,resigned as deputy first minister 
last Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinness-to-resign-as-northern-ireland-deputy-first-minister>
. He took the action in protest over the first minister, Arlene Foster, 
refusing to step aside while a public inquiry is held into the renewable heat 
incentive – an energy scheme whose costs have spiralled out of control.


It is unclear if McGuinness will stand himself as a candidate in the 
forthcoming electoral contest. WhileSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> is keen for his name to be on 
the party’s slate in the city of Derry , it is understood his family is 
concerned over his health and the impact a bruising election campaign could 
have on him.


If Sinn Féin fails to nominate a new deputy first minister by 5pm on Monday, 
the Northern Ireland secretary, James Brokenshire, will have to call a date for 
fresh elections to a new assembly.


The main parties represented in the devolved parliament have already started 
electioneering even before the official start of the campaign. Over the 
weekend, Sinn Féin revealed its party slogan for the contest – “Get Even” – 
while Democratic Unionist leader Foster attended a party rally at a hall 
belonging to the Orange Order in her native Fermanagh on Saturday night.


At a social club run for the benefit of ex-IRA prisoners in west Belfast, Sinn 
Féin also introduced its theme tune for the election – Aretha Franklin’s 
classic anthem Respect.

Outgoing Sinn Féin finance minister Máirtín Ó Muilleoir said: “People are 
looking for an opportunity to say they have zero tolerance when it comes to 
corruption, zero tolerance to bigotry, and that they want respect and equality. 
That is what will be on Sinn Féin’s ballot paper.”


The cross-community Alliance party said it wanted to keep the focus during the 
campaign on allegations of corruption and cronyism associated with the RHI 
scheme as well as other scandals.


Naomi Long, the Alliance leader, said: “Our party isn’t to blame for the snap 
election called as a result of the DUP’s and Sinn Féin’s mess. But, unlike 
some, we are not running scared of an election. We will be facing the people 
confident – and offering the electorate an alternative to the secrecy, 
corruption and cronyism that they are sick of at Stormont.”

On Sunday’s BBC1 Andrew Marr Show, Brokenshire stressed that he was not 
seeking any alternative form of government apart from a devolved administration 
following the election.


However, given the bad blood that exists between the two parties in the 
outgoing power-sharing executive – the DUP and Sinn Féin – negotiations to form 
a post-election government are expected to be long, tortuous and with no 
guarantee that they will agree to form a coalition after the poll.


Hardline unionist assembly member Jim Allister predicted that moves to rebuild 
a new coalition may fail this time around. “Those who have chosen to believe 
the lie that Sinn Féin wants to make Northern Ireland work, have had a rude 
awakening over the past few days,” he said.


“Sinn Féin will be seeking further concessions after the election, when there 
is nothing more for unionists to give.”

 