
The number of international students accepted as undergraduates at UK 
universities has gone down for the first time in five years, according to the 
higher education admissions service, Ucas.


Although the figure only relates to undergraduates, who make up a small 
proportion of international students in UK higher education, the sector is 
nervous as speculation mounts aboutgovernment plans to cut the overall numbers 
of non-EU students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/12/uk-halve-international-student-visa-tougher-rules>
 as part of its drive to reduce immigration.

According to the Ucas end-of-admissions report for 2016, published on 
Thursday, the number of students accepted from outside the EU fell by 2.3% to 
38,300, which marked the first fall since 2011. The fall in numbers was due to 
a decrease in both applicants and the acceptance rate.

Brexit could see EU student numbers nose dive, Cambridge warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/08/brexit-could-see-eu-student-numbers-nose-dive-cambridge-warns>
In contrast the number of EU students accepted to start their studies in 
September rose by 7%, with big increases from countries including Poland and 
Bulgaria. Most will have applied before the Brexit vote.


Now all eyes will be on the January university admissions deadline to start 
studies next year to see how international and EU student figures hold up. 
Cambridge University, which has an earlier applications deadline, has already 
seen a17% drop in EU applications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/08/brexit-could-see-eu-student-numbers-nose-dive-cambridge-warns>
.

James Dobson of Bright Blue, the conservative liberal pressure group, said: 
“The fall in acceptances from applicants outside the EU shows the very real 
impact of including international students in the net migration target. 
International students pay significantly higher tuition fees than their British 
counterparts and yield significant amounts of soft power to the UK government.

“Evidence shows that the public do not want to see fewer foreign students 
studying at our higher education institutions. The government should remove 
students from the net migration target.”

The latest Ucas report also raised concerns about a slowdown in the rates of 
entry among applicants from poorer backgrounds. Though young people from the 
most disadvantaged backgrounds are more likely to enter higher education than 
ever before, the gap in entry rates between rich and poor people has widened 
for the first time.

The wealthiest fifth of 18-year-olds were 3.8 times more likely to get a place 
at university in 2016 than those from the most disadvantaged backgrounds. The 
rate of entry among the wealthiest went up 1.2 percentage points from 2015, 
compared to a 0.1 percentage-point increase among the poorest.

The figures will come as a blow to the government which has been trying to get 
universities to do more to widen access. Ucas chief executive, Mary Curnock 
Cook, said: “When she entered Downing Street in July, the prime ministerpointed 
out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/cameron-announces-he-will-step-down-after-pmqs-on-wednesday>
 that white working-class boys are the least likely to go to university. Our 
report underlines this point, showing that nearly three-quarters of the group 
least likely to enter university are men, most are from lower-income families, 
and nine out of 10 are in the white ethnic group.

“Although the number of students from disadvantaged backgrounds entering 
higher education has reached record levels again this year, there are early 
signals that the good progress made in recent years may be slowing down. The 
best way to get on track to better progress is to focus efforts on improving 
GCSE outcomes for all children, which we know is the primary driver of 
increased entry rates to higher education.”

Sir Peter Lampl, chair of the Sutton Trust <http://www.suttontrust.com/> 
charity, said: “Today’s figures tell us that we need renewed and concerted 
efforts from government, schools and universities to improve participation 
rates for less advantaged students.”

The report also revealed a continuing gender gap, with women now a record 35% 
more likely to go to university than men, at a time when more UK 18-year-olds 
than ever before are winning places at university – up to 240,000 – while the 
number of British 18-year-olds is decreasing.
 