
In the afternoon of 3 September 2013 Captain Pete Willcox 
<http://greenpeaceblogs.org/2013/09/20/meet-captain-pete-willcox/> ate lunch at 
his home in Connecticut, hauled in a fresh supply of firewood for his 
93-year-old father and stepmother, and tossed two beat-up duffel bags into a 
car that would take him to the airport. Willcox had packed for enough of these 
trips over the years to have it down to the essentials: two pairs of trousers, 
a couple of sweatshirts, some hiking boots for when it got cold on deck, Crocs 
for when he was down below, some gym clothes, his laptop, his passport and 
driver's licence, his seaman's book and enough blood-pressure medication to 
last him for three months. He was headed out to sea to get himself arrested.

At 61, Willcox is the most senior ship captain at Greenpeace. In 33 years he 
has taken on seal hunters in Newfoundland, whaling ships in Japan and tuna 
poachers in the South Pacific. Once, to protest against American nuclear 
policy, he swam directly into the path of a 3,000-tonne navy destroyer sailing 
at 18 knots, coming so close he dragged his hand along the hull. (He later 
joked that he felt "like a matador".) For four years in the 1980s, Willcox was 
the captain of the Rainbow Warrior, theGreenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> ship, until the night it 
was bombed by French secret agents and sank to the bottom of a New Zealand 
harbour. If you're inclined to believe that devoting one's life to protecting 
the Earth is a noble pursuit, you might call him a hero.

That September day he was looking forward to getting back on the water. He'd 
been working mostly part time since getting custody of his two girls nine years 
before. It wasn't easy raising daughters on his own: they lived in a cramped 
apartment above Willcox's parents' house and he'd had to take merchant marine 
jobs to make ends meet. Now they were grown up: Anita, 22, was living in Paris, 
and two weeks earlier he'd driven 18-year-old Natasha to college. He could go 
back to sailing full time. The only hard part was leaving Maggy. They'd married 
just six months earlier.

This time Willcox was going to the Arctic. A month earlier, the Russian 
petroleum company Gazprom announced plans to activate itsPrirazlomnaya 
<http://www.gazprom.com/about/production/projects/deposits/pnm/> platform, an 
offshore oil rig 200 miles above the Arctic Circle. Although the Arctic holds 
as much as a quarter of the world's untapped oil and gas reserves, drilling 
there had long been considered too dangerous, too remote, too expensive. But 
now that they were running out of places to drill in the rest of the world – 
and, perversely, polar ice melting due to global warming had made Arctic 
reserves easier to reach – oil companies were jockeying for a piece of the 
action. Gazprom wanted to start pumping by the end of 2013, breaking the de 
facto moratorium. Willcox and Greenpeace might not be able to stop the company, 
but they could show the world what it was up to.
 'It was unthinkable': the Rainbow Warrior sinks in Auckland, New Zealand, in 
1985 having been attacked by French agents. Photograph: Sipa Press/REX 
Willcox flew first to Amsterdam for some meetings at Greenpeace headquarters. 
Then he headed to the Norwegian port of Kirkenes, where his ship, a 166ft 
icebreaker named the Arctic Sunrise, was docked. Most of his crew were there 
already: 27 activists from 17 countries, plus two journalists to document the 
trip. Willcox had sailed with several of them before. He'd first met the action 
co-ordinator, a Briton named Frank Hewetson, in 1990, when they worked together 
to block cyanide-spewing pipes at a steel mill in Australia. But most of the 
younger activists he was meeting for the first time. Camila Speziale, a 
21-year-old photography student from Buenos Aires, was born 11 years after 
Willcox started sailing for Greenpeace. Still, when she found out who her 
captain would be, she could hardly contain herself. "Oh my God!" she thought. 
"I'm sailing with Peter Willcox."

The Prirazlomnaya trip was going to be a so-called "banner action": two 
activists would climb to the top of the rig and unfurl a banner that read "Save 
the Arctic" in Russian. It seemed easy, but it was not risk-free. A year 
earlier, another Greenpeace crew had attempted the same thing but had to turn 
back when rig workers sprayed them with hoses and pelted them with chunks of 
metal. This time, both sides seemed to be bracing for a fight. Willcox had been 
in trouble inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> before.

In 1983, he was leading a protest trip to an illegal whale-processing station 
in Siberia, when six of his crew went ashore to take pictures. They were 
arrested at gunpoint and Willcox spent the next several hours evading a Soviet 
warship sent to intercept them, eventually escaping to international waters. 
A decade later he confronted the Russian navy over toxic waste in the Sea of 
Japan. He had a reputation within Greenpeace for taking risks, for pushing the 
envelope. He was a little nervous but also excited for the chance to mix it up. 
Before he left Norway, he sent Maggy a postcard: "If the Russians keep their 
sense of humour, I think this is going to be a fun action."

The four-day sail from Kirkenes to the platform began on 14 September. In less 
than a day, the Russian coast guard was on their tail. Still, the Greenpeace 
crew was relaxed. The view from the bridge was breathtaking. It was late summer 
so there was no ice, but they saw walruses andnarwhals 
<http://www.worldwildlife.org/stories/unicorn-of-the-sea-narwhal-facts> and the 
Northern Lights. And then, on the fourth day, there it was: a hulking 
red-and-white platform, 40 storeys tall and 117,000 tonnes, with wells snaking 
out from its base like tentacles – a monstrosity in this pristine landscape.
 All aboard: the crew of the original Rainbow Warrior. Photograph: Fernando 
Pereira/Greenpeace 
At 4.30am the next morning, a dozen Greenpeace members took off towards the 
Prirazlomnaya in five rubber inflatables. Two managed to hook on to the 
platform and were making their way to the top when the chief of the rig turned 
on the fire hoses. He also phoned his bosses in Moscow, who called the Federal 
Security Service – a successor to the KGB. The Russian troops swooped in, 
yanking on the ropes to shake the climbers loose. When a Greenpeace inflatable 
tried to intervene the Russians opened fire, sending bullets ripping through 
the water. They knifed the inflatables and took the climbers into custody, and 
the rest of the crew limped back to the Sunrise.

For 36 hours the Russian coastguard pursued the Sunrise, ordering Willcox to 
stop and let them board. Willcox, reminding them they were a Dutch ship in 
international waters, refused. The Russians then accused them of being 
terrorists and warned that if the Sunrise didn't stop, they would open fire. 
Willcox replied that they should do what they had to – but if they did fire, 
could they please not hit the silver barrels on the deck, which were full of 
gasoline. The coastguard ship turned its cannon towards the Sunrise and 
proceeded to fire between 4 and 11 warning shots across its bow.

At this point, Willcox decided that since they probably weren't getting their 
climbers back, they'd return to Norway to regroup. A few hours later, one of 
his communications officers burst in. "Pete!" she said. "They're trying to 
board!" Willcox raced to the bridge and saw a helicopter dropping ropes on to 
the deck. He told Hewetson to run back to the helipad to try to keep them from 
landing. But it was too late. A dozen Russian commandos wearing black 
balaclavas abseiled on to the deck with assault rifles, tackling the activists 
and kicking some in the ribs.

Willcox had been arrested in foreign countries before, from Peru to the 
Philippines, and had almost always been held overnight and released. He assumed 
this time would be the same. But eight days later, the Leninsky District Court 
announced it was charging the activists with a violation of Section 227 of the 
Russian Criminal Code – piracy by an organised group – which carries a 
potential penalty of 15 years in prison.

It wasn't the first time Willcox had been charged with piracy. It had happened 
twice before. First in 1982 when he was arrested for protesting against 
acid-waste dumping off the coast of New Jersey ("Technically, I wasn't 
charged," he says. "I was sued for 'piratical action,' which I thought had 
a great ring to it"), and then again a year later, when he snuck aboard a 
Japanese whaling ship in Peru and had to make a $3,000 "donation" to a local 
prosecutor to secure his release. His Russian captors weren't interested in 
cutting a deal.
 Behind bars: Willcox in court after being arrested as one of the Arctic 30. 
Photograph: Igor Podgorny/Greenpeace 
Vladimir Putin soon admitted that the activists were "obviously not pirates", 
and the charges were reduced to "hooliganism" – a catch-all allegation often 
used against Russian dissidents that carries a seven-year sentence. But, in a 
way, this was worse. Though a piracy conviction was a long shot, hooliganism 
was not. At that time, members of Pussy Riot were in a labour camp on the same 
charge.

"Until we were indicted in Murmansk, everything was going according to plan," 
Willcox says. "We'll get arrested, pay a $700 fine and be back in Norway by the 
weekend – no big deal. But seven years – that's just a game changer for 
anybody. For me, it means I don't see my parents again. For some of the young 
women on the crew, it means they don't have families."

The crew were kept in isolation for 23 hours a day, with one hour of exercise 
in a 15ft concrete pen and one shower per week. Their food came from a slop 
bucket – mostly potatoes, fish stew and a chicken dish that some suspected was 
pigeon. (Willcox, a fish-eating vegetarian, strained his meat out with a fork.) 
They communicated by passing notes through sewer pipes or tapping coded 
messages on radiators. Willcox also kept a journal that tracked his descent 
from stoicism to despair. (4 October: "Vlad made me shoelaces today. It was a 
really thoughtful present." 25 October: "I have never wanted to leave this 
place more.")

Willcox says that throughout his prison stay, his biggest worry wasn't his 
health or his future, but the thought that his crew might be pissed off with 
him. "If anybody should have known better, it was me," he says. "It was my 
responsibility to keep them out of trouble, and I completely blew it." The 
first time he ran into some of the female crew members in a hallway in 
Murmansk, they hugged him and he almost cried out of relief. Even now, he 
second-guesses himself a lot – for not leaving the night of the action, for not 
stopping and letting the Russians board and, especially, for ignoring the shots 
across the bow. "That's supposed to be a demonstrative order to stop on the 
high seas and we just told them to fuck off," Willcox says. "We really rubbed 
their noses in it. I'm sure they were fuming: 'These dirty hippies told us to 
piss up a rope. These assholes aren't going to get away.'
 Set free: Willcox meets his wife Maggy at Saint Petersburg airport. 
Photograph: Dmitri Sharomov/Greenpeace 
"But again," he says, "this is what we wanted. We were trying to push them 
into locking us up. To make for a bigger story."

"If you want to understand why I do what I do," says Willcox, "you have to go 
back to my grandparents." Henry Willcox ran a construction company in New York 
that built low-income housing, until he was accused of treason by theHouse 
Un-American Activities Committee 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/House_Un-American_Activities_Committee> (HUAC) 
for leading a peace conference in China in 1952.

In 1949, Willcox's father Roger, his wife Elsie and four other couples pooled 
$100 each to buy 67 acres on the Norwalk waterfront in Connecticut, where they 
built a community called Village Creek. It was to be "a model of democracy", 
their prospectus said, with "no discrimination because of race, colour, creed, 
or politics". Roger designed the layout, and 67 families moved in. During the
Red Scare <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_Scare> it was nicknamed Commie 
Creek, and there were rumours that the flat roofs were designed to guide Soviet 
bombers to New York City.

This is where Pete Willcox grew up. When he was five, he was on a dinghy 
carrying a sign protesting against a power plant being built in Norwalk 
Harbour. When he was seven, his parents took him to picket the local 
Woolworth's in solidarity with the Greensboro sit-ins 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greensboro_sit-ins>. When he was 12, he and his 
father went to Alabama for Martin Luther King Jr's Selma-to-Montgomery march.

Always athletic, he grew up sailing with his father in the Long Island Sound. 
When he was 13, Willcox started getting serious about ocean racing. He entered 
his first Newport-to-Bermuda race at 15 and, later, spent a season sailing for 
America's Cup legendDennis Conner <http://www.dennisconner.com/>. The summer 
after his senior year of high school, folk singer Pete Seeger, a friend of the 
family's, called with an opportunity – he had a boat on the Hudson River, a 
little sloop called the Clearwater, which he was using to educate kids about 
pollution. Did Willcox want a job on the crew? Willcox was number one in that 
year's draft lottery, while the Clearwater was federally approved 
conscientious-objector duty. And so, in 1972, thanks to Pete Seeger and the 
Vietnam War, 19-year-old Willcox became a full-time sailor.

Willcox took over as captain of the Clearwater four years later and stayed for 
four more years after that. But he was getting bored with taking elementary 
schoolers out for a sail. He'd recently read a book about Greenpeace by one of 
its founders when he came across an ad inNational Fisherman magazine saying the 
organisation was looking for more crew. Willcox applied for a job as a deckhand 
and, three months later, became the skipper of the first Rainbow Warrior.

These days, Willcox helms all three of Greenpeace's ships: the Arctic Sunrise, 
the 236ft Esperanza, and thenew Rainbow Warrior 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/about/ships/the-rainbow-warrior/>. 
When he's not on the job, he still races yachts competitively. "I'm not going 
to say I'm the best sailor in Greenpeace," he says with a grin. "But I'm the 
best sailor in Greenpeace."

When Willcox joined the organisation in 1981, it had about 200 employees. Now 
there are more than 4,000, spread across 28 offices around the world. "When I 
started out, there was one campaigner on the boat, and half the time his job 
was to bring the recreational pharmaceuticals," Willcox says. "Now there's 
a campaigner, an assistant campaigner, a comms person, a second comms person, 
a webbie, photographer… I remember saying in the early 80s that we had to get 
as disciplined and organised as IBM or Exxon, or we weren't going to matter. 
And in a lot of ways we did, and it sucks. I'm still glad we did it. But now 
you're kind of just a cog in a wheel."

As the group's methods have shifted, so has its focus. The organisation made 
its name on the wildlife and peace campaigns of the 1980s. But, in the past few 
years, climate change has emerged as its top priority. "When I first started 
out, our big worry was saving the whales," Willcox says. "Now our big worry is 
whether our kids will survive to have kids of their own. So, in that sense, 
we've been a total fucking failure." He isn't completely pessimistic: "We made 
the problem, and we can solve it. Our mission is to put it in the public 
sphere, and, hopefully, people start to do the right thing."

The Warrior was Willcox's first posting with Greenpeace. "For four years," he 
says, "that boat didn't go anywhere without me." In July 1985, he was prouder 
of it than ever: They'd just spent seven gruelling months refitting it with a 
mast to turn it into a sailing ship, and then sailed through the Panama Canal 
and across the Pacific to New Zealand. The plan was to spend a few days in 
Auckland, then head to their next action, which was interfering with a French 
nuclear test near Mururoa. On 10 July, a cold, drizzly day, the crew got the 
boat ready to ship out. That night they threw a birthday party for their head 
campaigner, and around 11pm Willcox had a nightcap and went to sleep in his 
bunk.

He was awakened soon after by a blast so powerful it rattled windows in the 
harbour. At first he thought they'd been hit by another boat. He started to 
make his way among the cabins to check on the crew. Then a second blast went 
off and he gave the order to abandon ship. The first explosion blew a hole in 
the starboard hull large enough to drive a truck through. Six tonnes of water 
poured in every second. The second blast ripped apart the propeller shaft, and 
within minutes, the Warrior had sunk to the bottom of the harbour. Of the 10 
people on board at the time, nine made it off. ButFernando Pereira 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/about/history/the-bombing-of-the-rainbow-war/Fernando-Pereira/>
, a photographer who had gone to his cabin to retrieve his camera after the 
first blast, was trapped underwater and killed.

It turned out the bombing was the work of France's General Directorate for 
External Security (DGSE), the equivalent of the CIA, which had been ordered to 
stop Greenpeace from disrupting the nuclear test. Two of the operatives were 
captured at the airport and, after months of denials by the French government, 
pleaded guilty to manslaughter and served two years. The rest escaped 
punishment entirely.

The bombing was eventually revealed to have been personally approved by the 
then-French president François Mitterrand. "It was unthinkable," Willcox says. 
"A first-world government had targeted us for murder." It also confirmed they 
were doing something right.

The sinking of the Warrior made Willcox a minor celebrity, and Greenpeace's 
fund-raising went through the roof. "The whole organisation changed 
dramatically," he says. "It got harder to maintain the… morality may not be the 
right word, but the spirit of the thing." According to Greenpeace's 
international executive director, Kumi Naidoo, theArctic 30 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/arctic-30-protesters> case has been a 
similar windfall: membership is up, and the Save the Arctic campaign has seen 
its number of supporters go from 2m to 5m. The irony, of course, is that two of 
the highest-profile moments for the organisation were two of the hardest for 
Willcox personally.

Like any employee who's been with the same company for three decades, Willcox 
has his issues with Greenpeace. He and his superiors haven't always seen eye to 
eye. "When all of a sudden they're saying, 'You're not really right any more; 
why don't you fuck off?'" His voice trails off. "They've done that two or three 
times, which, over the course of 33 years, isn't bad."

At Greenpeace, Willcox earns a third what he could in the merchant marines. 
Between his daughters' college loans and his credit cards, he's about $80,000 
in debt. "We hardly went on vacations. Taking my kids skiing was out of the 
question. They enjoyed the fact that I was part of Greenpeace and we had a lot 
of fun. I don't think they regret anything. But we definitely gave up some 
things so I could stay with the firm."

A week before Christmas, an amnesty was passed in the Russian parliament: they 
were going home. On 28 December – 100 days after the Sunrise was boarded – 
Willcox flew to Maggy's house in Maine.

It's January and Willcox is at home in Norwalk, taking his dog for a walk. 
"Not bad, huh?" he says as he gazes out at the sound. He is slowly readjusting 
to life back home. The night he got back, his daughter snuggled up on the couch 
with him and refused to let go. "When I was younger, I remember missing him a 
lot," Natasha says. "But the more I got involved with Greenpeace, the cooler it 
got that my dad was Pete Willcox."

She's studying marine biology and is considering sailing with Greenpeace when 
she graduates. And Anita recently applied for a job with Greenpeace France.

Willcox says the two months in jail were worth it: "For the publicity we got, 
and how we were able to elevate the campaign, I'll pay two months."

"The thing I admire most about Peter," Maggy says, "is at this point I think 
he thinks we're pretty well screwed. But he's still doing it anyway." She 
smiles. "The bastard."

At the end of January 2014, Royal Dutch Shell announced it was abandoning its 
plans to drill in the Arctic.

It's a victory for Greenpeace, but a bittersweet one. Because just two days 
after the Duma granted the crew of the Sunrise amnesty, Gazprom released a 
statement of its own. "Today," boasted the company's CEO, "we became pioneers 
in developing the Russian Arctic shelf." And with that – just as Willcox and 
his crew were packing to come home – the Prirazlomnaya platform started pumping 
oil.

© First published in Men's Journal Magazine (2014). Distributed by Tribune 
Media Services
 