
Ofgem <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ofgem> has published its first 
energy company league table, comparing the most expensive standard tariffs with 
the cheapest deals on the market to provide “greater transparency to consumers”.

The energy secretary, Greg Clark, said the table would show consumers where 
they could save money and would increase transparency for the “millions” of 
Britons who were overpaying for their gas and electricity by remaining on the 
expensive standard variable tariffs.

The table 
<https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/consumers/household-gas-and-electricity-guide/understand-your-gas-and-electricity-bills/energy-plans-what-standard-variable-rate-tariff-and-how-does-it-compare>
 will compare the average energy bill paid by a household on a standard 
variable tariff from the larger energy companies with deals from the 10 
cheapest suppliers. Consumers can typically save £200 a year; this figure could 
be as much as £260 for those with the supplier Extra Energy.

Energy customers advised… don’t run up a big credit balance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/03/energy-customers-advised-dont-run-up-big-credit-balance-supplier-collapse>
The energy regulator said last month that 66% of all households remained on 
expensive standard variable tariffs.

The government is also launching a call for evidence on allowing customers 
access to accurate electronic data on how much energy they use to enable them 
to share it securely with price comparison websites in return for individual 
quotes.

The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) warned in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/energy-bills-plans-for-blanket-ceiling-on-how-much-firms-can-charge-ditched>
 that 70% of people were on the more expensive “default” standard variable 
tariff, costing consumers £1.4 bn more than a competitive market.

Clark said: “Millions of people across Britain continue to pay too much for 
their energy. The measures announced today are a positive step to help more 
people benefit from increased choice and competition.


“As the government has made clear, where markets are not working for consumers 
– in energy or otherwise – we are prepared to act.”

The Citizens Advice chief executive, Gillian Guy, said: “This league table 
will lift the lid on the price difference between standard tariffs and cheaper 
deals, helping those customers who are currently paying over the odds for their 
gas and electricity identify a better rate.


“We’d also like to see energy companies do more off their own back to help 
customers who are on a low income, like moving them to a cheaper deal.”

Mark Todd, the co-founder of energyhelpline.com 
<https://www.energyhelpline.com/fri/>, said the energy price league table would 
expose just how expensive standard energy tariffs were and how much customers 
could save by switching.

“We hope this publication acts as a clarion call for consumers to ditch these 
horrible tariffs this Christmas. Standard energy tariffs offer almost no 
protection against price rises as well as very high prices.

“They are the worst of all worlds. Around two thirds of the population, about 
40 million people, are blighted by their scourge and so considerably poorer as 
a result. The basic rule is: never be on a standard variable energy tariff – 
they are a rip-off,” he said.

Energy UK figures released on Wednesday showed more than 4 million customers 
switched electricity supplier this year, “eclipsing” the past three years, 
while more than 400,000 switched last month – the highest figure since November 
2013.


Lawrence Slade, the chief executive of the industry body Energy UK, said: “A 
record number of people have switched electricity supplier in 2016. This is 
fantastic progress, but more needs to be done.

“Over 40 companies across the industry, big and small, are working hard to win 
customers. I’d encourage everyone to look at the best deal for them, whether 
that is one that offers a lower price or better customer service, there are 
choices for everyone.”
 