
Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> in England receive no 
recognition for their “incredible achievement” in helping immigrants integrate 
successfully into society, Ofsted’s chief inspector has said, after likening 
the education system to England’s football team.

Sir Michael Wilshaw rubbished “tabloid claims” that British children suffer as 
a result of immigration, saying non-immigrant pupils do better as a result of 
having immigrant peers, and described the government’s plans to open more 
grammar schools as a “monstrous mistake”.

In a speech in London 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/sir-michael-wilshaws-speech-at-the-fasna-autumn-conference>
, the outgoing head of Ofsted mixed familiar criticisms of state schools with 
high praise for their role in educating and integrating recent arrivals into 
British society, which Wilshaw claimed “has largely gone unnoticed”.

“We regularly castigate ourselves – rightly – for the poor performance of 
white British pupils. Children of immigrants, conversely, have in recent years 
done remarkably well.

“This trend is now so ingrained that it is assumed that children of immigrants 
always outperform. But in most of Europe that just isn’t the case. In many 
countries they do worse than the children of non-immigrants,” Wilshaw told an 
audience of school leaders.

‘I came into teaching to raise standards’ – Michael Wilshaw's forthright 
farewell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/15/sir-michael-wilshaw-politicians-inevitably-come-up-against-people-like-me-chief-inspector-schools>
“In Germany, France, Finland, Italy and Switzerland, for instance, children of 
immigrants do far worse in school than their native peers. Not so in England.

“Our schools are remarkable escalators of opportunity. Whatever cultural 
tensions exist outside of school, race and religion are not treated as 
handicaps inside them. All children are taught equally. And contrary to tabloid 
claims, non-immigrant children do not suffer, rather the reverse.

“Schools, it turns out, are great forces for social cohesion. Yet nobody talks 
about it. We are so used to picking over problems that we forget to notice what 
an incredible achievement this is. Most other countries aren’t as fortunate.”

After making the headlines recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/30/grammars-harm-british-schools-says-ofsted-chief-michael-wilshaw>
 for describing England’s schools as “mediocre but improving,” Wilshaw was more 
circumspect: “Let’s not kid ourselves. Although some of our achievements may be 
unsung, our shortcomings are still serious”.

“For the most part, England’s education system is a bit like its football team 
– better than many but hardly top-notch. We comfort ourselves with past 
success, illusory as that might be, dream of future glory then collapse into 
despair when we come across superior play,” Wilshaw said.


But critics of England’s schools were wrong to conclude that new grammar 
schools were the answer. “I think this would be a monumental mistake,” he said.

Wilshaw argued that “grammars are back in vogue now partly because we have 
failed to sufficiently reform comprehensives”, and partly because of the 
damaging effects of “anti-academic ideology associated with the early 
comprehensives”.

Tory councils warn of £600m black hole after demise of education bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/30/tory-councils-600m-black-hole-demise-education-bill-grant-england>
“You can see it in the disdain for competitive sports, the half-hearted 
pursuit of high academic standards and the meagre respect given to leadership 
and authority. You can see it in sneering headlines when heads try to impose a 
uniform policy,” he said.

“As a consequence of all this, and in spite of the enormous strides we have 
made in the past few years, the comprehensive name is still associated in the 
minds of many with mediocrity, laxity and failure. For many journalists and 
politicians, their reputation remains tarnished.

“This is why the proposal to set up more grammars has, despite the evidence, 
found a wider welcome than it had any right to expect.”

The government’s recent proposals also came under criticism from the London 
assembly, which passed a motion objecting to any removal of the cap on children 
admitted to free schools based on religious criteria.

Alongside new grammar schools the government wants to allow churches to open 
new faith schools, and has proposed ending the 50% cap on religious criteria 
being imposed to limit admissions.

 