
The head of the schools watchdog has linked the Brexit vote to the failure to 
raise education standards in parts of England.

Sir Michael Wilshaw, speaking before the publication of the Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> annual report on Thursday, 
highlighted the continuing geographical divide in education, with schools in 
the north and east Midlands continuing to lag behind those in London and the 
south.

He told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme that the failure to improve schools in 
some areas may have contributed to the feeling of alienation and a sense of a 
“divided nation” that was exposed by the referendum vote to leave the EU 
earlier this year.

He also made clear he believed that schools should not be used as a border 
control by the Home Office. Commenting on a report based on documents leaked to 
the BBC showing that theHome Office wanted to “deprioritise” the children of 
parents unlawfully in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/01/may-wanted-to-deprioritise-school-places-for-children-of-people-illegally-in-uk>
 for school places, Wilshaw said: “I’m amazed and shocked by it. Schools should 
not be used for border control.”

Wilshaw, whose term at the school inspectorate ends later this month, said 
standards were rising overall, with almost 90% of primary schools doing 
“phenomenally well” across the country.

Some secondary schools were still struggling, however, and because of the 
geographical divide in educational standards, parents in Manchester, Liverpool 
and towns in the north of England were less likely to see their children get a 
good job or go on to university than those in London.

One in three schools in Manchester and almost 50% in Liverpool were “not 
good”, and he said the inequality of provision was “feeding into a wider 
malaise” and a “sense of alienation” that people were feeling in parts of the 
country.

In an earlier interview with the BBC during a visit to Manchester, he said: 
“The situation is very, very serious. It’s feeding into a sense that the people 
of Liverpool, Manchester and the north are not being treated fairly – that 
their children have less of a chance of educational success than people south 
of the Wash.

“And that’s feeding into a wider malaise that I sense with the Brexit vote, 
that actually this wasn’t just about leaving Europe, it’s about ‘our needs 
being neglected, our children are not getting as good a deal as elsewhere’.

“Parents want to see their children doing well; they want to see them going 
off to university; they want to see them getting a good job. Well, they have 
less of a chance of that in this city [Manchester], in Liverpool and elsewhere, 
and that feeds into this sense of discontent in the north and in the Midlands.”

Wilshaw also flagged up the crisis in teacher recruitment, saying it should be 
the first priority of the Department for Education to make sure there are 
enough teachers in classrooms and enough people training to become teachers.

He also reiterated his opposition to government plans to extend grammar 
schools, saying that as a former headteacher he knew that had a grammar school 
opened up down the road, taking the top 15-20% of children, he would have been 
unable to raise standards for all children in his school. He said he was 
“totally against” the idea.

Commenting on the Ofsted annual report, Brett Wigdortz, chief executive and 
founder ofTeach First <https://www.teachfirst.org.uk/>, said: “It’s hugely 
welcome that standards are increasing overall, but we must not take our eye off 
the ball and see disadvantaged areas fall behind.


“Teach First is committed to helping the areas with the greatest need – the 
north, Midlands and coastal areas – by recruiting many more great teachers to 
increase the attainment and unlock the aspirations of pupils from all 
backgrounds.

“Schools, government and communities need to work together to ensure teaching 
remains an attractive, viable choice for top talent across the country.”
 