
The chair of Ofsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, David 
Hoare, who caused uproar when he described the Isle of Wight as a poor ghetto 
where there has been inbreeding, is to stand down.


The former City businessman agreed to resign with immediate effect from his 
£50,000-a-year role after a meeting with the education secretary, Justine 
Greening, on Monday.

It is understood pressure to step down was put on Hoare at the meeting, where 
the Isle of Wight comments were discussed. He will receive no severance pay, 
Ofsted confirmed on Tuesday.

The Ofsted senior non-executive board member James Kempton will take on the 
role of chair on an interim basis while Greening starts the process of making a 
permanent appointment.

It’s not the Isle of Wight that is inbred. It’s the establishment | Polly 
Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/05/isle-of-wight-inbred-establishment-david-hoare>
Hoare told a teaching conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/05/ofsted-chair-david-hoare-isle-of-wight-poor-ghetto>
 three weeks ago that the Isle of Wight was blighted by a “mass of crime, drug 
problems, huge unemployment” and underperforming schools.

His comments were made during a discussion about raising educational standards 
for the most disadvantaged communities.

Hoare, who has a home overlooking the island, told teachers that it was often 
a topic of conversation with his dinner party guests. “They think of it as 
holiday land. But it is shocking. It’s a ghetto. There has been inbreeding.”

His comments prompted outrage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/05/ofsted-chair-david-hoare-isle-of-wight-poor-ghetto>
 from Isle of Wight residents, with the council leader, Jonathan Bacon, 
describing them as “an insult to the proud and hardworking Isle of Wight 
community”.

Hoare apologised twice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/09/ofsted-chair-to-visit-isle-of-wight-after-apology-for-ghetto-remarks>
, and appeared to have survived the outcry, boosted by thebacking of the chief 
inspector of schools, Sir Michael Wilshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/06/ofsted-chair-should-not-lose-job-over-inbreeding-comment-says-chief>
, who said the Ofsted chair had gone “over the top” but should be allowed to 
remain.

Wilshaw said Hoare had been right to draw public attention to underachievement 
in rural and coastal areas, such as the Isle of Wight, where school standards 
had been “terribly, pitifully low” until recently.

In a full and unreserved apology, Hoare acknowledged that some of his comments 
were offensive and unfounded, and promised to visit the island to find out more 
about the challenges being faced.

In a statement issued by the Isle of Wight council, he formally retracted his 
comments regarding crime, drug use and unemployment, describing them as 
“factually inaccurate”.


But on Tuesday, two weeks after that apology, Ofsted released a statement in 
which Hoare said: “I have today informed the secretary of state that I will be 
resigning from my position as chair with immediate effect.


 “It has been a great privilege to chair the Ofsted board for the past two 
years. I am pleased that the organisation now has an excellent board in place 
with expertise across all of our remit areas, including early years and further 
education.”

Responding to his resignation, Greening said: “I have accepted David Hoare’s 
resignation from the post of chair of the board of Ofsted. I would like to 
thank David for his hard work in this role over the past two years.”

 Hoare’s resignation was welcomed by Neil Leitch, the chief executive of the 
Pre-school Learning Alliance, who said his comments were “offensive, 
thoughtless and damaging”.

“Ofsted plays a pivotal role in supporting the provision of high-quality 
education services in all areas of the country. We hope that whoever replaces 
Mr Hoare takes this responsibility more seriously.”

The Isle of Wight MP, Andrew Turner, said: “The role of Ofsted is to help 
improve education, not demoralise teachers, insult parents and pupils and those 
involved in raising education standards.

“His resignation, albeit somewhat delayed, was probably inevitable and clearly 
for the best. I said at the time that he would never have dared make such 
remarks about an area with a high ethnic [minority] population, and I stand by 
that view.”

Bacon said: “The council had been in constructive dialogue with his office to 
arrange his promised visit the Isle of Wight, and had a date in the diary for 
this, in order to better understand, recognise and acknowledge these 
challenges, faced by the Island,” said Bacon.

“I extend the same invitation to Mr Hoare’s successor, whomever that may be, 
to visit the island in order to learn more about the challenges we face and 
ensure that Ofsted is playing the fullest possible part, working alongside the 
other agencies, to support the further improvement of educational outcomes on 
the Island.”

He pointed out that education was improving for island children with just one 
primary school – and no secondary schools – still deemed inadequate by Ofsted. 
Previously Ofsted had judged a quarter of schools on the Isle of Wight to be 
inadequate.

In his statement, Hoare welcomed the appointment of Amanda Spielman, who is 
due to take over from Wilshaw as chief inspector in January.

“We have also been able to agree the strategic priorities for Ofsted, focusing 
on improving the life chances for the disadvantaged children of our country. I 
will miss working with an excellent team, making a real difference,” he said.

Meanwhile, early indications this year suggest that school exam results on the 
Isle of Wight may be improving, with 90% of students achieving the national 
benchmark of two A* to E passes at A-level, or equivalent, which is a three 
percentage point improvement on 2015. The number of students passing three 
A-levels has increased by four percentage points, from 64% in 2015, to 68% this 
year.

• This article was amended on 23 August 2016. In an earlier version of the 
story we mistakenly called David Hoare Sir David Hoare. This has been corrected.
 