
The universe is at least 986 billion years older than physicists thought and 
is probably much older still, according to a radical new theory.

The revolutionary study suggests that time did not begin with the big bang 14 
billion years ago. This mammoth explosion which created all the matter we see 
around us, was just the most recent of many.

The standard big bang theory says the universe began with a massive explosion, 
but the new theory suggests it is a cyclic event that consists of repeating big 
bangs.

"People have inferred that time began then, but there really wasn't any reason 
for that inference," said Neil Turok, a theoretical physicist at the University 
of Cambridge, "What we are proposing is very radical. It's saying there was 
time before the big bang."

Under his theory, published today in the journal Science with Paul Steinhardt 
at Princeton University in New Jersey, the universe must be at least a trillion 
years old with many big bangs happening before our own. With each bang, the 
theory predicts that matter keeps on expanding and dissipating into infinite 
space before another horrendous blast of radiation and matter replenishes it. 
"I think it is much more likely to be far older than a trillion years though," 
said Prof Turok. "There doesn't have to be a beginning of time. According to 
our theory, the universe may be infinitely old and infinitely large."

Today most cosmologists believe the universe will carry on expanding until all 
the stars burn out, leaving nothing but their cold dead remains. But there is 
an inherent problem with this picture. The Cosmological Constant - a mysterious 
force first postulated by Albert Einstein that appears to be driving the 
galaxies apart - is much too small to fit the theory. Einstein later renounced 
it as his "biggest blunder".

The Cosmological Constant is a mathematical representation of the energy of 
empty space, also known as "dark energy", which exerts a kind of anti-gravity 
force pushing galaxies apart at an accelerating rate.

It happens to be a googol (1 followed by 100 zeroes) times smaller than would 
be expected if the universe was created in a single Big Bang. But its value 
could be explained if the universe was much, much older than most experts 
believe.

Mechanisms exist that would allow the Constant to decrease incrementally 
through time. But these processes would take so long that, according to the 
standard theory, all matter in the universe would totally dissipate in the 
meantime.

Turok and Steinhardt's theory is an alternative to another explanation called 
the "anthropic principle", which argues that the constant can have a range of 
values in different parts of the universe but that we happen to live in a 
region conducive to life.

"The anthropic explanations are very controversial and many people do not like 
them," said Alexander Vilenkin a professor of theoretical physics at Tufts 
University in Massachusetts. Rather than making precise predictions for 
features of the universe the anthropic principle gives a vague range of values 
so it is difficult for physicists to test, he added.

"It's absolutely terrible, it really is giving up," said Prof Turok, "It's 
saying that we are never going to understand the state of the universe. It just 
has to be that way for us to exist." His explanation by contrast is built up 
from first principles.

But if he's right, how long have we got until the next big bang? "We can't 
predict when it will happen with any precision - all we can say is it won't be 
within the next 10 billion years." Good job, because if we were around we would 
instantly disintegrate into massless particles of light.
 