
Back in the 1986-87 summer, when Australian cricket had slumped so dismally 
into an unsettling period of crisis following the retirements of national 
heroes Greg Chappell, Dennis Lillee and Rod Marsh, a cynical view of the local 
crowds persisted among the travelling English press pack.

The Guardian’s then cricket correspondent Matthew Engel put it thus: “The 
Australian sporting public has a marvellous knack for averting its gaze from 
things it doesn’t like.” In that instance he was referring to fans filing out 
of the MCG as the home side lost five wickets in the space of 40 minutes to 
surrender the Melbourne Test and with it the Ashes. Of note: those who did hang 
around focused their attentions on scoreboard updates of the Davis Cup tennis 
drama unfolding down the road.

Chris Lynn and Billy Stanlake to make ODI debuts against Pakistan at Gabba
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/chris-lynn-and-billy-stanlake-to-make-odi-debuts-against-pakistan-at-gabba>
Swap Pat Cash for Nick Kyrgios and little might have changed by the time 
Australia take the field for their second one-day international against 
Pakistan in Melbourne this Sunday – a daybefore the Australian Open actually 
kicks off, of course, but still very much in both its shadow and that of the 
ragingly successful Big Bash League.

It is now self-evident and not particularly original to point out how one-day 
cricket has fallen victim to T20’s success. One only need note the recent TV 
and attendance figures for the Big Bash: 34,677 at the Gabba for Wednesday 
night’s Heat-Scorchers clash as home viewership nudged the million mark; 44,189 
happily piling into godforsaken Etihad Stadium for the Stars-Renegades derby 
and in doing so, easily outstripping the combined attendance totals for days 
three, four and five the recent MCG Test.

The Big Bash’s cannibalisation of a willing and engaged audience for limited 
overs cricket is the kind of problem other sports dream of, but a problem it is 
if the game’s best high-volume TV product (a minimum of 100 in-built 
advertising opportunities as opposed to 40) is to remain viable and grease the 
wheel of the game at large.

The argument often put forward here is that a rolling international one-day 
championship or the accrual of World Cup qualification points for every ODI is 
the answer – and providing such context to games certainly can’t hurt – but you 
wonder whether such measures would mean much to the casual cricket fans who’ve 
deserted the format. “Hang on, a win here will put Australia eight points clear 
of Bangladesh on the table for an event happening in two years? Maybe I will 
spend eight hours baking on a sticky plastic seat after all.”

It doesn’t help that Australian fans are right now faced with five games 
against a Pakistan side that has spent the last four weeks repeatedly rolling 
over, nor that so many other appealing live sports options present themselves 
in the form of the tennis and A-League football (over 40,000 are expected at 
Saturday’s Sydney derby).

But the basic equation is thus: unless India or England are touring, one-day 
international attendances in Australia are increasingly a bust and one that 
coincides with the Big Bash going from strength to strength.

The 30,696 average crowd for one-day games in the dizzyingly successful 
2013-14 Ashes summer and the none-too-shabby 27,225 for India last year were 
happy anomalies. Contests in the other two of the last four summers have drawn 
average crowds of 16,306 and 15,239 respectively. If Pakistan do better at the 
box office it’ll be a near miracle.

This is all a bit of a pity, because at its best 50-over cricket can engage 
the heart and mind in ways T20’s brevity cannot; batsmen can consolidate, build 
or rebuild in ways a 20-over contest does not allow. Bowl a couple of bad overs 
and you can come back later. But you can’t sell nuance these days, andCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia are not even trying. 
Years ago they decided that encouraging people to dress up as superheroes and 
cartoon hot dogs was the most plausible answer and so far haven’t come up with 
an alternative.

Digital illusion: the mystery of Josh Hazlewood's missing finger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2017/jan/11/digital-illusion-the-mystery-of-josh-hazlewoods-missing-finger>
What the Australian one-day summer is now, if you stand back and take the long 
view, is an audition and jockeying process for better jobs – important Test 
tours and the bigger one-day tournaments people actually watch, or at least 
care about. And really, the true novelty of these upcoming games against 
Pakistan is that they are essentially a Big Bash talent showcase; out go old 
hands George Bailey and Aaron Finch, in come Chris Lynn and Billy Stanlake.

When national selector Trevor Hohns briefed the media on the somewhat 
surprising promotion of Stanlake, he did so in terms of the player’s Big Bash 
form, which was not unusual because the last game of Stanlake’s brief state 
career with Queensland came 14 months ago, and boasted a viewership in the 
hundreds via CA’s live stream.

“Billy himself and the medical staff involved in his recovery have done a 
great job,” Hohns said. “He’s back playing again and playing well and we 
believe that now is the right time to give him a chance to stretch himself.”

The other stretch will be whether anybody turns up to see if he’s successful.
 