
One in four young people in developing countries are unable to read a 
sentence, according to a report, which warns that poor quality education has 
left a "legacy of illiteracy" more widespread than previously believed.

Research published on Wednesday by Unesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco>, the UN's educational, scientific 
and cultural body, suggests that 175 million young people lack even basic 
literacy skills.

"Access [to education] is not the only crisis – poor quality is holding back 
learning even for those who make it to school," said Unesco director-general, 
Irina Bokova, in a foreword to the 11th annualEducation for All global 
monitoring report 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-agenda/efareport/reports/2013/>
, which measures progress towards global goals.

An estimated 250 million children are not learning basic reading and maths 
skills, according to the report, even though half of them have spent at least 
four years in school. This "global learning crisis" costs developing countries 
billions of dollars a year in wasted education funding, it warns.

Adult literacy has remained stubbornly high over the past decade, the report 
adds. In 2011 there were 774 million illiterate adults, a decline of 1% since 
2000. This figure is projected to fall only slightly, to 743 million, by 2015.

Ten countries – India, China, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Egypt, 
Brazil, Indonesia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo – account for almost 
three-quarters of the world's illiterate adults, according to the report.

Globally, almost two-thirds of illiterate adults are women, a figure that has 
remained almost static since 1990. If current trends continue, the poorest 
young women in developing countries are not expected to achieve universal 
literacy until 2072.

Pauline Rose, the report's director, said literacy and adult education have 
suffered from relative neglect, as attention has focused on boosting primary 
school attendance rates in poor countries. Measures of progress at the national 
and global level often obscure deep inequalities, she added.

If current trends continue, for example, the wealthiest boys in sub-Saharan 
Africa will achieve universal primary completion in 2021, while the poorest 
girls will have to wait until 2086.

Rich countries' education systems are also failing minorities, says the 
report. In New Zealand, almost all rich students achieve minimum standards in 
grades four and eight, while only two-thirds of poor students do. More than 10% 
of grade eight students in Norway and England performed below minimum learning 
levels in mathematics in 2011.

Last year a survey of basic skills by the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development sparked widespread debate about illiteracy and 
innumeracy among young people and adults in rich countries. A failure to 
sustain post-16 education and deep-rooted problems ofpoverty and social 
inequality were blamed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/08/oecd-adult-literacy-numeracy-uk-poverty-inequality>
 by some commentators for England's poor showing in the rankings.

The NGO Save the Children said young people from low-income families in the UK 
were alreadyfalling behind at school by the age of seven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/08/oecd-adult-literacy-numeracy-uk-poverty-inequality>
, with most unlikely to go on and achieve good grades in maths and English.

The report says governments must rethink their teaching policies and redouble 
efforts to ensure marginalised and disadvantaged learners benefit. Governments 
must train teachers to support the weakest learners, as well as provide 
incentives to attract and retain the best instructors, it says.

Many developing countries have rapidly increased their teacher numbers by 
hiring people without training. This may help get more children into school but 
it puts education quality in jeopardy, warns the report. "What's the point in 
an education if children emerge after years in school without the skills they 
need?" said Rose.

David Archer, head of programme development at the NGO ActionAid, praised the 
report's attention to adult literacy and education. "Post-independence most 
African governments ran adult literacy campaigns to redress historic 
injustices. Today there is an urgent need for new long-term investment in adult 
literacy programmes in order to redress the inequalities and injustices that 
arise from failing education systems," he said.

Improvements will come at a cost, says the report, which estimates that basic 
education alone is underfunded by $26bn (£43m) a year.

Countries should commit to spending at least 6% of their gross national 
product on education, the report says. Donors must increase their aid for 
education and sharpen its focus to support the poorest and most underserved 
populations. It stresses that countries cannot afford to keep adult literacy 
and education off the agenda.

The 2000 World Education Forum summit in Dakar, Senegal, agreed six global 
goals 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-agenda/education-for-all/efa-goals/>
 to meet the learning needs of all children, young people and adults by 2015.

According to the Unesco report, no country is projected to reach all the goals 
– which cover early childhood care, primary and secondary schooling, adult 
literacy, gender equality and educational quality – by the deadline.
 