
Incidents of domestic abuse, mostly involving violent attacks on women, make 
up one in 10 crimes recorded by the police and account for one-third of all 
reported violent crimes, according to the latestOffice for National Statistics 
research 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/releases/domesticabuseinenglandandwalesyearendingmarch2016>
.

In the year to March, 1.2 million women and 651,000 men were victims of 
domestic abuse, according to theCrime <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> 
Survey for England and Wales. The overwhelming majority of incidents (78%) 
involved violent attacks.

The ONS figures confirm that domestic murders are overwhelmingly perpetrated 
by men against women – labelled by some women’s campaigners asfemicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/22/femicide-census-equality-eva-wiseman>
.

MPs ask May to ratify international accord on violence against women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/mps-theresa-may-violence-women-ratify-international-accord-seema-malhotra>
 The ONS said there were 432 domestic homicides recorded by police between 
April 2012 and March 2015, of which 315 victims (73%) were women and 117 were 
men.

Domestic homicides represent a third of all murders in England and Wales. 
Overall, two-thirds of all murder victims are male.

Among women murdered by a partner or ex-partner, 97% were killed by a man, 
while among male domestic homicide victims only a third were killed by a woman.

The ONS figures also reveal that domestic abuse is most common in the West 
Midlands, at a rate of 7.33 cases per 100 adults, and Wales, at 7.07, and 
lowest in London, at 4.57. The highest rates by police force area are in 
Suffolk and Cleveland, and the lowest in Surrey and London.

“An estimated 1.8 million adults aged 16 to 59 experienced domestic abuse in 
the last year, equating to a prevalence rate of six in 100 adults,” the ONS 
said.

“Women were more likely to say they have experienced domestic abuse than men. 
However, the difference between the number of male and female victims is at its 
lowest compared with previous years.

“The trend in the prevalence of domestic abuse has remained fairly stable 
since the year ending March 2009, but is at its lowest since the year ending 
March 2005.”

It said a large proportion of domestic abuse-related incidents were reported 
to and recorded by the police – 1.03m of the 1.8m – and after investigations 
the police concluded in 41% of these cases (421,000) that a domestic 
abuse-related criminal offence had been committed.

A decision to charge was made in 70% of domestic abuse-related cases referred 
by police to the Crown Prosecution Service. Convictions were secured in 
three-quarters of domestic abuse-related prosecutions.

In 68% of the domestic abuse cases referred to the CPS, the defendant pleaded 
guilty, so most of the cases recorded as successful outcomes were due to guilty 
pleas (91%).


“It is harrowing to learn that last year, nearly 2 million adults experienced 
domestic abuse, including one in eight women aged 16 to 19,” said Lucy 
Hastings, of the charity Victim Support. “That the prevalence is so high among 
this age group demonstrates the importance of high-quality sex and 
relationships education being available to equip young people with the tools 
they need to understand healthy relationships, make safe choices and know how 
to seek advice and support.”

Louisa Rolfe, the National Police Chiefs’ Council lead on domestic abuse, 
said: “The better our data, the better we understand domestic abuse as a crime 
and the more we can do to support victims and prevent harm, which is what 
really matters.

“However, this is only the first phase of a wider project and caution must be 
taken when interpreting the data or trying to make direct comparisons across 
different organisations, methodologies and points in time. For now, it should 
be used to stimulate thought rather than draw conclusions.”

She said the statistics “do not currently represent the extent of our 
commitment to tackling domestic abuse and the scale of the challenge we face”, 
adding: “It is still far too acceptable in society.

“Reports to the police are continuing to rise, and the gap between experienced 
crime and recorded crime is narrowing. It is good to see more victims having 
the confidence to come forward and start to take back control from those who 
seek to control and intimidate them. Domestic abuse is a serious crime and 
never the fault of the victim. We are here to help.”
 