
There was a grand bargain struck between individuals and banks when we began 
moving away from cash and towards electronic payments. Transactions would 
become faster, more efficient and more profitable for the banks, and in return 
individuals would be protected from fraud. That bargain is perilously close to 
falling apart.

Financial Fraud Action UK  
<http://www.financialfraudaction.org.uk/consumer-about-ffa.asp>(FFA UK) has 
issued its “definitive overview” of payment fraud in the UK, and the figures 
make for miserable reading. Total fraud jumped by more than a quarter in 2015, 
with 1.5m card accounts in Britain raided by scam merchants who stole more than 
£750m.

To put that figure in context, it is 15 times Britain’s biggest ever single 
cash heist <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/jan/28/ukcrime.markoliver>, the 
2006 raid on a Securitas depot in Tonbridge in Kent, which netted £53m. Two 
years later the five criminals were jailed for between 15 and 20 years each.

The far more numerous victims of cyberfraud rarely see the villains locked up 
behind bars. FFA UK says the banks are collaborating on a “strategic threat 
management process” and “intelligence sharing” with the police and other 
agencies, but the reality is that in too many cases they do little to pursue 
fraud, and far more worryingly, seem happy to blame the victims.

The fastest growing area of bank fraud is crooks gaining online access to, and 
transferring funds from individuals’ bank accounts, often by posing as a member 
of staff or even the police.

In these cases, the bank’s default position seems to be that the customer has 
done something wrong – by answering phishing emails or by being careless with 
their personal data, usually over social media. In some cases they are right to 
apportion blame, but the sophistication of many of the scams is quite 
breathtaking, catching even the most savvy online consumer.

The Guardian has previously highlighted the story of a professional couple who 
lost £25,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/fraud-scam-email-barclays-lloyds>
after hackers intercepted emails, issued fake invoices and convinced them to 
pay money into a fraudulent account.

Shockingly, Barclays, which operated the account the fraudster used to accept 
their money, said it does not report such crimes to the police on the grounds 
that “the bank is not the victim”. So much for “intelligence sharing”. Needless 
to say, the unfortunate couple have seen none of their money back.

Given the meteoric rise in contactless payments, Apple Pay, Android Pay, 
Samsung Pay, Paym, new online-only banks such as Atom, Fidor, Tandem, Mondo et 
al and almost daily launches of new banking apps, what customers need is a new 
grand bargain.

When credit cards first launched, customers were safe in the knowledge that 
£50 was the most they were down for if it was stolen or misused. Can we have 
less of the strategic threat management processes, and more simple, easy to 
understand protections such as the £50 limit?





 