 Magnus Flaws, the ruddy-cheeked skipper of the antiquated ferry Eynhallow, is 
the link between the Orkney mainland and the island of Rousay's 360 residents. 
With the concrete landing fast approaching through the murk, wind and rain, he 
juggles the wheel, a mug of coffee and, the hardest bit of all, a question 
about Orkney's future in the new Scotland.
Although he is pleased there will be a Scottish parliament, he has a huge 
reservation. `There is a general worry of being dominated by Central Belt 
politics,'' he said, expressing fear that island communities like Orkney will 
be at the mercy of a parliament run by an urban mafia fromGlasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow>, Edinburgh and the rest of the Central 
Belt, where the bulk of the Scottish population lives.

 Mr Flaws is a member of the Orkney Movement, which wants more autonomy for 
the islands. If `small is beautiful' is an argument for having a Scottish 
parliament, Mr Flaws believes smaller is more beautiful still. Spencer Rosie, 
an oil worker who chairs the Orkney Movement, said: `We have to make sure 
devolution does not stop with Edinburgh.''

 The movement is fielding only one candidate in the elections, Mr Flaws's 
mother, Margaret, who is standing for the local council. Membership of the 
20-year-old organisation is only marginally bigger than the average book club, 
with 20 paid-up members, down from 500 in its heyday in the mid-1980s. But it 
would be a mistake to dismiss it.

The sentiments expressed by the movementare repeated time and time again round 
Orkney, from church ministers to fishermen, farmers and oil workers, from the 
editor of the Orcadian to the owner of the Orkney Brewery. Orkney voted 
overwhelmingly against the proposal for a Scottish parliament in the 1979 
referendum. In the 1997 referendum, it emerged as the most reluctant part of
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to embrace the idea, just 
and voted against tax-raising powers.

 The suspicion of urban domination is shared elsewhere in rural Scotland This 
divide between the cities, dominated by the Labour party, and the rural areas, 
represented mainly by Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National Party, will 
be one of the faultlines in the new parliament.

 The Rev Ron Ferguson, minister at St Magnus cathedral, the huge sandstone 
edifice at the heart of Kirkwall, Orkney's main town, said rule from Edinburgh 
might prove to be no better than rule from London: `At the end of the day, you 
do not have too many choices. The name of the game is London or Edinburgh, and 
Edinburgh is the lesser of the two evils.''

 Orkney is one of the most difficult parts of Britain to reach, frequently 
fog-bound, with planes unable to land because the airstrip lacks modern 
facilities. Inadequate transport is high on the list of complaints on the 
doorsteps: unreliable air link, poor ferry services and exorbitant fuel costs. 
The poor links contribute to depopulation, as the young leave to live closer to 
work.

 Duncan MacLean, one of the new generation of fiery Scottish writers, lives at 
Stenness, looking out over the sea to the island of Hoy, one of the best views 
in the British Isles. He described Hoy as a `defensive barrier', blocking out 
the Scottish mainland. He is not a member of the Orkney Movement but is a 
sympathiser: `No one is suggesting Orkney could be independent. A population of 
20,000 would be pushing it a bit. We need more autonomy. I hope and believe 
that once the new principle of devolution has been accepted, they (the Scottish 
parliament) would be on very shaky ground if they tried to stop it. You can 
learn from the Channel Isles, the Isle of Man, the Faroes.''

 The Orkney Movement has already achieved success out of all proportion to its 
size. Along with its bigger sister organisation, the Shetland Movement, it 
helped to persuade Labour, during discussions on the blueprint for a Scottish 
parliament in the early 1990s, that Orkney should have its own member of the 
Scottish parliament rather than share one with Shetland, as it does at 
Westminster.

 The movement is dismissed as an organisation for `dreamers'' by Roger White, 
owner of the Orkney Brewery. But Mr White, a teetotaller who tastes but does 
not swallow his own beer, added: `I would feel safer if there was a 
coalition.'' It is a widespread view on the islands, a strong desire for a 
coalition government that would include the Liberal Democrats, who would 
counter-balance Labour's Central Belt prejudices.

 Mr Ferguson, who has been minister of St Magnus for the last eight years, 
said the shift in Orkney from a no vote in 1979 to a `maybe'' in 1997 was 
because of the unpopularity of Thatcher and the poll tax. But there was another 
factor: `PR helped persuade people. It made it less likely that one party would 
dominate. If Labour won an outright majority, people would fear that.''

 Labour hegemony would condemn the Scottish parliament to begin life with an 
inbuilt tension between rural and urban Scotland. And the moribund Orkney 
Movement would stir again. Mr Rosie, who was a founder member, predicted: 
`There would be a real fight then.''
 