
Gaby Hinsliff: Osborne sounded like a man outlining his legacy




Forget the sugar tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-george-osborne-sugar-tax-growth-forecast-falls>
, sweet as it is for middle-class mothers who disapprove of fizzy drinks. 
Forget the nostalgic Thatcherite stuff about helping corner shops and plucky 
small businesses battling Amazon, even the tax cut at the end. The bit of this 
budget that mattered most to George Osborne was the doom-laden stuff at the 
beginning about how the world economy may be about to go horribly wrong.

If there’s another recession, then the chancellor can kiss goodbye not just to 
his cherished surplus but to his chances of ever succeeding David Cameron as 
leader. His reputation couldn’t survive a second crash.

This budget felt strangely like a pre-election one, aimed at suburban swing 
voters – they’ll love the cheap petrol and after-school sports clubs in 
Nuneaton – perhaps because it is. Once the EU referendum is over Tory MPs will 
move on to pondering the succession, with the most restless predicting a 
handover as early as 2018 to give the new leader time to settle in. So Osborne 
made his pitch – a vision of a small-state, low tax Britain that rewards work 
and has nothing much to say to those out of it – with brisk clarity.

There was an odd moment when, introducing the sugar tax, he said he would 
never forgive himself for not doing something about childhood obesity while he 
could. It was as prime ministerial as he has ever allowed himself to sound. But 
there was no warmth in the reception from Tory backbenchers, merely cool 
respect for the way he ticks electoral boxes. Unwittingly or not, Osborne 
sounded more like a man outlining his legacy than one who feels his time coming.

Aditya Chakrabortty: The chancellor continued shovelling money at the well-off

Ignore the usual staginess. Look at the fundamentals: growth down, borrowing 
up, more cuts. Whichever way you look at it, this was a bad day at the office 
forGeorge Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>.

He brave-faced the fact that he will break his own targets on debt and welfare 
spending and did his utmost tosprinkle around what little money he could 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-at-a-glance-key-points>
 – splashing around small Treasury giveaways on cathedrals and sports lessons 
and sprinkling cash in Faslane and Teeside and East Anglia – but it was thin 
stuff.

What should really concern us is the vision of Britain 2020 laid out this 
afternoon: our economy more shrunken, our wages far reduced (a consequence of 
the lower productivity now forecast) and hit by a fresh wave of spending cuts 
and tax rises. Just how big those cuts and tax rises have to be is almost 
certainly going to be picked apart by the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
tomorrow: the Treasury appears to have picked 2019 as the year in which it 
starts a huge fiscal retrenchment. What glorious timing! Osborne is going to do 
all of this months before an election, and just as David Cameron is handing 
over the reins of the Tory party to its new leader.

With barely any room for giveaways, the chancellor continued shovelling money 
at the well-off: raising the threshold for 40% income tax, cutting capital 
gains for the private-equity boys and girls. A bedroom tax for the poor who 
have a spare room, but a tax cut for themiddle classes renting out a room on 
Airbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/16/landlords-and-traders-receive-2000-tax-allowance-to-boost-sharing-economy>
. Even theIsa for the young  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/16/what-is-a-lifetime-isa-budget-2016>
that Osborne announced with such fanfare can only be fully enjoyed by those 
with rich parents.

Anne Perkins: Having been impoverished, councils will also lose control of 
schools




It felt like watching a bloke on the pavement with an upturned milk crate 
doing the three card trick. The sunlit uplands of the chancellor’s opening 
patter, then the welter of tax changes and then, ultimate distraction, the 
great big sugar bunny: the government capitulation to the case argued by almost 
everyone concerned with public health – a tax on sugary drinks.

We know that we all eat too much sugar. How to deter it, though, is more 
contentious. Only a few months ago the government was insisting that the impact 
of a tax on sugary drinks, the source of nearly a third of the sugar intake of 
primary-age children, remained unproven (just like its earlier resistance to 
plain cigarette packaging). Now it’s introducing a tax predicted to raise 
£500m, which in a wonderful virtuous circle will be diverted to supporting 
sport in schools, breakfast clubs and after-school care. Jamie Oliver, 1.Sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/sugar> lobby, 0.

But hang on: it’s not coming in until 2018, so drinks manufacturers have the 
time to reformulate their products. If they do so successfully, the tax won’t 
raise the predicted cash. Who then pays for the services the government now 
recognises are so badly needed?

At the same time, local government is being starved of sources of income: 
business rates, on which the new devolved funding model that will see councils 
raising all their budgets from their own residents regardless of need or 
capacity to pay, are being cut. There is no news yet of any kind of 
redistribution or rate support scheme that used to make sure poorer councils 
remain able to provide essential services.

And having been impoverished, councils will also lose control of schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/15/osborne-chancellor-focus-budget-schools-reform-academies>
 as every primary and secondary is forced to become an academy funded directly 
from the Department for Education. But from Liverpool to East Anglia, they will 
have directly elected mayors, Osborne announced. Where did that ace of spades 
come from?

Polly Toynbee: A short-term budget to save face on the EU referendum
 Photograph: The Guardian 
Long-term economic plan? This was the most short-term budget in living memory 
because only one thing matters now – staying inside the EU. All theseOffice for 
Budget Responsibility forecasts 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/efo/economic-fiscal-outlook-march-2016/> 
are predicated on remaining, not on a decade of bitter Brexit negotiations. Not 
even the worst of Osborne’s budgets so far could deliver the hammer blow to the 
country’s long-term future that would be inflicted by a vote to leave.

So, despite the haemorrhage of funds the Treasury had expected to flow in, 
this had to be a feel-good, hurt no one, universal giveaway to woo the legions 
of the undecided. Something for everyone saw booze and fuel spared, flood 
defences, cathedrals, Shakespeare and the homeless remembered, with a bonanza 
for well-off ISA savers, a tampon tax spent on women, hurrah for a sugar tax 
for school sport, a love song to the local – and a love-bombing of small 
business, at most risk of Ukip sentiment.

Profligate, spending on the wrong people for the wrong reasons, never forget 
this was only made necessary because Osborne and Cameron tipped Britain into 
this referendum peril out of a momentary panic over Ukip’s rise, when Labour 
stood firm against it. Luckily, the careers and legacy of chancellor and prime 
minister hang on winning, with whatever bribery it takes. If they – and the 
country - survive the vote, expect a sharp autumn pull-back. Scrutiny will soon 
reveal how far all this apparent largesse covers up sinkholes in Osborne’s 
finances. But for now, we are left praying that this chimera of a budget can 
save us from their reckless folly.
 