
We are glad to add our own statue to those you mention (Tributes to ‘Red’ 
Ellen and Pankhurst show male domination is no longer set in stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/09/britain-statues-women-emmeline-pankhurst-ellen-wilkinson-victoria-wood>
, 9 January). We have been planning and raising funds for two years to create a 
lasting memorial to Mary Barbour, who led the Glasgow rent strike in 1915 
against the greedy landlords pushing rents up in the rundown tenement flats 
while many men were away fighting in France. That year men in the shipyards and 
engineering works downed tools in support when 20,000 marched to the sheriff 
court. By Christmas Day Lloyd George, then munitions minister, pushed a new law 
through parliament to bring rents back to prewar levels for the duration of the 
war and six months after.

This new law benefited tenants throughout Britain. Yet Mary Barbour’s name is 
not mentioned in the histories of red Clydeside. That is why we are having a 
statue unveiled in a few months’ time, not only to honour Mary Barbour, but to 
remind people of what so-called ordinary people can achieve. This happened 
years before the first Labour government came to power. Mary became one of the 
first female Labour councillors in 1920, then went on to battle for numerous 
reforms: clean milk free to schoolchildren, provision of public baths and 
washhouses, play parks, and the first ever family planning clinic.
Maria Fyfe
Chair, Remember Mary Barbour Association

• The conscripted women in the Sheffield steelworks – memorialised in the Women
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> of Steel statue – did vital, 
hard work, but let’s not forget that it wasn’t only the men who were away 
during the second world war. Three young sisters volunteered to be away from 
all they knew. My Auntie Ann joined the ATS and was posted to Belgium, France 
and Germany; Auntie Nora trained as a nurse during the London blitz; and my 
mother, Lyn, became a WAAF aircraft plotter in Lincolnshire. Sheffield women 
all.
Marti Cooper
Castleford, West Yorkshire

• The beautiful statue of Amy Johnson in Hull, her place of birth, was matched 
by an equally fine statue on the promenade in Herne Bay where she looks out to 
sea, the site of her tragic death. Another example of a local campaign to 
recognise an extraordinary woman.
Nick Black
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 