
The Englishman abroad has been accused of believing that if he shouts loud 
enough the “native” will understand what he is trying to say. At the back of 
his mind, perhaps, is the determination not to admit that an Englishman can be 
a foreigner. What the Englishman does is the natural thing to do; what he does 
not do is suspect.

If, however, any Englishman cares to see himself as a foreigner, he should 
join one of the courses on “English life” that are arranged at this time of 
year for the many students from overseas who are about to start their 
university or college life. Many of these courses are arranged by the British 
Council, but the course for the 86 overseas students atBlackburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/blackburn> Technical College is being led by Mr 
F. G. Gemmel, a lecturer in English and modern languages in the commercial 
department. After three of the seven days of it, the English observer begins to 
see his fellow-countrymen as more foreign than the students sitting near to him.

Self-disciplined 
He finds it rather quaint on Monday to hear that “Lancastrians are 
self-disciplined; they believe in the holiday spirit and always go on holiday,” 
or that “the Englishman is a practicable individual and is proud of our 
justice; he visits the courts of law” or that “welfare committees interest him; 
he is also fond of domestic animals and he supports the R.S.P.C.A.,” that the 
Englishman believes that cleanliness is next to godliness, treats women with 
respect, always shows respect to the State, and is hard-working, “mainly owing 
to the climate, and to his ancestors who were so hard-working.”

By the next morning, however, he is becoming immersed in English lore. He is 
no longer the objective Englishman but a man beginning to see England with 
fresh vision, as the lecturer tells the students “To a certain extent, you have 
to avoid being ill.” The lodgings supervisor begins her talk with the motto “He 
that expecteth, receiveth nothing” and he is hardly at all inclined to say that 
the English do not usually express themselves in aphorisms. He nods sagely as 
the lecturer makes her points.

“The purpose of an electric iron is to iron clothes, not for putting it in the 
bed to keep it warm... The electric fire is for heating the room, not for 
cooking on... Do not drink water out of the geyser or the hot tap... “What 
strange urges these English must have! But how kind they are! “Don’t come home 
with the milk, your landlady will be worried about you...” And how honest! “If 
you are a Mohammedan, explain to your landlady that you don’t eat pig. You can 
take her word for it, then, that any piece of meat she may give you, you can 
eat. Don’t tell her, ‘I think that’s pig.’”

The information comes out in torrents. You do tip the waitress, you don’t tip 
the civil servant, you do tip the hairdresser, you don’t tip the policeman 
(very dangerous, this). If your landlady asks for £3 10s a week you don’t 
bargain with her. If you give her a present, it must not be money. You offer to 
carry the coal for her, but she will be shocked if you come down to supper in 
your pyjamas. Where do you go to retrieve property left on a bus? If you run 
out of money, who will take an IOU? Where do you go for sums greater than can 
be obtained with an IOU? How do you get an Englishman to teach you to play 
bowls?

By Wednesday morning, the English observer hardly dares to speak to his 
friends or to walk across the town. Whom don’t I shake hands with? When don’t I 
raise my hat? When do I use the word “Cheerio!” and when “Goodbye!”? In 
self-defence he begins to find fault with the lecturers. If he cannot prove to 
himself that they have nothing to teach him, he will be in as much of a social 
tangle as the centipede who tried to work out how he moved 100 legs without 
tripping over himself. “Conversation” is discussed. The observer picks up the 
lecturer on a dangerous piece of advice.

Talk of the weather 
“It is important, when starting a conversation, not to choose controversial 
subjects. The weather is a suitable subject. And so is sport, as long as you 
talk about the local team. Everyone will agree with you about the local team.” 
Surely this is dangerous. If the local team is near the bottom of the league, 
even colonialism might be a safer topic of conversation. But the torrent of 
information rushes on. Don’t talk about the weather if you want to ask somebody 
for something – come to the point. If your host asks “Would you like to use the 
bathroom?” don’t tell him you had a bath yesterday.

Above all, be punctual! The lecturer turns on three students who missed a tour 
of the town on Tuesday. Two of them, it seems, went to the bank. “In England,” 
he says, “you must get used to the idea that when a time is stated we mean what 
we say. Besides, you missed a lot of things, including the birth-place of the 
person who introduced constitutional government in India. You see? You don’t 
know where it is, now. because you were unpunctual.”
 