
Consumers are not getting value for money from the UK's £8bn overdraft market 
and a significant number of people are paying too much when they go into the 
red, the City regulator has said.

Research by the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> found that 
customers were confused by the fees on accounts and often considered overdrafts 
as an extension of their income rather than as borrowing, in part because they 
were presented by providers as available funds.

As of July 2013, consumers owed a combined £8bn in overdrafts, of which the 
FCA estimated 90% were pre-arranged, which tends to attract lower charges than 
unauthorised debt.

However, repayments of debt tended to be driven by income coming in, rather 
than as scheduled payments to clear an outstanding balance, and using an 
arranged overdraft could quickly become habit, the regulator said.

The FCA warned banks and building societies that they could face new rules on 
overdraft charges after it found they were earning revenue from consumers' lack 
of understanding, confusion and limited attention, and had incentives in place 
to make money by increasing overdraft limits.

Of the 61m current accounts held in the UK, more than 30m have an overdraft 
facility, and in 2011 banks and building societies made £1.7bn, or a third of 
their current account revenue from people borrowing money in this way.

Overdraft charges were at the centre of a court battle between current account 
providers and the Office of Fair Trading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/nov/25/bank-overdraft-charges-supreme-court>
 which was won by the banks but put the level of charges under the spotlight.

More than four years on, the FCA said providers appeared to still be charging 
very high, complex and opaque fees for unauthorised overdrafts, the regulator 
said, and while voluntary measures such as text alerts for unarranged 
overdrafts had improved matters, many consumers were still paying too much.

Christopher Woolard, director of policy, risk and research, at the FCA, said: 
"Just about everybody who banks can have access to some sort of overdraft 
facility – whether they've signed up for it or not.

"The sheer size of this market is huge and with overdrafts bolted on to more 
than 30m UK current accounts, we want to make sure it is working well for 
consumers."

The FCA will now investigate how providers set and monitor overdraft limits.
 