
The Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> spending 
season is fast approaching, and bank accounts and credit cards will be taking a 
pounding. But if you are planning to use an overdraft to see you through, costs 
can vary dramatically, according to new research.

Meanwhile, some people may be able to give their bank balance a boost at this 
expensive time by doing what’s known as a credit card “money transfer”. This is 
a relatively new facility on offer to some credit card holders, and allows 
someone to take part of their credit limit in the form of cash that is paid 
directly in to their bank account. For some people it will be a cheaper 
alternative to an overdraft, but needless to say there are strings attached.

Some people won’t have to worry about paying interest or fees – they will be 
in the fortunate position of being able to finance the cost of Christmas from a 
combination of the money in their current account and savings, and/or credit 
cards that they pay off in full each month. But others will automatically turn 
to their bank for an overdraft to help manage the extra expenditure.

Andrew Hagger of financial website MoneyComms.co.uk says: “With many banks 
charging daily or monthly fees, even for agreed overdrafts, the costs can soon 
mount up and vary widely between providers.”

Hagger looked at two scenarios – borrowing £750 for 21 days, and £2,500 for 42 
days – to see how much someone who opted for an authorised overdraft from one 
of the leading banks would pay. First Direct came out cheapest in both cases, 
with an actual cost of £4.27 and £38.45 respectively. First Direct’s overdraft 
rate is 15.9% EAR, though it doesn’t charge overdraft interest on the first 
£250 of someone’s limit.

Other cheaper banks and building societies when it came to borrowing £750 via 
an agreed overdraft for three weeks included the Nationwide’s FlexAccount 
(£7.52). At the other end of the spectrum, someone holding Santander’s 123 
account or the Halifax’s Reward current account would pay £21.

That’s because both banks impose a £1 a day fee for using an authorised 
overdraft. (The Halifax account’s daily fee rises to £2 for an authorised 
overdraft of £2,000-plus, then to £3 at £3,000, and is £5 for an unauthorised 
overdraft, while the Santander 123 account’s unauthorised overdraft usage fee 
is £6 a day.)

Hagger says that for some people a credit card “money transfer” may work out 
cheaper and can often be arranged at short notice. “Money transfers are still 
quite rare among providers, with MBNA and Virgin Money the main players 
offering this to new customers. Barclaycard and Tesco Bank offer it, too, but 
only to select existing customers,” he adds.

Barclaycard is currently offering this facility to some of its cardholders. If 
you are one, you may have had an email from the company recently saying 
something like: “Transfer cash to your bank account at 0% until 1 August 2016 
(1.9% fee applies).” In the case of Barclaycard, you can transfer up to 90% of 
your available credit to your current account (the minimum amount you can 
transfer is £100). You pay a single upfront fee – 1.9% is the most common – and 
then pay no interest on the amount transferred for the chosen term. Provided 
you make at least your minimum payment each month you can repay however much 
you want. A 1.9% fee suggests that someone transferring £750 into their bank 
account would pay £14.25.

But with the Barclaycard offer there is a catch that will put many people off: 
you will incur interest on all items you buy, at your standard purchase rate, 
until you repay all of this money, even if you repay your monthly spend in full 
each month. In other words, when you transfer the money you temporarily lose 
the normal 56-day interest-free period on what you buy.

Sell your unwanted vouchers

Consumers given unwanted gift cards and vouchers as Christmas presents may 
want to try a new app which promises to sell them on for close to their 
original value.

Available for Apple and Android devices, the free Zeek app 
<https://www.zeek.me/> aims to match people with unwanted gift cards with 
people who would be shopping in that particular store anyway. Zeek estimates 
that 47% of Brits are given an unwanted gift card each year – half of which 
never get redeemed.

The app allows sellers to scan in their unwanted gift card and set the price 
they want for it. Buyers, some of whom might be in the store to make a 
purchase, can buy the unwanted credit for a discount of around 3%-10%. 
Electronic vouchers can be redeemed instantly; others have to bought as a 
physical card and sent in the post by the seller within seven business days.

Co-founder of Zeek Daniel Zelkind says: “The app solves a problem we’ve all 
experienced. We’re allowing people to earn real money for something that would 
go unused or ultimately expire.”

He says 94% of vouchers sell within 24 hours, with Amazon vouchers holding the 
record time of just five seconds.

Sellers of vouchers will be paid by PayPal or bank transfer. Be warned, 
however, that you have to wait up to 14 business days for the payment to be 
made. The Israeli company, which has been trading for more than a year, says 
the delay is for security reasons. It says the money raised by sales is held in 
a separate collateral account before a payment is made.

Guardian Money took a look at the site and was slightly underwhelmed – many 
vouchers were being sold with just a 2% or 3% discount, making it hardly worth 
the hassle. However, voucher discounts may become much more attractive after 
Christmas as more of them appear on the market.

Additional reporting by Miles Brignall
 