
Sir Rick Trainor became rector of Exeter College, Oxford in 2014. We listened 
in to a fascinating conversation between Rick and Katrina Hancock, director of 
development and alumni relations at Exeter. The college isseeking her successor 
<http://www.exeter.ox.ac.uk/director-development-and-alumni-relations.html> and 
Rick is keen to hear her thoughts on what has made her so successful in the 
role.

 Sir Rick Trainor, rector of Exeter College Oxford. 
RT: Katrina, after 10 years as director of development and alumni relations, 
and 12 years overall working for the college, you’re going to be a hard act to 
follow. What do you think the college needs in its next director of development 
and alumni relations?

KH: I think that you need someone who’s a strong and strategic leader, able to 
take the initiative, creative and very flexible. They need to be good at 
building relationships, but the one thing that you really need is someone who 
loves fundraising. They’ve got to love seeing the joy of alumni in making that 
gift, and the impact that has on our students.

RT: You’ve been in this post now for a little over a decade - how have you 
seen the college change?
 Katrina Hancock, the departing director of development and alumni relations. 
KH: The development office was set up in 1998 with the generosity of two 
alumni. Over the last 10 years we have raised nearly £50m, and in our 
anniversary year of 2014, 49% of our undergraduates were giving to us which 
makes us the most well supported institution outside of the US. Around 70% of 
our alumni have been engaged with us in some way. I’ve seen fundraising become 
normal - this is our 16th year of running a telethon, our alumni are expecting 
it and they are comfortable that we will be asking for their support. Donor 
impact and respect are high on the agenda. I think this college is one of the 
best charities you could possibly support, both in terms of the engagement we 
offer and the stewardship that we guarantee.

RT: You’ve built very good relationships across the college. Who have been 
your key allies?

KH: I think that my key ally has been you, and your predecessor Frances 
Cairncross. Success is impossible without a positive and good working 
relationship with the rector. Our bursar William, our accountant Eleanor and 
our sub-rector Jeri have also been incredibly important. The governing and 
student bodies have also been key internal allies.

The support for fundraising in this college is phenomenal. Our fellows will 
attend events, and come and speak to donors with me. Likewise with the 
students, so many are willing to engage with alumni. Externally I have been 
very fortunate to have an amazing campaign committee. I can phone them up to 
sound things out, but to also be challenged by them. A lot of the ambition 
comes from alumni standing behind us and encouraging us to be the best we can.

RT: Is there an achievement you are most proud of in your time with the 
college?

KH: Well as an alumna I am genuinely proud to have been able to come back to 
the college and play such a key role in securing the future for our students. 
During the 700th anniversary celebrations in 2014, we had over 1,000 alumni 
come back for a weekend of celebrations. I am also really proud of the fact 
that although I have only 6 months left to go, I am still fundraising and that 
there are many more gifts to come. In fact, you and I were talking just this 
morning about a £2.5m pledge that we received earlier in the week.

To ask you a question - if you were sitting down with my successor in 10years’ 
time having this conversation, what would you hope to have achieved together?

RT: That’s looking a long way ahead! As you know we are on the brink of having 
a renewed campaign which will dovetail with the formal opening of the Cohen 
Quadrangle. We are also on the brink of launching a new strategic plan for the 
college.

In 10 years’ time I would want to be reflecting with your successor on the 
fact that we had articulated objectives in line with the needs of the college, 
and managed to deliver on these.

In the future it’s the people dimension that’s going to loom especially large. 
I am thinking of our academics and others who work here. Investing in our 
fellows, the people who do the research and who are crucial to the teaching 
vitality of an institution like Oxford, will be key. Also, our students are 
going to be at the heart of the objectives that your successor and I will be 
pursuing. We are thinking of additional scholarships for graduate students and 
also of providing even better for a wide range of activities for our 
undergraduates. At all levels, travel, conference and hardship grants are very 
important to make sure that we get students with a very broad range of 
backgrounds in college. Then we also need to encourage a broader group of 
people to become donors and even more alumni to become involved as regular 
donors in the future.

Do you have any pearls of wisdom for our next director of development and 
alumni relations?

KH: I think it’s really important to understand that Exeter is a family. We 
are a community of fellows, staff and scholars in the building on Turl Street, 
but also a global community of alumni, parents and friends beyond that. If 
someone is willing to commit and become part of the Exeter family, they will 
thrive and ensure that Exeter will thrive as well.

RT: Thank you for that. I think this conversation has illustrated that 
fundraising is at the heart of Exeter College. We are now at an interesting 
turning point where your successor will have the opportunity to enhance 
fundraising even more and to help achieve the new strategic plan. There is a 
great opportunity here for a person of experience, talent, imagination and 
determination to put their own mark on the college’s fundraising and assist me 
and the fellows in leading Exeter to even greater achievements.

Find out more about the director of development and alumni relations vacancy, 
and apply for the job,here 
<http://richmond-associates.com/jobs/director-of-development-and-alumni-relations-3>
.
 