 Trustees of two compensation funds set up after the Dunblane primary school 
massacre are being urged to provide details of who has benefited from their 
payouts, weeks after the families of a child who died and one who was seriously 
injured had their claims rejected by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board.
 The final audit will be published next month, shortly after the third 
anniversary of the gun attack by Thomas Hamilton in which 16 children and their 
teacher were killed, but it will contain only limited information on how the £7 
million has been distributed,so as to protect some of those who have received 
support.

 Yesterday, the mother of one child who was injured criticised what she said 
was secrecy surrounding the final report on the town's two funds, arguing that 
exact details of payments to all beneficiaries, except those whose children 
were murdered, should be made public.

 Veronica Hutchinson, whose daughter Amy, aged seven, had her leg shattered 
when Hamilton opened fire in her classroom, told a Sunday newspaper that the 
figures could embarrass some people who had received big payouts for stress. 
'They got a lot more than my daughter, and she is still suffering physically.'

 Mrs Hutchinson and other parents have refused to reveal how much they 
themselves received.

 She also said less should have been spent on buildings and more on children. 
The trustees have confirmed that £4.5 million went to parents whose children 
died or were injured and to those who suffered trauma. A further £1.8 million 
was spent on community projects and £500,000 on a memorial fountain and garden.

 Charlie Clydesdale, of Falkirk, whose daughter Victoria, aged five, was 
killed, said he had a right to know who benefited from the fund. 'The fund was 
set up to support the families, but I didn't get much. In fact I was turned 
down three times when I applied for help.'

 Dunblane Councillor Pat Greenhill, a trustee of the Observer Fund and the 
Dunblane Fund, yesterday defended the 'discreet approach'. 'Our decisions were 
based on a great deal of advice given to us in confidence from families and the 
medical profession. To start publishing who got what would mean people asking 
questions which would breach that confidentiality.'

 Mrs Greenhill argued that to publish details would only add to the animosity. 
'Everyone has the right to have their claims kept confidential.'

 The rulings came weeks after Mr Clydesdale and Christine McSkimming, 
grandmother and legal guardian of Aimie Adam, who also had a leg shattered by a 
bullet, had their claims turned down. The board ruled that they had been unable 
to prove sufficient suffering.

 Last month it granted Linda Stewart, the nursery teacher who witnessed the 
aftermath of the massacre, an undisclosed amount. She has not worked since the 
shooting and had already received an undisclosed interim payment.
 