
One of the best pieces of advice I was ever given was from a friend in the 
restaurant business. If I were planning to complain about any part of my meal 
or service, he said, I should wait until I had eaten all I was going to eat 
that night. He illustrated this warning with examples of what can happen to 
food prepared for awkward customers, and so I’ve followed this advice ever 
since. It’s a good principle: don’t complain to people on whom you’re relying – 
unless there’s no way they can wipe your steak on their bum or drop a bogey in 
your soup.

As with restaurants, so with schools. The difference with schools is that 
you’re likely to be stuck with them for a lot longer than one meal. So think 
carefully before putting on your Mr Angry face and marching into the school for 
a spot of ranting.

Think carefully before putting on your Mr Angry face and marching into the 
school for a spot of ranting

Like all institutions, though, schools do occasionally cock things up, and the 
fact that it’s their child on the receiving end can make parents hotter under 
the collar than they would be about a bit of overdone steak. So how best to go 
about complaining to a school?

Think. Think again

Well, first of all, don’t complain. Yes, that’s right, don’t complain. 
Complaints are destructive things. They’re the sign of minds missing their 
meeting, and they’ll do nothing for your relationship with your child’s teacher.

If that doesn’t help, just don’t lose sight of your objective. You’re not 
complaining to get someone into grief, satisfying though that may seem at 
times. You’re trying to get something to change. That requires a little more 
reason and a little less shouting. After all, how would you want a teacher to 
approach your child’s mistakes: “Try doing it this way next time”, or “You got 
it wrong, you incompetent git”?

If you don’t want a positive relationship with your child’s school, then feel 
free to go and tell the headteacher exactly what you think of the colour of his 
new academy chain-sponsored Ferrari, and the fact that he only seems to be 
employing sixth-formers as teachers. But don’t expect Johnny to win any more 
“Star of the Week” certificates. You have to be more subtle. Let’s look at some 
ways and means of making your point effectively to a school.

Do you really have a point?

Try to remember that your child is not the only student in the school. 
Complaining that she didn’t get the lead in the nativity play, or that he’s not 
captain of the football team, is pointless because you don’t know how other 
children are doing. The school has to manage all the children, including the 
ones who aren’t yours. Shocking, I know, but what can you do? It’s just 
possible that your offspring might not be the very best footballer or scholar.

The most common complaint of this kind tends to arrive with “setting”. There 
can’t be many teachers who haven’t at some time had to point out that, yes, Tom 
is a bright boy, and yes, he’s been making good progress, but no, he can’t go 
in the top set because there are 200 students in his year, 30 chairs in a 
classroom and 100 kids who are performing better than him. As an aside, it 
always seems to be the parents who are most committed to competition, setting, 
ranking and all the rest of the dog-eat-dog stuff who get most upset when the 
dog bites their own puppy. Anyway, if you complain about this, you’ll rapidly 
become the sort of parent who, when your name is mentioned, causes teachers to 
raise their eyebrows and mutter “Oh,that Mrs Smith”.

Consider proportionality

Let’s say a harassed teacher gives your child a sanction for missing homework. 
Your child is adamant that no instruction was received. If you think a raw deal 
has been had, then speak to the teacher, politely. You may get a slightly 
different version of events than your child’s, or you may get a teacher who 
apologises for a case of confused record-keeping. Either way, you’ll have 
created a positive relationship for the future. Do not write a steaming novella 
to the chair of governors complaining that your son’s civil rights have been 
denied. In sensible schools, this will be laughed at, and then ignored after a 
polite acknowledgement. In less sensible schools, many man-hours will be wasted 
in justification, explanation and recrimination as everyone scrambles to cover 
their arses. When the dust settles, your child will still be in that teacher’s 
class, only now he’s going to be getting a lot of individualised PhD-standard 
homework which you’ll have to help him with every night until your eyeballs 
bleed. This is not a positive relationship for the future.

Early on in my teaching career, I suffered this fate. I was introducing 
A-level coursework, and told my class of year-13s that they had to choose a 
question that had an element of historical doubt, so there was no point in a 
question like “Is Blair a bit dishonest?” or “Was Thatcher evil?”.

It was a joke. Not my best, but the sort of thing that raises a loyal chuckle 
on a boring Thursday afternoon. The next day I was hauled into the head’s 
office to be read a spittle-flecked diatribe about how a particular parent felt 
Thatcher “saved this country from the Argentinians”, and they did not send 
their child to my school to be “indoctrinated by trendy lefty teachers”. The 
head and I had a chuckle, and I went back to my classroom secretly pleased to 
have been called “trendy” for the first time in my life. This was not an 
effective complaint.

Ask first, shout later

Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> can be odd 
institutions, with odd ways of operating, and often employing odd people. The 
students, being children, are by definition also odd. So odd things might 
happen. If something happens that seems, well, odd, then try to approach it 
first by asking someone to explain. That completely unmarked book might be a 
sign of a teacher who has lost his pen-of-officially-approved-colour since the 
start of the year. Or it might be a sign that all the assessments are now done 
online. If you’re dissatisfied with the answer, by all means make your views 
known, but don’t assume the worst.

Consider the reliability of witnesses

Look, I’m a parent, and love my children dearly, but I have to admit that when 
it comes to the “it wasn’t my fault” championships, they’re gold medallists. 
Every parent has watched one of their children punch a sibling, rip the head 
off a doll, or write “mum is fat and horrible” on the kitchen table, then turn 
around with a face of angelic innocence and proclaim sincerely “But I didn’tdo 
anything!”. It’s great that parents want to stick up for their children, but if 
your child comes home from school with a detention, here are the possibilities:

• Your child, being 13 years old, decided to chat to his tablemate about 
Arsenal while the teacher was talking; got caught, and was handed a detention.

• Your child was sitting there paying full attention to every single word, 
ignoring the temptations of less well-behaved children, when the only adult in 
the room, a trained professional, decided that she would randomly sanction him 
for her own sadistic pleasure.

It’s a good idea to apply Occam’s razor (the fewer assumptions, the 
better)before hitting the complaint button.

Still want to complain?

Having accepted all the above, there will be occasions when the school, or a 
teacher, does get things wrong. So if you’ve contacted the person in question 
and still think that something unsatisfactory is taking place, here are a few 
dos and don’ts about how to proceed.

Do complain to the head 

She/he will pass that on to the relevant manager to investigate and report 
back before responding to you. This might take a couple of days, but it will 
happen. Note that if you write every week with a complaint, she/he will pass 
that on to the wastepaper-basket file, and you probably won’t get a response. 
You nutter.

Don’t leave an answerphone message 

Only messages from teachers pretending to have flu to avoid bottom-set year 9 
are ever picked up by the office. All the recorded complaints get turned into a 
mix tape with a death-metal backing track, and played at the end-of-year, 
sixth-form disco.

Do use the language of Ofsted 

Don’t say “What extra are you doing for my child?”. Instead, say “Can you tell 
me exactly how you’re spending my child’s pupil premium money?”. Trust me, the 
last one works much better – I’ve used it.

Don’t use ad hominem attacks 

I’ve heard parents describing their child’s 12-year-old adversary as a cross 
between Genghis Khan and Damien the Omen. Clue: a teacher is never going to nod 
and say: “Yes, Michael is, in fact, a little turd, and we’re going to expel him 
soon”. Stick to the issues, like whether a class move might be possible, or 
more teacher supervision at potential breaktime flashpoints – we might be able 
to do something about those.

Do get yourself elected as a governor 

If you’re lucky, your school hasn’t yet been swallowed up by a private academy 
chain, and so its governing body still has ultimate power, and the headteacher 
is accountable to it. If you think the school is getting something consistently 
wrong, then join up. If, on the other hand, your child’s school already has the 
coat-of-arms of a carpet magnate flying proudly from fifteen newly-installed 
masts, then you’re stuffed. Sorry.

Curriculum and exams

Complain to the government. They did it. Not us.

Snow days

Complain to God. He’s in charge of the weather.

All things considered

State schools are, by nature, inclusive institutions and encompass all 
opinions and tastes. Thus it’s impossible to please everyone. For every parent 
who thinks that their 17-year-old should be allowed to wear Julia Roberts’s 
Pretty Woman costume to sixth form, there’s another who thinks all the children 
should be made to dress like a member of Harold Macmillan’s cabinet in 1959.

Let me give you an example of how other parents get in the way: parents’ 
evenings.

Many schools have taken to handing parents five-minute time-slots with 
teachers. Theoretically, each parent/child combo turns up at the right time, 
gets a prepared talk from the teacher for those five minutes and no longer, and 
then departs to their next appointment. Except the orderly timetable usually 
lasts approximately fifteen minutes. Why? Other parents.

Parents get lost on the school site when trying to find a toilet; their child 
loses her appointment sheet. All these things happen. But they also want to 
talk about their child. It’s so unreasonable! Some of them carry on even after 
the five minutes is up. I used to sit helplessly smiling back, while watching a 
pile-up of agitated other parents behind them.

Now I employ a variety of tactics, ranging from closing my markbook with the 
Thump Of Finality, to sticking my hand out and saying, “thanks for coming in”. 
It seems to work. But I’ve heard of parents complaining bitterly about being 
kept waiting by others who had lengthy arguments with their child in front of 
us (always a good one), or have even broken down in tears (the parent, not the 
child).

Nearly all the issues you might feel are worthy of complaint stem from this 
inescapable fact: there are a lot more children in school, and the school has 
to try and do something for all of them.

Life would be great if the entire institution could be tailored just to your 
child, with a carefully personalised curriculum and school dinners that provide 
only your child’s favourite pizza toppings. Such institutions exist: they’re 
called “home-schools”, and you’re the headteacher. Best of luck.

• The writer is a history teacher in London who blogs as Disappointed Idealist 
<https://disidealist.wordpress.com/>
 