 Labour and the Liberal Democrats were tantalisingly close to finalising a 
coalition deal last night, only hours before the first meeting of the Scottish 
parliament. The two sides sat late into the night to put the finishing touches 
to a joint document that will cement the first coalition government since the 
second world war.
An opportunity for a face-saving climbdown by the Lib Dems over tuition fees 
was provided yesterday by university principals who warned the parties against 
meddling. Dr Ian Graham-Bryce, convener of the committee of Scottish higher 
education principals, warned political leaders inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> that an 'uninformed decision will not 
be the best solution for Scottish students'.

The Lib Dems campaigned for the abolition of tuition fees, a move Labour has 
resisted, making it the biggest stum bling block to a coalition. After three 
days of talks, Labour and Lib Dem sources reported 'smiling faces' round the 
negotiating table in Edinburgh last night.

The first business of the new parliament will be routine, with the MSPs 
swearing allegiance to the monarch an awkward little ceremony as many MSPs are 
republican. The afternoon session will be more interesting, with MSPs electing 
by secret ballot the presiding officer, roughly equivalent to the speaker at 
Westminster. Lord Steel, the former Liberal leader, will face a challenge from 
the Scottish National Party's George Reid. Although the Lib Dems insisted that 
Labour support for Lord Steel was not part of the coalition negotiations, the 
SNP suspect that it will be.

Although the exterior of the building is of soot-encased antiquity, the 
chamber itself is an MFI parliament, with desks looking as if they had been 
hurriedly screwed together. Election of the presiding officer will be by ballot 
box but other votes will be done electronically rather than trudging through 
lobbies in the Westminster ritual. MSPs can also register electronically that 
they want to speak, instead of jumping up and down trying to catch the 
speaker's eye.

Devolution across the UK <http://www.newsunlimited.co.uk/Devolution> 
Devolution in Scotland 
<http://newsunlimited.co.uk/Scotland/0,2759,41845,00.html> 
Devolution in Wales <http://newsunlimited.co.uk/Wales>  