
A new breed of payday loan brokers are making as many as 1m attempts per month 
to raid the bank accounts of some of the poorest members of society.

The behaviour is provoking alarm at one of Britain’s biggest high street 
banks, Natwest, which says it is being inundated with complaints from its most 
vulnerable customers.

NatWest said it is seeing as many as 640 complaints a day from customers who 
say that sums, usually in the range of £50 to £75, have been taken from their 
accounts by companies they do not recognise but are in fact payday loan brokers.

The brokers are websites that promise to find loans, but are not lenders 
themselves. Often buried in the small print is a clause allowing the payday 
broker to charge £50 to £75 to find the person a loan – on top of an annual 
interest charge as high as 3,000%. In the worst cases, the site shares the 
person’s bank details with as many as 200 other companies, which then also 
attempt to levy charges against the individual.

The City regulator has received a dossier of information about the escalating 
problem, and the Financial Ombudsman Service also confirmed that it is facing a 
wave of complaints about the issue.

NatWest, which is owned by the Royal Bank of Scotland, gave as an example a 
41-year-old shop assistant who took a payday loan of £100 at 2,216% interest. A 
month later she complained to NatWest after seeing a separate fee of £67.88 
paid to My Loan Now and £67.95 to Loans Direct on her account, companies she 
said she had never dealt with.

The broker sites tell customers they need their bank account details to search 
for a loan, but then pass them on to as many as 200 other brokers and lenders, 
which then seek to extract fees, even if they have not supplied a loan. The 
small print allowing the site to pass on the details and demand payments can be 
hidden in the site’s ‘privacy policy’ or in small print at the bottom of the 
page.

The sites use sophisticated methods to take money from personal bank accounts. 
They typically push their charges through bank payment processing systems 
between midnight and 3am, knowing that state benefit payments are added to 
accounts just after midnight. When the person living on unemployment or 
disability benefit wakes in the morning, they find their money has already 
vanished.

RBS Natwest, whose parent is majority-owned by the taxpayer, said it has 
terminated payment arrangements with 20 payday loan brokers already, but is 
battling against sites which reappear under various .net or .uk domains.

Terry Lawson, head of fraud and chargeback operations for RBS and NatWest, 
said: “We’ve seen large numbers of customers incurring charges they don’t 
expect when using a payday loan broker since July this year. Customers’ account 
or debit card details are gathered and sent on to up to 200 other brokers and 
lenders who charge them fees for a loan application.

“At its height we were seeing up to 640 calls a day on unexpected fees, but 
we’re pleased to say we’re seeing this decrease on account of the actions we’re 
taking to help stop these sharp practices.”

Wendy Scurr from Middlesborough, who lives on disability benefits, looked for 
a loan online to buy a new settee. “I put in my bank details as they said I had 
got the loan. But as soon as I submitted the final bit of information, it 
popped up that I had been declined. I felt that I had been conned out of my 
bank details, but I thought not much more about it.

“But on the Friday when I went to take some money out I found there had been 
two payments made of £67.88 to My Loan Now and £59.99 [to another lender].

“I went into the bank and they told me that six minutes after My Loan Now had 
taken the £67.88, it attempted to take the money again but as I had nothing 
left it was rejected.” She has since had to change her bank account to stop 
repeated attempts to take money, while on her phone she receives as many as 20 
or 30 calls and texts a day from payday loan brokers.

My Loan Now’s website displays a warning that it will charge a “one-off loan 
matching fee” of £67.88.

NatWest said that during August it saw 1m attempts by payday loan brokers to 
take money from its customer accounts, although the majority were rejected as 
the customers were already seriously overdrawn. It added that it is working 
with the “merchant acquirers” – such as WorldPay and Barclaycard - to blacklist 
the brokers where possible, and from next month will entirely block payments to 
two of the major players.

“We are reaching out to customers to warn them of these fees and taking steps 
to block the transactions altogether.

We are also actively working with the industry to raise awareness of these 
practices and in many cases halt some of the brokers’ operations, but, these 
are sophisticated organisations, they are resourceful and more needs to be done 
at an industry and regulator level to protect customers who may already be in 
vulnerable situations. If one of our customers finds they have paid these 
charges, they should get in touch , so that we can stop payment of further 
charges and help them recoup any funds already paid, if possible”.

What shocks many of the victims of payday loan brokers is that the companies 
are usually authorised by the Financial Conduct Authority. The FCA said it has 
only recently taken on the job of authorising credit brokers, which was 
previously handled by the Office of Fair Trading. What is called “interim 
authorisation” was granted to 5,247 brokers, and only since 1 October has the 
authority begun assessing applications in detail.

My Loan Now is the trading name of Katsea Financial Solutions, which gives its 
address in Ipswich and runs ten other loan brands.Peter Tuvey, a director of 
Katsea, told the Guardian he did not charge fees and that My Loan Now was an 
Isle of Man-registered company that had no connection to him. But a check on 
the Isle of Man registry showed Tuvey was also registered there as a director 
of My Loan Now.

Tuvey said: “I resigned as a director of Katsea (Isle Of Man) in June 2014. My 
resignation was due to the company changing its principal business practices 
from a free comparison site to other practices.” He did not respond to further 
requests for information.

Loans Direct is run by Syed Rizvi from an address in Manchester. Neither Loans 
Direct nor Rizvi could be reached for comment.
 