
The Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> has taken 
emergency action to tackle payday loan brokers after a deluge of complaints 
over “blatantly unfair” practices.

The brokers have made as many as one million attempts a month to raid the bank 
accounts of some of the poorest members of society. While promising to find a 
loan, the they charge a fee of £50 to £75, and then share the person’s bank 
details with as many as 200 other companies, which also attempt to charge the 
individual.

The financial regulator said it had blocked seven payday loan brokers from 
taking on new business, with three in line for further “enforcement action”.

In October, NatWest said it was being contacted every day by hundreds of its 
most vulnerable customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/oct/29/payday-loan-brokers-bank-accounts-poor-customers>
, who were bewildered by the charges added to their accounts.

The FCA said the new rules would come into force on 2 January 2015, and would 
end the lack of clear information on the websites currently luring people into 
paying fees without “informed consent”.

In an unusual step, the FCA said the rules had been made without prior 
consultation because it considered that the delay arising from the time it 
would take to consult “would be prejudicial to the interests of consumers”.

It added: “The FCA also believes that enforcement action alone is not 
sufficient to protect consumers from the poor practices identified in the 
market.”

The rules will ban credit brokers from charging fees to customers, and from 
requesting customers’ bank details unless they comply with new requirements 
making it clear who they are dealing with, what fee will be payable, and when 
and how the fee will be payable.

The FCA clampdown on brokers is the latest in a series of regulatory actions 
against the payday loan industry. From2 January 2015, the interest that payday 
loan brokers can charge will be capped at 0.8% a day in a move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/nov/11/payday-loans-caps-fca>, which, 
along with other measures, is expected to drive as many as four out of five 
lenders out of business.

The FCA said that over 40% of consumer credit complaints received were about 
credit brokers.

“The FCA has also received relevant intelligence from consumer groups and 
others who are seeing increasing complaints from people who have had money 
taken from their accounts unexpectedly and often by more than one broker.”

RBS NatWest was the first major bank to blow the whistle on payday loan 
brokers. It said it had terminated payment arrangements with 20 of the brokers 
already, but had had to battle against sites that then reappeared under various 
.net or .uk domains.

Terry Lawson, the head of fraud and chargeback operations for RBS and NatWest, 
told the Guardian in October: “We’ve seen large numbers of customers incurring 
charges they don’t expect when using a payday loan broker since July this year. 
Customers’ account or debit card details are gathered and sent on to up to 200 
other brokers and lenders who charge them fees for a loan application. At its 
height we were seeing up to 640 calls a day on unexpected fees.”

Wendy Scurr from Middlesborough, who lives on disability benefits, looked for 
a loan online to buy a new settee. “I put in my bank details as they said I had 
got the loan. But as soon as I submitted the final bit of information, it 
popped up that I had been declined. I felt that I had been conned out of my 
bank details, but I thought not much more about it.

“But on the Friday when I went to take some money out I found there had been 
two payments made of £67.88 to My Loan Now and £59.99 to another lender.

“I went into the bank and they told me that six minutes after My Loan Now had 
taken the £67.88, it attempted to take the money again but as I had nothing 
left it was rejected.” She has since had to change her bank account to stop 
repeated attempts to take money.

My Loan Now’s website displays a warning that it will charge a “one-off loan 
matching fee” of £67.88.
 