
Well over a million people will see the cost of their borrowing fall now that 
new price caps on payday loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/nov/11/payday-loans-caps-fca> have 
taken effect.

However, early indications are that many of the sector’s bigger players will 
be charging the maximum amount allowed to under the new regime, rather taking 
the opportunity to set their fees below the cap.

Interest and fees on all high-cost short-term credit loans are now capped at 
0.8% per day of the amount borrowed. If borrowers do not repay their loans on 
time, default charges must not exceed £15.

In addition, the total cost (fees, interest etc) is capped at 100% of the 
original sum, which means no borrower will ever pay back more than twice what 
they borrowed, said the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA),which has introduced 
the new rules 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/news/fca-confirms-price-cap-rules-for-payday-lenders>.

Someone taking out a £100 loan for 30 days and paying it back on time will not 
pay more than £24 in fees and charges.

Payday lending is a multibillion-pound sector: the Competition & Markets 
Authority 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/competition-and-markets-authority> 
said there were 1.8 million payday loan customers in 2012-13, while the FCA 
estimates that in 2013, 1.6 million customers took out around 10m loans. 
However, some lenders quit the market before the changes took place. These 
include Minicredit, which ceased its lending on 10 December.

Consumer organisation Which? <http://www.which.co.uk> said the new regime 
“comes not a moment too soon”. Richard Lloyd, Which? executive director, said: 
“The regulator has clearly shown it is prepared to take tough action to stamp 
out unscrupulous practices, and they must keep the new price cap under close 
review.”

Which? carried out research into the amounts payday lenders were charging just 
before Christmas, to see if they had cut the cost of borrowing ahead of the 
price caps taking effect. It found that some of the bigger payday lenders had 
already brought their charges in line with the price caps. Wonga, QuickQuid, 
PaydayUK and MyJar were charging the maximum £24 to borrow £100 for 30 days, 
with default fees charged at £15.

When the Guardian checked some of the lender websites on 31 December, it found 
some had not yet updated their pricing. Peachy.co.uk’s website was quoting a 
cost of £135 for a £100 loan over 30 days, while Quid24.com showed a cost of 
£134.70 and Safeloans quoted £130.

Which? said London Mutual credit union was the only payday loan provider it 
looked at that charged less than the maximum allowed under the cap, with 
borrowers having to pay just £3 in interest on a loan of £100 over one month, 
with no default fees.

Martin Wheatley, chief executive of the FCA, said the new caps would make the 
cost of a loan cheaper for most consumers. “Anyone who gets into difficulty and 
is unable to pay back on time, will not see the interest and fees on their loan 
spiral out of control – no consumer will ever owe more than double the original 
loan amount,” he added.

However, it appears the new regime will not spell the end of the huge 
annualised interest rates quoted on payday loan websites. Despite the changes, 
Wonga is still able to charge a representative APR of 1,509%, while QuickQuid’s 
site was promoting an APR of 1,212%.

New rules covering payday loan brokers have also taken effect after the 
regulator was deluged with complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/dec/01/payday-loan-brokers-emergency-action-financial-regulator>
 over practices such as imposing charges that consumers often knew nothing 
about until they checked their bank account.

These firms cannot now request an individual’s bank details or take a payment 
from their account without their explicit consent first. Payday loan brokers 
will also have to include their legal name, not just their trading name, in all 
advertising and other communications with customers, and state prominently in 
their ads that they are a broker, not a lender.
 