
Bank customers who overspend could soon get an electric shock to warn them 
that they have gone into the red, thanks to an invention from a British 
technology firm.

Zapping someone for going overdrawn might sound harsh, but the company behind 
the idea claims many customers worried about exceeding their limits would agree 
that it is better to get a little shock now instead of a nasty jolt later.


The banking platform has been developed by Intelligent Environments 
<http://www.intelligentenvironments.com/info-centre/press-releases/world-s-first-internet-of-things-bank-helps-you-take-control-of-your-finances-and-kerb-overspending>
, which said it hoped to see the technology made available to the public “in 
the near future”.


The platform, called Interact IoT (internet of things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/10/internet-of-things-surveillance-smart-tv-cars-toys>
), involves linking some smart web-enabled devices to a bank account. These 
includePavlok <http://pavlok.com/hello.php>, a wearable device that gives users 
mild electric shocks to help them break bad habits, and which claims to have 
already helped hundreds of people quit smoking, nail-biting and unhealthy 
eating.


The “zap” that the wristband delivers supposedly ranges from “pleasant to 
slightly uncomfortable”.

The link-up between the platform and the Pavlok wristband would involve 
customers logging into their bank or credit card account, connecting the device 
and setting a spending limit. When they get near their spending limit, their 
phone will display a notification. But if that did not work and the individual 
exceeded their limit, they would get an electric shock.

Interact IoT also works with Google’s Nest <https://nest.com/uk/> smart 
thermostat, which learns and manages the heating patterns of a house. 
Intelligent Environments claims it will help people save money on their utility 
bills. If a customer’s account balance drops below their self-imposed spending 
limit, the technology will automatically turn their thermostat down to a 
pre-decided temperature.

Pavlok and Nest are opt-in services, so customers can decide whether to switch 
them on or not. But Intelligent Environments claims: “With the Pavlok 
integration, users have told us they love it.”

The firm, which specialises in digital financial innovations, said it was 
responding to demand, pointing out that contactless payment methods had made it 
more difficult for people to keep track of their spending, thus increasing the 
risk that some will get into financial trouble.


It said its research had found that one in three millennials were “too scared 
to check their bank account”. It also found that only a third of 18- to 
24-year-olds felt their banks provided them with the digital budgeting tools 
they needed to stay on top of their debt and finances.


Intelligent Environments added that it “anticipates many discussions with 
banks and credit card companies to bring the Interact IoT platform to their 
customers in the near future”.


The company has previously worked with a number of UK financial services 
companies including HSBC, Lloyds Banking Group and Atom Bank. In 2013, it 
launched the “world’s first” smartwatch banking app, while in 2015 it developed 
an emoji-only passcode, enabling customers to log into their financial services 
app using only emojis.


David Webber, managing director of Intelligent Environments, said: “With 
cashless payment methods such as contactless, direct debits and Apple Pay, it’s 
unsurprising we lose track of spending, so we decided to solve this by enabling 
smart devices to manage our overspending for us. This means customers can now 
get complete control and oversight of their finances without having to lift a 
finger.”

 