
The Department of Education is poised to exact a record $2.4m fine to Penn 
State University for its mishandling of sexual assault incidents that include 
the infamous child sex abuse crimes committed by Jerry Sandusky.

Jury hands $7m damages to Penn State whistleblower in Sandusky scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/jury-hands-7m-damages-to-penn-state-whistleblower-in-sandusky-scandal>
The proposed fine, which will surpass the department’s previous highest 
penalty for a case of this nature by more than $2m, was immediately hailed by 
victims’ advocates as a warning shot to other colleges.

“This signals a significant change in how seriously the department is taking 
its enforcement responsibilities,” said S Daniel Carter, a longtime campus 
safety advocate. “It is a major shift that is important for all higher 
education institutions in the United States.”

The fine comes nearly five years to the day after a child sex abuse scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/penn-state-sexual-abuse-scandal> rocked 
the Penn State community with revelations that senior administrators had failed 
to act on reports that Sandusky, an assistant football coach, was sexually 
abusing young boys. The revelations, in November 2011, plunged Penn State into 
a federal criminal investigation. A separate, searing report by the former 
director of the FBI confirmed that Penn State’s president, its athletic 
director, the head of its campus police, andJoe Paterno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/17/penn-state-joe-paterno-anniversary-sex-abuse-scandal>
, the school’s revered football coach, were all exposed as having played key 
roles in a cover-up of Sandusky’s crimes.

Amid the conflagration, the department of education quietly opened up an 
inquiry into whether Penn State officials had violated the Clery Act, a 1990 
act of Congress that requires colleges to track and publicly disclose crimes 
that occur on campus or in the vicinity.

But of all the investigations into Penn State, said Carter, it may be this one 
that has the greatest implications for other schools which mishandle cases of 
sexual misconduct.

The significance is in the sheer breadth and detail of the investigation. 
Whereas previous education department probes have covered only a few years of 
alleged violations, the duration of Sandusky’s crimes forced investigators to 
search for Clery Act infractions dating all the way back to 1998.


Investigators concluded that Penn State had committed 11 different violations 
from 1998 to 2011, ranging from a failure to maintain a daily crime log to a 
failure to issue timely warnings about a crime to the campus community. A major 
failure came when the school failed to notify the campus about the forthcoming 
charges against Sandusky.

“In short, a man who was about to be charged with violent crimes against 
defenseless minors was free to roam the Penn State campus, as he pleased,” the 
report said.

In the largest individual fine, the department has proposed penalizing Penn 
State $2,167,500 for a “failure to properly classify reported incidents and 
disclose crime statistics from 2008-2011”.

“The overall fine was that large because in this case, the department 
uncovered a long-term history of sustained noncompliance,” said Carter.

Penn State said the report was being reviewed and noted that since 2011 it has 
implemented “robust” training and collection processes under the Clery Act.

Carter could think of few other probes that cover such a long period of time. 
But the steep fine proposed for Penn State was not just a function of the span 
of time investigators covered.

This is the first major investigation to be concluded by a new education 
department division dedicated solely to probing Clery Act violations, he noted. 
“And they could be putting their stamp on what Clery Act enforcement is going 
to look like in the years going forward,” Carter said.

The department’s report gave more detail about the accusations against 
Sandusky, who was sentenced to several decades in prison in late 2012. The 
report said Penn State officials disclosed in June that 45 people have claimed 
they were victims of Sandusky, who was convicted of abusing 10 boys.

The education department said Penn State’s police department concealed its 
investigation into a 1998 report involving Sandusky and a boy in a team shower. 
Police didn’t record the matter on its daily crime log even though university 
policy required that the log describe the type, location and time of every 
criminal incident.

The report also disclosed new details about Paterno, including that he once 
had his secretary email university officials to say he would take care of 
disciplining players involved in a 2007 fight at an off-campus apartment 
building. Paterno, who was seen at the time as a disciplinarian, then texted 
two of the players to advise them on avoiding the campus adjudication process.

When the school attempted to reform its disciplinary system, the report said, 
Paterno resisted. “What ensued was an overlong and dysfunctional standoff 
between the football program and student affairs officials with the president 
positioned somewhere between the two sides,” the report said. “Some members of 
the football team, aware of the conflicts, took the program’s attitude toward 
the student conduct process as license to break the rules.”

Carter said the record-shattering fine was in keeping with a trend: for the 
past two decades, the education department has steadily increased its penalties 
for schools that violate the Clery Act.


In the early 2000s, fines exceeding five figures were incredibly rare. Only 
twice between 2000 and 2010 did the department impose a six-figure penalty, and 
the median fine during that period was $55,000. Then, from 2011 to 2014, the 
department doubled the rate at which it slapped universities with six-figure 
penalties, and the median fine increased to $110,000.

Penn State could negotiate for a settlement amount of less than $2.4m. But the 
college is still likely to pay a record penalty. To date, the largest fine a 
college has paid for Clery Act violations is the $350,000 Eastern Michigan 
University paid in 2007.

“When we determine that an institution is not upholding this obligation, then 
there must be consequences,” said Ted Mitchell, undersecretary at the education 
department.
 