
A pensions expert has raised questions about the fate of the Dunlop Slazenger 
pension fund asSports Direct prepares to sell the Dunlop sports brand to its 
Japanese distributor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/sports-direct-sells-dunlop-for-137m>
, Sumitomo Rubber Industries.

Accounts for Dunlop Slazenger International, a subsidiary of Sports Direct, 
indicate the company had a £9.2m pension deficit in April 2015, with sales of 
£30.6m for the 12 months to 26 April and a loss of more than £20m. Sports 
Direct has said it is only selling the Dunlop brand – best known for its green 
flash tennis shoes. It will retain Slazenger, the supplier of Wimbledon’s 
tennis balls.

Pensions expert John Ralfe, who recently advised a parliamentary committee 
inquiry into the handling of the BHS pension fund, said: “Will the new owners 
be guaranteeing the pension obligations of the company they are buying?”

He added that new legislation should be brought in to ensure that such 
guarantees were given in future.

Frank Field, who chairs the work and pensions select committee, said the 
Pensions Regulator should be closely examining the Dunlop deal and publicly 
flagging up any issues. “What can be gained by the regulator’s secrecy?” he 
said.

Sports Direct should “give reassurance that it is not going to dump the 
deficit on the pension protection fund and the regulator should be active and 
reviewing this”, he said.

The regulator declined to comment on a specific case and said seeking 
clearance was a voluntary matter.

MPs have called for the pension regulator to be given powers to veto takeover 
deals which put too much strain on pension schemes, among a raft of measures 
they believe could help avoid a rerun of the situation at retailer BHS, which 
collapsed in April and prompted recriminations about its £571m pension deficit.

It is unclear whether the pension deficit has changed since the accounts for 
the year to April 2015 were filed. Sports Direct declined to comment, citing 
confidentiality and stock market rules.


In a statement to the stock market earlier this week, Sports Direct said the 
Dunlop business made a pretax profit of £4m on sales of £41.8m this year, 
figures which it said were unaudited.

Accounts filed for the Dunlop Slazenger group in 2015 at Companies House show 
a £22.3m loss. The group was technically insolvent, with more liabilities than 
assets but the accounts state that Dunlop Slazenger remained a going concern as 
working capital was financed by Sports Direct.

Sports Direct’s founder and major shareholder, Mike Ashley, acquired Dunlop 
Slazenger for an estimated £40m in 2004 from Royal Bank of Scotland – which had 
taken control of the struggling business from its private equity-backed owners.


The company is selling Dunlop to a Japanese buyer in a surprise $137.5m 
(£112m) deal. Sumitomo Rubber Industries, which already owns the Dunlop rights 
in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, confirmed that it will acquire the remaining 
international rights to the brand, as well as its sporting goods and licensing 
businesses. The deal is scheduled to be completed in May 2017.


As part of the deal it has granted Sports Direct a royalty free licence to 
continue to usethe Dunlop brand for premium workwear and safety wear sold in 
its own stores.

Last year, Dunlop Slazenger’s sales were about half the £58m recorded in the 
year before Ashley took over the group. In 2003 it made a £5.5m loss while its 
pension deficit stood at £13.3m.


Sumitomo did not respond to a request for comment.
 