
A big increase in the number of people becoming insolvent in England and Wales 
has prompted fresh warnings about the fate of financially stretched households 
when interest rates start to rise.

There were 27,029 personal insolvencies in England and Wales in the second 
quarter, a 5.1% rise on a year earlier.

The increase was driven by a 20% jump in the number of people entering into 
individual voluntary arrangements (IVAs) to a record high of 14,571, the 
Insolvency Service, which published the figures, said.

Some experts said it was evidence that creditors were more confident about 
recovering debts in an improving economy. But others insisted it showed more 
families were on a financial knife-edge after years of falling real wages and 
government cuts.

"Aside from all the talk of economic recovery, it's clear that people are 
really struggling," said Bev Budsworth, the managing director of The Debt 
Advisor.

She said hundreds of thousands of people were only just about making their 
monthly debt repayments because interest rates are still at a record low of 
0.5%. But financial markets are pricing in a rate hike by the end of the year 
against a backdrop of stronger economic growth.

"The acid test will be when the Bank of England starts to raise its base rate 
and people's mortgage payments follow suit."

Brian Johnson, insolvency partner at the chartered accountants, HW Fisher & 
Company, said the figures showed Britons were shrugging off austerity and had 
been tempted to overextend.

"With as many as a quarter of mortgage holders facing unaffordable payments if 
interest rates rise to a more normal level of 3%, a personal insolvency storm 
could be gathering," he said.

But Matthew Chadwick, business restructuring partner at advisors BDO, said 
with the economy looking healthier, those with bad debts were now more likely 
to be asked to pay them back.

"A continuing rise in the number of personal insolvencies in the next 12-18 
months is therefore likely," he said. "Today's rise in individual voluntary 
arrangements is typical at our position in the economic cycle and need not be 
cause for alarm."
 