
The pharmaceutical company Pfizer <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer>
 has been fined a record £84.2m by the UK’s competition regulator after the 
price charged to the NHS for an anti-epilepsy drug was increased by up to 
2,600%.

The Competition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission>, issuing its 
biggest fine, said the “extraordinary price rises have cost the NHS and the 
taxpayer tens of millions of pounds”.

The CMA also fined the drugs distributor Flynn Pharma £5.2m for charging 
excessive and unfair prices in the UK for phenytoin sodium capsules, which are 
used by an estimated 48,000 epilepsy patients in the UK to prevent and control 
seizures. The watchdog has ordered both companies to drop their prices.


US-based Pfizer <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer> rejected the 
CMA’s findings. Both companies said they would appeal against the decision.


The CMA has four other ongoing investigations into the pharmaceutical 
industry, with at least one of those focused on excessive pricing.

Cancer drug companies cut prices to win NHS approval
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/18/cancer-drug-companies-cut-prices-to-win-nhs-approval>
The fines follow an overnight price increase for the drug of up to 2,600%, 
after it was deliberately debranded, the CMA said. Pfizer makes the drug and 
sells it to Flynn, which in turn sells it to theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

Before September 2012, Pfizer manufactured and sold phenytoin sodium capsules 
to UK wholesalers and pharmacies under the brand name Epanutin, and the price 
was regulated. In September 2012, Pfizer sold the UK distribution rights to 
Flynn Pharma, debranding the drug and making it generic.

The drug was no longer subject to price regulation, leaving Pfizer free to 
sharply increase the price it charged Flynn, which in turn further raised the 
price it charged the NHS.

Generic drugs are generally available to customers at cheaper prices than 
branded products because they can be manufactured by any company, not just the 
developer of the original drug.

However, the CMA said that because epilepsy patients who are already taking 
phenytoin sodium capsules would not usually be switched to other products, 
including another manufacturer’s version of the product, the NHS had no 
alternative but to pay the increased prices for the drug.

The amount the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> was charged for 
100mg packs of the drug was increased from £2.83 to £67.50 before being reduced 
to £54 from May 2014. As a result, the amount the NHS spent on phenytoin sodium 
capsules rocketed from about £2m a year in 2012 to £50m in 2013.


The CMA also found that Pfizer, best known for its mass-market drugs such as 
Viagra, was charging a far higher price for the anti-epilepsy drug in the UK 
than in any other European country.

Its fining of Pfizer is the highest imposed in UK competition law, reflecting 
the seriousness of the case, the watchdog said. The previous record wasa £58.5m 
fine handed to British Airways in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/apr/19/ba-fuel-surcharge-fine-oft> 
for colluding with Virgin Atlantic on fuel surcharges.


Philip Marsden, who led the investigation for the CMA, accused the Pfizer and 
Flynn Pharma of exploitation and said there was no justification for such price 
rises. Phenytoin sodium capsules are an old drug and there had been no recent 
innovation or significant investment, he said.

Marsden added: “The companies deliberately exploited the opportunity offered 
by debranding to hike up the price for a drug which is relied upon by many 
thousands of patients. These extraordinary price rises have cost the NHS and 
the taxpayer tens of millions of pounds.


“This is the highest fine the CMA has imposed and it sends out a clear message 
to the sector that we are determined to crack down on such behaviour and to 
protect customers.”

Pfizer defended its actions, saying the drugs were loss-making before they 
were debranded and distributed through Flynn Pharma. It also argued that the 
price was less than that of the equivalent medicine from another supplier to 
the NHS.

A spokesman for the CMA said Pfizer recouped its losses on the medication 
within two months, adding that the price of other drugs did not permit the 
companies fined to charge “excessive and unfair prices”.

Pfizer said in a statement: “Pfizer refutes the findings set out in the 
Competition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission> decision. In this 
transaction, and in all of our business operations, we approached this 
divestment with integrity, and believe it fully complies with established 
competition law.


“Phenytoin capsules were a loss-making product for Pfizer and the Flynn 
transaction represented an opportunity to secure ongoing supply of an important 
medicine for patients with epilepsy, while maintaining continuity of 
manufacture.

“Pfizer believes the CMA’s findings are wrong in fact and law and will be 
appealing all aspects of the decision.”

David Fakes, Flynn Pharma’s chief executive, said: “We believe that, left 
unchallenged, the CMA’s decision today would stunt investment in generics, 
eventually leading to a reduction in supply and less choice for doctors and 
patients. It is a matter of common interest for us to appeal and see this 
decision overturned.”


Duncan Liddell, competition partner at the law firm Ashurst, said the CMA had 
decided to make a point by handing out a record fine.

“Amidst the manifold uncertainties of Brexit, there’s a clear message here 
that boards should be including competition law compliance in their priorities 
for 2017.”
 