
He had big ears, bad breath (due to false teeth, heavy drinking and smoking) 
and a reputation for treating women as roughly off screen as on. He was also 
tall, charming, handsome and (from the 1932 film version of O'Neill'sStrange 
Interludeonwards) distinctively moustachioed. His powerful scowl, beguiling 
smile and intense gaze endeared him to the camera and a national poll in 1938 
crowned him "King of Hollywood". In 1939 he was everyone's choice to play Rhett 
Butler inGone with the Wind, and got to speak his signature line, "Frankly, my 
dear, I don't give a damn."

For a democratic king, his background was suitably log-cabin humble. Gable 
grew up in blue-collar Ohio, his mother dying before he was a year old. He did 
manual work before developing a taste for acting. His first wife, an actress 14 
years his senior, smoothed his rough edges and got him film work as an extra. 
But it was on the stage that he was first noticed, the critic of theNew York 
Morning Telegraphsaying of his performance in Machinal (1928), "He's young, 
vigorous and brutally masculine." His second wife, a rich Texan, even older 
than his first, took him further along.

His first featured role was the heavy in a western, The Painted Desert (1931), 
and he was signed by MGM where he remained for the next 23 years, appearing 
opposite (and invariably sleeping with) the studio's top stars: Joan Crawford, 
Norma Shearer, Greta Garbo, Jean Harlow, Myrna Loy, Lana Turner and Hedy 
Lamarr. Under the right direction he was as good at comedy as drama and won an 
Oscar as the hard-boiled reporter accompanying runaway heiress Claudette 
Colbert in Capra's first great success,It Happened One Night (1934). The scene 
in which he was revealed to be wearing no vest had a devastating effect on the 
underwear business.

Gable's one true love was the lively, free-spirited Carole Lombard, his third 
wife, who had his number from the start and encouraged him to accept the role 
of Rhett Butler. Her death in a 1942 air crash during a wartime bond-raising 
tour, followed by his subsequent three years as an army air-force gunner and 
cameraman, created a watershed between the Golden Age of pre-war Hollywood 
which he dominated, and its post-war years of decline. Back in California he 
developed a serious drinking problem, married twice more, suffered doubts and 
depressions, went freelance and starred in a further 22 films. He worked with 
John Ford onMogambo (1953), a remake of his 1932 classic Red Dust with Ava 
Gardner replacing Jean Harlow, and he played opposite Sophia Loren and Doris 
Day. His only truly significant film was John Huston'sThe Misfits (1961), 
giving his subtlest, most poignant performance opposite Marilyn Monroe as a sad 
loser in thrall to the illusions of the American Dream. He died before it was 
released and four months before the birth of his only son.

Joan Crawford on Gable "He was a king wherever he went. He walked like one, he 
behaved like one, and he was the most masculine man I have ever met in my life."

What's Up Doc? The animator Friz Freleng used Gable as a model for Bugs Bunny.

Essential DVDs Dance, Fools, Dance, Susan Lenox, Red Dust, It Happened One 
Night, Mutiny on the Bounty, Gone with the Wind, The Misfits.
 