
Government plans to fast-track degree-awarding powers to new startup 
institutions as part of its controversial higher education proposals are “a 
risk too far”, experts in the sector are warning.

Ministers say the legislation, which returns to parliament for further 
scrutiny next week, will increase competition and choice in the higher 
education sector, and deliver value for money for students.

But a new report by the Higher Education Policy Institute 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/> thinktank says that opening up the sector to so-called 
“alternative providers” could put the reputation of UK universities at risk if 
not properly regulated.

The report, published on Thursday, claims that under the legislation, more 
than two-thirds of alternative providers would remain outside of the new 
regulatory system. It also calls for better protection of public money as the 
number of for-profit providers proliferate.

“Alternative providers are numerous and diverse, with over 700 institutions 
operating in England alone,” said report co-author, John Fielden. “Designing a 
regulatory system for both the traditional sector and the newcomers is a bed of 
nails.”

Moreover he said, while the higher education and research bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2016/oct/18/higher-education-research-bill-needs-amended>
 – which begins its committee stage in the Lords next Monday – removes some 
barriers to market entry, “the new high-speed approval system for 
degree-awarding powers is a risk too far”.

In the past it could take six years for a provider to obtain degree-awarding 
powers. Under the new legislation, they can be given the same powers from the 
day they launch for a three-year probationary period, reducing the time it 
takes to acquire the title of university.

The government faces major cross-party opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/31/lords-revolt-tory-plans-free-market-universities>
 to its proposed changes. Labour, Liberal Democrats and crossbench peers in the
House of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/01/leave-state-control-of-universities-to-china>
 have joined forces in an attempt to scupper what they believe is an attempt at 
full-scale “marketisation” of the sector.

The Hepi report also looks at lessons that can be learned from the experience 
in Australia and the US, where there has been rapid growth in for-profit 
institutions. Co-author Robin Middlehurst says: “Better protection of the 
public purse is overdue, especially given the growth in the number of 
for-profit providers. [Ninety-five per cent of new entrants to the market in 
the past five years have been for-profit providers, the report notes.]

“Experience in the US and Australia shows overly generous rules for 
alternative providers are a magnet for questionable business practices. The end 
results can include stranded students, a bill for taxpayers and regulatory 
intervention.”


The University College Union (UCU), which represents further and higher 
education staff, said the Hepi report should sound alarm bells in government. 
The UCU general secretary, Sally Hunt, said: “We cannot afford to ignore the 
lessons from the US where the for-profit higher education sector has 
unravelled, taking billions in taxpayers’ money but failing the majority of its 
students.


 “If we are to protect our students and the global reputation enjoyed by UK 
universities, the new legislation must protect taxpayers’ money from being 
handed over to a potential pool of unscrupulous providers.

“We must have more rigorous quality measures applied before any new provider 
is allowed to access either degree-awarding powers or state funding via the 
student loans system.”

Nick Hillman, the director of Hepi, added: “All higher education institutions 
were new entrants once, and many alternative providers are providing flexible 
and innovative provision to underrepresented groups.

“But, as the higher education market continues to change shape, we must be 
vigilant in ensuring bad apples do not contaminate the sector as a whole.”
 