
Rail passengers could be given a boost under government plans to make it 
clearer which is the cheapest ticket option available to them.

Ministers are planning an overhaul of the complex train ticketing system, 
under which many passengers end up paying more than is necessary for their 
travel. It is understood that rail firms face being ordered to redesign 
thousands of station ticket machines as part of the measures, which are due to 
be announced next month.

“Rail passengers must be able to trust that they are getting the best possible 
deal every time they travel and we are working with industry partners and 
consumer experts to identify improvements which could be brought in quickly 
across the network,” said the Department forTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> (DfT).

GWR fails to deliver on the final cost of online special offer rail tickets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/25/great-western-railway-special-offer-tickets-delvery-charge>
“We want a simpler, more modern and passenger-focused fares and ticketing 
system which takes advantage of all the benefits of new technology. Progress 
has been made, including an announcement earlier this week of £80m to 
accelerate the roll-out of smart ticketing across the network.”


It is understood that ministers are considering forcing rail operators to 
alert passengers who are using station ticket machines or buying from the 
ticket office if there is a cheaper way to make their journey.

Under the ticketing settlement agreement of 1995, train operators are only 
obliged to tell customers of the most suitable ticket for their journey.

A source indicated that the government was believed to be planning to order 
firms to be more consistent on conditions, such as peak time restrictions, 
attached to tickets.

According to the Times, passengers travelling between London and Birmingham 
are offered more than 40 different fares and there are an estimated 16m 
different train fares available on the UK’s rail network.

Plans to allow rail users to claim compensation for 15-minute delays
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/13/rail-users-train-passengers-claim-compensation-15-minute-delays-repay>
The paper reported that different self-service machines inside the same train 
station offer vastly different fares for the same journey, meaning some 
passengers end up paying more.


Stephen Joseph, executive director of the Campaign for Better Transport, told 
the paper: “There are 16m fares on the national rail database … anything that 
makes the system more transparent is very welcome, but this must go further and 
look at the real fundamentals of the ticketing system.”

A spokesman for the Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operators, 
said: “We want rail customers to get the best possible deal every time. We’re 
making it easier and quicker for people to pay to travel by train with smarter 
ticketing, and we want to speed up improvements that will mean simpler, clearer 
fares that people can trust.”
 