
A major overhaul of the UK’s 70,000-strong cashpoint network, Link, is under 
discussion in a move that could lead to the closure of a large number of 
hole-in-the-wall machines.

The 30 or so members who make up the automated teller machines (ATMs) network 
are debating what would be the first major changes in 16 years. There are fears 
the system could break up unless agreement can be reached.

It comes at a time when the number of cashpoints is at a peak but withdrawals 
are declining as customers use contactless cards and other payment methods.


The system costs £900m a year to operate and is based on a fixed formula under 
which card issuers pay an interchange fee to machine providers to cover the 
costs. It is calculated by dividing the cost of running the free-to-use network 
by the number of transactions and is between 20p and 30p.

This means the cost of the system is rising for some members of the network, 
which includes banks, building societies and independent providers, and now 
operates more than half of the UK’s ATMs.

It would be the first overhaul since 2000 when a row erupted over potential 
charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2000/jun/29/business.personalfinancenews> 
and led to many ATMs provided by banks and building societies becoming free to 
use.

One of the new ideas has come from Lloyds Banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group, which has raised the need 
for a review of machine locations – such as too many in some areas and not 
enough in others – to reduce the network cost.

Link said the review was of its “multilateral interchange arrangements, which 
is one aspect of the fee mechanism paid to ATM deployers”, and said it was a 
business decision for ATM providers to decide how many to operate.


The siting of ATMs was highlighted on Monday by the Federation of Small 
Businesses (FSB),which raised concerns about towns and villages running out of 
cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/17/uk-towns-and-villages-running-out-of-hard-cash-says-report>
 because of bank closures, not enough cash machines, and poor-quality ATMs. The 
FSB quotes a member in Lochinver in the Scottish Highlands as saying: “The ATM 
is currently causing a lot of headaches in the village. The machine is past its 
sell-by date. There was an ATM in the post office but it was costing them a lot 
of money to run so it had to go.”

Of the UK’s 70,000 ATMs, some 40,000 are provided by independent suppliers. 
Machines that charge customers for withdrawing cash - about 25% of the network 
– set the costs in agreement with the owner of the location, such as a corner 
shop. These machines account for about 3% of transactions.

Lloyds said it was “committed to ensuring that our customers can access their 
banking in the easiest and most convenient way possible. As part of Link’s 
network members council, we work with all ATM service providers to understand 
how we best serve our customers.”

One of the independent providers warned that without agreement the system 
could fragment. “It is highly detrimental if it does break up. It has ensured 
widespread cash access across the UK,” said Peter McNamara, chief executive of 
NoteMachine, which has 8,700 cash machines across the country.




 