
The attraction of well-washed hands and young words.
Hands eyes emotions in confined spaces.
The hill seems clean, the houses on top of it we ignore.

Smoke in the valley too proclaims a settlement.
Even the glances of the very poor at the moderately rich
Are timid. Always with us. Settled in.

Those men conferring on the river bank –
Are they going to shoot something? They are
Planning to build a city. Some trees are spared.

A bird’s nest holds itself in a winter tree.
Forgive us our clothes our houses our bridges, they are misleading.
I go to my love. She lives by a stream.

Forgive us our morals forgive us our practices, they are inhuman.
The end of love as the end of a journey
Is that two things should be one.

Beauty enough en route is what no man can be sure of
And yet in mimic motion he can be surer of no thing else.
There is still some snow about. My love lives by a stream.

• By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.


There are poets one instinctively trusts as well as those one instinctively 
distrusts, even while instinctively distrusting both those instincts.John Riley 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Riley_(poet)>, for me, is firmly in the 
first category. I think he says what he means, though the movement of his mind 
is quick, and opposite positions may be juxtaposed. I don’t think irony is 
intended by the opening of The Attraction, even though the term “well-washed” 
just might cast doubt on the true cleanliness of the hands in question (the 
apparently fragrant hands of Pontius Pilate, and all kinds of traitors and 
fraudsters since, coming to mind).

 In the Britain of 1968, where the poem was written, a more innocent 
connection is possible. Washed hands may equal social mobility and entry into 
privilege. The paired concept of “young words” fits that reading, and suggestsa 
post-Butler educational environment <http://www.bbc.co.uk/schoolreport/25751787>
 (Riley was a secondary school teacher for some years) conducive to speaking up 
and acquiring eloquence. “Hands eyes emotions in confined spaces” mimes the 
clutter and intensity of the classroom, invoking something bright and good as 
well as demanding and overcrowded. Then the third line brings rupture: “The 
hill seems clean, the houses on top of it we ignore.”

 The utopian light dims. Suddenly, the speaker confesses to being among the 
people who edit experience, or are, as we’d put it today, “in denial”. The hill 
only “seems” to be clean. The reader attends to what may be a criticism of the 
very aesthetic act in which he or she is engaged. The attractiveness of the 
images we see may depend on our rejection, as poets and readers, of others less 
attractive.

 The Attraction insists that we look properly. There’s a double layer of human 
settlement to acknowledge, on the hilltop and in the valley. As elsewhere in 
Riley’s work, the location seems particular yet general enough to work 
allegorically. His Divine Comedy is situated in the north or west of England. 
Postwar England is registered as pressure on space (expressed in the comma-less 
noun clusters), and a general depiction of hierarchy. Developers and/or 
visionaries stalk the green-and-pleasant. The question concerning the men 
gathered “conferring” on the bank, “are they going to shoot something?” doesn’t 
get, or need, a direct reply. In building their planned city, the men will 
destroy much more than “something”. The speaker’s tone seems deliberately 
objective: “Some trees will be spared.” Is the announcement cause for hope? The 
reader has to decide, but, in the quick transition to the beautiful image of 
the bird’s nest which “holds itself in a winter tree” sees plainly what will be 
lost when trees are not spared.

 Class difference is laid bare in verse two, an injustice revealed as 
entrenched and inescapable. There is considerable extra mileage when Riley’s 
modifiers sharpen the over-familiar antithesis of poor and rich as the “very 
poor” and “moderately rich”. The very poor see nothing moderate, of course, in 
the wealth of the moderately rich: their timidity is understandable.

 “Always with us” in the last line of the second tercet echoes Jesus’s remark 
about the poor inMatthew 26 <http://biblehub.com/kjv/matthew/26.htm>. Jesus is 
claiming his right to a little luxury as death approaches. It’s a moment of 
shocking humanity. In the poem, it foreshadows the modulation from social 
analysis to prayer and entranced declaration. The Attraction evolves into a 
love poem, one of the possibilities the title obviously enfolds. “I go to my 
love. She lives by a stream.”

 A different register is entered with the reiterated plea of stanzas four and 
five (“Forgive us … ”) echoing that ofthe Lord’s Prayer 
<http://www.ocf.org/OrthodoxPage/prayers/lord.html>. The “trespasses” listed in 
those two stanzas are infinitely complex: they embrace the whole condition of
homo sapiens, from “our clothes our houses our bridges” to “our morals” and 
“our practices”. The first listed trespasses are “misleading” but the second 
are in a different, far more terrible category: they’re “inhuman”. And 
inescapable.

 However, as for Dante, erotic love is sacred. It’s sufficient aspiration for 
the poet-pilgrim to seek his Beatrice in her modest pastoral setting “by a 
stream”. He chastises ecstasy (“Beauty enoughen route is what no man can be 
sure of”) but this profoundly sombre warning is not the end of the matter. 
There’s a reversal, in fact, a paradox: “And yet in mimic motion he can be 
surer of no thing else.”

 Could meditation be the “mimic motion” that brings the reward? Other 
suggested movement is that of the lingering snow, soon to be melting and 
flowing. “My love lives by a stream” states more than location. It reminds us of
the “eternal present” at the end of the Paradiso 
<http://digitaldante.columbia.edu/dante/divine-comedy/paradiso/paradiso-33/>, 
and “the love that moves the sun and the other stars”.

Riley’s poetry has not been forgotten since his untimely death in 1978, but it 
has been too little known. A handsome new edition of the intense, succinct body 
of work he left, Selected Poetry and Prose, edited by Ian Brinton, has recently 
been published by Shearsman. It includes Riley’s translations of Osip 
Mandelstam, a preface by Ian Duhig, and a helpful, generous introduction by 
Brinton, drawing attention to the earlier editorial work of Michael Grant. Ian 
Brinton’s talk on his role in the acquisition of the John Riley archive for 
Cambridgecan be read here 
<http://www.academia.edu/6165116/Talk_for_the_Friends_of_the_University_Library>
.

 * John Riley’s Selected Poetry and Prose will be launched in the School of 
English, University of Leeds, on 23 February at 6.15 pm. The speakers are Ian 
Brinton, Michael Haslam, Peter Riley, Andrew MacMillan, Helen Mort and others. 
All are welcome, and admission is free.
 