
Poles and other eastern Europeans living in Britain fear there will be a fresh 
spike in hate crime when the Brexit process is formally triggeredbefore the end 
of March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, MPs have been told.

Polish community leaders told the Commons home affairs committee that since 
the EU referendum a small minority of people in Britain had been emboldened to 
launch verbal and physical attacks against migrants in public places, at work 
and in schools.

“Every statement and every political activity around Brexit negotiations 
brings a spike in inquiries to our organisation. We expect when article 50 is 
triggered it will bring another level of discontent,” Barbara Drozdowicz, of 
the East European Resource Centre, told the MPs.


Police figures show reports of hate crime rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/hate-crimes-eu-referendum-home-office-figures-confirm>
 by 46% in the immediate aftermath of the vote last June and a second spike 
occurred in the last week of July, before incidences settled back to a weekly 
level 16% above those seen in 2015.


Community leaders say complaints to the police receive a mixed response and 
some schools turn a blind eye to incidents on their premises.

Joanna Mludzinska, chair of the Polish Social and Cultural Association, told 
MPs of her shock when her west London cultural centre was covered in graffiti, 
and said only a government guarantee on the post-Brexit status of the 3 million 
EU nationals in Britain would give them the confidence to reply to such attacks.

Tadeusz Stenzel, the chair of trustees at the Federation of Poles in Great 
Britain, said of those responsible for the attacks: “They feel there is a less 
of a brake on them and they think if the people involved are migrants it is not 
a racist situation.”

Drozdowicz said her resource centre had experienced an “explosion of calls” 
since the referendum result. She said there were incidents of teams of Polish 
construction workers being told to “go home”. A mother with a child in a buggy 
in the street had been told to “take your Polish bastard back home”.

In a secondary school in west London, teachers had seen a Polish boy being 
beaten and had failed to respond. When his mother had complained to the school 
she was told that if he had been black it would have been treated as a racist 
incident.

Drozdowicz said not all police forces were ready to respond to those who 
wanted to report hate crime. “They are sometimes waved away as employment 
issues about discrimination. Others are told that if they do not speak fluent 
English they are partially to blame for what happened,” she said.

Drozdowicz said the pace of change had been too much for some communities, and 
people were turning on their neighbours. She said integration policies were not 
yet in place to help them respond, with east European communities often 
regarded as a problem rather than an asset.

She stressed that hate crime victims were more likely to be poor east 
Europeans who were working in low-skilled jobs rather than middle-class 
professionals such as doctors, managers and lawyers.

Yvette Cooper, the committee’s chair, said the details of hate crime incidents 
they had heard were appalling. “Hate crime is appalling, unBritish and should 
have no place in our country,” she said.
 