
Police were called to a school in the Kent seaside resort of Margate on 
Tuesday after about 50 pupils were sent home for wearing the wrong clothes.

Parents and pupils protested about the start-of-term crackdown at Hartsdown 
academy <http://www.hartsdown.org/>, where children were sent home for breaches 
of the uniform code including having the wrong shoes, the wrong trousers, no 
blazer, a gold buckle on a shoe and frills on socks.

Parents said there were year 7 children, just starting at secondary school, 
who were reduced to tears after being turned away.

“I understand there are rules about uniform,” said one mother, Sian Williams, 
whose year 7 daughter managed to pass the uniform check, “but to be so strict 
and allow children to feel that way on their first day of school must have been 
petrifying for them.”

Another parent, Phillipa Turner, wrote on Facebook: “My niece was one of these 
children sent home today, first day of a new school and she didn’t even make it 
into the school gates.

“Apparently wrong trousers (they were too stretchy) what a load of crap 
because she looked really smart and tbh I’ve seen a lot worse going into that 
school.”

The uniform crackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/05/school-sends-hundreds-pupils-home-uniform-breaches>
 on the first day of term is becoming a ritual in schools up and down the 
country, as headteachers increasingly favour astrict dress code 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2662518/Headteacher-defends-taking-250-girls-lessons-shirts-short-uniform-crackdown.html>
 which they say improves classroom behaviour.

The new headteacher of Hartsdown, Matthew Tate, who was also marking his first 
proper day as head at the school, explained: “This is a school that has been 
underperforming and we are determined to do the very best by the children of 
Thanet.”

The school wrote to pupils and their families at the end of last term 
reminding them of the uniform policy and warning that if it was not adhered to 
at the start of the new term children would be sent home. Of those sent home on 
Tuesday, about 20 pupils returned to classes wearing the correct uniform.

“This is part of raising expectations and standards so that every child has a 
fantastic education,” said Tate, who joins the school from Trinity Free School 
in Sevenoaks. “A small minority of parents were not happy but we have had 
emails and phone calls from other parents to express their support.”


In his welcome message on the school’s website, Tate says that part of the 
school vision is “excellent uniform, a commitment to perfect uniform”. He 
continues: “And a ‘no excuses’ culture where excellence is the norm.”

Police were called by a member of the public shortly after 11am after reports 
of a disturbance outside the school in George V Avenue, where a number of 
parents and pupils had gathered. There were reports of “tension” but no charges 
were brought.

Allison Hopper’s daughter, who is in year 9, was turned away for not wearing a 
blazer or the correct shoes. “I rang the school, who were extremely rude, and 
they said she’s not allowed in because of unacceptable uniform, which I might 
add cost me a small fortune. The secretary agreed she was allowed to go home to 
get her blazer, but she’s not allowed in due to her shoes.”

Sian Williams added: “There were 11-year-old children on their first day at 
school in tears because they were being sent home. There was one girl who was 
sent home because she had a gold buckle on her black shoes.”

Another parent, who did not wish to be named, said: “I think this has been 
handled badly especially the head teacher being so strict with the children. 
The school has a duty of care - anything could have happened to those children.”

Hartsdown, which is rated “good” by Ofsted and is sponsored by the Coastal 
Academies Trust, is a challenging school with a large number of pupils from 
disadvantaged backgrounds, including unaccompanied asylum seekers and eastern 
European children with English as an additional language.

The executive head of the Coastal Academies Trust, Paul Luxmoore, said: 
“Hartsdown has previously been viewed in the community as a scruffy school. 
Matthew is right to ensure that changes and he has my full support.

“We’re bound to have a bit of a sticky period at the start as there are a 
small number of parents and pupils who are unhappy.”

 