
I would rather not think about poverty while I am being presented with gift 
guides in which the smallest “stocking filler” is £15: it may well be a tad 
unfestive. The cheerleading for Christmas this year has become a form of 
“self-care”. “It has been a hard year, so treat yourself.” (“Oh, go on then …”) 
The managing are coercing the “just about managing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/20/just-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study>
”. In these new social divisions, I am not sure what the “not managing at all” 
are called. Let’s stick with poor. The poor are always with us, but poverty 
itself goes through changes – changes that are not reflected in the way we 
speak about it.

A new report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/study-finds-7m-britons-in-poverty-despite-being-from-working-families>
 from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation highlights the rise of the working poor. 
The political tactic to justify monstering the welfare state using rhetoric 
around poverty being largely the result of unemployment or “skiving” has been 
largely successful. But that narrative is falling apart. The number of workers 
living in poverty (counted as having below 60% of median income) is larger than 
it has ever been.One in eight workers 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/joseph-rowntree-report-housing-crisis-rental-price-impact-on-poverty-2016-12?r=US&IR=T>
 – 3.8 million people – live in poverty. They work, often in more than one job, 
but wages are low and rents are high. In London and the south-east, rents often 
account for a third of income. Working-age benefits have been cut. Many people 
now live in extreme financial difficulty. Those with disabilities have borne 
the brunt of this onslaught. Women are worse off than men.

Much of what has happened in the name of austerity has been well documented. 
But this is not just about cuts. We have a crisis of pay. And of housing. 
Decent wages and affordable homes are but a dream for many. But failure to live 
the dream is so often experienced as individual failure. A culture that tells 
people that work is the way out of deprivation cannot explain the current 
deprivation. It locates it elsewhere: Europe, immigration, globalisation.

This deprivation, however, is a choice. We need to be clear who has made it. 
Has the mother skipping meals, living in damp accommodation, eventually costing 
the NHS because of illness, made a choice to be poor? Have the young people 
living at home with their parents, unable to be independent, made that choice? 
Have the breadwinners of “hard-working families” chosen not to have a pay rise 
for 10 years?

No. Everyone has a degree of agency – I don’t wish to take this away – but the 
continual portrayal of poverty as an individual choice is untenable now. 
However hard some people are working, they are trapped.

The choice was made long ago by the Tories and Labour that inequality is a 
price worth paying for growth. The richer would get richer. But so would the 
poor, somehow. Boom, boom, boom. This is the lie that was told. The sight of
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> cheered to 
the rafters when he left the Commons, the front man for George Osborne’s 
idiotic and cruel “rebalancing” of the economy, turned my stomach.

But, sadly, there is no point in denying that, as an imaginative project, the 
idea that we must embrace austerity worked. Wherever you go now, people parrot 
the “tightening our belts” story. It has become internalised. The state must be 
shrunk. Everyone should work harder. In this vision, the only “innocent” poor 
are the disabled and children – and yet the disabled and the dying, as we know, 
are still expected somehow to earn.

When work does not provide living wages, though, the narrative can be 
challenged. This is still fraught as poverty often feels personal, and 
shameful. It is both mind-numbingly boring and deeply stressful never to 
foresee a different future. The promise of “recovery” is a fantasy for most 
people. The impulse to blame the EU is not entirely wrong. As a whole, Europe 
has not invested in infrastructure, it has pursued austerity to the detriment 
of younger generations. No, we don’t have the youth unemployment of Spain or 
Italy, but the life chances of younger people in the UK have been severely 
limited.

Of all the identity politics spoken about in the wake of Brexit, and indeed 
the Trump victory, the fact that these are the choices of middle-aged and older 
voters is significant. The relationship of stagnation to gender, racial or 
generational divides is too often spoken about in the abstract. In reality, 
women live with men, children with adults, people who were born here live with 
people who weren’t. We are interdependent, not isolated economic units, and 
thus poverty is not reducible to an identity. Except from the outside. To see 
the poor as workers – for whom work is failing – is a way to move this forward. 
It is a way to identify collectively rather than sustain the limbo in which 
many currently live, where failure to provide is personally embarrassing, 
emasculating, depressing. Too often, accounts of modern poverty are simply 
dismissed or not believed. Actual starvation is required.

It as if we don’t live in one of the richest countries in the world – because 
that is the main point of highlighting this degree of poverty. This level of 
inequality is a deliberate political choice. It is not an inexplicable 
byproduct of some economic weather. It is what consecutive governments have 
signed up to. The political shaming and blaming of the poor for their own 
circumstances, their bad choices, masks an abject moral failure. When 
employment is not a way out of poverty, what is? The lotto?
 