
Police Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> have confirmed that 
they will contact MP Michelle Thomson after she moved colleagues to tears in 
the Commons on Thursday when she revealed harrowing details of her rape at the 
age of 14 and its subsequent impact on her life.

Speaker John Bercow told Thomson that her testimony had “left an indelible 
impression” on the House after she described how she was attacked in a wooded 
area 37 years ago by someone she knew as she walked home from a youth event.

During a debate on the UN’s International Day for the Elimination of Violence 
Against Women, the Edinburgh West MP told MPs: “I’m not a victim, I’m a 
survivor.”

She explained how the rape had “fatally undermined” her self-esteem, 
confidence and sense of self-worth, and revealed that she had not sought help 
for the trauma until her mid-40s. “I carried that guilt, anger, fear, sadness 
and bitterness for years,” she told the chamber.

How do you change a macho parliament? Talk about the reality of rape | Emer 
O’Toole
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/michelle-thomson-rape-personal-political-parliament>
A Police Scotland spokeswoman said: “Speaking out about sexual abuse is 
incredibly difficult, and disclosures are often made many years after an 
incident took place. Police Scotland will listen to any such disclosure, 
regardless of the passage of time, and will investigate. Our response is always 
victim focused and every investigation will be tailored to meet their 
individual needs.”

Thomson has since been universally praised by colleagues, campaigners and 
members of the public for her bravery.

Sandy Brindley, the national coordinator of Rape Crisis Scotland, said: “It is 
not uncommon for women to contact rape crisis many years after a rape and tell 
us this is the first time they have ever spoken about it. Someone speaking so 
publicly about rape can send a strong message to other rape survivors – that 
the shame is not theirs, and it is okay to talk about it and to seek support.”

The Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, described the speech as “very 
moving and incredibly brave”, while many other former SNP colleagues of 
Thomson, who resigned the party whip last year amid an investigation into 
property transactions, also praised her bravery.


Thomson said she was overwhelmed by the support she had received.
 