
At my first uni, the postgrads had their own halls at the top of the hill on 
campus. It was like a symbol of their academic ascension, and a way for them to 
avoid the rowdy hordes of undergraduates. But when I used to look up there, I 
felt kind of bad for them – while I was necking Jägerbombs and dancing with my 
friends to electro swing, they were highlighting textbooks or having a stale 
conversation about their careers. Time was on my side, and it felt great.


A few years passed and now I’m at the top of the hill. And it’s true, the air 
is calmer up here. Tuesday nights are for Netflix, not for £3 doubles at Lola 
Lo, and I’ve never talked so much about money, jobs and professional success. 
But although my perception of postgraduate life was not entirely unfounded, 
apparently invisible to me were its many benefits.


You have a much closer relationship with your tutors and become part of a 
little community where everybody has similar interests. You have far more 
choice in what you study and the freedom to write a creative, impactful 
dissertation.

Studying development: seven tips for your master's
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/28/studying-development-seven-tips-for-your-masters>
More specialised

“I would definitely say my postgraduate degree was an improvement on my 
undergrad,” says Helena, who went from a BA in international relations to an MA 
in global political economy, “mainly because it was in a more specialised 
subject area. I finally got to focus on the topics I genuinely found 
interesting.


“Also, my year group was small, and everyone was engaged with the studies and 
the seminars – something that didn’t happen in my first degree.”


For me, a postgrad has been a second chance, a way to expand the opportunities 
afforded to me by my BA. In contrast to fumbling my way through Ucas while at 
school, I have been able to make an informed decision about my career and move 
into a field that would have been otherwise inaccessible.


By the same token, however, I feel a heightened pressure to succeed for the 
sake of a good job, and apparently I’m not the only one who feels this way. In 
conversation with my course mates – who have come from universities in Denmark, 
Germany and Colombia – a consensus quickly builds that career anxiety is one of 
the defining features of the postgraduate experience.


Valerie sums it up: “You suddenly feel the pressure to build your CV – not 
only by doing some high-level internship but by figuring out what it is you 
really want to do for a living, what your chances are in that line of work, and 
what you would have to give up for it.”


Career worries aside, I knew my master’s was going to be very different from 
my first degree. When I showed up at Sussex more than six years ago, I had left 
home for the first time and there was more on my mind than English literature. 
I had three years in front of me – in a new town with new people – spurred by 
the idealism of late adolescence.


Pivoting postgrads: how to change direction and win a job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/10/pivoting-postgrads-how-to-change-direction-to-win-that-dream-job>
Time is tight

Turning up at university for postgrad was a whole different experience. All 
the same elements were there – the crowds, the society booths, the keyrings and 
free pizza – but time didn’t stretch out before me in the same way, because 
there simply wasn’t as much of it. I had less than a year and no grace period 
where assignments didn’t count. It was a fresh start, sure, but the end was 
already in sight.


That for me is one of the more negative aspects of the postgraduate experience 
– brevity. While an undergraduate degree is all-consuming, a life era in 
itself, postgrad is often a transition, to a PhD or a better job; an expedient 
way to demonstrate your mastery of a subject or plug a gap in your CV.

In the language of university prospectuses, degrees are no longer 
“life-changing” in cities filled with “endless possibilities”. They are an 
investment, a stepping stone towards a better future.


But for all its fleeting pragmatism, postgraduate life is far better than my 
19-year-old self could have anticipated. Time may be tight, but I’ve never been 
more fulfilled academically. For me, a postgrad is about a change of direction; 
for others, it’s a chance to specialise. But in any case, life is pretty good 
here at the top of the hill – and I always hated Jägerbombs anyway.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 