
Software that helps touts bypass the security systems of major ticketing 
companies and scoop up tickets at the expense of fans is easily available 
online – and even comes with YouTube videos to explain how to use it.

Scrutiny of ticketing firms and touts has reached fever pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
ahead of a government-backed report into the industry due to be published this 
week.

But efforts to clean up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/21/ticket-tout-criminalised-inflated-prices-secondary-ticketing>
 the market are being undermined by firms selling custom-made software designed 
to help touts get the tickets they want. One site, ticketbots.net, sells 
automated programs called “bots” that can search for and buy tickets from 
primary sites, such as Ticketmaster, as soon as they go on sale.

The website, registered in Panama, did not return emailed requests for 
comment. But when theObserver posed as a customer, staff at the website wrote 
back within a few hours offering a “bulk discount”. The company also boasted 
that it could bypass the Captcha security system used by sites such as 
Ticketmaster.

Captcha is a way of testing whether someone trying to buy a ticket is a human 
or a bot, for example by showing the user a gallery of pictures and asking them 
to place a tick next to all of those that depict, say, trees. But an employee 
of ticketbots.net said its bots were able to defeat this security protocol by 
enlisting real people to tick the right boxes. “Our softwares already bypasses 
these picture Captchas using 3rd party CAPTCHA bypassing companies, who types 
the Captchas for you,” ticketbots.net wrote in an email.

The website also offers a vast array of other tools designed to boost the 
amount of tickets that touts are able to scoop up.

One product description boasts: “In short, the bot grabs hundreds of tickets 
for multiple event simultaneously and let you choose cream tickets from them to 
buy with just a single click.”

Ticketbots.net even demonstrates how to use one of its bots in a YouTube video 
that shows how to get multiple tickets 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fa3Is7D0gSU> for comedian Kevin Hart at 
Wembley Arena.

And the website offers “PDF copiers”, which can be used to copy the unique 
barcode on a ticket to produce counterfeit copies.

According to ticketing expert Reg Walker, fraudsters can even copy the barcode 
from pictures that fans post on social media sites such as Facebook and 
Twitter. “Do not post pictures of your tickets on social media,” said Walker. 
“Someone will make a copy and when you go to the gig, you won’t be able to get 
in if they got there first.”

How the ticket touts get away with bleeding fans dry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
More than £5m was lost to ticket fraud in 2015, up 55% on the previous year, 
according to figures released this weekend by the Local Government Association.

Other products on offer on ticketbots.net include “spinners”, which 
automatically flip purchased tickets on to secondary websites, where they can 
be sold at a large mark-up. Buyers can also pay for “drop checkers”, which 
automatically monitor ticketing sites for new events and pick up tickets 
automatically based on the users’ preferences.

Walker said that while the use of bots was not that common among UK touts, his 
ticket security firm, The Iridium Consultancy, had seen an increase in attacks 
from overseas.

Michael Waterson, an economics professor from the University of Warwick, is 
due to publish his recommendations on measures to improve the ticketing 
industry at the end of this week.
 