
On the face of it, drawing a line under the payment protection insurance 
mis-selling scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/payment-protection-insurance> seems a 
reasonable idea. There can be few consumers unaware of the gigantic scam 
perpetrated by the big banks during the 1990s and the 2000s. A time bar was 
first mooted by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) for 2018, but now looks 
like being extended by a year to 2019. That sounds like good news for customers.

The banks are deeply unimpressed with the first big decision made by Andrew 
Bailey, the FCA chief executive, since his arrival from the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/city-regulator-fca-proposes-2019-deadline-for-ppi-claims>
. Lloyds, RBS, Barclays and the other big lenders have all been making 
provisions for a line to be drawn in the sand in 2018.


Clearly, this is not good news for the banks, because a PPI bill that already 
stands at £37bn means weaker profits, smaller dividends and a lower share 
price. Nor is it marvellous news for a government which will find the 
uncertainty over the final cost of PPI unwelcome as it seeks to get rid of its 
stakes in Lloyds and RBS.

In fact, there should be no sympathy for the banks. The hefty costs they have 
incurred, are incurring, and will continue to incur as a result of PPI are 
entirely of their own making. As even a cursory look at the charge sheet shows, 
Bailey is still letting them off lightly.

Let’s start with the way the banks mercilessly and knowingly rooked their 
customers. PPI was not a case of mis-selling by the odd bad apple; it was 
mis-selling on an industrial scale. Regulation of the banks as they perpetrated 
this scam was somewhere on the scale between lax and non-existent.

Nor was there much contrition when the scandal finally came to light. On the 
contrary, when the regulator finally woke up to what was happening and said 
compensation should be paid, the banks fought the decision in the courts. It 
was only when Lloyds broke ranks that consumers started to get paid back.

Even then, consumers have had to battle against quite blatant foot-dragging on 
the part of the banks. The reluctance to settle legitimate claims is 
demonstrated by figures showing that 70% of complaints to the ombudsman about 
the refusal of banks to pay up have been upheld.

Consumer groups argue that only when the banks stop playing for time should a 
deadline for PPI claims even be considered. It’s hard to disagree.

Helicopter money looms closer in Japan

Going Japanese. It’s the fear that haunts policymakers the world over. Mario 
Draghi had the travails of the world’s third-biggest economy at the back of his 
mind when he made the case for negative interest rates in the eurozone. The 
risk of deflation helps explain why the US Federal Reserve has been so 
reluctant to push up the cost of borrowing and why theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has kept UK 
official rates at 0.5% for the past seven or so years.

Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has been trying to get out of 
its economic mess for a quarter of a century. It demonstrates what can happen 
if countries fail to spot the root causes of a problem, fail to act quickly 
enough, and remove policy stimulus over-hastily. More pertinently, it provides 
a warning of what can happen when conventional economic tools cease to work.

The government of Shinzo Abe has just announced details of a supplementary 
budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/japan-pm-shinzo-abe-launches-spending-programme-to-boost-economy>
 designed to boost growth and drive inflation back up to its official 2% 
target. A 28tn yen package sounds like a lot of money, but as has tended to be 
the way in Japan, appearances can be deceptive. Half the 28tn yen is supposed 
to be extra spending by the private sector, and a further quarter will be the 
provision of cheap loans. The extra spending by the government amounts to 6tn 
yen, only 4.5tn yen of which will be spent in the current year.

Abe’s government says the fiscal measures will increase national output by 
1.3% in the current year. That looks highly improbable given the modest size of 
the package. Lifting Japan out of its malaise is going to require something 
more radical, which is why the talk of helicopter money is becoming louder. And 
why Draghi et al are watching so closely.

Lack of strikes is not a sign of workplace harmony

Like bell-bottomed trousers and prog rock, industrial action is a relic of a 
bygone age. Official records stretch back to the 1890s and never in all that 
time have as few people been involved in disputes as the81,000 who went on 
strike in 2015 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/workplacedisputesandworkingconditions/articles/labourdisputes/2015>
.

Nor was this a one-off. The post-war peak for days lost through strikes came 
in a period that embraced the miners’ strikes of 1972 and 1984-5 and the Winter 
of Discontent in 1978-9. Since then, the number of stoppages has dwindled.

So is this a golden era of workplace harmony? Hardly. Grievances have not 
disappeared. Brexit was partly caused by year after year of falling real wages. 
The difference is that with union power restricted and fewer workers covered by 
collective bargaining, employers call the shots.
 