
Customers who were mis-sold payment protection insurance could be forced to 
make their claims for compensation by the spring of 2018 under proposals to 
draw a line under the financial industry’s costliest mis-selling scandal.

The industry has already incurred a bill for more than £26bn in compensation 
and administration costs from the scandal and it has called on theFinancial 
Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> to put a 
time bar on claims. The City regulator responded on Friday with proposals to 
set a 2018 deadline for people to claim redress. More than 10 million customers 
have already received compensation for policies that were sold alongside loans 
and credit cards.

The move was welcomed by the stock market. Shares in Lloyds Banking Group – 
the bank with the biggest PPI claims – rose 1%. Lloyds has set aside more than
£13bn to tackle claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/31/ppi-bill-rises-again-at-lloyds>
 for half of the 16 million customers to whom it sold PPI in the last 15 years. 
Other bank shares were also higher.


However, consumer bodies remained cautious and questioned whether the move was 
politically motivated given the potential liabilities of bailed-out banks, such 
as Lloyds, at a time when they are being gradually privatised.

Martin Lewis, founder of MoneySavingExpert.com 
<http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/>, said: “The urgent clarion call to 
consumers is if you’ve had a loan, credit card or mortgage in the last 10 years 
you should be checking now whether you had PPI on it and if so, was it 
mis-sold?”

In a two-pronged announcement 
<http://fca.org.uk/news/statement-on-payment-protection-insurance-ppi>, the FCA 
also raised the prospect for claims from customers for another element of PPI 
which has arisen from a supreme court case brought by customer Susan Plevin, 
which analysts have forecast could cost asas much as £33bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/30/banks-face-ppi-compensation-bill-commission>
.

This case, known as Plevin v Paragon Personal Finance 
<http://ukscblog.com/new-judgment-plevin-respondent-v-paragon-personal-finance-limited-appellant-2014-uksc-61/>
, means that if a PPI seller failed to disclose to a customer that it had 
received a large commission from the product provider, the sale was unfair 
under the Consumer Credit Act 1974. In a closely watched decision, the FCA said 
it believed 50% commission should be deemed as too high – relief for the 
industry which had feared that the 72% in the Plevin case could be set as 
precedent.

To encourage customers to bring forward any remaining claims, the FCA intends 
to run an advertising campaign. That proposal immediately triggered a backlash 
from claims management companies (CMCs), which take a fee for pursuing cases. 
Steven Hulme, legal director at Stanton Fisher, said: “We do not support the 
imposition of any deadline that could potentially deny the consumer access to 
justice.”


Richard Lloyd, executive director of consumer body Which?, blamed the banks 
for dragging out the process of paying out claims. “If a timebar is introduced, 
the FCA must make sure all banks carry out a complete review of their PPI 
handling. Efforts must be redoubled to ensure that anyone mis-sold PPI is given 
fair, speedy compensation so that people get back what they’re rightly owed,” 
said Lloyd.

Andrew Tyrie, the MP who chairs the Treasury select committee, questioned the 
decision to set a time bar. “It will be the regulator’s job to ensure that any 
decision to set a deadline does not bring detriment to the consumer,” he said.

Others were also sceptical about the motivation, citing the privatisation of 
Lloyds which was bailed out in 2008. “The question must be asked: is this due 
to pressure from George Osborne to protect Lloyds Bank which has most to lose 
from continued payouts?” said Lewis.

The consultation will run to the end of the year and look at introducing a 
deadline by which consumers would need to make their PPI complaints, or else 
lose their right to have them assessed by firms or by the Financial Ombudsman 
Service. The proposed deadline would fall two years from the date the proposed 
rule comes into force, which would give customers until at least spring 2018 to 
complain.


“A potential cut-off date in the spring of 2018 for PPI complaints offers real 
certainty for businesses which have set aside significant resource to manage 
the very large number of PPI claims which have hit the UK banking and insurance 
industry,” said Colin Read a partner at law firm Pinsent Masons.

 