
Although Carol Vorderman manages to add thousands of pounds to the value of 
properties every week by changing kitchens or bathrooms in the TV series Better 
Homes, estate agents rarely advise sellers to make major changes before selling 
their home.

Julian O'Dell of Homesmart in High Wycombe says: 'It's not worth spending a 
lot changing your kitchen or bathroom, or even decorating the house. There's no 
guarantee that other people will like your taste or that it will add value to 
the property. Most people would prefer to pay less for their new home and make 
any alterations themselves.'

Everyone knows the clichéd ways to attract a buyer - flower arrangements 
positioned artistically around the house, lights on in all the gloomy corners, 
and the smell of either freshly ground coffee or baking bread permeating 
throughout the property. But in practice, buyers are more likely to be 
impressed by a clean, tidy home.

Estate agents suggest the following tips to present your home at its best:

1 Garden
 This is the first thing potential buyers will see, so make sure it is, at the 
very least, tidy. Mow the lawn, rake the gravel, weed the flower beds, and if 
its summer, try planting a few annuals to give a splash of colour.

2 Floors
 Try to keep as much floor space clear as possible - it makes your home look 
bigger. If your carpets look like they have been through World War Three, get 
them professionally cleaned - it only costs about £100 for a whole house, and 
can really improve the appearance of the carpet.

3 Smell
 Air the house, particularly if you have pets. It's not really practical to 
make coffee every time someone comes to view, but it might be worth investing 
in a few air fresheners.

4 Front door
 Wash it down, and polish any brassware. If the paintwork is chipped and 
peeling, consider giving it a lick of paint. Blue is the most popular colour 
with buyers, according to a survey by the Alliance & Leicester.

5 Windows
 Clean them.

6 Junk
 Keep as much of your belongings as possible out of sight. Clear or tidy 
surfaces look much more classy.

7 Children
 If your estate agent is showing your home to potential buyers, try to keep 
your children out of the way. At the very least they will distract the viewer, 
and you never know what embarrassing comments about the house, buyer or estate 
agent could emerge. Try to keep toys tidy if not tucked away in cupboards.

8 Decoration
 If there are problem areas, such as damp patches on the ceiling where a bath 
has over-run, or a border has started peeling off, get them sorted. If you have 
decided to redecorate a room, choose a simple colour scheme that anyone can 
live with - white or cream - and forget fussy florals. Likewise if you insist 
on replacing a bathroom suite or kitchen, keep it plain, and preferably white.

9 Pets
 Some people are scared of dogs, so try to keep yours contained in one room 
during the viewing, or lend him to the neighbour for the afternoon. It's more 
difficult to control cats' movements - estate agent Ian McKenzie had to dispose 
of a dead mouse before showing a property last week. But do move the cat litter 
tray outside during viewings.
 