
Pressure is mounting on the government to introduce compulsory sex and 
relationships education (SRE) in schools after five chairs of parliamentary 
select committees sent a strongly worded letter to the education secretary 
demanding a change in policy.

The letter 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/Education/Correspondence/Chairs-letter-to-Secretary-of-State-re-PSHE-status-29-11-2016.PDF>
 criticises the government’s “lacklustre”response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/29/government-not-doing-enough-to-combat-sexual-harassment-in-schools>
 earlier this week to a new report by the women and equalities committee in 
parliament, which revealed thatsexual abuse of girls had become “accepted as 
part of everyday life” in England’s schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/29/government-not-doing-enough-to-combat-sexual-harassment-in-schools>
.

One of the report’s key recommendations, which the government sidestepped, was 
that personal, social, health and economic education (PSHE), including 
up-to-date SRE, should be made a mandatory part of the school curriculum.

Wednesday’s letter expresses regret that the education secretary, Justine 
Greening <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>, has failed to 
seize the opportunity provided by the report, and urges her to “engage 
constructively” with a private member’s bill currently before the house on the 
same subject or bring forward her own proposals. It also says that failing to 
act on PSHE will have consequences for the education and life chances of young 
people in schools.

Quoting the report, the letter says sexual harassment and sexual violence in 
schools is having an impact on young people and school life. Consequences 
include “physical and emotional harm, including teenage pregnancy and sexually 
transmitted diseases; girls feeling unable to participate in educational and 
extra-curricular opportunities; teachers spending valuable time dealing with 
incidents of sexual harassment and bullying; and young people developing a 
sense that sexual harassment and sexual violence are acceptable behaviours and 
learning social norms that are carried through to adult life.”

Hopes were raised when Greening appeared before the cross-party education 
committee soon after her appointment in September, and told MPs she was looking 
into the question of statutory status for PSHE and ways to improve the teaching 
of it.


“We ask that you give serious thought to this proposal and the benefits that 
would arise from it,” the letter states. “We also ask you to consider the 
consequences of failing to act, not only on the quality of education in England 
but also for the lifelong consequences which can result from patchy or 
inadequate access to PSHE and SRE.”

The letter is signed by the Tory MP Neil Carmichael, chair of the education 
committee; Maria Miller, the Tory chair of the women and equalities committee; 
Labour’s Yvette Cooper, chair of the home affairs committee; the Tory Dr Sarah 
Wollaston, chair of the health committee; and the Labour MP Iain Wright, chair 
of the business, energy and industrial strategy committee. It is the second 
letter on this theme the joint chairs have sent to the secretary of state; the 
last was in January.

One of the key issues concerning campaigners who are calling for compulsory 
PSHE and SRE in schools is the impact of “sexting”, which can lead some pupils 
to feel so distressed if images of them are shared that they have to move 
schools.

No Jeremy Hunt, you can't use tech to ban sexting for the under-18s | Jonathan 
Haynes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/jeremy-hunt-cant-use-tech-ban-sexting-stop-cyberbullying-under-18s>
On Tuesday, the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, suggested under-18s should be 
prevented by social media companies from texting sexually explicit images 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/jeremy-hunt-proposes-ban-on-sexting-for-under-18s>
. Giving evidence to the Commons health committee on suicide prevention 
efforts, Hunt said social media firms needed to do more to combat the culture 
of online intimidation and sexual imagery, which is having a negative impact on 
the mental health of young people.

“I think social media companies need to step up to the plate and show us how 
they can be the solution to the issue of mental ill health amongst teenagers, 
and not the cause of the problem,” he said. “There is a lot of evidence that 
the technology industry, if they put their mind to it, can do really smart 
things.”

Responding to the letter, the Department for Education said the government is 
looking at options to ensure that all children have access to high quality sex 
and relationship education. “High quality sex and relationship education is a 
vital part of preparing young people for success in adult life - helping them 
make informed choices, stay safe and learn to respect themselves and others.”

Meanwhile, teaching unions said the government should demand a “zero-tolerance 
approach” to sexual harassment and violence in schools, and give extra 
resources to teach pupils about sex and personal relationships.


“Yet again the government’s response is to do nothing,” said Russell Hobby, 
general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, whose members 
have long campaigned forPSHE lessons to be included in the national curriculum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/24/personal-social-health-education-compulsory-schools-estelle-morris>
.

“PSHE is crucial to provide time in the curriculum to discuss important and 
sensitive issues, and to protect teachers when grappling with these subjects. 
To tackle sexual harassment and sexual violence, education has to be the key, 
with good quality age-appropriate sex and relationship education, and PSHE for 
all pupils.”

Chris Keates, general secretary of the NASUWT teachers’ union, said schools 
had been forced to cut back on teaching about personal relationships because of 
budget cuts and pressures on timetables. “Schools should be places of safety, 
yet research undertaken by the NASUWT shows that all too often pupils, and also 
teachers, are being exposed to sexualised comments, threats and abuse,” Keates 
said.

“The government needs to set out how schools can secure a zero-tolerance 
approach to sexual harassment and bullying by providing clear guidance on how 
to deal with these issues and to ensure that all schools record, report and 
take effective action whenever incidents of sexual violence and harassment 
involving pupils occur.”

The report said 29% of 16- to 18-year-old girls had experienced unwanted 
sexual touching at school, while more than two-thirds of both boys and girls 
reported hearing words like “slut” or “slag” aimed at girls in school on a 
regular basis. In total, 59% of girls and young women aged between 13 and 21 
said they had faced some form ofsexual harassment at school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/29/government-not-doing-enough-to-combat-sexual-harassment-in-schools>
 or college within the past year.

In its response to the MPs, the government suggested a “holistic” school-based 
approach, with individual schools developing their own codes of practice. It 
also promised to establish a new advisory group to the Department for Education.

“Schools must also be supported in tackling the problem. It must be recognised 
that sexual harassment and violence is a societal problem which cannot be left 
to schools to tackle alone,” it said.

But the National Union of Teachers said the government needed to make 
appropriate PSHE compulsory to ensure that schools made time for it. “Parents 
understand that growing up is complicated and can be challenging. They expect 
schools to help teach students about relationships, safety and equality, but 
the exam factory culture – which is fuelled by government policy – limits the 
scope for these important parts of learning,” said Rosamund McNeil, the NUT’s 
head of education and equal opportunities.

Yvette Cooper MP, who chairs the home affairs select committee, added: “At a 
time when harassment and violence in teenage relationships is growing, and when 
young people are exposed to violent online pornography or bullying linked to 
sexting, the current patchy and inadequate approach to sex and relationships 
education just isn’t working.

“Leaving sex and relationships education to chance means leaving young people 
to think this sort of behaviour is normal – that it should be tolerated. 
Teenagers need to learn respect in relationships - for themselves and for each 
other - as well as how to cope with online challenges.”
 