 The Mike Tyson bandwagon appeared to be turning into an unstoppable commercial 
force yesterday, even as protests intensified over the decision to let him 
fight in Glasgow.
The boxing promoter, Frank Warren, claimed more than 15,000 people had applied 
for tickets for the bout with Lou Savarese before yesterday's confirmation that 
it would take place at Hampden Park on June 24.

The Scottish Football Association, defending its decision to allow the use of 
the national stadium, said the fight would be a showpiece event for Glasgow - a 
view echoed by one of the city's leading hoteliers.

"For three or four days next month the whole world will be talking about Mike 
Tyson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mike-tyson> in Glasgow and watching 
film from Glasgow," said Klaus Zsilla, general manager of the Hilton hotel, 
which has a provisional booking for the Tyson entourage. "It is advertising for 
the city you could not pay for."

Elsewhere, efforts were continuing to try to reverse the decision by the home 
secretary, Jack Straw, to let the boxer, a convicted rapist, into the UK for 
the second time. The Scottish National party will call on the Scottish 
parliament next week to seek a judicial review of the decision.

The SNP leader, Alex Salmond, said the parliament would be within its rights 
as guardian of the public interest inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to challenge the decision in court. 
The Scottish executive has already indicated it will not mount a legal 
challenge, but it is understood that at least one Glasgow rape crisis group is 
considering court action.

Other women's groups are said to be planning to try to disrupt the fight if it 
goes ahead. Julie Bindel, of the UK campaign group Justice for Women, which 
unsuccessfully sought a judicial review of Mr Straw's decision to allow Tyson 
into the UK last January, said the group would not mount another challenge. But 
she said: "It is really outrageous that the government can make this decision 
to let in a convicted rapist at a time when it is holding a sexual offences 
review with tightening of rape laws right at the heart of it."

Earlier, a spokesman for Downing Street backed Mr Straw's decision. "We 
deplore violence against women and the government has put in place several 
initiatives to tackle that problem because it is a very real problem," he said.

"But equally Jack Straw has to reach a judgment in his capacity as home 
secretary. He has said that in reaching that judgment he has been fair and 
impartial and set out the reasons for making that judgment. It is not a 
judgment that is made about Mike Tyson and what he has done. Jack Straw has 
legal responsibilities under the immigration act and he has to exercise those."

The home secretary is ready to meet concerned MPs, who plan to make their 
opposition to the decision clear in a Westminster debate on Tuesday.

Mr Warren, meanwhile, said that six facilities in England had expressed 
interest in hosting the fight, and he claimed that Celtic football club had 
offered Celtic Park at a discounted rate in an unsuccessful attempt to stage 
the bout. Celtic has refused to comment.

Mr Warren is confident a crowd in excess of 40,000 can be attracted to 
Hampden, making it the biggest gate for a boxing promotion in Britain since 
1993 when Chris Eubank and Nigel Benn fought a draw at Old Trafford in front of 
42,000 spectators.

He said Tyson was "delighted" to have been given the opportunity to return to 
fight in front of what will be the largest live audience of his career.

"People are entitled to their opinions about Mike, after all we live in a 
democratic society.

"I don't intend to be his apologist, but there are a lot of people who want to 
see him fight."
 