
Swimmers are being urged to take extra care in waters off Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> amid warnings the 
deadly irukandji jellyfish is moving further south.

Four people have been taken to hospital since Wednesday after suffering 
suspected irukandji stings off Queensland’s Fraser coast.

The irukandji – the world’s smallest and most venomous box jellyfish – is 
usually found in waters north of Mackay, about 700km further up the coast.

The James Cook University associate professor Jamie Seymour said it was clear 
the species was following warming sea temperatures south.

“We’ve got good data now that shows quite nicely that irukandji has been 
spreading down the east coast of Australia, moving slowly but surely 
southwards,” he told ABC radio.

“It’s only a matter of time before they get to the southern end of Fraser 
Island down to the Sunny coast.”

Irukandji jellyfish could have caused deaths of tourists on Great Barrier Reef
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/irukandji-jellyfish-could-have-caused-deaths-of-tourists-on-great-barrier-reef>
Queensland Ambulance supervisor Martin Kelly said at least one of the cases 
off the Fraser coast had been positively identified as an irukandji sting.

He said while it was enticing to swim in areas off the Queensland coast, it 
could also be quite dangerous.

“People can wear stinger suits but ... where you have a choice of not swimming 
in an environment where they [stingers] are you should do that or stay in the 
very shallow water,” he said.

“Prevention is far, far better than a cure.”

Irukandji jellyfish are typically difficult to see as they are only roughly a 
cubic centimetre in size. Their potentially deadly stings can cause very high 
blood pressure or affect the heart.

They can also cause severe muscular pain, anxious behaviour, headaches and 
vomiting. Stings should be doused in copious amounts of vinegar or seawater 
until medical help arrives, Kelly said.
 