
Higher rail fares have come into effect, with passengers across Britain facing 
an average rise of 2.3%, prompting renewed outcry from campaigners.

The overall rise in prices will outstrip the increase in season tickets set by 
the government, leading unions to accuse private train companies of milking the 
system.

Labour party research shows that season tickets have gone up by an average of 
27% since 2010, while the TUC found that rail fares had risen at more than 
twice the rate of inflation and wages over the last decade.

Rising fares and crowded trains: the misery of Britain's rail users
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/31/rising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users>
According to Labour, some commuters will now payover £2,000 more to travel to 
work than when the Conservatives came to power in 2010. A comparison of costs 
on nearly 200 routes shows that the average commuter is now paying £2,788 for 
their season ticket, £594 more than in 2010.

The shadow transport secretary, Andy McDonald, said: “Passengers have faced 
truly staggering fare rises of over £2,000 since 2010. Fares have risen more 
than three times faster than wages, and passengers on some routes have also 
been hit by stealth fare rises of up to 162%.”

A Virgin Trains season ticket between Birmingham and London now costs £10,200, 
up £2,172 since 2010, while commuters travelling from Brighton to London on the 
troubled Southern Rail route now pay almost £1,000 more than in 2010, Labour’s 
research found.

“Passengers were always told that higher fares were necessary to fund 
investment, but vital projects have been delayed by years and essential 
maintenance works have been put on hold,” McDonald said. A less fragmented 
railway, under public ownership, would have lower costs, he added.

The transport secretary, Chris Grayling, took a different view. He said: “We 
are delivering the biggest rail modernisation programme for more than a 
century, providing more seats and services. We have always fairly balanced the 
cost of this investment between the taxpayer and the passenger.”

The train companies pocket millions in compensation for delays
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/dec/31/train-companies-pocket-millions-delays>
The Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operators and Network Rail, 
said around 97p in every pound paid by passengers goes back into running and 
improving services. Its chief executive, Paul Plummer, said: “Nobody wants to 
pay more to travel to work and at the moment in some places people aren’t 
getting the service they are paying for.”

This year the rise in overall fares, which is set by train companies, outstrip 
the rise in season tickets and other regulated fares. Fares on Virgin Trains 
East Coast have risen by 4.9% overall, with the company pushing up the price of 
some off-peak singles by 7% and the price of a ticket London to Edinburgh up to 
£137.20.

Regulated fares have increased by 1.9% in line with July’s retail price index 
inflation figure, which is three times higher than the consumer price index 
(CPI) figure that the government more commonly employs.

The Campaign for Better Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> 
called on the government to use CPI inflation figures to determine fare rises. 
It also demanded a cap on increases on walk-on fares, and season tickets 
targeted to equally benefit part-time workers.

Lianna Etkind, a spokeswoman for the campaign, said: “With the average cost of 
an annual season ticket into London now more than £4,000, many people can 
simply no longer afford to get to work. It’s clear to us, and to millions of 
passengers up and down the country, that the whole fares and ticketing system 
needs overhauling.”

Rail fare rises driven by hikes on Virgin Trains East Coast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/02/rail-fare-price-rises-virgin-trains-east-coast>
The TUC’s research shows that rail fares have increased by 56% since 2006, 
more than double the rise of 24% rise in average earnings and 26% in inflation 
over the decade.


Action for Rail, a campaign by rail unions and the TUC, says the UK’s 
privatised rail service has increased costs for commuters. It plans protests at 
more than 100 stations around Britain on Tuesday, when the majority of 
commuters will return to work after the new year holiday.

The TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said: “British commuters are 
forced to shell out far more on rail fares than others in Europe. Many will 
look with envy at the cheaper, publicly-owned services on the continent.

“Private train companies are milking the system, and the government is letting 
them get away with it.”

A survey for the campaign group We Own It found that around half of 
respondents believed fares would fall under public ownership. According to 
polling by Survation, 48% of people believed train travel would be cheaper in a 
renationalised railway, and 58% said privatisation had been a failure.

Cat Hobbs, the director of We Own It, said: “We need an integrated, efficient 
railway that is accountable to all of us. Profits should be invested for the 
benefit of passengers, not shareholders.”

The rail fare increases come as strikes continue to affect passengers on 
Southern rail. Services were disrupted and some lines closed by a three-day 
strike by conductors from the RMT union in a long-running row over reforms to 
their jobs and duties. The latest strike started on 31 December and concludes 
on Monday. Southern said a “team of contingency conductors” was keeping key 
routes open.

The most extreme disruption yet in the Southern dispute looms next week, when 
a a six-day walkout by drivers from 9 January is expected to bring the network 
to a complete standstill.
 