
Before his appearance at transport questions in the Commons, Chris Grayling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling> was last seen being pushed 
to the back of the queue at Clapham Junction railway station as he fought with 
other commuters to get into work during Monday’s tube strike.

Is Britain’s rail network getting worse?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/06/is-britains-rail-network-getting-worse>
You might have imagined the transport secretary would have rolled with the 
punches on that one: Failing Grayling has been demoted so often in his 
political career, as David Cameron and Theresa May have vainly searched for a 
job he can’t do badly, that there should have been a certain familiarity to his 
predicament.

Quite the opposite. Instead of acceptance, there was rage. The scars still 
throbbed as Grayling unburdened his heartache. Wisely choosing to focus on the 
three days of mayhem onSouthern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> 
rail rather than the tube strike which was in large part a result of an 
unresolved dispute on Boris Johnson’s watch as London mayor, Failing time and 
again spoke of the hardship that he and thousands of others had suffered – even 
going so far as to suggest he was considering legislation to limit further 
strikes.

In Grayling’s view, the strikes were entirely the responsibility of a lazy 
workforce who were merely using the pretext of safety as a disguise for having 
a few days off and making commuters’ lives a misery. Never once did it appear 
to have crossed his mind that at least half the responsibility for the mess lay 
with Southern operator Govia – a company that most people wouldn’t trust to run 
a Hornby model railway set safely and to time. No. Failing couldn’t see further 
than his humiliation at Clapham Junction and was determined to lash out by 
making sure many more people would feel his pain. Starting with those to the 
south-east ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

Labour’s Matthew Pennycock asked why the minister was so keen to repeat the 
mistakes of Southern in his proposed solution for the new Southeastern 
franchise. Failing was adamant he wasn’t politicising the situation. It was 
just that he did not want a Labour mayor getting his fingers anywhere near his 
train set.

Andy McDonald, the shadow transport secretary, couldn’t believe what he was 
hearing. “He has put party politics ahead of passengers and clearly prefers to 
see trains running late than running on time under Labour,” he said. “Will he 
now agree to an independent assessment of the proposal by a respected figure 
outside his department, given yesterday’s revelations of conflicting commercial 
interests, to restore credibility to the process?”

The short answer was no. Not until McDonald condemned the strikes and told 
everyone to go back to work. Next, Failing wanted to move on to the triumph of 
HS2. You could feel some of the transport secretary’s composure return at this 
point. No matter how badly he does his job, there’s little chance of him still 
being in it by the time the first piece of track has been laid, let alone by 
the time it is up and running.

Could he explain why the Adam Smith Institute had predicted the costs could 
rise to £80bn with each mile of track costing nine times more than in France, 
asked the SNP’s Margaret Ferrier. Easy. It was because we were nine times 
keener on protecting the environment. Where the French just leftleurs hérissons 
(their hedgehogs) to fend for themselves, we were giving all ours intensive 
therapy and brand-new starter homes. An admirable sentiment. But perhaps the 
money might have been better spent on the NHS.

At which point, the Conservative Martin Vickers woke up, demanding to know why 
there were now only Saturday train services to Cleethorpes. Failing grinned. He 
had that covered. He wanted to see more overcrowded trains. Overcrowded trains 
were a sign of how popular rail travel had become under privatisation. 
Commuters ought to be thrilled to be squashed together like sardines. And the 
later trains ran, the better it would be as there would be more people on them. 
Go Govia.

A few Labour MPs started shaking their heads. They were probably trying to 
work out why he had been so pissed off earlier in the week at his 45-minute 
delay.
 