
About £4bn of taxpayers' money has been set aside by the government to ensure 
Railtrack is able to complete the £5.8bn upgrade of the west coast main line 
between London and Glasgow, the company admitted to the Guardian last night.

The money has been delivered by the deputy prime minister, John Prescott, to 
the industry as part of a £30bn package of investment in rail over the next 10 
years.

Negotiations are still going on between Gerald Corbett, Railtrack's chief 
executive, and the shadow Strategic Rail Authority on the exact amount to be 
paid.

But the overall effect will be that two-thirds of the cost of one of the 
biggest rail infrastructure projects in Europe is being funded by taxpayers.

The figure shows that in spite of rail privatisation, the taxpayer is largely 
responsible for underpinning the railway.

Train operating companies are receiving £1.3bn in subsidies which are due to 
expire in 2002 but will have to be continued beyond that date for large, 
unprofitable sections of the railway.

The cost of the west coast main line project has been a source of 
embarrassment for Railtrack and the government for some time.

Railtrack said yesterday that the cost had more than doubled from £2.2bn when 
it was started several years ago to £5.8bn when it is due for completion in 
2005.

Earlier this year the company quietly admitted that the costs were spiralling. 
It said it could not finish the project on its own and that it would have to be 
bailed out.

Robin Gisby, Railtrack's director of network development, said Railtrack would 
have to make the investment before it could recoup the money, and the railway 
would have to be tested. "It is not just being handed over to us and we are 
told to get on with it."

He explained that when the original £2.2bn project was begun the Treasury put 
£1.4bn into the scheme, "so there has always been some element of public 
involvement".

The £4bn of state funds is being held by Sir Alastair Morton at the SSRA. A 
spokesman pointed out that a small part of this money would be set aside for 
signalling and safety on other parts of the network.

Railtrack's revelations took the rail unions by surprise. Vernon Hince, 
assistant gen eral secretary of the RMT rail union, said that it exposed the 
industry's foolishness.

"It is outrageous that the government is being forced to subsidise a private 
company which makes millions in profits and distributes millions to its 
shareholders."

Mr Hince said that the disclosure also called into question the proposals for 
part-privatisation of the London Underground.

The 400-mile west coast line, linking the most populated parts of Britain, is 
being redeveloped for the first time in 30 years. It is planned that the line 
will be used by tilting trains, operated by Sir Richard Branson's Virgin 
company, capable of achieving speeds of 140mph. But there are now doubts this 
will happen.

Virgin is confident that Rail track will be able to deliver the first phase of 
the deal - with tilting trains running at speeds of 125mph by 2002 - cutting 
the journey time between London and Manchester to around two hours.

But bad planning and Railtrack's over-ambitious reliance on a new signalling 
system could upset the second phase.

Railtrack has even suggested that it would pay Virgin up to £250m to withdraw 
from the construction project, but the Branson organisation has rejected the 
idea.

Thousands of passengers along the route constantly suffer the side-effects of 
the upgrade work. Trains frequently run late, or are cancelled.

Railtrack says it will get worse before it gets better but that when the route 
is finished it will be fast and efficient.
 