
A chartered accountant and his wife are £1,100 out of pocket after discovering 
that their son’s old bank account number has been given to someone else. The 
couple have learned to their cost something that every person who banks online 
should know: it’s not just things such as paper and glass that are recycled. 
Banks can, and do, recycle closed account details.

David and Lyndsay Boyack from the Scottish city of Stirling are the latest 
people to discover that transferring money via online banking can be fraught 
with peril. But this wasn’t a fat finger error, whereby you erroneously key in 
the wrong account number and the money goes to an unintended recipient; and it 
also wasn’t one of those nasty email scams where someone is duped into paying 
money to a fraudster posing as their builder/carpenter etc.

In this case, Lyndsay made several separate payments into what she thought was 
her 33-year-old son’s current account, but is actually now someone else’s 
account – and this person is refusing to give the money back.

Her son’s name, account number and sort code were among the list of payees 
saved on her system, but unbeknown to her they were no longer her son’s banking 
details. In fact, he had closed that account some years previously and 
subsequently opened another one with the same bank, the Clydesdale. What 
shocked the couple were the revelations that both the same account number and 
sort code from their son’s old account had been given to someone else, and that 
no one within the banking system seems to be able to compel this individual to 
hand back money that isn’t theirs.

The Boyacks’ experience shines a spotlight on the little-known world of 
current account recycling. Did you know, for example, that your bank account 
could be “second-hand”? Very little information is available on this, but it is 
understood that banks typically wait at least three years before recycling 
closed account details. Clydesdale has confirmed that once one of its accounts 
has been closed for four years, both the number and sort code can be given to a 
new customer.

Not all banks do this – HSBC doesn’t, and neither does Santander. And it may 
be the case that of those banks that do do it, some split the account number 
and sort code. If all old accounts were recycled to different branches, this 
would presumably have prevented the Boyacks’ error.

If proposed new rules for online payments outlined last month were in place 
now, what happened to the Boyacks would not have been able to occur. In future, 
when a bank customer transfers some money, they will receive a message matching 
the sort code and account number with the name of the recipient account holder, 
so they can double check they are paying the right person (see below).

David Boyack, who is 64, admits the whole experience has left the couple 
frustrated. However, he says they will continue their efforts to recover the 
money because otherwise it would suggest to him and his wife that “crime does 
pay”.

The Boyacks made four online transfers of funds from the couple’s Royal Bank 
of Scotland account over a period of 15 months, unwittingly using the details 
of their son’s old account, which he had closed in 2006 after moving to 
Glasgow. The first transfer was £50 in December 2014, followed by £100 in 
February 2015, £150 in December 2015, and £800 in February of this year.

Recycling account numbers is common practice due to a limit on the amount of 
numbers available

The couple only realised there was a problem when their son told them the £800 
had not arrived. They then realised the same thing had happened three times 
previously. Initially the couple thought they were the victims of a fraud, and 
contacted their bank, RBS. When it became clear what had occurred they 
complained to the Clydesdale. It eventually told them in August that it was 
unable to give them any more help. In a letter it said it had written twice to 
the customer who now has those account details to request the money back, “but 
we have had no response”. The Boyacks then wrote a letter which they asked to 
be forwarded to the customer, but again there was no reply.

Intriguingly, through a spot of detective work they managed to get hold of the 
customer’s name and also where he works (a cafe in the Manchester area), 
although they don’t know his home address. “He’s a young chap and we imagine he 
has spent the money,” says David. His son managed to contact the man via 
Facebook, without joy, and now David has sent him a recorded delivery letter, 
to his workplace, asking him to pay back the debt at a rate of £75 a month or 
£20 a week.

The couple took their complaint to the Financial Ombudsman Service, but it 
ruled that the Clydesdale “hasn’t done anything wrong in this situation” and 
had “made a reasonable attempt to try to retrieve the funds”.

David told Guardian Money that “we do accept some contributory negligence … we 
[made the transfers] four times”. He acknowledges that if their son had noticed 
that the first £50 had not arrived then they wouldn’t be where they are now. 
But he says the FOS has shown itself to be “toothless”, with no solution 
offered to prevent a recurrence.

“Clydesdale ‘made a reasonable attempt’ – I would have expected more. They 
contacted their client twice. He did not provide debit authorisation, so that’s 
it?” he says. “The recipient’s crime is that of unjust enrichment, and I am 
very keen that he pays back what he has ‘taken’ from us.”

Boyack adds: “Why is there no flag on recycled accounts? Or better still, why 
is there not a split of the old account number for re-use with a different sort 
code? Is there no way to validate the recipient’s name as well, to avoid 
depositing funds in the wrong account in error?”

In a statement Clydesdale Bank told us: “The issues raised have been 
investigated thoroughly and, while we sympathise with Mr Boyack, regrettably, 
given the circumstances, we could not provide a refund, and despite our efforts 
we were unable to retrieve the funds in question. The Financial Ombudsman also 
upheld our decision not to refund.”

It adds that recycling account numbers is “common practice due to a limit on 
the amount of numbers available. In this case, the account number had not been 
used for eight years”.

New safety measures

A system is being introduced in the UK aimed at preventing people from sending 
payments to the wrong account, either by accident or as a result of a scam. But 
the bad news is that it isn’t due until 2018-2020.

The “confirmation of payee” system will mean that when someone types in a sort 
code and account number to transfer some money, they will receive an instant 
message saying something like “Is ‘Joe Smith’ the person/business you intended 
to send the money to?” Crucially, this will appear before the money leaves the 
person’s account.

Many people are unaware that currently the name of the person/company they are 
paying is effectively irrelevant as banks don’t do any cross-checking.

As the proposals require a major systems change to enable banks to instantly 
identify recipients, it will be a couple of years before people see it. So what 
can they do now? As Clydesdale Bank says: “Always double-check the account 
details you are sending funds to, and check the recipient has received those 
funds.”

Perhaps it is time to do an end-of-year spring clean of your list of payees 
and check that everyone’s bank details are up to date.
 