
Thousands of people evacuated from their homes along Britain’s east coast have 
been told they can return to their properties after an anticipated storm surge 
failed to cause the disruption expected.

Some homes in Yorkshire were flooded, but conditions along much of the east 
coast did not reach the forecast level of danger, which had prompted the
Environment Agency <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/environment-agency> 
(EA) to issue 17 severe flood warnings and tell those in Norfolk, Suffolk and 
Essex that they were most at risk.

Seven people were rescued after a cargo ship sank in bad weather off the Kent 
coast. The vessel made a mayday call shortly before midnight on Friday while 
north-east of Ramsgate.

Snow across the UK – your photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2017/jan/13/snow-across-the-uk-your-photos>
Steve Carson, the UK Coastguard duty commander, said: “The weather on scene 
has been challenging, but we are pleased to report that all the crew have been 
rescued and are on their way to hospital.”

High tides passed overnight without significant impact on coastal residents 
despite more than 100 EA flood warnings. On Saturday, 34 warnings and 50 alerts 
remained in place.

Doug Wilson, the EA’s flood duty manager, said: “High tides and strong winds 
caused large waves along the east coast yesterday, bringing significant 
flooding and danger to life.”

He said the organisation operated its permanent flood defences, including the 
Thames and Hull barriers, and set up temporary defences in at-risk areas to 
protect more than 550,000 properties.

“But in the event, the combination of the peak surge, strong winds and large 
waves did not coincide in all areas and did not reach the most dangerous levels 
possible.

“Some properties in North and East Yorkshire were flooded and our thoughts are 
with those affected.”

Wilson said EA teams were inspecting and repairing damaged defences, and would 
continue to update the public of any flood risks.

Evacuated residents at a rest centre in Jaywick, Essex, were told they could 
return to their homes in the early hours of Saturday after the predicted 
flooding failed to materialise.

Police spokesman Matthew Horne defended the warnings to residents, saying they 
were grounded in science and advice from the EA and the Met Office.

In Norfolk, police said the closure of rest centres would be staggered to 
ensure residents and property owners could return home safely.

The temporary deputy chief constable Nick Dean said: “Thankfully the high 
tides passed without significant incident, which means that people can now 
return to their properties.

“There may still be some hazards caused by flooding and we would remind people 
to continue to listen to the advice of the emergency services and heed the 
ongoing public health information.”

The EA advised walkers to be wary on coastal paths and promenades as the 
unsettled weather continues.

The Met Office predicted a calmer week ahead, but said some parts of the 
country would experience cold and icy conditions.

Forecaster Steven Keates said tides were still quite high and it remained 
windy on the North Sea coast, but that the situation had improved and the main 
risk was over. Wintry showers were expected in Norfolk on Saturday, including 
snow in Great Yarmouth, but there would be some sunshine further north.

“Overnight tonight there will be a weather front coming in from the west, 
causing breakouts of rain,” Keates said. “Along the eastern edge of the country 
is a risk of some rain turning to snow across parts of Scotland. And there will 
be more sleet and snow across some parts of East Anglia tomorrow [Sunday] 
morning so anyone travelling should take care.”

After some milder weather across many parts of the country early in the week, 
things are set to get cold again. The Met Office said temperatures would drop 
again in the south, with an easterly wind coming off a cold continent, and that 
the weather would remain mostly dry with some frost. Scotland would experience 
milder temperatures, with westerly winds and cloud.









































 