
Renewed strike action on Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail has left hundreds of 
thousands of commuters again struggling to get to work by alternative means.

Cabin crew at British Airways have also started a two-day strike, while 
efforts continued to restart talks to avert further action on theLondon 
Underground <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-underground>.

Virtually all of Southern’s trains were wiped out on Tuesday, as drivers from 
the Aslef union started a second period of strike action in the long-running 
dispute over the role of guards.


Southern ran two early-morning trains from Brighton to Victoria, operated by 
driver-managers and unadvertised, which carried a few passengers who had turned 
up for Thameslink trains, and a few peak-hour non-stopping services on the 
Caterham-Victoria line, but the rest of its 2,242 daily trains were cancelled. 
Southern owner Govia Thameslink Railway said there was a good uptake on the 
buses it had arranged for connections with other train operators.


A GTR spokesman said: “We would like to thank passengers for their patience 
and understanding, and for heeding the advice to only travel if absolutely 
necessary.”

Further strikes are due on Wednesday and Friday, while services will also be 
severely disrupted on Thursday as the effects of the walkout and an overtime 
ban persist. The strike follows a similar three days of action over a week in 
December, and a third tranche of strikes is planned from Tuesday 24 January.

Mick Whelan, general secretary of Aslef, said: “We greatly regret the 
industrial action we have taken on Southern railway today. We don’t want to 
inconvenience passengers, nor do our members want to lose money, because we 
want to help build a better railway for Britain. But we have been forced to go 
on strike by an intransigent management that has not been prepared to negotiate 
with us.

“Southern are bullies. Throughout this dispute, from when they first announced 
their intentions 10 months ago, they have tried to force through changes in the 
terms and conditions of staff by tearing up agreements rather than by 
negotiating.

“In contrast, we stick to deals we have made and have always been willing to 
negotiate when someone shows goodwill; that is how we managed to strike a deal 
last year with ScotRail which works well for the company, the passengers and 
the staff. So it can be done.”

Whelan said he hoped that Southern would resume talks to find a resolution. 
The company said it was “available” for talks, but no negotiations were planned.

Meanwhile, a second transport strike got under way, by British Airways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways> cabin crew, in a dispute 
over pay. About 2,500 Unite members working at Heathrow started a 48-hour 
strike that has forced the airline to cancel 22 flights on Tuesday out of 
around 800 planned.

BA said that the flights had been merged with other departures so that all 
passengers would get to their destinations. Flights to Hamburg, Düsseldorf, San 
Jose [California], Oslo and Aberdeen were among those affected.

The strike is by members of the mixed fleet, a branch of cabin crew 
established during the bitter strikes of 2010-11 on inferior terms and 
conditions, and which all recruits must now join. Basic pay starts at just over 
£12,000, although the airline says most earn at least £21,000 after additional 
flight pay and allowances. Unite members mounted picket lines in the Heathrow 
area. A union spokesman said: “The strike is being solidly supported, and we 
are receiving support from passing motorists.”

The action comes a day after London’s transport services were severely 
affected by a 24-hour strike by tube station staff that left mostLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Underground services down and caused 
gridlock on the roads. More strikes could be called but all parties have 
signalled a willingness to keep talking.

Manuel Cortes, general secretary of the TSSA, one of two unions representing 
the station staff, said: “We hope London Underground will resume talks with us 
without delay so that a resolution to this longstanding dispute can be found.”

He said that all sides agreed more jobs should be restored for a safe service. 
“Given this, a resolution should not be beyond our wit. Our negotiating team 
remains available for talks anytime, anywhere.”

London Underground said it urged more talks and the RMT union said it remained 
available.

The RMT’s general secretary, Mick Cash, said the union’s executive was 
considering its next steps, and warned: “Tube bosses have conceded that more 
jobs are required to tackle the growing safety and security crisis but RMT is 
looking at substantial moves that can be properly evaluated and signed off by 
our safety reps, who know better than anyone what is required on the ground.”
 