
Climate scientists have done a great job winning the scientific arguments 
about climate change. To be clear about what I mean, we have done a very good 
job investigating whether or not the Earth’s climate is changing (it is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/21/global-warming-continues-2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-ever-recorded>
), what is causing the change (humans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/sep/27/global-warming-ipcc-report-humans>
), how much will it change in the future, and what will be the impacts.


There are no longer any reputable scientists who disagree  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/apr/13/its-settled-90100-of-climate-experts-agree-on-human-caused-global-warming>
with the principle view of that human emissions will cause climate change that 
will lead to societal and human losses (they already are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/dec/02/fires-and-drought-cook-tennessee-a-state-represented-by-climate-deniers>
). So, I use the term “win” here not to indicate it was a battle of “us” versus 
“them”. Rather, I mean “win” in that we have faithfully followed the scientific 
method, explored alternative hypotheses, checked and rechecked our work, and 
have come to a truth that is unassailable. We’ve done our job.

In the past, that is where our job ended. I mean maybe we would help with a 
press release on a breaking study, do an interview. But only rarely.

Now, particularly with an issue like climate change, that has such an impact 
on peoples’ lives, scientists are being asked to go further. We are being asked 
to effectively communicate to the public why this matters, what will happen if 
we take action or not, and what some trade-offs are. This means we can be put 
in an uncomfortable position where we’re forced to advocate. Some of my 
colleagues are understandably skittish about advocacy and avoid it religiously. 
Others, like myself, will advocate on occasion but be very clear about when the 
scientist hat comes off and the advocate hat is put on.


But regardless, scientists are tasked with communicating complex science in a 
short amount of time, to people with varied backgrounds. This is a really tough 
ask, especially when we are not trained at it. Fortunately, we are getting 
help. The art of effective scientific communication is being shared with 
scientists to help us properly convey concepts.

A very recent publication 
<http://public.wmo.int/en/resources/bulletin/unnatural-disasters-communicating-linkages-between-extreme-events-and-climate>
 by several communication experts has been published in the World 
Meteorological OrganizationBulletin. The lead author, Susan Hassol and her 
co-authors weave together effective language and accurate science in an 
uncommonly profound way. The results are simple suggestions that the rest of us 
can use to be both true to facts as well as clear.

The article centers around the influence human-caused warming has had on 
natural disasters. We know that some disasters, such as coastal and flash 
floods, heat waves, heavy rainfall, and drought are increasing. But how do we 
talk about the human effect on such events? The authors remind us that heavy 
rainfall that can cause flooding has increased markedly because warm air holds 
more water.


Regarding heat waves, the summer-long extreme heat of 2013 in Australia was 
made approximately 5 times more likely due to human-caused warming; and there 
are other examples reviewed. Now, this doesn’t mean that climate change was the
solecause of a particular event. And this is the fallback position of most 
scientists. Our hesitancy to highlight the role of human warming in individual 
events makes listeners think that the influence of climate change on extreme 
weather is smaller than it really is.


It is more accurate to say that all weather events are now influenced by 
climate change. Some weather events are coming on stronger; they last longer, 
or are more severe. As a result, climate change is increasing the impact of 
these events. The authors reviewed various examples of extreme weather events 
for which attribution studies allow scientists to make meaningful statements 
about the role of human-caused climate change.


Another point made in the paper is that with acute weather events, speed of 
reporting is key. We need to speak with as much clarity as possible while a 
weather event is still in the media. Fortunately, advances in scientific 
understanding are enabling us to make statements about the human influence on 
extreme events that can be conveyed through the media to the interested public. 
It is important to make these connections while events are still a matter of 
public interest.

The authors note three factors that enable confident conclusions about the 
influence of climate change on certain types of extreme weather. First, we need 
to have a strong understanding of the physical processes involved in the 
extreme weather event. Second, high-quality observations are needed so we can 
assess whether the type of event (such as flood, heat wave, drought, storm, 
etc.) is changing over time. Finally, climate models are necessary that can 
simulate the type of extreme weather event.


So, as we move forward, we must ensure that these three items are maintained. 
For instance, if we neglect funding of observational equipment, we may no 
longer be able to conclude whether and how events are changing as the climate 
warms.


This is a good, readable report. I would encourage not only scientists to read 
this, but also anyone else who regularly communicates climate change effects to 
an audience, whether receptive or hostile.
 