
Taxpayer-funded academy chains have paid millions of pounds into the private 
businesses of directors, trustees and their relatives, documents obtained from 
freedom of information requests show.

The payments have been made for a wide range of services including consultancy 
fees, curriculums, IT advice and equipment, travel, expenses and legal services 
by at least nine academy chains.

Critics fear that the Department for Education (DfE) is not closely monitoring 
the circulation of public money from academies to private firms.

While defending their use of public money, one trustee of an academy chain has 
called for increased scrutiny of their spending. Another said a director had 
resigned from the trust because of fears over a conflict of interest.

There is no implication that the chains or their directors and trustees have 
broken any rules, and all insisted that they had been properly audited.

But the findings have led to shadow schools minister, Kevin Brennan, calling 
forDavid Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> and the 
education secretary, Michael Gove, to look into this practice urgently. "David 
Cameron has failed to put in place the appropriate checks over academy chain 
funding decisions, prioritising pace of expansion over the protection of public 
money and school standards," Brennan said. "It is deeply concerning that so 
much taxpayer money is ending up in the pockets of academy chain directors and 
trustees."

Grace Academy, which runs three schools in the Midlands and was set up by the 
Tory donor Lord Edmiston, has paid more than £1m either directly to or through 
companies owned or controlled by Edmiston, trustees' relatives and to members 
of the board of trustees.

Payments include £533,789 to International Motors Limited, a company owned by 
Edmiston, and £4,253 to Subaru UK Ltd, where he is the ultimate controlling 
party. More than £173,000 was also paid to the charities Grace Foundation and 
Christian Vision, both of which were set up by Edmiston. In addition, £108,816 
has been paid to a company controlled by the son-in-law of one trustee.

Grace Academy also employs Gary Spicer, the brother of Lady Edmiston, as its 
executive director, on a salary of £30,000 plus pension. Spicer's own company 
received more than £367,732 from Grace Academy over the last six years for 
consultancy work.

Judi Wood, the academy's director of corporate development, said the total net 
contribution to the academy from related parties amounted to more than £4.5m, 
while the amount paid by the academy's sponsor, which was founded by Edmiston, 
was £5m. Christian Vision has provided offices worth £57,000 a year, she said, 
while International Motors financed the academy's development, which were 
reimbursed at cost. "Grace Academy and those it serves in education, have 
benefited hugely from the substantial financial support offered by Grace 
Foundation and from the time and resources offered by trustees," she said.

Since 2010 more than 3,444 schools – including more than half of secondary 
schools – have taken on academy or free school status. Payments to businesses 
in which academy's trustees have a beneficial interest are allowed if the trust 
has fully complied with its procedures and conditions set out in the trust's 
articles of association. Before July 2010, the Charities Commission oversaw the 
governance of academies, but this was switched to the DfE in August 2011.

Leigh Academies <https://www.theguardian.com/education/academies> Trust, run 
by Michael Gove's newly appointed schools commissioner, Frank Green, has paid 
£111,469 since 2010 to Shoreline, a private company founded by him, in 
consultancy fees.

Green was appointed as the DfE's schools commissioner in December and is due 
to begin shortly. Green said the payments were approved by the board. "These 
payments were entirely pro rata for extra work beyond my contracted part-time 
employment over a two-year period and were included in the accounts as part of 
my employment earnings," he said.

Aurora Academies Trust has paid £213,015 to Mosaica Education for educational 
services, reimbursement of travel expenses and for use of the Paragon 
curriculum resource. At least three Aurora directors currently have a direct or 
indirect interest in Mosaica Education.

An Aurora spokesperson said: "The licence is on an 'at-cost' basis in 
accordance with a Tripartite Agreement between the Trust, Mosaica and the DfE."

School Partnership Trust Academies (SPTA), which has converted more than 30 
schools to academies, revealed payments of £424,850 over two years for legal 
services to Wrigleys Solicitors, where the trust director Christopher 
Billington is a partner, and for education consultancy to Elmet Education, 
where another member of School Partnership Trust Academies is a director.

A spokesman for the SPTA said it was inevitable that transactions would take 
place with organisations in which someone may have an interest because of the 
nature of the trust and that all transactions were conducted at arm's length. 
"Wrigleys Solicitors historically have carried out legal work for academy 
conversion work for a number of academy trusts," he said.

Since September 2011, The Elliot Foundation (TEF), which runs primary 
academies in the West Midlands, East Anglia and London, has paid £452,373 to 
founding directors for their work as consultants and for travel and subsistence 
expenses.

The foundation has existed since being set up with donations and pro bono 
work, the academy said. Hugh Greenway, TEF's managing director, took the 
unusual step of calling for greater scrutiny of academies' finances to protect 
the public pound. "We believe there should be even greater scrutiny of 
education finance … We may have passed our audit with flying colours but we 
firmly believe that we should continue to improve financial management and 
control in our schools," he said.

Academy Transformation Trust , which controls 16 academies in the south-east 
and Midlands, has paid in total £57,282 to a trustee and a company owned by the 
daughter-in-law of the trust's chief executive, Ian Cleland. The payments were 
made for ICT hardware, software, associated support services, marketing and 
company stationery.

The Active Learning Trust, which oversees five schools, has paid £16,943 to a 
company owned by trustee, Marilyn Toft.

Cabot Learning Federation (CLF) has paid £9,000 for training courses to 
Transform Training and Consultancy, where a former trustee of the federation is 
also a director. Sir David Carter, CLF chief executive, said the trustee stood 
down as a director in October because her role as a trainer may have produced a 
conflict of interest. Navigate Academies Trust has paid its sponsor's business, 
Navigate Resourcing Ltd (NRL), £5,400 for recruitment support service to three 
academies within the trust. The managing director of the sponsor is a trustee 
of Navigate Academies Trust.

Since the trust was formed in 2012, nine members of staff have been recruited 
through NRL for three of its academy schools. "This was achieved at cost, which 
means no profit has been made by NRL," the spokesman said.

In July this year, the country's largest taxpayer funded chain, the Academy 
Enterprise Trust, came under fire following revelations of almost £500,000 
worth of payments made to private businesses owned by its trustees and 
executive.

In November, the Guardian disclosed that a new cadre of powerful school 
regulators called chancellors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/nov/20/michael-gove-regulators-free-schools>
 are to be appointed by Michael Gove.

A DfE spokesman said: "As charities, academies are required to adhere to 
accounting standards. These require the full disclosure of related-party 
transactions and auditors check those disclosures. This government has ensured 
that academies and trusts are subject to tighter financial controls than ever 
before and to much more scrutiny than local authority schools."
 