
EMPLOYERS: THE HEROES…

‘The difference in attitude has meant that I cope really well’

I am 32 years old and only received my diagnosis of Asperger syndrome four 
years ago. I was working full time and had been struggling with colleagues. I 
was always open about my difficulties and they knew of my diagnosis, but 
despite this felt I was a ‘nightmare to work with’ because of my Asperger’s.


Autism heroes: Guardian readers send in their stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/may/24/autism-heroes-guardian-readers-send-in-their-stories>
Colleagues and my line manager received training from Leicestershire 
Empowerment for Autism Today (LEAT), but this was to no avail, and I was still 
subject to discrimination. It caused a lot of anxiety and stress, resulting in 
a poor attendance record and me feeling I couldn’t face work. The job wasn’t a 
high-pressure role, but the discrimination I faced made it unmanageable.

I went to my local jobcentre and spoke to a disability adviser who informed me 
that I was selfish, self-centred and neglected my children because of my 
Asperger’s. This was the only time I saw her, and I had not said anything about 
my children at all, just that I had two sons. I only went to get help to look 
for alternative employment, but this put me off.

Fortunately I now have a support worker from LEAT and they’ve been great. I 
managed to get a job with the county council and subsequently the city council 
and am better supported now. The role I am doing now is a higher level and 
utilises the degrees I completed and the difference in attitude to 
disabilities, and acceptance, has meant that I can cope really well, despite 
the high level of responsibility and accountability I now have.

Nadine Sargent

‘Not all employers are the same’

My work gives me a warm feeling every day. I decided many years ago that 
employers would not give me the 13 weeks’ holiday every year that I required to 
look after my autistic son. Fortunately, I had friends who recommended that I 
go back to study to fill the void I had in my life for something else apart 
from caring.


The college had the same school holidays and the university lecturers helped 
me to catch up whenever it was required. I graduated with a first-class degree 
and was so proud but apprehensive about my future employment. When I was 
applying for jobs I was upfront about my caring responsibilities, and decided I 
would make it a condition of accepting any position. It worked, and I was 
offered all the jobs I applied for.

My current employer is the University of Salford; the university I graduated 
from. My manager, the management and my colleagues are accepting and 
accommodating about my caring requirements. There is no big fuss, no form 
filling or extensive explanations. I can schedule my work around my son’s needs 
and it has taught me a very valuable lesson – not all employers are the same.

Karen Kinghorn

‘She allows me to focus on what I can achieve, not where I might fail’

Though preached often, following your dreams is a courageous and risky thing. 
For me, being an autistic woman pursuing a career in the art department of 
television and film, it feels that following my dreams is the most ill-advised 
thing I can do.

 Life in the art department is not as glamorous as it may seem. Each day is a 
sensory overload – rapidly changing work locations, inconsistent routines, long 
hours and huge social pressures to continuously make contacts. What’s more, for 
a non-driver like me, traversing local transport in an unfamiliar city is both 
terrifying and expensive. It’s a cut-throat industry, regardless of disability. 
If you’re not good enough, you’re out.

 This is why I’m lucky to have met EJ. As a production buyer, she is very busy 
working long hours with people at the top of the food chain, yet she always has 
time for me. From encouraging me to branch out my contacts and offering 
world-class industry advice, to gently talking me out of a meltdown, she allows 
me to focus on what I can achieve as opposed to where I might fail. It’s 
humbling to know that someone so important is willing to care.

Georgia Harrison

‘My confidence has grown massively’

I started a voluntary work placement at my local pottery-painting studio, 
which has accommodated my autism no end. From day one they have recognised that 
I had reservations about talking to new customers, but with their help and 
guidance I have flourished and can now assist customers without aid, make small 
talk, offer drinks and give eye contact.


 My confidence has grown massively. At first my work placement offered me time 
out in a calm, isolated environment if things got too much. It was things like 
this that gave me the confidence to trust my work placement and realise that 
they wanted to help me. My experience in this workplace has been outstanding.

Annabel Prince


‘They took time to know me’ 

I got my Waitrose job because they accommodated me in Marlow, Buckinghamshire. 
It was difficult to find a job because I didn’t have good grades.


In college I was given work experience at Waitrose. Before that I worked in 
the college shop, which helped me learn about money.

I didn’t know anyone at Waitrose, but everyone was friendly. I couldn’t do 
things on my own, so they helped me until I knew how. They were quite patient 
because they knew I had autism and hearing problems. When construction work 
happened, they told me what was going on.

After work experience, they offered me work on a weekday, but my mum and dad 
are employed and they drive me to work because I live too far away. So I was 
given a trial for Saturday, which was really helpful. Then they accepted me as 
a part-time worker. I started with stock rotation and then learned about 
tastings and checkouts. I really like checkouts because I like talking to 
people.

Because they took time to know me, they knew I’d be a good worker. I learn new 
skills and they let me try new things. I am always happy on Saturday going to 
work.

Chris Cassidy

‘We deserve the opportunity to be the best we can be’

I feel really happy in my reception job at the moment. It’s not an obvious 
choice of work for me because it includes a lot of areas that I find really 
challenging. But because my manager understands my autism, she’s good at making 
sure we have fortnightly catch-ups and allowing adjustments that can make 
things feel easier for me when I’m starting to get stressed.

Because of this I’m able to expand my workload and take on more areas outside 
my comfort zone that I’m actually really enjoying. And I have meetings with a 
work coach to help me recognise when my stress is rising and work out 
strategies to cope.


But the experiences I’ve had in work haven’t always been so positive, and back 
then I couldn’t communicate what I needed and why. Since the help has come 
along, it changes things around for me in a huge way. It’s so important for 
employers to have that bit of understanding, so that someone can help work 
things out, even if you might not know what’s quite wrong yourself.


Autistic people have so many amazing things to offer the world, and all we 
need is understanding and a willingness to make adjustments in order to achieve 
this. Every single one of us deserves to have the opportunity to be the best we 
can be.

Erin Ekins

EMPLOYERS: THE ZEROES

‘My boss called me “slow” and “retarded”’

 There is no denying that, in this day and age, it’s hard to get full-time 
employment. But when you’re on the autistic spectrum, with a language disorder 
and diagnosed with anxiety and depression, that’s a different game.

I was super-grateful for the disability support I received during university. 
Yet there were times when my confidence was knocked; during a work placement, 
despite being aware of my language disorder, my boss referred to me as “slow” 
and “lacking initiative”, and at one point called me “retarded”.

After gaining a 2:1 degree in early childhood studies in 2012, I travelled 
120-miles per day to work for two part-time jobs for two nurseries five days 
per a week for three years. I enjoyed work, but things underneath were starting 
to crumble. I was struggling; I was turned down by two disability charities for 
support because I wasn’t “disabled enough”. With the travel came stress and 
anxiety, with an inability to communicate. I isolated myself; I felt worthless.


In August 2015 I quit both jobs, yet my mum saw that I was struggling – it was 
too painful to look for jobs. I was then diagnosed with depression and anxiety 
in September 2015.


This year though, things are better. I had counselling, lifestyle changes, 
travelled in America, and currently I attend speech and language therapy and 
courses through the local women’s centre. I’m also in a relationship with a 
loving and supportive partner and built a good circle of friends.


From diagnosis onwards it’s a painful transformation to learn how to live with 
anxiety, on top of being on the autistic spectrum. I still don’t know what the 
chances are of me ever getting into fulltime employment. However, I do know 
this; I own my story because I owned my condition. I am now my own autism hero.


Aileen Campbell

‘I hope that a new application method is created’

I had a 10-week work placement at a local supermarket and the manager was keen 
to offer me paid work. He recommended I apply online to experience the 
application process.


When I applied, I had to complete three personality tests, but failed to get 
shortlisted for an interview.


People on the autism spectrum can have difficulties with social communication, 
social imagination (ability to predict) and social interaction. These 
personality quizzes work on the basis of predicting outcomes to different 
scenarios. Having these difficulties means those on the spectrum don’t get the 
opportunity to show the skills and abilities that they do have.


Without being given the chance to demonstrate our skills, there are those on 
the spectrum who feel less confident about making applications, due to the 
anxiety that it can cause. Only 16% of people on the spectrum are in full-time 
employment and although these tests help to sift through the volume of 
applicants, they don’t play to our strengths. It’s disheartening to see people 
not being given the opportunity to work, and I hope that a new application 
method is created for those on the autism spectrum to be given a fair chance in 
the working world.


Adam Baker


‘There are feelings of dread, victimisation and discrimination’

Unemployed for three years after graduating from university, the jobcentre 
seems indiscriminate, almost too indiscriminate. It’s a ‘waiting game’ with 
regard to self-referrals to third-party support, such as employment support and 
job coaching, as well as Talent Match. The jobcentre staff ignore the support 
needed for my disability (acknowledging its actual presence), failing to 
provide me with a disability employment adviser, despite putting forward this 
plan of action themselves, further treating me in a condescending and 
patronising manner.


Due to the length of my unemployment, I have recently been forced on a work 
programme that requires sitting in a computer room for four hours, three days a 
week. There are further emotions and feelings of dread, victimisation and 
discrimination. I’m frightened of being sanctioned if I inadvertently put a 
‘toe out of line’, as the pressure and stress amplify, made worse by sensory 
overloads, anxiety and depression issues, and a tendency to meltdowns while 
living with Asperger syndrome on a day-to-day basis.


On top of this unnecessary negativity is the balancing of ‘family life’, 
looking after and trying to provide for my partner with fibromyalgia and our 
16-month old daughter.


Having Asperger syndrome has made finding ‘any old job’ just as difficult as 
one correlating to my university degree.


The jobcentre doesn’t seem to want to listen or understand. My employment 
support allowance application has been declined twice, despite a clear, recent 
history of my declining mental health, manifested by my Asperger’s.


John Clark


You can make a difference: sign the National Autistic Society’s petition 
<http://bit.ly/autism-employment-gap>, which calls on the government to take 
decisive action to double the number of autistic people in work.
 