
In one of the futile demonstrations that marked the run-up to the Iraq war, I 
saw a woman with a sign that read “How Did OurOil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> End Up Under Their Sand?” In nine 
words she managed to sum up a great deal of American foreign policy, back at 
least as far as the 1953 coup that overthrew Mossadegh in Iran and helped toss 
the Middle East into its still-boiling cauldron.

 If the Senate approves Rex Tillerson after his testimony on Wednesday, 
they’ll be continuing in that inglorious tradition – in fact, they’ll be taking 
it to a new height, and cutting out the diplomats who have traditionally played 
the middleman role.

Rex Tillerson – who has literally spent his entire working life at Exxon – is 
big oil personified. It’s like appointing Ronald McDonald to run the 
agriculture department (which is certainly a possibility, since that job is 
still unfilled).

All in all, it’s hard to imagine a single hire that could do more damage to 
the planet

 So in one sense Tillerson’s appointment simply makes formal what has long 
been clear. But in another way, his announcement is truly novel: the honor 
(secretaries of state are usually considered the second-most important official 
in our government) comes after a season of disgrace at the world’s largest oil 
company, in a moment when the energy business is on the ropes and when its 
product is causing the greatest crisis the planet has yet faced.

 Those three things are linked, of course. The disgrace is the long, slow 
reveal by investigative reporters that Exxonknew all about climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/08/exxon-climate-change-1981-climate-denier-funding>
 as early as the late 1970s. Their scientists were so far ahead of the curve 
that management was taking precautions and planning strategy a quarter-century 
ago – building drilling rigs to account for the sea level rise they knew was 
coming, and plotting to bid for leases in an Arctic they knew would melt.

But instead of telling the rest of us, the investigations revealed their deep 
involvement in the effort to spread doubt and confusion about climate change. 
Given the consequences, this is a series of corporate crimes that makes VW’s 
emissions cheating seem like stealing a candy bar from the 7/11. In a rational 
world, Congress would be grilling Tillerson about the company’s conduct, not 
preparing to hand him the country’s plum unelected job.

Exxon knew of climate change in 1981, email says – but it funded deniers for 
27 more years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/08/exxon-climate-change-1981-climate-denier-funding>
 But climate change means not just the collapse of the planet’s fundamental 
systems (after thehottest year ever measured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jul/11/we-just-broke-the-record-for-hottest-year-9-straight-times>
, global sea ice has beencharting record lows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/arctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record>
 – literally the world looks different from outer space). It also means that 
the energy business is in serious trouble.

Big oil has underperformed on the stock market for years. Exxon’s 
once-sterling profit record is now checkered at best. And as a result it’s 
resorted to every kind of chicanery. USA Today reported on Monday that, through 
a European subsidiary, it managed to do business with Iran, Syria and Sudan 
while those countries were under US sanctions (sanctions the, um, secretary of 
state would need to enforce). Everyone knows that the company stands to make 
billions-with-a-B if America lifts its sanctions on Russia. With its business 
in decline, these are the kinds of moves that Exxon has been reduced to 
plotting.

 The global response to climate change is the third part of the puzzle. If we 
listened to climate scientists and ramped up our commitment to change, the oil 
business would suffer deeper damage yet. That was the hope ofthe Paris accords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement>, which called 
for ratcheting up the modest plans agreed to in 2015, in accordance with 
emerging science.

But now the guy responsible for our participation in the Paris process will be 
able to make sure that doesn’t happen. He can’t save Exxon and its kin 
long-term – the rapidly falling price of renewables will see to that – but he 
can keep it from being pinched harder over the next few years, even at the cost 
of pushing the planet’s carbon load past every benchmark the scientists have 
warned us against.

 All in all, it’s hard to imagine a single hire that could do more damage to 
the planet (though the rest of Trump’s cabinet will doubtless give him a run 
for his money). Making this man secretary of state rewards climate denial, 
further warps our foreign policy towards oil and does it at the precise moment 
when every bit of data screams that we should be going in the opposite 
direction.

 The only consolation is that it removes all the window-dressing. Big Oil will 
run our foreign policy, right out in the open. In that sense, I suppose, Trump 
gets credit for a kind of barbaric transparency. When the CIA overthrew 
Mossadegh at least they had a little shame about it. No more.
 