
Fourteen-year-old Rhiannon Doolan’s favourite lesson is PE, and she wants to 
work in sport when she’s older. But, unlike most children going back to school 
this week, she is already doing a full-time job: caring for her disabled dad, 
Andy.

In their two-bed council flat in Liverpool, Rhiannon keeps things as clean as 
she can: she hoovers, mops, does the dishes, and polishes. It’s been just the 
two of them for years – “since Rhiannon was in nappies”, Andy says – and she’s 
got used to doing whatever they need. Or, as Rhiannon puts it quietly to me, 
“things my dad would like to do but can’t.”

For Andy, 48, that’s a lot. Twenty years ago, he had a double hip replacement 
and caught MRSA in both legs. He’s had almost 25 operations since, and he can 
barely walk, then only with crutches. The crutches have brought their own 
problems – arthritis in his joints – and he can’t straighten his arms; he can 
barely move his wrists. “I’m useless without her,” he says.

‘Biased’ fit for work tests penalise poorer people | Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/09/biased-fit-for-work-tests-poorer-disabled-people>
Rhiannon was three years old when she started caring for her dad. “I’d help 
put his socks and shoes on when I was a toddler. Put cream on his legs [as 
medicine],” she says. By four, she was helping with shopping, pushing the 
trolley in the supermarket while her dad stood behind with his crutches. 
Outside help never came – the council went as far as putting grab-rails near 
the toilet, but no further. As she got bigger, and her dad’s health got worse, 
Rhiannon took on more.

“I do breakfasts,” she tells me. Cereal in the week and egg, sausage and bacon 
on toast at the weekend. For “a big meal” – Rhiannon likes mince and chips best 
– they cook together. “He struggles but he tries,” she says.

To help him with his medication, Rhiannon puts her dad’s prescription together 
and then collects it from the pharmacy down the road from the estate. Each day, 
she helps him get dressed and reach his feet when he washes. There’s no shower 
in the flat – just a bath with a shower head – and Andy stands in the bath with 
Rhiannon leaning over the side. “I’m proud of her,” Andy says, pausing. “But 
she should be out playing. She shouldn’t have to be doing any of this.”

It’s a tough way of life, and one that has just been made even harder. Since 
before Rhiannon was born, it’s been Andy’s two disability benefits that have 
paid the bills: disability living allowance (DLA), and because he’s too 
disabled to work, incapacity benefit (IB). But now – as both benefits are 
abolished nationally and tougher tests put in their place – Rhiannon has had to 
watch as her dad’s only support is being taken away.

The first hit came last June, when Andy – put through the “fit for work” test 
– was, in Rhiannon’s words, given “no points whatsoever”. He promptly had his 
benefit cut to £46 a week. By the time he could appeal against the decision six 
months later, he and Rhiannon were living off food hampers they had been given 
by a charity.

Andy ended up taking a deal at his December tribunal: he could have his 
benefit reinstated and backdated, as long he accepted a lower rate. Otherwise, 
he would have to wait for the new year for any money. “I wouldn’t have had a 
Christmas,” Rhiannon says.

Now they’ve had a second hit: after being tested for DLA’s replacement, 
personal independence payments (PIP), last month Andy was told he had been 
bumped down to the lower benefit rate for help with mobility. He often falls 
nowadays – the last time crashing into the radiator and ending up with an “egg” 
on his split-open head – and Rhiannon can’t understand why they’re losing the 
money they need. “His doctor and the chemists have all the evidence of his 
illnesses,” she says.

With his benefits cut, Andy doesn’t know how he’ll afford his car – his 
“legs”, as he calls it. He bought it 10 years ago on hire purchase but still 
has 18 months left to pay – £130 a time – and he needs it to drive Rhiannon to 
the shops for their food. “I can’t just send her on the bus,” he says.

Rhiannon tells me she doesn’t like it on the estate. “There’s always something 
bad happening here. Shouting. Drunk people.” And it’s clear the car, like all 
their routine, is a way to make things easier. Even the issue of which 
supermarket her dad drives her to has an effect on how overwhelmed Rhiannon 
feels. “We don’t go to the big Asda. We go to the little one,” Andy says. “The 
big one’s too much for her.”

Ask most politicians, and they would assert that children and disabled people 
are two categories of citizens Britain cares about. In reality, families such 
as Rhiannon and her dad are not only being neglected by government policy but 
practically pushed over the edge.

Rhiannon tells me she’s really worried about her dad. “I don’t like seeing him 
how he is. He thinks he has no future because of this,” she says. “I’ve heard 
him crying. It’s horrible.”
 