
Richard Adams, who has died aged 96, was the author of one of the most 
successful books of the 1970s. Published in 1972, Watership Down, Adams’s story 
about a colony of rabbits travelling across the country in search of a better 
home in the Berkshire Downs when their burrow is destroyed, became a cult 
novel, with a “crossover” readership.

Despite being published as an adult book, Watership Down won the two most 
distinguished children’s book prizes, the Carnegie medal and the Guardian 
children’s book prize, and sold more than 100,000 copies in Britain in its 
first year of publication. Unlike some such instant successes, Watership Down 
was not just a book of its time; it is now firmly established as a classic and 
has sold more than 50m copies worldwide.

The story of the publication of Watership Down is an example of the quirky 
nature of publishing. As a manuscript of more than 200,000 words, it was turned 
down by all of the major publishers and many of the smaller ones, beforeRex 
Collings 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-rex-collings-1335987.html>, 
a small independent company, picked it up. From the moment of publication, it 
was widely hailed as an exceptional title and almost instantly became a 
bestseller. At one point, it held the record for the highest sum paid for 
paperback rights. Its mass success and cult status was furthered by its 
subsequent adaptation in 1978 to animatedcartoon film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1n8E3ntWUg>, with a soundtrack that included 
the hit singleBright Eyes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cGyQmH9NZcw>.

The origins of Watership Down lay in stories Adams wrote down to entertain his 
daughters on long car journeys, based on his observation of rabbits from the 
train window on his daily commute to work. However, Adams himself did not 
categorise it as a children’s book. Once published, its evocation of the 
English countryside (the Downs near Adams’s home), combined with its detailed 
descriptions of rabbit society – much taken fromRM Lockley 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2000/04/24/world/ronald-lockley-of-rabbit-fame-dies-at-96.html>
’s The Private Life of the Rabbit (1964) – which includes a sharply observed 
study of leadership through the characters of Fiver, Bigwig and Hazel, made it 
as much a political allegory as a simple adventure story.

Son of Evelyn Adams, a country doctor, and his wife, Lilian (nee Button), 
Richard was born in Newbury, and brought up in Berkshire. He was educated at 
Bradfield college, Berkshire, and Worcester College, Oxford, where he studied 
history for two years until he was called up in 1940. He served in the Royal 
Army Service Corps in Palestine, Europe and the far east before returning to 
Oxford in 1946 to finish his studies. Adams then joined the civil service, 
where he worked in the Ministry of Housing and Local Government and in the 
Department of the Environment, before becoming a full-time writer in 1974 after 
the success of his first book.

Subsequent books followed quickly, including Shardik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/26/shardik-richard-adams-watership-down-beware-bear>
 (1974), the story of a hunter and a giant bear, which was particularly poorly 
received by readers wanting more Watership Down; The Tyger Voyage (1976), a 
picture book in verse with illustrations byNicola Bayley 
<http://www.walker.co.uk/contributors/Nicola-Bayley-1674.aspx>; and The Plague 
Dogs (1977). None had the same success as the tale about rabbits.

Adams was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1975 and held 
posts as writer in residence at both the University of Florida (1975) and 
Hollins University in Virginia (1976). He continued to write for both adults 
and children. He revisited Watership Down in Tales from Watership Down (1996) 
and contributed a short story to Gentle Footprints: A Collection of Animal 
Stories, which was published to raise funds for the Born Free Foundation in 
2010, just before his 90th birthday.

For almost all his writing, Adams drew on his deep affection for the 
countryside and the wildlife that lives in it that was formed during his 
childhood. In his autobiography,The Day Gone By 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/Books/Day-Gone-Autobiography-Richard-Adams/0091739675>
 (1990), he describes how, as a child, he lost his heart twice, once to the 
River Kennet and once to the Downs, of which he writes: “I can’t remember ever 
to have done anything – anything at all – more delightful than walking on the 
crest of the Downs, looking away to the purple, heat-rimmed edge of the 
horizon.”

Adams was invited to become president of the Royal Society for the Prevention 
of Cruelty to Animals in 1980, having been a lifelong campaigner for animal 
welfare and an active member of the society, including taking part in a lecture 
tour in Canada in 1977 to drum up opposition to the hunting of baby seals. In a 
subsequent RSPCA members watchdog publication Adams was described as giving a 
stirring and inspiring speech as president elect, but his time at the RSPCA was 
short lived.

Already going through a turbulent time internally, as traditionalists and 
modernisers fought and tried to put right the £1m deficit that had accrued, the 
RSPCA council voted to shorten Adams’s term of office as president and he 
resigned in protest. He later commented angrily that senior members of the 
council were more interested in their own careers than in the welfare of 
animals.

He continued to be honoured for his work throughout his life, and was the 
recipient of the inaugural Whitchurch arts award in 2010, given by the 
Hampshire town in which he lived in later years. Earlier this year, it was 
announced that the BBC planned a new adaptation of Watership Down for release 
in 2017.

Adams married Elizabeth Acland in 1949, and they had two daughters, Juliet and 
Rosamond. They all survive him.

• Richard George Adams, writer, born 9 May 1920; died 24 December 2016
 