
Consumer borrowing on credit cards, loans and overdrafts is growing at its 
fastest rate since before the financial crisis, according toBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> figures that 
brought further warnings over the state of UK household finances.

Unsecured consumer credit was up 8.3% in the 12 months to November 2015, the 
Bank’s figures show, with consumers borrowing an additional £1.5bn in November. 
This was compared to an average increase of £1.2bn over the previous six 
months. The growth rate was the highest since February 2006.

Debt charities said they were concerned about the increase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/04/new-year-financial-headache-millions-british-families>
, which has driven the level of outstanding consumer credit to £178bn.

Joanna Elson, the chief executive of the Money Advice Trust, the charity that 
runs the National Debtline advisory service, said: “Increased borrowing is to 
be expected in an economy that is recovering – but such steep rises in recent 
months are a cause for concern.

“Many households will be able to handle this extra borrowing – but many will 
not, and we are expecting an increase in debt problems in the new year as a 
result.”

The charity’s research suggests that nearly six million people are likely to 
fall behind financially in January, and that more than one in three put 
Christmas spending on credit.
Unsecured lending figures 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/unsecured_lending-zip/giv-27167tXm2M05XjXmW>
The Bank of England, which overseas commercial bank lending, has expressed 
concern about the impact of rising personal borrowing on the stability of the 
UK economy. It has already advised high street banks to limit the number of 
high loan-to-income mortgages, to prevent households from paying sky-rocketing 
home values, and could launch a wider clampdown. Andrew Haldane, the Bank’s 
chief economist,admitted in November that policymakers might want to look 
“fairly carefully” at growth in consumer lending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/24/consumer-spending-troubling-bank-of-england>
.

The latest data from Threadneedle Street showed that borrowing on credit cards 
increased by £411m in November, up from a rise of £271m in October, while debt 
on personal loans and overdrafts increased by £1.1bn over the month.

The return of heavy unsecured borrowing follows a three-year hiatus between 
August 2009 and August 2012, when consumer credit contracted every month. 
However, since then banks have become more willing to lend and a price war on 
personal loans has seen costs fall to the lowest-ever level.


Tougher rules on mortgage borrowing are also likely to have persuaded more 
borrowers, who would previously have remortgaged their homes to release cash, 
to instead turn to personal loans.



Some analysts have warned that the trend for older borrowers to pay down debts 
at a faster rate, while younger people borrow more to compensate for low pay 
rises, will also increase the risks of another financial crash.



Howard Archer, the chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said the rise in 
borrowing tied in with figures showingstrong retail sales in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/17/black-friday-discounts-drive-surge-uk-retail-sales>
, and that the Bank would need to keep an eye on borrowing levels.

 “The pick-up in unsecured consumer credit to a near eight-year high in 
November follows on from data from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) 
showing that the household savings ratio dipped to 4.4% in the third quarter of 
2015, which was the equal lowest rate since 1963,” he said.

This will fuel concern that consumers are borrowing more and saving less to 
finance their spending
Howard Archer 
 “This will fuel concern that consumers are borrowing more and saving less to 
finance their spending, which is likely a consequence of relatively high 
consumer confidence and extended low interest rates.”

Nicolas Frankcom, of financial comparison website uSwitch, said the figures 
“expose the true extent of consumer spending ahead of Christmas”.

“With borrowing at an all-time high, it’s critical that consumers don’t bury 
their head in the sand and ignore their debt,” he said. “The long-term impact 
of falling behind on repayments cannot be underestimated.”

The Bank’s figures for mortgage borrowing showed lending was up by £3.9bn in 
November, compared to an average increase of £3.1bn over the previous six 
months. This is the highest monthly figure since May 2008, as the credit crunch 
was looming.

Gross lending secured on dwellings reached £20.3bn in November, while £16.7bn 
was repaid by borrowers. A total of 70,410 mortgages were approved for house 
purchases, compared to the average of 68,428 over the previous six months.



 