
Telling Rory Gleeson his characters are awful makes him smile. That’s a good 
thing: in his debut novel Rockadoon Shore, his cast of self-obsessed 
twentysomethings are possibly the worst bunch of people I’ve ever met. And I 
have met them, too many times; their awfulness does not stem from lurid 
villainy, but from far more conventional motivations like insecurity, sexual 
frustration, small knocks and humiliations. We’ve all probably met them.

Set in a tiny cabin in the Irish countryside, Gleeson’s claustrophobic story 
follows Cath, the mother hen, who can irritate as much as she comforts; DanDan, 
who initially seems fine while grieving a dead ex – until he gets over it; 
Lucy, who is constantly performing for, mostly male attention; the beautiful 
Steph, who treats men appallingly; Merc, the Irish version of an American 
fratboy who has traded in muscles for personality; and JJ, that guy who brings 
MDMA to a cottage getaway. But Gleeson’s very well written debut is fresh in 
its unpredictability: not one of these characters does what you think they 
going to do.

Their awfulness makes Gleeson smile, but it also makes him wince. “Insecurity 
is such a nasty thing,” he groans, ruffling his hair. “It’s terrible. Everyone 
is so insecure. We want people to love us, but actually we just like attention. 
We’ve all had those relationships where we look to others for reinforcement 
that we’re good and attractive. You can always tell the readers who know these 
characters – at one writing workshop, some people were like, ‘Oh these seem 
like fun people, let’s get into it!’ but there were three or four others going 
‘These people areawful’.”

Rockadoon Shore switches between all six perspectives, plus a seventh: a 
watchful, elderly neighbour. For a debut, it is gutsy and ambitious. “Youthful 
folly,” Gleeson corrects. “I wanted to see if I could do it. I hadn’t seen many 
books where characters would pick up the story from each other. I wanted the 
story to belong to all of them and none of them, without anyone retelling 
everything. And I could do it – it just took a long, long time to edit. There 
were days I wanted to throw it in a fire. It absolutely wrecks your head.”

Gleeson began the book in 2013, spending two years, he says, “playing with it 
in my head and getting really very angry.” Writing can’t be that bad, cant it? 
He looks incredulous. “Oh yes it can. You’re wrecked and you hate it and you 
hate yourself. And then you think you’re brilliant and then people try to help 
you with it and the ones that are truthful are the worst because then you hate 
them as well.” He shrugs and says, rather ruefully: “You just smoke a lot of 
cigarettes and drink a lot of coffee to get through it.”

His blog <http://www.rorygleeson.co.uk/>, updated as he wrote, documents his 
love for distractions away from the page: walks, films and rather sweetly,egg 
painting <http://www.rorygleeson.co.uk/blog/2016/4/6/waiting-on-eggshells>. 
“Aside from visions of my old English teachers all showing up in a bus to tell 
me I’ve made a work of mediocrity,” he writes in one post from 2016, “what has 
been concerning me most over the last while is the idea that two years or so 
from now, I’m going to open this book that I wrote, read the first line, and 
think to myself, ‘Balls’.”

Gleeson, 27, has the charming, ruffled-ginger look that betrays his lineage: 
his father Brendan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2011/aug/14/brendan-gleeson-mad-eye-moody>
 is a celebrated film actor, his brothers Domhnall and Brían followed their 
father into the profession. Does that mean he had complete freedom to do 
whatever he wanted? “I think it has to do more with their mindset than their 
professions. My dad was a teacher for 10 years and ma studied English. They are 
‘follow your dreams’ kinds of people. They’re doing what they love, and they 
want me to do the same, because they know the thrill of it.”

Their household was a bookish one; every car trip and every queue saw all of 
the Gleeson brothers buried in a book. “It was always clear that books were 
always there for us to enjoy and learn from. When I was giving people a rough 
time as a teenager, my dad just threw Catcher in the Rye at me like a stun 
grenade and said: ‘Read that, it’ll make sense’.” Did it work? “Oh yes,” he 
says. “I stopped calling everyone a hypocrite, for one. And no one wants to be 
ol’ Holden.”

His first book has not come easily. Gleeson had never finished any writing, 
beyond blogposts and short stories. He studied psychology at Trinity College 
Dublin, then did a master’s in prose fiction in Manchester, as well as writing 
workshops at Oxford University and UEA. Publishers’ interest in Rockadoon Shore 
sparked and died while he was at UEA, so when he got a Canadian visa, he took 
off and spent six days a week in the University of Toronto’s alarmingly drab 
looking library (“Students call it Fort Book,” says Gleeson) and wrestled with 
edits. “You’re awful sad and worried,” he says of the time. “I hadn’t had 
anything published at all, so when it came up to giving up on Rockadoon, it 
felt like I’d be left with nothing. I was starting to make plans to retrain in 
a career,” he says like a curse. “Leave writing as a hobby for evenings and 
weekends.”

These days he’s resigned to the difficulties of writing. “Having something 
down on paper is much better than having something beautiful in your head,” he 
says. “I wanted to write a book about young people that doesn’t end with a car 
crash or an overdose. I didn’t want to start killing them, Cabin in the 
Woods-style, with horror tropes everywhere, because that’s how so many books 
about young people end.” Film directorRichard Linklater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-linklater> is his inspiration and 
antidote for that: “He was able to make a lot of movies about young people that 
understood them on their level. InDazed and Confused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/dazed-confused-comedy>, you’re 
waiting the whole time for a car crash. And it never happens! It is a special 
and weird time when they’re between two periods of their lives and they all 
move on. I’ve always really admired that and wondered if that could be done in 
fiction.” He suddenly looks embarrassed, as if he’s gone too far in likening 
himself to Linklater. “I dunno, maybe not.”

A new Irish literary boom: the post-crash stars of fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/17/new-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction>
One strange, welcome repercussion of Ireland’s financial crash seems to have 
been a boom in new fiction: the passing of its brief boom years seems to have 
given renewed energy to the literary scene, with Eimear McBride, Donal Ryan and 
Lisa McInerney being just a few of the names arriving since 2012. “Well, I 
think it would have been better not to have the crash and keep literature the 
same,” Gleeson says, sombrely. “But there is a freshness coming in that I am 
really enjoying. Eimear and Donal are huge for me because they’ve been ignored 
for a long time and they weren’t flattened and hammered by traditional 
publishing, they stayed technical and heartbreaking. People are breaking my 
heart a lot more, which I really, really like. I treasure it.”

 * Rockadoon Shore by Rory Gleeson 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rockadoon-shore.html> is published by John 
Murray.  