
Rory McIlroy’s participation this week in the Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship is 
in doubt, with the world No2 confirming in the immediate aftermath ofa play-off 
defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/graeme-storm-rory-mcilroy-south-african-play-off>
 at the South African Open that he will undergo a scan on his injured back on 
Monday.

Graeme Storm, whose future on the European Tour was in doubt at the end of 
last season, defeated McIlroy at the third sudden-death hole on Sunday. The 
pair had earlier tied at 18 under par, McIlroy having made up a three-shot 
deficit after the third round.

Graeme Storm beats Rory McIlroy in South African Open play-off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/graeme-storm-rory-mcilroy-south-african-play-off>
Since Friday, the Northern Irishman has endured an upper-back problem. While 
he insisted his intention is to play in the desert this week, McIlroy conceded 
he may have to avoid snap judgments for the sake of his 2017 major prospects.

“I am going for a scan tomorrow,” McIlroy said. “I fly to Dubai tonight and 
then will go for an MRI tomorrow just to see what’s up with this joint in my 
back.

“It was manageable this week with tape and a few pills, so I am fine, but 
first and foremost I have to get fully fit and healthy again and hopefully I’ll 
be all right to play next week. Obviously that [pulling out] is worst‑case 
scenario.

“We will see what happens. But like I said, it is manageable with the tape and 
a few anti-inflammatories but it’s not 100%. Part of me really wants to make 
this week because there is so much to play for but at the same time there is so 
much to play for over the whole season and I don’t want to jeopardise long-term 
goals for short-term gain, but hopefully I’ll be good to go.”

Added incentive for McIlroy comes in the form of potentially topping the world 
rankings should he win in Abu Dhabi. As for South Africa, the four-times major 
winner was pragmatic.

“Obviously it’s disappointing to finish like that but Graeme has played well 
all week and what a story for him,” McIlroy said. “He thought he had lost his 
card at the end of last year and there he is now standing with a trophy in his 
hands after the first event of 2017.

“I’m delighted for him. I wish I could have done a little more but it’s not a 
bad way to start the season and gives me something to build on in the weeks 
ahead.”
 