
A few miles from his home in south Birmingham, four-year-old Nicholas Bolton 
is due to start a special needs school for autistic children in September. His 
mum, Rosalind, and dad, Francis, not only love the school but knew he’d be safe 
getting there: funded byBirmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> 
city council, the school minibus has special seats, harnesses and trained 
guides.

But as an insight into what parents of disabled children are currently 
experiencing up and down the country, last month Rosalind was informed that 
Nicholas – who is non-verbal, incontinent, struggles to control his body and 
can’t understand instructions – would not be granted specialist transport to 
school. Instead, the council would assist with travel by offering a free bus 
pass.

“It took me a while to process it,” Rosalind admits. “I wasn’t sure they could 
actually be suggesting it.”

But they were. The council wanted Nicholas to use a regular bus: not only a 
standard school bus unsafe for disabled children but – for a little boy who 
becomes distressed near strangers – a public bus alongside commuters, shoppers 
and students. Because there’s no bus that goes directly to Nicholas’s school, 
he’d have to take two separate buses, changing midway. Morning and afternoon, 
an hour there and back in normal traffic. “That journey would be overwhelming 
agony for him,” Rosalind says.

It’s like the council saying they haven’t got the money so they’re going to 
stop collecting the rubbish

Talking to other parents, Rosalind quickly discovered that Nicholas wasn’t 
alone. Every other disabled child starting at his school this year was being 
refused specialist transport too. And the more she dug, she found this was 
happening all over Birmingham.

One friend with an autistic child at another school across the city has just 
been told the entire reception class won’t have specialist transport, Rosalind 
says. The council, she explains, are “trying to dress this up” to parents as a 
way to help their children be independent.

“We’d love them to go to the local school on their scooters and when they’re 
older get the bus to senior school with their mates. That is never going to 
happen, and the council knows it,” she says. “By ‘independent’, they mean 
independent of the council.”

In the current climate, independence for severely disabled children is a 
budget cut by another name. Travel Assist, the part of Birmingham city council 
that provides transport services, has been told it must find £2.8m, a local 
councillor informed parents, according to Rosalind. When approached for 
comment, Colin Diamond, director for education at Birmingham city council, 
tells me the council has received “significant grant cuts from central 
government and these have affected all parts of the council, including Travel 
Assist”.

“It’s like them saying they haven’t got the money so they’re going to stop 
collecting the rubbish,” Rosalind says.

The law states that a child with a disability that would prevent them walking 
to their nearest suitable school must get free transport help regardless of 
distance (non-disabled children must live more than three miles from their 
school to be eligible). ButContact a Family <http://www.cafamily.org.uk/>, a 
charity that supports families with disabled children, tells me some local 
authorities are now trying to cut corners to save money. They regularly hear 
from families whose child is clearly eligible for school transport but have 
been refused help.

The farce and the agony of trying to get universal credit payments | Frances 
Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/28/universal-credit-payments-delays-loans>
The result is parents who are already exhausted, faced with shrinking 
services, left living in a logistical nightmare. Without safe transport for 
Nicholas, Rosalind, who works in utility regulation, would need to drive her 
son to school in the morning, get to the office, leave to collect Nicholas in 
the afternoon, and get his 18-month-old sister to and from childcare.

“My husband has epilepsy so he can’t drive,” she says. “I’ve worked out I’d be 
left with about four and half hours at work. I’d have to quit my job.”

Childminders or after-school clubs – typically untrained to look after 
disabled children – aren’t an option for families like Nicholas’s. There used 
to be a specialist after-school club at Nicholas’s school. “That funding’s been 
withdrawn now,” Rosalind says.

A few days after we last spoke, Rosalind emails with good news: following an 
official appeal to the council, Nicholas has been told he’s eligible for a 
place on the specialist minibus. Rosalind is relieved but hesitant. “I feel 
like it’s a battle we’re going to have every year,” she says. “And there’s all 
these other parents who are still going through this now.”

She tells me about a single mum at Nicholas’s school who’s already struggling 
with money but, without transport for her autistic child, would have to give up 
her one remaining job. Another friend with two autistic children was planning 
to get back into nursing part time, she says, but now doesn’t think she’ll ever 
be able to work again.

Diamond says the council will “always endeavour to ensure support for getting 
children to school is safe and cost effective, and enables children to be as 
independent as possible. Any parent or carer who feels the assistance provided 
is not appropriate is able to appeal.”

But with only a few weeks until the start of term, Rosalind worries other 
families won’t have time to appeal before their child needs to start school. 
“The council is seeing disabled children as an easy target,” she says. “It’s 
just horrible.”
 