
“Dermot’s back! Hooray! And so is his dancing! Welcome home, Dermot.”

That’s a quote by Simon Cowell, heralding Dermot O’Leary’s return to The X 
Factor. Because, yes, Dermot O’Leary is returning to The X Factor. He didn’t 
host last year and, in his absence, the show became a weird ham-fisted parody 
of itself. Watching the last series ofThe X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> was like watching the 
sort of horrific Lithuanian variety show that Clive James would disbelievingly 
introduce in 1982, where everyone’s drunk and perpetually on the verge of 
tears. It was like watching the end of civilisation itself.

Dermot O’Leary to return to The X Factor after a year away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/29/dermot-oleary-x-factor-simon-cowell>
But now O’Leary’s back to right the ship. On paper, this seems an eminently 
sensible decision. AsOlly Murs <https://www.theguardian.com/music/olly-murs> 
ably demonstrated last year, hosting a live show with as many moving parts as 
The X Factor is an almost impossible task. There are cues to hit, numbers to 
reel off. There’s crack after crack to paper over, judges to prompt, and all 
manner of heightened emotions to corral. There is – if the noise they make is 
any indication – a studio audience comprised solely of trapped cattle to keep 
in check. It’s a nightmare of spinning plates – and, on top of that, you’re 
also expected to inject some semblance of personality into the job. O’Leary is 
one of the few people in the country capable of doing this. It’s only right 
that The X Factor would want him back.

But let’s circle back to that Cowell quote. Doesn’t it give you the creeps? 
I’m not sure what the problem is. Perhaps it’s the phrase “Welcome home, 
Dermot,” which seems to aggressively reframe his absence as a sort of happy gap 
year of his own making, not the result of a hair-trigger youth-chasing 
dismissal.

Or perhaps it’s all the exclamation marks. Only two types of people use three 
exclamation marks in the space of eight words: children and fools – and, 
frankly, neither should be trusted.

Personally, it’s the word “Hooray” that puts me most on edge. This is Simon 
Cowell we’re talking about. He’s not one for something as plaintively 
enthusiastic as “Hooray”. Imagine a situation – any situation – where this man 
would ever use the word “Hooray”. I’ve literally scrolled through every single 
scenario on Earth, and these are the only three in which he would say “Hooray”.

1) Simon Cowell opens his fridge. Three eggs topple out and crack on the floor.
2) Simon Cowell can’t get his phone to connect to a plane’s Wi-Fi.
3) Through binoculars, Simon Cowell watches Len Goodman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/dec/27/len-goodman-dress-sense-how-i-get-ready>
 fall off a ladder.

That’s it – and even then they don’t warrant a genuinely happy “Hooray”. As a 
sincere exclamation of celebration, “Hooray” is an utterly alien noise to put 
into Simon Cowell’s mouth. No matter how hard he tries, it’s doomed to either 
come out as a sarcastic response to life’s inherent cruelty, or as the sort of 
monstrously villainous threat that’s sporadically muttered into a sleeve by a 
straight-up sociopath. And he’s used it in a press release about Dermot O’Leary 
returning to The X Factor.

In short, Dermot O’Leary is going to be on The X Factor again, but it’s almost 
certainly a trap. Run, Dermot! Run while you still can!
 