
Russian investigators are looking into a disturbing video of a bear being 
crushed to death by a group of men riding in off-road vehicles over Siberian 
tundra.

In the video, apparently shot by one of the assailants, two trucks normally 
used by Russian oil and mining workers in off-road conditions repeatedly drive 
over a brown bear sitting in the snow.

Investigators in Russia’s Yakutia region, which spans the Siberian Arctic, 
said they were examining the incident to determine whether it constitutes an 
animal cruelty criminal offence.

In the clip, which went viral on Tuesday and was picked up by state media, one 
of the men in the truck shouts “Squash him! Squash him!” and squeals as the 
vehicle runs over the bear.

After driving the truck back and forth over the animal, which attempts to get 
up, the men can be heard saying, “It’s still alive” and poke it with a metal 
rod.

Welcome to crocodile country: the remarkable comeback of Australia's Jaws of 
the north
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/27/welcome-to-crocodile-country-the-remarkable-comeback-of-australias-jaws-of-the-north>
“Currently we have established that the video shows local (Yakutia) 
residents,” interior ministry spokeswoman Irina Volk said in televised remarks. 
“We will strive for the most serious punishment for these scoundrels,” the 
minister for natural resources and environment, Sergei Donskoi, wrote on his 
official Facebook page, calling the incident a “carnage”.

“Such crimes should be followed by real prison terms!”

Bears who fail to go into hibernation for winter can be dangerous and are 
often shot with the sanction of the authorities if found near towns or villages.

Russia’s abundant wildlife regularly comes in conflict with workers developing 
remote territories like the Arctic. Last year, a video that showed a 
construction worker at an Arctic military base feeding a firecracker to a polar 
bear, which roared with pain after it exploded in its mouth, sparked widespread 
indignation.


 