
The Kremlin has hit out at the biggest deployment of US troops in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> since the end of the cold war, 
branding the arrival of troops and tanks in Poland as a threat to Russia’s 
national security.

The deployment, intended to counter what Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> portrays as Russian aggression in 
eastern Europe, will see US troops permanently stationed along Russia’s western 
border for the first time.

About 1,000 of a promised 4,000 troops arrived in Poland at the start of the 
week, and a formal ceremony to welcome them is to be held on Saturday. Some 
people waved and held up American flags as the troops, tanks and heavy armoured 
vehicles crossed into south-westernPoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> from Germany, according to 
Associated Press.

But their arrival was not universally applauded. In Moscow, Vladimir Putin’s 
spokesman Dmitry Peskov said: “We perceive it as a threat. These actions 
threaten our interests, our security. Especially as it concerns a third party 
building up its military presence near our borders. It’s [the US], not even a 
European state.”

The Kremlin may hold back on retaliatory action in the hope that a Donald Trump
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> presidency will herald a 
rapprochement with Washington. Trump, in remarks during the election campaign 
and since, has sown seeds of doubt over the deployments by suggesting he would 
rather work with than confront Putin.

But on Thursday Nato officials played down Trump’s comments, saying they hoped 
and expected that he would not attempt to reverse the move after he became 
president on 20 January.

US to speed up deployment of troops to Poland, Romania and the Baltic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/14/us-deployment-poland-romania-baltic>
That prediction was reinforced by Trump’s proposed defence secretary, James 
Mattis, and his proposed secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, who backed Nato 
during Senate confirmation hearings.

Mattis, in rhetoric at odds with the president-elect, said the west should 
recognise the reality that Putin was trying to break Nato.

Tillerson, who has business dealings in Russia, described Russia’s annexation 
of Crimea as “as an act of force” and said that whenRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> flexed its muscles, the US must 
mount “a proportional show of force”.

Nato was caught out by the Russian annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 
and has struggled to cope with Russia’s use of hybrid warfare, which combines 
propaganda, cyberwarfare and the infiltration of regular troops disguised as 
local rebels.

In response, the US and its Nato allies have been steadily increasing air 
patrols and training exercises in eastern Europe. The biggest escalation is the 
current deployment of US troops, agreed at last summer’s Nato summit in Warsaw.

The move was billed as an attempt to reassure eastern European states who have 
been calling for the permanent deployment of US troops in the belief that 
Russia would be less likely to encroach on territory where US troops are 
present.

Peter Cook, the Pentagon press spokesman, said: “The United States is 
demonstrating its continued commitment to collective security through a series 
of actions designed to reassure Nato allies and partners of America’s 
dedication to enduring peace and stability in the region in light of the 
Russian intervention in Ukraine.”

Poland in particular has pressed for a permanent US troop deployment since 
soon after the fall of communism in 1989.

Nato officials insist that the US and other alliance troops deployed to 
eastern Europe are not “permanent”, which would be in breach of an agreement 
with Russia. The US plans to rotate the troops every nine months, so it can 
argue they are not in breach of the Russian treaty, but effectively there will 
be a permanent presence.

Deployment was originally scheduled for later in the month but a decision was 
made last month to bring it forward, possibly a move by Barack Obama before he 
leaves office to try to lock the president-elect into the strategy.


The troops from the Third Armor Brigade Combat Team, 4th Infantry Division, 
based in Fort Carson, Colorado, along with hundreds of armoured vehicles and 
tanks, were moved from the US to Germany last week for transit by rail and road 
to Poland and elsewhere in eastern Europe. The US is sending 87 tanks, and 144 
armoured vehicles.
Poland map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/us_deployed_troops-zip/giv-3902p2c4aePJUvZx>
As well as being stationed in Poland, the US troops will fan out across other 
eastern European states, including Estonia, Bulgaria and Romania.

The UK is also contributing to the buildup of Nato forces in eastern Europe. 
The UK formally took command this week of Nato’s response force, made up of 
3,000 UK troops plus others from Nato who will be on permanent standby ready to 
deploy within days. The contributing countries include the US, Denmark, Spain, 
Norway and Poland.

Few at Nato seriously believe that war with Russia is likely but there have 
been dangerous developments, with escalation on both sides, including a buildup 
of Russian troops. Russia alarmed Poland and other eastern European states by 
moving nuclear-capable Iskander-M missiles to its naval base at Kaliningrad in 
the autumn. At the time Nato regarded the move as a response to its own 
deployments.

The Polish foreign minister, Witold Waszczykowski, voicing concern in eastern 
Europe that Trump might do a deal with Putin, said this week he hoped that any 
such reconciliation would not be at Poland’s expense.










 