
The Russell group of leading research universities has rejected claims that 
its members are failing their students from disadvantaged backgrounds because 
they do little to improve their post-graduation employment prospects.

The research, published by the thinktank CentreForum 
<http://www.centreforum.org/>, argues government policy is too narrowly focused 
on encouraging universities to recruit more students from disadvantaged 
backgrounds, rather than on what happens to those students during and after 
their studies.

It proposes that a "social mobility graduate index" be used to measure how 
successful universities are at finding employment for all of their students, 
with greater weight given to students from areas with very low rates of higher 
education.

A prototype of the index put University College London's School of Pharmacy 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/pharmacy> in first place, followed by the University of 
St Mark & St John <http://www.marjon.ac.uk/> – nicknamed Marjon – in Plymouth. 
Other than the School of Pharmacy, not a single Russell group university 
appeared in the top 20 and only Aston University represented the pre-1992 
universities.

Professor Michael Brown, a former vice-chancellor of Liverpool John Moores 
University and the author of the report, said: "In terms of graduation 
performance and employment outcomes, students from areas of high disadvantage 
have a lower success rate than those from more advantaged backgrounds.

"And despite the political focus on access to Russell group universities, the 
most selective institutions do not necessarily deliver the best professional 
graduate outcomes for disadvantaged students either. It is time to raise the 
game."

But Wendy Piatt, director general of the Russell group 
<http://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/>, said: "We reject the findings and methodology 
of this report. It makes very strange assumptions about social mobility.

"It fails, too, to recognise that those students from more disadvantaged 
backgrounds are more likely to complete their degree at a Russell group 
university than they are at other institutions."

Piatt said the index used only a survey of graduate employment six months 
after completion of studies and gave a lower weight to students undertaking 
postgraduate study.

"In fact, graduates from Russell group universities go on to earn more than 
other graduates, are more likely to be in high-skilled jobs and earn 24% more 
per hour than their peers from other universities," Piatt said.

"Employers know the quality of students from our universities is high: that is 
why nine out of the top 10 universities most often targeted by Britain's top 
graduate employers are Russell group universities."

Brown said the point was not to criticise Russell group members so much as 
demonstrate that many less-selective universities were doing a better job of 
helping graduates into professional employment.

The report says that Russell group universities do badly in the social 
mobility index because so few of their students come from deprived backgrounds. 
While 70% of Russell group undergraduates are in the two most advantaged 
quintiles as measured byparticipation in higher education 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/news/newsarchive/2014/news85400.html>, only 5% were 
from the lowest participation areas.
 