
A Sainsbury’s Bank TV ad has been banned for “trivialising” credit cards and 
presenting them in a “socially irresponsible” way.

The campaign featured a couple talking about how their credit card had helped 
them do up their house.

They said: “Being our first renovation, we kind of went in headfirst really. I 
just started knocking things down, didn’t I? Yeah, you got a bit overexcited. 
We definitely bit off more than we could chew. Washing up in the bath, we cook 
on a camp stove and we sleep in a camper van.

Related: Anti-begging posters banned over 'negative stereotypes' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/28/anti-begging-posters-banned-nottingham-city-council>

“Getting a credit card, we’ve been able to pay along our terms and use the 
flexibility that that gives us. If we can get through that, we can get through 
anything.”

As they spoke, there were shots of cartoon bulls stampeding, a building being 
demolished, a dog chewing a bone and two people being shot out of a cannon.

Text then showed the terms and conditions followed by a voiceover which said: 
“It’s never just money, it’s freedom.Credit cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/creditcards> from Sainsbury’s Bank.”

One viewer complained to the Advertising Standards Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> that the ad suggested the best way to 
finance property renovation was with a credit card.

Sainsbury’s Bank said the ad featured a real couple talking about their 
experiences in an unscripted way. They said their card had given them more 
flexibility, but did not suggest they had used it to fund the entire renovation.

It said the card offered an affordable alternative for customers as it gave 27 
months’ interest-free credit up to a limit that Sainsbury’s believed was 
suitable for funding parts of doing up a home in an affordable, responsible way.

The ASA said it accepted the ad did not suggest the whole renovation had been 
paid for by credit card – rather, it was used as an easy solution for 
unforeseen expenses.

However, it said the couple’s comments suggested “additional costs had been 
incurred because of ill-considered or reckless decisions and lack of planning”.

The ASA said the overall impression was that the card could be used to fix 
problems that arose during a non-essential project, while failing to emphasise 
the potential risks of using credit.

It therefore banned the ad, ruling that it “trivialised the process of taking 
out credit and was therefore irresponsible”.
 