
Borrowers who want to take out a personal loan are not only being offered 
rock-bottom interest rates – but also the chance to borrow record amounts of up 
to £35,000.

Sainsbury’s Bank has become the first provider to offer new and existing 
customers a personal unsecured loan of £35,000. It comes with a typical 
interest rate of 6.9% for those borrowing over five years, or 6.8% for those 
borrowing between one and three years.

Personal loans <https://www.theguardian.com/money/loans> are usually available 
for amounts up to £25,000, where the best rate is just under 5%.

Sainsbury’s said its decision to move into the “larger loans market” was 
because it wants to offer “greater choice and flexibility to those considering 
making a significant investment or purchase, such as home reconfigurations and 
renovations like an extension.”

The tightening of rules on mortgage lending may also be behind the move. These 
came in April this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/apr/25/mortgage-rules-homebuyers-fca-rules>
 and have meant it is harder for borrowers to get a home loan or to extend an 
existing one to pay for something like home improvements.

Typically, under the new rules triggered by the mortgage market review, 
mortgage holders now have to undergo a two hour interview from their lender in 
order to extend their borrowing.

“I think now that Sainsbury’s has made this move other providers will follow,” 
said Andrew Hagger, personal finance expert at Moneycomms.co.uk. “I am sure one 
reason the bank has done this is because people don’t want to go through a two- 
or three-hour interview just to extend their mortgage.”

However, Hagger sounded a note of caution for those thinking of borrowing this 
much, pointing out that rates on most mortgages are far below the 6.9% offered 
by Sainsbury’s.

“For those who would rather take a personal loan rather than adding to the 
mortgage with a further advance, the process and obtaining the funds will be 
quicker and less arduous, but it does come at a price,” he said. “It [the 
Sainsbury’s loan] works out quite a bit more expensive.”

Repayments on the Sainsbury’s loan work out at £691 a month over five years. 
Extending a mortgage would allow a borrower to increase the period of borrowing 
and therefore reduce the monthly repayments.

However, he added that it would also appeal to those who didn’t have the 
equity in their property to enable them to borrow an extra £35,000.

There are other lenders that lend this amount unsecured, but their deals come 
with restrictions. Barclays will lend as much as £35,000 to existing bank 
customers and the loan comes with a rate of 8.5%. Hitachi will also lend this 
much via moneysupermarket.com but at a rate of 11.9% and lending is restricted 
to those over 25 who earn £20,000 a year or more and the loan must be used for 
home improvements.

A price war in the personal loan market, particularly for loans around £7,500, 
has fuelled a recent surge in sales of unsecured personal loans to a level not 
seen since 2009, according to the August figures from the British Bankers’ 
Association.

“I was particularly struck that after years of decline demand for unsecured 
personal loans is rising quite strongly again,” said BBA statistics director 
David Dooks. “Those products are often used to finance bigger purchase such as 
cars or major home improvements – the sort of spending we often put off until 
we feel confident about our financial circumstances.”
 