 Senior Scottish National Party figures were yesterday sharpening knives for 
their leader Alex Salmond after a disastrous campaign that has seen the party 
slump in the polls with less than two weeks left to the Scottish parliament 
election.
One SNP source, who will be a key player in the new Scottish parliament on May 
6, criticised the way Mr Salmond had conducted the campaign: 'I am not sure 
what is being done and why.' He was critical of Mr Salmond's failure to consult 
before describing the Nato bombing as 'unpardonable folly' and committing the 
party to a 1p tax rise.

SNP fundamentalists, a mixture of left and rightwingers who would like to see 
an all-out campaign for independence rather than a slow march via devolution, 
have taken a vow of silence, fearful of being accused of undermining Mr Salmond.

But the source broke ranks to issue a warning to Mr Salmond that he will be in 
difficulty if the SNP fails to win at least 40 of the 129 seats in the Scottish 
parliament. In an implicit threat of trouble ahead, the source said: 'We are 
not saying anything until one minute past 10 o'clock on May 6.'

The source added that Mr Salmond will be challenged for his failure to make 
independence a central theme of the election: 'The campaign is flat and 
independence is what people react to. Independence is what motivates the 
workers.'

Mr Salmond has long argued that Labour's devolved Scottish parliament should 
be seen as a stepping stone to full independence, but the fundamentalists are 
impatient with his approach.

The most extensive poll yet, with three times the normal sample, puts Labour 
on 46% and the SNP, which at one point had been neck and neck with Labour, on 
only 26%.

The System Three poll, in the Herald, translates into 63 seats for Labour, 34 
for the SNP, 18 for the Liberal Democrats, 13 for the Conservatives and one 
independent, probably Dennis Canavan, the expelled Labour party MP

With time running out, the SNP yesterday relaunched its campaign, promising 
more 'razzmatazz', which will include a speech by Sean Connery at a rally on 
Monday. The party is to distribute 500,000 leaflets over the weekend 
criticising the government's increase in fuel prices.

Mr Salmond promised a big push over the final fortnight: 'We will be here, 
there and everywhere.'

If turn-out is low, as many fear, the SNP will benefit, as its supporters are 
the more likely to make the effort to vote in an election to the Scottish 
parliament.

Although Mr Salmond has managed to present the SNP in recent years as 
monolithic, it is a fragile coalition.

Among those with ambitions within the party who will be ranged against him are 
the Ewing dynasty Winnie, Maggie, Fergus and Annabelle, all of whom can expect 
to be elected and leftwingers such as Margo MacDonald, Kenny MacAskill and Alex 
Neil, also near-certainties to be elected.

Labour's line yesterday was a predictable warning from Gordon Brown, that the 
party would not be complacent. Labour has created a formidable election 
machine, with levels of staffing and finance that the SNP cannot match.

Mr Brown has fought an effective campaign, with a series of scares warning of 
the consequences of divorce betweenScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and England.
 