
The Conservatives may like to lecture on the value of work, but since Sarah 
Jones – paraplegic, with chronic rheumatoid arthritis – took on a part-time job 
she has found herself under investigation for benefit fraud, and is struggling 
to feed her children.

Jones is not her real name. She tells me she feels as if the Department for 
Work and Pensions (DWP) is “hounding” her, and she’s afraid speaking out will 
only make her more vulnerable.

Worry and shame are constants for people in her situation. She sits in 
lingering nerve pain, but when we talk the first thing she wants to stress is 
that “being on welfare isn’t a life I chose”. Six years ago she was a 
comfortable, healthy mother of two doing a job she loved as a teaching 
assistant. Then, at only 40, she broke her back. Overnight, she was paralysed 
from the waist down.

Disabled people are accused of using aids they don’t need – to cut benefits 
again | France Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/26/disabled-people-aids-consultation-cut-benefits>
Now she lives by stretching her out-of-work sickness benefit – employment and 
support allowance (ESA) – to cover bills, rent, and clothes for the boys. 
Physiotherapy to cope with the pain from the arthritis is another cost. 
Private, because the NHS doesn’t cover it. But in November last year, life 
began to look a little brighter: with the help of a friend, Jones was offered 
some work: eight hours a week doing consultancy at an agency. As she describes 
it, “a purpose, a way to contribute”.

In the benefit bureaucracy, this is what the DWP call “permitted work 
<https://www.gov.uk/employment-support-allowance/eligibility>”: a disabled 
person may be employed for fewer than 16 hours a week (and earn less than 
precisely £115.50 for it) and not lose their sickness benefits.

However, when she checked the rules online, Jones says she found every 
disability forum “screamed ‘Don’t do it!’.” The message was clear: “If you 
raised your head above the parapet, you’d be shot down in flames.

“The thing is, I had two kids, and I wanted them to see me working, even if 
only for a few hours a week,” she tells me. “And I wanted to prove to myself 
and everyone else that I wasn’t on the scrap heap.”

After getting written permission from the DWP, Jones started work that winter. 
But by March, even a few hours a week was taking its toll on her health. She 
told the DWP she had to resign. The next month, an official envelope landed on 
her doorstep: the DWP fraud department was accusing her of working without 
permission. If she didn’tfill in a PW1 
<http://www.pkc.gov.uk/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=23634> – a “permitted work” form – 
and send them her bank statements and pay slips, they would stop her ESA.

Despite the fact that she already had permission to work, Jones sent the 
paperwork the DWP demanded – but she couldn’t find her January payslip. A 
fortnight later, she got a letter from the department informing her she hadn’t 
“complied” by sending in requested information. Her benefits would be stopped.

Jones rang the DWP straightaway – “I was honestly hysterical,” she says – and 
was given an entirely different explanation: her benefits had been discontinued 
because she’d earned too much in January to qualify for ESA.

“That was because my boss hadn’t paid my Christmas holiday pay in December and 
so the January payment did seem inflated,” Jones stresses. “A quick call to my 
employer or myself would have clarified this. But no: they just stopped my 
benefit.”

Jones spent all that weekend “turning the flat upside down”, trying to find 
proof. “I couldn’t eat or sleep and was seriously at one point thinking of 
suicide,” she says. “I just couldn’t see a way through it. We had no money or 
food, and I’d been tried and found guilty of something that I didn’t do.”

I wanted to prove to myself and everyone else that I wasn’t on the scrap heap

In the early hours of the Monday morning she found the payslip and sent a scan 
to the DWP. She got a call that afternoon: the DWP accepted that she had got 
permission to work. But her payslip wasn’t enough to explain her “overpayment”, 
and they wanted to keep investigating. “People claiming ESA are able to 
undertake some paid work without it impacting on their benefit entitlement,” a 
DWP spokesperson said when approached for comment. “If further details of this 
case can be provided we will investigate.”

Jones has now been without her benefits for four weeks. “I can’t feed my 
children or pay my bills,” she says. “I can’t remember the last time I ate or 
slept.” (Jones later tells me she’s had to start taking antidepressants.)

“I’ve had to have nerve blocks injected into my legs because I can’t afford to 
pay for physio now they’ve stopped my payments.”

Currently, Jones says, it’s like she’s living in “hell” and “limbo”. She’s had 
no letter informing her of the fraud investigation, or a time frame as to when 
it will be over – or when she’ll get her benefits back.

“I’m powerless,” she says. “I did everything by the book. I was totally honest 
and upfront … but because I’m disabled and poor, no one wants to listen. I need 
a lawyer, but of course I’m in no position to pay for one.”

A few days later, Jones emails me: she’s been vomiting. She has just called 
the DWP and been told her January sickness benefit has been “disallowed” – “I’m 
not sure what that really means,” she says – and they’re deciding whether she 
can continue claiming it. In the meantime, no benefit payments will go into her 
account. It’s half term for her boys this week, and that means no free school 
meals to help feed them.

“I want people to see what this government is doing,” she says. “I was just 
trying to make things better, and they used that to destroy me and my children.”
 