
Millions of homeowners are paying too much for their mortgages. Although 
falling loan rates have led to cuts for people paying a loan with a variable 
rate, they could reduce their payments further by switching their loan.

There are wide variations between what mortgage giants charge for a simple 
variable rate loan and what building societies and some of the new lenders 
charge. For example, Halifax's standard variable rate is 6.95 per cent from the 
beginning of March. Building society Nationwide will charge 6.45 per cent, and 
Standard Life, the insurance company that recently moved into mortgages, has a 
standard rate of 6.05 per cent, discounted by 1.5 per cent for the first six 
months.

 More than half of the UK's 11 million mortgages are on standard variable 
rates. But while a switch may save you money on a variable rate, the really big 
savings are to be made by switching from a variable rate to a low fixed rate or 
a discounted variable loan. Patrick Bunton of broker London & Country says: 'A 
typical lender's base rate today is going to be 6.95 per cent. If you compare 
that with a cheap rate in the market, you could get a 1.5 per cent discount. On 
£60,000 that is a saving of £900 a year. '

 There will be one-off charges for remortgaging, which could include an 
arrangement fee of perhaps £300, plus solicitors' and valuation fees. These 
costs could amount to 1 per cent of the mortgage. But many deals now include 
free legal work and valuations. So switching can be relatively inexpensive.

 And it may not be necessary to switch lender. Many banks and building 
societies will offer existing borrowers cheaper deals if they think they are 
about to lose them. Always approach your existing lender first.

 The exception is borrowers who are locked into a deal by early redemption 
penalties. Special deals taken out in the past two or three years are likely to 
include penalties that extend beyond the fixed or discounted period. Borrowers 
who came out of a special rate last year are likely to have had a nasty shock, 
and although their payments will be falling now, the savings may not outweigh 
the redemption penalties.

 The figures stack up more favourably for people with fixed rates of five 
years or longer, and it may be worthwhile moving even if there are penalties to 
pay.

 Ray Boulger, technical manager at broker John Charcol, says: 'Someone who 
took out a five-year rate two or three years ago may find it worthwhile to 
move. The rule of thumb is that the longer there is left to run on the fixed 
rate and the lower the penalties, the more likely it is to be worthwhile.'

 Advisers agree that borrowers considering a switch from a fixed rate with a 
penalty need to compare costs with benefits. Some will find that the only 
viable route is a rock-bottom rate that includes another expensive and extended 
redemption penalty. A 3.3 per cent discount from Northern Rock, for example, 
lasting until 1 April 2001, has penalties for six years. Brokers advise seeking 
if possible a new deal that locks you in for no longer than your present one.

 Savings on switching fixed rates can be spectacular. For example, John 
Charcol recently dealt with a client who took out a £150,000 five-year fix with 
Bristol & West at 7.48 per cent until 1 October 2001. There was a six-month 
redemption penalty and the charge worked out at £5,212. As the borrower was two 
years into the five-year deal, Charcol went for a new deal over three years. 
The borrower switched to a loan with a sliding discount starting off at 1.65 
per cent until 1 May 2000. That would reduce the monthly repayments to £636.99, 
a saving of £279.31 a month, or more than £10,000. After deducting the 
redemption penalty, the client was £4,843 better off.

 The temptation might be for borrowers to keep waiting for cheaper rates. But 
Bunton believes the current level of discounting is as steep as it is likely to 
be. As rates fall, lenders will not have to sell borrowing so hard.

 Miers agrees: 'In three years' time, the availability of fixes and discounts 
will probably have reduced.'
 