
If you thought things couldn’t get any worse for savers, think again. During 
October there were 240 rate cuts as banks and building societies withdrew many 
top-paying accounts.

Financial data firm Moneyfacts says 23 best-buy savings deals were withdrawn 
during the month, and some of the best new deals on the market were only 
available for a few days.

Savers’ options were slim even before the Bank of England cut its base rate to 
0.25% in August, but they’ve since taken a further hit. Among the top deals to 
go were the five-year fixed-rate bond from Yorkshire bank which was paying 
2.08%, and the 1.5% 12-month-notice account from Raphaels bank. Hodge bank’s 
popular 90-day notice account, which paid 1.3% for deposits of £10,000 plus, is 
another no longer accepting applications.

Rachel Springall from Moneyfacts says there’s no end in sight for the cycle of 
cuts and withdrawals. “Cuts have clearly engulfed the market, but what’s worse 
is the fact that some of the best deals are being withdrawn at an alarming 
rate,” she says. “Making countless cuts to a savings range is just not 
practical, which is why providers are resorting to closing some of their most 
attractive deals to cope with demand. With deals disappearing so rapidly, it’s 
more important than ever for savers to look at the best-buys and act fast in 
opening a new account if they want a top rate.”

The SavingsChampion website, which also monitors rates, says most banks and 
building societies seem to be “trying to escape from the best-buy tables rather 
than enter them”. It is pointing savers towards Secure Trust Bank, which has 
launched a five-year fixed-rate bond paying 2.01% on balances of more than 
£1,000.

Charter bank, meanwhile, has launched a two-year fixed-rate bond paying 1.51%, 
also with a £1,000 minimum and the option for monthly interest. The best 
instant access online rate is a paltry 1%, available from National Counties 
building society, RCI bank and NS&I.

These rates are all better than those on offer to some savers. Data from the 
Bank of England shows the average interest rate on instant access accounts 
dropped from 0.3% at the end of July to just 0.22% by the end of October, with 
more cuts to existing accounts still filtering through.
 