
The scale of sexual harassment and gender violence by UK university staff has 
been likened to the scandals involving the Catholic church and Jimmy Savilein 
accounts shared by more than 100 women with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/26/have-you-been-affected-by-sexual-harassment-at-university>
.

Their stories – including those of verbal bullying, serial harassment, 
assault, sexual assault and rape – expose an alarming pattern of abuse and 
harassment in British universities which remains largely hidden.

A number of contributors drew parallels with the abuse scandals affecting the 
Catholic church andSavile, the disgraced late TV star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/jimmy-savile>.

Sexual harassment at university: 'I felt terrified to say anything'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/07/abuse-at-university-case-study>
Many women said they had not pursued complaints for fear of jeopardising their 
academic careers. Those who did complain said they felt isolated and 
unprotected, while the more powerful men they accused appeared to be 
untouchable.

The women’s accounts follow an exclusive Guardian report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/26/sexual-harassment-of-students-by-university-staff-hidden-by-non-disclosure-agreements>
 on the use of non-disclosure agreements in university sexual harassment cases.

Rachel Krys, the co-director of End Violence Against Women 
<http://www.endviolenceagainstwomen.org.uk/>, called for urgent change within 
universities to both prevent senior male academics abusing positions of power 
and develop better processes to bring them to account.

“We know this is happening to young women at universities across the country 
and they continue to be failed by the institutions in which they put their 
trust,” Krys said. “Our universities need to listen more to the women who are 
coming forward and telling these stories. They need to investigate properly 
when there is an allegation of abuse, and act quickly to protect all women from 
these perpetrators.”

According to EVAW, UK universities are legally obliged under human rights and 
equality laws to protect female students from sexual assault and other forms of 
violence against women. Their analysis of universities’ policies concluded that 
many were likely to be in breach of these obligations.

'I was so traumatised': accounts of sexual harassment in UK universities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/07/i-was-so-traumatised-accounts-of-sexual-harassment-in-uk-universities>
Later this month Universities UK (UUK) is publishing its long awaited report 
on sexual violence and harassment in universities, but there is concern that it 
will focus on “lad culture” and incidents between students, rather than those 
involving staff and students, which have remained largely under the radar.


The majority of cases reported to the Guardian involve senior male academics, 
often professors, harassing and abusing younger female PhD students whose work 
they supervise. There are also accounts from undergraduates and female 
academics, while a small number of other allegations involve assault, 
male-on-male harassment and one allegation of sexual assault by a female 
lecturer.


Many of the accounts indicate that universities are failing in their duty of 
care to students and staff who are harassed. One female academic who made a 
complaint of sexual harassment against a more senior male colleague – against 
whom there had been previous complaints – said she was marched off the 
university premises and suspended for three months after he accused her of 
making a false allegation.

Sexual harassment of students by university staff hidden by non-disclosure 
agreements
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/26/sexual-harassment-of-students-by-university-staff-hidden-by-non-disclosure-agreements>
Another female academic who complained to HR of being sexually assaulted by a 
more senior male colleague, was then interviewed by two male colleagues. “I was 
so traumatised and ashamed, not only by the assault but by having to give 
details of the assault to two men (one of whom seemed to regard me as a waste 
of space) that I did not take my complaint to the next formal level.”

In another statement, a PhD student, who brought a complaint after being raped 
by a senior member of staff with whom she was in a relationship, described her 
sense of utter powerlessness: “He is a renowned professor. He can do what he 
wants.”


The incidents are reported to have taken place at a variety of institutions 
across the UK, including prestigious and high-ranking Russell Group 
universities. Some date back to the 1980s and 90s, but most are recent and many 
are ongoing, and in the majority of cases the women involved have asked to 
remain anonymous, and their institutions unnamed, because of fear of 
repercussions.

Jennifer Saul, professor of philosophy at the University of Sheffield and an 
expert on sexual harassment in higher education, said she was not surprised by 
the deluge of stories: “There’s a systemic problem. Too often, victims are 
afraid to come forward for fear (well-justified) of retaliation.


“When they do come forward, often they are brushed off or not believed. When 
they are believed, their allegations are still often dismissed as unprovable. 
Even when things are taken more seriously, harassers are generally allowed to 
leave quietly, which enables them to move some place else and do the same 
thing.”

Many of the women who made complaints to their institutions said they felt 
they were the ones on trial, while alleged perpetrators were often protected by 
management who feared losing a star researcher and their funding.


A number of respondents said their harassers were allowed to remain in post; 
some moved to other institutions without facing any formal investigation or 
disciplinary action, leaving them with an unblemished employment record and the 
opportunity to continue preying on students elsewhere.

“They don’t know where he is or what he is doing, and they don’t care. He is 
not their problem any more,” said one female academic whose sexual harassment 
complaint resulted in her senior colleague leaving with a financial settlement 
and a non-disclosure agreement which prevents any discussion of the case.

A number of PhD students described their excitement to be working with eminent 
professors, only to find themselves under pressure to enter into more intimate 
relationships. When they refused, they were ostracised and neglected by their 
supervisor, putting their academic future at risk.


“My (much older) supervisor kept messaging me for naked photos of myself,” 
said another student who didn’t report the incidents. “When I refused he told 
me I was probably going to get raped. He was very well liked, and I knew he 
would never be punished for it.”


Another contributor said: “The culture [in universities] is very sexualised. 
It’s very, very macho. Whenever complaints arise, they are covered up. In 
general society there’s been a shift in the way in which complaints of sexual 
misconduct are dealt with – in higher education, not so much.”

Have you been affected by sexual harassment at university?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/26/have-you-been-affected-by-sexual-harassment-at-university>
A UUK spokesperson said the forthcoming report would identify best practice in 
a range of areas which would be shared across all universities. “The university 
sector has been clear that there is no place for violence and sexual harassment 
on a university campus, nor anywhere else.

“Universities across the UK already have a range of initiatives and policies 
in place to address these issues, including policies on student-staff 
relationships.”

How far the higher education sector will enforce the report’s recommendations 
remains to be seen. A number of universities have instigated reviews of their 
own policies and practices in response to individual cases within their 
institution.

The University of Sussex has commissioned an independent inquiry into its 
handling of the assault of a postgraduate student by a lecturer. The media 
lecturer Lee Salter met Allison Smith during induction week and they began a 
relationship. But in September 2015, he punched her, knocked her out, stamped 
on her and threw salt at her face. He was found guilty of assault by beating 
and causing criminal damage on 13 July at Brighton magistrates court.

In the 10 months between his arrest and sentence, he continued to teach at the 
university, to Smith’s distress. “Their policies were clear that he should have 
been suspended,” she said. “It felt very damaging that the institution would do 
this. It started to feel that their reputation was more important. They swept 
me under the carpet and that was that.”

Salter, who pleaded not guilty in court and received a 22-week suspended jail 
sentence, was issued with a restraining order not to contact Smith. He has 
appealed against his convictions.


More than 300 Sussex University staff and students sent a letter to the vice 
chancellor, Adam Tickell, calling on the university to “investigate and 
publicly acknowledge its mishandling of the case [and] establish a taskforce to 
comprehensively examine university policy and practice on issues of violence 
and harassment”.


Tickell, who was appointed after the alleged incident and launched the inquiry 
at the start of his tenure, has promised to appoint a deputy pro-vice 
chancellor for equalities. “I believe strongly that this institution should 
learn lessons from this case and rectify any failings, and I’m committed to 
ensuring that Sussex does what is right for our community,” he said.

To find out more about supporting the Guardian’s own journalism by becoming a 
supporter, please clickhere 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=mem_us_ed_jo_footer>
 