
Three long-serving primary school cleaners, who went on strike over claims 
their wages and conditions were cut when a private company took over the 
contract, have been sacked days before Christmas.

The women – Lesley Leake, Marice Hall and Karen McGee – sparked a debate over 
outsourcing when theywent on strike for 14 weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/09/kinsley-school-cleaners-enter-week-six-of-strike-over-wage-cuts>
 after their school in West Yorkshire was turned into an academy earlier this 
year.

Known as the “Kinsley cleaners”, the women said they had their wages cut from 
£7.85 an hour to the minimum wage of £7.20 once the contract switched from 
Wakefield council to C&D Cleaning in April.

The women, who between them have more than 28 years’ experience cleaning 
Kinsley primary school, returned to work earlier this month. But on Thursday 
they were told they had been sacked.

Jeremy Corbyn said he was angered by the news of the cleaners’ dismissal. 
“When I met them, they explained how their wages were cut following the 
outsourcing of their contracts to a private company,” the Labour leader said.

 “Outsourcing is bad for our public services and workers. The cleaners’ jobs 
must be brought back in-house with fair pay and conditions. The race to the 
bottom in wages and working conditions faced by huge numbers of workers right 
across Britain is a national disgrace and Labour would put a stop to it.”

Dave Prentis, the Unison general secretary, said the women had bravely taken 
action to protect their wages and employment rights. “To then sack them just 
days before Christmas is heartless in the extreme,” he said, adding that the 
union would be consulting lawyers over the decision to dismiss them.

Speaking to the Guardian in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/09/kinsley-school-cleaners-enter-week-six-of-strike-over-wage-cuts>
, Leake – who has two adult children and a second job – said her pension, sick 
pay and holiday entitlement had also been hit by the outsourcing. “The first 
month [under C&D Cleaning] when we got our payslips we just thought it could be 
a few teething problems, but the second month it was the same, and it just went 
on and on,” she said.

The women said they had tried to raise the issues with C&D Cleaning but were 
“fobbed off”. In the end the three got in touch with their union, Unison, but 
C&D Cleaning, based in nearby Barnsley, was reluctant to discuss the women’s 
cases.

In one email seen by the Guardian, the company’s head of human resources, Nick 
Thorpe, replied to Unison: “I understand … the impact for you as an 
organisation when members realise that we are no longer living in the 1980s and 
they question the actual value of union membership when you have no say, power 
or influence over their employer.”

The three women decided to go on strike, staging their first picket outside 
the school at the beginning of September. “It was a bit scary at first because 
none of us have ever done anything like this, but we didn’t know what else we 
could do,” said Leake. “It wasn’t just the money we were losing, it was the 
stress that was affecting us and our families as well.”

A statement from C&D Cleaning read: “The employees were invited to a 
disciplinary hearing on an earlier date in December to respond to allegations 
of gross misconduct. At the employees’ request, the hearing took place on 19 
December 2016 as their chosen Unison representative was not available on the 
earlier date.

“Full details of the allegations were provided to the employees in advance of 
the hearing. The employees and their representative were given full opportunity 
to put their cases. The outcome of the hearing was termination of employment. 
The individuals have been informed of their right of appeal. The company will 
not comment further at this stage so as not prejudice any internal process.”

Jon Trickett, the local MP, said all the “three courageous women” had done was 
stand up for their right to work. “With only days until Christmas, it looks 
like Scrooge has been brought back to life from Victorian times and ruined the 
festive period for three families in my constituency,” he said.

He said the women’s experiences were unfortunately common. “Our country needs 
better pay, better conditions and better corporate governance to make sure that 
all employees are treated fairly,” he said. “It is also time that we stopped 
outsourcing services paid for by the taxpayer to rogue employers.”
 