
Three primary school cleaners in the West Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> village of Kinsley are entering 
the sixth week of a strike over claims their wages and conditions have been cut 
since a private company took over the contract.

Like thousands of school support staff around the country, Lesley Leake, 
Marice Hall and Karen McGee found that when their school was turned into an 
academy last year the cleaning was outsourced to a private firm.

The women, who between them have more than 28 years’ experience cleaning 
Kinsley primary school in the former coalmining village, said that once the 
contract switched from Wakefield council to C&D Cleaning in April, they had 
their wages cut from £7.85 an hour to £7.20, the minimum wage.

Leake, who has two adult children and a second job, said their pensions, sick 
pay and holiday entitlement had also been hit.

“The first month when we got our payslips we just thought it could be a few 
teething problems but the second month it was the same, and it just went on and 
on.”

The women said that as they struggled to make ends meet they tried to raise 
the issues with C&D Cleaning but were “fobbed off”.

“They didn’t want to know. Sometimes they would just put the phone down as we 
were talking,” said Leake. “It was pretty devastating because we’d always been 
happy and we all depended on the money to make ends meet, pay the mortgage and 
bills.”

In the end the three, who all come from former mining families, got in touch 
with their union, Unison, but regional officer Robin Symonds said C&D Cleaning, 
based in nearby Barnsley, was reluctant to discuss the women’s cases.

In one email seen by the Guardian, the company’s head of human resources, Nick 
Thorpe, replied to Unison: “We do not recognise you or your organisation and 
subsequently we will not be entering into any form of dialogue with you in 
relation to our employees.”

In another, he added: “I understand … the impact for you as an organisation 
when members realise that we are no longer living in the 1980s and they 
question the actual value of union membership when you have no say, power or 
influence over their employer.”

The three women, believing they had no other option, decided to go on strike, 
staging their first picket outside the school at the beginning of September.

“It was as bit scary at first because none of us have ever done anything like 
this but we didn’t know what else we could do,” said Leake, who lives with her 
husband, a former miner turned caretaker, in Kinsley. “It wasn’t just the money 
we were losing, it was the stress that was affecting us and our families as 
well.

“I would go home crying because it just felt we were being treated so unfairly 
and I didn’t know how I was going to pay the mortgage or the bills.”


Experts say that tens of billions of pounds’ worth of contracts 
<http://www.socialenterprise.org.uk/uploads/files/2012/12/the_shadow_state_3_dec1.pdf>
 are outsourced each year and trade unions warn that too often this process 
results in worse wages and conditions for the workers involved.


Last week workers who provide mental health support for vulnerable people in 
nearby Bradford 
<https://www.unison.org.uk/news/article/2016/10/bradford-mh-strike/> went on 
strike over what they said were unfair imposed changes to their working hours. 
And last monththe Guardian reported on the case of teaching assistants in Durham
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/teaching-assistants-durham-pay-slashed-women-lions-of-durham-grunwick>
 who were fighting dramatic changes to their contracts.

Dave Prentis, the general secretary of Unison, said that for years public 
services “had been on sale to the lowest bidder”.

 “When a service gets taken over by a private company, employees often lose 
out in the race to the bottom, ending up on lower pay, zero-hours contracts and 
working longer days.”

Unison is taking the three women’s case to an employment tribunal, claiming 
the company may have broken rules meant to ensure workers’ terms and conditions 
are maintained when contracts change hands.

C&D Cleaning refused to comment on the case when contacted by the Guardian, 
referring queries to Crooks Commercial Solicitors in Wakefield. Nick Wilson 
from Crooks said the firm would not be commenting on the case while an 
employment tribunal was under way.

Helen Grantham, the assistant chief executive of Wakefield council, said it 
was “committed to protecting staff and ensuring they have fair working 
conditions”, adding: “We are in discussions with those involved to try and 
resolve the issues.”

Known locally and on social media as the Kinsley Cleaners 
<https://twitter.com/KinsleyCandD>, the women have been supported by their 
local MP, Jon Trickett, who has been in touch with the company and the school 
in an effort to find a solution.

“These women are devoted to the school and the children there. They are 
showing real courage and principles to do this because it is not easy but they 
felt they had no option,” said Trickett. He said their working lives had been 
turned upside down through no fault of their own.

“This is part of a much bigger problem of people living in precarious jobs 
with employers who don’t seem to have high regard for the staff that work for 
them and I think it is completely unacceptable.”

The three say they have been overwhelmed with support from the local 
community, which was at the heart of the 1984-85 miners’ strike. But as they 
enter the sixth week of their strike McGee said all they want is their old 
lives and jobs back.

“I have never been on strike and I did not want to go on strike. This is all 
new to all of us, but we had no choice and now we are 100% determined to see it 
through.”

• Update added on 2 November 2016. After publication C&D Cleaning Services 
contacted us to say that they were not provided with updated information on the 
local living wage by Wakefield council before the transfer, and the council 
acknowledged an oversight. C&D Cleaning Services say that now the information 
has been provided they have taken the necessary steps to ensure that any monies 
owed to the cleaners have been paid to them.

Wakefield council issued this statement on 2 November 2016: “The council 
recognises that there was an oversight in providing C&D Cleaning Services Ltd 
with the updated and accurate employee liability information on the local 
living wage. It had previously informed C&D Cleaning Services Ltd of a 
collective agreement between Unison and the council for 2015/16 in February 
2016. Unfortunately the council did not then confirm, prior to the actual point 
of transfer, that the agreement would continue into 2016/17. As soon as this 
was identified the council made significant efforts to rectify the situation by 
providing details of the most recent agreement to C&D Cleaning Services Ltd so 
that any issues arising regarding the local living wage could be addressed. We 
apologise for this oversight and recognise that this, among other issues 
outside the council’s control, has caused difficulty for all parties.”

 