
Small schools whose budgets are already under severe pressure could be pushed 
beyond breaking point by the introduction of the newapprenticeship levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/12/apprenticeships-levy-will-go-ahead-next-year-uk-government-confirms>
, school and local government leaders are warning.

The levy, to be introduced in April, requires all businesses – including 
schools – with a wage bill over £3m a year, to contribute 0.5% of their wage 
bill to fund new apprenticeships.


But whereas academy or faith schools – who employ their own staff – will be 
exempt from the levy if their wage bill is under the £3m threshold, small 
schools with similar wage bills that are run by local authorities will have to 
pay the levy because staff are employed by the authority and therefore 
contribute to the overall wage bill of the council.

The Local Government Association (LGA), which represents 370 councils in 
England and Wales, argues that all schools with a wage bill of less than £3m 
should be exempt from paying the levy and says council-maintained schools are 
being “dealt an unfair hand” compared with academies.

“It is discriminatory for small council-maintained schools not to be exempted 
from the apprenticeship levy in the same way that small academies and faith 
schools will be,” said Richard Watts, chair of the LGA’s children and young 
people board.

“They will be forced to find additional money to pay the levy, while an 
academy or faith school with an identical wage bill can invest that money in 
making sure their pupils get an excellent education.”

The LGA estimates that the disparity will affect up to 2.8m pupils at 9,000 
council-maintained schools with wage bills under £3m. Watts called on the 
government to level the playing field for schools, adding: “It is no secret 
that many schools are struggling with their funding, yet once again, 
council-maintained schools are being dealt a poor hand compared to academies.”

In response, apprenticeship and skills minister Robert Halfon said the 
apprenticeship levy would boost economic productivity, increasing the country’s 
skills base and give millions a step up the ladder of opportunity.

“In the majority of cases, local authorities will be responsible for paying 
the levy in the community schools they maintain, rather than the schools 
themselves. We expect these schools to have full access to funding for 
apprenticeship training and will support all employers, including schools and 
local authorities, in using levy funds to invest in quality apprenticeships.”

The growing crisis in school budgets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/school-funding> is likely to produce a 
string of headlines in the coming year with reports from schools around the 
country of class sizes going up, teacher and support staff jobs being lost, and 
curriculum choices narrowing.


Russell Hobby, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, 
said the new apprenticeship levy could push some school budgets beyond breaking 
point.Figures released by the National Audit Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/14/ministers-have-failed-to-explain-where-schools-will-find-savings-watchdog-says>
 at the end of last year revealed that schools in England are facing cuts of 
£3bn, resulting in an 8% real-terms cut in funding per pupil by 2019/20.

Civil servants expect schools will need to make efficiency savings of £1.3bn 
through better purchasing and save another £1.7bn by using staff more 
efficiently. In the meantime many are having to meet increased national 
insurance and pension contributions. “The new apprenticeship levy is yet 
another example of a government policy negatively impacting school budgets and, 
potentially, standards,” said Hobby.

“When the national funding formula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/england-school-funding-formula-justine-greening-education-secretary>
 was announced the government promised that no school would lose more than 1.5% 
of its budget, as this would be so drastic a reduction.

“But the apprenticeship levy will mean that council-maintained schools of any 
size will lose a further 0.5% of their staff budget – and this on top of the 8% 
real-terms cut in funding schools are already faced with,” he said.

The NAHT called for small council-maintained schools to be treated in the same 
way as small academies and free schools. Hobby said: “It is not fair for some 
pupils to suffer purely because of the structure of their school and the way it 
receives its funding.

 “We further call for the government to recognise new training and 
apprenticeship schemes that schools can access, using the dedicated 
apprenticeship funding gathered by the levy. Currently small schools are faced 
with paying into a fund they may not be able to benefit from.”
 