
Supreme court justices have granted a council permission to bring a final 
appeal over the case of a father who successfully challenged a conviction for 
taking his daughter on holiday in term time.

 Jon Platt, from the Isle of Wight, won a landmark decision earlier this year 
after challenging the Department for Education’s rules barring term-time 
absences for state school pupils in all but extraordinary circumstances.

 Isle of Wight council had attempted to impose a £120 penalty after Platt took 
his daughter to Disney World in Florida. He took the case to a magistrates 
court, arguing that his daughter’s attendance record of more than 90% met the 
requirement of section 444 of the Education Act, that parents ensure their 
children attend school regularly. He also argued that the law did not place 
restrictions on parents taking their children on holiday in school time.

School absence for unauthorised holidays at five-year high
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/20/school-absence-unauthorised-holidays-five-year-high>
 After Platt won the backing of the magistrates court, the council then 
appealed to the high court, whichin May upheld the earlier decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/13/high-court-father-fine-term-time-holiday-jon-platt>
 that parents whose children who attended school regularly could be allowed 
family absences.

The court ruled that the magistrates were entitled to take into account the 
“wider picture” of the child’s attendance record. “I do not consider it is open 
to an authority to criminalise every unauthorised holiday by the simple device 
of alleging that there has been no regular attendance in a period limited to 
the absence on holiday,” said Lord Justice Lloyd Jones.

It was a ruling that highlighted the gap between the existing law and the 
DfE’s tougher regulations introduced in 2013 when Michael Gove was education 
secretary. “I am obviously hugely relieved,” Platt said at the time. “I know 
that there was an awful lot riding on this – not just for me but for hundreds 
of other parents.”

 But the DfE said it was disappointed by the judgment, and soon thereafter 
Nick Gibb, the schools minister,formally requested that the Isle of Wight 
council make an application 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/09/isle-of-wight-appeal-jon-platt-florida>
 for permission to appeal.

The council submitted papers to the supreme court for permission to launch a 
final legal challenge, arguing that the case raised important issues for 
schools and families up and down the country. On Wednesday a panel of three 
justices who reviewed the case decided a hearing should go ahead. There are 
plans for it to take place early next year.

The decision is expected to be greeted with scepticism by campaigners, who 
celebrated the earlier rulings after lobbying against the stricter rules, which 
removed leeway allowing headteachers to authorise up to two weeks’ term-time 
holiday a year for pupils with good attendance records.

Any future changes to legislation would probably mostly involve a definition 
of “regular” school attendance, possibly in line with the 90% threshold that 
the DfE requires from schools overall. The department’s definition of truancy 
is a persistent absence accounting for 10% of school days.
 