
‘Don’t worry, it’s not dangerous,” says Thomas, 10, carefully positioning a 
tray of bread cakes over burning coals. “It’s OK if you do it right. There are 
people here who know the safety rules and they teach us,” he adds.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> at this state junior 
school have lessons in using sharp knives, saws and even air rifles. They get 
to cook food and smelt metal over an open fire and to skin and bone rabbits. 
Mike Fairclough, their headteacher, believes exposing children to risk fosters 
a confidence that improves their educational performance, behaviour and 
attitudes.

Fairclough has no truck with the “elf and safety” brigade and he arrives, 
lurching alarmingly on the rough terrain, on a quad bike. “A lot of teachers 
agree with me. Headteachers and governors are more reticent due to their 
accountability should things go wrong,” he says. “I feel strongly that we 
should not be limiting ourselves or the children through fear. The reality is 
that headteachers are much freer than they often believe they are.”

He thinks schools – and parents – are failing children by protecting them from 
anything that might cause harm instead of teaching them how to handle danger. 
His decision to take pupils clay-pigeon shooting brought himnotoriety 
<http://www.theargus.co.uk/news/10690741.Headteacher_defends_clay_pigeon_shoot_at_Eastbourne_school/>
 – and plaudits fromOfsted 
<https://reports.ofsted.gov.uk/inspection-reports/find-inspection-report/provider/ELS/114467>
 and the Health and Safety Executive.

Children should learn mainly through play until age of eight, says Lego
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/children-learn-play-age-eight-lego>
Now Fairclough has written a book provocatively titled: Playing with Fire: 
Embracing Risk and Danger in Schools 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/playing-with-fire-464475.html>. In it he 
describes how his school,West Rise Junior <http://www.westrisejunior.co.uk/> in 
Eastbourne, East Sussex, rents 120 acres of marshland to keep a herd of water 
buffalo, beehives, chickens, sheep and goats, and gets children out in all 
weathers to “build grit and resilience”. He invites other schools to “tear off 
the cotton wool from around our kids and cast it into the flames”.

He wants to counter the “widespread misconception” that health and safety 
rules prohibit any activity with a potential for danger. He says the subject is 
shrouded in myths, such as bans on conkers or snowballs “for safety reasons”.

“The reality is that every school can take risks and engage in ‘dangerous’ 
activities, in the same way that I have done so at my school for years. No one 
is stopping them. The government,Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> and the Health and Safety 
Executive would all love to see schools embracing danger in a responsible way,” 
he says.

Fairclough, son of the late actor Gordon Fairclough, is a fine art graduate. 
He taught in Wood Green, London, Slough and Aylesbury before arriving at West 
Rise, a 274-pupil school serving two estates where two-thirds of children are 
eligible for free school meals. He caused a stir when he turned up for the job 
interview 12 years ago in a vintage pinstripe suit and silver shoes. Today his 
white shirt is unbuttoned to reveal a glimpse of chest art.

“I took one look at him and thought, not a chance,” says Alex Richards, then a 
parent governor and now the school’s farm manager. “Silver shoes? What a 
nutter. I asked where he came from and he said Aylesbury. I said if you think 
kids come skipping into school here like they do in posh Aylesbury, think 
again.” Sue Poore, the school’s business manager, admits that Fairclough had 
looked “distinctive”. “Despite being patently unprepared, he spoke with passion 
about his aspirations and it came straight from the heart, not a laptop.”

It was the right decision, says Richards: “Mike has transformed the school. 
We’re in the top 5% nationally forattainment in the Sats 
<http://www.westrisejunior.co.uk/?page_id=749> and the top school in Eastbourne 
for reading, writing, maths, punctuation and grammar. He’s getting that hit by 
having the children challenging themselves and finding solutions together 
rather than spending all the time facing walls in the classroom.”

The school is on land once occupied by the second largest bronze age 
settlement in Europe and the children are preparing and cooking food in the way 
their prehistoric ancestors are thought to have done. Fairclough tastes the 
flatbread they’ve made, out of flour, honey and milk, spread with butter beaten 
from cream, and compote from brambles they had foraged. “They are so good, they 
just get you totally in the groove,” says Fairclough, who describes himself as 
a hippy and talks about being “loved up”, “totally cool” and “in the vibe”.

That’s just one side of him. The other is an insistence on good behaviour and 
manners based on mutual respect, a trait he attributes to his “strict but 
loving” upbringing. He wants West Rise pupils to leave the school as 
“well-rounded people who don’t wimp out” but who are also proficient in 
reading, writing and maths. He is keen on art and creative writing but also 
provides extra tuition sessions to make sure year 6 pupils do well in their 
Sats.

Fairclough is also, surprisingly, a fan of video games after watching his 
teenage sons play them online with people from all over the world. “Like health 
and safety, I believe that video gaming is misrepresented and not understood 
deeply enough in the teaching profession. In terms of risk and danger, video 
games offer a broad spectrum of subject matter which will engage most 
children,” he says.

It’s not only schools that are letting down children but parents too, he 
believes, when they foist their own anxieties on their offspring. He identifies 
a growing trend for parents to seek labels, such asADHD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/04/adhd-nation-the-disorder-drugs-inside-story-alan-schwarz-review>
, to explain poor or disturbed behaviour rather than tackling it: “They see 
something on television about a new disorder, fill in an internet questionnaire 
and hey presto, the child has a label. Of course there are children with 
special needs, but in many cases it’s just a result of poor parenting.”

No grammar schools, lots of play: the secrets of Europe’s top education system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/20/grammar-schools-play-europe-top-education-system-finland-daycare>
Russell Hobby, the general secretary of the National Association of Head 
Teachers agrees children should learn to handle risk, though he says it is a 
matter for judgment. “There are obvious risks in allowing opportunities for 
reckless behaviour and there are more subtle risks in limiting opportunities 
for adventure and challenge. School leaders steer a difficult course between 
the two and, inevitably, people will find fault from one direction or another. 
If we trusted school leaders more and threatened them less, they would be able 
to exercise this judgment more confidently,” he says.

Dame Judith Hackitt, the former chairwoman of the Health and Safety Executive, 
visited West Rise to see for herself: “Once in a while you encounter someone 
who inspires you. Hearing about and then meeting Mike Fairclough was one such 
encounter for me. I spent most of my tenure encouraging teachers and parents to 
recognise their role in helping children to learn about risk to prepare them 
for life. Here is someone who does exactly that and much, much more,” she says.

Of course, not every state school can rent swaths of marshland, but Fairclough 
thinks they can all find ways to challenge children. “If you follow your heart 
and do what you love, while also being strategic with Ofsted and the 
requirements of the government, then teachers are able to do whatever they 
like, provided it has a measurable and positive educational impact on the 
children,” he says.

He admits that some parents worry at first but says they are reassured by the 
careful risk assessments drawn up for each activity and their children’s clear 
enthusiasm. “It’s the best part of school. I love it more than anything,” says 
Thomas. It’s not just a boy thing: “It’s good to come out into the fresh air 
with your friends and try new things,” says Georgia, 11. Their favourite 
activity is making food and cooking on an open fire. “And the really good thing 
is you get to eat it,” says Dominic, 10.

Order a copy of Playing with Fire: Embracing risk and danger in schools (John 
Catt Educational Ltd, £14) atthe Guardian bookshop.  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/playing-with-fire-464475.html> Free UK p&p 
over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99.
 