
It has all the trappings of a classic horror plot: a group of normally timid 
individuals are transformed by scientists into instinctive killers, programmed 
to pursue and sink their jaws into almost anything that crosses their path.

However, this hair-raising scenario was recently played out in a study of 
laboratory mice, designed to uncover the brain circuits behind the predatory 
instinct.

The research revealed that one set of neurons triggers the pursuit of prey, 
while another prompts the animal to clench its jaws and neck muscles to bite 
and kill. The study relied on the technique optogenetics, in which neurons can 
be artificially activated using light, effectively allowing scientists to 
switch the killer instinct on and off at will.

Light switches memories on and off | Mo Costandi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2014/jun/03/optogenetic-memory-switch>
When the laser was off in the experiment, the animals behaved normally, but at 
the flick of a switch they assumed qualities of “walkers” fromThe Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>.

Ivan de Araujo, a psychiatry researcher at the Yale University School of 
Medicine and lead author said: “We’d turn the laser on and they’d jump on an 
object, hold it with their paws and intensively bite it as if they were trying 
to capture and kill it.”

In the study, the mice were seen to pursue almost anything in their path, 
including insects, robot insects and even inanimate objects such as bottle caps 
and wooden sticks.

However, De Araujo said the mice stopped short of displaying aggression 
towards fellow mice or the researchers, and seemed only to target objects that 
were smaller than themselves. “It had to be something that could be grabbed and 
contained, something they want to capture and subdue” he said. “It’s not that 
they got out of control and tried to kill everything. It had to be something 
that looks like food to them.”

In the study, published in the journal Cell 
<http://www.cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-8674(16)31743-3>, the scientists used 
a technique called optogenetics to pinpoint and eventually take control of the 
neuronal circuits involved in predation. The mice were genetically engineered 
so that specific groups of neurons were light-sensitive, meaning that these 
could be switched on and off by shining a laser into the mouse brain.

The scientists identified two separate clusters of neurons in the central 
amygdala, a brain area normally linked to emotion and motivation. These were 
shown to be communicating with other neurons in two motor areas – in one case, 
a region linked to the ability to run and change speed and, in the other, a 
region known to control jaw and neck movements.

In real life sensory cues, such as a small animal scurrying across the 
predator’s field of view, would trigger activity in the amygdala setting off 
this “chase and kill” neuronal chain of command, the scientists said.

Rodent recall: false but happy memories implanted in sleeping mice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/mar/09/rodent-recall-false-but-happy-memories-implanted-in-sleeping-mice>
In the experiment, they were able to bypass the usual sensory requirements and 
could trigger the predation circuits artificially using lasers.

They found that the two clusters operated independently: if they only 
activated the “hunting” neurons, the animals would chase the prey, but the 
biting force of the jaw was decreased by 50%. “They fail to deliver the killing 
bite,” said De Araujo.


When they only activated the “biting” neurons, mice in empty cages would 
display “fictive feeding” behaviours, raising their paws as though they were 
chomping on something.

Hunger had a powerful influence on predatory behaviour – hungry mice were much 
more aggressive in their pursuit. “The system is not just generalised 
aggression,” said De Araujo. “It seems to be related to the animal’s interest 
in obtaining food.”

The same circuits are thought to be closely conserved in the human brain, 
although De Araujo said that the circuitry is more likely to be associated with 
our drive to find food, rather than with anger or the instinct to attack.

“My take on this is that predatory behaviour is more related to food intake 
itself,” he said. “I would be a little hesitant to associate this with 
aggression.”

Professor Candy Rowe, a zoologist at the University of Newcastle, said that 
the research provided a valuable insight into predation, although said it was 
unsurprising that mice have effective predation circuitry in the brain. “Mice 
are often represented as prey - take Tom and Jerry as an example - but in fact 
they are predators themselves, particularly of invertebrates. At this time of 
year, that might include worms or hibernating butterflies,” she said.

Rowe added that in future, scientists hope to gain a better understanding of 
what sensory information triggers pursuit and capture behaviours, and how prey 
might evolve strategies to evade this.

“There may be a tussle between predators and prey, with prey being selected to 
change their appearance so that they don’t trigger these predatory responses, 
and with predators being selected to have neural circuits that help them track 
changes in prey appearance and select the right objects in their environment to 
chase and capture,” she said.
 