
Nicola Sturgeon has told the Scottish parliament that the devolved government 
would explore the possibility of giving women fromNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> access to abortions in 
Scotland’s health service free of charge.

Responding to a question from Green party MSP Patrick Harvie on Thursday, the 
first minister said: “I am happy to explore with the NHS what the situation is 
now in terms of the ability of women from Northern Ireland to access safe and 
legal abortion in NHSScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and 
whether any improvements can be made.

“Like Patrick Harvie, I believe that women should have the right to choose, 
within the limits that are currently set down in law, and that that right 
should be defended. When a woman opts to have an abortion – I stress that that 
is never, ever an easy decision for any woman – the procedure should be 
available in a safe and legal way.”

The health service has so far refused to pay for abortions for women from 
Northern Ireland who travel to Britain for terminations. The procedure is only 
available in Northern Ireland’s hospitals when there is a direct threat to the 
mother’s life if the pregnancy continues. In all other cases, it is illegal.

Harvie pointed out that women from Northern Ireland had to fund their own 
private terminations, which can cost from £400 to £2,000.

He asked Sturgeon if she would “agree that the national health service in 
Scotland should be exploring what can be done to ensure that those women are 
able to access abortion in Scotland, if that is where they choose to travel to, 
without facing that kind of unacceptable financial barrier?”


The supreme court in London is currently considering an application from a 
Northern Irish teenager who, as a15-year-old, had to go to England to terminate 
a pregnancy. She is challenging the NHS’s refusal to fund abortions for women 
from Northern Ireland.

Amnesty International welcomed Sturgeon’s offer. Patrick Corrigan, its 
Northern Ireland programme director, said: “Given the utter human rights 
failure of Northern Ireland’s ministers to provide free, safe and legal 
abortion healthcare for women and girls here, we welcome the commitment of 
Scotland’s first minister to explore what can be done viaNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Scotland.


“The UN human rights committee recently ruled that Northern Ireland’s laws 
prohibiting and criminalising abortion constitute a human rights violation. The 
Scottish government could help lessen the harsh financial impact of that 
violation by allowing women from Northern Ireland to access abortions free of 
charge on the NHS.”


Corrigan said Sturgeon’s offer of help should not, however, allow Northern 
Irish politicians to do nothing on the question of abortion. “While this would 
be a welcome and helpful step, it is no substitute for the Northern Ireland 
executive putting its own house in order with respect to significant reform of 
our scandalous abortion laws,” he said.

“The fact that Scotland’s first minister is now exploring what she can do to 
help women and girls from Northern Ireland is an indictment of the failure of 
Northern Ireland own’s first minister, executive colleagues and the assembly.”


Last November, a high court judge ruled that Northern Ireland’s abortion laws 
violated the rights of women and girls in cases of fatal foetal abnormalities 
or where a pregnancy was the result of a sexual crime.


An estimated 2,000 women a year have to raise the money to travel to private 
English clinics and hospitals from Northern Ireland to have terminations.


However, there is strong opposition across the floor of the Northern Ireland 
assembly to liberalising the province’s strict anti-abortion laws. TheAbortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> Act 1967 was never extended to 
Northern Ireland and an attempt to ease the law to include cases of fatal 
foetal abnormalities and pregnancy via sexual crime was rejected earlier this 
year.

Genevieve Edwards, director of policy at Marie Stopes, said: “I’m delighted 
they’re going to look at this in Scotland and I’d hope NHS England would 
consider following suit and mitigating, in part, this huge inequality for women 
in Northern Ireland by funding their treatment.

“Of course, women also face travel costs, and the additional upset of having 
to travel outside their country often at very short notice, for a procedure 
which is available on the NHS to every woman in England, Scotland and Wales.


“Ultimately, politicians in Stormont hold the power, and the responsibility, 
to make a reality of women’s reproductive rights in Northern Ireland. But until 
then, I’m delighted to see politicians in other parts of the UK stepping up to 
the plate.”

 