
Nicola Sturgeon has announced that the Scottish government will move to 
formally join the next legal battle over MPs’ right to vote onarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> after the British 
government’s defeat in the high court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
 last week.

The Brexit case will be heard at the supreme court over the course of four 
days between 5 and 8 December. The Welsh government has already declared its 
intention to intervene in the case.


All 11 justices on the court will sit on the panel hearing the case – an 
unprecedented number. The panel will be chaired by the supreme court president, 
David Neuberger. Permission to appeal has been formally granted to the 
Westminster government.

The four-day hearing will be broadcast live by the court. Judgment will be 
reserved. It is expected to be published in January. Appeals by Northern 
Ireland groups, arguing that parliament and the assembly in Stormont should 
ratify the triggering of Brexit, may also be joined to the supreme court case.


Sturgeon confirmed that Scotland’s lord advocate would lodge a formal 
application to intervene in the UK government’s supreme court appeal against 
last Thursday’s unexpected high court ruling, which stated that MPs needed to 
vote on triggeringarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/article-50-brexit-debate-britain-eu>
 to begin the process of leaving the EU.

Brexit plans in disarray as high court rules parliament must have its say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
At a regular press briefing at Bute House, in Edinburgh, the first minister 
said Holyrood should also be formally consulted on the decision, and accused 
Theresa May’s government of “seeking to bypass the Scottish parliament and take 
steps that will involve fundamental changes to the devolution settlement with 
no proper scrutiny here in Scotland”.

This would mean Holyrood voting on a legislative consent motion, under the 
parliamentary convention which requires that Holyrood agree to any changes in 
its powers and responsibilities. This does not amount to Holyrood having a veto 
on triggering article 50.

Sturgeon said that, regardless of the legal outcome, politically she believed 
there should be a legislative consent motion before Holyrood. “It strikes right 
at the heart of the devolution settlement. I believe as a matter of politics, 
of fairness and respect to the devolution settlement, it is inconceivable that 
the UK government would try to ignore the opinion of the Scottish government.

“It would be disrespecting the whole devolution settlement and the place that 
that convention has always had in the devolution settlement for a decision of 
this magnitude and with this degree of impact on our devolved responsibilities 
to be taken without the Scottish parliament being consulted.”

She said she believed members of both the Welsh and Northern Irish governments 
would take similar views of their own parliaments.

“The Scottish government is clear that triggering article 50 will directly 
affect devolved interests and rights inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>,” she said. “And triggering article 
50 will inevitably deprive Scottish people and Scottish businesses of rights 
and freedoms which they currently enjoy.


“It simply cannot be right that those rights can be removed by the UK 
government on the say-so of a prime minister without parliamentary debate, 
scrutiny or consent. So legislation should be required at Westminster and the 
consent of the Scottish parliament should be sought before article 50 is 
triggered.”

The SNP leader said the lord advocate – Scotland’s most senior law officer – 
would lodge the application as soon as the UK government lodged its own appeal. 
Having been granted leave to intervene, she said, the lord advocate would then 
set out the relevant legal arguments. The Scottish government had legal counsel 
attending the previous article 50 hearing throughout as an observer.

Sturgeon said the intervention was “not an attempt to frustrate the will of 
the people of England and Wales. But it is part of our overall attempt to 
protect the will of the Scottish people. My priority is to seek to protect 
Scotland’s interests and part of that is to protect the voice of the Scottish 
parliament.”

She added: “Let me be clear: I recognise and respect the right of England and 
Wales to leave theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. But 
the democratic wishes of the people of Scotland and the national parliament of 
Scotland cannot be brushed aside as if they do not matter.


“The prime minister said that on 23 June people across the UK had voted with, 
in her words, ‘emphatic clarity’ when they voted by a margin of four points to 
leave the EU. The margin for remain in Scotland was 24 points: a far more 
emphatic and clear result.

 “So the prime minister needs to live up to her promise to treat Scotland as 
an equal partner in the United Kingdom and listen to the will of the people of 
Scotland.”

Asked about the shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer’s Guardian article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/07/keir-starmer-labour-will-not-block-article-50-but-must-know-plan>
 on Monday in which he said Labour MPs would not vote to block article 50 in 
the Commons, Sturgeon said she remained hopeful that there was potential to 
build a coalition in Westminster against a hard Brexit.

She said: “In fairness to him, to everybody, we don’t yet know what the 
precise terms of a vote on article 50 would look like. Would it be a 
straightforward vote on triggering it or would there be more substance 
associated with that?”

She said Starmer’s comments on the need for “special arrangements” for 
devolved administrations were encouraging. “I don’t believe there is a majority 
either in the country or the House of Commons for a hard Brexit,” she said.
 