
A Scottish minister has admitted that Scotland’s flagship private finance 
programme has been called into doubt by stricter EU rules on public spending. 
Keith Brown, Scotland’s transport secretary, told MSPs on Wednesday that 
tougher EU statistics agency regulations “brought into question” his 
government’s multi-billion-pound programme to use private financiers and 
contractors to build new roads, hospitals and offices at increased cost to 
taxpayers.

An investigation by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/scottish-auditors-to-investigate-9bn-private-finance-bill>
 andthe Ferret <https://theferret.scot/probe-private-finance-schemes-scotland/> 
revealed on Wednesday that the Scottish government was expected to lose £932m 
in public borrowing because the Eurostat rules now required public agencies to 
include private sector deals in government accounts. The Scottish government 
had hoped that using private financing would help it to avoid doing so, while 
allowing it to borrow more from the UK Treasury.


Scottish Labour MSPs tabled a motion at Holyrood calling for a parliamentary 
inquiry into the disclosures by the Guardian and the Ferret.

Brown told Holyrood’s rural economy committee that ministers were reviewing 
their investment strategy, implying that they may scrap or greatly reduce their 
use of the non-profit distribution model (NPD) of private financing.

The UK government increased its budget for new infrastructure and buildings by 
£820m last month, allowing ministers to use public money instead of private 
borrowing.


The motion from Neil Findlay, the convenor of Holyrood’s health committee, 
describes the private contracts as “bad for taxpayers and bad for workers”, 
because the private maintenance contracts involved lead to public sector 
employees being replaced.

Derek Mackay, the Scottish finance secretary, told Findlay during economy 
questions at Holyrood that compared with the first PFI schemes, his 
government’s model was “much better at profit-capping, and we have been able to 
accelerate capital infrastructure investment to build schools, hospitals and 
community facilities and undertake other infrastructure projects, which have 
been welcomed acrossScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. 


“We have been, and will continue to be, perfectly transparent about how those 
projects are delivered.”


Five major public projects with a total construction cost of £932m – the 
Aberdeen western peripheral route bypass, three new hospitals and a new 
headquarters for the Scottish blood transfusion service – have fallen foul of 
the tougher Eurostat regulations.

Scottish ministers now have to set aside the equivalent sum from their £3bn 
borrowing allocation from the Treasury for public infrastructure projects to 
ensure those construction costs are fully accounted for in public budgets.

That will prevent ministers from using that public money for other projects at 
far lower interest rates than that being charged by the private sector. 
Meanwhile, the private contractors will be charging commercial rates for 
running and repairing those facilities, adding to the bill.

The 36-mile Aberdeen bypass has a headline construction or capital cost of 
£469m, but its 30-year private maintenance contract, debt repayments and 
management costs mean the full bill to the public sector will reach £1.45bn by 
2048.

Scotland’s leading economics thinkthank, the Fraser of Allander Institute, 
forecast on Wednesday that the Scottish government would have to set aside all 
of next year’s £450m borrowing allocation to cover that bill.The institute said 
<https://fraserofallander.org/2016/12/14/the-outlook-for-capital-borrowing-in-the-scottish-budget/#more-1158>
 that the Eurostat rules had “fundamentally changed the landscape [and] thrown 
a particularly large spanner in the works” for the Scottish government.

The institute said the rule changes had come into force after the contracts 
were placed. “Whether people agree with the rights or wrongs of the accounting 
rules, it is clearly a risk when designing new, innovative funding mechanisms. 
NPD programmes have a number of advantages, but they can be more expensive to 
finance than traditional public infrastructure projects.”

Other economists insist that the Scottish government and its private financing 
agency, the Scottish Futures Trust, should have known that Eurostat was going 
to tighten up its rules. Prof David Heald, an expert in public sector 
accounting at the University of Glasgow, said it was “entirely predictable” 
that these projects would fall foul of the EU statistics agency rule change. It 
had been widely expected for several years before it came into force in 2014.

“There’s political relabelling for politically acceptable reasons going on, 
which is recurrent, and there’s obviously a game with the standards,” Heald 
said. “My concern is that once people start playing games with the standards, 
they start losing focus on what is good value.”
 