
Moral panic about the impact of new technologies on our behaviour and 
development is not new. Socrates railed against the dangers of writing for fear 
that it would nurture “forgetfulness in the learners’ souls, because they will 
not use their memories.” One source of contemporary anxiety is “screen time”. 
Recently,a letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/25/screen-based-lifestyle-harms-health-of-children>
 signed by a group of writers, psychologists and charity heads raised concerns 
that childhood health and wellbeing in the UK is declining, in part due to 
“increasingly screen-based lifestyles.” The signatories argued that the policy 
response to these concerns, first raised over a decade ago, has been 
half-hearted and ineffective.

As a group of scientists from different countries and academic fields with 
research expertise and experience in screen time, child development and 
evidence-based policy, we are deeply concerned by the underlying message of 
this letter. In our opinion, we need quality research and evidence to support 
these claims and inform any policy discussion. While we agree that the 
wellbeing of children is a crucial issue and that the impact of screen-based 
lifestyles demands serious investigation, the message that many parents will 
hear is that screens are inherently harmful. This is simplynot supported by 
solid research <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26581738> and evidence 
<http://www.cogitatiopress.com/ojs/index.php/mediaandcommunication/article/view/516>
. Furthermore, theconcept of “screen time” itself is simplistic and arguably 
meaningless <http://www.dart.ed.ac.uk/guardian_letter/>, and the focus on the 
amount of screen use is unhelpful. There is little evidence looking at the 
impact of thecontext of screen use, and the content that children encounter 
when using digital technologies – factors that may have a much greater impact 
than sheer quantity alone.

If the government were to implement guidelines on screen-based technology at 
this point, as the authors of the letter suggest, this would be on the basis of 
little to no evidence. This risks the implementation of unnecessary, 
ineffective or even potentially harmful policies. For guidelines to have a 
meaningful impact, they need to be grounded in robust research evidence and 
acknowledge that children’s health and wellbeing is a complex issue 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ped.12447/full> affected by many 
other factors, such as socioeconomic status, relational poverty, and family 
environment – all of which are likely to be more relevant for children’s health 
and well-being than screens. For example, there is no consistent evidence that 
more screen time leads to less outdoor play; if anything theevidence 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14971190> indicates that screen time 
<https://ijbnpa.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1479-5868-7-66> and physical 
outdoor activity 
<https://ijbnpa.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1479-5868-7-46> are unrelated
 <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3560151/>, and reductions in 
average time spent in outdoor play over time seem to be driven by other 
factors. Policy efforts to increase outdoor play that focus on screen time are 
therefore likely to be ineffective.

'Needs less shock and more substance': Susan Greenfield's tech claims 
criticised | Pete Etchells
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2015/aug/13/susan-greenfield-bmj-editorial-digital-technology-video-games-need-less-shock-and-more-substance>
Any simplistic approach to issues facing childhood health and wellbeing is 
inappropriate, and a focus on screen time is not evidence-based. Divisive and 
scaremongering rhetoric that takes a casual approach to evidence is unhelpful 
at best and, in our opinion, damaging. Digital technologies are part of our 
children’s lives, necessarily so in the 21st century. We agree that further 
research is necessary, and urge the government and research funding bodies to 
invest in this, so that clear policy and betterguidelines for parents 
<http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/66927/1/Policy%20Brief%2017-%20Families%20%20Screen%20Time.pdf>
 can be built on evidence, not hyperbole and opinion.

Dr Pete Etchells Senior lecturer in biological psychology, Bath Spa University
Dr Sue Fletcher-Watson Chancellor’s fellow, Centre for Clinical Brain 
Sciences, Edinburgh University
Prof. Sarah-Jayne Blakemore Professor of cognitive neuroscience, UCL
Prof. Chris Chambers Head of brain stimulation, CUBRIC, Cardiff University
Dr Daniel Kardefelt-Winther Postdoctoral researcher, department of clinical 
neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet
Dr Kathryn Mills Postdoctoral researcher in developmental social neuroscience, 
University of Oregon
Prof. Marcus Munafò Professor of biological psychology, University of Bristol
Dr Adam Rutherford Honorary research fellow, UCL
Prof. Miranda Wolpert Director of the evidence based practice unit, UCL/Anna 
Freud National Centre for Children and Families
Prof. Essi Viding Co-director of the developmental risk and resilience unit, 
UCL
Prof. Steven Pinker Johnstone family professor, department of psychology, 
Harvard University
Dr Suzi Gage Lecturer, department of psychological sciences, University of 
Liverpool
Dr Richard D. Morey Senior lecturer, school of psychology, Cardiff University
Prof. Paul Fletcher Bernard Wolfe professor of health neuroscience, University 
of Cambridge, UK
Dr Catherine Sebastian Senior lecturer in psychology, Royal Holloway, 
University of London
Prof. Daniel J. Simons Professor of psychology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign
Prof. Uta Frith Emeritus professor of cognitive development, UCL
Prof. Sonia Livingstone department of media and communications, LSE
Dr Andrew K Przybylski Research fellow, University of Oxford
Prof. Mark Griffiths Professor of behavioural addiction, Nottingham Trent 
University
Dr Stuart J. Ritchie Postdoctoral fellow, University of Edinburgh
Prof. Chris Ferguson Head of the psychotechnology lab, Stetson University
Dr. Sarah Rose, Lecturer in psychology, and Director of the Children’s Lab, 
Staffordshire University
Dr Gerome Breen Reader in neuropsychiatric & translational genetics, MRC 
social genetic and developmental psychiatry centre, KCL Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology <https://www.theguardian.com/science/psychology> and Neuroscience
Prof. Lydia Plowman Chair in education and technology, University of Edinburgh
Prof. Helen McConachie Professor of child clinical psychology, Newcastle 
University
Prof. Peter Fonagy Chief executive, Anna Freud National Centre for Children 
and Families & division of psychology and language sciences, UCL
Dr Duncan Astle Programme leader, MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 
Cambridge
Prof. Liz Pellicano Director of the centre for research in autism and 
education, UCL Institute of Education, University College London
Dr Jennifer Wills Senior educational psychologist, DEdPsy, CPsychol, AFBPsS
Anne Scheel Doctoral student, department of psychology, LMU Munich
Dr Rachel Kowert Research psychologist, independent consultant
Dr Vaughan Bell Senior clinical lecturer and clinical psychologist, UCL
Prof. Dorothy Bishop Professor of developmental neuropsychology, University of 
Oxford
Prof. Kate Nation Professor of experimental psychology, University of Oxford
Dr Linda K. Kaye Senior lecturer in psychology, Edge Hill University
Prof. Eric-Jan Wagenmakers Professor for neurocognitive modeling, University 
of Amsterdam
Prof. Dorothy Miell Professor of social psychology, University of Edinburgh, 
former president of the British Psychological Society
Dr Malte Elson Postdoctoral researcher, department of education, Ruhr 
University Bochum
Dr Judith Good Reader in informatics, creative technology Group, University of 
Sussex
Dr Anne-Lise Goddings Postdoctoral clinical fellow, UCL Institute of Child 
Health
Dr Simon Bignell Senior lecturer in psychology, University of Derby
Prof. Nicola Botting Professor of developmental disorders, City University of 
London
Prof. Hal Pashler Distinguished professor of psychology, University of 
California, San Diego
Dr Christian K. Tamnes Senior researcher, department of psychology, University 
of Oslo
Dr Helen J. Wall Senior lecturer in psychology, Edge Hill University
Dr Victoria Simms Lecturer in psychology, Ulster University
Dr Kathrin Cohen Kadosh Lecturer in cognitive neuroscience, University of 
Surrey, UK
Prof. Geoff Bird Head of the social interaction lab, University of Oxford
Dr Jason Chein Director of brain and cognitive sciences, department of 
psychology, Temple University
Dr Simon C. Hunter Senior lecturer in psychology, University of Strathclyde, UK
Dr Lauren E. Sherman Postdoctoral fellow, department of psychology, Temple 
University, Philadelphia, PA
Dr Kirstie Whitaker Postdoctoral researcher, University of Cambridge, UK
Dr Allen Copenhaver Assistant professor of criminal justice, Columbia, KY
Prof. Helen Pain Professor of interactive learning environments, University of 
Edinburgh
Dr Antonia Hamilton Reader in social neuroscience, UCL
Dr Holly Joseph Associate professor of language education and literacy 
development, University of Reading
Prof. Nicholas Allen Ann Swindells professor of clinical psychology, 
University of Oregon
Prof. Kevin Mitchell Associate professor of genetics and neuroscience, Trinity 
College Dublin, Ireland
Dr Rory T. Devine Research associate in developmental psychology, centre for 
family research, department of psychology, University of Cambridge
Prof. Candice Odgers Professor of public policy and psychology and 
neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC
Prof. Maggie Snowling Professor of psychology and president of St. John’s 
College, Oxford
Dr Tim Dalgleish MRC programme leader scientist, MRC Cognition and Brain 
Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK
Prof. Stephen Houghton Director, centre for child & adolescent related 
disorders, The University of Western Australia
Prof. Caroline Rowland Co-director, ESRC LuCiD centre, department of 
psychological sciences, University of Liverpool
Prof. Alison Gopnik Professor of psychology, University of California at 
Berkeley
Prof. Stephen Wood Professor of clinical & translational neuroscience, Orygen, 
the national centre of excellence in youth mental health, & centre for youth 
mental health, University of Melbourne
Dr Carol Joinson Senior lecturer in developmental psychology, centre for child 
and adolescent health, school of social and community medicine, University of 
Bristol
Prof. Denis Mareschal Centre for brain and cognitive development, Birkbeck 
University of London
Dr Mairéad MacSweeney Director of the deafness, cognition and language 
research centre, UCL
Dr Lucy Foulkes Research associate, developmental lab, Institute of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, UCL
Dr John Colwell Principal lecturer, department of psychology, University of 
Westminster, London
Prof. Kevin Durkin School of psychological sciences and health, University of 
Strathclyde
Prof. Patrick Markey Director of the interpersonal research laboratory, d
epartment of psychology, Villanova University
Prof. Thorsten Quandt Professor of online communication, University of Münster
Prof. Faraneh Vargha-Khadem Head, cognitive neuroscience and neuropsychiatry 
section, University College London Great Ormond Street Institute of Child 
Health, London
Dr Nandita Vijayakumar Postdoctoral researcher, developmental social 
neuroscience lab, University of Oregon
Dr Leah Somerville Associate professor of psychology and center for brain 
sciences, Harvard University
Prof. Mark H Johnson Centre for brain & cognitive development, Birkbeck, 
University of London
Dr Joni Holmes MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit
Dr Jennifer Pfeifer Associate professor of psychology, University of Oregon
 