
Secondary schools in England face the steepest cuts to funding since the 
1970s, according to analysis by theInstitute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/institute-for-fiscal-studies> that 
reveals differences in spending of nearly £20,000 per pupil during their time 
in the classroom.

The thinktank’s figures – which forecast a funding cut of 7% per pupil by 2020 
– set off calls by teaching unions for the funding freeze to be relaxed, while 
opposition parties said the government should avoid diverting funds into 
converting all schools into academies as required by the latest education white 
paper.

“This backs up what our members have been saying. With flat cash education 
spending at a time of rising costs, school budgets are being pushed to breaking 
point,” said Russell Hobby, the general secretary of the National Association 
of Head Teachers.

The IFS researchers said that in real terms school budgets will still be about 
50% higher than they were in 2001, before the last Labour government’s 
substantial investment in schools.

Lucy Powell, the shadow education secretary, said: “Parents will be very 
surprised to learn that schools’ budgets face real cuts after the prime 
minister personally promised to protect their budgets at the last election. 
These cuts will have a huge impact on standards and outcomes.

“This government’s costly reorganisation of our schools system, forcing every 
primary and secondary school to become an academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/every-english-school-to-become-an-academy-ministers-to-announce>
 by 2022, will remove even more money, time and effort away from where the 
focus in schools should be – on raising standards.”

London and inner city pupils could lose out over changes to school funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/07/london-and-inner-city-pupils-could-lose-out-over-changes-to-school-funding>
A Conservative spokesperson responded: “Lucy Powell obviously can’t remember 
her party’s election pledge on school spending, which failed to take account of 
a rapid increase in pupil numbers, meaning they would have overseen a 
significant cut in the amount of money schools would have received per child.

“And the Labour party’s lack of financial credibility and economic illiteracy 
would have put funding for schools at risk.

 “By contrast, despite taking the difficult decision to reduce the deficit and 
making savings across Whitehall, we have been able to protect the schools 
budget in real terms, so that as pupil numbers increase, so too will the amount 
of money in our schools.”

The IFS data for the first time estimated the spending on a state school pupil 
from entering reception at the age of four to taking GCSEs at age 16: an 
average of £57,000 over the course of their school career to year 11.

However, the IFS also found wide variation caused by the current local 
authority funding formula. While 10% of pupils taking their GCSEs had less than 
£49,000 spent on them, a more fortunate one in 10 had more than £67,000 spent 
on their education by the government.

The Department for Education has launched a consultation to develop a fair 
funding formula by the end of the parliament. The IFS researchers warned that 
the arrival of a new formula could cause considerable disruption for schools, 
although details were not yet available.

“The introduction of a national funding formula for schools in England looks 
set to be one of the most radical shakeups of school funding in at least the 
past 30 years,” said Luke Sibieta, the co-author of the report.

“Replacing 152 different formulae with one single, simple formula will 
inevitably lead to substantial changes in funding across schools and, for good 
or bad, will almost completely remove local authorities from the school funding 
system.”

According to the report, much variation has been driven by targeting resources 
at disadvantaged pupils.

Policies such as the pupil premium, which grants schools around £1,000 a year 
for each pupil qualifying for free school meals, have increased spending in the 
most deprived schools.

'Perfect storm' has state schools struggling to balance the books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/06/perfect-storm-has-state-schools-struggling-to-balance-the-books>
In 2013-14, schools with the highest proportion of pupils eligible for free 
school meals spent 31% more per pupil compared with schools with the most 
well-off pupils – up from about 15% in the late 1990s.

A DfE spokesperson said: “This report highlights the historical unfair local 
differences in school funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/21/george-osborne-end-arbitrary-unfair-school-funding-forumla>
 that we are determined to eradicate so that every young person can realise 
their potential, irrespective of their background.

“At the budget, we announced that there will be an extra £500m over the next 
three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/16/osborne-puts-500m-towards-national-funding-formula-for-schools>
, over and above that per pupil protection, to speed the introduction of the 
national funding formula. And we have committed to continuing the pupil premium 
– worth £2.5bn this year – giving schools significant extra funding to raise 
the attainment of disadvantaged pupils.”

 John Pugh, the Liberal Democrat education spokesman, said: “The government 
should be committing to protect education funding from cradle to college – not 
focusing on their disastrous plans to overhaul school ownership which will 
increase pressure on school budgets while doing nothing to drive up standards.”
 