
It’s year 8 parents’ evening. The dining hall is alive with the buzz of 
conscientious parents ready to hear how their children are getting on, and 
whether the 13 years of love, worry and encouragement they’ve invested in their 
offspring are bearing fruit.


I’ve got back-to-back five minute appointments, and halfway through the 
evening a queue has built up. As a mother and daughter get up to leave, my 
stomach drops. Uh-oh. Blond hair, long face, pointy chin. Next is either Tom or 
Tim … but I can’t tell them apart unless they’re in the classroom.

Tom sits in the middle of the room and gets on with his learning. He’s near 
the top of the class and deserves to see his parents beaming with pride at a 
good report. Tim sits in the front and messes about, and once attempted to 
fling glue on to my ceiling. I want to tell his parents that he could do a lot 
better if he only took a more positive attitude towards his learning.

“Hello,” I say with a warm smile, and introduce myself. I’m hoping his mum 
will introduce herself in return with “I’m Tom/Tim’s mum” but no, she just 
shakes my hand with a friendly “hello” and the two take a seat. Time for 
another tactic. I scan my appointment sheet with rising panic.

Secret Teacher: I can't help but judge on parents' evening
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/oct/03/secret-teacher-judge-parents-evening>
“I can’t see your name on here … Can you find it and tick it off for me, 
please?” I hand the sheet to the boy and he shrugs. “Your sheet was completely 
full so I thought I’d just come anyway. It’s not on there.”

I’m going to have to guess and hope for the best. Mother looks calm, like she 
hasn’t had a string of teachers sugar-coating their criticisms of her pride and 
joy all night. It’s got to be the good kid. I dive in and say: “Well, Tom is 
doing really well in science this year.” The two smile and exchange pleased 
glances. I’ve guessed right. Phew.

It’s not that I don’t care about Tom or the other 31 kids in his class. It’s 
just that I see them only one hour per week, and I’ve got a second year 8 class 
as well. I share both classes with another teacher, because all key stage 3 
students get timetabled last, after the A-level and GCSE groups have been 
assigned to specialist teachers. I used to share Tom’s class with a very 
experienced colleague, until he was redeployed to cover the year 11 class of a 
teacher who left. Tom’s other two hours per week of science are now taught by a 
long-term supply teacher.

The rest of my meeting with Tom’s mum goes well. She’s pleased her son is 
making progress, and he’s pleased to have his hard work recognised. They are 
about to go. Then, “Just one more thing,” the mum says. “It’s about his 
homework. He always says he hasn’t got any, and I’m not sure if I should 
believe him. Is he doing it?”

 I shoot a glance at the kid. “Yes, that’s right,” I say. “I haven’t set him 
much homework lately, but what I’ve set, he’s always done. He’s a good student.”

Tom and I are in cahoots now – he hasn’t had any homework from me in at least 
half a term. I kept meaning to, but I just haven’t had time to organise 
printing the sheets for his class – much less collecting it and marking it. 
Thankfully, he doesn’t give me away, and mum leaves feeling positive, 
bamboozled into believing her son is getting a quality education.

The truth is, Tom’s class is my lowest priority. My performance as a teacher 
is judged completely on exam results. Since the move away from national 
curriculum levels, it’s difficult even to judge if Tom is where he should be, 
and I haven’t got the time to worry about him. He seems OK, and I guess we’ll 
find out when he gets to year 10 and starts his GCSEs.

Ofsted recently published a report about students such as Tom. It’s called “
Key stage 3: the wasted years? 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-3-the-wasted-years>” and 
it’s bang on the money. It’s not that we secondary school teachers don’t care 
about our younger students – of course we do. But if your performance is judged 
completely on exam groups and you’re creaking under the strain of an 
unsustainable workload of 60-plus hours a week, you’re going to cut corners, 
and it’s going to be in key stage 3.

It’s got worse in recent years, as the teacher shortage forces schools to 
allocate exam groups to the experienced and qualified staff, leaving key stage 
3 to supply teachers or non-specialists. The ever-increasing workload causes 
many teachers regularly to ask their key stage 3 students to self- or 
peer-assess their tests, further diminishing the accuracy of any tracking of 
progress.

Sadly, all of this is only kicking the can down the road, because when these 
kids do their GCSEs in a few years’ time, they won’t necessarily be engaged 
with education after three years of lacklustre teaching. Even if they are, they 
haven’t been given a solid foundation to build on.

Secret Teacher: parents, stop undermining us in front of your children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/feb/13/secret-teacher-parents-stop-undermining-us-in-front-of-your-children>
This is already clear in national statistics. In primary schools, most kids do 
well, but by the time they finish their GCSEs, a huge gap has opened up between 
the rich and the poor. Many students who progressed well throughout their 
younger years, fall far short of where they should have been.

The solution for kids like Tom is easy. Teachers need more time to plan 
exciting lessons and thoroughly assess students’ work. If their workload was 
addressed, the teacher shortage problem would disappear.

It isn’t good enough to warehouse Tom for three years, entertaining him in the 
classroom for an hour a week but scarcely thinking of him when he’s not in 
front of me, doing only the bare minimum to keep the class ticking over, 
sparing the majority of my effort for the older students. But I haven’t many 
options. I’m the one facing the parents, and doing the whitewashing.

Names in this article have been changed.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 