
This term I had the most soul destroying conversation of my career. I was told 
by my ever supportive line manager that although the school wanted to award my 
pay rise, based on the hard work I had put in last year, the policy would not 
allow them to because the results in my department were not good enough. 
Instead, I would have to submit additional evidence, on top of the documents 
I’d already put forward to showcase the hours of work I had put in.

I understand performance-related pay is being rolled out across the country 
and, to a certain extent, I agree that any salary raise I get needs to be based 
on the fact that I do my job properly. So much rides on me doing a good job and 
there are a very small number of teachers who aren’t and are being unfair to 
their students.

I wasn’t despairing for my own career progression or bank balance; it just 
made me feel like the job was endless and that success was not a possibility. I 
was at a loss as to how I could work even harder than I did last year to 
improve student results. I can count on one hand the number of evenings I did 
not take work home in the whole of last year. It was such standard practice, my 
partner imposed a “work ban” on at least one evening every week. I always said 
no to plans in the week and shied away from weekend events as they would eat 
into my planning/marking time. The sad thing is that this is normal for many 
teachers today. But what can we do if giving everything we have still isn’t 
enough?

In the week after the conversation with my line manager, I was watching an 
episode fromChannel 4’s Educating Cardiff 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/educating-cardiff> (I clearly cannot get 
enough of our educational system) when I found the solution to my problem. Mr 
Hennessy, a male teacher in the show, stole my teacher heart. It was not 
because he can roll out outstanding lessons all day every day, or because he 
gets the best results in the school, but because of the time, effort and 
compassion he gives to the students. Don’t get me wrong, he’s not unusual – 
every day I see exhausted, overworked and disillusioned teachers doing 
everything they can to enrich, support and challenge their pupils. But he 
reminded me of what’s important in the job – the students.

It was then I realised I needed to find my own measures of success to bring 
back my faith in my own capability and restore my love for my work. I will 
always fail to understand the measures of success that our government and 
schools use because they do not take into account some of the most important 
aspects of my job. So, here is my criteria. I am successful at my job when:

 * My students understand the complex material that I present to them in class.
 * I can excite students about a topic they have never given a second thought 
to before. 
 * Students question what I am telling them. 
 * Students leave my classroom discussing what they have learned with me. 
 * Students in my classroom are happy and laughing together, not at each other.
 * A student feels safe to express themselves freely in my classroom. 
 * I see my students supporting one another with their work. 
 * A student is proud of the progress they have made. 
 * I can comfort, support and get a smile out of a student going through the 
most traumatic of life experiences at too young an age. 
 * I instil confidence and self-esteem in the most fragile and vulnerable of 
my students. 
 * My students feel successful. 
My own measures of success are based on my students because they are why I do 
this job and why I still love it. These measures are difficult to remember in 
an environment consumed by data, paperwork, observations, inspections and 
unrealistic expectations, but they were well worth writing down. I would 
encourage any teacher to do the same.

On the last day of the Christmas term I found a letter in my pigeon hole 
informing me that I was being granted my pay rise after all (the additional 
evidence must have made the difference). But even that cannot make me forget 
the conversation and the impact it had on my career enjoyment and aspirations. 
I now know I am working in a sector where the systems and expectations mean I 
will always be seen to be “failing” in some respect. But when I look at my own 
measures of success, I know I am damn good at my job and that is why I will 
show up at work every day.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 