
As part of their English Literature course, my GCSE students are studying A 
Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens. I love the time I get to spend with them, 
unpicking the messages of the novel and considering how they might have applied 
to Victorian society.

Secret Teacher: there's no place for luxury on my Christmas list – all I need 
is pens and wine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/dec/19/secret-teacher-no-place-luxury-christmas-list-pens-wine>
But recently, when we started to focus on the character of Mr Fezziwig, I 
realised that it’s my school’s senior management team who would benefit most 
from Dickens’ lessons.


My students were able to understand quickly that Fezziwig’s festive parties 
and cheerful, friendly demeanour serve as a point of comparison to Scrooge’s 
miserly mismanagement of his long-suffering clerk, Bob Cratchit. My students 
were also able to identify that Fezziwig’s caring, patient and celebratory 
approach towards his staff resulted in both happiness and increased 
productivity.


My students made the connection that, in comparison, Scrooge’s disdain for 
Cratchit meant that the put-upon employee spent his energy on trying to be able 
to leave work as fast as possible, rather than ensuring that his job was 
finished to the highest standard. Cratchit is described as being invisible to 
Scrooge, despite working in the room next door.


My bosses could learn a lot from Fezziwig. Due to curriculum changes and a 
comparatively weaker cohort, the current data is not projecting a dazzling 
outcome for the all-important results day next summer. The answer from above 
seems to be – as it is in so many schools across the country – for teachers to 
work harder, longer and under more pressure than ever.


The results simply must improve, even if outside factors make this logically 
implausible. This responsibility is passed from the senior management team down 
to individual class teachers, but – oddly – away from the students. If my data 
projects a downward turn in results, I must not be working hard enough. My 
colleagues and I have responded to this pressure by setting more homework, 
completing more marking and running more booster sessions than ever before.


Secret Teacher: do they know it's Christmas?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/dec/07/secret-teacher-schools-christmas>
Like Scrooge, the leaders in my school have forgotten to reflect on their own 
past experiences. They seem to have lost sight of what it was like to juggle a 
full teaching timetable. They seem to believe that marking cannot be a source 
of teacher anxiety, because it always gets completed; extra parents’ evenings 
must be a welcome opportunity, because staff always attend them. Every time a 
new initiative arises from the headteacher’s office, it is in addition to what 
came before, without allowance for the extra hours or energy spent. Like 
Scrooge, these leaders prefer to spend their time in the counting house 
(otherwise known as Excel spreadsheet meetings) rather than engage with those 
around them.


This fuels a them-and-us culture, moving further and further from the “family 
feel” of Fezziwig’s staff (as wisely identified by my students). We are told 
that we are all part of the staff “team”, of course, but when it comes to 
making sure that students’ reach their (sometimes ridiculous) target grades, 
that is a personal problem.


My headteacher’s Ghost of Christmas Present could show staff marking first 
thing in the morning and last thing at night, or planning lessons while family 
members complain about being ignored. It could highlight the conversations I 
have with my husband, where he uses the phrase “work-life balance” and I have 
to restrain myself from laughing at the thought. It could show the six-day 
weeks that have recently started leaking into seven in the desperate hope that 
I will be adequately prepared for the week ahead.


The future looks bleak, just as it did for Scrooge. The story of demoralised 
staff, working themselves to exhaustion, is being repeated across the country. 
At my school, people have already begun to vote with their feet and suitable 
replacements are proving difficult to come by. Our warnings, like those of 
Marley’s Ghost, are falling on deaf ears.

Secret Teacher: an early Christmas present from Ofsted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/dec/14/ofsted-inspection-christmas-secret-teacher>
As bad as things are for us, I worry most for the children in our care. For 
many, we are role models, the only adults they can depend on and confide in. An 
overworked, anxiety-ridden teacher is not going to set a good example.

The Ghost of Christmas Past could show that it didn’t used to be like this – I 
can still remember when things were different. But now, as a new academy, 
management is so desperate to show their positive impact that nothing will 
stand in their way.

Like Scrooge, something needs to change. My colleagues and I want to support 
our students and help them to develop as learners and people, but we must first 
be supported and valued. Cratchit, I salute you, but I do not know how much 
longer I can handle living like you. Let’s hope the ghosts make a visit to my 
school soon.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 