
As soon as John* became a deputy head it was clear that he did not have the 
skills to deal with his team. He was an outstanding teacher, but couldn’t 
handle his new role and became autocratic. He now dictates how his staff should 
work, stands over them, checks every little thing they do and undermines them 
at every opportunity.

Secret Teacher: don't let spineless school managers drag you down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/mar/07/secret-teacher-school-managers>
As with many excellent teachers, he is a terrible manager. Once he complained 
about a display outside a classroom. I thought it was a good example of quality 
work, but John disagreed, criticising the teacher in front of her teaching 
assistants (TAs) – and me – for not double mounting and allowing the “messy” 
work of a child with special educational needs to be displayed. He demanded 
that it be taken down and put up properly, leaving the teacher visibly shaken. 
I helped her re-do the work; it didn’t look better, but it was done to his 
specifications, and so was deemed acceptable.

Even if it was a shoddy effort – which it wasn’t – speaking to a colleague in 
such a derogatory manner was unprofessional. A quiet word, or suggesting that a 
TA who was particularly good at displays might be able to give some pointers 
would have been a better course of action. John is now a headteacher.

This is not an isolated case. Often teachers who are outstanding 
practitioners, producing amazing lessons and getting great results, can be 
completely out of their depth when promoted to management.

I’ve been a key stage leader and a primary practitioner for years, but before 
that I managed a team of 200 in a large organisation. I had a lot of training 
in personnel and management issues, whiling away many hours investigating 
theories of team building and leadership, which stood me in good stead for 
leading a team of teachers.

But most managers in teaching haven’t had training in how to give positive 
feedback, they don’t know how to build a team or how to get the best out of 
people. They do not realise that there is more to leading a team than making 
sureOfsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> is happy and results 
are good. This permeates up into the senior leadership team, who do nothing 
about outstanding teachers who bully their staff and adopt an unprofessional 
approach because they are getting the results the school needs and ensuring 
their students’ progress. If the school data dashboard looks great, the fact 
that some of the less well-paid staff are not happy is not a priority.

My friend Lucy* is a TA. Her boss is an outstanding teacher, but she couldn’t 
manage her way out of a paper bag. She expects the TAs to stay late to complete 
tasks over and above the hours for which they are paid and makes pointed 
comments if they don’t. She has never said anything positive about Lucy’s work, 
only criticised her time management and lack of commitment to the job because 
she goes home at 4pm, which is when she is paid until.

Her behaviour has taken its toll on her team: she goes through TAs like there 
is no tomorrow. Lucy has gone from being a confident young TA to dreading 
encounters with her manager, and there are frequently tears among the staff in 
her key stage. Alarm bells should be ringing among the senior leaders of this 
school – and yet, because of her excellent results with the children, the 
school has never questioned her on it.

If, as a manager in the private sector, I had had such a rapid turnover of 
staff there would have been serious questions asked at my annual performance 
management review (which incidentally, was always pay-related) and I may well 
have found myself not only failing to receive a bonus or pay rise, but worse 
still, being taken down the competency route, however good I was at the rest of 
my job.

Secret Teacher: new leaders sparked a staff exodus, but I won't run
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/sep/19/secret-teacher-new-leaders-staff-exodus-run>
Part of the problem lies with the structure of the teaching profession. The 
only way to progress is to go into management. You can become a specialist 
leader in education (SLE) for the kudos, but that’s actually about developing 
leadership skills not – as the old advanced skills teachers were – about 
developing outstanding classroom teaching. There are some outstanding teachers 
who know their skills lie in the classroom and choose to remain there without 
taking on the extra responsibilities (and pay) of managing staff. But there are 
others, who come across brilliantly at interview and, of course, in the 
classroom, where they demonstrate their obvious teaching ability, and who get 
catapulted into positions they can’t handle.

When I worked in the private sector, promotion to managerial positions was a 
robust and difficult process. We weren’t just interviewed or observed doing our 
job, we had role-play activities and different scenarios to handle. The 
interviewing process for the final job I did involved conducting a performance 
management review with an employee who was failing in their person management. 
Even when I took the job, I was drilled within an inch of my life on Belbin and 
Myers-Briggs.John Adair’s action-centred leadership 
<http://www.learn-to-be-a-leader.com/john-adair.html> model became my bible. 
But most of all, I had training in how to deal with people, how to build teams 
– not flatten them.


We need to make sure great teachers have the right management training. After 
all, surely promoting happiness among colleagues is a crucial part of being a 
truly outstanding teacher.

*Names have been changed in this article.


Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 