
I suffered a sense of humour failure at 3.15am on day four of our recent 
residential trip. I expect to be up at all hours when taking 60 primary school 
children on a week-long outing – especially when many of them haven’t left home 
before. I expect to be sleep-deprived, in loco-parentis 24/7, dealing with 
everything from homesickness and travel sickness to shampoo leaks and lost 
underwear.

In fact, some of my fondest teacher memories come from residential-trip 
disasters. Like when Daniel mistook his shower gel for suncream and lathered up 
on the beach, when Ava brought five outfits for the disco but none for 
rock-climbing and had to do every activity in a glittery dress, or when we 
discovered Jess was a terrible sleepwalker. It’s all part of the adventure.

Secret Teacher: parents, stop undermining us in front of your children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/feb/13/secret-teacher-parents-stop-undermining-us-in-front-of-your-children>
This time, however, after less than four hours’ sleep in three days, it wasn’t 
fun. It had become a battle – and one we were losing. Part of the reason we 
take children away for a week is to develop independence, and we carefully 
design the week to do just that. We ask that pupils don’t bring mobile phones 
or laptops, electronic games or items of value that could get lost or broken, 
and that they don’t fill their bags with tonnes of sweets and snacks. We make 
some some allowances in this respect by asking them to bring treats to share 
with the group, which we dole out at appropriate times, such as around the 
campfire or on a hike. We also ask them to bring no more than £5 spending 
money, which is plenty for a gift shop full of key rings and snow globes.

I think the rules are really quite reasonable; I can’t imagine that many 
parents at home would load up their 10-year-old with electronic gadgets and 
Haribo to take to bed, or send them to the local corner shop with a blank 
cheque to blow on cheap plastic. Of course, there are always a few who push the 
boundaries, but mostly it’s easily managed.

Not this time. On the first night, two children were sick and we confiscated 
more than two kilos of sweets and biscuits from just one bedroom. By the second 
night, an entire friendship group had fallen out through instant messaging on 
their phones and DS consoles which went on into the early hours. On day three, 
several children wouldn’t eat breakfast because they’d gorged themselves in 
their rooms so much. As a result, one was sick on the paddle boats.

We conducted a quick room search and removed much of the contraband, including 
a full sports bag of snacks from one child, but inevitably much was hidden and 
we hadn’t packed sniffer dogs. By the third night when my sense of humour 
finally failed in its entirety, there was a full-blown criminal investigation 
underway – including phone calls home – to establish what had happened to the 
£50 cash a child had been given which had disappeared from the “secret” pocket 
in her bag.

You might wonder why controls weren’t tighter and why the children were 
allowed these items in the first place. The short answer is: they weren’t. 
These are primary-aged children, not hardened criminals. It had been made very 
clear what they should and shouldn’t bring, but their parents had taken the 
conscious decision to flout those rules and provide their children with the 
very “treats” that ruined the trip. In fact, one parent shouted at me saying I 
didn’t have the right to cut off her communication with her daughter by taking 
away her mobile phone, despite the fact all parents had been given two phone 
numbers to call if they needed to get hold of their children at any time and 
had signed a form agreeing to the rules we put in place.

Independence, empowerment and the environment: school trips are more than 
jollies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jun/15/independence-empowerment-environment-school-trips-educate-students-green-issues>
I should briefly put my complaints in context: at least half of the children 
were an absolute delight to take away and had done everything we asked of them. 
They had a lovely time. But I was left feeling angry and undermined by parents 
who expected the staff to give up their week of sleep and sanity, working round 
the clock, to deal with the nightmare they had willingly created. Some even 
giggled as I handed back the items we’d confiscated, one commenting: “D’oh! You 
were caught then!” before opening the returned sweets to feed her child in 
front of me.

Not only was the immediate situation a problem, but the attitude of not having 
to do what the teachers say, which was promoted by some parents, seriously 
damaged the authority we needed to manage the trip successfully. Bearing in 
mind we spent a week responsible for their children’s care and safety, I’d have 
thought parents would want to work with us, not against us.

As for the £50, it turned up. It was in the child’s coat pocket, which she’d 
left in the food hall. We allowed her to spend £5 of it, which I thought was a 
reasonable compromise, and locked the rest away until we got back to school. 
She sulked for the whole week and still hasn’t forgiven me. Her father’s 
reaction? “It is supposed to be a treat for the children. Aren’t they allowed 
to have their fun?” Yes, it’s a treat, but also also a carefully planned 
learning experience. And you ruined both.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 