
Let me start by saying I’m not a whinger. I’ve been a teacher for 24 years and 
a headteacher for 12 of those. I relish a challenge: the bigger the better, 
positive is my middle name. I’ve seen the introduction of a national 
curriculum, levels, SATs, phonics testing, a new national curriculum and now no 
levels. None of this has fazed me. “Come on,” I say to my staff. “Let’s have a 
go, let’s see it as an opportunity.”

I’ve supported the inspection agenda in every incarnation – self-evaluation, 
community cohesion, British values, five days, and now two days. But changes of 
government and an overt Tory agenda means thatOfsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> now operates within a bleak and 
predatory educational landscape and, as I have found, the impact of a poor 
inspection can be devastating.

Secret Teacher: Dear Ofsted, please can you send me a copy of the real rules?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jan/24/secret-teacher-ofsted-rules>
My school has its challenges: it is a big primary with 47 different languages 
and a large non-white British population. We even have our own pre-school which 
I agreed to establish from scratch using Clegg’s funding. “Come on, we can do 
it,” I said, “it’ll be fun!”

When I arrived a few years ago, it was graded satisfactory. But both the local 
authority (LA) and I knew it was inadequate, so it was no surprise that we were 
graded “requires improvement” (with good aspects) a while later.

Since then, we’ve been working our socks off to get a “good” overall at the 
next inspection. We joined the LA improvement programme and worked with 
education challenge partners and national leaders in education. We’ve 
overhauled a lot: we’ve changed our management structure, introduced a creative 
reading curriculum, improved our marking and feedback and raised our 
aspirations.

Staff wrote a curriculum for our children, took risks in their teaching to 
provide the very best learning opportunities, and removed any “ceilings” on 
what the children could achieve. I am incredibly proud of my team; they seized 
the vision of the school, changed their practice and stood shoulder to shoulder 
with me to make huge changes.

The governors also got to work. They reconstituted to a smaller body and 
focused on what needed to be done in the school. They listened to me, 
challenged me and asked pertinent questions. They ran interviews with pupils 
and staff to check I was telling the truth and interrogated the data with a 
fine-toothed comb.

Parents attended school improvement meetings where I shared the new vision and 
how they could help us. We ran curriculum workshops and they raised money for 
interesting projects, such as iPad minis.

The countdown began in February last year. We were ready. External monitoring 
agreed with our self-evaluation that we were “good” overall. I made sure my 
staff shared my confidence and encouraged them to channel the positive attitude 
we were famous for. But the weeks and months passed with no dreaded phone call.

At first, it wasn’t any different to any other time I had waited for an 
inspection, hoping they’d call but being slightly relieved when they don’t. 
However, it was 2015 and the blatant academisation agenda was niggling in the 
back of my mind. It hit me like a train when a colleague told me a rumour: “The 
academy broker is saying your school would be better as an academy under a 
local multi-academy trust (MAT).”

I was overtaken by a temporary madness – my partner refers to it as “the night 
of the flying cushions”. My school? The school that had made so much progress 
we were now evaluating it as “good” with “outstanding” features? How dare they? 
The broker hadn’t even seen my school, how could they possibly know what is 
best for it? I don’t want to be forced to become an academy under an MAT that 
might not share our values and ethos or have the school’s best interests at 
heart.

And still Ofsted, our chance to prove we were back on track, held back. We 
thought they’d be at the school by Christmas but the final carol was sung and 
still they didn’t arrive. I have not been directly told why they are behind, 
although there were far fewer inspections in Autumn 2015 than the previous 
year. I also know there have been issues with the number of qualified 
inspectors available to carry out inspections.

We’ve now been told it should be in January – as of today that leaves five 
days to ring. I cannot express how this makes me and my staff feel. It is 
cruel. Every Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday we hold our breaths at 12pm. As each 
day passes we no longer feel relief that we’ve had a reprieve, we are furious 
that we haven’t been inspected. I have teachers turning up to work obviously 
too ill to be there but saying they don’t want to let the school down just in 
case Ofsted rings.

Secret Teacher: let the government think I'm a failure, I've got my own 
success criteria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/09/secret-teacher-government-think-failure-own-success-criteria>
It’s taking its toll on me too. I dare not be out of school at 12pm in case 
they ring, I wake up at 3.30am regularly on a Monday morning and can’t go back 
to sleep as my mind starts to race. I try to promote my school to potential new 
parents, but I face an uphill struggle thanks to our last grading.

With the academy brokers circling and Ofsted gone quiet, we have decided to 
take control over our destiny and become an academy in our own right. David 
Cameron made it clear that he wants all schools to be academies; quite frankly 
the job of leading a school is tiring enough without battling academisation 
too. We want to establish a MAT which retains the inclusive, fair, moral 
principles and high aspirations and standards ethos. There is just one hurdle – 
we need to be “good”, and for that, we need the inspectors to come.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 