
You approach an empty science lab, clutching some uninspiring worksheets. 
There’s an audible cheer of delight from the year 7s in the corridor who have 
just realised that they have a cover lesson. And you are about to deliver it.

The Secret Teacher: supply work has restored my love for teaching
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2012/aug/04/secret-teacher-supply-teaching>
In the supply game, the issues facing UK education are writ large. For 
starters, the amount of work available is staggering. Few days go by without an 
offer of employment, and some schools host between five and 10 supply teachers 
on a daily basis. These are institutions stretched to their limits, filling the 
gaps however they can.


I have covered classes that haven’t had a permanent teacher for months. I have 
worked in schools where key stage 4 classes had long-term supply teachers for 
all three core subjects. For the most part, the impact is felt by key stage 3 
pupils – GCSE and A-level learners are insulated by tricks of timetabling. But 
the knock-on effects will be felt as the younger students progress.


The quality of cover work you are expected to deliver is variable, to put it 
politely. In most cases, you’re handed the ubiquitous worksheet; 
one-dimensional, undifferentiated, uninspiring. In others, there’s a Post-It 
note scrawled with textbook page numbers.

In the worst cases, you have nothing to go on but the 30 students in front of 
you. On these occasions, you have to rely on a combination of gut instinct and 
common sense. Get the class focused on a generic task, and send the most 
trustworthy-looking student to find a member of staff.

This strategy may be good enough for the odd lesson, but not for the huge 
number of classes now being covered by agency staff, supervisors and 
non-specialists. This sort of inconsistency is no longer good enough if any 
kind of standards are to be maintained.


Chaos in the classroom 

The teacher recruitment crisis: views from the frontline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/feb/10/the-teacher-recruitment-crisis-views-from-the-frontline>
It can lead to chaos in the classroom. The tried-and-tested strategies used by 
permanent staff are largely useless to the supply teacher. There is no 
relationship with the class, which means no trust and, often, no respect. 
Permanent teachers can establish boundaries, expectations and routines. They 
can identify and tackle issues early, and build connections. They become 
dependable and consistent figures of authority.


As a supply teacher, you are perceived as the antithesis of this. Students 
know that your presence is temporary. They doubt your commitment, and will 
openly question your expertise. They often perceive the work as pointless, and 
react with apathy at best and outright aggression at worst.


When I challenged one student about his questionable language, he grabbed 
another student’s crutch, and ran round the room hitting anything that got in 
the way. The teaching assistant, sitting in the corner of the room, shrugged 
and told me: “He’s usually worse with supply teachers.”


You have two options when things reach boiling point. You can call in the 
cavalry: a head of department, the teacher next door, a cleaner who happens to 
be passing – any recognised figure of authority can buy you a valuable reprieve.

Or you can put up and shut up, a blatant dereliction of duty which becomes 
increasingly appealing but is inevitably tinged with guilt. Neither option is 
really effective. Because neither deals with the root cause of the problem: a 
system that lacks any interest in the enormous challenges faced by supply 
staff. The days are long, frustrating and exhausting.


The dearth of support for supply teachers is unsurprising, considering the 
pressure on the permanent staff. The schools I find myself in most often are 
already struggling, with overworked teachers and weak or absent senior 
leadership. Looking after supply staff is very low on the priority list of 
professionals overburdened by their own responsibilities.


Invisible and ignored

Secret Teacher: Your child is low priority unless they're exam-age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/mar/12/secret-teacher-child-lowest-priority-exam-gcse-aleve>
In fact, we seem invisible to most other teachers. We huddle in the corner of 
the staffroom like second-class citizens, ignored by all but other support 
staff, bright-eyed PGCE students and those NQTs whose sunny dispositions have 
not yet been crushed by the daily grind of education.


Even in long-term placements, no one comes near you after an initial 
orientation session that mostly consists of “here’s your room”. Help has to be 
extracted through cap-in-hand pleas to heads of department. In some schools you 
are treated as a necessary evil, in others you can face outright hostility.


I’ve had some positive experiences, of course. There are schools where 
management is strong and the place is run as a community, striving for the same 
goals. Staff treat you as a fellow professional and take the time to brief you 
on classes and content. You are given concrete options in the case of behaviour 
issues, and expectations are reinforced to students, bolstering your authority.

My foray into the world of supply teaching was only ever temporary; I was 
between two international postings and back in the UK for a few months. Sadly, 
this period did nothing to change my decision to leave the British education 
system.


It is never ideal to have a temporary teacher, for anyone concerned. But if 
they are utilised correctly, supported and respected, supply teachers can 
provide the quality relief the teaching profession so desperately needs.


Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 