
I’m about to turn 40. I can’t say I’m happy about it (although it has, at 
least, given me an excuse to drink). This birthday is making me re-evaluate my 
life and my work and I realise that I’ve never felt more trapped by the job.

Unfortunately, 40 is teaching limbo; I’m between the enthusiastic 25-year-old 
I was and the exhausted, 68-year-old zombie I’ll become, crawling towards 
retirement after another few decades of being overworked and underappreciated. 
I don’t mean to moan. I love teaching, but my bouncy, early enthusiasm has well 
and truly bounced off. And unless this job changes, it’s unlikely to return.

When I began teaching, I may have been the most excited NQT ever to have stood 
in a classroom. I loved it. I worked evenings and weekends without batting an 
eyelid. I tried every new teaching idea and invented some of my own. I got 
angry at my husband when he said he was jealous of my students because I 
thought more about them than anything else. Looking back, he was right. Looking 
back, I was a gigantic pain in the arse.

Then I had children. Suddenly, there was no time to plan or mark and I was a 
sleep-deprived mess. I could just about keep my head above water, but I 
couldn’t teach the lessons I wanted to. A lot of teachers seem to reach a point 
(not always as a result of having children) where they acknowledge that their 
teaching will have to be a compromise.

But the job doesn’t stop. The teaching wheel keeps turning and the standards 
get higher and more unrealistic. Younger, less knackered versions of you enter 
the profession. Students compare you. Management compares you. Training 
sessions become guided tours of “Brilliant things other people are doing that 
you’re not”.

It’s the same with the online forums teachers use to share resources and good 
practice. I think this is an excellent idea, genuinely, and it’s lovely that 
these people give up even more of their precious time to share things for free. 
But I end up feeling like the world’s most inadequate teacher within 10 minutes 
of being on those sites.

One suggested making dozens of jellies in the shape of brains for the students 
to label. The 25-year-old me would have been legging it to Lakeland to buy 
moulds. The 40-year-old me thought that labelling a diagram would do. It’s not 
that it’s not a great idea, I just can’t keep up. The diagram version allows me 
to cook dinner tonight and read my son a story at bedtime before I start my 
marking. But by making decisions like this, I leave myself open to criticism 
from parents and pupils (I’m still reeling from a particularly cutting round of 
student feedback recently).

Another thing with students: they never age. Every year a new class of 
teenagers walks in, but with every year you teach, the age gap between you and 
them widens. In some ways, this is good; being older means being more 
experienced and more considered in your approach to the job. But it can feel 
like standing in front of 24 aliens. And that feeling is getting stronger as I 
get older.

I sometimes hear myself speak and realise that I sound like my mum. I tried to 
use pop music in a lesson recently, but didn’t realise that I was about five 
years out of date. My students told me about the music that’s out now, about 
“whipping” being a dance move and a rapper who calls himself “Fetty Wap”. I 
half expected one of them to go “awww” and give me a friendly pat on the head. 
It was sweet, but sad.

I worry that I’m becoming a grumpy old woman. And if I’m like this now, what 
will I be like at 68? I remember a colleague from the beginning of my career; 
he seemed about 70 and often nodded off in the staff room. He hated new ideas 
and would heckle young teachers delivering Inset sessions, like he was one of 
those two old men from The Muppets. Now I wonder if he was an innovative young 
teacher who got busy and found that it all went wrong.

Will I even make it to retirement? I wonder how many 40-something teachers 
leave the profession because their youthful enthusiasm isn’t sustainable; 
because they can’t work every night and every weekend and just accept that 
that’s how it is.

Unfortunately, teaching is like a venus flytrap. I imagine that the fly plonks 
itself down quite happily, thinking it’s made an excellent decision. Even when 
the trap snaps shut, it may initially be warm and secure. It probably realises 
too late that the trap is sucking the life out and there’s no escape.

By the time teachers realise that they can’t keep up with the workload and 
that no one is going to make it stop, they’re probably quite far up the pay 
spine, perhaps the main wage-earner, with a family and a mortgage, like me.

The sad thing is that we, the experienced teachers, have an immense set of 
skills. We avert minor and major disasters every day, defuse difficult 
situations without causing a riot and have conversations that have the 
potential to change our students’ lives. Yet we trudge through the system 
feeling undervalued.

What else can we do? I guess I’m going to have to work that out. To my fellow 
40-something teachers: stay strong, I hope to see you on the other side.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 