
“I’m sorry Miss, I don’t understand what you’re saying. You look like you 
speak Spanish or something.” He was in year 2, and had a smile that stretched 
from ear to ear. I had told him I was his supply teacher for the day. When I 
repeated what I said, he put his fingers in his ears and shouted: “I don’t 
understand your language!”

Diversity in school leadership: the higher up you go, the harder you have to 
fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/apr/26/diversity-school-leadership-fight>
As a woman of colour, situations like this happen to me all too often. I don’t 
know whether it stems from ignorance or narratives the children are hearing at 
home, but it highlights the inadequacies of the school system in addressing 
race and diversity.

In the aftermath of the EU referendum and the US presidential election, staff 
at the schools I work at were heartbroken. As I listened to them discuss their 
disappointment and fears for the future, the common question seemed to be: 
“When did society become so racist?”

For me, the answer was another question: when hasn’t it been? In their shock 
at the result, they failed to realise how integral their insensitivity is to 
the problem.

True colours


A teacher recently dictated a lesson plan to me: the topic was painting 
portraits. Students were to blend two colours to create the appropriate shades 
for a face. I looked over at the table with the paint brushes and water trays, 
and noticed the bottles of paint. There were only two: one was white, the other 
red.

As the class arrived (including several students who were not white) I 
rummaged through the cupboard and took every bottle of possible flesh colour 
and set them on the table. The reluctance of non-white students to reach for 
any colour other than white or red was heartbreaking.

Pupils are shown, day in​ and day out, that they need to be white to be safe 
and to succeed

This is just one of many, many examples I have seen of teachers lacking 
understanding of ethnic minority children’s experiences in school.

Shortly after the referendum, I was covering for a teacher who was very 
disappointed with the result. He said he felt ashamed of being British.

We walked through the corridor to his classroom and he went over his lesson 
plan. “Just a heads up,” he said, “the Polish boys can be a real nuisance, and 
at the end of the day their mums might give you a hard time. I don’t know what 
it is about them, but their children can do no wrong.”

On another occasion, I was in an assembly where staff and students were 
challenged to guess which pupil had won a prize – they were told that the 
winner had a “difficult name”. It made me think of the Somali-British poet
Warsan Shire 
<http://warsanshirefan.tumblr.com/post/118411691706/give-your-daughters-difficult-names-give-your>
, who says: “My name doesn’t allow me to trust anyone that cannot pronounce it 
right.”

Children of ethnic minorities either grow to feel that they belong, or adjust 
to a role that makes white people more comfortable. Even I began abbreviating 
my surname after hearing fellow teachers butcher it. One told me: “That’s too 
difficult to pronounce, I’ll leave it to you to introduce yourself to the 
class.”

‘White is right’

As all school staff know, the curriculum is woefully inadequate in terms of 
diversity – even history classes support the interests of the hegemony. 
Historic inequality and genocide at the hands of white oppressors are 
completely ignored in our white-washed textbooks. Teachers, without the time to 
stray from this curriculum, feed it to children without question.

Teach black students they can change communities - they don't have to escape
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jul/07/teach-black-students-change-communities-not-escape>
These children watch the news. They see how black lives are being taken by 
state authority in the US. They know people in power have got away with being 
openly racist. They hear how many refugees are fleeing from devastating 
catastrophes. They are shown, day in and day out, that they need to be white to 
be safe and to succeed. A small instance, like having the wrong colour paint, 
can reinforce the notion that white is right.


It is sad and emotionally draining to work with people who cannot see how 
their actions contribute to the racist society that they now, suddenly, seem to 
notice. What disturbs me most is that they, as educators, should be able to 
recognise racism in its many forms and tackle it. Despite the daily challenges 
that teachers face, they are in a privileged position to help address 
injustice. They have the responsibility to question how their actions impact on 
the children of our society, and influence their development.

We will not be able to fix the wider issues in our society until the education 
system changes. It starts with teachers improving their own understanding of 
race and diversity, and building empathy, not ignorance.


Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 