
Ten years ago, I took my first job as an English teacher in an east London 
comprehensive next to a large council estate. I had gravitated towards the 
profession because it was in my family. My father was a lifer at his school and 
vastly improved the chances of thousands of students over 30 years; I wanted to 
be able to say the same for myself when I reached retirement age.

Five myths about teaching in international schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/feb/16/five-myths-teaching-international-schools>
After a gruelling training year, I felt like I was on course to achieve that. 
I came home exhausted every day, but it was the type of satisfied exhaustion 
you get from putting your all into something you believe in.


Two economic downturns, two governments, two specification changes, three 
schools, five headteachers and six heads of English later, I found myself 
red-eyed and shaking as my GP filled out the paperwork to sign me off for 
work-related stress. She told me I wasn’t the first teacher she’d had to do 
this for that week.


So I made the choice: I decided to teach abroad. It would wrench me from 
friends, family and a country that I love, but it was that or face the 
uncertainty of starting at the bottom of a new career. I trusted my gut, handed 
in my notice, and survived a hellish final term in a dysfunctional work 
environment. Then, last August, I jumped on a plane to east Africa.


What awaited me was the most under-resourced school I’ve ever worked in. We 
have no photocopier, limited internet access and my classroom is only separated 
from the neighbouring room by a thin wooden partition. But I am undeniably 
performing my job to a far higher standard than at any other point in my career.


It’s a low-pressure, high-freedom environment that places absolute trust in 
its teachers’ abilities. As a result, my students are making the sort of 
progress that would make an inspector drool.


Smaller class sizes are crucial to this. I am responsible for the education of 
roughly 75 students; two KS3 classes of 25, one Y10 class of 7 and two 
sixth-form classes of about 8. Last year, I had about 130 students to account 
for in classes of 30–32. It is hard to form meaningful relationships when your 
students barely fit in the room.


Secret Teacher: I miss the torture of inset training
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jan/03/secret-teacher-i-miss-the-torture-of-inset-training>
As well as space, I have time. Working hours are not whipped away from me for 
emergency data-meetings, twilight Insets, morning briefings, and admin-centric 
departmental meetings. They are not offset by an endless cycle of parents 
evenings nor eroded by the box-ticking exercises of bloated middle-management 
teams, insistent that Ofsted will have our guts for garters if we don’t drop 
everything so we can Blu-Tack the school literacy policy on every inch of 
wall-space.


I’ve realised that, in the British schools I worked in, management was simply 
not doing a good job. The academisation (or deregulation, if you like) boom has 
flooded corridors with sharp-suited Machiavellis, clinging desperately to iPads 
and spreadsheets in the hope that they are projecting a credible image of what 
a manager looks like.


Here, I work for a team of leaders who encourage, support and involve the 
classroom practitioners in the running of the school. There are no 
sharp-elbowed struggles for crumbs from the promotion-table. There are 
certainly none of the Gestapo tactics which have British teachers fearful that 
the next “book-trawl” or “data-cycle” or “pupil voice questionnaire” or 
“learning walk” will mean that the wind has changed for them, and they are next 
in the firing line.

We do have lesson observations and performance management and all those other 
things, but they are used as constructive tools rather than leverage over the 
underlings.


Secret Teacher: without antidepressants, I stop being the person I should be
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/nov/01/secret-teacher-antidepressants-mental-health-wellbeing>
We don’t have have fallacious “like-for-like” league tables and whole-school 
shamings of departments, and we certainly did not begin the year with a state 
of the union address on whose summer results weren’t up to scratch. Compare 
this to last year when my browbeaten department was told – in front of all of 
our colleagues – that we were to spend this year as a “serious concern” in 
light of exam results which, as it transpired, shifted unrecognisably after two 
months of appeals and remarks.

I am only able to write this article because I can complete all of my tasks by 
the end of each school day. I am not exaggerating – I work until 3.30pm every 
day and I finish every Friday with no outstanding work to grade (and I grade a 
lot of work).

If I see my colleagues outside of work, it is for enjoyable social activities 
and excursions. We don’t talk about work, but rather about what books we are 
reading or news from our wider lives. We have wider lives over here.


I will wake up on Monday and look forward to the day’s work ahead of me in the 
worst-paid and most under-resourced job on my CV. My friends back at home will 
wake up and ask themselves what they need to do to get through. But they have 
their limits.


Moving to another country saved my career and my health. But if this is the 
only answer that Britain’s teachers are left with, what will be left in 10 
years’ time?


Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inboxSe
 