
I left school crying recently after parents’ evening. But it wasn’t a student 
who reduced me to tears – it was her mother.

I had just finished giving my speech about becoming who you want to be, 
leading by example and using lunchtime sessions to focus on learning, when I 
looked to her mum for support. All I got was: “She can’t work because your room 
is too noisy.”

She told me I couldn’t expect her daughter to work hard for her GCSEs unless I 
improved my behaviour management. “You should be able to control your class,” 
she said. “How can you expect good grades if the class is naughty?”

Oh, so it’s not because she ignores my instructions? Or because she laughs in 
my face when I hand out worksheets? And it’s got nothing to do with all the 
lessons she’s missed? Once she spat on the floor as she walked into the 
classroom. After establishing she wasn’t unwell, I asked her to mop up the 
saliva about to be trodden into my carpet by the 20 kids behind her. Far from 
obliging, she just screamed, “Why are you always so dramatic?”

Secret Teacher: I can't help but judge on parents' evening
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/oct/03/secret-teacher-judge-parents-evening>
I assured her mother that the classroom atmosphere is my priority and I always 
follow the school’s behaviour policy. “It’s not about behaviour policies. It’s 
about controlling behaviour,” she retorted. Well, dear parent, that’s an 
oxymoron if ever I heard one; I’m bound by that policy.

“You need presence,” she continued. Oh, you went there. “Do come and see my 
lessons, Ms Parent,” I responded. “I’m sure that will relieve your worries. You 
and anyone else is welcome at absolutely any time.”

“It’s not my job to check on you,” she said. “Besides you’ve clearly got a 
problem with my daughter and I’m not sure you should be teaching her.” At this 
point my options are to weep, roll my eyes or put a plan for change in place. 
The latter won. I organised: a seating move; tuition with another teacher; for 
her to report to her form tutor with specific targets to meet; catch-up work to 
be sent home and so on. After one last dig about not understanding why it had 
to be her daughter doing all the extra work, we shook hands and I took my leave.

Though we parted on civil terms, I was anxious and distraught. I’m acutely 
aware of my responsibility to my students and, when you work so hard and you’re 
told you’re not good enough, unnecessary doubt can creep in. That’s not doing 
anything to develop my “presence” by the way.

The fact is that much of the power I have comes from parents, so to have them 
speak to me like that is completely undermining. I cannot make a child do 
anything without their parents’ blessing and, if mums and dads fight against 
something, school leaders will do almost anything to appease them (particularly 
when Ofsted’s arrival is imminent). I’m also relatively young and to a teenager 
one is either 21 or 60 so I fall I to the 
“shut-up-you’re-only-five-minutes-older-than-me” club to those looking for an 
excuse to misbehave.

Top tips for teachers on engaging parents in learning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jun/28/top-tips-for-teachers-on-engaging-parents-in-learning>
My priority is to keep students learning. Sometimes this means I keep hold of 
students who have been incredibly disrespectful to me so I can speak to them 
later rather than disturb the whole lesson. I hope this shows how willing I am 
to forgive and that my goal is to simply aid learning; I’m not vain or spiteful 
and I don’t give up on my relationships with them easily. Perhaps to some 
parents (and students) this is a weakness. I wish you could see that it’s the 
opposite – and say it to your child.

Take an incident last year, as another example. I made a phone call to a 
parent whose daughter had verbally abused a teacher, damaged school property 
and destroyed another student’s exercise book. The student’s behaviour was 
already being monitored following a brief exclusion and it is our policy to 
refer any issues to parents and heads of year. I recounted the incidents and 
named the staff who witnessed them, but the parent responded: “That can’t have 
happened. I don’t want her head of year to deal with this.”

Despite numerous assurances, the student returned to school the following day 
and, after a simple instruction to remove her coat, launched into a blazing 
rant about how her dad said the school had it in for her. I was to understand 
she would not be allowed to attend any more detentions.

Lies to save face, I thought. Not so. I called home that afternoon to discuss 
this incident and her father assured me she would not attend future detentions. 
So that’s that. Unsurprisingly, her behaviour is not improving.

Parents, however you feel about us and our work, ​nothing good can come from 
​​undermining us in front of your children.

Parents, when you undermine us in front of your children, they walk around 
saying we’re rubbish teachers because they trust you. I become reluctant to 
contact you because I don’t want to be lambasted again – I will do it, because 
it’s my job, but I’ll dread it. I’ll be less effective that afternoon because I 
am human and I care. That’s what made me suitable for the job in the first 
place.

If you come and speak to me, I will ease your worries because I want to help. 
No teacher thinks they are perfect at their job and we are constantly trying to 
improve. I spend hours observing other teachers to learn from them. I read 
books to get new ideas, build websites of resources for students and find 
myself thinking about seating plans at bedtime.

 However you feel about us and our work, nothing good can come from 
undermining us in front of your children. It gives them a get-out-of-jail-free 
card to shirk responsibility and means I have to work even harder to regain 
their respect (and that of the students around them) when I’m already working 
flat out. That time could be better spent on lesson planning, discussing my 
students’ learning, designing resources or working with you to help them.

Teachers actually like children. We want them to succeed, just as you do. 
Walking into that conversation with a shared goal is the only way to get 
results. We’re on the same side.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 