
Dear Ms Morgan,


On Wednesday, I sat with a child and my heart ached for her. It was SATs week 
and she was at her desk, brow furrowed, pencil in hand. She’d written the 
numbers down several times but still they made no sense to her. It was the 
third day of this. The reading had been tough, arithmetic worse. And now this.

I’d been asked to administer – such a cold, clinical word – the test to the 
children who qualified for extra time: the statement children, the slow 
readers, those with special educational needs (SEN). As the minutes ticked by, 
I looked around the room and, unlike you, Ms Morgan, I didn’t see 
representatives of data or progress – I saw children.

Nicky Morgan accused of creating chaotic mess despite academies U-turn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/09/nicky-morgan-chaotic-mess-academies-u-turn>
I saw a girl who recently joined the British schooling system after moving 
from overseas. Behind her, a boy so painfully autistic, it’s a miracle he makes 
it to school each day. And finally I saw the last boy in the row. A boy who, as 
I write, is undergoing aggressive chemotherapy for advanced leukaemia. He’s 
lucky to be alive but he’s tired, Ms Morgan. In fact, he’s beyond tired. He’s 
exhausted just from getting up in the morning. Each day is a battle for him: 
drugs, drips and side effects, which even without going to school, are enough 
to draw the life out of anyone.


He’s missed two years of school, his attendance is sporadic and he doesn’t 
always focus. But still, he spends his days learning about the subjunctive 
form, short multiplication and how to make better verb choices. All that on top 
of a cocktail of pills, multiple trips to hospital and the knowledge that the 
friends he made when he was first diagnosed are all slowly dying.

Yet still he tries, with all the energy he has left, to tick the right boxes. 
To be what he’s supposed to be. But some things, even for the strongest of 
people, are just out of reach.

So there I sat, looking around my room and suddenly, I too felt sick and 
exhausted, Ms Morgan. This week I have watched children cry; I have seen eager 
anticipation fade into confusion then embarrassment and finally shame. I looked 
on as children put their heads on their desks and, at 11-years-old, feel that 
they’re just not quite good enough. That no matter how hard they try, no matter 
how hard they listen, they will never quite be good enough.

Education needs a Lego moment – more fun and fewer pointless targets | Gaby 
Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/education-lego-let-our-kids-be-kids-protesters-sats>
And let me tell you, Ms Morgan, this is no exceptional case. These children 
all attend a mainstream school and I’m sure there are many others just like 
them all over the country. But that means nothing. In your data-driven eyes 
they are the same as their peers; they’re expected to attain, function, perform 
and understand the same as their peers. But they don’t, because – and this may 
be a revelation to you – children are all different.

And that’s when the anger came. I wanted to tell them to close their test 
papers and that it doesn’t matter how many jars full of jam were made for the 
school fair. I wanted to march the children to Whitehall and for you to look 
them in the eye and tell them that despite all they have gone through, despite 
the living hell they face every day – the kind of hell that would bring most 
adults to their knees – that they still aren’t good enough for you and your 
chums in parliament. But I couldn’t. So the clock ticked on. The extra time 
supposed to help give these children a fighting chance had become nothing but a 
tool with which to prolong their agony.

And now, as I write this, Ms Morgan, I’m ashamed. Like my students, I went 
home and cried too – this time because of the shame I feel through supporting 
your regime. I didn’t enter this profession to do this. I entered it to spark 
excitement; to share my love for learning and to give children the confidence 
to think big.

What happened to catching mini-beasts? What happened to walking in rivers? 
What happened to getting messy? To painting pictures? To rolling down banks and 
grazing knees? Excuse me if I’m speaking out of turn, Ms Morgan, but, as a 
person who spends 33-hours a week with children, that’s what I thought 
childhood was supposed to be about. But what do I know? I’m only their teacher.

Signed,
Anon

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 