
When a shopping experience goes wrong – a retailer goes bust or disappears 
without delivering your goods – it can pay to have paid on plastic. Purchases 
made on credit cards and debit cards have protections that are not available if 
you pay with cash. These apply whether the purchases are goods or services.

Section 75
 Photograph: Alan Schein Photography 
If you have a problem with a purchase made by credit card or via a credit 
agreement offered by a retailer, you may be protected undersection 75 of the 
Consumer Credit Act <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1974/39/section/75>. 
This makes the credit provider jointly liable with the retailer for anything 
you buy, provided the item costs between £100 and £30,000.

The protection covers undelivered and faulty goods, and services such as 
flights, if the retailer goes out of business or disappears. It applies to 
purchases made overseas, and to those made online or by phone from an overseas 
retailer.

To make use of section 75 you only need to put the deposit for the purchase on 
your card, not the whole cost.

Should you need to make a claim, the government-funded body Consumer Direct 
has a template letter 
<https://consumer-tools.direct.gov.uk/consumer-advice/template_letters/consumer_credit>
 you can download and send to your credit card provider.

The cover does not extend to items paid for with credit card cheques.

Chargeback
 Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images 
Purchases made on debit or prepaid cards or chargecards are not covered by 
section 75. Neither are purchases on credit cards that are worth less than £100 
or more than £30,000. However, your card provider may offer chargeback.

This allows customers to claim back money if the goods do not arrive or are 
faulty, or where the retailer has gone bust. Visa, Mastercard and American 
Express all offer chargeback schemes.

Visa's scheme

• The cover applies to Visa debit cards, prepaid cards and Visa Electron 
cards, and purchases made on a Visa credit card which don't qualify for section 
75 cover

• There is no upper limit on spending

• There is a 120-day limit on claims which starts "the day you are aware of a 
problem". When an airline goes bust, the countdown starts on the day that the 
flight was due to depart; when a retailer goes out of business the time limit 
starts "the day the cardholder is made aware that the supplier is unwilling or 
unable to provide the goods"

• Claims must be made to your bank, not to Visa

See the Visa factsheet (pdf) 
<http://www.visaeurope.com/idoc.ashx?docid=6836ade1-c479-4986-9dcc-5fcca73e50f3&version=-1>
 for more information.

Mastercard's scheme

• The cover applies to Mastercard debit cards, prepaid cards and Maestro 
cards, and to purchases made on a Mastercard credit card which don't qualify 
for section 75 cover

• There is a minimum spend of £10 but no upper limit on spending

• There is a 120-day limit on claims which is "typically the expected delivery 
date of the goods or services not provided"

• Claims must be made to your bank, not to Mastercard

• The cover applies to transactions in the UK and overseas

American Express's scheme

• The cover applies to American Express charge cards, and to purchases made on 
an American Express credit card which don't qualify for section 75 cover

• There is a 120-day limit on claims. Where the claim relates to a company 
that has gone out of business, the period starts on the day it announces it is 
going into administration; when a holiday has been booked, the period starts on 
the day of travel

These chargeback schemes are voluntary – unlike section 75 which is set in law 
– but do not be put off if the person you speak to at the bank claims to know 
nothing about them.

If your claim is rejected by your bank and you think this is unjust, you can 
take your complaint to theFinancial Ombudsman Service 
<http://www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk/consumer/complaints.htm>.

Chargeback and PayPal

If you use your debit card to load your PayPal account and then use that 
account to make a purchase, you are unlikely to be able to use chargeback if 
there is a problem with that purchase.

The transaction is considered to take place the moment you load the PayPal 
account, not when you use that account to pay.
 