
If you are paid a salary through PAYE

You are limited in what you can offset against tax, but there are still a few 
useful "breaks", says Mike Warbur-ton, tax guru at accountants Grant Thornton, 
and one of the few people who admits to logging on to the HMRC website on 
Christmas day.

• Mileage allowances. Staff paid a mileage allowance to use their own car can 
offset some cash if their employer pays them less per mile than the permitted 
rate. If you run a car and you are paid less than 45p/mile for the first 10,000 
business miles travelled, then you can claim the difference. For any business 
mileage in excess of 10,000 miles you can claim 25p per mile.

• Charitable donations. If you are a higher-rate taxpayer and have made 
charitable donations, you can claim back the higher rate tax you have paid. For 
example, if you gave £1,000 out of your taxed salary to Children in Need and 
you are a 40% taxpayer, you can claim £250 against the tax bill. 

Most employer-organised Give As You Earn schemes are paid out of gross salary 
but not always. The same is true of pension contributions. Most are paid out of 
gross salary, but if not, you can claim back all the tax that you paid on the 
extra pension contribution. Check with your employer. 

• Professional fees. If you are a member of a professional body and pay annual 
fees, you should be able to offset them against tax. Union fees don't always 
count, so check theHMRC list <http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/list3/index.htm> of 
approved memberships.

• Uniforms. If you have to pay, the cost can be deducted against tax.

• Working from home. Sorry – if it's for your full-time employer, you cannot 
offset any of your bills against tax. 

If you are a freelance/self-employed

Broadly speaking, you can deduct from your turnover all the costs you incur 
for the sole purpose of earning business profits, says HMRC. The full checklist 
is athmrc.gov.uk/factsheets/expenses-allowances.pdf 
<http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/factsheets/expenses-allowances.pdf>

• Gas, electricity, water, council tax. If you use your home to conduct your 
work you can claim a proportion of all your household bills, gas, electricity, 
water and council tax against your bill. If your office accounts for, say, 20% 
of your household space, you can claim 20% of the costs against tax.

• Mortgage. The interest portion of your mortgage repayments can also be 
claimed, again on a pro-rata basis.

• Broadband/phone. The same goes for broadband/phone costs. You can claim for 
any business calls. For line rental and broadband connection, a proportion of 
the cost can be claimed based on business use.

• Computers. If your computer is only used by the business, you can offset the 
whole cost. But if the family uses it half the time ... you get the idea.

• The £104 no-quibble deduction. Warburton says if you use your home in a 
minimal way to conduct your extra business, such as writing up your business 
records, HMRC will accept a £2 per week office deduction. 

• Clothing. You can't claim unless you need specialist items that are entirely 
used for work. A self-employed journalist, for example, cannot claim for a new 
suit arguing he has to wear it as part of his work. But if, say, you are a 
self-employed tree surgeon, you can offset the full cost of steel toe-capped 
boots and a protective jacket.

• Entertaining. Taking clients out for lunch is a "non allowable expense", 
even if you spend the whole time talking about work.
 