
Governors provide a school’s backbone, keeping it in check and overseeing 
development. But being a board member can seem far removed from the reality of 
classroom life.Government plans to allow schools to replace parent governors 
with “professionals” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/17/parent-governor-role-scrapped-schools-teacher-qualifications>
 could further erode governors’ understanding of what goes on at the chalkface. 
So how can governors and trustees ensure they get beyond the confines of a 
board meeting? Here are our top tips for getting to know your school:

1 Do your homework

Reading up is an essential first step for all governors. There’s a wealth of 
information out there about your school; start with the latest Ofsted report, 
which will paint a picture of the school and outline any challenges it is 
facing.

There’s also plenty of advice on good governance. The Governance Handbook 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/governance-handbook> is a helpful 
guide to the responsibilities involved. “It’s almost a Bible,” says Naureen 
Khalid, an experienced governor in Bromley.

10 top tips for effective school governance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/mar/05/school-governance-governors-top-tips-training-best-practice>
2 Get a mentor

“Sometimes I’ve been paired up with new governors,” says headteacher and 
governor Ian Dewes. “It helps them to understand the context because they’re 
more aware of what’s going on. They know the backstory of why the school does 
this or that.”

Khalid agrees: “A mentoring scheme is a very good idea. If a governing body 
doesn’t have this in place, ask your chair if you could be allocated a mentor. 
That person can then talk you through things you might not understand and it’s 
somebody to bounce ideas off.”

3 See the school in action

The best way to get to know a school is by visiting it. School governance 
specialist Katie Paxton-Doggett explains: “Ultimately, governors need to spend 
time in the school. They need to go on learning walks, see learning in action, 
witness what pupils and staff do all day and understand how this fits into the 
overall vision of the school.”

Dewes agrees that pre-arranged visits are vital, and points out that school 
leaders should grant this kind of access. “I think any governor who’s not 
allowed [to visit] should be asking questions,” he says. “If you don’t have a 
chance to meet the children, you’re going to have a limited view.”

4 Look beyond senior staff

If governors really want to get to know their schools, it’s vital they listen 
to a range of voices. If you rely too heavily on senior staff, you may only see 
things from their perspective. “I say this as a headteacher myself, but it’s 
quite important to get past the headteacher’s office,” Dewes says. “If you just 
go in there and have a chat with the headteacher then you’re going to have an 
interpretation of the school based on what they’re telling you. So it’s really 
important to see it for yourself.”

Chair of governors, Nick Johnson, also warns of governors only seeing a school 
through a mass of statistics, spreadsheets and reports. “Seeing happy attentive 
children engaged in learning is very powerful and arguably just as important,” 
he says. He suggests more can be learned through observations and talking to 
others in the school. “Watching how the pupils go from the playground to the 
classrooms can say a lot about the school. Is it chaotic, or is it smooth and 
ordered?”

5 Meet experts and colleagues

Don’t limit your resources to within the school; there are lots of 
opportunities to share best practice and learn from others. For instance, the
National Governors Association <http://www.nga.org.uk/Home.aspx> runs workshops 
and conferences where you can tap into expertise.

Meeting other governors is also a great way to gain key insights into the 
role. “There is never any point in reinventing the wheel – grab opportunities 
to meet other governors to share best practice and to learn from their 
mistakes,” says Paxton-Doggett. “Meetings with governors from other schools can 
also be arranged on very local levels within partnerships or other cluster 
arrangements.”

6 Share tips on social media

According to the national leader of governance, Martin Matthews, social media 
is becoming increasingly important for governors. “As some local authorities 
withdraw from school improvement, governors are evolving their own solutions to 
support each other,” he says. “The depth of knowledge from contributors can be 
as detailed as quoting directly from the statutory regulations or primary 
legislation.”

 “I would particularly recommend Twitter, where there is an abundance of 
really useful governance resources,” says Paxton-Doggett. Naureen Khalid, who 
helped set up the#ukgovchat <https://twitter.com/hashtag/UKGovChat?src=hash> 
Twitter chats for school governors, agrees: “By going on Twitter, you’ve got 
access to governance up and down the country and it keeps you really up to 
date.”

Without parent governors, schools face an uphill battle to engage families
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/may/04/parent-governors-schools-battle-engage-families>
Matthews adds that social media can also give governors a sense of the mood 
among key stakeholders. “Parent governors connected to the wider social media 
world are often good at hearing the parental vibe on how happy people are,” he 
says. “Soft skill contributions like that are often overlooked.”

7 Go to social events

Although governors should avoid barging into schools unannounced, public 
events can be a great way to tune into the school’s atmosphere. Johnson says 
school visits do not need a specific monitoring purpose – it’s a just a good 
chance to set your governance in context.

“Social events are a really good way to get to know the school,” says Khalid. 
“Go to the Christmas play, go to the summer fair. That gives you a feel of what 
the school does besides academic things. It also gives the school community a 
chance to get to know you, so you aren’t this faceless person who appears once 
a year at prizegiving.”

The school governors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/series/school-governors> series is 
funded by Zurich Municipal. All content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled “brought to you by”. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 