
How many more reports on sex education do we need making the same 
recommendations for the government to take action (Sex education in schools is 
inadequate, say MPs, 13 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/12/maria-miller-young-people-sex-education-inequality-tory-mp>
). The women and equalities committee report is yet another in a long line to 
make the recommendation for “age-appropriate sex and relationship education to 
be compulsory in primary and secondary schools and for clear national 
government guidance on the issue”.

Earlier this year Middlesex University published research in collaboration 
with the Office of the Children’s Commissioner and NSPCC, and called for safe 
spaces where children can freely discuss the full range of issues related to 
sex, relationships and the accessibility of online pornography in the digital 
age. It is especially positive that last week’s report highlights the links 
between online pornography, sexual harassment, violence and relationships, and 
sex education. These are links that those working in the field have known about 
for years but are regularly ignored. Building children’s digital resilience is 
vital. We need to enhance their awareness and understanding of the pressures 
they experience and ensure that sex (on- and offline) is placed in the context 
of respectful relationships based on mutual consent.
Dr Miranda Horvath
Associate professor of forensic psychology, Middlesex University

• British-based commercial pornography sites are already required to have an 
age verification system which keeps out under-18s (When did pornography become 
sex education, 14 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/the-guardian-view-on-sexual-harassment-in-schools-action-is-needed>
). However, most porn sites are based overseas. The relevant parts of the 
digital economy bill now before parliament will apply a similar standard to 
them. How sites verify someone’s age will have to be approved by the proposed 
new regulator, but there is no doubt that technologies exist which will allow 
that to happen without anyone having to hand over details of their credit card 
– credit card numbers provide a very direct way of identifying a specific 
person, their home address and so on. All porn sites need to know before 
granting viewing rights is “is this person over 18?”. Third-party companies can 
vouchsafe that information and confirm it to a porn site via a highly secure 
encrypted file which renders no other information about the individual.
John Carr
London
 