
There is a “slow creep” of sexualised language and behaviour among children as 
young as five in the classroom, teachers have told the Guardian.

Primary and secondary school teachers described the level of sex and 
relationship education (SRE) available to children as inadequate in response to 
a call out via theGuardian’s online Teachers Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network>.


Their evidence, although anecdotal, gives a troubling glimpse into classrooms 
where teachers are trying but failing to tackle sexual bullying, harassment and 
other sexual violence experienced by pupils.

One primary school teacher, based in Merseyside, reported a series of 
disturbing incidents in the classroom, including pupils as young as 10 being 
sent explicit photos via social media and a sexual assault between two 
seven-year-old boys. A secondary school supply teacher, who has worked in 
London and Humberside, reported “several sexual assaults and a possible rape” 
over seven years of teaching.

Dozens of teachers contacted the Guardian in response to a call out about 
sexual violence in schools, shortly before the publication of the Commons 
select committee inquiry into the issue on Tuesday. The inquiry, begun after a 
study revealed that many incidents went unreported and others were “brushed 
off” by teachers, is expected to raise the issue of mandatory SRE, which, 
although widely supported, was rejected by the government last year.

The teachers who spoke to the Guardian echoed concerns raised by witnesses to 
the inquiry, who called for children as young as four to be taught about sexism 
and harassment in order totackle a “ticking timebomb” of sexual bullying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/07/teach-children-about-sexism-to-stop-ticking-timebomb-of-sexual-bullying-in-schools>
 at school. All said they would like to see compulsory SRE, as well as specific 
guidance on how to prevent sexual bullying and violence.

One primary school teacher with 20 years’ experience, who works in Merseyside, 
said she believed unrestricted access to the internet was partly responsible 
for the sexualisation of children.

Speaking on the condition of anonymity, in order to protect the children 
involved, she said: “As a primary teacher, I have been appalled by the rise in 
sexual language and behaviour in children as young as five. Unfiltered access 
to the internet and age inappropriate computer games is exposing more and more 
young children to things they are not able to cope with or understand. Many 
parents haven’t got a clue what is happening.”

The teacher, who works in an area with high levels of deprivation but has seen 
problems in schools in better off areas, said: “In the 60s and 70s, the TV was 
the babysitter in the corner but now it’s the internet and the internet is a 
dangerous place. Children as young as five are being left on their own with 
access to the internet. They seeing things they should not be exposed to and 
it’s not being balanced by parents telling them how to keep safe.”

She has noticed a “slow creep” of inappropriately sexual language and 
behaviour, to the point where it has become “almost commonplace” she said.

“We’ve had children as young as 10 getting on to social media forums, where 
they can have conversations and then have been sent explicit photographs. We’ve 
had a sexual assault, involved two seven-year-old boys. One of them said he was 
copying something on TV. I’ve heard male children say ‘let me touch your 
boobies’ and you can see the horrified faces on some of the other children. 
There is a lot of use of the word ‘gay’ as a term of abuse. I’ve had a boy of 
five or six talk about dildos.”

Age-appropriate SRE was vital, she said, and should start in primary school. 
“You can’t put the genie back in the bottle but children need to be taught 
about what is and isn’t OK.”

Teachers said the pressure on them to deliver academic results meant that 
teaching social skills such as respect and healthy relationships took a back 
seat, with disturbing results in some schools.

One secondary school supply teacher, who has worked in Humberside and London, 
said: “During my seven years of teaching, there have been a number of serious 
sexual assaults, including a possible rape. As a matter of course, this 
information is not openly shared among staff and, therefore, possibly allowed 
to continue unchecked.”

He expressed concern over the fall-out after a 14-year-old girl, who broke 
down in his class, alleged that she had been raped by a fellow classmate. On 
another occasion, a female pupil accused two boys of forcing her to perform a 
sex act in a science cupboard in an incident that the supply teacher said was 
as treated as “teenage high jinks”. Neither incident appeared to be treated 
appropriately, he said.

“I found it preposterous that the girl who had made the accusation of rape had 
to leave the class. She ended up leaving the school to go to another school. It 
blew my mind. There should be policies in place to deal with sexual assault in 
order for the schools to properly deal with it.”

According to a BBC investigation last September, based on freedom of 
information requests to police, 5,500 sexual offences were recorded in UK 
schools over a three-year period, including rapes. A 2014survey by Girlguiding 
UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2014/dec/02/sexual-harassment-party-daily-life-british-girls-girlguiding-uk>
 found that 59% of young women aged 13-21 had faced some form of sexual 
harassment at school or college in the past year.

A deputy head of a secondary school in Manchester told the Guardian that 
children needed extra guidance because of the rise in social media and the 
availability of online pornography.


The deputy head said: “We are living in a different world. In a school, its 
bell to bell, the day is gone in the blink of an eye. We know it’s important 
but you do need support to get it right. The whole basis of gender respect and 
healthy relationships should be on the curriculum. Our PHSE has been taken off 
the timetable in terms of having a regular weekly or two-weekly slot. It’s now 
down to six days a year. That’s not enough. If children were graded in how 
healthy and respectful their relationships [were], as well as maths and 
English, there would be time on the timetable for it.”

The National Police Chiefs Council, in its evidence to the commons inquiry, 
highlighted the availability of online pornography and the absence of sex and 
relationship education in schools as driving factors in altering the behaviour 
of young people.

One secondary head of PHSE, based in Lincolnshire, told the Guardian that 95% 
of a class of year 7 boys told her they had accessed pornography online.

Another teacher, who works in a state-funded secondary school for vulnerable 
children who have been excluded from mainstream school, described her job as a 
“tug of war”. She said that for excluded or otherwise vulnerable children SRE 
should be on a par with maths and English. “Our children are classified as a 
vulnerable because they have been in gangs or because of their family or 
behavioural issues. There is a lot of violence in their lives. We try to teach 
respect and feminism but it’s hard because we only have one lesson a week. We 
need an extra lesson every week, at least.”

“In a school like ours, it’s a tug of war between getting exam results and 
getting them into college, and teaching them life skills about how to engage in 
healthy relationships. It is sad because they are the ones [who] need it most.”


Additional reporting by Marianna Spring

 