
Appetite is growing for shared ownership schemes in areas where many people 
are priced out of the housing market. But what’s it really like?

Readers report mixed feelings about shared ownership: often it gave them much 
cheaper accommodation costs, but the fluctuation in rent and service charges 
were a particular bugbear, and issues that are avoided when buying outright.

For Jessica, the experience has been broadly positive. “I bought a shared 
ownership flat in Hackney three years ago and love it,” she says. “It was that 
or continuing to rent a room in a flat share. For a monthly payment that’s 
affordable I get a whole flat to myself – something I could never afford to do 
(or justify even if I could) if renting privately. I wasn’t in a position to 
get help from my parents or buy with a partner so outright ownership was 
completely out of the question.”

However, in contrast with owning outright, payments of rent and other charges 
can fluctuate and increase. “The only thing that worries me is that the rental 
portion does keep rising linked to inflation over time and the service charge 
is pretty unregulated,” she says.

Shared ownership comes with risks – here's what to watch out for
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/sep/15/shared-ownership-risks-affordable-housing-rent>
 Jessica doesn’t have any worries about reselling - something some do worry 
about - because the property is in London, where there is huge demand. “My 
housing association has an interesting-looking scheme to allow people to move 
up to a bigger property, although the capital limits means that I’d have to 
move to a cheaper area if I wanted to do that.”


Shared ownership has been sold as a path to outright ownership for many people 
hit by exorbitant price rises in London and the south-east, but for some 
tenant/owners, price rises have left them concerned over the affordability of 
their homes.

Helen, who is in her mid-50s, bought a 50% share of a flat in a block in Stoke 
Newington, London in 2001 and says that she was “almost immediately” priced out 
of being able to buy the other half. “We kept thinking that the prices just 
couldn’t keep going up like this. It would be funny now if it wasn’t for the 
fact I am worried we will lose this place if the government tries to change the 
rules about market rents.” Helen pays £500 a month in rent, which she said is 
“nothing” compared with the prices landlords charge for private flats in the 
block. “The market rent is around £400-500 a week, which would be impossible to 
afford. I am really concerned about the future.”

She is also concerned about patchy relations with the housing association. 
“The biggest pain is they never keep the housing officers long enough to 
understand our needs, and we are always back at square one. For example, when 
we all first bought, the sales representative promised better and more secure 
gates, plus bike racks,” Helen says. “These have never materialised and in the 
end one of the tenants arranged for three racks, which is not sufficient for a 
12-block flat, but even those who paid for the racks cannot claim them and they 
must be kept free for everyone to use. It took 12 years for this to even 
happen.”

Is shared ownership a vital first step on the property ladder, or a slippery 
slope?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/26/shared-ownership-first-step-property-ladder-slippery-slope-affordable-pitfalls>
James bought his flat in a particularly fraught moment, but avoided far more 
costs in the long term through shared ownership. “Our mortgage application went 
in via the housing association’s adviser on the day that the financial crash 
happened,” he explains. “Our mortgage provider pulled the 0% deposit mortgage 
we had applied for off the market, necessitating an actual taxi dash back to 
the City to meet the adviser and re-sign the paperwork as if we’d actually 
applied the day before – or we’d have lost the mortgage. Other than that, the 
process was very smooth and because we were buying a new build there was no 
chain, which made things easier.”

Although James only “owns” 35% of his flat, he says he has a significant 
amount of equity in the property. The sale price in 2008 was £180,000, and a 
recent valuation put the flat at £370,000). The overall combined costs of 
mortgage, rent and service charge are significantly lower, says James, at 
approximately £750 a month than equivalent current market rental value of about 
£1,200. “On the downside, service charges are high in my case, and although I 
only own 35%, I’ve had to pay 100% of various repair costs.”

Names have been changed.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 