
Late last year an American child, not yet a teenager, killed herself. A video 
has surfaced online which purportedly shows the girl recording herself via life 
stream video doing it.

Facebook Live is changing the world - but not in the way it hoped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/facebook-live-social-media-live-streaming>
I came across the video via Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>. Someone alerted me to it 
less than a week after her death. I did what any reasonable person would do: I 
followed Facebook’s own advice and reported it for showing graphic details of 
self-harm or suicide.

Less than two hours later I received a reply. It wasn’t what I expected:

We’ve reviewed the share you reported for showing someone injuring themselves 
and found that it doesn’t violate ourCommunity Standards 
<https://web.facebook.com/communitystandards/>.

In subsequent communications, Facebook also claimed that because it is not 
hosting the video, it is not responsible. This is despite the fact that due to 
its inaction the links were widely available on Facebook for anyone to see long 
after I reported the problem. It has not been verified that the video is 
authentic but whether it is or it isn’t, the content of the video shows a child 
committing the most serious act of self harm and is not appropriate for public 
viewing.

After nearly 20 years working with suicidal people I have a particular view on 
whether this is something that people should be watching: we should not. What 
community would find this acceptable?

Before social media, we used to have a term for videos like this: snuff films. 

In New Zealand, we have very clear laws around the reporting of suicide. You 
can’t even report that a death is a suicide without permission from the chief 
coroner. And even then, talking about how the person did it, or what happened 
is out. There’s a good reason for this.

Research shows that when suicides are reported in detail, including how the 
person did it, there is a sharp rise in “copycat” suicides. Vulnerable people 
are triggered and influenced by the gratuitous details of suicide stories. In 
fact, if you feel suicidal it’s not uncommon to feel compelled to watch such a 
video. And in doing so, drive yourself even closer to the edge.

Despite what many might think, suicidal people are not going to be “talked out 
of” their situation by the reality of how painful, or messy the death they 
choose for themselves might be. You don’t shock people out of such state; you 
care them out of it.

Facebook has recently made a big deal of being sensitive to, and aware of, 
mental health issues and the impact of graphic videos about self-harm and 
suicide. They even have a “Compassion Team 
<https://web.facebook.com/compassion/?_rdr>”.

But is it compassionate to allow the sharing of a snuff video of a child’s 
death? If a distressed child stumbles across the video on Facebook and takes 
their own life, is Facebook liable?

Facebook claims to have taken the video down but it still appears on other 
pages. Whatever systems Facebook has in place aren’t working. They claim people 
need to report each and every instance of the video being shared in order for 
it to be taken down – but couldn’t it use its extensive resources more 
effectively than that? That’s why I have set up apetition 
<https://our.actionstation.org.nz/petitions/ban-suicide-videos-on-facebook> 
with suicide prevention ambassador Mike King tocall on Facebook to make the 
required changes urgently. 
<https://our.actionstation.org.nz/petitions/ban-suicide-videos-on-facebook>

Perhaps the last word should go to her family, the people who loved her and 
have watched this unfold. They posted their own request, on Facebook of course, 
begging people to share their tribute rather than the video:

I get the fact that people want to spread awareness about depression and I 
stand up for that 100% because I know how real it is, but spreading a video 
showing a ... girl do the absolute unthinkable is not the way to do it. Please 
remember that we (her family) already have to live with it and having that 
video pop up every time we turn around is NOT what we need right now.

For those who have showed our family nothing but compassion, I would like to 
say THANK YOU. It is a very difficult time for us all and your support is 
greatly appreciated.

May you finally rest in peace.

Democracy is in crisis, but blaming fake news is not the answer | Evgeny 
Morozov
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/08/blaming-fake-news-not-the-answer-democracy-crisis>
I assume they’re not thanking Facebook for their compassion. 

So it’s up to all of us. If you think you’re helping by sharing this video, 
you’re not. So please if you have shared it, delete your post. And if you see a 
link to this video in your feed report it to Facebook.

Facebook has failed us. But we don’t have to fail each other.


 * In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. In the 
UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide 
Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In New Zealand, you can contactLifeline 
on 0800 543 354.

Kyle MacDonald is a New Zealand based psychotherapist.
 