
Alex spent £675 on a washing machine and a fridge-freezer from Littlewoods, 
opting to “buy now pay later”. At the time his income was sufficient to make 
the repayments before the end of the interest-free period, but when he was 
suddenly made redundant he couldn’t afford to repay the debt in time, and then 
an interest rate of 39% kicked in.

“Suddenly the payments went up from about £130 to £250 a month and I didn’t 
have the cash,” he says. “Buy now pay later seemed the easy option, but looking 
back I should have just saved up the money for a couple of months. It was 
naivety on my part.”

Related: Consumer credit sees fastest growth in 10 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/24/consumer-credit-fastest-growth-10-years-personal-loans-overdraft>

Alex sought advice from debt charity StepChange, and with its help reached an 
agreement with Littlewoods. In total he repaid £1,130, nearly twice the amount 
he borrowed. “I will never have a catalogue debt again,” he says, “If I want 
something I’ll save up for it.”

Alex’s difficulties were compounded by the fact that interest rates on goods 
bought from catalogues tend to be higher than those on mainstream credit. At 
this time of year it can be tempting to use these firms to buy Christmas gifts, 
but finance experts warn that if you’re not going to pay off your borrowing 
quickly, you could end up paying a high price.

Traditional catalogues such as Freemans and Littlewoods have been around for 
decades. They allowed customers to shop at home and spread the cost with a 
range of payment options. The rise of the internet means these brands now 
operate online, and have been joined by a host of catalogue-style firms selling 
clothes, gadgets, gifts and furniture.

The catalogue companies typically offer customers incentives to open “personal 
accounts” with a discount off their first order or free delivery. Account 
holders are then offered various options to spread the cost of their purchases. 
Recently, comparison website Money.co.uk described the cost of catalogue credit 
from some suppliers as “clear as mud”. It warned that in some cases catalogues 
were charging three times the typical credit card APR of 22.8%.

Among the biggest firms, Very.co.uk charges a typical interest rate of 39.9%; 
JD Williams (which owns Jacamo, SimplyBe, Fifty Plus, and others) 58.7%; Studio 
48.9%; Look Again (owners of Kaleidoscope, Witt International and Curvissa) 
34.9%; and Argos 29.9%.

“Buy now pay later”, or BNPL, is a common option. Borrowers who pay the entire 
bill within the stipulated timescale, normally three, six or 12 months, pay no 
interest at all. Managed well, this can be a great way to borrow. But if your 
personal circumstances change and you run into problems, or you just miss a 
payment, it can cost you dear. If you fail to pay off your borrowing in time 
the interest is usually backdated to day one – not the date the interest-free 
period ended.

Much like payday loans, the rates are high because non-payment issues are more 
common
Andrew Hagger, MoneyComms 
Headteacher Jacquie Sainsbury recently learned this the hard way. She has been 
a Very customer for five years, always making her repayments before interest 
kicked in. However, when she recently attempted to settle a £1,621 balance a 
power cut meant her debit card payment wasn’t processed and she missed the 
deadline. Very charges a typical APR of 39.9%, and interest at this rate – £644 
– was applied to her account. She asked Very for leniency given that she had 
tried to make the payment, but the matter is yet to be resolved.

A spokesperson for Shop Direct, which owns Very, says: “Our BNPL options, at 
terms of six, nine or 12 months, allow customers to budget by making payments 
of any amount at any time to suit them, and avoid interest by paying the full 
cash price of the item before the end of the BNPL period. The APRs we offer are 
competitive, and are based on customers’ individual circumstances and their 
credit risk profiles.”

Very also offers “low monthly payments” as an option, allowing customers to 
“take as long as they like” by paying the minimum each month: £5 or 7% of their 
account balance. But a customer doing this would take five-and-half years to 
repay a £500 debt, paying £314 in interest in the process. Paying £100 a month 
instead of the minimum would mean the debt was repaid in six months, with an 
interest bill of £48.

In comparison, if you borrowed £500 on a mainstream credit card charging 
18.29% and repaid £100 a month, you’d pay just £23 in interest over six months.

Jane Tully, director of external affairs at the Money Advice Trust 
<http://www.moneyadvicetrust.org/Pages/default.aspx>, says the wording “take as 
long as you like” sends entirely the wrong message. “It could lead to customers 
paying a large amount of interest, even on a relatively small debt. This 
language should be changed as a matter of urgency.”

The trust is one of several debt charities warning about the high cost of 
catalogue debt. Its research shows an estimated 1.9 million people used 
catalogue credit to buy Christmas presents in 2015. About one in 10 callers to 
the National Debtline, the charity’s free advice service, have problems with 
catalogue debt.

Related: 25 texts and emails a day: how payday loan firms hound vulnerable 
borrowers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/12/vulnerable-borrower-hounded-payday-lenders-tougher-regulation>

Shop Direct also owns Littlewoods. Its customers can “spread the cost” with at 
least 20 weeks’ interest-free borrowing. After that interest kicks in, although 
the Littlewoods website doesn’t display the representative rate. A spokesperson 
toldThe Observer that the rate depends on the individual customer’s 
circumstances, but that only a minority choose to arrange their repayments so 
that they attract interest. “The majority pay the full cash price before the 
interest opt-out period is over. The most common rate of interest for those 
that do pay interest on BNPL transactions is 44.9%.”

Grattan was the only company The Observer came across that provided a worked 
example of the cost implications of not repaying a BNPL deal in time. It 
states: “Failure to pay a £200 debt in 12 months incurs an interest charge of 
£60.69, and the new balance of £260.69 then incurs interest at a typical rate 
of 34.9% until repaid.”

Andrew Hagger of financial website MoneyComms <http://moneycomms.co.uk/> says 
many people wouldn’t buy things from catalogues if they were aware of the 
potential cost. “Because the interest charges are applied over multiple weeks 
or months, the customer loses track of how much they are actually paying back,” 
he says. “Much like payday loans and credit builder-type credit cards, the 
interest rates are high because the default rates and non-payment issues are 
more common than with mainstream credit.”

StepChange says 36% of its clients have catalogue debt, with the average 
amount owed standing at more than £2,000 – and rising. “Catalogue credit can be 
an extremely expensive way to shop if people cannot afford to pay it off 
quickly or they miss payments,” says spokesman Edward Ware. “People need to 
think carefully about whether credit is the right option for their shopping, 
before searching for the best deal and deciding whether they can afford to pay 
off the balance before interest starts to mount up.”

If you fall behind on catalogue repayments, don’t stick your head in the 
sand. It’s vital to get in touch with your creditors and explain your 
situation. A debt adviser can help you work out a payment based on a pro-rata 
distribution of your available income – this means you offer all your creditors 
a fair share of what you can afford to pay. You can also ask for any interest 
and charges to be frozen.
 