
Hugh Muir: The former colonies are losing out to Europe

Sometimes it’s hard to know whether to laugh or cry with David Cameron. First, 
he tells the Caribbean countries thathe won’t countenance an apology or 
compensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/jamaica-calls-britain-pay-billions-pounds-reparations-slavery>
 for slavery. We must look forward not back, he says. Which is easy for him 
personally as his family benefited directly from the slavery past, and when it 
was over, was well compensated for it too. And the future as he sees it has 
nothing to do with due paying, but rather providing British money to build a 
new jail so that we can repatriate more Jamaican criminals from prisons here. 
Big guy, big heart, big Dave.

Should the rich nations that became rich by plundering and stunting other 
nations continue to recognise that fact? Of course they should. And in some 
ways, we used to do that via trade agreements and special relationships with 
the former colonies. But we have other priorities now. I’m holding my nose as I 
write this, but Nigel Farage is right when he says that our ties with Europe 
complicate the relationship we have with the former colonies. We make trade 
deals via Europe. When the US strikes trade deals with Europe, it is keen to 
ensure that these aren’t undermined by historical arrangements we might have 
with the former colonies. We have a choice to make. The colonies lose out.

Jamaica calls for Britain to pay billions of pounds in reparations for slavery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/jamaica-calls-britain-pay-billions-pounds-reparations-slavery>
We are prisoners of terminology. Even if we resolved to reconnect with the 
former colonies, and even if we threw off this notion that the debt is paid 
because it all happened a long time ago and we are fed up of paying it, we 
still could not psychologically come to terms with paying reparations. What 
would that say about our Britain? All the monuments, buildings, streets, 
institutions, wealthy bloodlines that emerged from the bloody trade. Not to 
mention the legal ramifications, which would be immense.

That may not be a happy moral position, but it is life as it is. Much worse is 
the current approach that says the whole thing is settled, thus there is no 
need to maintain the trade and cultural ties that at least acknowledged a 
shared if bloody history. That heaps insult on still unmanageable injury.

Reni Eddo-Lodge: It’s naive to think the past is irrelevant to today

Britain made money from the dehumanisation of black bodies, and it is right 
that black bodies demand that money back. The “historic links” between the UK 
andJamaica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jamaica> that Cameron proudly 
boasts of are rooted in violent racist colonialism. When Britain ended the 
slave trade, it wasn’t the enslaved who received compensation for their 
suffering – instead, it was slave owners. Cameron’s distant relatives received 
amounts equivalent to millions today.

Some might insist that what his long dead relatives did 200 years ago is no 
longer relevant, but it’s naive to think that the past has nothing to do with 
the shape of today. Moreover, this is less to do with David Cameron as a 
private individual and more to do withDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> as the leader of a nation – 
a nation that has never fully apologised for its key role in the transatlantic 
slave trade.

The closest we’ve ever come to a full apology was Tony Blair’s “deep sorrow” 
almost a decade ago. Cameron’s decision to dodge questions from the Jamaican 
press signals a prime minister running scared of facing the consequences on 
Britain’s whitewashed history, in which the British were always the heroes and 
never the bad guys. How can he be so eager to move forward with Jamaicans, if 
he’s not willing to be honest about the past?

Esther Stanford-Xosei: It’s not just about money, we want justice

Reparations cannot be reduced to money. The media is refusing to hear and 
amplify this essential message. Instead, there is an attempt to impose on us, 
the descendants of the enslaved, a definition of reparations where it is 
synonymous with compensation, which is not accepted by the International Social 
Movement for Afrikan Reparations (Ismar). This point was emphasised in the1993 
Abuja Reparations Declaration 
<http://www.shaka.mistral.co.uk/abujaProclamation.htm>.

Now more than ever, our people’s reparations message is making greater sense, 
given recent developments in British politics. We mean the election of Jeremy 
Corbyn as the leader of the Labour party and his message of redistribution of 
wealth, which is consistent with our approach to securing reparatory justice.

Together with Corbyn’s activists, we are working to ensure that an autonomous 
Afrikan Heritage Community for National Self-Determination (AHC-NSD) develops 
in Britain, which will ensure that Labour’s agenda for redistribution of wealth 
is done locally, nationally and internationally. Wealth criminally expropriated 
from the enslaved people and their descendants must be redistributed. This is 
the reparatory justice we demand. Ismar’s campaign for the establishment of a 
UK all-party commission for truth and reparatory justice is one important way 
forward.
 