
The pupil

“I couldn’t concentrate as well out of uniform.”

David Hershman, 18, is a student at Stafford grammar school

I think school uniform is very important – in my opinion, it did aid my 
concentration, because it reminds you that you’re at school to learn. For some 
reason, when I was in my early years of high school, I didn’t feel as though I 
could concentrate as well if I didn’t have school uniform on – but I’m not sure 
if that’s because I am so used to wearing uniform and I associated my own 
clothes with free time and not being at school. It’s quite useful on trips to 
identify members of the school and stop them getting lost, too.

I also think it’s a great tool to prevent bullying. If everyone is wearing the 
same clothes, it’s impossible to mock each other’s clothing, as is the case 
sometimes on days where you’re allowed to wear your own clothes. I don’t think 
this should repress a child’s need to express themselves, though. Uniform rules 
can be taken too far: I was once told I would get a detention for every day I 
turned up to school with my grey bag instead of a black one.

The educational psychologist

“If they let the school down, they shouldn’t be allowed to wear it.”

Tim Francis is a former teacher and director of the Dyslexia Centre in London

Uniform has to be seen as something that is earned. I think pupils should 
start school with no uniform, and as they progress through the school they 
should start wearing it. I always think children need to be proud of their 
school, and uniform is important for that. So, make them earn it! If they let 
the school down, they shouldn’t beallowed to wear it. Look at the marines and 
SAS – they can’t wait to get that beret.

How a child wears the uniform shows their feelings towards the school. To an 
extent, school uniform definitely levels things between pupils compared to 
wearing no uniform at all, but this argument is overrated. Children can still 
single other children out from the make of their shoes, or how well-fitting 
their clothes are. If you wanted to do it properly, it would be like the 
police: the children would come in and change into uniform provided for by the 
school. Still, in a way I agree with strict uniform rules. In my experience, 
they help schools maintain authority.

The parent

“My house is often crammed with uniform-wearing girls, and no two of them ever 
look the same.”

Joanna Moorhead is a journalist and mother of four

In a perfect world, school uniforms wouldn’t exist. Children would project 
their personalities through their clothes at school, just as they do at home.
Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> wouldn’t impress on 
pupils the need to wear skirts to a certain length, or to do a minimum number 
of buttons up on shirts – and if the rules weren’t there, kids wouldn’t try to 
break them.


But we don’t live in a perfect world, and learning to fit in is one of the 
things being at school teaches our children. One of my daughters wore only 
trousers for five years, but her school uniform was a skirt, so she had to fit 
in and wear one. It seemed unfair and tough at the time; in the end, it didn’t 
do her any harm at all – in fact, it taught her an important lesson.

From my point of view, with times when I’ve had four daughters in as many as 
three different schools, uniforms spell simplicity, and help put order into the 
school day (“Have you got your uniform all sorted out?” I shout up the stairs 
on a Sunday night to my secondary-school-age girls). And, overall, I think it’s 
cheaper: uniforms are hard-wearing clothes, and they’re put through the mill.

I know some people have this idea that they’re democratic, but from what I see 
that’s not really true. My house is often crammed with uniform-wearing girls, 
and no two of them ever look the same. Kids customise whatever they wear. If 
uniform rules are strictly enforced, it all becomes about the bag or the coat 
or the shoes. But the best thing about uniforms, for me as a parent, is the 
simplicity.

The teacher

“If uniforms are used to improve behaviour, it can become counterproductive.”

Enayah Byramjee taught English at secondary schools. She is now educational 
development director at Debate Mate

I have had 10 years’ teaching experience in inner-city secondary schools, and 
my last position held was second-in-charge of the English and literacy faculty. 
I have had experience teaching in both uniform and non-uniform schools, and I 
can definitely see the benefits of pupils wearing uniform. A uniform can be 
vital in creating a sense of school identity and community, and I feel it is 
often a source of collective pride for students. However, if a school relies 
heavily on uniform regulation to improve behaviour and raise aspirations, then 
it can push out other more positive forms of behaviour management and become 
counterproductive.


In my current role at Debate Mate, an organisation that organises after-school 
debates, I’ve seen thousands of students all over the country, both in uniform 
and not, and I think that what actually distinguishes students is not what 
they’re wearing, but how they interact and engage with each other. I believe 
teaching students how to express themselves with confidence should be the 
priority, rather than the length of their tie or the shine on their shoes.
 