
The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) seems to be on another planet in 
its allegations against the Showmen’s Guild of Great Britain (Watchdog: unfair 
trade body could be stifling competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/funfair-trade-body-in-breach-of-competition-law-cma-says>
, 22 December). Its provisional findings would appear to have been reached 
without any serious consideration of the history of fairs in this country and 
the environment in which travelling showmen operate. How many fairs did they 
actually visit during their deliberations – or were they all conducted in 
splendid, ideologically bound isolation? Their conclusions certainly do not 
bear any relationship to reality on the fairground.

Contrary to their suggestion, there is always pressure “to provide different 
or new attractions” – and it comes from the fairgoers, who from time immemorial 
have always looked for novelty at the annual fair. The travelling showman is 
acutely aware of this and has always sought to satisfy this demand. But he can 
only reinvest in his business if he has the sort of security and stability that 
the 127-year-old Showmen’s Guild has been able to offer its members through its 
regulations. These regulations, it should be said, are democratically agreed by 
its members and have always been subject to revision in light of changing 
economic and social circumstances. In addition to the benefits conferred on its 
own members, the guild also provides organisations such as local authorities 
(and ultimately all fairgoers) with the assurance that its members comply with 
more socially important considerations including strict fairground safety 
requirements.

Some of the guild’s regulations the CMA criticises were actually introduced to 
bring greater order to the fairground industry at a time when unfettered 
competition was resulting in unseemly incidents that were a credit to no one. 
The rules of the Showmen’s Guild have a strong, ethical basis: a fact that is 
due in large measure to the influence of its first full-time general secretary, 
the Reverend Thomas Horne, a clergyman who had long campaigned on the showmen’s 
behalf.

Perhaps the CMA should reveal why they have conducted this presumably costly 
exercise in chasing imaginary butterflies?
Graham Downie
Chairman, Fairground Association of Great Britain

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 