
There are certain buttons on the internet that no one ever clicks. No 
17-year-old presses “exit” when warned that the content is only suitable for 
adults aged 18 years and above. No one clicks “reject” when told about cookies 
(even if they should). And I thought no one ever said “yes” to Trainline’s 
insurance. Why bother to pay a few more quid to “insure” something as mundane 
and risk-free as a short train trip? Most of us just swipe past the junk 
insurance “offers” on train, concert and budget airline sites as speedily as 
possible.

But we were contacted this week by a reader who, remarkably, did actually pay 
£4 to insure her journey – a £37.50 ticket from Birmingham to York. And her 
experience when she tried to claim tells you everything you need to know about 
these policies.

The most extraordinary aspect of the payment protection insurance saga was not 
just that it was scandalously overpriced (which it was), but that even after 
charging ludicrous amounts, and paying vast commissions to the banks, the 
insurers did their best to avoid making payouts.

One wonders if train “cancellation protection” is that much different. Our 
reader had to cancel her trip because her friend had, unexpectedly, to go into 
hospital for eye surgery. She diligently assembled extensive documentation, 
including letters and emails from the hospital, running to 17 pages.

But her application for a refund was flatly turned down. Why? Because the 
cancellation policy only pays out if the person you are visiting is a close 
relative. If it’s a lifelong friend it is not worthy. Even aunties and uncles 
are excluded – only “immediate family” qualify.

Our reader describes the policy as “a complete waste of time”. TicketPlan, 
which sells it, doesn’t agree. It says it administers many thousands of refund 
applications each year on behalf of a range of different clients and receives 
very few complaints.

“We and Trainline go to great lengths in order to ensure that the cancellation 
protection facility is clear and administered fairly, but this product is not 
intended as a substitute for a flexible ticket.

“Clearly, the range of circumstances in which claims can be made cannot be 
exhaustive and a balance has to be struck between what is reasonable and what 
would effectively render the service impractical,” it told us. The company 
declined to reveal what proportion of claims received are paid.

We then took a closer look at the terms and conditions. We found that if you 
are the traveller but miss the train because of illness, you have to provide a 
doctor’s letter to show you couldn’t make the journey – at a typical cost of 
£20. This is not repaid. So for a £37.50 journey, that’s £20 of the 
compensation out of the window.

Then there are the processing fees that the company deducts from any payout 
which, oddly, rise according to the value of the ticket.

If you make a successful claim for a ticket costing £101, TicketPlan deducts 
£30 as a processing fee. If the claim is £21-£50 it deducts £10. There is no 
processing fee if the claim is up to £20, but if you have to pay for a £20 
doctor’s note there’s little point.

Then there are other exceptions. Pregnant women can’t claim if their morning 
sickness means they are unable to travel. If there’s a strike on a connecting 
service – for example, if your ticket is King’s Cross to Edinburgh, but you 
can’t make it because the trains up to London from East Croydon are on strike, 
then cancellation protection won’t pay out.

To be fair, all these points are in the terms and conditions Trainline 
publishes on its site. However, when I tried to reserve a trip to Edinburgh, 
the booking timed-out because it took so long for me to read the T&Cs.
 