
Sir David Clementi, who has been named as the next chair of the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/sir-david-clementi-bbc-chair-unitary-board-trust-bank-of-england>
, didn’t apply for the job. The former City grandee and deputy governor of the 
Bank of England was asked to put his name forward after he advised the 
government that it should scrap the BBC Trust – the corporation’s governing 
body.

In his government-commissioned review, Clementi said the trust should be 
replaced by the type of board that governs top FTSE companies, and the board 
should be run by a chairman with extensive corporate experience. Someone, 
actually, just like Clementi.

The 67-year-old Winchester and Oxford-educated accountant spent 22 years at 
investment bank Kleinwort Benson, working his way up to chief executive, before 
going on to serve as chairman of insurance giant Prudential and Sir Richard 
Branson’s Virgin Money. During his stint at theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, he oversaw the 
UK’s preparation for the introduction of the euro in 1999.

Sir David Clementi confirmed as new BBC chair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/sir-david-clementi-bbc-chair-unitary-board-trust-bank-of-england>
Clementi, whose appointment will be officially made by Theresa May, has very 
little if any experience in the media business but his talents have been called 
on by several prime ministers.

He advised Margaret Thatcher on the multibillion-pound privatisation of BT in 
1984, and was seen to have done such a good job of it that his bank, Kleinwort, 
had a near-monopoly on running the sell-off of state assets including British 
Gas and the electricity industry.

It was Clementi who was the brains behind the groundbreaking £12m advertising 
campaign to encourage the public to directly buy shares in BT, which was 
praised by Thatcher and, she later said, encouraged her to press ahead with the 
privatisation of more than 50 companies.

His colleagues and friends at Kleinwort said Clementi became “fascinated by 
the Whitehall machine” while working on the privatisations.

Clementi’s next big call from government, a decade later, was from Gordon 
Brown, then chancellor of the exchequer, tapping him up to become deputy 
governor of the Bank of England.

Clementi, who had hosted a breakfast for William Hague shortly after the 
Tories’ 1997 election defeat, was not expecting the call. His selection came as 
a surprise to many, including his bank bosses in Frankfurt, as most had 
expected Labour to reward Goldman Sachs economist Gavyn Davies.

Lord Myners, a member of the Court of the Bank of England and later Brown’s 
City minister, described Clementi’s appointment as an “inspired choice”.

On Tuesday Myners said Clementi was “very wise and sensible”, adding: “He 
treats people fairly and expects the same in return, a man of high integrity.”

During his time at the Bank, in 2002, Clementi warned about the house price 
bubble and admonished members of the Treasury select committee for not heeding 
his warnings.

He left the Bank shortly afterwards, going back to the City and becoming “the 
man from the Pru” as chairman of Prudential from 2002-2008 and of Virgin Money, 
where he oversaw its successful flotation.

The keen yachtsman was called upon by the government again in September 2015, 
when former culture secretary John Whittingdale commissioned Clementi to review 
the structure of theBBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust>.

His independent review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/a-review-of-the-governance-and-regulation-of-the-bbc>
, published in March 2016, said the BBC Trust model was “flawed” and called for 
a “fundamental reform of the [BBC’s] system of governance and regulation”.

He said the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> should be run by a 
unitary board – composed of mostly non-executives overseen by a conventional 
chairman – to ensure it met its royal charter obligations and served the 
licence fee payer, while regulatory oversight should pass to Ofcom.

A shortlist was complied, to which Clementi’s own name was added. The other 
two on the shortlist were John Makinson, the chairman of the book publisher 
Penguin Random House, and Dame Deirdre Hutton, the chair of the Civil Aviation 
Authority.

Former BBC bosses, however, reckon Clementi’s reformed structure makes sense 
and the businessman is well placed to make it work.

“Sir David Clementi proposes a strong BBC board and a strong external 
regulator – a change we have argued for,” said former BBC Trust chair Rona 
Fairhead, who had called for external oversight of the corporation.

Greg Dyke, who was director general between 2000 and 2004, said: “Well he was 
right, wasn’t he. His analysis was dead right. It was right analysis. A 
traditional board is the right way to go. The BBC Trust was never a good idea.”

Michael Grade, BBC chairman from 2004 to 2006, said: “I think bringing boards 
back together is a sensible idea, it is much clearer. All systems depend on the 
quality of people you recruit. Clementi has been through the process [and] I’m 
sure he will be fine.”

Jonathan Quin, chief executive of foreign exchange company World First, of 
which Clementi has been chairman since 2011, said: “He has always been very 
supportive, thoughtful, generous with his time and wise in his counsel. I would 
say that he knows, by name, over 100 people at World First and takes the time 
to talk to people across the business. He is very commercial but also 
passionate about governance and fairness. I think he will balance well the 
tradition and high standards that the BBC is famous for while also ensuring it 
represents good value to its customers.”

A leading City figure who has known Clementi for a decade said he was 
“formidably intelligent”: “He did a huge amount for privatisation, has a very 
strong reputation and is known for being very ethically grounded and 
straightforward.”

Clementi’s new position is likely to bring with it a lot of headaches, with 
nowhere near the level of financial compensation he has enjoyed as a banker or 
City chairman. The chairmanship pays £100,000 – £10,000 less than Fairhead 
earned.

While Clementi had a lucrative investment banking career and held several 
other well-paid posts, Karen Bradley, the current culture secretary, made clear 
to the Lords that the candidate should not be motivated by money. “It is a 
great honour to be chair of the BBC and first chair of the unitary board,” she 
said.

Clementi, however, has never had to worry about money. Friends describe him 
as, variously, “a blueblood”, “a man of breeding” and “from a family of class”. 
His great-great-grandfather was Muzio Clementi, a composer and pianist who 
competed with Mozart in the 1770s. In a rare interview David Clementi was once 
asked who won that contest. He professed not to know, but said it was probably 
Mozart.

Muzio settled in London, where he became a piano maker and raised a family who 
went on to become equally successful. David Clementi’s paternal grandfather 
became governor of Hong Kong, while his maternal grandfather was a permanent 
secretary at the Department for Education. A great-great-uncle was also a 
British colonial administrator in Singapore, Malaysia and Sri Lanka.

His father, Creswell Montagu Clementi, was an air vice-marshal who attended 
the British nuclear tests on Christmas Island in the 1950s. While his father 
travelled the world, Clementi was enrolled at Winchester College, where he 
later returned as warden [equivalent to vice-chairman of the £12,000-a-term 
school].

After Winchester, Clementi read politics, philosophy and economics at Lincoln 
College, Oxford. Studies may have come second to sport, with Clementi winning 
the 100m, 200m and 400m hurdles in his first year and an athletics blue every 
year. He went on to train as an accountant, and then complete an MBA at Harvard.

His athletic days may be behind him, but Clementi is still an avid yachtsman 
and member of the prestigious Royal Yacht Squadron in Cowes on the Isle of 
Wight.

Despite the family having settled in the UK for more than 200 years, 
Clementi’s Italian heritage stuck with him: colleagues at Kleinwort nicknamed 
him “Il Duce”.
 