
Because they live and hunt alone, there is no collective noun for cougars. 
Though I wouldn't apply this piece of zoological trivia to the huddle of 
excited skiers, among them a significant number of expensively maintainedfemmes 
d'un certain âge, waiting to meet their hero at the Kaiserburgbahn lift station 
in Bad Kleinkirchheim, Austria, early one winter morning.

At 60, Franz Klammer remains a charismatic and ruggedly dishy figure, along 
Liam Neeson lines. Add to that his status as the greatest downhill skier in 
history, and the annual ski day he hosts in his boyhood resort for a group of 
lucky punters chosen in a lottery, and it sends a frisson of macho glamour into 
the crisp Carinthian air. His still-unsurpassed achievements in Austria's 
national sport – 26 World Cup wins plus a legendaryhell-for-leather Olympic 
victory in Innsbruck in 1976 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/feb/15/franz-klammer-interview-skiing-tips>
 –make him something akin to Pelé in his country, but he arrives with no surly 
manager, no controlling PR and no security. This makes for some initial 
awkwardness, as we all pretend not to be desperate to share his chairlift, 
apart from a Viennese Mrs Robinson in snug tangerine ski pants who swiftly 
sidles into the Klammer-flanking position she will maintain for most of the 
day. The man they call "The Kaiser", however, is a master of social ease and 
banters good-humouredly with everyone around him, reminiscing about his 
competitive glory days, discussing his more recent passions for golf and 
cycling, and voicing concern for the sanitised dullness of today's "too 
business-like" downhill racing scene.

"What the hell is that?!" is his opening gambit to me as he notices that, 
among the neat pairs of ski tips poised to shadow him down K70, the first run 
of the day, I am packing a snowboard, the only tray in the village, and the 
group's laughter bounces around the soft, forested contours of the Nock 
Mountains.
 Gentle slopes … Bad Kleinkirchheim’s 103km ski network is ideal for beginners 
and leisurely intermediates. Photograph: Michael Gruber 
With snowboards inherently around 20% slower than skis, I know I'll have my 
work cut out just to keep Klammer in my sights, and for the first couple 
of runs, I only come close to his virtually turn-free tracks at the 
regular stops he makes to allow us all to regroup. So it's ridiculously 
gratifying when my attempts to channel some of the reckless speed of his 
Innsbruck triumph (which I've been looping on YouTube) start to pay off, even 
allowing me, at one glorious moment, to burn off his annoyingly accomplished 
tangerine shadow. As he stops to wait for stragglers, and I sit down to take a 
breather, he peers uphill over my head. "Where is our snowboarder? Oh, there 
you are already. You must be going pretty fast."

The small, traditional resort of Bad Kleinkirchheim (dubbed BKK by British 
visitors) has been good to Klammer. It was here that he would ski to school 
from his parents' cattle farm, that he honed his mountain moves, and that he 
won his first major downhill in 1971's inaugural European Cup. It was also here 
that, in 2004, a new World Cup course – the pacy highlight of our ski day – was 
named in his honour.

Other than this swooping, 3km (1.8m) black run, BKK's 103km (64m) network of 
mainly red runs is a gentle affair, better suiting beginners, leisurely 
intermediates and families than mileage-hungry thrillseekers. The resort first 
found fame for its radon-rich local spring waters, whose curative powers were 
noted in the 11th century. Home to two huge public thermal baths, plus 50-odd 
hotel spas, BKK has an unrivalled bathing culture for a ski town.
 Franz Klammer in action during the 1976 Olympic Games in Innsbruck. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Cross-country skiing, toboggan runs and extensive winter hiking (not to 
mention a picturesque setting, traditional hearty cuisine, relaxed and friendly 
hospitality and good value) round out BKK's offer as an exemplary destination 
for mixing mid-range exertions with extreme relaxation.

And Klammer's dedication to promoting its charms goes beyond the call of duty. 
For the duration of our session, he takes care to chat with his guests, 
offering one-on-one technique tips when he's asked for them, but focusing most 
of all on making sure everyone feels included and setting a pace that keeps us 
skiing together in a relaxed but cohesive group.

As we cruise down the last slope of the day, he leads us to a small 
course where traffic cones, snow-bikes, snow-adapted skateboards and a table 
laden with schnapps and shot glasses have been set up for a daft It's 
A Knockout-style competition. Suddenly, I find that I'm head to head with the 
Kaiser, joining him first at the schnapps table for some "compulsory doping", 
before we belly-flop onto skateboards to haul ourselves around a comedy slalom 
course. As it turns out, it's a discipline for which I have some talent, and on 
the day's final downhill (I swear the course sloped by at least two degrees), 
Kaisership is mine.

• Sadly, It's a Knockout-style larks are no longer on the menu, but Franz 
Klammer returns to Bad Kleinkirchheim to ski with up to 50 guests this season 
at a new event, This Morning the Slope is Mine (badkleinkirchheim.at 
<http://www.badkleinkirchheim.at/news-this-morning-the-slope-is-mine>). The 
dates are 5 and 21 January and 4 and 25 February, tickets cost €69 (suitable 
for good skiers only) and include a two-hour ski pass, small warm-up breakfast 
and brunch. Flights were provided by Ryanair (ryanair.com 
<http://www.ryanair.com/>), which flies from Stansted to Salzburg from 
around £60 return, excluding charges and fees (Salzburg is a two-hour drive 
from Bad Kleinkirchheim). Accommodation was provided by the Hotel Thermenwelt 
Pulverer (+43 4240 744,pulverer.at <http://www.pulverer.at/en>), where 
half-board accommodation in winter costs from €115 per person a night, 
including use of the hotel's spa area
 