
What is it: Bryan Cranston’s new, far-fetched but fun TV thing.

Why you’ll love it: It stars Giovanni Ribisi (Phoebe’s kid brother in Friends) 
as Marius, a super-slick conman fresh out of jail and in desperate need of a 
hideout. He is being pursued by a menacing thug-lord called Vince (Cranston), 
who wants the $100,000 Marius owes him. So Marius becomes Pete (his old cell 
mate, who won’t get out for years) and travels to Pete’s family home in the 
countryside to pose as him until the heat dies down. Real Pete hasn’t been home 
for 20 years and the two men aren’t entirely dissimilar with their brown hair, 
pale skin and chin stubble, so it is probably a safe bet that Marius will go 
undetected among a houseful of relatives and friends who knew Real Pete when he 
was a youngster.

This is where you will either leave Sneaky Pete, tutting about suspension of 
disbelief, or climb aboard for a happy canter around Cranston and co-creator 
David Shore’s mind-paddock. The moment when Marius knocks on the front door at 
Pete’s grandparents (played by Peter Gerety and the marvelous Margo Martindale) 
and says, “Hi, it’s me, Pete”, is make or break in terms of whether you are 
going to enjoy the ride.

Marius’s first few days with his new family are, of course, peppered with 
moments where one of them will pull that, “Remember that thing we used to do?” 
trope and “Pete” will search desperately for a conversational exit. But he is a 
conman so it is meat and drink to him. And, thankfully, this isn’t overused. 
Plus, Audrey (Martindale) is no dummy and starts to suspect her “grandson” is 
not all he seems.

Of course, this is a knockabout crime caper with a charismatic male lead, so 
there is some believable sexy tension with Julia (Marin Ireland), Pete’s 
childhood friend, who now works for his grandparents’ bail bond business. 
Before long, the pair are combining their ass-kicking and confidence 
trickstering skills to great effect on the trail of a dangerous bail-hopper 
with an overprotective mum. Julia, a single mum, is beautiful and independent, 
but with a weakness for “the wrong men”. All ducks present and correct for 
future romance, then.

Marius’s impressive ability to lift a wallet here or steal a mobile there 
offers endless opportunity for cute set pieces. He even has a Bond-style Q in 
the form of old friend Joseph (CS Lee), who runs a one-stop swindling shop for 
the busy con artist on the go. See? Fun. You can’t help but root for him, the 
scoundrel.

As Marius’s old life becomes tangled up with his new one, he finds himself 
stuck between the two, waiting to be found out. Can he walk away from the past 
when Cranston’s tux-wearing thug is threatening to chop bits off Marius’s 
brother unless he gets his money? Of course he can’t. So begin 10 episodes of 
pacey intrigue, very occasionally cliched dialogue and, above all, thumping 
good fun.

Where: Amazon Prime.

Length: Ten episodes, all available from 13 January.

Standout episode: The pilot has the near-impossible task of cramming in a ton 
of exposition while making you side with Ribisi’s character even though he is 
an arsehole. And Cranston’s entrance is choice.

If you like this, watch: Better Call Saul (Netflix), Hustle (DVD).
 