 New life was breathed into the Scottish elections campaigns yesterday when an 
opinion poll revealed the Scottish National Party has begun a dramatic comeback.
With less than a week to go until the election, the latest System Three poll 
for the Glasgow Herald forecasts that the SNP will be only seven seats behind 
Labour at Holyrood. If the result is replicated next week, no party would have 
an overall majority and an SNP-Liberal coalition government is again a 
possibility.

The poll results will make worrying reading for the Tony Blair as he arrives in
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> this morning. Only last week 
SNP support appeared to be in free fall, with System Three putting the party 20 
points behind Labour. Now they appear to be only 11 points behind in the first 
vote, and three points in the crucial second vote.

SNP party strategists are putting the surge down to their latest campaign 
tactic of taking their views directly to the electorate.

The party, battered by a hostile Scottish media, had cancelled daily press 
conferences in favour of public walkabouts and hustings.

The poll sample was taken largely over the weekend, before Sean Connery 
intervened with his rallying cry to SNP activists on Monday. SNP strategists 
believe the 'Connery effect' is still to filter through and they are hoping to 
bite further on Labour's heels over the next few days.

'We think we are gradually beginning to win over the masses of undecided 
voters. We have put forward proposals that people want, they like our style of 
campaigning and it's all beginning to work. Sean Connery is certainly part of 
that,' said a party spokesman.

Labour brushed aside the apparent rise in support for the nationalists. The 
chancellor, Gordon Brown, said: 'As you know, we don't talk about polls.' But 
privately senior figures who had begun to look noticeably more relaxed over the 
last few days, have been jarred by the news.

The poll predicts a tense finish to an election campaign that has lacked any 
real drama. Although Labour is still well ahead of the nationalists, there are 
a high proportion of voters currently 21 per cent who are still undecided. But 
the number of undecided voters has fallen since previous polls and many of 
these voters appear to have been captured by the SNP.

With the gamble of by-passing the media apparently paying off, the SNP 
yesterday continued on this track. The party launched its own newspaper, which 
will have a daily 60,000 print run and will be distributed across Scotland.

The SNP leader, Alex Salmond, has been criticised by the so-called 
fundamentalist wing of his party for failing to make independence the central 
plank of his campaign. But the issue will be brought to the fore today when the 
party unveils its economic plans for an independent Scotland.

In an attempt to win over the hostile business community, Mr Salmond and the 
SNP treasury spokesman, John Swinney, will present their Economics for 
Independence document to a conference in Glasgow.
 