
The chief inspector of schools has warned that some police forces are failing 
to “take their child protection responsibilities seriously”.


In a letter to the chief inspector of police on Tuesday, Sir Michael Wilshaw, 
the outgoing head of the schools inspectorate, said more than half of Ofsted’s 
42 inspections of local authority children’s services in the past year had 
identified serious weaknesses in the police’s contribution to safeguarding 
children.

Inspectors found that police forces were failing to share information about 
domestic abuse cases in a timely way and were not notifying social workers 
quickly enough when children went missing. They also found there were delays by 
the police in vetting people to work with children.

“I would like to be reassured that every chief constable recognises the vital 
role that the police have to play in protecting our most vulnerable children 
from harm,” wrote Wilshaw in a letter to Sir Tom Winsor. “They are the ones 
armed with the intelligence to identify where organised abuse may be taking 
place and to spot emerging patterns of criminal activity.

“I fully appreciate that in the current climate, police forces are facing many 
competing pressures and demands on their limited resources. However, my worry 
is that if chief constables fail to give this issue sufficient priority, we may 
see a repeat of the sort of catastrophic failings we saw a few years ago in 
places like Rotherham, Oxford and elsewhere.”

Gaps remain in tackling child sexual exploitation, Ofsted finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/29/gaps-remain-in-tackling-child-sexual-exploitation-ofsted>
A review by the National Crime Agency in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/23/national-crime-agency-south-yorkshire-police-failings-rotherham-sex-abuse>
 found that a catalogue of police failings left criminals free to sexually 
abuse more than 1,400 children in Rotherham over a 16-year period. A serious 
case review in March last year similarly found that Thames Valley police failed 
to prevent more than 300 young people being sexually exploited by gangs of men 
in Oxfordshire.

Wilshaw said that the most serious concerns raised about the role of police in 
protecting children followed an inspection of children’s services in 
Stockton-on-Tees. Inspectors found an “unacceptable and potentially dangerous 
gulf between the stated priorities of Cleveland police in relation to its 
support for child protection and the practice observed in the course of the 
inspection”, he said.

“In one disturbing case, Ofsted’s lead inspector also had cause to question 
the decision by the police to close an investigation even though there was 
clear evidence that the children concerned had suffered non-accidental 
injuries,” wrote Wilshaw. “It was only through the intervention of the local 
authority, prompted by my inspectors, that this case was reopened and further 
investigated by the police.”


Cleveland police said protecting the vulnerable and recognising risk in their 
communities was their priority. A spokesperson said: “The letter fromOfsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> refers to an inspection, focused 
on Stockton borough council, which took place during May-June 2016.


“We acknowledged the issues raised by Ofsted in their report published in July 
2016 and take the points raised by Ofsted extremely seriously. The force 
co-operated fully with Ofsted inspectors at the time to explain our approach to 
attendance at strategy meetings and measures already in place to deliver 
improvement.”

Responding to Wilshaw’s letter 
<http://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmic/wp-content/uploads/letter-to-sir-michael-wilshaw.pdf>
, Winsor wrote that Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary inspected every 
force in England and Wales annually and this included an assessment of how 
forces protect the vulnerable from harm and support victims.

“In our 2015 vulnerability report, we rated 27 forces as requiring improvement 
and four as inadequate; vulnerability of course includes child protection,” he 
said, adding: “You will of course recognise that many of the problems to which 
you refer are also concerns of local authorities and other statutory agencies.”

He said the body would persist in ensuring that the police understood their 
“very high public duty most efficiently and effectively to use their powers, 
and discharge their responsibilities, in connection with the protection of 
children”.
 