
The RMT has called a fresh 24-hour strike by conductors on Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> trains to come immediately 
before three days of drivers’ strikes, a move that underlines that the dispute, 
and commuter misery, is unlikely to end soon.

Rail strike: search goes on for job Failing Grayling can't do badly | John 
Crace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/rail-strike-failing-grayling-cant-do-badly>
Its members will strike on Monday 23 January and Aslef’s drivers will start 
another round of strikes the following day. Drivers will stage their third day 
of strikes this week on Friday, halting virtually all of Southern’s 2,242 
scheduled daily services.

Southern’s trains were badly disrupted again on Thursday even without a 
strike, due to the knock-on effects of this week’s action and an overtime ban.

Although Southern’s conductors have now been forced to accept new contracts 
rebranding them as onboard supervisors, the dispute over their role and 
responsibilities has continued.

The RMT general secretary, Mick Cash, hit out at the chief executive of 
Southern’s operating company, Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR), saying he had 
failed to honour a pledge to ensure trains had two members of staff onboard – 
one that he made again in a regional BBC TV debate with unions earlier this 
week.

Cash said: “Charles Horton has repeatedly promised publicly to retain a second 
safety-critical member of staff on his trains but, as soon as it comes to 
direct talks, the pledge melts away. That is the main reason why we are forced 
again to put on further strike action.

“It is down to the company to end this posturing and to get back into the room 
with us to kickstart the negotiating process, which is what the public are 
clearly crying out for.

“RMT is available but it is down to GTR to show that same commitment and to 
stick to the promises they gave on camera in front of a TV audience across the 
region.”

A Southern spokesperson said Horton had spoken to the RMT’s representative 
Mick Lynch immediately after the BBC debate to invite the union to fresh talks 
but had been given no dates or times, adding: “We remain ready to meet the RMT 
leadership, as we do Aslef, any time, any place, anywhere to find a way to end 
their disputes.”

The prospect of talks appears to have receded as relations between the train 
operator and unions worsen. GTR announced on Wednesday it was again pursuing 
legal action against Aslef to halt the strikes, going to the supreme court 
after losing a court case and an appeal last year.

In December, the high court rejected GTR’s argument that a strike would breach 
rights under EU law guaranteeing freedom of movement. Aslef described last 
month’s legal action as a waste of money for taxpayers, shareholders and 
passengers.

The union insisted it had genuine safety concerns over the further 
implementation of driver-only operation on Southern services, including the 
responsibility of drivers to close the train doors. The potential ramifications 
were highlighted this week when a driver appeared in court after a passenger 
was dragged along a station platform and injured after trapping her arm in a 
train door.

Southern: Labour calls for inquiry into 'murky world' of rail franchising
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/southern-rail-labour-inquiry-franchise>
However, rail industry bodies say that driver-only operation is safe, a 
position endorsed last week again in a report by the rail regulator, the Office 
of Rail and Road.

The row over driver-only operation could soon extend north, with the RMT 
having this week given ultimatums to both Arriva Rail North, which runs 
Northern, and Merseyrail to commit to keeping guards on trains or face 
industrial action.

The union warned that the taxpayer would be liable for losses to train 
companies in the event of similar strikes, with the government having inserted 
clauses in new franchise agreements to allow firms to claim for lost revenue.

The RMT estimated that the Southern contract meant the cost to the public 
purse in strikes was now £60m in lost revenue. Cash said the clauses meant 
taxpayers would “bankroll Theresa May’s war on the unions”.
 