
Rafael Behr mentions false memory regarding the old British Rail (Rail chiefs 
and unions: can passengers trust either 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/all-aboard-failing-train-service-lack-of-accountability-commuters>
, 4 January), a condition he appears to suffer from himself. He writes that BR 
was synonymous with shabbiness. Really? In 1993, InterCity, the flagship, was 
rated by passengers at 95% in this regard (The InterCity Story, 1994). Customer 
satisfaction at service levels was at 98%, and the company made a profit for 
the six years to 1994, when it was privatised, despite the huge distractions of 
that process. Which privatised rail company has since delivered these levels of 
success? To equate BR with Southern Rail is a calumny.
Dr John Carlisle
Sheffield

• Rafael Behr correctly identifies the market failures at the heart the rail 
network. However, he wrongly dismisses public ownership as a solution to these 
failures, and misreads the reasons why the public support such a policy. On the 
first point, public ownership works. When the east coast line was in public 
ownership it was the most efficient franchise in the system, returning £1bn to 
the Treasury. If the whole network was in public ownership, it would save 
£1.2bn a year – that’s money that could be used to invest in network 
improvements or reduce fares. Across Europe, too, public ownership works. So Mr 
Behr is wrong to write off those of us who want the railways in public 
ownership as ideological. Rather it is those who continue to push privatisation 
(mostly just train companies and government ministers) that remain wrongly 
committed to failed economic mantras of the 1980s. They need to catch up.

On the second, the public do care about structures and ownership. In 2015, 
YouGov polling on exactly this issue found that the “whatever works” that Mr 
Behr promotes is in fact the least popular option of all. A clear majority 
favour public ownership in almost all public services. Continuing to promote 
such tired third-way tropes like “whatever works” completely misreads the 
situation and does a disservice to the vast majority who want to see publicly 
owned and run public services.

Lastly, in framing the debate about rail privatisation as a “rail chiefs v 
unions” issue, you actually sideline even further the passengers you claim are 
stuck in the middle. The majority of the public (58%) think privatisation has 
been a failure. Just 13% think it has been a success. The public, not Mr Behr, 
seem to have a good grasp of the situation – they just aren’t being listened to.
Matthew Bramall
Campaigner, We Own It <https://weownit.org.uk>

• Re Rafael Behr’s comments that the usual point of striking, which is to 
deprive the bosses of income, doesn’t apply to a privatised rail franchise, has 
he being paying attention to any of the other significant industrial disputes 
that have occurred over the last few years? This statement is equally 
applicable to the junior doctors, the teachers, the firefighters and the 
numerous other public-sector workers who have taken to the picket lines to 
defend their terms and conditions against a political class that has decided 
they can no longer be justified while refusing to make similar sacrifices 
themselves. In each case, the impact of the strikes has been felt predominately 
by service users, not by the politicians and mandarins who run the services. 
Although inconveniencing the public through such action is regrettable, the 
only alternative faced by these workers would have been to simply accept 
changes that leave them worse off and ultimately lead to a denigration of the 
services they proudly deliver. While such a solution may be beneficial for Mr 
Behr’s commute in the short term, I for one am glad that there are still 
workers who maintain both the right and the will to take action to defend both 
decent jobs and the services we all rely on.
Andy Prendergast
Senior organiser, GMB

• There are three parties to the Southern Rail dispute, not two. Normally, 
though nothing is normal in our dysfunctional railway system, the rail company 
keeps the ticket revenue and pays the government a contract fee. With Southern, 
the government keeps the ticket revenue and pays Southern an agreed contract 
fee, whether it runs any services or not. So there is no financial imperative 
for Southern to resolve the dispute. It’s the government that wants to prolong 
this dispute as it sees this as an opportunity to hang out to dry two of the 
last unions that still have some industrial muscle.
Michael Gold
Green candidate for Walthamstow 2015

• With regard to Samantha Renke’s recent experience travelling on Virgin 
Trains and the facilities available to disabled passengers (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/i-feared-for-my-health-disabled-actor-tells-of-nightmare-train-journey>
, 4 January), I recall that when Jeremy Corbyn went public with complaints of 
overcrowding on a Virgin train, Richard Branson was very quick to release CCTV 
footage refuting the accusations. In a spirit of openness and fairness, perhaps 
Richard could arrange to release CCTV pictures of this latest incident just as 
quickly, to allow us to see what happened and make up our own minds about the 
overcrowding issues on Virgin trains. I won’t hold my breath.
Vernon Dodd
Radcliffe-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 