
Two weeks of unprecedented disruption on Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail now loom in January after 
a planned six-day walkout by train drivers was split over two periods, a move 
which the train company said would “maximise misery for commuters”.


The driver’s union, Aslef, said it was “taking a longer-term view” of the 
dispute, and warned that strikes over driver-only operated trains could spread 
to other franchises such as Northern.

Drivers on Southern had been due to strike from Monday but will now walk out 
on 10, 11 and 13 January, and again on 24, 25 and 27 January.

Whelan said the union had revised its action in response to passengers’ 
concerns over a week-long strike, as well as in consideration of how long the 
dispute could last.

But Southern’s owning company, Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR), said it was “a 
cynical ploy to minimise the impact on Aslef’s drivers’ pay packets and 
maximises misery, disruption and hardship for passengers”.

The firm said there would still be major disruption: no trains will run at all 
on strike days, while an ongoing overtime ban will continue to disrupt services 
through the week. The company is organising 200 coaches or buses each day from 
key stations to connect with other train operators’ services, but says it can 
only offer limited help, and has told passengers not to travel if possible.

The passenger service director Angie Doll said: “Anyone who does travel should 
expect to queue, plan for longer journeys and realise the service they join 
will be exceptionally busy.”

She added: “This strike is futile – drivers are now operating the doors on 
over 75% of our trains and our onboard supervisors have moved into their new 
roles.”

Southern’s passengers have suffered months of disruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/13/my-life-shouldnt-be-dictated-by-southern-rail-strikes>
, with industrial action exacerbating problems such as staff shortages, 
engineering work and other problems in the wider franchise.

Before December, strikes by conductors in the RMT union had affected services, 
but driver walkouts have brought Southern to a standstill.

Mick Whelan, general secretary of Aslef, said his union had previously had 
good relations with Southern’s owning company – and he had even written in 
support of GTR as it bid for the franchise, “which I don’t think I’ll be doing 
again”. But he said the government was writing “contentious terms” into the 
contracts that train operating companies were bidding for.

He said: “If the tactic of the Department for Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> and the train operating companies is 
going to be implication without agreement, we’ll find ourselves in the same 
place again and again.”

Some services in the Northern franchise as well as Merseyrail trains are 
intended to become driver-only, which could mean more action. Whelan said if 
the practice was to spread to other franchises without agreement, he would be 
“obliged to” call more strikes.

Whelan said the dispute was not politically motivated, despite claims from the 
transport secretary, Chris Grayling, that Aslef had promised him a decade of 
strikes. The Aslef general secretary said the action was being led by his 
members, who had real safety concerns about closing the doors and operating the 
trains alone. “Train drivers are saying they don’t want to do it, it’s not 
safe, and they are incredibly angry about it being imposed.”

'My life shouldn’t be dictated by Southern rail strikes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/13/my-life-shouldnt-be-dictated-by-southern-rail-strikes>
Aslef will be distributing flyers to the public next week to show what they 
say a driver sees using the CCTV in cabs to close doors. He said improved pay – 
which the union is seeking in parallel talks – would not affect the strikes. 
“You can’t buy this.”

Despite the action by the RMT and now Aslef, conductors have already been 
rebranded as onboard supervisors, without responsibility for closing train 
doors. But, Whelan said, Southern trains were now regularly leaving without an 
onboard supervisor, in breach of pledges made by GTR to retain a second onboard 
member of staff on its trains. He said: “It’s happening now. We’re keeping our 
fingers crossed every day there isn’t a major incident.”

The rail minister, Paul Maynard, dismissed Aslef’s safety concerns. He said: 
“This modern way of running trains has been safely used elsewhere in the UK for 
30 years. There is no safety issue; the independent rail regulator has 
confirmed it is safe.”

He said: “Fewer strike days will still cause massive disruption for 
passengers. I urge Aslef to call off these wholly unnecessary strikes and come 
to the table for talks.”

Meanwhile, talks at Acas between London Underground and the RMT and TSSA 
unions concluded on Wednesday, meaning hundreds of station staff are set to go 
on strike for 24 hours from Sunday evening in a row over the effects of closing 
ticket offices. Talks will continue but unions warned that time was running out 
to avert a walkout that could see many Tube stations closed on Monday.
 