
A state school in south London lauded by politicians is likely to be stripped 
of its management after refusing to repay £2m in government funds and charging 
pupils to use its own swimming pool through a tangled network of payments and 
companies.

The Department for Education said that the Durand Academy Trust, which runs 
the school in Lambeth, has beentold its funding would be ended 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/notice-of-intention-to-terminate-to-durand-academy-trust>
 after “repeated and significant breaches” of its agreement, and the school’s 
inability to cut ties with Sir Greg Martin, its former head teacher.

The episode ends a long-running saga involving Martin – who was knighted for 
services to education in 2013 – and the school’s byzantine commercial 
structure. At one point Martin was paid £160,000 a year as director of a 
leisure centre that rents property from the school, on top of receiving his 
£230,000 annual salary as head.

John Nash, the academies minister, said that “serious concerns about financial 
management and governance” had led to the notice being issued.

“This is not a decision we have taken lightly but it has been done to 
safeguard the future education of Durand’s pupils and to ensure public money 
and public assets intended for the education of children are managed 
effectively,” Nash said.

Durand Academy’s management did not respond to requests for comment.


Martin was previously praised by the former education secretary Michael Gove, 
Liberal Democrat David Laws and other politicians for his work in turning 
around the struggling inner city primary school and expanding it into an 
all-through school of more than 1,000 pupils, including acontroversial boarding 
school in Sussex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/jun/29/lambeth-boarding-school-teenagers>
 which the DfE was prepared to fund.

As education secretary, Gove appeared at Durand in 2011 to deliver a 
high-profile speech, and described Durand as “an already outstanding school 
doing a wonderful job for children in one of London’s most challenging 
neighbourhoods”.

“What has been achieved here is inspiring,” Gove remarked, and later that year 
described Martin as one of his “heroes” as part of a select group of “great 
headteachers”.

Nearly half of academy trusts paid millions to ‘dubious’ contacts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/13/nearly-half-academy-trusts-related-party-transactions>
But the school’s overlapping web of payments between different trusts and 
companies revolving around Martin brought it to the attention of regulators, 
including the Education Funding Agency (EFA) and charity commissioners.

Durand and Martin also came under the spotlight of the National Audit Office, 
which saw Martin scrutinised over his additional £160,000 in fees as the owner 
of a separate company running rental accommodation and a fitness centre from 
the school’s property. The NAO cited “a large number of conflicts of interest” 
in the way the academy was run.

Martin was also grilled in 2015 by parliament’s public accounts committee, and 
suffered further embarrassment over his scheme to start a dating website using 
the school as a contact address.

By the middle of this year, the DfE and Durand were engaged in legal battles, 
with theDfE issuing a provisional notice to terminate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/21/academy-trust-served-financial-notice-warning>
 its funding unless the school’s management met its demands. They included the 
return of nearly £2m in funding that had been transferred from the Durand 
Academy Trust that runs the school to the Durand Educational Trust, a separate 
charitable arm.

After stepping down as head teacher last year, Martin stayed on as a governor 
of the school despite the DfE’s demands. He remains unrepentant, and four 
months ago gave an interview saying “for the the greater good of the education 
system we need more people like me”.

The DfE’s patience was exhausted by the legal manoeuvers, and led to a blunt 
letter from the EFA’s chief executive, Peter Lauener 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/notice-of-intention-to-terminate-to-durand-academy-trust>
, to begin the formal process to replace Durand Academy Trust in running the 
school.

The letter from Lauener says that the trust has “failed or refused to comply 
fully with six of the eight requirements” in its earlier notice, and that the 
DfE has been requesting the full repayment of the £2m since February 2015. 
Lauener notes that he has “no confidence” the trust’s managers will repay the 
money.

The termination notice details how the leisure centre’s operating company 
charged the school £158,000 in 2014 for using its own property – including the 
school swimming pool by pupils during school hours – at market rates rather 
than at cost.

The Durand case closely resembles another school lauded by Gove. An EFA report 
into thePerry Beeches academy trust in Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/10/perry-beeches-academy-trust-lauded-by-cameron-falls-apart-executive-head-quits>
 uncovered complex accounting and additional payments to the executive head 
teacher, Liam Nolan, leading to the trust’s management being deposed.

Mike Kane, Labour’s shadow schools minister, said: “This is an extremely 
concerning case which further exposes the Tories’ failure to properly oversee 
academy schools and make sure taxpayers’ money is being spent where it should 
be.

“The Conservatives need to get a grip of the academy system as it stands, 
rather than make the problem any bigger by adding more schools and academy 
trusts.

“It’s clear what we need: good teachers in good schools, but every day that 
goes by shows the Tories can’t deliver the change we need.”

The academy trust can appeal against the DfE termination, which comes into 
effect in a year’s time.
 