
A strike by train drivers on Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail planned for next week has 
been suspended and talks announced, raising fresh hopes of a resolution to the 
long-running dispute.

The TUC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc> will host talks from 
Wednesday between Southern’s owner, Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR), and the 
train drivers’ union Aslef.


The union proposed suspending the action for new talks, to be chaired by the 
TUC general secretary Frances O’Grady. The government then proposed that the 
talks be co-chaired by a rail industry executive, a condition accepted by both 
Aslef and GTR.

Mick Whelan, Aslef’s general secretary, said he wanted government backing for 
the process “given the implications of this dispute for the wider railway 
industry”.

“Aslef believes that the best way to resolve the dispute at Southern is for 
all parties to engage in meaningful talks, without preconditions, aimed at 
finding an agreed way forward,” he said.


Charles Horton, GTR’s chief executive, said it was “an important and 
significant development for the travelling public and the regional economy”. He 
said the firm’s “focus and efforts now will be on productive talks with the 
union and trying to find a solution and a way forward”.


Aslef is expected to formally confirm the suspension of its industrial action 
when talks begin at the TUC’s Congress House, including an overtime ban that 
has also affected services on the short-staffed rail network.


In a joint statement, O’Grady and the co-chair, Andy Meadows of Abellio – 
which runs ScotRail, Greater Anglia and Merseyrail – said: “We are committed to 
finding a fair solution to this dispute. We are pleased the parties have agreed 
to meet for meaningful talks.”

ScotRail reached a working settlement with unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/05/scotrail-dispute-resolved-staff-accept-deal-guards-southern-rmt>
 last year in a similar dispute over the role of guards on the franchise.

The possible breakthrough comes ahead of a week that could have been the most 
disruptive yet for the 300,000 passengers who travel daily on Southern. Drivers 
were due to walk out for three days from Tuesday after a strike by conductors 
on Monday. The conductor’s strike is still due to go ahead, although the RMT 
union has indicated it is willing to join the talks.


A spokesperson said: “RMT has written to the TUC requesting that this union be 
involved in the same process over the current Southern guards’ dispute that has 
been agreed with our sister union Aslef over the drivers’ dispute. RMT is 
awaiting a response to that request.”

Talks have broken down before, but the series of announcements and a new venue 
may indicate a new willingness to find an agreement.


A deal would be welcome news for commuters and businesses hit by Southern’s 
breakdown in service, but even without strikes passengers have experienced 
enormous disruption. On the rail replacement bus currently serving the line 
from London to Seafood in Sussex, which has been closed since early December 
because of staff shortages during the overtime ban, passengers were dubious.

Margery Diamond, 48, said: “The railway is the lifeline really. You’re 
stranded without it. But people feel lied to. If anyone else ran a company like 
this they’d be fired. I don’t believe it will end.”


 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/14/mick-whelan-aslef-train-drivers-union-boss-interview>
 