
A six-day strike by drivers on Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail next week has been cut to 
three days, but there will be three further strike days at the end of the month.


Members of Aslef were due to walk out from Monday, which would have halted 
services for the entire week.


The union announced that strikes would now be held on 10, 11 and 13 January 
but not on other days next week.


The general secretary of Aslef, Mick Whelan, said the move did not mean the 
union was rolling back and warned of further strikes.


Later the union said it would be holding three more days of strike action on 
January 24, 25 and 27.


Whelan said: “We are taking a longer-term view of this trade dispute. The 
company has not been prepared to move – it is simply going through the motions, 
turning up at Acas, as it did yesterday, and telling us that it intends to 
impose driver-only operation.

“We remain committed to a negotiated settlement, as was reached with ScotRail, 
but it is difficult to negotiate with people who are not prepared to be 
flexible. We still believe a deal can be done but we are, at the moment, a long 
way from that position.

“It is time for the company to come up with a genuine offer rather than carry 
on posturing.”

The union had reduced next week’s action out of consideration for how long the 
dispute will last and because of concerns from the public about the impact of a 
week-long stoppage.


Southern’s passengers have suffered months of disruption because of industrial 
action, staff shortages and other problems.


Aslef members are operating an overtime ban that is leading to services being 
cancelled or delayed every day.


The Rail, Maritime and Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> 
union is also embroiled in a dispute with Southern over changes to the role of 
conductors, which has led to a series of strikes.


A Southern spokesman said: “This is a cynical ploy to minimise the impact on 
Aslef’s drivers’ pay packets and maximises misery, disruption and hardship for 
passengers.


“Aslef’s move shows pure contempt for the travelling public and it still 
causes massive disruption over next week. These strikes are pointless and they 
should call the whole thing off and let common sense prevail.”



 