
The union behind a series of strikes disrupting services on the Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail network has accepted an 
offer of direct talks with the government in an attempt to solve the 
long-running dispute.


The RMT, which represents the on-board supervisors, formerly conductors, on 
Southern trains, said its general secretary, Mick Cash, would meet the 
transport secretary,Chris Grayling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>, at his earliest 
convenience.

In a letter on Thursday, Grayling wrote: “I ask you again to call off the RMT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt> strikes on Southern and come to the 
table to meet with me to reach a resolution to this long-running dispute.”


The news is unlikely to affect the disruption ahead for commuters this month, 
when two strikes called by Aslef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/southern-rail-drivers-split-planned-six-day-strike-in-two>
, the train drivers’ union, will stop all Southern services for at least six 
days. Just 12 of the drivers are RMT members and intend to join the action.


Rail chiefs or unions: can passengers trust either of them? | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/all-aboard-failing-train-service-lack-of-accountability-commuters>
In response to the same invitation from Grayling, the Aslef general secretary, 
Mick Whelan, said he was willing to meet again to explain drivers’ concerns, 
but warned that “your offer to meet does not provide a rationale for my union 
to call off next week’s strike”.

It does, however, represent some movement in the dispute, during which unions 
have opposed changes to the role and responsibilities of conductors on trains 
as more services move to driver-only operation.


Both unions have long argued that the change threatens passenger safety. They 
also say the move has been imposed by the Department forTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport>, leading to calls for direct talks 
with the government.

Grayling has been reluctant to get involved, telling MPs that such a move 
would escalate and further politicise the dispute. But the transport secretary 
is now seeking to involve the unions in drawing up a national framework for 
safely dispatching trains – a move that could head off further disputes in 
other franchises, or at least nullify rows over safety.

The invitation to talks was prompted by a further report by the rail 
regulator, the Office of Rail and Road (ORR), that said driver-only trains were 
broadly safe for Southern if it upgraded some CCTV facilities and took other 
precautions.

Referring to Southern’s parent company, Govia Thameslink Railway, Ian Prosser, 
HM chief inspector of railways, said: “Following a thorough review of 
GTR-Southern’s method and implementation of driver-only operation, ORR is 
satisfied that with suitable equipment, proper procedures and competent staff 
in place, it is a safe method of working.”

Grayling has asked Prosser to draw up a national safety framework to lay out 
ground rules for how driver-only trains can safely operate, saying he expects 
the unions to be fully involved in this process.

Grayling said: “This is a powerful report from the independent rail regulator 
that confirms that Southern’s plans for driver-controlled trains are safe.


“We should never stop trying to make our railways safer, and that is why the 
ORR has followed their review with recommendations on how GTR can go even 
further to improve the safety of train dispatch.

“I have written to the unions again today to ask them to suspend this needless 
strike. This report should provide an opportunity for both sides to get back 
round the table for talks to put an end to this dispute, which is causing 
misery for hundreds of thousands of passengers.”

While Southern said the report confirmedits plans were safe, the RMT denounced 
it as a “total whitewash” and questioned the independence of the ORR. Cash said 
the authors had taken no evidence from unions and ignored other safety issues 
around driver-only operation, adding that it “proves conclusively that the ORR 
is no longer fit for purpose and is nothing more than an arm of government, 
wholly committed to propping up the train companies and the Department for 
Transport”.

Whelan said: “Despite what Southern railways is disingenuously claiming, the 
report from the Office of Rail and Road does not give driver-only operation a 
clean bill of health. It doesn’t say it is safe, merely that it can be safe.”

Charles Horton, the chief executive of GTR, said: “The independent rail 
regulator carried out a full and comprehensive review, including a thorough 
risk assessment, of our plans to implement driver-controlled trains on new 
routes on the Southern network. We warmly welcome their robust report, which 
confirms that our roll-out programme is safe.”


He repeated calls for Aslef to stop its planned strikes, starting on 10 
January, saying: “The unions must now acknowledge that they have no credible 
argument that it’s an unsafe method of operation.”
 