
A publicity roadshow aimed at encouraging foreigners to buy Spanish holiday 
homes has been branded "an insult" by groups of Britons caught in legal 
difficulties over the status and funding of their properties on the Costas.

Spanish housing minister, Beatriz Corredor, and public works minister, José 
Blanco, visit Britain this week at the start of a six-nation tour. The Spanish 
authorities said the ministers will use the roadshow to encourage individuals 
and institutional investors to buy some of the estimated 1m new homes lying 
empty inSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>.

"We must revive the holiday housing market to speed up the 'digestion of 
stock'," said a Spanish government spokesman, while Blanco claimed the exercise 
will "highlight the strengths of our economy [and] transparency and legal 
certainty of our planning legislation".

However, protest bodies such as the Spanish Bank Guarantees Petition 
<http://www.bankguaranteesinspain.com/> and the Finca Parcs Action Group 
<http://www.fincaparcsactiongroup.com/> are organising online petitions calling 
for the roadshow to instead address long-standing grievances on the alleged 
refusal of Spanish banks to honour aval bancario, or bank guarantees.

Since the late 1960s, Britons buying homes off-plan from Spanish developers 
have been told their deposits go into third-party reserve funds set up by 
Spanish banks. If a developer goes bankrupt or fails to build a property the 
banks then refund a purchaser's deposit. But in recent years, the groups claim, 
many banks have allegedly refused to honour the guarantees of several thousands 
of British buyers.

Keith Rule, a spokesman for the campaigners, said: "Many estate agents, 
lawyers and banks were negligent and acted with a complete lack of professional 
due diligence. We, as innocent victims of the Spanish housing market, demand 
action and recompense."

Ruth Genda from Wymondham in Leicestershire put down a £75,000 deposit on a 
Spanish holiday home in 2003. Construction was delayed, but as the apartment 
was finally completed it was declared an "illegal build" as it didn't have 
formal planning permission. Genda took Banco Popular Hipotecario (BPH) to 
court, which declared her guarantee valid and ordered the bank to refund the 
purchase. But BPH appealed and the ruling was overturned.

"The case was eventually dismissed and my deposit was never returned. We 
believe thousands are in the same position. Where is the transparency and 
fairness which the government ministers now want others to believe in?" Genda 
said.

The Spanish government says the roadshow is a "pioneering initiative" 
targeting countries with national economies that are recovering from the 
downturn and which have historically provided many of the foreign buyers for 
properties on the Costas.

This week's publicity events in Britain will be followed by similar exercises 
in France, Germany, the Netherlands and Scandinavia, with Russia later in the 
year.

Michael Cashman, a Labour member of the European parliament and long-time 
supporter of British buyers seeking bank guarantee repayments, has written to 
the Spanish government. "What about those that have already invested and who 
have found absolutely no results through the Spanish legal system?" he asked, 
adding: "I would not advise any investment in Spanish property until this 
problem is resolved."
 