
Parents in Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> are being urged to 
go on a weekend homework strike this month in protest against the 
“unacceptable” amount of after-school tasks their children are given.

The homework load of Spanish children has long been a sore point with some 
parents, who argue that the burden is too great, places too much pressure on 
pupils and eats into family time.

According to a 2012 study by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development 
<http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/education/pisa-2012-results-what-makes-a-school-successful-volume-iv_9789264201156-en>
, Spanish 15-year-olds have 6.5 hours of homework a week compared with an 
average of 4.9 across the 38 OECD countries.

The Spanish Confederation of Associations of Mothers and Fathers of Students 
(Ceapa) has decided that enough is enough and is calling on parents whose 
children attend Spanish state schools to boycott weekend homework in November.

“We’ve lost a bit of common sense in this country when it comes to talking 
about education and we’ve got a system in which boys’ and girls’ free time has 
disappeared,” said José Luis Pazos, president of Ceapa.

“Schools are passing on tasks to families that they shouldn’t be. They’ve made 
us into second teachers and left children in the latter stages of secondary 
children with up to 60 hours of schoolwork a week. It starts with children from 
the ages of three to six doing half an hour’s homework every day. For us, 
that’s an unacceptable situation.”

Pazos said Ceapa disagreed profoundly with the notion that children should 
endure huge amounts of homework in the hope that it would ensure them a better 
future.

“They should be happy when they’re little and learn that life isn’t just about 
someone telling you that you have to suffer inexplicably,” he said, adding: 
“The model needs to change because society has changed.”

Schoolchildren have to fit their homework around the school day, which varies 
from region to region and school to school, but starts early – from around 8am 
or 9am – and finishes anywhere between 2pm and 5pm (with a long lunch break). 
However, schools are increasingly using an 8am-2pm timetable to save money and 
in the face of evidence that suggests the longer hours do not yield better 
results.

Ceapa, which represents 12,000 parents associations, said the strike had 
received support from both parents and some teachers.


The group is providing striking parents with three letters to give to their 
children’s schools: one asking the headteacher not to set weekend homework, 
another making the same request of teachers, and a third explaining that the 
work has not been done because of the “constitutional right that families have 
to make what they consider to be the best decisions for family life, which is a 
private matter and one on which schools should not intrude”.

Parents waiting to pick up their children from the Padre Coloma infant and 
primary school in eastern Madrid on Wednesday afternoon said finding the right 
balance between homework and family life was sometimes tricky. None, however, 
seemed overly militant about the issue.

Patricia Ruiz said her eight-year-old son would be getting five tasks this 
weekend, which would take him about an hour and a half - long enough to cause 
arguments.

“I spend the whole day trying to get him to do his homework otherwise he’ll be 
punished,” she said.

Ricky Pérez, a security worker, said he thought the school was giving pupils 
about the right amount: “It’s a normal level of homework here; they’re not 
doing it all day.”

Beatriz Velásquez, who works in cleaning, reckoned children now ought to be 
counting their blessings.

“When I went to school, we had homework all week and at weekends – about 14 
hours a week [in total],” she said.

“My children have it easier as they don’t have as much as I did, or as much as 
they do at other schools. They have time to play, which is the most important 
thing. They need to study, but they also need to have the time to be kids.”

A spokesman for the education department of Madrid said homework was a matter 
for individual schools rather than regional governments.


“They’re the ones who know best what the need is in each case,” he said. “It’s 
a question of autonomy: the teachers know what the needs of every student and 
every class are. But we do urge that schools try to make sure that different 
teachers and departments coordinate homework so that they’re not all giving a 
lot of homework at the same time. We also recommend that schools explain their 
homework policy to parents when they enrol their children.”
 