
It is the meal most associated with the UK, along with slurping tea and 
moaning about the weather. But the great British fish supper could be on the 
way out, replaced by more continental variations such as squid and chips, as 
seas continue to warm, the British Ecological Society will be told this week.

Britons may have to adopt a more continental diet when it comes to fish, as 
climate change sees cold-water fish such as cod gradually replaced by squid and 
other warm-water species, according to research led by Dr John Pinnegar of 
Cefas, theCentre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science 
<https://www.cefas.co.uk/>.


“Our models for 2025 and beyond suggest that seawater temperature may continue 
to rise in the future,” said Pinnegar. “As a result, UK waters will become more 
hospitable for some species and less suitable for others, with the overall 
result that most commercial species will move northwards.”

Squid numbers have increased dramatically over the past 35 years in the North 
Sea, according to Cefas, which has monitored North Sea fish populations for the 
past 114 years. It said squid was found at 60% of its 76 survey stations in 
2016, compared with just 20% in 1984.

The organisation analyses records of where fish are caught and water 
temperature, to monitor the impact of climate change and fishing intensity to 
long-term changes in abundance.


Cod numbers have been slow to recover after overfishing drastically reduced 
their numbers, according to Cefas. While there was 1.3m tonnes of cod in the 
North Sea in 1971, numbers fell to 124,000 tonnes in 2004. Following the 
imposition of fish stock quotas, that increased to 295,000 tonnes in 2016, but 
scientists believe cod reproduction has been hampered by warming waters.

The UK became a net importer of fish in 1984, a year after the Common 
Fisheries Policy and its quotas were introduced. Two-thirds of British catch – 
including scallops and langoustines – are exported, while British consumers 
remain loyal to varieties of traditional fish no longer caught by Britons, such 
as cod.


Out of the fryer and into the fire: my fish and chip hell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/03/out-of-the-fryer-and-into-the-fire-my-fish-and-chip-hell>
“UK consumers enjoy eating quite a limited range of seafood, but in the long 
term we will need to adapt our diets,” said Pinnegar. “In 2025 and beyond, we 
may need to replace cod and other old favourites with warm-water species such 
as squid, mackerel, sardine and red mullet.”


Pinnegar, who will present his results at the British Ecological Society 
annual meeting at ACC, Liverpool, on Monday, said small-scale fisheries 
targeting warm-water species such as squid, sardine and anchovy would be likely 
to overtake fisheries catching more traditional species such as haddock and cod.


The Scottish Fisherman’s Federation recently argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/07/brexit-vote-great-relief-for-uk-fishing-industry-lords>
 that Brexit could help the UK’s fishing industry to become a world-leading 
seafood exporter like Norway, the world’s leading producer of salmon and the 
second largest seafood exporter.


Bertie Armstrong, its chief executive, said the referendum result would enable 
Britain to regain control of its waters after decades of “common grazing” 
rights given to European neighbours.
 