
This is the scenario: an employee goes into their place of work on a Sunday to 
host an out-of-hours event for some clients. These kind of gigs aren’t 
uncommon, and while this time of the week there are less people around the 
worksite than usual the place is right in the middle of a major city, opposite 
a train station and a 24-hour McDonald’s. The employee may be young but they’ve 
been doing this kind of work for a while. There is no reason to expect anything 
will go wrong.

But something does go wrong. Something happens on that night on that worksite 
that leaves the worker critically injured and dying. According to reports, the 
clients are present when they realise the worker is dead. But they don’t phone 
emergency services. They don’t even run to the nearest police station – a mere 
290 metres away. They flee.

Family of woman found dead in Australian strip club tell of devastation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/family-of-woman-stacey-tierney-found-dead-in-australian-strip-club-tell-of-devastation>
And a 29-year-old is left dead in their place of work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/family-of-woman-stacey-tierney-found-dead-in-australian-strip-club-tell-of-devastation>
 for 12 hours before someone finally reports that the death has taken place.

Yes, the police are now investigating. Yes, there’s going to be a coronial 
inquiry. But because this workplace death has occurred in what is known in
Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> as a 
“gentleman’s club” and the worker – a young British woman called Stacey Tierney 
– was employed as an exotic dancer there, the news story travelling the world 
is one where the “bombshell” that followed her death wasn’t the disgraceful 
alleged conduct of her clients but her own choice of job.

I only wish I were joking but a Sydney newspaper I can’t bring myself to name 
actually wrote that for parents who had just learned their child was dead 
“there was another bombshell coming” – as if holding down a job in an adult 
entertainment role could possibly be worse than death.

Stacey Tierney’s story has got to me. For years I lived only a couple of 
hundred metres away from where her death occurred – and knowing it as a busy 
area, knowing how many people are always around even late on a Sunday night, 
the abandonment of her there is of a bleakness that is enraging. It is 
difficult to imagine a more profound disrespect of a human being than that 
shown to Tierney in death ... until you see some media coverage of it. One 
British tabloid described her dancing job as a “lucrative but seedy sideline” – 
accompanied by photos of her in a bikini.

“Media coverage of this woman’s tragic death is shocking but not surprising,” 
says Jane Gilmore. Gilmore is the Melbourne journalist and editor whose infamous
“FixedIt” project <http://janegilmore.com/category/fixedit/> exposes 
victim-blaming and slut-shaming in media headlines.

“Reporting, particularly from tabloid publications, routinely separates women 
into ‘good’ women – loving wives and mothers – and ‘bad’ women, where any hint 
of sexuality is portrayed as evidence of moral failure,” Gilmore explains. “It 
plays into the myth that women can be ‘bad’ and that such women are responsible 
for crimes committed against them. While there is no evidence yet about how 
Stacey died, the media has already diminished her life and her death with 
salacious speculation about her ‘secret’ life ... which must be heart-breaking 
for her grieving family and friends.”

 This “salacious” tradition of reporting fuels the stigma associated with work 
in adult entertainment and the sex industry. One of the saddest parts of 
Tierney’s story is this young woman travelling in a foreign country on her own 
didn’t feel she could tell her parents what she was doing.

Even sadder is that for adult entertainers and sex workers, the stigma 
enhances workplace risk – because it compromises disclosure, reporting and 
external respect for the maintenance of workplace safety standards. Stigma 
normalises a dangerous assumption that adult entertainers and sex workers don’t 
have the same right to work in safety as others working in, say, mining, 
construction, classrooms or anywhere else. That’s untrue.

The new normal: why television has chosen to humanize sex workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/14/television-sex-workers-porn-the-girlfriend-experience>
“We’re very used to negative coverage,” says Jane Green, the spokesperson of 
Victoria’s Vixen Collective, which represents workers in these industries. Even 
though the cause of Tierney’s death is still not known, Green says that, “The 
tone in reporting injury or violence in adult industries crosses over to victim 
blaming very clearly – you can see that in the treatment of Stacey Tierney’s 
death.”

Green is right to point out that sensationalised reporting targeted to one 
group of workers obscures the attention that should be paid to a universal 
right to safety at work. “All workers deserve to work in safe workplaces,” says 
Green “and no one should be vilified or treated as if their workplace excuses 
or justifies harm against them.”

There is no allegation the club where Tierney died was in any way involved in 
her death.

To ignore the role that cultural mythologies play in marginalising any group 
of working people has consequences for us all. As the investigation of 
Tierney’s death proceeds, the allegation that her clients abandoned her is too 
easy to believe. We have all, alas, absorbed lifetimes of cultural messaging 
that create convenient – and immoral – excuses for doing so.
 