
Thousands of people along England’s east coast have been evacuated from their 
homes as life-threatening floods were expected to hit towns and villages at 
Friday night’s high tide.


But while many have been forced to spend the night in shelters, there was 
relief as the tide came and went without the storm surge causing as much damage 
to communities as had been feared.

There was some flooding along the Yorkshire coast and people in Essex were 
still crossing their fingers late into Friday night, with the worst set to hit 
in the early hours of this morning.

Norfolk fire and rescue service said it attended a few incidents to assist 
with flooding but the area, which was expected to be the worst hit, seemed to 
have been largely spared.

“The river did get pretty high but I didn’t think it would ever go over the 
walls. I guess there was a lot of panicking but you can’t be too careful,” said 
52-year-old Charles Osborne from Great Yarmouth, Norfolk.

Late on Friday, Norfolk police said a man had been arrested for public order 
offences after jumping into the river in Great Yarmouth amid the flood 
warnings. “Despite numerous warnings from police and our partner agencies to 
stay away from the water, a small number of people do not seem to be taking 
this message seriously,” Supt Dave Buckley said.

Police, the fire service and the army were called out to protect residents 
along the east coast. Flooding had been expected around midday on Friday but 
high tide passed without incident.

In the evening, the Environment Agency (EA) had 17 severe warnings in effect. 
An evacuation also took place in Jaywick, near Clacton-on-Sea, Essex. A severe 
flood warning remained in place for the village for the high tide expected 
shortly after midnight.

A full evacuation plan was triggered at about 11am on Friday, and by the 
evening, scores had sought safety in emergency refuges in Essex. By early 
evening more than 170 people had registered – many with their pets – at 
emergency rest centres in Clacton and West Mersea.

Earlier, Essex police insisted they were not crying wolf as they urged 
residents to evacuate homes immediately. Some residents facing evacuation have 
expressed concerns about looting, but police said there would be increased 
patrols around empty properties.

Some in Jaywick decided to stay put. Tracey Edwards, 51, said the police told 
her to try to get some sleep in the early evening so she could be alert between 
midnight and 2am, when the tidal surge was expected to peak.

She said she would remain at home because of her snakes and bearded dragons, 
which could not be moved to the rest centre. “It is mostly the elderly that 
have gone, a few people have had family come and pick them up but most people 
are staying in,” she added.

Mother-of-two Danielle Hammond, 21, said she was staying at home for now but 
had moved her belongings upstairs. “I did it all three years ago and came home 
to a couple of puddles on the ground,” she added.

North Yorkshire’s coastal residents were also warned to be prepared for large 
tidal surges yesterday afternoon. The local fire and rescue service said crews 
were dealing with flooding in Sandsend, an area where high tides had been 
expected to cause problems. A spokesman said the service had set up command 
hubs in strategic locations. Some flooding was also seen in Whitby.
 