
Strobe lighting has been shown to reduce levels of the toxic proteins seen in 
Alzheimer’s disease, in findings that raise the tantalising possibility of 
future non-invasive treatments for the disease.

The study, in mice, found that exposure to flickering light stimulated brain 
waves, called gamma oscillations, that are known to be disturbed in Alzheimer’s 
patients. Boosting this synchronous brain activity appeared to act as a cue for 
the brain’s immune cells, prompting them to absorb the sticky amyloid proteins 
that are the most visible hallmarks of the disease in the brain’s of people 
with Alzheimer’s.

The authors caution that a “big if” remains over whether the findings would be 
replicated in humans – and whether cognitive deficits as well as visible 
symptoms of the disease would be improved.

“If humans behave similarly to mice in response to this treatment, I would say 
the potential is just enormous, because it’s so non-invasive, and it’s so 
accessible,” said Li-Huei Tsai, director of the Picower Institute for Learning 
and Memory at MIT, and the paper’s senior author.

Alzheimer’s research has faced a number of major setbacks – most recently the 
failure ofEli Lily’s drug trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/23/dismay-as-alzheimers-drug-solanezumab-fails-in-clinical-trials>
 – after promising results in rodents did not translate into clinical 
improvements for patients.

The latest intervention, scientists predict, should be quicker and cheaper to 
confirm in humans than pharmaceuticals, which typically take more than a decade 
to develop and assess for safety before the clinical efficacy is even examined.

The study, published on Wednesday 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature20587> in the journal Nature, 
hinges on the observation that Alzheimer’s patients show a loss of synchronised 
brain activity, known as gamma oscillations, which is linked to attention and 
memory.


To restore the activity, the scientists first used mice that had been 
genetically engineered such that the neurons that generate gamma activity in 
the brain were sensitive to light. The technique, known as optogenetics, 
allowed the scientists to artificially cause groups of neurons to fire in 
unison by pulsing light into the brains of the mice.


After an hour of stimulation, the researchers found a roughly 50% reduction in 
the levels of beta amyloid proteins in the hippocampus, the brain’s memory 
centre. Closer inspection showed that the amyloid had been taken up by 
microglia, the brain’s immune cells.

In a healthy brain, microglia act as chemical rubbish collectors, surveying 
the local environment, clearing up unwanted compounds, but in Alzheimer’s these 
cells can lose this function and switch into an inflammatory state in which 
they secrete toxic compounds instead. Strengthening gamma oscillations appeared 
to switch the microglia back into a productive state.

Next, the scientist showed that gamma oscillations could also be stimulated 
non-invasively in the visual brain region simply by exposing the mice to a 
flickering light. At 40Hz the flicker of the light is barely discernible and 
would be “not offensive at all” for a person to have in the background.

After being given one hour of flickering light each day for a week, the 
scientists saw a 60% reduction of harmful amyloid plaques in the brains of the 
mice.

Ed Mann, an associate professor of neuroscience at the University of Oxford, 
said: “I was surprised, and it’s exciting, that such a simple stimulus can 
target a molecular pathway and have such an effect in an hour.”

Questions remain, however, about whether boosting gamma oscillations and 
sweeping amyloid plaques out of the visual brain region would help with memory, 
which is centred in the hippocampus, or broader cognitive abilities.

David Reynolds, chief scientific officer at Alzheimer’s Research UK, said: “It 
is conceivable that changing brain cell rhythms could be a future target for 
therapies, but researchers will need to explore how light flickering approaches 
could not only reduce amyloid in the visual area of the brain but in those 
areas more commonly affected in Alzheimer’s.”

The authors suggest that it may be possible to take a multi-sensory approach, 
using a combination of flashing lights and vibrating chairs. Tsai and Ed 
Boyden, a colleague at MIT and co-author, have started a company called Cognito 
Therapeutics to pursue tests in humans.

There are 850,000 people with dementia in Britain and this figure is expected 
to reach 1 million by 2025. Earlier this year,dementia overtook heart disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/dementia-and-alzheimers-leading-cause-of-death-england-and-wales>
 as the leading cause of death in England and Wales.
 