
Back in June I featured the case of AG of London who was charged £60 in fees 
when she booked four tickets through the online agency StubHub.

The charges had not been specified during the booking process (unless you 
clicked a link beside the final total on the payment page), but the mark-up was 
shown on the confirmation email. The Advertising Standards Authority agreed the 
company was in breach of its committee of advertising practice code by not 
making its charges clear at the outset, but it was powerless to insist on a 
refund and StubHub, part of eBay, refused to offer one.

StubHub told me it would make its tickets look uncompetitively expensive if it 
included fees in the advertised price, but that its vague mention of service 
charges (which can be up to 20% of the ticket price) complied fully with the 
code. Undeterred, AG took her case to the small claims court and, as a result, 
StubHub has been required to refund her the £60 fee plus court costs and 
interest.

StubHub insists AG can’t be said to have “won” her case, because it was 
unaware of the legal claim: “It is disappointing to receive a default judgement 
where StubHub did not have the opportunity to defend or represent itself in 
court, and more importantly where our site is fully compliant with applicable 
laws,” says a spokesperson.

“While on this occasion we decided against setting aside this judgment, 
StubHub will continue to vigorously defend any claims of this nature in the 
future. To reiterate, on StubHub.co.uk, we make it clear … that there are 
additional service fees added on to the price.” Indeed it does, but the company 
can’t seem to grasp that mentioning the existence of charges in a footnote 
below the ticket price is not enough; the exact amount must be included in the 
ticket price, according to the ASA’s code.

StubHub’s website still declares in small print beneath each ticket price that 
service fees may apply, without giving any indication what they are.

The ASA hails the “positive result” for AG. “We’ll reassess StubHub’s 
marketing to see whether they have taken the guidance on board, and if it 
appears they haven’t we’ll consider what further action may be needed,” says a 
spokesperson.

AG considers her case a victory for the consumer against a corporate giant: “I 
hope this encourages more customers to apply for refunds for booking fees.”

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 