
My first year of university was nothing short of catastrophic. I lost hours of 
sleep over feeling not clever enough, constantly weighing the option of 
dropping out against my lack of any plan B. I trudged through the university 
process, eventually finishing my first year – which was meant to be the “fun 
year” – with little enthusiasm for the future.

But that summer, everything changed. Desperate to break free from my gloomy 
existence, I applied to work as a senior mentor for theNational Citizen Service 
<http://www.ncsyes.co.uk/>, a kind of condensed Duke of Edinburgh programme for 
15- to 17-year-olds. I was accepted, and was soon in a job for the first time 
since my year 9 paper round.

How to find valuable work experience while you study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/how-find-valuable-work-experience-while-study>
It was the perfect summer job: it was well paid, not boring and fairly easy. 
The experience bolstered my self-confidence, and added a much-needed bullet 
point to my CV. Both helped in a later successful application to intern at the 
Raindance Film Festival: a fun few weeks and another bullet point.

My university holidays have proved to be distracting yet productive, the 
antidote to the all the drudgery of term time. But you obviously don’t need to 
be a struggling student like me to get something special out of your holidays. 
Tom Fenton, a fourth year studying history, pushed the boat out further than 
most by spending his free months working with NGOs around the world. He 
travelled to Cyprus, Kosovo, Israel and the Palestinian territories.

“I learned an incredible amount,” he says. “It was extremely tough, but 
challenges are good if you can overcome them and I am so glad I was able to do 
that.”

Tom’s experiences leave him well placed to offer advice when it comes to 
applying. “Make opportunities yourself. It’s a slog, it will take ages, you’ll 
be running into all sorts of cul-de-sacs, and it can be very demoralising.

“But you don’t just come out of your university time with a degree; the 
experiences it gives you are far more important than being able to recite the 
words of some pompous philosopher,” he says. “Get out there – have an 
experience.”

Got a 2:2? Don't panic, get some work experience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/05/got-a-22-dont-panic-get-some-work-experience>
Most universities give you around five months off a year. Kate Wetherell, a 
third-year physics student, had three empty summer months in her calendar. 
That’s a lot of time to have on your hands. She decided to use it to start her 
own jewellery business from scratch.

“It’s been an amazing experience,” she says. “I gained a load of transferable 
skills, from communication and customer service, to organisation, 
self-motivation and market awareness. My advice to anyone who is a bit stuck is 
not to panic. Anyone who has a unique idea can start up a small business, and 
the summer is the perfect time to try it.”

In 2015 alone, a record 592,290 applications to study were submitted to Ucas. 
That means we all have a heck of a lot of competition for employment once we 
graduate. So how do you stand out from the ever-growing crowd of graduates? The 
answer is easy: spend your holidays doing something different.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 