
It is highly probable that Scotland will hold a second independence referendum 
by 2020 if the UK is taken out of the EU single market,Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> has said.

Scotland’s first minister said an independence referendum a year after the UK 
formally exits the EU was “highly likely, given the situation we’re in”. But 
Sturgeon said she also wanted to explore the possibility of keepingScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> in the single market even if the rest 
of the UK left.

There may be alternatives to a second referendum vote, she said. “We have to 
see the prime minister be serious about listening to those other options, 
because if Scotland really is, as we’ve been told repeatedly, that we are an 
equal partner in the UK, Theresa May is serious about protecting the UK, then 
it’s time for her to turn those words into action and actually demonstrate that 
Scotland’s voice is heard and our interests can be protected within the UK.

“We’ve not seen much of that from the prime minister so far, so I hope we see 
more of it in the weeks to come.”

Brexit debate in parliament would give game away to Brussels, says minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/16/brexit-debate-iwould-give-game-away-to-brussels-priti-patel>
At the SNP conference this week, Sturgeon repeated her pledge to call a second 
independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/15/nicola-sturgeon-vows-to-hold-second-scottish-vote-in-event-of-hard-brexit>
 if the UK is pushed towards a so-called hard Brexit. More than 60% of Scottish 
voters backed remain in the June vote on whether to stay or leave the EU.

Speaking to ITV’s Robert Peston, Sturgeon said the SNP wanted to “work across 
the political divide with Labour, liberals, moderate Tories, to try to avert 
that kind of hard Brexit for the UK as a whole” in the first instance, rather 
than make an immediate push for a referendum.

She said: “If that doesn’t work, we will put forward anyway proposals that 
would enable Scotland to maintain its place in the single market, preserve 
aspects of our relationship with Europe even if the rest of the UK leaves.”

Sturgeon, who is scheduled to meet May along with the leaders of other 
devolved administrations next Monday, said she wanted to keep Scotland in the 
single market.

“I’m not pretending any of this will be straightforward, there’s lots of 
challenges along the way, but we are in an unprecedented set of circumstances 
and I think there is an obligation on all of us to try to square the circle. 
Scotland voted to stay in the EU, and I think we should try to honour that, and 
I think Theresa May has an obligation to try to honour that as well.”

The Scottish secretary, David Mundell, said on the BBC’s Sunday Politics 
programme that the UK government would have to agree to a second referendum if 
it was called by the Scottish government.

“Of course there could be another referendum, but we want to argue that there 
shouldn’t be another referendum,” he said. “We believe that the decision has 
been made and that it is now in Scotland’s best interests that the two 
governments work together in a team UK approach to get the best possible deal 
for Scotland in the EU.”

Mundell said the UK government would look at any proposals the Scottish 
government brought forward about securing a special status for Scotland 
post-Brexit, but said none had yet been forthcoming.

 “We’ve had four months. There’s no specific proposals have come forward,” he 
said. “Nicola Sturgeon’s this morning talking about having proposals, but at 
this moment I see it impossible, for example, that Scotland could remain within 
the EU whilst the rest of the UK left.”

Pressed on whether Scotland could staying the single market, Mundell said: “I 
think it would be difficult to see how that could be achieved.”

Greg Hands, minister of state for international trade, said the UK government 
was still working out its position on crucial details, including whether the UK 
would need to pay EU budget contributions in exchange for favourable trading 
conditions.

“It’s difficult, at this stage ... we’ve said we want to make sure that we 
know in advance before we trigger article 50 all of the pros and cons. The 
prime minister has been clear we need to get the best possible deal for the 
UK,” he told ITV’s Peston on Sunday. “We’ve got time to be able to get the 
right answers to those questions.”
 