
I want to take out a subscription to the Guardian/Observer. How do your 
subscriptions work?

We operate three main types of subscription: a Voucher system, which is 
available throughout the UK, the Home Delivery service, which is available 
within the M25 and a Digital Only subscription.

You can place an order for any of our paper or paper + digital subscription 
packages onlinehere <http://subscribe.theguardian.com/> or call us on 0330 333 
6767 (option 1). For Digital Pack subscriptions clickhere 
<http://subscribe.theguardian.com/>

Vouchers
When you sign up to one of our voucher subscriptions, you receive a book of 
personalised dated vouchers every 3 months. These can be redeemed for your 
newspapers in all participating retailers in the UK, including most independent 
newsagents, Tesco, Sainsbury’s and Waitrose.

Delivery
If you live within the M25 you can choose to have your newspaper delivered to 
your door by 7am (8.30am on Sunday). There is an additional charge for this 
service. Please note: we can only deliver to addresses that we can access 
straight away; we can’t use access codes or entry keys.

Digital Only
Digital Only subscriptions give you access to our daily edition and the 
premium tier of our Guardian app. The daily edition is available across iPad, 
Android tablets and Kindle Fire devices. The Guardian App is available to 
download across iPhone and Android handsets.

Which subscription options are available and how much do I pay?

There are various subscriptions packages you can choose from (listed below). 
The standard subscription prices for our packs are also given below.

Some promotions offer a special introductory price. The terms of our 
introductory offers are stated in the promotional materials. At the end of any 
introductory offer period, the standard subscription prices set out below, will 
apply.

Paper Only

EVERYDAY
Monday to Saturday Guardian and Sunday Observer papers 
Standard voucher subscription price: £10.99 per week
Home delivery: £14.49

SIXDAY
Monday to Saturday Guardian papers 
Standard voucher subscription price: £9.49 per week
Home delivery: £12.49

WEEKEND
Saturday Guardian and Sunday Observer papers 
Standard voucher subscription price: £4.79 per week
Home delivery: £5.79


Paper + Digital

EVERYDAY+
Monday to Saturday Guardian and Sunday Observer papers, plus 7-day access to 
the daily edition for tablet (iPad, Android and Kindle Fire) and premium tier 
Guardian app access on iOS and Android devices.
Standard voucher subscription price: £11.99 per week
Home delivery: £15.49

SIXDAY+
Monday to Saturday Guardian papers, plus 7-day access to the daily edition for 
tablet (iPad, Android and Kindle Fire) and premium tier Guardian app access on 
iOS and Android devices.
Standard voucher subscription price: £10.99 per week
Home delivery: £13.99

WEEKEND+
Saturday Guardian and Observer papers, plus 7-day access to the daily edition 
for tablet (iPad, Android and Kindle Fire) and premium tier Guardian app access 
on iOS and Android devices.
Standard voucher subscription price: £6.79 per week
Home delivery: £7.79

SUNDAY+
Observer paper, plus 7-day access to the daily edition for tablet (iPad, 
Android and Kindle Fire) and premium tier Guardian app access on iOS and 
Android devices.
Standard voucher subscription price: £5.09 per week
Home delivery: £6.09

Digital Only
Digital Only
7-day access to the Guardian & Observer daily edition (iPad, Android and 
Kindle Fire) and premium tier Guardian app access on iOS and Android devices. 
£11.99 per month.

General Subscriber FAQs

How do I pay for my subscription?

Our preferred method is monthly payment by Direct Debit. We also accept 
monthly payments by Visa and Mastercard credit cards or by debit card. For 
information about other payment methods, please call us on 0330 333 6767 or 
email us atsubscriptions@theguardian.com <mailto:subscriptions@theguardian.com>

What is the minimum subscription term?

We ask all new subscribers to enter into an open ended agreement with the 
Guardian on purchasing a subscription, with a minimum term of 12 months. We 
guarantee that during that 12 month period you will be protected against any 
price increases (except where you change subscription package). If you need to 
cancel within the 12 months then you must contact our customer services team 
and they will accept a cancellation on expiry of your current voucher book. In 
some of our introductory offers there is a trial period during which you are 
entitled to cancel without any further obligation. This will be specified 
within the promotional material.

I would like to buy a gift subscription, is this possible?

As long as the person you want to buy the subscription for resides in the UK, 
it is possible to buy a subscription as a gift. For more information, please 
call 0330 333 6767 ((Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm or Saturday & Sunday 
8.00am-6.00pm).. Or email us atsubscriptions@theguardian.com 
<mailto:subscriptions@theguardian.com>

If I take up a voucher subscription, where and how can I use my vouchers?

Your voucher book will contain one voucher for each paper that is included in 
your package. Each voucher is dated and can only be exchanged for that day’s 
paper. Vouchers can be redeemed for your newspapers in all participating 
retailers in the UK, including most independent newsagents, Tesco, Sainsbury’s 
and Waitrose.

Do you have a list of retailers that accept your vouchers so I can find my 
nearest outlet?

We don’t publish a list as such, as most newsagents, major supermarkets and 
petrol stations accept subscription vouchers as payment for your Guardian or 
Observer newspaper. If you do have any difficulty, please call us on 0330 333 
6767 (Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm or Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm). Or email 
us atsubscriptions@theguardian.com <mailto:subscriptions@theguardian.com>

I want to subscribe using vouchers but I want my newsagent to deliver my 
newspaper. What should I do?

Most newsagents accept vouchers for home delivery – they don’t lose out as we 
pay them the same amount that they receive if you pay cash for your paper. 
Check with your newsagent – many will be happy to take your book of vouchers 
and manage the whole process for you. Please note, your voucher does not cover 
any charges your newsagent makes for delivering your papers.

My retailer already delivers my papers to my home and I pay them monthly. Can 
I use my vouchers to pay my monthly bill?

Yes you can. If your local newsagent already delivers your papers to your 
home, simply hand your vouchers for the relevant month to your retailer and 
these will be put towards your bill. Please note that your voucher does not 
cover any charges your newsagent makes for delivering your papers.

When can I expect my vouchers to arrive?

New subscribers should receive a voucher book within 14 days with vouchers for 
the first 3 months. A new voucher book is sent out every 3 months. Vouchers 
should arrive around 2 weeks before your book expires. If for any reason you do 
not receive your vouchers by this time, please contact us using the details 
below.

What happens if a section of my newspaper is missing?

We always try to ensure that our newspapers reach you complete, but in the 
unlikely event that a section is missing, we have a replacement service. Please 
call 0800 839 100 within one week of publication.

How do I notify you of a change of address, change of bank details etc?

Please contact our Customer Services team on 0330 333 6767.

For voucher subscriptions

We are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm or Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm, or 
you can email us at vouchersubs@theguardian.com.

For home delivery subscriptions
We are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm or Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm, or 
you can email us ath <mailto:customerservice@guardiandirectsubs.co.uk>
omedelivery@theguardian.com <mailto:omedelivery@theguardian.com>.

Can I suspend my subscription when I go on holiday?

Yes, you can.

If you are a voucher subscriber, you are eligible for up to 4 weeks’ holiday 
in any one year.

To claim your refund, you will need to send your unused vouchers to:

The Guardian, Unit 16, Coalfield Way, Ashby Park, Ashby-De- La-Zouch
LE65 1JT

Please note that we cannot make refunds for periods of less than 1 week and 
refunds must be claimed within 1 month of the first date of the holiday. 
Refunds are made only after we have received the returned unused vouchers.

If you are a home delivery customer, you are eligible for up to 36 days 
holiday per annum.

You can request a holiday using our online form here 
<http://subscribe.theguardian.com/manage>: or you can let us know by calling 
0330 333 6767 (8am-8pm, Monday to Friday and 8:00am to 6:00pm on weekends), or 
email us ath <mailto:customerservice@guardiandirectsubs.co.uk>
omedelivery@theguardian.com <mailto:omedelivery@theguardian.com> and we will 
make an adjustment to your next payment. Please provide at least 5 working 
days’ notice if you want to suspend your delivery.

As a subscriber, do I get any additional benefits?

There are additional benefits of being a subscriber such as:
• Regular gifts: recent examples include a free membership of the Gourmet 
Society, £25 to spend with Hello Fresh, Naked Wine vouchers and free e-books
• Discounts on other products and services available from Guardian News & Media
• Front Page email service exclusive to subscribers: see tomorrow’s front page 
the night before, delivered to your inbox
• A weekly email from Guardian Extra giving you access to ticket discounts, 
private views, film screenings, prize competitions, quizzes, and more.

What if I want to cancel my subscription?

Your initial subscription term will normally be for 12 months. If you then 
wish to cancel then please follow the below instructions.


For voucher subscriptions you should telephone us at least 6 weeks before the 
date printed on the last voucher in your voucher book. The number to call is 
0330 333 6767

We are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm or Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm, or 
you can email us at vouchersubs@theguardian.com.

For home delivery subscriptions please call at least 4 weeks before your 
intended cancellation date. The number to call is 0330 333 6767 (we are open 
Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm. Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm).

You can read our refunds and cancellations policy in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/subscriber-direct/subscription-terms-and-conditions>
.

Paper + Digital and Digital Only
You’ll find more daily edition FAQs here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/ipad-edition-faqs>
You’ll find more Guardian app FAQs here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/aug/12/1>.
You’ll find more Digital Pack FAQs here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2014/aug/06/guardian-observer-digital-subscriptions-faq>
.

What is the Guardian & Observer daily edition?

The Guardian & Observer daily edition is a version of the Guardian and the 
Observer, optimised for iPad, Android and Kindle Fire devices. It is delivered 
direct to your device, ready for when you wake up.
The edition carries all of the editorial content from that day’s newspaper, 
including supplements.
• Top stories, UK, international and financial news
• Comment, editorials and obituaries
• Reviews
• Sport
• G2
• Daily crosswords: one quick and one cryptic, including the Prize cryptic on 
Saturday and Speedy and Everyman puzzles on Sunday
• Weekday supplements Media, Film & Music, Education and Society
• On Saturday: Weekend magazine, the Guide, Sport, Review, Travel, Family, 
Money and Work sections are all included along with the main newspaper. Monthly 
Do Something is also included.
• On Sunday: The Observer’s news sections, Sport, New Review and Magazine, 
Food and Tech Monthly magazines
(Please note: the daily edition does not include TV listings or Sudoku and 
other puzzles.)

What is the Guardian app?

Available on iOS and Android devices, the Guardian app brings you breaking 
news and full access to all of the Guardian’s award-winning content. Tailor 
your home screen with the sections that matter most to you, follow your 
favourite writers and stories for personal alerts, keep reading when you’re 
offline, and save content for as long as you like.

• Stay up to date with live news and sport
• Enjoy the full range of guardian.com content
• Keep reading offline
• Make it yours by choosing the sections and topics that appear on your home 
screen
• Be informed with breaking news alerts
• Follow your favourite stories, series, writers and football teams for 
personal notifications
• Browse award-winning audio, video and interactive content, as well as 
full-screen galleries, with stunning Retina-quality images
• Save any content you want to keep
• Read comments on articles and share your own thoughts
• Search by keyword, topic, series, section, or contributor
• Premium tier which is included in Paper + Digital and Digital Only 
subscriptions include our daily crosswords, specially curated content, extracts 
from Guardian Books, and an advert-free experience

What is the difference between the Guardian & Observer daily edition and the 
Guardian app?




 I take up a Paper + Digital subscription, how do I access my everyday daily 
edition and premium Guardian app content?

When you subscribe you will be given a unique subscriber ID, which you will 
need in order to access your digital content. You will need to download the 
app/s from the relevant app stores and follow the in-app instructions for 
subscribers.

You’ll find more daily edition FAQs here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/ipad-edition-faqs>.

You’ll find more Guardian app FAQs here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/aug/12/1>.


If I take up a Paper + Digital or a Digital Only subscription, how do I access 
the daily edition and premium Guardian app content?

When you subscribe you will be given a unique subscriber ID, which you will 
need in order to access your digital content. You will need to download the 
app/s from the relevant app stores and follow the in-app instructions for 
subscribers.
You’ll find more Guardian & Observer Daily Edition FAQs here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/ipad-edition-faqs>.
You’ll find more Guardian app FAQs here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/aug/12/1>.

I already have a Paper Only voucher subscription, but would like to upgrade to 
one of the Paper + Digital subscription packs. What should I do?

If you already have a Paper Only voucher subscription but would like to 
upgrade to one of our Paper + Digital packages, please call our Customer 
Service team on 0330 333 6767, we are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm or 
Saturday &amp; Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm, or you can email us at 
vouchersubs@theguardian.com. and they will be happy to help you make that 
change. Once you have switched to a new package, you should be able to access 
the daily edition and premium Guardian app content straight away.

I already have a monthly subscription to the Guardian & Observer daily 
edition. What should I do?

Your existing subscription is managed by your provider (iTunes, Google Play or 
Amazon), so if you subscribe to a Paper + Digital subscription package, you 
will need to cancel your existing subscription and re-access the daily edition 
using your subscriber ID. Please call us on 0330 333 6767 Or email us at
digitalpack@theguardian.com <mailto:digitalpack@theguardian.com> 

You’ll find more daily edition FAQs here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/ipad-edition-faqs>.

I already have a subscription to the premium Guardian app. What should I do?

Your existing subscription is managed by your provider (iTunes, Google Play), 
so if you subscribe to a new Paper + Digital subscription package, you will 
need to cancel your existing subscription and re-access your content using your 
subscriber ID. Please call us on 0330 333 6767 (8.00am-8.00pm, Monday to Friday 
and 8:00am to 9:00pm on weekends), or email us atdigitalpack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:digitalpack@theguardian.com>

You’ll find more mobile app FAQs here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2013/aug/12/1>

Why is Kindle not included in the subscription packs?

The Kindle Fire edition is included in your package, but not the Kindle 
e-reader. We’re sorry, but the Kindle e-reader edition can only be purchased 
through Amazon.

If I only want to subscribe to the Daily Edition, how much does it cost?

A 2-week free trial of the daily edition for tablet is available on iPad, 
Android and Kindle Fire editions, after which time you will need to subscribe 
to continue to access issues. You purchase various subscriptions from the 
relevant app store.
If you subscribe via one of our Paper + Digital packages you get 7-day access 
across devices from £4 per month, depending on the package you choose. You 
purchase this type of subscription from the Guardian.
Please note: Subscriptions do not include the Kindle e-reader, which is 
available only from Amazon and is separate to what is available on Kindle Fire.
Or you can find out about our Digital Pack subscription here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/ipad-edition-faqs>

You’ll find more daily edition FAQs here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/ipad-edition-faqs>

Where can I find out more about the Guardian apps available with Paper + 
Digital packages?

Our Paper + Digital subscriptions include access to the Guardian & Observer 
daily edition for tablet and premium tier access on the Guardian app on iOS and 
Android devices.


For more information

If there is anything else you need to know, please contact us on these numbers 
and via these addresses.
Please ensure that you quote your Subscriber ID when contacting customer 
services.


Voucher Subscription 


Email: vouchersubs@theguardian.com

Phone: 0330 333 6767. Lines are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm.

Saturday & Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm. Calls cost no more than 01 or 02 numbers from 
landlines or mobiles.

Address:
The Guardian
Unit 16
Coalfield Way
Ashby Park
Ashby-De- La-Zouch
LE65 1JT



Home Delivery Subscription 
Email: homedelivery@theguardian.com <mailto:homedelivery@theguardian.com>
Phone: 0330 333 6767. Lines are open Monday-Friday 8.00am-8.00pm. Saturday & 
Sunday 8.00am-6.00pm. Calls cost no more than 01 or 02 numbers from landlines 
or mobiles.

Address:
The Guardian
Unit 16
Coalfield Way
Ashby Park
Ashby-De-La-Zouch
LE65 1JT

Guardian daily edition and Guardian app
Email - digitalpack@theguardian.com <mailto:digitalpack@theguardian.com>
Phone: 0330 333 6767. Lines are open Monday-Friday 8.00am- 8.00pm. Saturday & 
Sunday 8.00am-6pm. Calls cost no more than 01 or 02 numbers -from landlines or 
mobiles.
 