
Teaching <https://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> can be hugely 
rewarding: working with young people and your colleagues can bring many 
benefits, including a sense of fulfilment and pride in the achievements of 
pupils and staff. Children can also be endlessly entertaining, and charting 
their development over time is fascinating. Likewise, seeing colleagues 
develop, and knowing you played a part in that, can strengthen your sense of 
professional purpose.

But teaching is tough. The workload is demanding and appears to be growing. 
The pressures are also considerable; anxiety and stress seem to come with the 
territory. Teachers can feel overwhelmed and out of control, which has an 
impact on retention and recruitment.

10 top tips for teachers heading into school senior leadership teams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/aug/26/top-tips-teachers-school-senior-leadership-team>
Leaders at all levels – middle, senior and heads – have to deal with their own 
pressure, finding a sustainable balance in their lives, while ensuring those in 
their teams manage this too. So how can leaders ensure they are increasing 
teachers’ capacity to do their core job – teaching and caring for the pupils – 
rather than adding to the pressures, stresses and demands which can detract 
from that?

All leaders tend to be “buffers” to some degree. A middle leader responsible 
for a clearly-defined domain, such as a department, subject area or pastoral 
group, can get caught between their team on the one hand and senior leaders on 
the other. A senior leader with a whole-school brief and specific area of 
responsibility can find themselves caught between the staff and the head. A 
headteacher can feel stuck between the school staff on one side and the 
governors/trust/local authority/Department for Education (DfE)/Ofsted on the 
other.

The best leaders empower their teams rather than simply trying to protect them

For me, protecting teams from demands is only part of the picture. It could 
even be counter-productive. Leaders naturally want to cushion those they lead – 
to defend them, act as their advocate, shelter them from the storms of constant 
change and increasing expectations. The danger is that this leads to a culture 
of dependency where capacity to cope is eroded and, if the leader is absent or 
moves on, the team finds itself too weak. Arguably, one of the signs of a good 
leader is that when they are not there the team they lead is strong, 
self-sufficient and capable.

The best leaders are supportive, and certainly aware of the different 
perspectives of their team, but they empower those they lead rather than simply 
trying to protect them. They build capacity and ensure individuals develop 
personally and professionally over time. They hold team members to account, 
have a clear vision, strong sense of direction and high aspirations.

They achieve all this through a judicious balance of support and challenge. 
But what does this mean in practice? This would be my advice to leaders at all 
levels:

 * Know your team members well. Work hard to build positive relationships and 
to get communication right. See the best in others, acknowledge their 
contribution and show them it is valued. Make full use of team members’ 
complementary skills by identifying where they can make an individual 
contribution using their particular strengths. Everyone should then be able to 
take some credit for the success of the team as a whole, and know they make a 
difference to its vision, strategy and operational success. Consult, listen, 
involve them so they know they have a voice, and that it matters. The least 
experienced (and perhaps least confident) member of the group needs to know 
that if they have a good idea it will be listened to and taken seriously. 
 * Balance support and challenge. This balance will vary between different 
members of your team, and for each individual over time. Is someone showing 
particular drive, energy and initiative? This suggests they may be ready to 
take on greater responsibility. On the other side, is someone in need of 
additional support because, for whatever reason, they are feeling more 
vulnerable and this is reflected in their demeanour and approach to work? If 
you know the individuals well, you should be able to gauge this and your 
interactions with them can be calibrated appropriately. You need to be 
constantly aware of this. 
What I wish I’d known before starting as a head of department
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/aug/27/what-i-wish-id-known-before-starting-as-a-head-of-department>
 * Do not avoid the difficult conversations. These are required from time to 
time, but the key is to always go into such conversations well-informed and 
well-prepared. Show humanity and a determination to ensure that, as far as 
possible, both you and the team member concerned will feel positive at the end 
of the conversation. Focus on how you can help them to succeed without taking 
responsibility for this from them. Together, ensure you have a clear 
understanding of the issue you are discussing, and prompt your colleague to 
identify what action they could take to improve the situation, alongside what 
support they might need from you. 
 * Never lose sight of the perspective and pressures of those you lead. Assess 
the potential workload impact of any initiative. If you add a job, be prepared 
to take another away. 
There is certainly pressure out there, but leaders cannot be “umbrellas” and 
should certainly not be “funnels”. Think in terms of building your team 
members’ capacity to cope. One day some of those you lead will need to step 
into leadership themselves.



Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 