
 A snorkeller is in hospital after the ninth suspected irukandji jellyfish 
sting at Queensland’s Fraser Island in less than a week.

The 19-year-old man was stung on the lip while swimming in Coongul creek on 
the western side of the island about 11am on Tuesday. He was treated at the 
scene by paramedics before being airlifted to Bundaberg base hospital.


A paramedic, Phillip Switzer, said the man hadn’t seen the jellyfish but had 
experienced severe nausea, vomiting and pain.

Irukandji jellyfish could have caused deaths of tourists on Great Barrier Reef
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/irukandji-jellyfish-could-have-caused-deaths-of-tourists-on-great-barrier-reef>
The emergency is the ninth suspected irukandji sting at Fraser Island since 
Wednesday, withthe venomous jellyfish positively identified as being 
responsible for at least one of the episodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/queensland-swimmers-warned-as-irukandji-jellyfish-heads-south>
.

Switzer said all nine cases had happened on the western side of the island in 
its calmer and warmer waters. “We have no evidence to say they are or are not 
irukandji,” he said.

“There are certainly jellyfish floating but no one’s actually caught one so we 
can’t disprove that they’re not irukandji or a jellyfish in the same family 
that produced the symptoms of an irukandji jellyfish.”

Eight people people were treated at Fraser Island for irukandji-like symptoms 
in 2015, Mr Switzer said. The irukandji – the world’s smallest and most 
venomous box jellyfish – is usually found in waters north of Mackay, about 
700km further up the coast.

People stung initially experience severe nausea, followed by multiple bouts of 
vomiting, pain that normally begins in the back and radiates up the neck to the 
chest and abdominal cavity, leg pain and cramping.

Switzer said anyone believed to have been stung by one should treat the sting 
with vinegar and call triple zero.

 