
The slogan of the year, and perhaps the century, is the one about the need to 
“take back control”. Those intoxicating wordstook centre stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/19/michael-gove-makes-case-eu-exit-bbc-today>
 in the EU referendum and won the vote for the Brexiteers. Donald Trump noted 
the potency of the slogan and made it a central theme of his victorious 
campaign. This is a slogan that triggers tumultuous change.

But it does so with little or no scrutiny. One of the oddities about 
vote-winning slogans is that they become so familiar there is little curiosity 
as to precise meaning. Repetition is an alternative to clarity. In this case, 
the ubiquitous words are much more interesting than they seem. What form will 
“control” take? Who or what will be the mediating agencies? Presumably the 
advocates in the UK do not mean they want a private company to “take back 
control”. They are not calling forthe likes of Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/drivers-strike-halts-all-southern-rail-services-for-third-day>
 trains to have more control over our lives.

Instead the users of the slogan can only mean it is time for government or the 
state to take back control. Their focus produces a bizarre contortion. 
Thatcherite free marketeers in the UK and anti-government Tea Partyites in the 
US dance to statist tunes. During the UK referendum Michael Gove argued with 
his usual clarity that leaving the EU would enable government to intervene more 
to protect industries threatened by global competition. All the leading 
Brexiteers called for state intervention in the labour market. In a later rally 
with his friend Donald Trump, Nigel Farage pledged, to ecstatic cheers, that 
they would take on the banks and the multinationals. Farage sounded like Bernie 
Sanders.

Trump is the most statist US president-elect for decades. His economic 
policies make Ed Balls’ fiscal stimulus, proposed long before hebecame a famous 
dancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/28/strictly-come-dancing-tv-ratings-bbc1-ed-balls-kicked-off>
, seem ridiculously tame. In particular Trump won the election by proposing to 
borrow billions for capital investment projects. He did not talk about the 
state. Insteadhe would build roads, railways and the rest. He had personified 
the state.

The shift in the framing of the debate about the role of government is 
seismic. During the Thatcher/Reagan/Blair/Cameron era, the overwhelming pitch 
was also about “control”, but it took a different form. Then, “control” was 
supposed to be about the empowerment of the individual. Yet individuals have 
never felt less empowered, hence the power of this year’s vote-winning slogan.

In Britain patients were promised “choice” in a more market-based NHS, and 
parents were promised the power to choose a school of their choice. Try telling 
a patient they are empowered as they struggle to see a GP and fail powerlessly 
to navigate their way around a chaotic NHS. Schools are similarly fractured. 
There is a growing teacher recruitment crisis, and in some cases head teachers 
assume responsibilities when they are not remotely experienced enough. 
Choosing a school where the head is in their early 30s and with staff leaving 
in droves is not a form of empowerment for parents.

Nor do commuters in the south of England feel empowered by the fractured 
railway system where so many agencies are involved no one is responsible. The 
rail strikes and other forms of industrial action are unforgivably ruthless, 
but they do not erupt in a vacuum. They happen when there is no clear 
leadership and sense of direction. Who is in control? The train companies, 
Network Rail, the regulators, the transport secretary? The answer is all of 
these agencies and therefore none of them. The entire service is a shambles, 
uniting the CBI, passengers needing to get to work, and any sane person in 
their despair. There is no control.

What should Jeremy Corbyn’s brand of leftwing populism look like? | Yanis 
Varoufakis and others
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/panel-jeremy-corbyn-brand-leftwing-populism-yanis-varoufakis>
Chaos too can be seen in the NHS. A senior health official told me recently 
that in his area there are seven inefficient agencies supposedly responsible 
for health provision. It is not clear which of them has overall responsibility. 
He had been a strong supporter of the market-based reforms until he discovered 
that the NHS as constituted was not a market and the only way one agency could 
improve was to undermine one of the others. The official is now a convert to 
clear lines of control from the top down with prominent individuals held to 
account.

The slogan about “control” should be one that marks a move to the left. It is 
the left that on the whole believes markets should be regulated and the state 
can be a benevolent mediator – an instrument that can empower rather than 
stifle individuals. But across much of the democratic world the left is as 
fractured as the providers of public services in the UK. Its leaders lack the 
ability to communicate and use language as weapon. It is split between those 
who believe with a shallow intensity there is no left/right divide any more and 
those who do but are not sure how to pitch an argument.

The vacuum matters because the slogan of the year could move in two very 
different directions. The words might propel us towards an ugly debate about 
kicking out foreigners; alternatively they could begin a constructive debate in 
which we seek to answer what forms a modern, efficient accountable government 
should take in order to give voters a sense of control.

So far in the UK it is Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> who is moving gingerly on to 
fertile terrain. When she noted at her party conference that it was time to 
recognise the good that governments can do, her words marked the end of one era 
and a stumbling towards the next.
 