
I booked premium economy return flights with British Airways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways> from Manchester to Mexico 
City via Heathrow. Unfortunately, due to fog and because a passenger decided 
not to fly, the Manchester flight was delayed so I missed my flight from 
Heathrow to Mexico City.

British Airways rebooked me on an Iberia flight to Madrid, but this was also 
delayed so I had to stay in a hotel in Madrid overnight. I got a lunchtime 
flight the next day and arrived 24 hours later than originally planned.

The next problem is that my luggage did not arrive at Mexico City and I was 
without it for six days. The bag was given to me by BA at Mexico City airport 
for my homeward flight. BA says it is not responsible for the baggage going 
missing (even though it had generated a lost baggage reference) and that 
luggage is the responsibility of the last airline you flew with. I spent a lot 
on essential items while in Mexico.

Finally, I had to travel in economy on the outward flight because Iberia 
doesn’t have premium economy cabin class. BA has refused to help me.

JM, via email

What a dreadful journey, and very sad that BA washed its hands of you, even 
though it booked you on to its sister airline – part of the same IAG group.

Delays caused by fog are not covered by compensation rules, while the later 
delay in Madrid is down to Iberia. Technically, as BA said, the last airline 
you travel with is responsible for baggage, but given that they are the same 
company BA could have done more.

We have had many complaints about BA service in recent months. When we asked 
its press office to intervene in this instance, staff decided that you must 
send all the details again – to Iberia.

Iberia, as far as we are aware, is now handling this, but you have still not 
received any compensation. According to back-office staff who have contacted 
Money after previous appearances in this column, the company is fixated on cost 
cutting, which is bound to have a negative effect on customer service.

Regarding being charged for premium economy but only getting economy seats, BA 
says you must take this up with the travel agent that issued the tickets. We 
are shocked it won’t do more. Some readers say they are already boycotting BA 
and you can see why.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <> or write to Consumer Champions, Money, 
the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 