
An academy chain whose financial management was heavily criticised by 
regulators following aninvestigation by the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/12/academy-schools-cash-cow-business>
 is facing a mass walkout of teachers at one of its schools, and demands from 
the local mayor to “call it a day”.

The staff body at Whitehaven academy <https://whitehavenacademy.org.uk/> in 
Cumbria have written an open letter to political leaders in the area, the 
second in a week, declaring of the Bright Tribe academy chain: “We are unable 
to improve the school if it remains with the trust.” Whitehaven has had six 
headteachers and been placed in special measures since the Bright Tribe 
charitable trust took over in 2014.

Last week all 70 staff signed a letter threatening strike action if the trust 
is not gone by 13 December. The trust responded with its own letter defending 
its record in investing in the school, claiming much of it was “invisible” but 
that £400,000 had been spent.

It blamed historical failures for the academy’s Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> rating along with the poor state 
of its buildings and demanded that staff “take stock of the facts”.

Now a second letter from the staff has accused the trust of taking too much of 
the school’s central government funding and preventing it from ensuring 
improvement works were “cost-effective” by giving contracts to a firm, Blue 
Support Services, owned by the man who leads the trust, Mike Dwan.

The letter says: “This conflict of interest, in our views, means that the 
academy has been unable to tender for works completed to ensure the most 
cost-effective deal, so any reference to any amount spent to improve the school 
is totally irrelevant.

“We would suggest that significant improvements could be made to the condition 
of the building if the trust did not levy a 9% top slice on us. The trust takes 
9% of all the academy’s income, which is more than most other trusts, who take 
between 3 and 6%.

“Just think what improvements could be made with this money. The trust states 
that £400,000 has been spent improving the school. It fails to mention the 
significant amount that it takes out.”

Mike Starkie, the independent mayor of Copeland, the west Cumbria district, 
joined calls for the government to transfer the school to another chain. He 
said: “It’s time Bright Tribe called it a day. There’s been a complete 
breakdown in trust and confidence in Bright Tribe, and it really is time to get 
them to go.”

Bright Tribe runs 12 schools and was recently awarded part of a £5m grant – to 
fund its expansion in the north – as part of a drive to raise educational 
standards.

The trust states £400,000 has been spent improving the school. It fails to 
mention the amount that it takes out
Whitehaven Academy staff 
In June the Observer published an investigation revealing unexplained 
discrepancies in the trust’s accounts involving “related companies” that were 
providing services for large fees to the chain’s schools.

The Education Funding Agency published a report last month 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/financial-management-and-governance-review-bright-tribe-trust-and-adventure-learning-academies-trust>
 criticising Bright Tribe’s governance and procedures in selecting the 
companies that would receive taxpayers’ cash, a number of which were run by the 
man running the trust.

A spokesman for Bright Tribe said that all services provided were “in 
compliance with theAcademies <https://www.theguardian.com/education/academies> 
Financial Handbook, were provided at cost or less and audited, and the accounts 
of the trust correctly reflect this”.

With regard to Whitehaven, the spokesman added: “The condition of the 
buildings is not in dispute but we inherited at least a decade of decline and 
mismanagement. This is not Bright Tribe’s fault and it is something we will 
continue to try to do something about.

“The trust charges a 5% central charge. Other charges are levied for other 
services. This has always been the case. We absolutely refute that any profit 
has ever been made by Mr Dwan or any of his companies.

“The evidence as stated in the accounts clearly shows the reverse, with 
contributions of £2.6m made directly and indirectly by Mr Dwan to Bright Tribe 
Trust.”

A Department for Education spokesperson said: “We are aware of issues at 
Whitehaven academy and the regional schools commissioner is working with Bright 
Tribe to address historic challenges of underperformance. The trust is taking 
action to ensure urgent improvements are made and we will be closely monitoring 
its progress. If we are not satisfied with these improvements then further 
action will be taken.”

A spokesman added that the trust had enacted some of the recommendations from 
the EFA, but added: “More work needs to be done.”
 