
I’ll never know how many people liked this article, shared it or found it 
irrelevant, anti-progressive or ironic. Nor will I get to read comments about 
my personal hygiene, or suggesting that a luddite like me needs to embrace 
industrialism. And that is no bad thing, for the moment writing becomes a 
popularity contest – rewarding sensationalism, groupthink and deceit over 
honest exploration of complex matters – people and places lose, and those who 
need to be held to account win. Win, that is, for a shortsighted moment.

The reason I won’t see any web reaction is because I live in a cabin – built 
with spruce, oak, hands, straw, Douglas fir, stubbornness, earth and knees – 
without electricity or so-called modern conveniences (I’ve never found doing 
the work to buy and maintain them particularly convenient).

From Wednesday, I’m rejecting the world of complex technology entirely. That 
means no laptop, no internet, no phone, no washing machine, no tapped water, no 
gas, no fridge, no television or electronic music; no anything requiring the 
copper-mining, oil-rigging, plastics-manufacturing essential to the production 
of a single toaster or solar photovoltaic system.

Having already rejected these industrial-scale, complex technologies, I intend 
to move fully towards what is pejoratively called primitive technology. Insofar 
as engaging with civilisation allows, I’m also trying to resist the modern 
domination of whatJay Griffiths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2007/jun/06/scienceandnature.conservation>
, in Pip Pip, calls clock time – and failing daily.

That probably sounds like I’ve given up a lot of stuff. But while I intend to 
be clear and honest about the difficulties involved over the coming months, 
especially in the digital age, I’m just as fascinated in exploring what lessons 
about life – myself, society, the natural world – I might learn; perhaps things 
my cyborg-mind cannot yet imagine. That was my experience ofliving without 
money for three fine years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/15/living-without-money-what-i-learned>
.


Rejecting technologies that my generation considers to be the basic 
necessities of life wasn’t done on a thoughtless whim. I already miss not being 
able to pick up the phone and talk to my parents. Writing is different, my 
pencil unaided by both copy-and-paste and the easy delete, two word-processing 
functions reflective of a generic, transient and whimsical culture; and it has 
been a while since the media and publishing worlds worked by snail mail.

I decided to eschew complex technology for two reasons. The first was that I 
found myself happier away from screens and the relentless communication they 
generate, and instead living intimately with my locale. The second, more 
important, was the realisation that technology destroys, in more ways than one.

It destroys our relationship with the natural world. It first separates us 
from nature, while simultaneously converting life into the cash that oils 
consumerist society. Not only does it enable us to destroy habitat efficiently, 
over time this separation has led us to valuing the natural world less, meaning 
we protect and care for it less. By way of this vicious technological cycle, we 
are consciously causing the sixth mass extinction of species.

Living without money: what I learned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/15/living-without-money-what-i-learned>
Technology destroys places. Aside from the oceans, rivers, topsoil, forests, 
mountains and meadows, it helps us massacre and pollute with ever-improving 
precision and speed, its complex set of cogs quickly spreads us out all over 
the world, safe in the knowledge that we can stay in touch with loved ones via 
technologies that offer what is really only a toxic substitute for real 
connection and time together. It is badly injuring, perhaps fatally, rural 
communities, luring their youth into industrial and financial centres – cities 
– whose existence is premised, as the American writer and environmentalist
Wendell Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/06/wendell-berry-americans-sustainability-joke>
 said, on the devastation of some other far-flung place, which consumers don’t 
have to look at thanks to the out-of-sight, out-of-mind distance afforded by 
technology.

When I walk to the spring to collect water in the morning I meet neighbours 
and we talk. Yes, it takes time, something I found frustrating at first, but 
slowness only became a bad thing when time became money. Walking four miles to 
the post office to send my letters takes time too, but it ties me to people and 
place in a way that sitting in my bedroom on my own, writing endless emails, 
could never do.

Technology destroys people. We’re already cyborgs (pacemakers, hearing aids) 
of a sort, and are well on our way to the type of Big Brother dystopia of the 
techno-utopians. And look at the state of us. Our toxic, sedentary lifestyles 
are causing industrial-scale afflictions of cancer, mental illness, obesity, 
heart disease, auto-immune disorders and food intolerances, along with those 
slow killers, loneliness, clock-watching and meaninglessness. We seem to spend 
more time watching porn than we do making love, relationships are breaking down 
because we stare into screens instead of eyes, while social media are making us 
antisocial.

Living without complex technology has its own difficulties, especially for 
people like me who were never initiated into those ways. But already I much 
prefer it. Instead of making a living to pay bills, I make living my life. 
Contrary to expectation, my biggest issue is not being bored, but how to do all 
the things I’d love to do. Of course hand-washing your clothes can be a pain 
sometimes, but that minor inconvenience is hardly worth destroying the natural 
world over.

Well-intentioned friends often try to convince me to go off-grid, but in using 
batteries, electrical cables and photovoltaic panels (as I once did), I would 
still be connected, by a peculiar sort of invisible cable, to the global 
network of quarries, factories, courtrooms, mines, financial institutions, 
bureaucracies, armies, transport networks and workers needed to produce such 
things. They also ask me to stay on social media to speak out about the 
technology issue, but I say I’m denouncing complex technology simply by 
renouncing it. My culture made a Faustian pact, on my behalf, with those 
devilish tyrants Speed, Numbers, Homogeneity, Efficiency and Schedules, and now 
I’m telling the devil I want my soul back.

No fridge, no TV: send your questions to the writer ditching technology | 
Sarah Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/no-fridge-no-tv-send-your-questions-to-the-writer-ditching-technology>
My life has its fair share of irony, and it can look hypocritical. Despite 
originally writing these words (a technology) with a pencil (a technology) in a 
hand-crafted cabin (a technology), the irony of this being an online blog is 
not lost on me. That is my compromise for now, for if you want to contribute to 
a healthier society, compromise can be a healthy thing if you know your 
boundaries. Being a hypocrite is always my highest ideal, as it means I’ve set 
higher standards for myself to strive for than I’m achieving at any one moment.

We know that, at the very least, some technologies are harming our natural 
world, our societies and, ultimately, ourselves. Therefore we can recognise the 
need to reject some technologies. If we’re to avoid technological extremism 
we’re going to have to draw a line in the sand somewhere. I’ve drawn mine, and 
I will only move it in the direction of my home.

• Get in touch with Mark here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/no-fridge-no-tv-send-your-questions-to-the-writer-ditching-technology>
 or in the comments below, a selection of which will be posted to him
 