
A 13-year-old Russian-German girl has admitted making up a story about being 
kidnapped and raped by migrants in a case that triggered a furore inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and briefly embroiled Berlin police 
in a spat with the Kremlin, state prosecutors said.

The parents of the teenager, named only as Lisa, reported her missing on 11 
January after she failed to appear at school in the Marzahn district of the 
capital. She reappeared 30 hours later with injuries on her face, and told her 
parents she had been attacked by men of Middle Eastern or north African 
appearance. News of the incident spread on social media, sparking outrage among 
Berlin’s Russian-German community.

But when she was questioned by trained specialists three days later “she 
immediately admitted that the story of the rape was not true”, said the 
spokesman for the state prosecutor, Martin Steltner.

He said the teenager had been scared of going home after the school had 
contacted her parents over an incident at school.

Yet the allegations caused uproar in Berlin, particularly after reports of 
mass sexual assaults allegedly carried out by migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/tensions-rise-in-germany-over-handling-of-mass-sexual-assaults-in-cologne>
 in Cologne. A Russian-German community group staged a protest, supported by 
the Pegida-related Bärgida movement. The far-right National Democratic party 
also demonstrated in Marzahn.

The mood was exacerbated by a report on Russian state TV, in which the girl’s 
relatives claimed her allegations were not being investigated.

The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, also weighed in to criticise the 
Berlin authorities. “The news that she disappeared was kept secret for a very 
long time,” he told a press conference, blaming “political correctness”.

Analysis of the teenager’s mobile phone records showed she had spent the night 
with a friend, who is not being treated as a suspect.

Her mother told Der Spiegel magazine on Sunday that Lisa was “doing very 
badly” and was having treatment in a psychiatric ward.
 