
The number of households evicted from rental accommodation in England and 
Wales rose by 5% in the first three months of the year, while the repossession 
rate for homeowners fell to a record low.

Seasonally adjusted figures from the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/mortgage-and-landlord-possession-statistics-january-to-march-2016>
 show there were 10,732 repossessions of rented homes by bailiffs between 
January and March, up from 10,253 in the final three months of 2015. The number 
was, however, down on the 10,855 in the first quarter of 2015.


Meanwhile, separate figures from banks and building societies show that the 
repossession rate among mortgage customers has fallen to its lowest level.


The Council of Mortgage Lenders (CML) said 2,100 properties were repossessed 
by its members between January and March, made up of 1,500 homeowners and 600 
buy-to-let borrowers.

If repossessions continue at this rate it said it would be the lowest annual 
number since 1982, but at that point there were only 6.9m mortgages, against 
11.1m today, making the rate of repossession much lower.

Since the financial crash the cost of servicing a mortgage has fallen 
significantly, with lenders cutting their standard variable rates as the base 
rate plummeted, and more recently launching record low rates for new customers.

Lenders have also helped struggling borrowers stay in their homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/2011/dec/01/mortgage-arrears-banks-and-building-societies>
. As a result, even during the recession the number of repossessions remained 
well below the peak of 75,540 recorded in 1991.

While mortgage costs have fallen, rents in the private and social rented 
sectors have risen. The latest figures from rental referencing agency Homelet 
showed a7.7% increase in the monthly rent for new private tenancies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/05/rents-continue-rise-uk-london> 
over the year to April.

Non-seasonally adjusted figures from the MoJ show 10,636 evictions in England 
during the first three months of the year, or which 4,942 were by social 
landlords such as housing associations. Private landlords are listed as making 
1,567, with the rest “accelerated claims”, which are quicker than normal 
evictions. These tend to be used by private rather than social landlords.

The housing charity Shelter said that meant around 14,235 people had been 
evicted from their homes by private landlords, assuming an average of 2.5 
people in each household.

Campbell Robb, chief executive of Shelter, said: “Today’s figures are a 
painful reminder of the catastrophic impact welfare cuts and our drought of 
affordable homes are having on thousands of people in England.

“Our advisers are already struggling to keep up with demand, and we’re worried 
that short-sighted plans in the government’s housing bill will further shrink 
the numbers of genuinely affordable homes and make things even worse.”

A cap on local housing allowance that came into force in April could lead to 
an increase in the number of social tenants who are evicted, the charity warned.

Meanwhile, Jeremy Leaf, a former Rics chairman and north London estate agent, 
said new tax rules for landlords could mean more private tenants receiving 
eviction notices.

“The number of evicted tenants is worth keeping an eye on as the restrictions 
on buy to let start to bite and it becomes more difficult for landlords to get 
the numbers to add up,” he said. “We expect the number of evictions to rise as 
landlords find it hard to meet their obligations and have no choice but to 
sell.”

Joanna Elson, chief executive of the Money Advice Trust, the charity that runs 
National Debtline, said she was encouraged to see that mortgage repossessions 
had continued to fall.


“Favourable economic circumstances have certainly played a part in this 
decrease but the work of both lenders and the advice sector to help homeowners 
in difficulty to stay in their homes has also been significant,” she said.

“However, the slight increase in landlord repossessions by county court 
bailiffs since the last quarter is something we should keep an eye on. Renters 
have faced ever greater financial pressure in recent years due to rising rents 
in addition to other squeezes on their household budget.”
 