
The number of tenants evicted from their homes by bailiffs reached a record 
high in 2015, according to official figures for England and Wales showing that 
42,728 households in rented accommodation were forcibly removed.

Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> campaigners blamed 
welfare cuts and the shortage of affordable homes for the 2% rise in 
repossessions over the year, revealed in figures from the Ministry of Justice. 
More than half the evictions are thought to have been by private landlords.


The MoJ data shows the number of evictions increased by 53% over the five 
years from 2010, to the equivalent of more than 170 a day. In England, 19,093 
evictions were by social landlords, such as housing associations, while 5,919 
were by private landlords. A further 16,440 were made through the “accelerated 
procedure”, which can be used by either type of landlord to evict tenants on 
assured shorthold tenancies. However, the housing lawyer Giles Peaker said they 
would be “almost entirely” actions by private landlords.


The London borough of Newham had the highest rate of repossessions, equal to 
191 for each 100,000 households in the area. Londoners were most likely to lose 
their homes, as of the 20 boroughs with the highest proportion of landlord 
repossessions, 16 are in the capital.


The number of possession claims – the start of the repossession process – fell 
during the year to 148,043, the figures show. Of these, 90,317 were by social 
landlords, 20,063 by private landlords and 37,663 were accelerated claims.

Campbell Robb, the chief executive of housing charity Shelter 
<http://www.shelter.org.uk/>, said the figures were “clear proof of the 
devastating impact that welfare cuts and the chronic shortage of affordable 
homes are having on hundreds of renters every day”.

Rents have risen rapidly in recent years as high house prices have led 
would-be buyers to put their plans on hold. Figures from theAssociation of 
Residential Letting Agents <http://www.arla.co.uk/> (ARLA) show that UK tenants 
spent an average of 22% of their wages on rent last year, and that buyers 
getting on the ladder this year will have previously paid out an average of 
£52,900 to landlords.

Robb added: “Successive governments have failed to build enough genuinely 
affordable homes, and short-sighted welfare cuts are only making things 
tougher.”


The shadow housing minister, John Healey, said the figures “expose just how 
difficult life has become for millions of renters after Conservative ministers’ 
five years of failure on housing”.

He said the figures could be “just the tip of the iceberg”, as some tenants 
could be losing their homes without going through the court process.

The ARLA research, which is based on someone moving out of their family home 
at 18 and renting for 13 years, shows that in the north-east a typical tenant 
will have spent £31,300 on rent before they can buy, while in London the figure 
is £68,300. The figures, which were compiled with theCentre for Economics and 
Business Research <http://www.cebr.com/>, suggest that someone moving into 
rented accommodation in London today will spend an average of £91,500 on rent 
before buying their first home. A fifth of those renting now told ARLA they did 
not expect to ever be able to afford to buy a home.

 * This article was amended on 12 February 2016. It originally said there were 
250 evictions every day in 2015 in the standfirst. The correct figure is more 
than 170.
 