
A team of academics claims an unsophisticated type of cyber attack that 
exploits “flaws” in the Visa card payment system was probably used to defraud
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> Bank customers of £2.5m last 
month.

Cyber attack: hackers 'weaponised' everyday devices with malware to mount 
assault
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/22/cyber-attack-hackers-weaponised-everyday-devices-with-malware-to-mount-assault>
In an academic paper 
<https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B--vWd1BN_IsOXcydGUtNVlDQk0>, the team at 
Newcastle University claimed that working out the card number, expiry date and 
security code of any Visa credit or debit card could take a criminal “as little 
as six seconds” and involved nothing more than guesswork.


They said the so-called “distributed guessing attack” method they had 
identified was able to circumvent all the security features put in place to 
protect online payments from fraud, and exploited vulnerabilities at Visa – 
which hasmore than 500m cards <https://www.visaeurope.com/newsroom/faqs> in 
circulation in Europe alone – and hundreds of the world’s biggest and most 
popular retail websites. Some sites have changed their online security settings 
in response to the findings.


Visa said the research did not take into account the multiple layers of fraud 
prevention that exists within the payments system, “each of which must be met 
in order to make a transaction possible in the real world”.

The research paper, whose lead author is a 26-year-old PhD student, said the 
good news for people with MasterCard debit and credit cards was that this form 
of hacking did not work on MasterCards, because its systems were able to detect 
the attacks. It added that the minority of online retailers that used so-called 
3D Secure technology to provide extra protection – such as theVerified by Visa 
<https://www.visa.co.uk/products/protection-benefits/verified-by-visa/>, 
Mastercard SecureCode 
<https://www.mastercard.co.uk/en-gb/consumers/features-benefits/securecode.html>
 andAmerican Express SafeKey 
<https://www.americanexpress.com/uk/content/safekey-information.html> systems – 
were also “safe” from this type of attack.


The paper was published weeks after Tesco Bank suffered what was described as 
anunprecedented attack on its online accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-thieves-25m>
, which affected 9,000 customers and resulted in the theft of £2.5m.


The type of hacking identified by the Newcastle team involves criminals using 
merchants’ payment websites to “guess” people’s card details. The criminals use 
software that automatically generates different variations of a card’s security 
data – for example, the card number, expiry date and three-digit security code 
known as the CVV – and fires these off to hundreds or even thousands of 
websites around the world at the same time. The reply to the transaction will 
confirm whether or not the guess was right.


Because Visa’s network did not detect multiple invalid payment requests on the 
same card from different websites, “unlimited guesses” could be made by 
spreading the guesses over a large number of sites, even if individual 
merchants limited the number of attempts. This meant that “within seconds, 
hackers are able to get a ‘hit’ and verify all the necessary security data”.


Once they have all the details, the criminal can use these to buy goods online 
or, potentially, open a money transfer account and send cash to an anonymous 
recipient abroad.


The Newcastle team used a set of software tools – including a website “bot” 
and automated scripts – and their own bank cards, including seven Visa ones, to 
carry out an experimental distributed guessing attack. They chose 400 of the 
world’s biggest commercial websites for their investigation, including Google, 
Amazon, iTunes and PayPal, before later whittling this down to 389. Of these, 
47 made use of 3D Secure systems, which meant they could not be attacked in 
this way. That left 342 that were vulnerable.


The research paper stated that the experiment proved that this type of attack 
was practical and so a credible threat, and also that it was possible to run 
multiple bots at the same time on hundreds of payment sites “without triggering 
any alarms in the payment system”.


Mohammed Ali, a PhD student in Newcastle University’s school of computing 
science and lead author on the paper, said: “Most hackers will have got hold of 
valid card numbers as a starting point, but even without that, it’s relatively 
easy to generate variations of card numbers and automatically send them out 
across numerous websites to validate them.”


He added: “The next step is the expiry date. Banks typically issue cards that 
are valid for 60 months, so guessing the date takes at most 60 attempts. The 
CVV is your last barrier and theoretically only the cardholder has that piece 
of information – it isn’t stored anywhere else. But guessing this three-digit 
number takes fewer than 1,000 attempts. Spread this out over 1,000 websites and 
one will come back verified within a couple of seconds. And there you have it: 
all the data you need to hack the account.”


Ali said MasterCard’s centralised network was able to detect a guessing attack 
after fewer than 10 attempts, even when those payments were distributed across 
multiple networks.


The team said this guessing attack method was likely to have been used in the 
Tesco cyber-attack, and was “frighteningly easy if you have a laptop and an 
internet connection … The risk is greatest at this time of year, when so many 
of us are purchasing Christmas presents online.” Their research has been 
published in the academic journalIEEE Security & Privacy 
<https://www.computer.org/security-and-privacy/>.


In a statement, Visa said it was “committed to keeping fraud at low levels, 
and works closely with card issuers and acquirers to make it very difficult to 
obtain and use cardholder data illegally … We provide issuers with the 
necessary data to make informed decisions on the risk of transactions. There 
are also steps that merchants and issuers can take to thwart brute force 
attempts”.


The spokesman said that in cases where someone’s card details were used 
fraudulently the cardholder was protected from liability and added that where a 
merchant chose not to use its Verified by Visa system for a card-not-present 
transaction, they assumed the risk for fraud. “Visa welcomes industry and 
academic efforts to identify and address perceived vulnerabilities in the 
payment system.”

Tesco Bank said it refunded each customer account in full and no customer data 
was lost or stolen. “This incident has highlighted that all banks need to work 
together in the interests of all customers and the financial system,” a 
spokesman said.

 