
In the great tradition of this newspaper ruining Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> by being miserable about 
it, let me guide you through how to be a total grinch.

Get the moaning in early

I probably started on 2 December, because friends had started posting pictures 
of their trees online. What? Christmas now lasts six weeks? Christmas, like 
childbirth, should take just one day. Their pathetic excuses this year were 
about everything being terrible, a time of profound public and political loss, 
and they were just trying to make everything better. This is some self-deluding 
nonsense, as if facism can be fought with fairy lights. I got over myself, 
though, and bought a poinsettia. Shame it’s already dead.


It is imperative to moan about the relentless buying of stupid stuff 

No one needs all these presents, but the real trick is to simultaneously decry 
the instruction to go all crafty and handmade. Who has the time to whittle 
baubles out of wheatgrass? My personal beef, or the vegan equivalent of it, is 
the insanity of the stocking filler. A clementine and a bag of chocolate money 
no longer suffices. It’s now all very expensive crud. Death to all petal- and 
glitter-encrusted bath bombs!


Go on and on about people eating and drinking too much 

Did you know that the average Christmas dinner contains 8,000 calories? 
Obviously. That is the entire point if it. Did you know A&E departments are 
full of people who have done daft things after drinking too much? Is it 
sensible to put a lot of people who don’t really like each other (relatives) 
into a small space and fuel them with booze and other flammable humans? No. Act 
like you have recently discovered this information.

Talk about grief a lot

People die at Christmas. People who are ill are still ill at Christmas. Every 
Christmas, people think a lot about those they have lost and it’s a very 
difficult time for them. I find it is helpful to go round announcing your 
personal insights about grief and to try to get into some sort of competition 
about it. Likewise, if you hear any bad news at all, join in the general chorus 
that it is even worse than it already is because it is late December.

Coca-Cola didn’t invent Santa ... the 10 biggest Christmas myths debunked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/21/coca-cola-didnt-invent-santa-the-10-biggest-christmas-myths-debunked>
Ditto loneliness

We are suffering an epidemic of loneliness and it is fairly easy to invite 
anyone who is alone to come over at any point during the year, surely? 
Loneliness is long-term. Christmas is the time to bring home all kinds of 
failure: bad relationships, unwanted childlessness, separation – every 
imperfection can be amplified. I read some advice that said: “Avoid excessive 
rumination about your life.” Isn’t that what being under siege with your family 
is for?

Complain about the ridiculousness of the dinner

Basically, everyone wants the crappy meal they had as children. No one 
actively wants almonds in their sprouts. Or random star anise in surprise 
places. Celebrity cooks may spend weeks “brining” – that is their problem. 
Likewise, making your own “nibbles” or indeed even saying the word “nibbles” is 
deranged. If something isn’t a cheese straw, no one cares. The continual 
reinvention of the edible wheel is a huge faff that falls mostly to sweaty and 
stressed women.

You didn’t think I could get this far without saying that Christmas is 
essentially an anti-feminist conspiracy celebrating virgin births and stale, 
pale patriarchs, did you?

Spaff a lot of nonsense about not giving in to the pressure cooker of 
perfection

Do this while tweeting pictures of your family’s heirloom Christmas 
decorations. Your Christmas should be both the same as everyone else’s and 
superior to it. This is what social media is for.

Moan about what’s on the telly. All of it

Insist on the real meaning of Christmas and whinge about how we have lost it, 
but without specifying what that meaning is. Just say that it is all the fault 
of neoliberalism. No one will know what you mean, but they will agree with you.

The whole point of being a grinch is that you lower expectations dramatically. 
It is neither iconoclastic nor interesting to not like Christmas, but 
ambivalence is normal. Your friends and family will actively enjoy teasing you 
about it and in face of the moronic cheerleading everywhere, standards of 
ill-will have to be maintained.

Bad Christmases are way more memorable than good ones 

The one where I had to physically throw my friend’s sister out of the house 
after she slapped her; the one where we had “a compulsory buffet” in Cambodia; 
the one where my dying mother had a morphine syringe driver and kept thinking 
Prince Charles was in the room. The OK ones blur into one. So, the best you can 
aim for is maximal blur.

The secret of Christmas is supposed to be kindness in all its manifestations, 
but upon long consideration, I think it’s actually gravy

Don’t follow recipes. The best approach to gravy is a “free your mind and your 
ass will follow” one. Same with religion.

If the smash-and-grab jollity gets too much, have a nap and remember: most of 
us never attain the perfect Christmas. Muddling through is good enough. I hope 
you do. One and all.
 