
Traditionally, a British ambassador needs royal documents of accreditation 
from the Court of St James’s in order to represent Her Majesty abroad. There’s 
none of that fuss for Nigel Farage: he has appointed himself ambassador to the 
United States – as a stepping stone to some higher office, such as Foreign 
Secretary Farage, Prime Minister Farage or perhaps, ifThe Donald should suggest 
it in a 3am tweet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
, King Nigel. Not on the basis of such fussy old paraphernalia as a great seal, 
a royal charter or (perish the thought) elected office of any kind, but simply 
by flashing a photograph at us.

In the age of the selfie and the celebrity presidency, Farage has invented a 
new source of political authority. It dazzles and blinds, more than 10 days 
after it was taken, as it shines its power-drunk bully-light into every corner 
of the news. It is the picture that defines 2016, drooled one befuddled 
commentator.

At this rate, it will define 2017 too, for the photograph that stirred the 
confusions of a stupefied Britain on the weekend after America’s psychotic 
meltdown of an election shows no sign of slipping away into memory. Usually 
photographs record history; this one is making it, for Farage is successfully 
using it as a badge and instrument of power, like a barbarian chief returning 
to his Thanet village with a tablet from the Roman emperor that appoints him 
ruler of the Britons.

The sheer freakishness of the image enhances its grip on us, for we can’t stop 
staring at this monstrously matey exchange of bonhomie in a lift lined with 
gold. Trump’s almost beatific post-electoral grin is matched by The Nigel’s 
starstruck guffaw. They’re high rollers headed for the penthouse, where the 
casino has provided them with entertainment for the night – or whatever other 
cinematic image comes to mind.

To me, this is somewhere between a Martin Scorsese film and a scene from the 
heyday of the Third Reich.Hermann Goring 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/08/05/news/goring-gun-auction/> would have loved 
that gold elevator. But if this year has taught us anything, it is that you 
can’t assume your revulsion is universally shared. Maybe to many this is a 
gleeful, and even joyous, picture of two buddies having a well-earned 
celebration.

Love it or loathe it, Britain can’t stop looking at it. News sites whipped it 
out again this week like Farage’s personal Ultra Gold American Express Card 
(bonuses include lording it over HM government) after the president-elect 
attempted to appoint him by tweet as our man in Washington.

In dwelling on this potent picture, this virile vision, we are rushing after 
pied piper Farage, dancing gladly to his tune. For Mr Brexit loves this picture 
– and he understands it too. The gold is hilarious. It makes everyone look. 
What really matters, however, is the intimacy it parades: the proof that he and 
America’s scarily unpredictable new president are not just allies but real and 
close friends. This is what makes the picture so much more than just a nice 
souvenir of a visit to Trump Tower. It has become Farage’s Trump card, an 
actual instrument of political power that he has played with frightening 
brilliance.

When will we wake up to the fact that Nigel Farage is a political genius? He 
has used this photograph like aMachiavel 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/machiavel> of the digital age to 
ruthlessly undermine Britain’s prime minister and Cabinet just a few months 
after the entire government was turned upside down by the Brexit vote he claims 
credit for. What’s his game? Where does it lead?

The truly sinister thing about this photograph that is empowering Nigel Farage 
so much is that he personally produced it. He went to New York, got into 
Trump’s elevator, made sure they posed for a picture together – and released it 
on his Twitter account. It first appeared in atweet by Farage at 3.38pm 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/Nigel_Farage/status/797584449047265281> on 12 
November in which he smugly goaded Britain’s elected politicians with his 
proximity to the most powerful man on Earth.

Farage is understandably delighted with the picture’s progress. Writing a 
fuming attack this week 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/22/donald-trump-recommends-nigel-farage-british-ambassador-united/>
 on the May government’s supposed folly in refusing to obey an order from Trump 
Tower – in the far-right website Breitbart, naturally – he boasts about it: “I 
have said since the now famous photograph with Donald Trump ten days ago that I 
would do anything to help our national interest and to help cement ties ...”

Farage was first to release the photograph, and he’s still harping on it as 
incontrovertible evidence that he is the president-elect’s good friend while 
conventional politicians who have been shy of acclaiming a man who spewed out 
hatred and bigotry in his campaign look wrongfooted: look, the old 
parliamentary politics has failed – it’s time for the winners in the great gold 
elevator to have a go.

For Farage, this picture is gold. But what does it mean when the normal rules 
of power can be bypassed with a photograph of two guys in a lift? Is there 
anything inherently wrong with grounding a claim to political importance in a 
photograph of yourself next toDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>?

The German social theorist Max Weber distinguished between “rational-legal” 
authority, which corresponds to Theresa May’s government in this extraordinary 
situation; “traditional” authority, which is embodied in Britain both by the 
monarchy and the venerable traditions of our parliamentary democracy; and the 
third kind, the wild card: the dangerous, unpredictable force that is 
“charismatic” authority.

Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> has already 
done a lot to destabilise rational-legal and traditional authority in Britain 
with the “revolution” he sees in Brexit. But it’s not enough. Now he is calling 
politics a “cesspit” and catastophically undermining what is supposed to be the 
Brexit government. What will be good enough? When will he stop?

Charismatic authority revels in the glamour and irrationality of visual 
images, just as it revels in emotion, stridency, fear and loathing. In a world 
cut free from conventional rules, the charismatic leader uses bizarre, 
unprecedented symbols of power to undermine the dullards who cling to outworn 
expectations. Farage waves his picture about from his balcony as he rants about 
patriotism and the “negative” politicians who don’t yet get it: there is a new 
dawn.

That “famous” photograph. Two men in a golden elevator. A lot of people are 
scared of Donald Trump, yet looking at the way he has used this photograph to 
humiliate British democracy, I am almost more scared of his laughing friend.
 