
The deaths of musicians and actors may not be what future generations chiefly 
remember about 2016 but they did have an extraordinary impact at the time. Tens 
of millions of people were strangely and strongly moved by the deaths ofDavid 
Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/obituary-david-bowie>, 
Prince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/22/prince-obituary>, Leonard 
Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-obituary>, 
and nowGeorge Michael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/26/george-michael-obituary-wham-pop-star>
 and Star Wars actorCarrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-dies-star-wars-princess-leia>
. These artists were mourned all across the peaceful parts of the world by 
strangers who felt an intimate connection with the dead; who felt that the 
artist had been “killing me softly with his song”, and that his voice was truer 
and clearer than their own when it came to expressing dreams and hopes. 
Something is going on here, which can’t be dismissed as vacuous sentimentality.

There may not, in fact, have been an unusual number of celebrity deaths this 
year, but they seem to have been much more salient than before. Part of this 
must be the result of the growing reach and responsiveness of digital media. 
Technology makes it possible to observe and react to a distant readership 
almost as accurately and immediately as an actor can respond to their audience 
in a theatre. Sudden emotional impulses are amplified with astonishing speed 
across the internet just as they can be in a crowd. Each apparently solitary 
smartphone user is really sharing other people’s emotion as well as their own.

It’s not just emotions that are shared in this way. It’s memories as well. The 
generations of middle-aged people along with all their children and 
grandchildren have experienced a kind of collectivisation of childhood. This 
was a historic shift. Before the mass media, childhood memories were shared 
among very small groups, and anchored to particular places. But for the last 60 
years, children in the west, and increasingly elsewhere, have grown up in front 
of televisions, and many of the most vivid characters of their childhood and 
adolescence were actors or singers.

The entertainment industry has largely replaced religious ritual in many 
lives, and has itself grown more ritualised, and even religious, in the 
process. The success of the Star Wars franchise shows how astonishingly 
profitable the development can be. It is still true today that dementia 
sufferers can be roused from their nightmares by carols and perhaps hymns 
remembered from their childhood when almost everything else has gone, but soon 
it will be the theme tunes of their childhood’s films that call them back to 
life that way.

This huge change has provoked its own backlash. Attacks on celebrity culture 
are now a staple of satirists, and there is a great deal to satirise and mock – 
but that is true of all money-making forms of religion. The relationships that 
people have with the celebrities who inhabit their imagination express profound 
longings, and help to fulfil them too. Otherwise they would not survive. Some 
might say that imaginary friends are cultivated at the expense of real ones, 
and that the contemplation of such things as George Michael’s astonishing acts 
of private generosity is no substitute for actually giving yourself to a food 
bank or visiting granny in her nursing home. But this is a counsel of 
perfection. We are not made to care equally for everyone – and as a matter of 
simple fact, we don’t.

We aren’t creatures of unlimited compassion, or of entirely rational 
calculation. However, the alternative to rational calculation is not sloppy 
emotion but imagination, which shapes emotion into drama. That is what the 
lives of celebrities provide, quite as much as their work, and that is part of 
why they are mourned. They collaborate with their audience to make engrossing 
worlds that neither party quite comprehends, but both know they need. Although 
this may be one of the things replacing traditional religion, it only works 
because it does not seem “religious”, moralistic, or cut off from the world 
around it. It sanctifies, or makes vivid and valuable, the ordinary things of 
life.

If that were all celebrity culture does, it would be far less powerful. 
Consolation and even joy can come from many places in life. What has made these 
deaths so important to so many people is that they provide an occasion for 
grief as well. The performance in which the musician and their fans are caught 
up is ultimately one of tragedy. There is loss and grief in every life, and the 
death of a beloved singer provides a chance to express this sorrow in gestures 
more powerful than words could be. In the end, they give us their deaths quite 
as much as their works, and that is why they are so passionately mourned.

• This article was amended on 28 December 2016 to correct the line “killing me 
softly with his song”, from “singing me softly with his song” as an earlier 
version said.

 