 Jack Straw is the first person to admit that he is something of an anorak who 
likes nothing better than to entertain his family with regular rounds of Name 
10 Famous Belgians. So it came as little surprise when the new foreign 
secretary bounded up to Louis Michel, his outspoken Belgian counterpart, to 
flaunt his knowledge soon after taking office last June.
Did Michel realise, the newcomer to foreign affairs asked, that Belgium is not 
really a nation state in the same way as Britain is? Straw's remarks, which 
were meant to serve as a friendly way of opening up a discussion about the 
differences between the two countries, upset Belgium's diplomats, who are 
highly sensitive about the fraught relations between their country's French and 
Flemish speakers.

Straw's diplomatic faux pas served as a telling illustration of his uncertain 
performance since succeeding Robin Cook as foreign secretary in the 
post-election reshuffle. The sure-footed home secretary of New Labour's first 
term looks hesitant, struggles to command the House of Commons and - probably 
worst of all - allowed Jeremy Paxman to make mincemeat of him on Newsnight last 
month.

In the cruel world of Westminster politics, where impressions are quickly 
formed, Straw is seen as the weakest member of the cabinet's top four. His 
stumbling performances during the Afghan crisis have contrasted uncomfortably 
with a prime minister assuming the role of world statesman, a chancellor 
stamping his mark on ever greater areas of Whitehall and a home secretary 
making headlines as he dismantles his predecessor's legacy.

Menzies Campbell, the Liberal Democrat foreign affairs spokesman, who is 
generally supportive of the government, believes that Straw is the victim of 
unfortunate circumstances. Appointed out of the blue as foreign secretary - he 
was said to be preparing to take over at the transport department when the 
Downing Street call came through - he was pitched into the most serious crisis 
in a generation within months of taking over.

"Jack Straw has had a baptism of fire," Campbell says. "To be pitched into one 
of the most difficult military, diplomatic and political periods over the past 
20 years would have tested even somebody with a deep background in foreign 
affairs. This issue is sometimes described as being like three-dimensional 
chess. But after September 11 it has become more like nine-dimensional. In 
Shakespearean terms, the foreign secretary also labours under the burden of 
having to be a hero in a play dominated by Blair's Coriolanus."

Others take a less charitable view and say that Straw is seriously weakened by 
his lack of any frontbench experience on foreign affairs or defence in 21 years 
as an MP. Old hands on London's diplomatic circuit describe Straw as out of his 
depth, nervous, over-reliant on officials and completely dominated by the prime 
minister, who has taken personal command of foreign policy. Tony Blair has set 
up a parallel Foreign Office across the road in Downing Street - under the 
command of the diplomat Sir David Manning - which is calling the shots.

One of Straw's most painful moments came on the eve of the fall of Kabul last 
month when he submitted himself to a grilling by Paxman. The conditions should 
have been ideal - the Northern Alliance were finally at the gates of Kabul 
after weeks of uncertainty over whether the Taliban could be beaten. Despite 
that, the interview descended into an embarrassing duffing-up at the hands of 
Paxman.

A tired and puffy-looking Straw dismissed an earlier interview on the 
programme by the BBC's John Simpson, who predicted that the Taliban were on the 
verge of collapse. Hours before Simpson triumphantly "liberated" Kabul, Straw 
said that "not even an experienced reporter" such as Simpson could deny that 
Kabul could only be taken by street-to-street fighting. "Exactly what will 
happen - no one can be sure," he said.

Sensing the uncertainty of his prey, Paxman asked Straw what the Northern 
Alliance were planning to do with Kabul. The foreign secretary dodged the 
question on three occasions, before saying that the alliance was "not 
particularly interested in taking Kabul". Friends of Straw defend the 
interview, saying that amid the uncertainty of the Afghan war he could not have 
known that Taliban rule would crumble so quickly; that his hesitation over the 
Northern Alliance reflected the difficulty in dealing with a disparate 
organisation which is plagued by splits.

Critics, however, say that it is difficult to imagine Robin Cook floundering 
in a high-profile interview at what should have been a moment of strength. 
Straw's whole demeanour on the programme was that of a highly uncomfortable 
politician. His tie was not straight, his suit was lopsided and his 
descriptions of Afghanistan sounded like those of a keen geography student who 
had just been taught about the country from a map. Explaining the Northern 
Alliance's stronghold, he said: "Take a line 30km north of Kabul, take in a 
straight line west to Herat - most of that is their territory."

His performances in parliament, where Straw was seen as one of the cabinet's 
stars before the last election, have been little better. In some of the early 
debates on Afghanistan, when the allies were struggling to dislodge the 
Taliban, Straw fiddled nervously with his papers and struggled to maintain the 
flow of his speeches. In the first Commons debate after the summer recess, on 
October 16, he nervously clung to the dispatch box with both hands for 
reassurance, and scratched his eyebrow in the manner of an embarrassed teenager 
when he mispronounced the name of Lakhdar Brahimi, the UN special envoy to 
Afghanistan. "I do not feel that Jack Straw has made a big mistake," one MP 
said of his Commons performances. "But there is no great spark."

His unsure touch contrasts with his period as home secretary between 1997 and 
2001, when he was one of the few cabinet ministers to command the Commons. 
Exuding confidence on almost every appearance at the dispatch box, Straw used 
to deploy regular props to disarm his opponents. To MPs who complained about 
delays in introducing legislation on freedom of information, Straw would joke 
that they misunderstood the dialectical process, before reminding those less 
well versed in Marxism about thesis, antithesis, synthesis.

Straw's favourite Belgian from his top 10 list also made regular appearances 
as a prop. During heated debates on electoral reform, he would blind opponents 
with details about Victor d'Hondt, an obscure 19th-century Belgian who devised 
even obscurer voting systems.

In his new incarnation the props have vanished, exposing Straw to the 
unforgiving atmosphere of the Commons. The Middle East is one area he has 
struggled to master, as he treads a fine line between sympathising with 
Palestinian grievances while condemning the suicide bombers of Hamas and 
Islamic Jihad. Answering questions from MPs on October 30, he had the delicate 
task of condemning the murder of the tourism minister Rehavam Zeevi while 
urging Israeli restraint. His answers, from a carefully prepared text, were 
either plodding or faltering.

Some MPs believe his unease over the Middle East stems from tensions with 
Downing Street. This blew into the open on the day after the triple suicide 
bombings in Jerusalem and Haifa on December 1, when Straw's junior minister for 
the Middle East, Ben Bradshaw, trotted out the standard Foreign Office line. In 
a lunchtime radio interview, Bradshaw condemned the atrocities, but criticised 
Israel for refusing to return to the negotiating table without a seven-day 
ceasefire.

Amid uproar in Israel over Bradshaw's remarks - and the prime minister's 
personal disgust at the murder of innocent Israeli teenagers - Straw rushed out 
a statement later that day condemning the attacks as "abhorrent" and rowing 
back on the criticisms of Israel voiced by his junior minister. It was not the 
first time Downing Street had intervened over the Middle East. During Straw's 
first groundbreaking visit to the Middle East in September, in which he became 
the first British foreign secretary to visit Tehran since the revolution, Blair 
had to pacify the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, after Straw wrote an 
article for an Iranian newspaper that referred to "Palestine". Sharon lifted a 
threat to boycott Straw only after a 15-minute phone call from Blair and after 
Downing Street publicly distanced itself from the article.

One opponent thought that Straw's diplomatic slip-up was part of a carefully 
choreographed plan by the British government. "Poor Jack - there were clearly 
greater games at play. The article was all part of a concerted attempt to 
butter up the Muslim world as Britain and the US were building up support for 
the international coalition against the Taliban." Another opponent was less 
forgiving. "Straw's inexperience showed through - on that occasion he clearly 
gave the Arabists in the Foreign Office a free hand. He made the mistake of 
failing to remember the depth of feelings on both sides."

The whispering campaign against Straw has reached his ears in his opulent 
office overlooking St James's Park. Friends insist he is unruffled by the 
criticism.

Amid the grand surroundings of the Foreign Office in King Charles Street, the 
atmosphere is said to have been transformed since the departure of Cook, who 
was loathed by many senior officials. Straw, who visits the gym every morning 
when he is in London, kicks off every day with a 9am meeting in his office 
attended by all his ministers. A copy of Le Monde is always on prominent 
display on his desk - he brushed up on his schoolboy French while he was home 
secretary.

Friends say that one of his greatest achievements has been over Europe, where 
the one time Eurosceptic Straw has followed the same path as Cook, who became 
an enthusiastic champion of the euro. In tandem with his polished Europe 
minister, Peter Hain, Straw upped the tempo on the euro as E-Day approached. 
But, unlike his predecessor, he did this without antagonising Gordon Brown, who 
jealously guards government policy on the single currency.

Judge the man on what he achieves, Straw's friends say, rather than on 
superficial perceptions. Others are not so sure. "I always thought of Jack as 
the under-the-bus candidate for prime minister if Blair were to go suddenly," 
one former admirer at Westminster says. "But not any more."
 