
It was heralded by Iain Duncan Smith as a great way of beating the loan sharks 
and doorstep lenders. But now the My Home Finance scheme, launched back in 2010 
by the then work and pensions secretary, is on the brink of closure, 
potentially leaving housing associations out of pocket to the tune of £3.5m.

Helping those who struggle to get affordable credit – the so-called 
financially excluded – is a priority for many social landlords. Research 
earlier this month showed that one in six UK adults is living with problem debt 
and tenants aretwice as likely 
<https://www.moneyadviceservice.org.uk/en/corporate/one-in-six-adults-struggling-with-debt-worries>
 to be over-indebted as those who own their home.

My Home Finance scheme a boost to excluded borrowers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/sep/23/my-home-finance-government-loan-scheme>
When the National Housing Federation, which represents England’s housing 
associations, set up My Home Finance as a not-for-profit finance company, with 
the backing of the Royal Bank of Scotland, 26 housing associations and the 
Department for Work and Pensions, the idea was that it would offer fair loans 
at fair prices for those who would otherwise be forced to turn to loan sharks. 
But, after scaling back its original high street presence, it failed to grow 
loan numbers as expected and, in 2013 and 2014, it reported operating losses of 
more than £2.1m. In February, David Orr, chair of My Home Finance and chief 
executive of the NationalHousing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> 
Federation, wrote to the housing associations that have financed the venture, 
warning that while efforts to attract new investment were still ongoing, “time 
is very much against us”. The company would now need to more “vigorously” 
pursue plans either to dispose of the business or wind it down. This means that 
only a “small fraction ... (if anything at all)” of outstanding housing 
association investment, worth £3.5m, is likely to be repaid, although efforts 
to sell the loan book will continue until the end of April.

The housing associations involved are unlikely to be destabilised by My Home 
Finance’s problems, given the small size of their stakes relative to the value 
of their overall businesses. But the reputational damage could be significant, 
when housing associations are already facingmounting criticism for inefficiency 
<http://www.24dash.com/news/housing/2015-09-09-Osborne-versus-housing-associations-the-Lords-debate-in-full>
. And the saga also raises questions about attempts to scale up genuinely 
affordable finance for those who need it most.

Part of the problem is that at 98.94% APR, interest rates are still high. 
That’s still considerably less than, the eye-watering 1,509% APR quoted by 
payday lender Wonga, but more than the rates credit unions apply, which are 
capped at a maximum 42.6% APR.

With more than 7 million people needing credit at least occasionally to pay 
for essentials, there’s clearly a need to ensure that there are plenty of 
affordable options on offer. But as the My Home Finance story shows, it’s all 
too easy to dip a toe into the loan-shark infested waters, only for it to be 
bitten off.
 