
The times, as Bob Dylan once said, they are a-changing. I am an officer in the 
armed forces, but shock horror, I am also a full-on, hummus-eating, 
Guardian-reading liberal. I would not keep Trident and I would never vote to go 
to war.

I joined up for the travel (to count, on duty: 10 countries across four 
continents in seven years) and because I believe in paying my dues to a society 
that provides a comprehensive welfare state to those who cannot work, eat and 
exist without help. One day I will leave, knowing what I did made a modicum of 
a difference, once, to someone, somewhere.

I fought in an unjust war. Let me tell you what that feels like | Joe Glenton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/07/unjust-war-soldiers-iraq-afghanistan-vietnam>
As for war, I have often thought: “Why can’t we decide these things with a 
football match instead?” If it really were that important, your team would 
never lose and our children would not die in a desert far from home.

Don’t get me wrong, I am a professional soldier. Physically fit, a good shot, 
and an experienced leader. I will do what has to be done and I work hard for 
those who work hard for me. As a lieutenant, I commanded over 40 soldiers in 
Afghanistan. As an adjutant of a regiment, I was where the buck stopped for all 
HR and personnel issues and ultimately, for how “deployable” all our soldiers 
were. But I am a new breed, and I am not alone in my outlook.

A new century brings with it new challenges for the army; the soldiers and 
officers of a new generation expect different things. We are no longer the army 
of the 1970s, where shouting was pretty much how everything got done. The way 
we as a disciplined and uniformed force interact with the UK and the wider 
world has changed.

LGBT and ethnic minority issues have been placed squarely at the front and 
centre of the army’s agenda. There is anannual army LGBT conference 
<http://armylgbt.org.uk/>, that I have attended and which is a productive 
event: everyone regardless of sexual orientation leaves feeling positive, 
included, and inspired about the future. We have transgender people currently 
serving who are well-supported by their colleagues. Ethnic minority recruitment 
is on the rise and it is now, more than ever, socially acceptable within these 
communities to sign up. Each regiment has a welfare department to help with a 
soldier’s financial problems, divorces, custody disagreements, and the 
promotion of harmony within the army. Why? Because a satisfied soldier is an 
effective soldier. How many other employers can boast such a supportive system?

Your average soldier or officer is still essentially a flawed human, working 
for other flawed humans

However, your average soldier or officer is still essentially a flawed human, 
working for other flawed humans. Remember that when you see the sharp-eyed 
rifleman on the news sitting in a Chinook helicopter somewhere hot, or 
patrolling foreign streets in an attempt to bring stability to another part of 
the world. The man behind that rifle has a family, a mortgage, a baby, a sick 
mother – in short, he has a life, a life I as his officer have a direct 
investment in. It is a life with emotions, feelings, stresses. He might even be 
your brother or son, if things were different.

As soldiers, we go to places on the whim of a government that does not always 
grasp the human element surrounding the young people they may send to their 
deaths. We are often working with loose planning in dangerous environments, in 
countries without a stable government in place. I have been deployed to a mix 
of stable and riskier countries, and must be prepared to adjust to a new 
environment at any moment. On some assignments this can mean eating cold 
rations and washing myself and my clothes in a bowl for as long as is necessary.

My bag is permanently packed and I have sat ready to react within hours to 
anything – from peace operations to humanitarian crises and conflicts – for 
months on end. It is necessary, but chaotic. Two of my colleagues have been 
killed on duty and while I don’t suffer frompost-traumatic stress disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/post-traumatic-stress-disorder>, their 
faces will never leave me.

The army has a long history of counter-insurgency operations and my own 
experiences have been alongside skilled professionals. It’s not like the 
movies: in such situations every action is conducted meticulously, as it has to 
be. Planning over and over again, and conducting pre-patrol checks on 
ammunition, radios, body armour, and water are unglamorous but good drills that 
will ultimately save lives.

I can go from exhilarating deployment to drumming my fingers on an empty desk 
in HQ in the same week.

In barracks day-to-day, we are like any other corporation: navigating 
out-of-touch superiors, jumping through hoops, completing idiotic health and 
safety courses. My particular bugbear is other soldiers who are not prepared to 
go the extra mile, those who will make this whole rollercoaster feel like 
merely a job; as opposed to the all-singing, all-dancing vocation.

Politics (with a capital P) definitely shapes the lives of soldiers and 
officers, but office politics and daily frustrations are prominent and the same 
as anywhere – little arguments, line manager power struggles, coffee fund 
spats, open-plan offices, ineffective coworkers ... the list goes on.

The recent redundancies and Army 2020 cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jul/05/army-2020-fighting-future>
 have left many people doing upwards of three jobs to cover the workload. This 
makes daily working life harder and may go some way to explaining a certain 
laissez-faire attitude – some people are simply starting to give in as the new 
structures creak under the strain.

Saying that, army life comes with bonuses. Yes, I am gainfully employed, and I 
am grateful for this. The forces’ pay packet does provide benefits, such as 
Ministry of Defence housing, a pension plan, and a competitive salary. When in 
the UK, I live on an army estate, where I know my neighbour and where I could, 
if I wanted to, walk to work.

But all is not what it seems. The utopian ideal, this army for the 21st 
century, has not yet been realised. The army housing? We pay sizeable rent to 
the government to stay in it anyway. My garage? Not actually big enough for a 
car. Pension?Slashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/feb/09/armed-forces-pension-spending-cuts> 
in a series of reforms.

The secret life of an organiser: I clear my clients’ physical and emotional 
clutter | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/15/secret-life-of-an-organiser-clearing-clutter>
So what does the future hold? Well, in the lingering words of Jamie Foxx’s 
marine corps soldier in Jarhead, “I love this job”. I love it despite the 
system and the pervading “last days of Rome” atmosphere. I love the people, the 
fact the army levels the playing field for all, and I would like to continue 
serving this country.

The job offers travel to places you’d never get a chance to see in this day 
and age (Lashkar Gah <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lashkar_Gah> is great this 
time of year), along with camaraderie and an unparalleled sense of achievement 
if you’re working on the right project such as helping in a humanitarian 
crisis. We made a real difference in the wake of theNepal earthquake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/apr/26/nepal-earthquake-death-toll-exceeds-1500-rolling-report>
, for example. However the daily grind is as exhausting as anywhere else, and 
public opinion can vary widely despite our concerted efforts.

One day soon, the army will be nigh-on unrecognisable, and this will either be 
a great or a grave thing.

• Are you a flight attendant, a firefighter or an anaesthetist? We want to 
hear your candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on 
submitting your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 