
Social housing tenants can end up struggling with their finances for many 
reasons, from getting into debt or seeing their benefits cut, to moving house. 
Last yearCash Wise <http://www.getcashwise.co.uk/>, the financial inclusion 
team for housing association WDH, which has 31,000 properties in Wakefield, 
received more than 1,300 referrals. Here’s how the team helped tenants overcome 
financial pressures.

Juggling bills and debts

A major challenge faced by low-income tenants is managing money effectively to 
keep on top of monthly financial commitments. With fluctuating incomes, 
zero-hours contracts and the bedroom tax, juggling bills and debts can be 
difficult for many people across Wakefield.

Housing associations are seeing tenants move from exclusion to real poverty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/oct/27/housing-associations-tenants-exclusion-poverty-welfare-reform>
By working with tenants through intensive one-to-one support sessions, the 
Cash Wise team helps people create manageable budgets and checks they aren’t 
overpaying for utilities. As well as achieving collective savings of more than 
£25,000 on utility bills for tenants between April and December 2015, the team 
has also referred numerous people with unmanageable debts to debt charity
StepChange <http://www.stepchange.org/> for further expert advice and support.

Payday lenders and loan sharks

In recent years, short-term and high-cost loans have been used by tenants to 
make up a shortfall in their income or to subsidise unexpected costs. Today, as 
a result of tighter regulations across the sector, fewer people are affected by 
payday loan debt. When supporting tenants who have many debts, advisers often 
have to meet them several times before enough trust and rapport is built up for 
them to reveal the full extent of a problem.

A number of tenants have stated they are aware of loan sharks operating across 
Wakefield, and some have even said they view them positively because they offer 
access to money when low-cost high street credit is unavailable.

Working closely with our local credit union, we’ve been able to help promote 
low-cost credit and encourage saving. Workshops focusing on financial 
terminology, loans, APR and avoiding loan sharks have proven another effective 
way to improve our tenants’ financial awareness.

Moving to a new area or property


Relocating to a new area or moving into a new property can be a challenging 
time. As well as welfare reforms that continue to impact on household finances, 
new tenants often find themselves in a property without home essentials, such 
as furniture or white goods.

With very limited disposable income and no savings to cover emergency 
expenses, it’s not uncommon for tenants to turn to expensive weekly payment 
stores because they believe they have no other option.

Having worked closely with the local council for the past three years, the 
Cash Wise team now sees a speedy resolution to applications for discretionary 
housing payments and local welfare provision. These grants can cover shortfalls 
in rent or provide people with vital household items that might otherwise have 
been purchased at a costly rent-to-own store.

Cooking healthy food on an affordable budget

A lack of knowledge around healthy eating and basic cooking is something the 
team sees regularly.

One issue that’s been identified is that people spend more on takeaways than 
they think. Many consider a takeaway to be Chinese food or a pizza but forget 
about the £6 they have spent in Greggs on pasties and sandwiches. To combat 
this issue, Cash Wise partnered with the local NHS community food and health 
team to deliver healthy cooking workshops.

Credit unions: turning goodwill into action. Register now for panel debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/06/effective-uk-credit-unions>
Sessions provide tenants with the skills to cook simple family meals, but also 
challenge participants to see if they can tell the difference between branded 
and unbranded food items – encouraging them to swap to non-branded goods to 
save money.

Benefits cuts

Just over 32% of referrals received by the team this financial year have been 
about benefits issues. Some of these are complex inquiries where tenants are 
receiving the wrong benefit or require support through an appeal process. A 
loss of income through inconsistent hours at work or a reduction in benefits 
presents a major challenge; a by-product of this has been an increased reliance 
on food banks.

Many residents are facing the choice whether to “heat or eat” and one of the 
short-term solutions has been to support people to access emergency food 
parcels from food banks. Worryingly, last year the team accessed 389 of these. 
This reinforces the need for intensive support for struggling tenants to 
maximise their incomes.

In response to all these issues the team has created a financial capability 
website,getcashwise.co.uk <http://www.getcashwise.co.uk/>, developed alongside 
tenants of all ages.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you every 
Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 