
My throat feels tight, my heart is beating faster and I can’t seem to focus my 
attention on what’s in front of me. Someone walks past with some very colourful 
balloons. I’m distracted, then I hear a noise to my left and I spin round. 
Someone’s stubbing something out with their shoe. I see a cloud of too-bright 
pink vape smoke, and only then do I notice that a woman is talking to me, 
pleading with me to calm down. It’s hard to concentrate on what she’s saying 
with all this happening around me. I feel slightly panicky, like I want all the 
stimuli to stay in one place where I can control it.

I’m in Manchester’s intu Trafford Centre. And while being somewhere as vast 
and busy as this does ordinarily give me the mild heebie-jeebies, the virtual 
reality (VR) headset I’ve just been wearing has taken it to another level.

The Autism TMI VR Experience, launched yesterday, is the latest event in the 
National Autistic Society’s (NAS) Too Much Information (TMI) campaign, which 
was created to challenge misconceptions about autism.

The VR experience is designed to put members of the public in the shoes of an 
autistic person, so they can see and hear first-hand how it feels to be 
overwhelmed with sensory input in a busy shopping centre.

It follows on from the viral success of the charity’s film, Can you make it to 
the end? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lr4_dOorquQ>, which has been seen by 
nearly 60m people. The video followed 10-year-old Alex Marshall having a 
meltdown in a shopping centre.

Alex is at the launch today, trying the VR for the first time. He says he’s 
delighted with it. “It was great. Amazing. It’s very intense but it needs to 
be. It really gets the point across.”

“Autism is a spectrum condition so I don’t think it necessarily reflects how I 
feel all the time but it does focus on how a lot of autistic people do feel. 
For example, my meltdowns might be caused by people brushing past me but for a 
lot of autistic people it might be sounds.”

The charity’s CEO Mark Lever says: “It was about how we could translate 
awareness of autism into understanding. We know from talking to our members 
that the biggest thing that would make a difference is better public 
understanding of how environment can impact the behaviour [of autistic people] 
and the way they are seen to be behaving.”

The VR Experience is coming back to the intu Trafford Centre on 9 July before 
touring round the chain’s 14 other UK centres. And there are plans to possibly 
take it into workplaces, too.

Shirley Roughley, from Warrington, is one member of the public who was 
impressed by the film. “We come to the Trafford Centre with our 12-year-old 
[autistic] grandson all the time,” she says. “I would have liked him to see the 
film. It shows you the panic, which is something you don’t really understand 
until you can see it through their eyes. It’s a great insight.” Educating 
shoppers is seen by family members of autistic people as crucial, Roughley 
says, as they often bear the brunt of the tuts and stares.

The intention isn’t to make the public experts, says Lever, but to help them 
understand. “The next time they see someone flapping or talking to themselves, 
they might not think it’s a naughty child, they might just think that’s an 
autistic child who’s trying to cope with ‘too much information’.”

To find out more about autism, the person, and what to do visit 
autism.org.uk/tmi <http://www.autism.org.uk/tmi>
 