
With exactly a month to go until the deadline, almost six million of the 11 
million or so people in Britain required to fill in a tax return still haven’t 
sent it in yet.

Perhaps you’re planning to give Jools’ Annual Hootenanny (BBC2, 11.20pm) and 
Robbie Rocks Big Ben Live (BBC1, 11.25pm) a miss and knuckle down to doing your 
form tonight. That’s not as crazy as some might think: last year a 
record-breaking 24,546 people submitted their tax return online on New Year’s 
Eve, according to HM Revenue & Customs.

But, assuming you don’t plan to see in the New Year surrounded by payslips, 
bank statements and PAYE coding notices, you have only got a month to get your 
form done. The deadline for sending 2015-16 tax returns, and paying any tax 
owed, is midnight on 31 January.

Around 870,000 taxpayers missed the 2016 deadline and paid the £100 fine, plus 
extra penalties in some cases.

It’s one of those tasks that is eminently easy to put off, but it needn’t be 
grim. In fact, if your affairs aren’t that complex, the online form could well 
take you as little as half an hour, provided you’ve signed up for online filing 
and have all the necessary paperwork.

Who has to do a tax return? You’ll need to send one in if, in the 2015-16 tax 
year:

• you were self-employed

• you received £2,500 or more in untaxed income – for example, from renting 
out a property

• your savings or investment income was £10,000 or more before tax

• your income (or your partner’s) was over £50,000, and one of you claimed 
child benefit

• you made profits from selling things like shares or a second home and need 
to pay capital gains tax

• you got dividends from shares and you’re a higher or additional rate 
taxpayer – though if you don’t need to send in a return for any other reason, 
contact the helpline (see below)

• your income was over £100,000

• you were a trustee of a trust or registered pension scheme

Some other categories of people may need to send a return – for example, 
religious ministers or Lloyd’s underwriters.

Do I need to register? If you are submitting your return online for the first 
time, you have to register and that takes time.

You will need your 10-digit unique taxpayer reference number (UTR), which you 
can typically find on HMRC letters and other documents you have been sent. When 
you enrol, you will be sent an activation code in the post, which should arrive 
within seven days. You then use this to activate the service.

You can now also submit your return via your online personal tax account 
<https://www.gov.uk/personal-tax-account>. HMRC says it takes five minutes to 
sign up for an account, and it can be done at gov.uk/personal-tax-account.

If you’re a self-assessment old hand, you will hopefully have kept all your 
codes and passwords.

Some people will have been dragged (back) into the regime because of the rules 
on child benefit that affect those earning more than £50,000 a year.

How can I reduce my bill? The main way is by claiming expenses.

Chas Roy-Chowdhury, head of tax at the Association of Chartered Certified 
Accountants, says that if, for example, you did some regular freelance work 
from home during the year, on top of your normal PAYE job, you would be 
entitled to deductions against the freelance income.

Revenue & Customs says you may be able to claim a proportion of your costs for 
things such as heating, electricity, council tax, mortgage interest or rent, 
and internet and phone.

Let’s say you did one day a week of freelance work from home in 2015-16, your 
property has four rooms, one of which you use as your office, and your 
electricity bill for the year was £400. You could claim £14.29 as an allowable 
expense relating to your electricity bill (ie, £400 divided by four = £100, 
which is then divided by seven).

So be sure to keep a record of all the expenses in relation to your self 
employment. (You can be both employed and self employed at the same time – for 
example, if you work for an employer during the day and run your own business 
in the evenings.)

You may be able to claim tax relief if you have to use your own money to pay 
fees or subscriptions to some approved professional organisations, but only if 
you require membership to do your job or it’s “helpful for your work”, says 
HMRC. Thelist of approved organisations 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/professional-bodies-approved-for-tax-relief-list-3/approved-professional-organisations-and-learned-societies>
 is huge and includes everyone from the International Academy of Sex Research 
to the Esperanto Teachers Association – for the full list go to
http://bit.ly/11xrAJx 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/professional-bodies-approved-for-tax-relief-list-3/approved-professional-organisations-and-learned-societies>

Do I still need to declare my savings income? This year the government 
introduced thepersonal savings allowance 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/personal-savings-allowance-factsheet/personal-savings-allowance>
, which means the vast majority of peoplenow don’t have to pay tax on their 
savings income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/12/should-i-still-get-cash-isa-personal-savings-allowance-interest-tax-free>
. As of 6 April 2016, if you are a basic-rate taxpayer you can earn up to 
£1,000 in savings income tax-free. Higher-rate taxpayers can earn up to £500. 
Savings income includes interest from bank, building society and credit union 
accounts, plus income from government or company bonds, and interest (but not 
dividend distributions) from investment funds.

As Roy-Chowdhury says that “while this is, of course, good news for savers, it 
may also lead to some confusion. Some taxpayers may be under the impression 
they no longer have to file a self assessment.”

However, because it didn’t come in until April this year, this change doesn’t 
affect the current return, so fill that in as normal.

What about those tax breaks for Airbnb hosts and eBay sellers? Yes, in the 
March 2016 budget, George Osborne said he wanted to help the growing numbers of 
“micro entrepreneurs” making a bit of extra money on the side, so the 
government is introducing two new tax-free allowances each worth £1,000 a year 
– one for property income and one for trading income.

Individuals with property/trading income below £1,000 will no longer need to 
declare, or pay tax, on that – but these tax breaks aren’t coming in until 
April 2017 so, again, they don’t affect this tax return.

What if I have a good excuse for missing the self-assessment deadline? HMRC 
says: “There will always be help and support available for those who have a 
genuine excuse.” It adds: “If you think you might miss the 31 January deadline, 
get in touch now – the earlier we’re contacted, the better.”

HMRC has previously said it will treat those with a reasonable excuse 
leniently as it focuses on those who persistently fail to complete their 
return, and deliberate tax evaders. It says: “This remains the case, but the 
excuse must be genuine and we might ask for evidence.”

Earlier this month Revenue & Customs gave examples of some of the more unusual 
– and unsuccessful – excuses. These included “My tax return was on my yacht, 
which caught fire;” “A wasp in my car caused me to have an accident and my tax 
return, which was inside, was destroyed;” and “My wife helps me with my tax 
return, but she had a headache for 10 days.”

What are the penalties if I don’t get my return in on time, and I don’t have a 
good enough excuse? You’ll be hit with an initial £100 fixed penalty, which 
applies even if you don’t owe any tax or you paid your tax on time. If you are 
three months late, penalties of £10 a day start to kick in, up to a maximum of 
£900. After six months there’s a further penalty of 5% of the tax due or £300, 
whichever is greater, and after 12 months, another 5% or £300 charge. There are 
also additional penalties for paying late of 5% of the tax unpaid at 30 days, 
six months and 12 months.

How can I avoid having to do a return? Many people have in the past been taken 
out of self assessment because their tax affairs have been deemed to be 
relatively straightforward. The changes to the taxation of savings income may 
mean that more people are released.

While many would no doubt welcome being told they no longer have to file a tax 
return, Roy-Chowdhury says people need to weigh up whether they still want to 
submit one. He points out that not doing a tax form might not be such a good 
idea if, for example, you have changed jobs or had a change in circumstances 
which means you are eligible for a tax rebate.

Where can I go for help? Go to gov.uk/self-assessment-tax-returns 
<https://www.gov.uk/self-assessment-tax-returns>, or call the helpline on 0300 
200 3310.
 