
It may soon be easier for shoppers to find beauty products without toxic 
chemicals. The Environmental Working Group nonprofit launched a new label this 
month called EWG Verified, which certifies personal care products as free from 
chemicals of concern.

The program is an extension of the group’s work with the Skin Deep database 
<http://www.ewg.org/skindeep/>, which for more than a decade now has given tens 
of millions of visitors information on the chemical contents and relative 
safety of their favorite cosmetics and shampoos.

Before now, the personal care industry has mostly shied away from eco-labels, 
in spite of rising interest in non-toxic beauty products from consumers and the 
increasing popularity of eco-labels for other types of consumer products.

The number of eco-labels on consumer products across industries has grown from 
a few dozen in the 1990s to more than 400 today. The labels have helped some 
companies justify price premiums, but have also served to confuse consumers in 
industries like food where a large number of labels with varying degrees of 
credibility – ranging from baseless “all natural” claims to more rigorous 
organic certifications – can make it difficult for shoppers to separate the 
green from the greenwashed.

On-package labeling could become a common practice as retailers like Walmart 
and Targetroll out programs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/walmart-target-toxic-chemicals-soap-makeup-revlon>
 vetting the chemical ingredients in personal care products.

“Eco-labeling is a critical step in the regulation of the private sector, and 
third party labels are generally more trustworthy than the industry’s 
self-certified labels,” says Xinghua Li, a professor of media studies at Babson 
College, who researches green advertising. “The cosmetic industry needs it just 
as urgently as the food industry: products we put on our skin are just as 
important as the food we put into our mouths.”

An increase in eco-certification programs could be good for the personal care 
industry even if it doesn’t equate to more on-product labels. In arecent study 
<http://ioes.ucla.edu/perch/resources/delmas-grant-bas.pdf> on the value of 
eco-labels, UCLA researchers linked the rise of eco-labels to the price premium 
they can help command, but pointed out that the certification processes behind 
various labels alone can also deliver benefits to companies. The researchers 
cite the wine industry as an example because so many vineyards go through eco 
certification programs but opt not to use the companion eco-labels on their 
bottles.

“We find that consumers are not willing to pay a premium for wine eco-labels, 
but that certified though unlabeled wine enjoys a significant premium,” writes 
Magali Delmas, the lead author of the study. Delmas adds that eco certification 
may lead to improved production processes, which in turn help to produce a 
higher quality product that can be sold at a price premium.

That could be a template for personal care products, too. Nneka Leiba, deputy 
director of research for EWG, says she hopes consumers will recognize and trust 
the EWG Verified label, which will then persuade more personal care 
manufacturers to stop using toxic chemicals. “We thought it could be useful for 
consumers to see something at the point of sale, but also we were hearing 
pretty frequently from companies, asking if they could use our logo on their 
products to indicate that they had scored well in the Skin Deep database,” she 
says. “And we thought, ‘Hey that’s good idea, let’s make some criteria’.”

Criteria for using the EWG Verified mark are slightly more stringent than 
those for scoring green in the Skin Deep database.

In the database, EWG checks product ingredients against available studies and 
government databases on chemical toxicity, then assigns a score of one to 10 to 
each product based on more than a dozen criteria related to its relative hazard 
and how much information is available about the product and its ingredients. 
Products in the 0-2 range are marked green for “low hazards”; those with a 
score of 3-6 are yellow for “moderate hazards”; and products scoring 7-10 are 
listed as red for “high hazards”.

To qualify for the EWG Verified seal, a product must not contain any of the 
ingredients on EWG’s lists ofrestricted 
<http://static.ewg.org/ewgverified/docs/EWG_License_Program_Restricted_List_C01.pdf?_ga=1.255781192.1364012591.1421437671>
 andunacceptable 
<http://static.ewg.org/ewgverified/docs/EWG_License_Unacceptable_List_C01.pdf> 
ingredients. Companies also must fully disclose all ingredients on the label 
(and not use any catch-all terms like “fragrance”, for example) and must prove 
they are adequately preserving their products without using toxic chemicals.

The new seal doesn’t mean the Skin Deep database is coming to an end, however. 
EWG will continue to run the database because not every company – or every 
product within a company – will be eligible for the EWG Verified mark. Most 
sunscreens and products containing popular facial cream ingredient retinol, for 
example, do not meet the criteria for EWG Verified.

“The database is also necessary for showcasing bad actors in the market – 
those that are scoring red or yellow – and differentiating those brands and 
products from those that are rating green,” Leiba adds.

Healthy Lifestyle Brands, a brand management firm that works with various 
wellness-focused businesses, is administering the EWG Verified mark. Companies 
have to pay to apply for certification, but EWG wouldn’t disclose the fees. The 
money will help pay for EWG’s ongoing research into ingredients and will cover 
the costs of administering the program, according to EWG spokesperson Monica 
Amarelo.

EWG Verified has launched with two brands: Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/beauty> Counter and MyChelle Cosmetics. 
MyChelle chief marketing officer Kimberly Heathman says she expects the EWG 
Verified seal will help attract new customers. MyChelle plans to market its EWG 
Verified affiliation on its website, marketing materials and product packaging.

Rebecca Brooks, a marketing consultant and founder of the market research firm 
Alter Agents, says the label will help brands differentiate themselves even if 
they do nothing more than put it on their products. “Consumers will see it as 
an official label, so even if people don’t know EWG, it will stand out to 
them,” she says.


Brooks says it could also help cultivate customer loyalty, especially given 
her firm’s research showing that brand loyalty is waning these days. Factors 
such as prices and product reviews tend to sway millennials more than they do 
brand-loyal boomers. More certification programs for personal care products 
could emerge if EWG Verified proves to be successful in boosting sales for its 
participants.

However, a label boom in the personal care industry could be problematic for 
both the companies in the EWG Verified program and consumers. More labels could 
confuse consumers, water down the value of EWG Verified and leave companies 
once again struggling to differentiate themselves, according to Brooks.

“If I were a brand that was going to pay EWG to get verified, I would want 
some certainty that the marketplace won’t become crowded with other stamps and 
labels that would make my EWG marker irrelevant,” Brooks says. “So there’s a 
certain onus on them to promote and push to consumers about their label, what 
it means, and why it matters.”
 