
You have to volley back a lot of misconceptions when you tell people you play 
cards for a living. “What’s your poker face like?” tends to be the first thing 
people ask me. I feel as if I’m letting them down when I say that I don’t have 
one. Playing online, which is the bedrock of my poker income, it doesn’t matter 
what my face is doing (grimacing at the screen, usually). When I play live I 
tend to focus on other things for information: bet sizes; chip handling; hand 
history; what my opponents are wearing, drinking, talking about. Faces rarely 
come into it.

Another typical response is, “How can you make a living gambling? It’s all 
just luck, right?” Ah but it isn’t. Granted, there are short-term slices of 
good fortune or otherwise, but over hundreds of thousands of hands, 
psychological, mathematical and emotional skill reign. Steven D Levitt’spaper 
<http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/05/09/poker-as-a-game-of-skill/?_r=1> 
The Role of Skill Versus Luck in Poker along with other sources, support poker 
being a skill-based game. And while I admit that I was hopelessly addicted to 
fruit machines as a teenager, poker doesn’t feel at all like gambling. The 
steady incline of my profit graph stretching back four years demonstrates that 
ultimately hard work and talent are rewarded. That said, my annual income is 
unspectacular and below the national average wage.

I came to the game aimlessly and late at 36, after working as a freelance 
journalist. I was asked by an editor to write a weekly poker column charting 
the progress of a newcomer. I agreed and was immediately seduced.

I went to Aberdeen on a whim in February to play cash games, and almost cried 
with happiness looking over the docks

I threw myself into learning about the game and went from playing one table at 
a time to two, then, eventually, seven or eight. The column was scheduled to 
last a few months. When it finally petered out and I had a chance to look 
around me, it had been running for 88 weeks. My writing career lay in tatters 
and my income was now solely dependent on poker success. I found the idea both 
terrifying and exhilarating. I still do.

Time contracts when you spend most of your time on your own in a small room 
looking at a computer. I can barely recall anything that happened last week but 
remember the specifics of hands played several years ago. I am 40 now and any 
hopes of a life consisting of “normal” things – a mortgage, starting a family, 
hobbies – have all but gone.Poker <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/poker> has 
put me out on the fringes of society.

This isn’t healthy. Last year I went deep into the psychological trenches. I 
was playing live cash games at stakes I wasn’t properly bankrolled for and had 
a bad run. Losing a week’s wages in two minutes is tough to take.

To make up for these losses I was grinding eight tables online simultaneously 
for up to 15 hours a day. When I wasn’t playing, I was drinking to the point of 
blacking out to cope. I would play hungover or drunk (or both) and badly. 
Financial problems led to sleepless nights which led to poor decision-making at 
the tables which led to more sleepless nights. I found myself in a nightmarish 
loop. By the end of November my mental health was tied together by string. I 
had chronic insomnia, tinnitus, suicidal thoughts; weight slipped off me and as 
if that wasn’t enough – and, frankly, I felt like it was – I developedexploding 
head syndrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/apr/07/keep-waking-bang-sounds-exploding-head-syndrome>
.

I turned to the stoics <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stoicism> for help. 
Those ancient philosophers had a tonne of good advice for the modern-day poker 
player to add to his or her psychological toolkit. They focused on 
self-control, overcoming adversity, being conscious of our impulses, life after 
failure and so on. Aces cracked for the tenth time in a night? What do you do? 
Smash up your computer or exercise self-control and concentrate on playing 
well? Busted a tournament before the money? It’s no fun, but nothing that the
words of Marcus Aurelius can’t help soothe 
<http://thehardlifeofawriter.blogspot.co.uk/2015/10/words-to-live-by-10-why-pain-is-blessing.html>
: “The thing itself was no misfortune at all; to endure it and prevail is great 
good fortune.” Even their motto – Nil Admirari (“Be astonished at nothing”) – 
resonates when at the poker table.

The secret life of a trainee brain surgeon: it’s all about the drilling | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/18/secret-life-brain-surgeon-drilling>
A reasonable question here might be: why don’t you go and do something less 
financially precarious and mentally damaging instead? The thing is, I still 
find poker fascinating. The axiom of it taking five minutes to learn and a 
lifetime to master has never felt truer. Also, I am in a corner. I’m not sure 
if I could do anything else with such yawning gaps in my CV – or if I want to.

I went to Aberdeen on a whim in February to play in the cash games up there 
and almost cried with happiness looking over the docks on a dreary Saturday 
afternoon. My wallet was full and my career felt ideal: doing something that 
intellectually challenges me, that means I am not tied down, that I don’t have 
to answer to anyone, that doesn’t feel remotely like a job.

But I can’t shake the guilt that I should be doing something more positive 
with my life. They haven’t explicitly said it, but I get the feeling my family 
and friends feel I could be doing something better with my time than draining 
money from other people. I don’t mind taking money from fellow pros – I often 
relish it in fact – but I often feel grubby scooping up pots from recreational 
players after outplaying them.

I tell myself that it’s entertainment for them; that an evening playing poker 
is less expensive and more healthy than a weekend in the pub. Then the guilt 
may begin to evaporate. Plus I’m working on a book, exploring the relationship 
between stoicism, depression and poker, which I hope will help others.

This is how I kid my way through the days. Deception is a big part of the 
poker player’s armoury although most of the time, deep down, I realise I am 
mainly deceiving myself.

• Are you a GP, a dry cleaner, a childminder? We want to hear your candid 
accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your 
story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 