 The century-long battle for Scottish home rule is full of heroic figures the 
feisty founder of the Labour party, Keir Hardie, the Marxist teacher and Red 
Clydesider, John MacLean. Ironic then that the person who finally delivers it 
is a gangling, indecisive individual with a bad back, who, after four decades 
in politics, still punctuates his sentences with 'um-ahs'.
But when the Scottish parliament meets next week to elect the first minister, 
it is almost inconceivable the choice will be anyone other than Donald Dewar.

Known affectionately as 'Donny the Decent', he has also been dubbed, by an MP 
friend 'Donny the Saxt' a reference to Jamie the Saxt, the Scottish king who 
had a keen intelligence despite a dysfunctional image, and who finally earned 
the plaudit of 'the wisest fool in Christendom'. In 1603, he united the crowns 
ofScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and England, preparing the 
way for the union a century on.

What will be the fate of Donny the Saxt? Will he maintain the union or preside 
over its break-up?

The answer to that lies in the relationship between the Scottish parliament 
and Westminster, and in the short-term that means the relationship between Mr 
Dewar and Tony Blair. One of Mr Dewar's friends, when asked what Scotland will 
be like under Mr Dewar, replied caustically: "What kind of Scotland will Blair 
allow him to have?' If Mr Blair is seen to interfere, the Scottish National 
Party will be able to claim the Scottish parliament is a puppet, ruled by 
London.

Downing Street likes, or at least liked, Mr Dewar. But Mr Blair and Mr Dewar 
are no longer close. Downing Street staffers whispered at the turn of the year 
that Mr Blair was frustrated by the way that Mr Dewar was running Scotland, 
especially his inability to stop the SNP. The prime minister ordered the 
chancellor, Gordon Brown, to take charge of the Scottish campaign, and Mr Dewar 
has been pushed aside, left to tour around Scotland in a battle bus.

Mr Dewar is too discreet and too loyal to protest, either on or 
off-the-record. If he does hold a grudge, he hides it well. And, like the 
deputy prime minister, out meeting the public he does not patronise people. He 
likes old-fashioned street campaigning and this is partly what has irritated 
Downing Street. Not for him modern campaign techniques. A former staffer 
recalled: 'We had a fish supper and went round Paisley sticking posters on 
lamp-posts. He was driving and had an old jumper on.' He was shadow Scottish 
secretary at the time.

It offers a glimpse of the kind of Scotland he wants to create. A close friend 
said: 'The tone will be different from London. It will be anti-glitz.' No place 
for Mandelsonian spin doctors.

An MP who knows him well added: 'He is not New Labour. He is not new 
anything.' Springing from the same tradition as the late Labour leader, John 
Smith, a friend from Glasgow university days, he is seen to have 'a strand of 
presbyterian social democracy, moved, like John, by basic egalitarian 
instincts', according to another friend. He follows the mainstream Labour 
politics of the 1950s and 1960s, reinforced by his Glasgow constituency mainly 
the Drumchapel area which he has represented since 1978.

Unlike many other Scottish politicians, he has never wanted any job other than 
that of leading Scotland. Having spent all his life in Glasgow, his ambition 
since student days has been to become Scottish secretary and help create a 
Scottish parliament.

He has previously beaten the SNP which once had every ward in his present 
constituency and held together an impatient Scottish Labour party during the 
Thatcher years, with Labour being the majority party in Scotland but almost 
powerless down at Westminster.

Although he is regarded as cautious, he is capable of sur prises. He once led 
a Commons walk-out of all 50 Scottish Labour MPs during a speech by Malcolm 
Rifkind, then Scottish secretary for the Tories. And he led Labour into the 
Scottish constitutional convention, an umbrella group that devised the 
framework for the Scottish parliament and which opened up cross-party 
co-operation with the Liberal Democrats.

One of his hardest battles was in discussions about the Scottish parliament 
bill, where he found himself pitted against fellow Scot, Derry Irvine, the lord 
chancellor. There was a personal edge to the debate. Mr Dewar had lost his 
wife, Alison, to Lord Irvine.

One of those who witnessed the cabinet committee exchanges said: 'Irvine 
treated him abominably. I felt sorry for Dewar. It was a few months before 
Dewar felt able to take him on. A lot of things were not devolved that could 
have been.' But in the end Mr Dewar won almost all of what he wanted.

But Scottish Labour politics can be vicious and he has made enemies within his 
own party. One veteran Labour MP said: 'He is mean-spirited, curmudgeonly and 
petty. He is vindictive towards colleagues.' Another said: 'I don't go in for 
this sainthood stuff. He is not as talented as he thinks he is. He likes to 
surround himself with acolytes but he does not like to delegate.'

It is not a portrait his political friends recognise, but it gives a taste of 
what a Scottish parliament could be like. Mr Dewar will have to work hard to 
keep control of a Labour group that will be much more leftwing than that at 
Westminster. With no majority or, at best, a small one, he will be vulnerable 
as the SNP push a series of votes aimed at peeling off the Labour left.

And senior colleagues will be looking to replace him, though the 61-year-old 
Mr Dewar indicates that he intends to stay beyond the first four-year term: 'As 
long as the parliament wants me, my party wants me, I will serve.'

After the election, the chancellor, though still living in Scotland, will 
concentrate on the Treasury. And Mr Blair's remit will no longer apply over 
most parts of Scottish life. The reign of Donny the Saxt is about to begin.
 