
On Thursday MPs vote on whether to treble tuition fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/tuition-fees>. Ministers insist that 
unprecedented debt levels will not put poor students off doing degrees. But 
what will be asked of universities in return for their £9,000 cheque? Labour 
did much to widen participation to most universities, but the gates to the best 
remain extremely difficult to pass through. The results of my inquiries into 
Oxford and Cambridge admissions over the last six months reveal a system in 
which getting a place remains a matter of being white, middle class and 
southern.

Using freedom of information requests, I built up a picture of who the 
Oxbridge dons offer places to. The results provide shocking reading. If Britain 
has become a "classless society" then Oxford hasn't got the message. David 
Cameron's alma mater, Brasenose College, Oxford, recruits 92% of students from 
the top three social classes – the sons and daughters of solicitors and 
accountants. The average for UK universities is 65%.

The north-south divide is startling. Over the last four years the London 
Borough of Richmond received more than eight times as many offers from Oxbridge 
as were awarded to Rochdale, Barnsley, Hartlepool, Middlesbrough and Stoke 
combined. In fact, that same borough received only 18 fewer Oxford offers than 
the whole of Scotland. Little wonder that no student from Knowsley in 
Merseyside has applied to Cambridge since 2003.

The picture on race is no better. Just one British black Caribbean student was 
admitted to Oxford last year. That is not a misprint: one student. Merton 
College, Oxford, has not admitted a single black student for five years. At 
Robinson College, Cambridge, a white applicant is four times more likely to be 
successful than a black applicant. Last year, 292 black students achieved three 
A grades at A-level and 475 black students applied to Oxbridge. Applications 
are being made but places are not being awarded.

You will not find these figures on the Oxford or Cambridge websites. 
Our proudest universities were obstructive in responding to my inquiries. They 
provided patchy data, challenged valid requests and deliberately pushed back 
their deadlines until after Thursday's vote. If Oxford and Cambridge are 
ashamed of these statistics, they are right to be.

Rather than hiding from the truth, they should ask themselves some searching 
questions. In the US, Harvard proactively writes to every high-achieving 
minority student. Where are the Oxbridge schemes? One in every six Harvard 
academics are minority – they are rightly proud of this. Oxford is so proud of 
its figures that it wouldn't give me a breakdown of them. Cambridge doesn't 
employ a single black academic. How can they hope to admit a diverse student 
body without recruiting a diverse staff?

Yale employs staff in all 50 US states to reach talented but poor students; 
Oxford targets 21% of its outreach events at independent schools. In the last 
two years Oxford held nine "access" events at Eton – if that is their idea of 
widening participation then Britain is in deep, deep trouble.

Admissions are entrusted to individual colleges – have they justified this 
trust? Where is access money spent? What is it about the famed Oxbridge 
interview system that counts against students who didn't attend a top 
public school? The lesson from the US is not to compromise on excellence, but 
to search harder for those who are capable of it.

Universities are not like supermarkets: their job is to serve the country, not 
just the customers who happen to walk through their doors. Oxford and Cambridge 
receive nearly £400m a year of taxpayers' money. They cannot be allowed to 
spend that money entrenching inequality instead of addressing it.

Eighteen millionaires sit around the cabinet table. Their complacency is 
breathtaking. While they defend a fee rise, they have not published a word on 
what they will ask in return from Britain's top universities. How can MPs allow 
Oxford and Cambridge to charge £9,000 a year without assurances that these 
institutions will do more to recruit from every corner, colour and class of 
this country?

Oxbridge continues to recruit in the same image. It is the image of the prime 
minister and deputy prime minister, the authors of Thursday's bill.

Comments on this piece will be opened at midnight.
 