
Unlike many librarians who always dreamed of standing behind a counter and 
stamping books, I came to the profession by accident. When I left university 
with a humanities degree in the 1970s, I had no clue about what I wanted to do 
with my state-funded higher education. I applied for a job as a gas meter 
reader which seemed suitable for a working-class lad from a council estate, but 
at the interview I was told that I was over-qualified and so I became a library 
assistant instead.

I quickly discovered that there wasn’t much to the library lark, but that if I 
wanted to get on I would have to become a fully qualified librarian.

Armed with my diploma and a burning social conscience, I set out to change the 
world of public libraries. Nearly 40 years on I have made the smallest of dents 
in its battleship armour. But on the way I have made met some amazing people.

My bosses have mostly been of the keep-your-head-down-and-don’t-rock-the-boat 
variety. Colleagues have ranged from shrinking violets to strident activists 
who share my passion for social change. And the customers – whom we endearingly 
call borrowers, like those little people who live under the floor – have come 
from every walk of life. Public libraries seem to attract more than their fair 
share of what might be called “characters”.

I vividly recall opening a detective novel to find a piece of streaky bacon 
stuck between its pages

There is never a dull moment in the life of a public library. We open our 
doors and anyone can come in, so we never know quite what to expect and every 
day is very different. One of the most extraordinary things that has happened 
to me at work was when I was asked to search my central London library for 
bombs during a terror alert. I had contacted the police when I received a bomb 
threat but, as they pointed out, “you know what the library looks like, so 
please have a walk around to see if anything is out of place”. Fortunately it 
was a false alarm and there were no incendiary devices hidden in the card 
catalogue.

Some of the funniest things that have happened to me at work include the 
discovery of some remarkable objects left in books, presumably as book marks. I 
vividly recall opening a detective novel to find a piece of streaky bacon stuck 
between its pages. I pictured the borrower, reading his book at the breakfast 
table before rushing off to work, and reaching out for whatever was at hand to 
mark his page. I also worked at a library where a colleague decided to close 
the building and call the police when a used condom was discovered oozing its 
contents through the well-thumbed pages of a certain DH Lawrence classic.

I love my job so much that work-life balance has never been an issue. Plus I 
am very happy to take my work home with me because I never leave the library 
without a big stack of books, CDs and DVDs.

The only regret I have about my long career in public libraries is that I have 
not been able to convince more librarians that they should be less book-focused 
and more people-focused; that they should look outward to the community rather 
than inward to the library; that they should get rid of desks and counters and 
do more active roving inside the library and outside in the community; that 
they should put less emphasis on the excellence of the collection and more on 
providing books that people actually want to read; and, most important of all, 
that libraries should be community-led and based on the needs of the public 
they serve.

What I dislike most about the profession is its insistence on standards of 
excellence and a rule-bound culture which tends to exclude those for whom 
public libraries were founded in the first place – the deserving poor and, 
indeed, the undeserving poor as well. For it is a fact that libraries are used 
most by those who need them the least (the middle class) and used the least by 
those who need them the most (the working class).

The secret life of a clickbait creator: lousy content, dodgy ads, demoralised 
staff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/secret-life-clickbait-creator-content-ads-staff>
The job has not changed fundamentally from when I started out. Libraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> have been modernised through 
technology but their underlying strategies, structures, systems and culture 
remain the same. We have a plethora of rules and regulations, and the part of 
my job I dread the most is having to ban someone from the library, because 
usually they come from the section of society that needs libraries the most. 
But this is more than balanced out by the many pleasures of the job, which 
include helping borrowers to improve the quality of their lives and meet their 
needs – whether that is for books and information, or helping them to find a 
job or a roof over their head.

Librarians are chronically underpaid but we don’t do the job just for the 
money. It brings a great deal of satisfaction helping others who are 
significantly less fortunate than ourselves. More money is always good, but 
what we really want is recognition from politicians that we are the fourth 
emergency service. Proving this is difficult, but we are already starting to 
see what happens when public libraries are closed down. Library closures are 
low-hanging fruit but the tiny amounts that this saves from the public purse is 
more than outweighed by the costs of increased crime, and worsening health and 
education outcomes. While we cannot demonstrate a direct link, every librarian 
knows that we are an important ingredient of the glue that sticks communities 
together.

• Are you a surgeon, a jeweller, or a plumber? We want to hear your candid 
accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your 
story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 