
My day is busy from dawn until dawn, installing pretty containers, 
colour-blocking books within designer spaces and folding socks,Marie Kondo style
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/06/decluttering-cant-save-us-from-the-consumerist-mess-weve-made>
. I wish. Professional organising is in actual fact dirty, physical – and 
disappointingly almost never involves styling.

I might organise the removal of an old car or a pile of excess bricks. I 
sometimes declutter a paper-filled office or pack up a deceased person’s 
estate. I could even track spending and create a budget for someone whose poor 
organisation tumbles out of their wallet.

I have always been highly organised, even as a child. I heard about organising 
as a career in a magazine and pursued it, not knowing how to translate my skill 
set into consulting with clients. I had worked for nearly 20 years as a nurse, 
but felt organising was my calling – and it has not disappointed since I took 
it up in 2000.

Top tips to joyfully declutter your home, from Marie Kondo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/27/top-tips-to-joyfully-declutter-your-home-from-marie-kondo>
I’m self-employed and make a good hourly rate which I discount if I get a lot 
of work from a client. I don’t turn down any jobs, unless the person involved 
is showing signs of hoarding behaviour; I have no mental health training, so I 
don’t really feel I can help.

I love big jobs when I can transform an entire home or workspace, but that’s a 
big commitment from a client and they must trust and like you for it to work.

Most people outside of the organising industry think we “tidy up”, but tidying 
is only a visual thing. What a good organiser does is help with the 
functionality of a space – for example, making sure that frequently used items 
are in prime storage areas. Or maybe having a system in place to manage bills 
that arrive on email. Whatever it is I am helping with, I also want to teach my 
client how to tackle other areas of their space or life when I’m not there.

About 90% of my work is hands on – going through what is owned, reordering 
what is kept, and taking away items for charity or recycling. If I had once 
piece of advice for people it would be that 80% of the items you think you need 
are only fit for the tip, recycling or donation. Want to save some time? Use 
the bin, my friend.

Sometimes prospective clients break down on the phone before I’ve even met 
them. They are so overwhelmed with stuff, so overcome with shame at the mess 
they have created. For them I have nothing but compassion. There are so many 
factors that can impact a client’s ability to stay on top of things: illness, 
change in circumstances, relationship troubles, relocation to a new home, poor 
time management. Most often it’s washing dishes and doing the laundry that 
people struggle with. I don’t mind mucking in to get a backlog under control, 
and advise clients of methods to stay in control, particularly getting all 
members of the household to contribute.

To take an unusable space and make it usable again, or to empower someone to 
take charge of their life, is satisfying

Clients often cry with gratitude at my results. I often cry, too. It’s 
thoroughly rewarding to help people on such a practical and emotional level. To 
take an unusable space and make it usable again, or to empower someone to take 
charge of an aspect of their life that is not working for them is incredibly 
satisfying.

I encourage clients to make sound choices about what to do with their 
overwhelming belongings: the things weighing them down that are not 
contributing in a positive way. But I’ll never to force them to discard even 
the smallest item; the choice always needs to be theirs. Some people are very 
easily lost in the minutiae of their possessions and can’t see the forest for 
the trees. I bring perspective.

What makes my job so satisfying is hearing people’s stories. Am I a voyeur? 
Perhaps a little, but I have had ample opportunities to read things like 
personal letters and I’ve always turned my head. Discretion is very important 
and I have never taken advantage of the trust placed in me.

Surprisingly I’ve had very few clients I didn’t warm to, but the rude ones 
stand out. One in particular springs to mind because she didn’t want to get her 
hands dirty and sadly you can’t make decisions about the many things in 
someone’s domain without their input. At times like these I try not to judge. I 
didn’t know her full story and what caused her discomfort with me trying to 
help her.

On the flipside, a good number of clients have become close friends. I am 
lucky that I’m able to separate the people I enjoy working for from their 
sometimes unsettling behaviour. A family I adored had cats and dogs that they 
allowed to go to the toilet inside – and no one would attend to it promptly. 
Urine would soak into the floorboards and faeces got mushed into whatever was 
left on the floor. When you are constantly in an environment that is chaotic 
and smells, you become desensitised. So while it may seem extreme to you or I, 
the owner of the clutter barely notices it.

Of course you see all sorts of things and luckily it doesn’t bother me in the 
slightest. I thought it was funny when a client saw me spot lube in her 
bathroom and she said: “Oh, I’m sorry you had to see that.” Do they think I 
don’t have lube at my house?

Being at the coalface of unwanted belongings has changed my relationship with 
stuff. I rarely shop, I encourage friends and family not to give me gifts and I 
easily discard unwanted items. I’m a sucker, however, for saving things from 
clients – like plastic bags they put in the bin, which I find wasteful.

The secret life of a trade union employee: I do little but the benefits are 
incredible | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/08/secret-life-trade-union-employee-work-benefits-workers-rights>
I often come home from work and feel that my small apartment is like a 
five-star hotel: clean lines, most of the washing put away, and I know exactly 
what is in the fridge. I highly value that my down time is truly my own with 
nothing to do after hours. So many clients I see are playing catch up, with 
paper, belongings, information. When you simplify and let go, life has so much 
more grace.

Organising is very physical work, mentally demanding at times as you are 
constantly problem solving – and sometimes an emotional journey when the client 
is struggling. The hardest is when a client has a difficult life or if they are 
in denial about the cluttered and unhealthy environment they are forcing their 
family to live in. But despite the dirt, the emotions, and the overwhelming 
“stuff”, I really wouldn’t change my job for the world. Well, maybe just a bit 
more colour-coding would be nice.

• Are you a GP, a childminder or a magician? We want to hear your candid 
accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your 
story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 