
There is a popular misconception that becoming a landlord is purely a monetary 
decision, complemented by the myth that the only task involved is counting the 
never-ending flow of money, then deciding how to spend or hoard it. My decision 
to move into this profession was driven by a number of factors, none of which 
related to it being a supposedly lucrative occupation.

I bailed out of the business world at the relatively young age of 30 after one 
too many conflicts, my fiery temperament and straight-talking approach ruffling 
more than a few feathers. However, each job move during my short and turbulent 
career had created a small pot of severance pay and in thepre-bubble days of 
the London property market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/05/how-i-won-the-housing-market-without-really-trying>
 this was sufficient to put down a deposit each time and build up a small 
portfolio.

Working for myself, managing a portfolio without the need to consult others 
and play politics, turned out to be much better suited to my personality. I 
like the challenge of being CEO, marketing director, construction manager, 
interior designer, concierge, and yes, general dogsbody, all at once. It’s 
simplistic to look at the wealth I have created and think I have ruthlessly 
accumulated without consideration for others. But with no pension to speak of 
and the desire to provide for my children, I am proud to have this business to 
safeguard our futures.

Controversial as Airbnb and its counterparts are, they are a game-changer that 
is here to stay

However, the real passion that inspired me to enter a business that is much 
tougher than most imagine, is a love of period properties. I have no idea where 
it came from, but the moment I see a house with intricate mouldings, parquet 
floors or other character features, my heart starts to race just thinking about 
how it could look once restored. Typically, a single project takes 18 months 
from start to finish – and many, many sleepless nights.

Inspiring as it has been to have an interesting niche, the day-to-day work is 
often highly repetitive, with all too frequent peaks of stress. For every hour 
consumed with choosing a new sofa, vintage rug, or flicking through an interior 
design magazine, there are 30 spent dealing with an endless stream of leaking 
showers, malfunctioning boilers, blocked gutters, not to mention moaning 
tenants, reluctant builders, arrogant architects and tedious government 
regulations. Invariably, a crisis appears in the most inopportune moments – 
there is rarely such a thing as a weekend off.

It is understandable to see tenants as powerless victims, subject to the whims 
of their landlord’s commercial agenda, but it can and does cut both ways. Most 
tenants are genuinely decent people and simply want a nice place to live, but 
as in all walks of life some are capricious, irresponsible and even blatantly 
dishonest.

Illegal sub-lettings are a constant bane. Serious maintenance problems have 
built up over months then are casually mentioned in passing in a belated 
monosyllabic communication. In 25 years I can count on one hand the number of 
times a tenant has confessed willingly to property damage and offered to pay or 
fix it. Many wish to instantly break contracts when it is no longer convenient 
for them to live there.

A tenant’s failure to pay rent is usually a rare occurrence, but when it does 
happen it’s crucial to treat the problem sensitively rather than instantly 
reach for the lawyer’s phone number. There is often a personal or economic 
problem causing the arrears and once this is understood a solution can usually 
be found. One tenant who had been renting from me for five years lost their job 
and started drinking heavily. I found out that they had borrowed substantially 
to finance several months’ rent while out of work. The situation could not go 
on. We chatted extensively and through a combination of a rent moratorium, 
shortening of the contract and the promise of an excellent reference, an 
amicable solution was found.

It would be hypocritical of me not to sometimes feel a twinge of guilt owning 
numerous properties while a younger generation struggles to get their foot on 
the ladder. However, building up the portfolio has been my life’s work and I 
have poured a huge amount of time, energy, passion and money into it – a 
process which never stops. A vibrant city economy such as London needs a good 
quality stock of rental properties to meet its citizens’ frequently changing 
circumstances. It does frustrate me hugely reading about“slum” landlords with 
their ruthless commercial practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/26/return-slum-landlord-26-people-east-ham-peter-rachman-housing-shortage>
, orspeculative buy-to-let investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/31/buy-to-let-investors-complete-stamp-duty-rise>
 gobbling up soulless new builds furnished with cheap cookie-cutter interiors 
for maximum commercial gain. I have to accept that it is part of the business I 
am in to be tarred with the same brush.

Controversial as Airbnb and its counterparts are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/airbnb-discrimination-policy-changes-racial-discrimination>
, they are a game-changer that is here to stay. I branched out into more 
short-term arrangements three years ago. Even the best long-term tenant gets a 
little jaded after a while in the treatment of your properties, so it has been 
a breath of fresh air dealing with guests who are genuinely thrilled to rent 
from your portfolio. The other plus is that with shorter rental periods, the 
bad guests usually leave before they have time to do much damage.

Such short-term lets have been criticised as some kind of cash cow but the 
amount of work involved in even a single rental is breathtaking. The property 
maintenance and cleaning has to compete with a five-star hotel and you are in 
constant touch with guests at all times of the day and night. Fail in any of 
this and your rating plummets and the property will sink without trace on the 
listings. You habitually feel like an insecure, over-sensitive actor as you 
pore over the latest review.

It has also created interesting new scenarios with some bookings not quite 
what they seem. With the elegant period-style interiors I utilise, the 
temptation to rent them for more salubrious motives is too much for some 
guests. One of my first bookings comprised of five guests doing a photoshoot 
for a magazine. Although I politely requested “no porn” prior to booking, a 
pretty model proceeded to run around the patio of the building wearing only 
lingerie, to the delight of the elderly residents.

The secret life of a tax adviser: it’s not about devising fancy avoidance 
schemes | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/07/secret-life-tax-adviser-sifting-nonsense-keep-family-secrets>
Others have surreptitiously used my properties for commercial purposes, paying 
a fraction of the commercial rate of an official location. It is a 
cat-and-mouse game trying to spot them. However the majority of guests are 
lovely and have allowed me to recover a sense of pride in what I do, given all 
the negative publicity frequently surrounding landlords. The schadenfreude from 
giving overpriced, bland corporate hotel chains a kick in the teeth is an added 
plus.

As I sit in my home office at 7am and deal with a leaking shower tray in an 
Edwardian house for the eighth time in nine years, it is easy to fantasise 
about a profession with less daily drudgery and more stability. It can also be 
wearying being responsible for the accommodation for typically 20 people every 
day and night, 365 days of the year. But as a new booking comes in from Beijing 
or Berlin, or the photos arrive from a recently executed renovation, a surge of 
adrenalin kicks in and I am ready to face the day’s challenges.

• Are you a zero-hours worker, a novelist, or a Father Christmas impersonator? 
We want to hear your candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full 
details on submitting your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 