
’Twas the morning of Christmas Eve, a busy day for Father Christmas. I’d just 
left the church after my role in a service featuring the cast from the nearby 
panto and was eager to return the outfit I’d borrowed. Suddenly I became aware 
of a young boy, girl and their mother rushing after me, mum asking if I’d say a 
quick hello to her children. FatherChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> never refuses such a 
request, so I was happy to comply.

“Father Christmas, Father Christmas,” said the daughter excitedly. “Before I 
came to church today I did a poo.” Acutely aware of mum’s embarrassment but 
loving daughter’s unguarded spontaneity about something so natural I responded, 
quick as a flash, “Well, what a coincidence – so did I.” The honesty and 
openness of children is one of the real joys of the job.

Although I’ve told inquisitive “clients” I’m as old as the hills but younger 
than the mountains, it was in 2006 when I first donned the beard, gold-rimmed 
spectacles, red coat and hat of my alter ego. I’d worked in several temporary 
jobs for my local council, and its events organiser, aware that I had acting 
experience, offered me the role for its annual ceremony where Christmas lights 
are turned on in the city centre by a “celebrity” and a large crowd turns out 
for a feast of fun and entertainment. The job was well-paid and the council 
would supply the costume and my size 12 wellies. What was not to like? The 
event went swimmingly, we all had fun and I made a point of not knocking off 
until the last Santa enthusiast had left for home.

Santa Claus is a phenomenal imagination driver. Leave him alone | Padraig 
Collins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/santa-claus-is-a-phenomenal-imagination-driver-leave-him-alone>
I was to perform at this event for the next five years but it is in the grotto 
that Father Christmas really pays his dues and earns his corn. My first such 
gig was in a department store. On the first day my elves and I stood in the 
shop window, surrounded by toys. The elves were young, inexperienced students 
and felt a bit silly. But I loved it, particularly standing motionless as a 
mannequin then moving suddenly to startle passersby.

For the first couple of weeks the children were still at school and there were 
few grotto visitors. Instead, I was encouraged to wander around the shop, 
entertaining customers. Everyone from the Marx Brothers to the staff of Grace 
Brothers have exploited the big store’s comic potential and though I can’t 
claim such a pedigree, I had great fun surprising people on the escalators and 
taking a break in the vibrating massage chair. I also got to chat with 
children, parents and pensioners – always in character – in the store’s various 
restaurants.

The next year’s grotto was in the garden centre where there were – whisper it 
quietly so the kids don’t hear – two Father Christmases, one in each room of a 
large garden shed, which formed part of its range. In between was a reception 
area where we played our favourite Christmas songs and the ever-helpful elves 
steered our “clients” through one door or another. I’ve heard since of grottos 
with even more Santas as venues try to ease the often large queues that build 
up. I would often be encouraged to speed up the visits to ease the wait but 
always felt that each “consultation” should take as long as it needs for each 
individual child. I never want a child to leave until they’ve had a positive 
experience.

Children’s wish lists can be long or short, simple or works of art, expensive 
or complicated. They cover everything from the latest must-have toy, to a 
series of Argos catalogue numbers. I’ve even been asked for “a little brother”: 
mother and I gave each other a look. I never make a promise. I only say that I 
will try my very best. That’s all that any of us can do.

The secret life of a teacher: what stops me walking away? The children | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/14/secret-life-teacher-children-stop-me-walking-away>
Personally I think of Father Christmas as a kind of holy fool, old and wise, 
young at heart, quite old-fashioned, but above all a kind, generous and 
fun-loving friend to all children, irrespective of any particular faith or 
none. He embodies the spirit of the nativity story’s unconditional love but 
also embraces a whole host of pagan and folkloric midwinter drinking and 
feasting traditions from around the world. He’ll happily accept proffered gifts 
of mince pies, sausage rolls or Christmas cake, carrots or other goodies for 
his reindeer, and a range of liquid refreshments encompassing whisky, brandy, 
port, hot chocolate, glass of milk … or a can of Stella.

He loves goodness, of course, but hopes that adults will demonstrate it too. 
He tries hard to be good himself but acknowledges that it can be jolly 
difficult to be good all of the time. And if a parent attempts to make presents 
dependent on giving up a comfort such as thumb or dummy, he will recall how he, 
as a youngster, had a similar habit that, one day, he managed to give up. Just 
like that.

Am I paid what I’m worth in this role? Usually not, particularly if I’ve just 
spent an hour with 20 children and I’m soaked with sweat. That beard and wig, 
if your own hair doesn’t do the job, can make things particularly hot. And then 
there are the times I’ve had to turn down better-paid work because I’ve 
committed to the grotto. Saying that, I have on occasion rejected a better 
hourly rate in another grotto when I felt the set-up was too much like a 
conveyor belt or too heavily scripted. I love to improvise and children 
improvise too.

What about the other rewards? For the heart, the soul? Well, the smile of a 
happy child is priceless. As are the words of a serial grotto visitor who tells 
me that I’m the best Father Christmas they’ve ever met. Of course, I’m the real 
one.
 