
It would be wrong in an adult workplace, and it is much more so when the 
targets are pupils in a classroom. More than a fifth of girls aged seven to 12 
have experienced sexual jokes from boys; almost a third of 16- to 18-year-old 
girls have suffered unwanted sexual touching. Nearly three-quarters of 
teenagers heard girls denigrated with words such as “slut” or “slag” regularly. 
Teachers report frequent incidents of girls sending nude pictures to their 
boyfriends – then finding they have been forwarded to others.

The report from the House of Commons women and equalities committee 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmwomeq/91/9102.htm>
 paints an alarming picture of widespread sexual harassment in schools across 
England. Unveiled is a culture that is damaging not only to girls, but also to 
boys, who are sometimes victims and often face pressure to “prove their 
masculinity” by objectifying and baiting their schoolmates. Charities report 
similar findings from across Britain. Some of these problems are longstanding. 
It is disturbing to learn that teachers still write it off as “horseplay” when 
boys lift the skirts of girls, or ignore aggressive sexual remarks. Failure to 
take harassment seriously encourages perpetrators to see their behaviour as 
normal and to escalate their actions; it also deters victims from reporting 
what has happened.

Such problems have been exacerbated by new developments. Government guidance 
on sex education, drawn up 16 years ago, does not even mention pornography. 
That must change given that polls suggest almost a quarter of young people were 
12 or younger when they first saw porn, and what was previously considered 
hardcore material has become increasingly mainstream. The emergence of an 
internet culture that treats young girls – and suggests that they treat 
themselves – as sexual objects must be recognised and challenged. Pornographic 
images, demeaning comments and outright misogyny damage the wellbeing and 
self-esteem of our young people. Disturbingly, there is evidence that children 
are referencing pornography as a “benchmark” in sexual relationships. This 
environment promotes an insidious suggestion that hypersexualised 
self-presentation is a freely chosen expression of body confidence. It’s not.

To roll back the advance of pornography will need Theresa May to pick up where 
David Cameron left off. The government has already pledged tointroduce 
age-verification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/04/tories-promise-to-enforce-age-limits-on-online-pornography>
 for porn websites in the digital economy bill now under consideration. This 
will mean British porn sites will be accessed often only by credit card 
holders. To deal with foreign-based sites, ministers should revisit the idea 
that internet service providers should block porn unless customers ask that 
they do not. In the offline world, Tuesday’s report makes many sensible 
recommendations for further action, including ensuring that Ofsted inspectors 
consider sexual harassment as well as other forms of bullying, and updating 
guidance to schools on how to tackle these problems.

Most importantly, perhaps, is the need to combine zero tolerance of abuse with 
the fostering of positive attitudes towards sexuality.Sex education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/sexeducation> is compulsory in 
maintained secondary schools, and may be taught by primary schools. But the 
teaching focuses on the biology when it should concentrate on relationships and 
consent.

Sex education should be much more comprehensive and begin much earlier. 
In some cases, pupils are having sex before they are taught about it.In the 
Netherlands <http://www.pbs.org/newshour/updates/spring-fever/> there are 
lessons for children as young as four – but, equally importantly, they talk 
about values, ethics and reciprocal respect.

Ideally, such education might be led by younger instructors, perhaps from 
outside the school who are medically trained and not embarrassed to lead open 
discussions. Its aim should not only be to say that harassment and coercion are 
unacceptable, but to encourage children to value themselves and others, 
teaching them that informed consent and mutual enthusiasm should be the basis 
for sex.
 