
Theresa May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
 today was a doubly depressing event. It was a reality check for those who hope 
the UK can stay in the single market at the same time as leaving the European 
Union. But it was riddled with its own streak of global fantasy. It was a 
reminder that Britain’s exit from the EU puts livelihoods, values and alliances 
at risk. Yet it was also shot through with unsupported optimism about UK 
economic performance, trade prospects and the readiness of the remaining EU-27 
to strike the kind of deal that would suit the UK government.

Whatever else she may be, Mrs May is not a sentimental politician. Her speech 
<https://www.politicshome.com/news/europe/eu-policy-agenda/brexit/news/82451/read-theresa-mays-full-speech-outlining-britains-12>
 had no time for the EU’s historic achievements – nor indeed its failings. 
Instead it began from the core domestic political reality of the moment as the 
prime minister perceives it. “A little over six months ago,” as she put it at 
the outset, “the British people voted for change.” That vote for change cannot 
be denied. It was what brought Mrs May to 10 Downing Street in July. The entire 
speech made crystal clear that she is not going to waste her moment by hanging 
on to the European past or by pretending that leave means anything except leave.

Mrs May’s approach is hardened by three other large realities, as she sees 
them. The first is her conviction that the people voted for Brexit to control 
EU migration. The speech carefully placed the section on migration midway 
through the text, so as not to seem too provocative. Politically, though, 
migration was the starting point. Brexit, Mrs May said, “must mean control of 
the number of people who come to Britain from Europe”. That means Britain will 
leave the EU single market, because free movement of labour is one of the 
pillars of that market. Migration control and the single market are 
incompatible. Many have been in denial on this. Some still are. Mrs May is not, 
though the economic and human consequences could be, and probably will be, grim.

The second reality is that the Conservative party’s anti-European MPs are 
politically stronger, and thus more of a destabilising threat to her 
premiership, than the party’s pro-Europeans. The last three Conservative prime 
ministers have all fallen over Europe, and Mrs May is determined, not 
unreasonably in some respects, not to become the fourth. Her speech was 
therefore designed in equal parts to pander to the xenophobic press, and to 
keep backbench Brexiters firmly on side. True, there was an important 
announcement abouta vote for MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
 and there were significant softenings of tone compared with Mrs May’s party 
conference speech – for instance in language aboutEuropeans as allies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/eu-leaders-theresa-may-speech-caution-brexit-referendum>
, about diversity as positive not negative, about respect for workers’ rights, 
and in making clear that EU citizens are welcome here. All the same, the speech 
explicitly ruled out the remainers’ central demand to stay in the single market.

As a political manoeuvre, today was a huge success for Mrs May. In Downing 
Street, they think leave voters are still comfortable with what they did in 
June, while a significant number of remain voters have now accepted that Brexit 
is going to happen. Her speech was predicated on that. It enabled Mrs May to 
call the bluff of Tory remainers, who mainly responded favourably. But Mrs May 
has also used this speech to tighten her grip on the policy itself at the 
expense of leave ministers and – in another part of the forest – of the 
devolved authorities, about whom she was courteous but uncompromising. This 
speech has strengthened Mrs May’s authority both in her party and in the 
country.

It is less easy for Mrs May to turn the third reality to her advantage. That’s 
because this would involve the politically inconvenient need to acknowledge 
that the EU-27 and the European institutions will have a legitimate and perhaps 
decisive role in the deal Britain seeks. Mrs May talked about compromise, and 
she said it was important for many sectors of the UK economy – she name-checked 
several besides the City of London – to retain access to the single market. But 
she was confrontational too, saying that no deal would in the end be better 
than a bad deal. That will play well in the Europhobic press.But it is a bluff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/bravado-only-partially-masks-contradictions-in-theresa-mays-speech>
. It may backfire at the negotiating table, especially as she looks for the 
transitional implementation deal she rightly committed to seeking. Mrs May is a 
politician who needs to preside over a growing, not a failing, economy by the 
time of the first post-Brexit general election. The decision to allow migration 
to trump the single market may seem hard-headed, but it makes that goal less 
easy to achieve.
 