
Perhaps I found myself in the viral content world because I made the careless 
mistake of taking an arts degree at university. For over half a decade 
afterwards, I was lucky enough to work as an actual journalist for a few quasi 
well-known publications. But after years of trying, I gave up pursuing work 
with more esteemed outlets because colleagues with qualifications from 
prestigious institutions were more desirable hires.

After a round of layoffs at my publication and in hefty personal debt, I was 
forced to accept the first job I could find. So I took a role at a popular 
viral content site. The writers were young, mainly white men and women, who 
didn’t exactly pride themselves on cranking out posts about cute dogs and 
videos of someone almost dying. They were part of a different media audience, 
one thatSnapchatted <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/snapchat> 
everything and thought breaking news was “so five minutes ago”. While I didn’t 
personally click with them, we were still cordial and recognised that the 
company’s business model was a joke.

Viral content and clickbait sites are different to your classic startups. They 
often don’t raise any money, instead generating massive amounts of capital per 
day by posting other people’s kitschy videos and images while plastering them 
with countless ads. Instead of planning for the future and diversifying their 
business model, most rely heavily onFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> and adapt only when the 
social media company forces their hand by changing the algorithms. The worst 
part about these companies, however, is the emphasis on volume of product – the 
content – and the lack of emphasis on the wellbeing of the producers – the 
writers.

Every junior staff member was in search of a better opportunity

I was assigned to “write” seven posts a day by a team of editors who between 
them had no previous editorial background whatsoever. My task was to take 
content from other viral sites that were shared and liked a thousand times 
over, save the images and videos from those posts, and write “stories” around 
them – repurposing the works of our competitors. I would also write headlines 
in a very specific style (“You Won’t Believe So-And-So Did This! AMAZING! 
LOL!”) and include images that would get people to click on the article. The 
reason for including various images and headlines was to test them on a select 
number of readers, and the best-performing ones would automatically end up on 
our Facebook account to ensure maximum clickability.

Something going viral usually happens purely by fluke on social media, and 
viral sites simply try to capitalise on that content by reworking it for people 
who have yet to experience it. If you think about it, this is not so terrible. 
Sure, it’s pretty low effort to read or write these stories, but there is an 
audience of hundreds of millions who find joy in watching animal videos, 
reading about creepy things, and learning DIY crafting tricks.

The majority of these readers consume this low-effort content to escape from 
the barrage of political news on social media, which is why many viral sites 
are apolitical. At staff meetings the mere mention of politically or socially 
leaning topics would be met with a strict rebuke; instead we had to focus on 
topics with little to no inherent value.

Unfortunately, simply displaying ads was not enough to please the founders of 
my former company. They tacked on intrusive data-tracking modules to sell user 
data on the side and partnered with big-name marketing firms to create 
personality quizzes that were secretly used to test and identify potential 
sales targets for ad partners. If there was a deceptive ad practice, this 
company would use it and then some.

Facebook started to tire of clickbait in 2014. Though our site spent nearly 
six figures on Facebook ads every day, the social network decided to show our 
stories less. Since our company relied almost entirely on Facebook for 
distribution, this forced the executives running the site to scramble for ideas.

That’s when they took out their frustration on the writers. Some were fired 
for no reason other than that a VP was having a really bad day. The rest of us 
were asked to produce more content, work longer hours, and avoid taking any 
leave or face the threat of termination. The executives grew anxious, yelling 
more, and cutting back on the scant in-office perks for writers, such as coffee 
and snacks.

With morale at an all-time low, every junior staff member was in search of a 
better opportunity. Some fled to similar sites. Others took odd jobs to pay the 
rent, avoiding another office like the plague. The company hired freelancers in 
their place, paying them next to nothing per article and treating them with the 
same coldness as their former employees.

The secret life of a singing teacher: it’s like being a cheap therapist | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/secret-life-singing-teacher-therapist>
I didn’t even bother to give my notice before I started as a senior writer for 
our competitor on a higher salary. When I first spoke with my new employers, 
they enticed me with the chance to eventually write whatever I wanted and to 
work with other writers on original content. I learned quickly, however, that 
like-minded writers had been lured in on the same premise and the company had 
no intention of ever doing anything original. We were just another clickbait 
factory with the same deceptive ad practices, temperamental managers, and 
constant need to copy our competitors and replace their images with lifted ones.

After a year of nothing but repurposing old cat photos and ghost stories, I 
lucked out by finding myself a position as a writer for a media startup, 
creating articles and content I can actually include in my writer’s portfolio. 
Unfortunately, the papers and magazines I hoped to write for have no use for me 
thanks to the two years I spent in the viral content space. I am forever doomed 
to work for startups until they can figure out how to use quantum computers to 
replace me.

On the bright side, Facebook has yet again tweaked its algorithm to prevent 
clickbait sites from putting deceptively worded headlines and low-quality 
stories in anyone’s newsfeed. Some viral content sites have responded to this 
by choosing straightforward headlines with more meaningful stories, ironically 
almost becoming news sites simply to survive. But others, like my former 
employers, are struggling to stay afloat, continuing to push out 
attention-grabbing stories and gaining no traction because that’s the only way 
they know. I’m lucky to have been able to move my career in a better direction 
as I watch them try and fail to get clicks.

• Are you a designer, a waiter or an anthropologist? We want to hear your 
candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting 
your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 