
“Last year Christmas was a nightmare,” says Elizabeth Storey, 26, who has two 
boys aged three and 18 months. “The children didn’t have anything special. Just 
a couple of presents that were 50p from a charity shop and a normal dinner like 
they’d have every day, not aChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> dinner. And no 
decorations, no tree. It was upsetting.”

When she moved into her new housing association property in July 2014, 
Storeywas struggling to manage on a low income. Her new home had no carpets, 
white goods or furniture and friends told her to furnish it from Brighthouse, 
which supplies goods on hire purchase. It’s an expensive option, but one that 
many people on low incomes feel they have no option but to take.

Poverty premium: why it costs so much more to be poor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/10/poverty-premium-costs-poor-energy-phone-tariffs-councils>
Scared of getting into debt, Storey was referred to the money management team 
<http://www.getcashwise.co.uk/> at WDH, a housing association based in 
Wakefield. It has only been with the constant support of her personal adviser 
over the past year, says Storey, that she’s been able to get on top of her 
finances and understand how to budget – and even to save.

Anyone who has not been able to save up for Christmas is in good company. 
According toa survey 
<http://www.principality.co.uk/en/about-us/latest/20151211-chritsmas-spending.aspx>
 by the Principality Building Society, only just over a quarter of people in 
England and Wales (28%) have saved up over the year to help with the cost of 
the festive season, and 10% will fund Christmas via a credit card.

But for people who don’t have any plastic to flex, or who are living on a very 
tight budget, big expenses such as Christmas can tip the family finances into 
crisis. After organising a grant to pay for furnishing essentials so Storey 
wasn’t in hock to Brighthouse, her adviser went through her spending to work 
out where she could cut costs, such as buying non-brand name nappies from 
low-cost supermarkets, Storey explains. “It’s little things. She suggested I 
buy cheaper shampoo. Because I used to work, I used to buy Herbal Essences, but 
you can buy shampoo for less and it still cleans your hair.”

It might only be a few pennies here and there, but small tweaks to spending 
habits are crucial if people are to be able to save a few pounds a week as a 
cushion for expenses like Christmas, says the housing association’s financial 
inclusion manager, Peter Beaumont.

As December rolls on, the pressure to spend becomes acute. “People will often 
shelve any money issues they have till after Christmas, and it’s easy to think 
‘I’ll get a payday loan and worry about paying it back in the new year’,” 
Beaumont observes.

Christmas is a worrying time, especially as children get older and see what 
other kids are getting
Gillian Willmont 
By making small changes and exerting iron discipline, Storey has managed to 
save £4 a week and transform her family’s Christmas this year.

“I’ve bought 11 or 12 presents. I’ve got a tree. And there will be turkey and 
all the trimmings,” she says with triumph. It’s not been without hiccups along 
the way: she’s been tempted to dip into her Christmas fund when there’s been an 
unexpected expense: needing to buy a bed for her older son was a particularly 
difficult moment, but psychological and practical support from her adviser, 
including referrals to a food bank at times of greatest stress, has helped tide 
her over.

Some people have so little money they cannot save. At best, with budgeting 
advice they can start to pay off their debts.

At London’s Viridian Housing, financial inclusion manager Ellen Salkeld says 
that for families whose budgets are already at full stretch, it can be very 
difficult to save anything for Christmas. “What happens then, tragically, is 
that people will dip into their rent account. People are also going to loan 
sharks to afford Christmas and that means they’re trapped in a poverty cycle.”

But even for those in work, if you’re living on a single income, spending on 
Christmas can be frightening.

Gillian Willmont suffered a second bout of post-natal depression after the 
birth of her daughter, and struggled to manage the pressures of family life at 
home on her own with two young children while her husband, a prison officer, 
was regularly redeployed away. It was the support of a HomeStart volunteer that 
helped her start to cope on a modest income.

“Christmas is a worrying time, especially as children get older and see what 
other kids are getting,” she says. “Last year we were existing on the bare 
essentials.”

Willmont’s mother brought Christmas dinner round, so the family didn’t miss 
out there, but buying presents for her children was a struggle. Straight after 
that, there was another financial hurdle to negotiate: her five-year-old son’s 
birthday falls in January. Telling him they couldn’t afford to invite his 
friends round for a party so soon after Christmas was a bitter moment.

Willmont’s HomeStart volunteer did a budgeting analysis with her to help the 
family understand where they could make savings, but it was the emotional 
support offered over a sustained period that mattered most.

'I felt out of control with my finances, stuck at home having panic attacks'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/oct/28/finances-panic-attacks-social-housing-tenants-budgeting>
“Because of the great relationship we’d build up, I could tell her about all 
the [financial] detail, and let’s face it, that’s hard when you don’t feel 
great,” says Willmont.

Thanks to that ongoing relationship, her life is very different now. In 
gaining some control over the family finances, and confidence in herself, 
Willmont felt able to apply for some casual promotional work, which brought in 
a bit of extra money. Earlier this year she secured a steady job working three 
days a week at an estate agent.

“This year is totally different,” says Willmont. “My son is five now and he 
wants Lego [for Christmas]. It’s so expensive, but buying presents has been 
amazing.”

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you every 
Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 