
Politicians who want to celebrate the health of the British economy are always 
on the lookout for data to bolster their case, yet routinely neglect one 
consistent metric of success: immigration. People do not abandon the place of 
their birth and cross continents without expectation of a better life. It is a 
vote of confidence in the destination country.

But it is politically difficult to celebrate this magnetism. A perception that 
new arrivals are on a mission to milk the benefits system and abuse the 
hospitality of the indigenous population is widespread yet false. Most come to 
work. Yet assertion of that fact doesn’t neutralise demand that the numbers 
come down. While the aggregate effect of immigration on GDP might be positive, 
the gain is meaningless in places where there is no palpable feeling of 
prosperity and demographic change feels sudden and uncontrolled. Those 
conditions did not wholly account for Britain’s vote to leave the EU but their 
contribution was significant enough that Theresa May has chosento make an end 
to free movement of labour a non-negotiable clause of any Brexit deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
. Even once ardent supporters of EU membership, such as former business 
secretary Vince Cable, say the economics of free movement are open to 
ambivalent interpretation.

The PM’s decision solves a short-term problem (how to signal responsiveness to 
demands of many leave voters) but it brings her no closer to answering the 
deeper question – how to combine a border regime that is fluid enough to 
preserve economic dynamism and rigorous enough to inspire public confidence? . 
The scale of that challenge gets clearer daily. Yesterday, Andrea Leadsom, the 
environment secretary,suggested that farmers should be able to hire EU workers 
post-Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/andrea-leadsom-vows-to-scrap-eu-red-tape-for-farmers-after-brexit>
. Yet such seasonal influxes of labourers, bringing high densities of transient 
workers, are precisely the kind of migration that provokes resentment among 
longer-established populations. It is unlikely she would have suggested such a 
compromise last year, when drumming up leave votes.

It is not just farmers who want to continue importing workers. The NHS and 
social care services rely on foreign-born staff. The City of London wants to 
hire in the global marketplace. So do universities, retailers and 
internationally integrated industries.

One way to deal with these dilemmas is a move to more sector-specific and 
regional arrangements. Industries could sponsor incomers, whose immigration 
status would be pegged to their local job. Something along those lines is 
proposed ina report published today <http:> by MPs and peers. The all-party 
parliamentary group on social integration suggests visa devolution in imitation 
of Canada, where autonomous provinces help to set their own immigration 
requirements. This has the appeal of matching migration decisions to local 
conditions but is fraught with practical difficulty – the task of enforcing 
geographically circumscribed visas without offence to civil liberties, for 
example. Canada’s arrangements are predicated on its relaxedness about overall 
increases in the number of people in a vast country with low population 
density. Those conditions do not pertain in Britain.

No immigration regime for Britain can satisfy both political pressure for 
lower numbers and employer demands for flexibility. And there is no prospect of 
a return to the culturally homogenous workplaces and town centres of yore. 
Pretending otherwise, raising false hopes that the past can be restored, is a 
proven recipe for disappointment and anger. A wiser route would be to shift the 
emphasis on to conditions that give workers a greater sense of security in a 
labour market that offers ever fewer prospects of a job for life. That means 
proper enforcement of the minimum wage; punishment of gangmasters who exploit 
illegal migration; incentives for employers who develop the skills of their 
staff; and investment in retraining so that the vagaries of the market do not 
turn periods of unemployment into lifelong redundancy. That is a long-term 
project to make British workers more resilient and attractive to employers.

Fear of competition from foreigners will never be entirely neutralised, nor 
should nostalgia for the days before labour was globally mobile be dismissed as 
luddite or xenophobic. Those are understandable responses in a climate of 
insecurity. The prime minister is currently indulging the belief that Brexit 
will provide the necessary relief. It won’t. The demand for a better 
border-control regime is politically impossible to ignore, but the time is long 
overdue for Mrs May to show more honesty about the scale and complexity of the 
task.
 