
For me, learning to snowboard was a painful process, spent fighting the 
elements over a bleak weekend at Cairngorm Mountain in the late 1990s. But I 
was lucky; for those who live further from the hills, getting into snowsports 
can be even harder. It can involve paying a small fortune for flights, 
transfers, accommodation and lift pass – just to spend all week on the lower 
slopes, watching others head for the peaks. For this reason, it’s wise to avoid 
super-resorts when you’re only looking to pick up the basics.

On a recent visit to Zakopane, at the foot of the Tatra mountain range in 
southern Poland, I discovered what may well be the ideal destination for 
beginners. Sorry Scotland!

My cheap flight to Krakow got me within two hours’ drive of the resort, where 
the guys fromWhiteSide Holidays <http://www.whitesideholidays.com> (one week 
from £389pp with lift pass, transfers, lessons, ski hire and self-catering 
accommodation) met me for the last leg. They’re on hand all week to shuttle 
guests among the many small resorts that surround the town, sometimes ticking 
off two in a day.
 On a chairlift in Zakopane. Photograph: Alamy 
As most offered pay-as-you-go lift passes, we only paid for the runs we did. A 
full day of fast laps would still be a bargain for experienced skiers, and 
beginners would pay just a fraction of what they might in a mainstream resort.

The slopes were well-groomed and unchallenging, with friendly, 
English-speaking instructors on hand. As experienced snowboarders my friends 
and I might have got frustrated had it not been for the terrain parks at Witów, 
Białka Tatrzanska and Gubalówka, which were stocked with enough jumps and 
features to keep us busy. There were steeper slopes, too, at Kasprowy Wierch.

Unless you want out-and-out luxury, Zakopane rivals any resort in Europe for 
off-the-hill charm. It’s impossible not to be taken by the region’s unique 
dress, folk music and cuisine. Like everything else in Zakopane, eating out was 
an absolute bargain, and we took full advantage of the low bar prices too; 
thanks to those pay-as-you-go lift passes, there was no need to feel guilty 
about the late start next morning …

• Andrew Duthie is deputy editor of Whitelines magazine
 