
This autumn’s green paper, proposing the expansion of grammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/grammarschools> and selective education, 
has provokedmuch protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/30/grammars-harm-british-schools-says-ofsted-chief-michael-wilshaw>
. And rightly so, given that we now have a government openly challenging the 
inclusive ideals that have guided our education system for the past 40 years. 
But amid the uproar, there’s one vulnerable group receiving very little 
attention.

As the close of the consultation period 
<https://consult.education.gov.uk/school-frameworks/schools-that-work-for-everyone/>
 on 12 December fast approaches, I’ve been thinking about what these changes 
will mean for disabled children. Although the green paper is titledSchools that 
Work for Everyone 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/grammar-schools-green-paper-reveals-government-selective-education-expansion-plan/>
, it doesn’t contain one word about how disabled children should be educated. 
And yet, if these changes go ahead, there is reason to believe that they’ll 
have a disproportionately negative impact on this marginalised group.

To understand what will happen, we need look no further than our existing 
grammar schools. For Simone Aspis from the Alliance for Inclusive Education,
government statistics 
<http://epi.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Grammar-schools-and-social-mobility_.pdf>
 already prove the point. Aspis, which trawled through the data, says: 
“Compared to the secondary school population as a whole, grammars contain 18 
times fewer children with special educational needs or education health and 
care plans, and three times fewer disabled children without such documentation.”

Only two countries have placed restrictions on including disabled children in 
mainstream education: Mauritius and the UK

The move to end segregated, special education has gained ground under the 
inclusive principles of our comprehensive system; and with those principles now 
under attack, some of us fear a return to an era before the birth of 
comprehensives and the inclusion movement.

In 1972, aged 16, I unexpectedly lost my sight in an accident. Back then, the 
idea that I could continue learning at my existing school was unthinkable. I 
remember lying in a hospital bed as the deputy head read to me from the 
brochure of a special school that had all the expertise required to educate 
blind pupils. I was surprised and grateful to hear that such schools even 
existed. OK, it was far away from my home in London, meaning I’d have to be a 
boarder, but it was the best of its kind in the country and there was a hope 
I’d still get my GCEs and, if I worked hard, a place at university.

Six months later I arrived at that school, my head teeming with questions 
about what it meant to be blind and the limitations it would place on my life. 
I knew I wouldn’t be taking driving lessons, which had suddenly become such a 
hot topic among my old friends. On the other hand, I could now read and write, 
thanks to talking books and the braille my father had taught me while I was 
still in hospital. Other questions – like how strangers regarded me and how my 
disability would affect my chances with the opposite sex – remained unanswered.

What I discovered during my next three years was alarming and did nothing to 
help me form the new identity I needed. The first thing that struck me was the 
extraordinary level of institutionalisation. Many of the 90 boys had attended 
the same segregated schools from the age of two. As boarders, they’d never had 
the chance to form meaningful friendships with non-blind children in their home 
communities. With so much shared history, no wonder they’d developed codes of 
behaviour and a specialised vocabulary that would put our best public schools 
in the shade.

When my parents came to visit, I hoped that they wouldn’t ask about the boys 
in the corridors aimlessly rocking from side to side or classmates whose 
standards of dress and personal hygiene left something to be desired. I 
remember one story about a boy who’d been taken to a restaurant in town. Having 
cleared his plate, he held it aloft to show he wanted more. After all, that was 
how we’d been taught to do it in the school canteen.

In 1973, when I was into David Bowie, everyone at school was obsessed with The 
Archers. I remember walking down deserted corridors, the sound of a muffled 
radio behind every door, as my classmates tuned in to that day’s instalment. I 
began wondering whether such peculiarities were an inevitable feature of losing 
one’s sight. As friends from my old school slowly drifted away, it felt as if 
it was only a matter of time until I’d succumb to the oddness and insularity of 
my new classmates.

Surrey headteachers express 'vehement opposition' to grammar schools plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/surrey-headteachers-express-vehement-opposition-to-grammar-schools-plan>
To cut a long story short, I got the grades for university, trained as a 
teacher and went on to work as a disability coordinator, providing the support 
to ensure that hundreds of disabled young people could succeed at their local 
college. I can now say with certainty that there was no need to have sent me 
away at the age of 16. If the correct support had been on offer, I would have 
succeeded just as well in my local school.

And there’s another group who suffer from such a divided system. Segregation 
impoverishes the lives of those who do not have disabilities. Up until I was 
16, I only attended segregated schools, with not a disabled child in sight. I 
didn’t give a thought to where they were and how they were being educated: and 
this ignorance, plus a few negative stereotypes I’d absorbed along the way, 
only added to the pain and confusion I felt on losing my sight.

We live in a world increasingly inclined to scoff at the idea of human rights. 
But back in September, the UN published guidelines clarifying what is required 
by governments to uphold human rights in education. Under article 24 of the UN 
convention on the rights of disabled people, all disabled children must be 
included in mainstream education. Significantly, only two countries have placed 
restrictions on this international initiative: one is Mauritius and the other’s 
a small island in the Atlantic Ocean called the UK.

It’s time to decide. Do we want an education system bent on the creation of an 
intellectual, physical elite, with more losers than winners? Or is the point of 
education to prepare us for life in a society that respects difference, and a 
future in which most people are fulfilled and tolerant?
 