
The federal court met in Broome recently to hear from anthropologists in the 
Bindunbur native title claim, a case in which several Aboriginal groups are 
claiming ownership over large areas of the Dampier Peninsula, in the Kimberley,
Western Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia>
. The land at stake includes James Price Point, an area close to Broome that 
had been pegged as the site for the Browse Basin LNG processing plant.

The focus of this hearing is a competing claim between the Goolarabooloo 
family – who were lauded nationally and internationally by environmentalists 
for opposing the LNG development – and the Jabirr Jabirr people, who were 
widely pitied and pilloried for coming to an agreement with Woodside and the 
Western Australian government.

If Aboriginal people are forced off their land, who will pass down the 
stories? | Kelly Briggs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/22/if-aboriginal-people-are-forced-off-their-land-who-will-pass-down-the-stories>
The Bindunbur case has been making its way through the courts in various forms 
for the last 20 years. It comprises separate, and sometimes overlapping, 
actions by Aboriginal groups known as the Goolarabooloo, Jabirr Jabirr, 
Ngumbarl, Nimanbur and Nyul Nyul. In order to prove traditional ownership, they 
have to show that they own the land under traditional laws and customs that 
pre-date the 1829 British assertion of sovereignty over Western Australia.

In 2011 the Jabirr Jabirr had negotiated the Browse LNG land access agreements 
with Woodside and the Western Australian government. These agreements contained 
$1.5bn worth of benefits for Kimberley Aboriginal people, who, like almost all 
Aboriginal groups in Australia, live shorter lives, are less educated, and pass 
on less wealth to their children than non-Aboriginal Australians. The money was 
almost entirely slated for land, health, education, job creation, and cultural 
and language programs.

In signing the agreements, the Jabirr Jabirr were portrayed in many quarters 
as selling their Aboriginality to the highest bidder. Broome environmentalist 
Louise Middleton, for example, said of them that they knew:

nothing of their culture … cashing in on their ignorance ... You have people 
like me who are gadiya [non Aboriginal] who fight tooth and nail for culture, 
and you have Indigenous people now who are fighting tooth and nail to sell it.

The missing man in the courtroom was the so-called Goolarabooloo “law boss” 
for James Price Point, Joseph Roe. Roe was at the forefront of the national “No 
Gas” campaign to stop the LNG plant being built, a campaign that was at its 
peak between 2011 and 2013. He died in 2014 at the age of 47, soon after 
Woodside pulled out of the project and the agreements, many saying that his 
life had been shortened by the stress of his fight. He was posthumously named 
the Bob Brown Foundation 2014 environmentalist of the year. Brown said that, 
without Roe, “Woodside ... would by now be wrecking the Kimberley coastline.”

Yet Roe was a complicated man. He was not actually opposed to the LNG project 
– he is on the record supporting it, just not at James Price Point where his 
family lived. The former deputy premier, Eric Ripper, told me that Roe had 
offered to drop all opposition to the project if money were paid directly to 
him and his family. He had a reputation for extreme violence, with a string of 
convictions for assault. And, as the court heard, it is unlikely that he or the 
Goolarabooloo will be found to be traditional owners of James Price Point. 
Goolarabooloo claims to ownership are a fabrication under Aboriginal law, “myth 
making”, one anthropologist told the court.

So why was Roe seen as the key Aboriginal spokesperson for the area?

All parties to the case agree that the land traditionally belonged to the 
Jabirr Jabirr and that the Goolarabooloo only arrived in the area in the 1930s. 
Joseph Roe’s grandfather Paddy Roe was a Nyikina man from the West Kimberley 
who said that when he came to Jabirr Jabirr country there were almost no 
surviving Jabirr Jabirr people to look after it. A few remaining elders gave 
him the land, he said. Paddy rose to national prominence in the 1980s as an 
author and activist, and was awarded an Order of Australia medal after he 
established the “Lurujarri Trail”, a popular multi-day tour around James Price 
Point in which visitors are taught about Aboriginal culture. The term 
“Goolarabooloo” is a recent creation, a conflation of several Yawuru words 
indicating a western coastal people living in or near Yawuru land. Today the 
group essentially comprises the descendants of Paddy Roe.

The Jabirr Jabirr dispute Paddy Roe’s story. They have records from the 1930s 
that show many Jabirr Jabirr people and multiple births. Today their community 
comprises hundreds of elders, young people and those that have “been through” 
Jabirr Jabirr law. They accept that Paddy and Joseph Roe were taught aspects of 
Jabirr Jabirr law and culture, and that this gave them certain authority. 
However they dispute that it meant that the Goolarabooloo therefore took over 
ownership of Jabirr Jabirr land. In court in Broome, the majority of 
anthropologists appeared to agree with this argument.

Giving evidence was one of Australia’s best-regarded anthropologists, 
Professor Peter Sutton. Sutton told the court that the Goolarabooloo story of 
how they became owners of the land does not make sense under Aboriginal law. 
Aboriginal law, Sutton said, says that the law of the land is in the soil and 
the rocks put down by superhuman beings during the Dreamtime period. It would 
be possible for someone like Paddy Roe to be adopted by the Jabirr Jabirr 
people, but he would then have been bound by Jabirr Jabirr law rather than 
forming his own distinct family with a competing claim. The Goolarabooloo 
family were “welcomed and tolerated by Jabirr Jabirr, but ... it was the Jabirr 
Jabirr gift to do so”, Sutton said, and also in Jabirr Jabirr power to withdraw 
that welcome.

That welcome was withdrawn when the Goolarabooloo family sought to portray 
themselves as the true owners of James Price Point during the “No Gas” 
campaign. They did this, a senior Jabirr Jabirr woman told me, as part of a 
Goolarabooloo public relations campaign to take their land. For a time, it was 
highly effective. Media images of Roe and his family were powerful for the 
campaign. As a local Broome environmentalist said in 2013: “Goolarabooloo, if 
you open up that can, what a force.” A Jabirr Jabirr senior man I spoke with 
was scathing about the levels of adoration that Roe received from a mostly 
non-Aboriginal audience, saying “the type of person that gets captivated is the 
same type of person that travels to India to become enlightened.”

I am living proof of the stolen generation. Trust me, the trauma is real | 
Elaine Crombie for @IndigenousX
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/i-am-living-proof-of-the-stolen-generation-trust-me-the-trauma-is-real>
In Broome, Roe’s prominence in the campaign was controversial, not least 
because many locals knew his character flaws. A local Broome resident in 
support of the project said “there is a lot of anger about it because people 
who know Joe, know that he is not the black Elvis.”

Why did the Jabirr Jabirr agree to the development? An important reason is 
that the government could have compulsorily acquired the land if they didn’t 
agree. Yet many Jabirr Jabirr wanted the development, believing it could help 
end cycles of suicides and helplessness. One Jabirr Jabirr traditional owner 
told me that:

Maybe some of [the No Gas <https://www.theguardian.com/business/gas> 
protestors] genuinely think that they don’t want the Aboriginal way of life to 
be destroyed, but it is already being destroyed by alcohol, drugs and violence. 
If those things are not addressed, the next generation … will not know how to 
administer culture. 

There are many misconceptions about culture, and people are manipulating it to 
suit their own needs. The biggest threat to culture is the dysfunction among 
us, it is a much bigger threat than any development. This development we could 
have managed and controlled, and used it to strengthen culture because we would 
be functioning well, have a job, get healthy, educated. You can then practise 
culture properly.

The case before Justice North continues.
 