
When I tell people I work at a benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/benefits> office they often wince, as if 
I’ve just shown them a really nasty scar.

The secret life of a gardener: backache, stroppy clients and know-alls – but I 
love it | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/04/secret-life-gardener-i-love-it>
It probably comes as no surprise to hear that working in these frontline 
services means you get a lot of flak from angry people. “I know it’s not your 
fault, but … ” is often followed by a litany of sharp, sometimes heart-rending, 
sometimes abusive complaints, which can leave you emotionally drained by the 
end of every shift. To these people we are all the same. And who can blame them 
really?

Since the Welfare Reform Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2012/5/contents/enacted/data.htm> a couple 
of years back, with the introduction of the spare room subsidies and the 
benefit cap, the lives of those on the breadline are getting significantly 
worse by the year. Desperation is the new normal, and we are the human face of 
the government’s bad decisions that put them there.

I think all benefit officers – from central to local government – have a 
reputation for being unhelpful and deliberately obstructive. Yet for those of 
us who have not yet been poisoned by the toxicity of the environment and 
undertaken a siege mentality to get by, we are, believe it or not, actually 
trying to help.

Most people tend to think the “benefits office” is one department that deals 
with all of your different benefit affairs. I work for local government 
assessinghousing benefit <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing-benefit>, 
and not jobseeker’s allowance or income support (which are administered by 
central government). While it’s part of a housing benefit officer’s job to know 
about all the different welfare benefits available and their specific criteria, 
we can’t help if you’ve been wrongfully deemed fit to work by an assessment, or 
if you can’t claim JSA because you’re on an unpredictable zero-hours contract 
and you’re not getting enough work. What we can do, however, is make a decision 
as to whether we can pay your rent for you or not, interpreting the regulations 
to fit our agenda, regardless of what the Department for Work and Pensions has 
decided.

I started working in housing benefit in 2005, as a fresh-faced youngster happy 
to undertake a seemingly undesirable job. Starting off as a customer services 
officer, there was so much to learn in terms of the law and benefit 
regulations, who qualified for what and why. It was like having a really 
difficult yet interesting puzzle to solve, which was constantly evolving with 
every year that new benefit laws were passed.

After a few years, I progressed to becoming a housing benefit assessment 
officer. All local authorities do things differently but where I work the role 
is a mixed bag of back office assessments (where it’s easier to make difficult 
decisions regarding people’s lives when they’re not sat in front of you) and 
frontline, which is seeing brand new claimants, dealing with urgent enquiries 
(evictions, bailiff action etc) and generally helping people best navigate 
their way through a system that’s ultimately set up to fail them.

The secret life of a wedding gift list adviser: I help thankless couples 
bickering over china | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/27/secret-life-of-a-wedding-gift-list-adviser-help-thankless-couples>
While there are various complex situations and legal provisos that may make 
the task of assessing housing benefit a difficult one, the actual job as a 
“decision-maker” is fairly straightforward. To be eligible for housing benefit, 
all an applicant needs is a rental liability, a national insurance number and 
for their weekly income to be low enough (in comparison to their weekly cost of 
living – something that is determined by the government). Before any money can 
be paid out, the claimant must provide sufficient identity proof, recent income 
documents, proof of rental agreement, and anything else that the assessment 
officer deems necessary. This is something of a moot point among officers, as 
in my opinion some abuse their discretionary right to ask for more evidence 
than is required, and as a consequence, the claimant misses the deadline date 
and their benefit is never assessed.

This might seem rather controversial, but throughout the decade that I have 
worked here a debate has raged between officers as to what constitutes being 
good at their job. Depending on your own political viewpoint, or even which 
local authority trained you, your role can either be seen as that of a person 
who facilitates the needy to pay their rent, or that of a person who sees it as 
their duty to weed out the fraudulent claimants and to protect the public purse.

When I was less experienced and needed help on particular cases that weren’t 
clear-cut, I’d often get contradictory advice from whoever was in charge: some 
pro-claimant, others anti. Sooner or later, you learn to trust your own 
instinct in your decision-making. Mine was always to find a way to pay the 
claimant, if I could. Knowing that your decision will help somebody out who is 
genuinely struggling is perhaps the only reward in an otherwise unrewarding 
job. But some people don’t feel that way.

If anything, it has become harder to help those claimants who are struggling. 
Recently I met a very teary woman who had been on the council’s downsizing list 
for two years. It is unable to find a decent one-bedroom property for her until 
she sorts our her rent arrears. Her reason for having rent arrears? She’s been 
under-occupying by two rooms since her grown-up children flew the nest a few 
years back, and she’s having 25% deducted from her weekly housing benefit as a 
consequence. She’s tried to rent the spare rooms out, but the only people to 
respond to her advert have been young men, and she doesn’t feel comfortable 
living with them. I wish I could say that this particular catch-22 was a 
one-off, but unfortunately, it’s rather common.

With local government cuts and departments shrinking (some disappearing 
altogether), a lot of our work has been outsourced to an external agency, who 
are seemingly too quick in their decisions to cancel claims. Furthermore, with 
the government deciding that universal credit will soon take over all existing 
benefits, every housing benefit assessment officer I know is counting down the 
days until they are made redundant and their job is passed over to central 
government.

Morale is at an all-time low, yet despite some of the best officers jumping 
this sinking ship, some of us are still trying our best to plug the remaining 
holes and help people keep a roof over their heads.

• Are you a GP, a carpenter or a traffic warden? We want to hear your candid 
accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your 
story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>

• This article was amended on 13 July 2016. An earlier version referred to 
Atos fit-to-work assessments. Atos no longer carries out these assessments.
 