
I started truck-driving in the late 1970s, graduating from a dump truck on a 
Bavarian bypass to trips the length and breadth of Europe in a succession of 
rust buckets. After living and working in France, Germany and the Netherlands, 
in 2000 I sold up and emigrated to live in the tropics – where, believe it or 
not, I get bored.

These days I fly back to the UK in April, pick up the keys to a truck, hitch 
up a trailer and take off on a four-month European tour for a company that 
specialises in transporting equipment for bands. As a public school wide-boy, 
of whom there are many in the music business, with a taste for the open road, 
I’ve found my niche – where, as long as you do the job right, a certain degree 
of eccentricity isn’t a disadvantage.

I love waking up and pulling back the cab curtains, not knowing what the view 
will be and getting paid good money to go to places other people pay good money 
to go to. Norway is my favourite; I couldn’t afford to go there otherwise. 
Working in the music business also means I don’t have to tolerate the awful 
working conditions some UK drivers accept: horrible food, lack of parking, 
filthy toilets and showers, hanging around unpaid while waiting to load and 
unload. No wonder there’s such a shortage of drivers.

I have only met my boss once, very briefly. In the music business you’re left 
to get on with it and plan your own routes. I enjoy getting on with the crew 
and the musicians I work for. As humble diesel demons, we’re not really 
supposed to hang out with the talent, but I ignore that.

A few years ago I was driving the equipment around Europe for a heavy metal 
band from New Orleans

The EU may have made border transit delays a thing of the past, but English 
hauliers have had almost all their European work taken from them by eastern 
European hauliers, operating under EU rules, who have cut prices to an absurdly 
low level and driven firms from wealthier countries out of business. The trucks 
you see lined up inOperation Stack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/06/operation-stack-new-lorry-park-stanford-west-kent-m20-congestion>
 on the motorway in Kent are almost all from eastern Europe, not the UK. The 
EU, as it applies to truck-driving, has meant flooding the market with cheap 
foreign labour, which is perceived to have forced down wages and worsened 
working conditions. It’s not just a British problem. I noticed recently that 
even Spanish hauliers are now using Romanian-registered subcontractors.

One of my colleagues had a brick through his windscreen last week in Calais. 
It feels like only a matter of time before real trouble kicks off there. Around 
the “Jungle” is obviously a flashpoint but thepeople traffickers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/31/dismantle-calais-camp-modern-slave-trade-traffickers>
 have now penetrated far further inland into France, with each gang “owning” a 
services centre, systematically assaulting English-bound vehicles, so nowhere 
within 300 miles of the Channel is safe. The French police don’t seem to care.

Quite a few of my fellow drivers are linguists; many live abroad too. Speaking 
a foreign language helps, and can open other doors. A few years ago I was 
driving the equipment around Europe for a heavy metal band from New Orleans. 
During the end-of-tour party in Bilbao, the tour manager found out I lived in 
Brazil, so she invited me to tour South America and Mexico with the band as a 
guitar tech and translator.

That’s not to say the job is all fun and games: it’s bloody hard work too. 
Last month I travelled 17,000 kilometres, including a drive from the Arctic 
circle in northern Finland all the way to Lisbon, 24-hours off, then non-stop 
to Milan, Valencia, then back to London. Needless to say, it isn’t a line of 
work that allows much time for a work/life balance.

Sometimes I wish I’d got into the music business earlier, but had I not 
already paid my dues on general haulage I wouldn’t have been good enough. Just 
as every good production and tour manager I’ve met started pushing boxes at 
midnight for peanuts, every good tour driver learned their trade trying to do 
five collections in Milan on a Friday afternoon, or 25 deliveries inside the 
M25. Actual over-the-road driving skills are assumed: a tour driver’s real 
added value is experience, knowing whether a route is possible within the set 
time limit. That and people skills, being diplomatic enough to get any 
potential problem sorted in advance, without ruffling feathers.

A tour driver needs to be able to apply the planned tour schedule, set months 
in advance, to the EU truck and bus driving rules, which are, and this is a 
very short approximate summary of the basics: 90 hours’ driving time over two 
weeks; nine hours’ driving per day, 10 hours a day twice a week. Breaks: at 
least 11 hours per night, shortened twice a week to nine hours. Obligatory 24- 
and 45-hour breaks over a two-week period.

All trucks, thankfully, are equipped these days with digicards: credit 
card-sized chip gizmos which record our every movement and are impossible to 
falsify, so all transport businesses now run legally. Everyone operates on the 
same playing field, not only in the niche market of the music business but also 
in other types of transport. Efficient businesses make money.

The secret life of a DJ: a joyous job in a grimly misogynistic industry | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/01/secret-life-female-dj-music-industry-misogyny>
I’m insured. The trucks are taxed. Bribery and other shenanigans are almost 
unheard-of. We drive top-of-the-range trucks with fridges and night heaters and 
get paid on time. In the old days, at least when I started, the opposite was 
true.

All in all I love my job. However, never having had one, a work contract would 
be nice. And it’s definitely a lifestyle choice, not a sensible career option. 
My take-home pay is only relatively high because catering is paid for by the 
artist’s production company, and I’m paid while away from base during my time 
off. Averaged out per year, there’s more money driving nights for a 
supermarket. But I’m not complaining.

The greatest pleasure is listening to good music. Hearing Tom Jones warm up 
backstage, for example – what a voice. I love the solitude of driving and the 
sense of reward of being good at what I do, trusted to go out alone on a 
four-month tour around Europe for famous artists, knowing that everyone relies 
on me to get to every show on time. For the record, I’ve never been late. In 
return I get paid to listen to good music and work with highly professional 
people.

I tend not to watch television, or read the papers. What happens in the UK 
doesn’t affect me. At least, it hasn’t until recently, with what has been going 
on around the French/English border. Like almost all of my colleagues I voted 
leave in the referendum. At the sharp end of what the EU really means, I want 
out.

• Are you a prison officer, an actor’s agent or a driving instructor? We want 
to hear your candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on 
submitting your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 