
Loyalty to an ideological programme is rare in Britain. The labels that 
political activists use, often pejoratively, to define one another – 
“Thatcherite”, “Blairite”, “Trotskyist” – do not inform the voting intentions 
of the majority. Theresa May understands this pragmatic sensibility.“I don’t 
have an ‘ism’ other than Conservatism,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/23/theresa-may-desert-island-discs-dancing-queen>
 she has said. And by that she does not envisage a policy menu. Mrs May sees 
Tory values not as a doctrine but as cultural inclination and a social milieu – 
the parochial heart of Middle England. The prime minister’s unwillingness to 
define “Mayism” doesn’t mean such a thing will not emerge, as such concepts 
generally do, from the operation of her instincts on events. Already there is 
a discernible trajectory from old Conservative ideas towards something tailored 
to the challenges facing the country.

A starting point is to understand what Mrs May is not. She is not an apostle 
of Margaret Thatcher, nor is she a Tory “moderniser” in the terms established 
by David Cameron. Most revealing is Mrs May’s complex relationship with 
liberalism. She is evangelical about global free trade but ready to compromise 
on economic openness for tighter immigration control. She supports gay marriage 
and women’s right to choose abortion, although she has voted in parliament for 
shorter term limits. As home secretary, she was no friend of penal reform.
Leaving the European convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/29/ministers-put-british-bill-of-rights-plan-on-hold-until-after-brexit>
 and introducing a British bill of rights remains on the agenda. She quietly 
endorsed the remain campaign and the tone of her subsequent embrace of Brexit 
goes beyond the technical task of decoupling from Brussels.

The first post-liberal PM

The prime minister interprets the referendum as an instruction to reshape the 
state to address the grievance of voters who felt marginalised through the 
years of accelerating globalisation. That is a cultural project as well as an 
economic one. It posits pre-referendum supremacy of an elite that was liberal, 
cosmopolitan and quick to ignore – even to despise – alternative perspectives. 
It follows that this elite should now be sidelined and its opinions discarded. 
It is true that a broad consensus – merging aspects of social and economic 
liberalism – gave continuity to the succession from New Labour to Tory-led 
coalition government in 2010. Mr Cameron’s claim once to have been the “heir to 
Blair” was not without foundation. Mrs May’s choice to define Brexit as the 
reaction to that continuum makes herBritain’s first post-liberal prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/the-guardian-view-on-liberal-britain-it-will-need-to-be-recreated>
.

Influential figures in Mrs May’s close-knit entourage are sympathetic to the 
“Red Tory” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/09/red-tory-theresa-may-anne-mcelvoy>
 school of thought that combines a critique of social liberalism and free 
market libertarianism. This analysis identifies a corrosive interaction between 
two successive revolutions of the 20th century: the left-leaning, permissive 
culture of the late 1960s and the rightwing fixation on profit-seeking as the 
agent of progress that was the kernel of Thatcherism in the 1980s. Red Toryism 
rejects neither movement outright but says that their combination led to a cult 
of individual self-gratification, expressed through materialistic consumption, 
at the expense of community wellbeing.

Red Tories explain selfish individualism as an unintended consequence of the 
1980s. Mrs Thatcher, they say, extrapolated too much from her own Methodist 
faith and austere work ethic, believing that people would use their economic 
freedoms judiciously and charitably – restraining licentious appetites and 
diverting surplus profit into philanthropy. She underestimated the importance 
of the state as referee in the distribution of fair reward.There is an 
intriguing symmetry here with the “Blue Labour” critique of liberal third-way 
politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2015/jan/28/labour-interesting-alliances-forming-to-plot-partys-future>
. In this account, New Labour was insufficiently sceptical of the capacity of 
the state to effect social change by cash redistribution from the centre, 
overly squeamish in facing the impact of mass migration and neglectful of the 
resonance in traditional Labour-voting areas of identity, community and place 
as drivers of political allegiance – faith, flag, family. Insofar as Mrs May 
imagines herself occupying a new post-liberal centre ground of politics, it is 
in the space where Blue Labour and Red Tory sensibilities intersect.

Europe still matters

By the end of the 20th century, left liberals had won the culture war, and 
right liberals had won the economic war. Cultural conservatives felt aggrieved 
that their values were being traduced while the left felt they had been sold 
out. Mr Cameron’s Tory “modernisation” aggravated the offence on both sides. 
The reactionary right saw it as an ultra-cosmopolitan project symbolised by Mr 
Cameron’s support of gay marriage and short-lived dalliance with 
environmentalism. The left saw his “big society” rhetoric as a front for 
reheated small-state Thatcherism. Liberalism was the dominant governing ethos 
of a generation, yet liberals were scattered across party lines. The closest 
they came to unity was the gathering of disparate forces in defence of EU 
membership – an unloved proposition which became the proxy for a social and 
economic settlement that, in reality, had little to do with Brussels.
Since she became prime minister on 13 July, Theresa May has maintained a 
double digit lead over Labour 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T13:08:32/embed.html>
Mrs May is now committed to delivering radical change through that same proxy. 
Brexit has become the totemic mission of national renewal and yet EU membership 
is not the underlying cause of voter discontent. None of the ambitions she has 
declared for a fairer society is obviously connected to that mission. She talks 
about rebalancing the economy with an “industrial strategy” and professes 
commitment to workers’ rights. She pledges corporate governance reforms and 
crackdowns on tax avoidance to social responsibility on big business. 
She understands that a housing shortage and wage stagnation feed anxiety that 
today’s children will never sustain the lifestyle enjoyed by their parents. 
In her2016 conference speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/the-guardian-view-on-theresa-mays-conference-speech-actions-not-words-will-decide>
 she invited her party to remember “the good that government can do”. She wants 
to deploy state power in defence of people who feel they are “just about 
managing”. But she must know that the destabilising consequences of divorce 
from Europe’s single market will worsen their plight before any benefits are 
realised.

Balancing act

The place where Brexit most satisfies the post-liberal narrative is also the 
point where the argument is weakest – the assertion that social and economic 
malaise can be healed by ending foreign infiltration of British workplaces. 
There is a grim logic that will lead Mrs May to indulge that misconception in 
order to buy permission from her party to pursue other things. But she has only 
a vague aspiration to palliate the negative consequences of British capitalism 
and no policy equal to the task.

It is unclear how deep a commitment to that agenda runs through the Tory 
party. The more radical side of Mrs May’s ambition is a partial repudiation of 
an economic legacy still fetishised on the right of her party – the conviction 
that government is the obstacle to progress and that a shrunken state, with 
fewer labour protections, yields a more enterprising society. A backlash has 
been averted because the prime minister is simultaneously satisfying a 
long-held desire of the same section of her party – hardline Euroscepticism. 
Conflict is deferred, not avoided. Meanwhile, extracting Britain from EU 
membership will consume all of the administrative capacity of government for 
the foreseeable future.
 