
Back in 1989 I foolishly bought my first property, a one-bed flat in a 
miserable part of south London. I borrowed as much as I could, stretching to 
4.5 times my income, took the mortgage on an interest-only basis, and put down 
a deposit of just 5%. Within two years the property's value had fallen by half. 
As for the "repayment vehicle" I'd set up, a Pep (personal equity plan), I quit 
paying in after a couple of months anyway.

More than two decades later, the door is closing on interest-only mortgages, 
and probably rightly so. They have been one of the principal devices for 
homebuyers (including me in 1989) to over-borrow and feed the cycle of boom and 
bust.

This week the Co-operative Bank (which includes the old Britannia building 
society) entirely withdrew its interest-only range, while Santander and others 
have limited interest-only to borrowers with a minimum 50% downpayment, 
effectively excluding first-time buyers.

The argument over interest-only is less financial than philosophical. Should a 
nanny-ish state (FSA rules back the Co-op and Santander moves) forbid young 
adults from potentially over-borrowing? Can it not trust the young to behave 
sensibly and put aside enough cash, on a regular basis, to eventually repay the 
loan?

Maybe so. I have colleagues who sensibly put aside money every month, building 
up a tidy nest egg to repay their ultra-cheap interest-only tracker mortgages. 
They display all the rigour and discipline needed to ensure this way of 
financing a home succeeds. They even show me Excel spreadsheets that prove how 
financially advantageous it can be.

But the reality is that few people have the required self-control. A survey 
this week found that less than a quarter of people with interest-only loans are 
regularly putting money aside to pay off the capital. Most haven't a clue what 
to do, vaguely hoping in a fingers-crossed way that rises in house prices will 
rescue them.

I know of one interest-only borrower who took more and more equity out of his 
home during the boom years and mis-spent it on cars and holidays. Now he has a 
£170,000 mortgage on a property worth £130,000, and nothing put aside to repay 
it in 14 years' time.

But it's not just repayment that's the issue with interest-only. It's the 
turbo-charging effect it has on the property market.

People love to think their property has some sort of intrinsic value. In most 
cases it has very little. The price of a property is really just a function of 
how much finance can be mobilised to pay for it. In a crowded island with 
little space for new development, raising the amount of finance (through 
devices such as interest-only loans) available to buyers simply pumps up 
prices. Ending six-times salary mortgages, interest-only loans and zero deposit 
deals should help deflate the market in the longer term. Yes, young people may 
feel they are being denied access to property, but the tough love should, 
eventually, make things more affordable.

The main competitor to first-time buyers are buy-to-let speculators, who use 
interest-only as a tax fiddle. By all means, let's withdraw interest-only 
deals, but a level playing field demands that the same should apply to 
buy-to-let. Now that really would help prevent much of the boom and bust.
 