
Reaching a global agreement on climate change took more than 20 years of 
tortuous negotiations. Signed just undera year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations>
, the insufficient but workableParis agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement> at last 
constructed a legally binding framework for the principle of cutting carbon 
emissions. It was to be the foundation of a sustained ratcheting up of ambition 
that would hold global warming below 2C. Last Tuesday night, as one by one from 
east coast to west the United States went Republican red, that progress was 
wiped out.

Donald Trump is the first self-declared climate denier to lead of one of the 
world’s biggest emitters. Even President George W Bush, though he surrounded 
himself with sceptics, did not publicly disavow climate science. He even 
managed a few helpful moves. But Mr Trump has pledged to unpick the Paris 
agreement. In Marrakech, where delegates are meeting for the first time since 
Paris, they are putting a brave face on proceedings. But they know the outlook 
is bleaker than it has been since the collapse ofthe Copenhagen talks 
<http://unfccc.int/meetings/copenhagen_dec_2009/meeting/6295.php> in 2009.

Mr Trump cannot instantly extricate the US from the Paris accord: legal 
technicalities means withdrawal would take four years, although he may tryto 
speed up the process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-looking-at-quickest-way-to-quit-paris-climate-agreement-says-report>
. That, though, is just legal stuff. His chilling effect on climate 
negotiations has already begun. That is because these talks rely as much – if 
not more – on trust, good faith and political will as they do on law and legal 
process. Remember, for instance, that only the framework of the Paris pact is 
legally binding, not each country’s commitments on greenhouse gas emissions.

Trust and goodwill can go a long way: the personal charm offensive that 
President Obama launched on Beijing when he made climate change a legacy issue 
led to the historic joint statement without which the Paris deal could never 
have been made. The prospect of its success drew the presence of almost all 
major world leaders to Paris for the launch of the talks last December, sending 
an unmistakable signal to their negotiating teams. Now, even if the US remains 
technically a signatory for a while longer, all this is lost from inauguration 
day in January.

With a hostile US, China may cool on its commitments, or at least take a 
tougher stance, as it has done before. India was already a reluctant 
participant and the change in the US position is likely only to make its 
grumbles louder.

Games of “what if” are irresistible at this stage. As delegates started to 
gather in Marrakech, the world appeared on the brink of an unprecedented phase 
of stability. The Paris agreement had come into force within a year of its 
agreement, an astonishing achievement after the discord and mistrust that had 
threatened all the preceding meetings and even the whole UN climate process. 
But now that huge achievement may be shattered. Diplomats are working furiously 
to reassure countries that the departure of the US would not mean the end of 
the road and the process can continue.

And it is not only the global talks. In the US, too, more climate-unfriendly 
actions from a Republican-dominated Congress, like changes to clean energy 
subsidies, are on the cards, while President Obama’s clean power plan to 
regulate power stations is under grave threat. Mr Trump’s proposed leader of 
the Environmental Protection Agency is a prominent climate sceptic, Myron 
Ebell, a man once described by a senior George W Bush aide as “crazy Myron”.

Finally, a right-leaning supreme court may put a brake on future legal 
challenges from environmental groups. Taken with Mr Trump’s support for coal, 
US emissions may soon be back firmly on their upward track. And if he really 
wants to “cancel” Paris, Trump could even pull the US out of the UN framework 
convention on climate change, the foundation treaty under which Paris was 
signed. If he did, the world would lose its global forum for taking fair and 
effective action on greenhouse gases and adapting to climate change.

Withdrawal may be a step too far even for Trump, for the treaty gives the US a 
seat at the table that pragmatists would rather retain, even if they try to saw 
the legs off.

For delegates in Marrakech, the only source of optimism may be their years of 
experience in holding the talks together. But they cannot do it on their own. 
In the end, it may all come down to scientifically literate Republicans in 
Congress. They must be the voice of the two-thirds of Americans who understand 
the link between human activity and global warming – and want to break it.
 