
Amid the salt and spray of Brighton, Labour 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/pages/annual-conference-2015> has much to think 
about, not least the party’s need to reconnect with erstwhile supporters. Some 
of that is nuts and bolts: the economy, for example. But some of it runs deeper.

Last week, in a wide-ranging speech, Labour sage Jon Cruddas spoke of the need 
to consider how would-be Labour voters really feel about what is happening 
around them. “Since 2005, voters who are socially conservative are the most 
likely to have deserted Labour 
<http://labourlist.org/2015/09/jon-cruddas-labour-is-lost-in-england/>,” he 
said. “They value home, family and their country. They feel their cultural 
identity is under threat. They want a sense of belonging and national renewal. 
Tradition, rules and social order are important to them. Labour no longer 
represents their lives.”

There is a nod there to the idea that diversity, or, more specifically, 
multiculturalism, has caused uncertainty by degrading the common threads that 
once held tight-knit communities together. How to achieve cohesion when the 
constituent parts are so different?

Writing in the Times last week 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/columnists/article4564815.ece>, the Tory 
peer Daniel Finklestein also touched on this area. “I think most of us agree 
that people shouldn’t have to believe the same things, worship the same god or 
dress like each other,” he said. “Isn’t the great British principle that if 
someone wants to keep themselves to themselves, they are welcome to do so?” But 
there are limits, he said. “I think we do want everyone to be willing to accept 
the same basic laws, a common attachment to western democracy and a shared 
responsibility for the nation’s security.”

I won’t take issue with any of that. But the devil is in the detail. Yes, it 
is about laws, democracy and mutual security. But just as crucial is what 
happens day to day: do we have common experiences? Do we work in the same 
places? Do we learn in the same places? Do we watch the same television, giving 
us shared things to talk about? Do we speak the same language in the public 
sphere?

These interactions are the really tricky bit. It’s all too easy to speak 
another language among others who speak it, easy to form separate clusters in 
schools and in the workplace. Easy, with technology, to only consume culturally 
specific media. Easy and permissible in a free society but not without 
consequence for integration. But these micro opt-outs impose their cost on 
cohesion.
 