
“What have I seen you in?” is inevitably the first thing that people say when 
they meet me at a party. This is usually followed by “Have you worked with 
anyone famous?”

As an actor this is something that I’ve had to get used to it. But I have no 
idea what you have seen so I can’t answer the first question even if I wanted 
to. I probably have worked with several people whom you would know but I would 
rather that you were interested in me for my own sake. I’m afraid that if you 
rub my collar, stardust will not fall off. I’m also not going to regale you 
with salacious stories about my colleagues, even if I do know any.

In many ways, being an actor is just like any other job – in a 
zero-hours-contract <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/zero-hours-contracts> 
sort of way – with no guarantee that there will even be minimum wage at the end 
of the run; remember this next time that you go to a “fringe” production.

Yes, I chose to do it, in the same way that many other professionals chose to 
be lawyers and doctors. It doesn’t mean that I enjoy every minute of it or that 
I should be expected to live on the joy of just being there alone. This doesn’t 
cut much ice with the landlord or the utility companies.

Being an actor doesn’t make you an air head, nor did you choose performing as 
a career because you were lousy at school

If we get past the initial hurdle of awkward greetings, people often tell me 
that they are the star of their local amateur dramatic society and if only they 
could just get anEquity card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/feb/06/features.jobsmoney25>, 
they too could turn professional. This is what I tell them.

There is nothing to stop you realising your dream as long as you are prepared 
to invest huge amounts of energy (and a fair amount of hard cash) in learning 
and honing your skills on a continuous basis and you don’t mind sacrificing a 
secure roof over your head, the car, regular holidays abroad and an income that 
you can live on comfortably. Be prepared to apply continually for jobs in 
competition with hundreds of others and deal with constant rejection – week in, 
week out.

Remember not to mind about being told about your physical “shortcomings” to 
your face and to keep your temper when asked if you have ever worked on camera 
by someone half your age who doesn’t seem to understand the letters “BBC” on 
your CV. It is not unusual to be auditioned by a woman from the office because 
neither the director nor the musical director can be bothered to turn up. She 
can’t spell the name of the author of the play that you have made a long and 
considered choice about for your audition piece, and it goes without saying 
that although they are a leading contemporary dramatist with links to the play 
for which you are auditioning, she has never heard of them.

Your work-life balance will be perfect because there is no distinction between 
the two. I don’t act to live but I do live to act. This sometimes means that 
you will coexist with unpleasant thoughts and characters during the rehearsal 
period although I generally manage to shake them off once the research is 
concluded and the run or shoot is under way.

Get used to early mornings and late nights. There is no luxury of being an owl 
or a lark. You have to be both, and be fit at all sorts of times of day to 
produce deep emotions or light-hearted frivolity at the drop of a hat, whatever 
you actually feel. Ten or 20 times over if required. There is a lot of sitting 
around at auditions, in rehearsal and sometimes in performance. Doing the 
crossword and sudoku begins to feel as much as part of the job as acting.

The secret life of a photographer: free online content is putting us out of 
work | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/02/secret-life-photographer-free-online-content>
Toughen up. I can guarantee that you will be filming in furs in the height of 
a heatwave and in skimpy shorts in the depths of winter. Don’t expect a career 
progression. Your trajectory from juvenile lead to national treasure is 
unlikely to be a smooth one. In fact it is just plain unlikely. You may not get 
to love the day job, but remember: it is where you may end up most of the time.

Sex scenes? Par for the course, and I promise you, there is nothing remotely 
sexy about them. Really. Other performers and crew are generally very 
supportive as they know how awkward it can be, although don’t expect them to 
show you this in an obvious way. The first time that I rehearsed a scene in a 
play with no clothes on, I suddenly realised that the curtains were open on to 
the road, and that I and my onstage lover were in full view of passersby and a 
stream of traffic. Once the curtains were drawn we recommenced, only for a 
light to blow above our heads just as we got to a clinch, whereupon we were 
showered with fragments of glass. I have never seen a light do that before or 
since. In the dress rehearsal, the techies painted the surface of the stage 
where I was lying so that I ended up with a green stripe down my back.

And, by the way, if I’m not acting full-time, I’m not “resting”. Rather, I 
will be taking classes, practising instruments, applying for new jobs – all 
while earning a living doing something else at which you are also expected to 
be fully professional. Being an actor doesn’t make you an airhead; nor did you 
choose performing as a career because you were lousy at school. Most of us are 
well-educated and can talk about all sorts of things that are nothing to do 
with acting. Try me.

• Are you an aid worker, a chef, a private detective? We want to hear your 
candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting 
your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 