
There is a warning buried in the economic figures that appeared last week. 
While most of the focus was on the steady decline in house buying and numbers 
showing Britain’s national income grew more slowly last year than previously 
estimated; the latest borrowing figures set alarm bells ringing.

Consumer credit figures from the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/03/new-consumer-debt-reaches-7-year-high>
 revealed Britons ended the year slapping their credit cards on shop counters 
as if the financial crisis was a distant memory.

Borrowing on credit cards and unsecured loans grew in November at its 
strongest pace since 2008. We knew that retail sales had surged that month and 
now we knew why.

Mortgage borrowing added to the credit boom, piling another £2.1bn on the debt 
mountain in November. The increase was higher than expected and came despite a 
fall in the number of mortgage approvals.

At the same time the central bank was publishing its credit figures, a survey 
of factory managers could only be described as depressing. Yet again, just as 
the sector appeared to be finally recovering from the great crash, the momentum 
has tailed off.

The survey of manufacturers found expansion eased back in December after 
picking up in October and November. And that little period of early winter joy 
was shortlived, coming after a September that represented a 17-month low. 
Output and new orders growth moderated in December, and most importantly 
exports remained lacklustre.

Those economists who found reasons to be cheerful from the figures suggested 
that the UK’s strong domestic demand would keep the sector growing. The same 
economists look at the borrowing figures and discern a more benign outlook from 
the total UK household debt burden, which is continuing a trend since the crash 
and still coming down. What was once a household debt to income ratio of 175% 
is now nearer 130%.

Yet the overall figure depends on the over-50s paying off their mortgages at 
an accelerated rate. By contrast, the under-40s take on bigger mortgages to buy 
a home with an inflated price and borrow on credit cards to fund a lifestyle 
ravaged by six years of below inflation pay rises.

This rise in unsecured borrowing appears to be based on two things. There is 
the sense that the job market is so buoyant that redundancy is an unlikely 
prospect and second, there are the signals from the Bank of England that 
interest rates will remain low for another year.

It may seem uninteresting to economists who just watch the debt total decline 
that a large minority of poorer and younger households are ramping up their 
debt-to-income ratio, but it is the key for the economy’s survival in the next 
crisis. As countless studies have shown, the stability of the country is not 
based on the large number of people and businesses who either own assets 
outright or have low borrowings, but on people who borrow up to the hilt and go 
bust at the merest hint of impending crisis, hitting consumer spending and 
dragging down house prices.

The Resolution Foundation, an independent thinktank, has estimated that almost 
1.6m households are forced to spend more than half of their disposable income 
on mortgage payments or rent and more than 1m of those with mortgages will be 
at risk of defaulting and losing their properties in the wake of even a small 
rise in interest rates.

These are families who cannot cope with financial shocks and will need either 
large dollops of government benefits to survive or debt forgiveness by their 
bank and mortgage lender.

The UK is not just storing up problems for a future crash. There are short 
term problems associated with a recovery based on spending using borrowed cash, 
especially when it is aligned to a weak manufacturing sector that has barely 
regained its pre-2008 level of output.

Britain’s trade balance represents more than a third of GDP. A surplus in 
services exports over imports is undermined by a huge deficit in goods. For 
many years this deficit was closed by a combination of North Sea oil and income 
from overseas investments. Since 2003 oil imports have exceeded exports and in 
recent years investment income has slumped. In the third quarter of last year 
the trade deficit swelled to £11.2bn from £8.9bn in the second.

The trend has been for exports to fall and imports rise.

While not the only factor, the rise in borrowing to buy electronic goods made 
overseas is a large part of the story.

In the days of fixed currencies, a large trade deficit spelt disaster and 
forced governments to engineer pride-sapping devaluations. Now the currency 
adjusts on a daily basis in accordance with international buying and selling . 
The UK has seen the pound rise in the last three years in response to global 
instability. In short, its status as a safe haven has overridden qualms about 
its deteriorating trade position.

Next year looks like it will be much the same. The threat of a Greek exit from 
the euro, a slowdown in China and political crises in Ukraine and the Middle 
East will sustain the fear factor.

This situation could reverse at any time, especially when the eurozone 
situation settles down. Then the UK’s poor export figures will come under 
closer scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/10/uk-trade-deficit-narrows-october-exports-oil-imports>
. A failure to compete in world markets will be obvious. A reliance on 
debt-fuelled spending to maintain domestic demand will further undermine 
confidence. The currency will fall. The cost of imported goods will rise, 
further hitting living standards.

A lower currency will make exports cheaper and aid exporters but the British 
experience is that exporters outside the confines of the car industry do little 
to exploit this situation. Most importantly they bank the extra profit and 
refuse to increase investment. This was disappointingly shown by the 
pharmaceutical industry, which cut back on investment despite a fall in the 
value of the pound by a quarter in 2009.

Worse could be to come should consumer borrowing continue to spur growth in 
2015. As James Knightley, UK economist at ING Financial Markets, said: “With 
the economy looking set to expand by 3% this year and debt levels creeping 
higher once again we suspect that the BoE will be looking to tighten monetary 
policy from the third quarter of 2015 onwards.”

A rise in interest rates will compound a difficult financial situation for 
many households. If they restrain spending, manufacturers will find reliance on 
domestic demand restricts their ability to grow.

Wage increases could come to the rescue. Some forecasters have bet on a 3% 
average jump in earnings this year against about 1% in 2014. A further decline 
in inflation, largely as a result of falling oil prices, could also raise 
disposable incomes without the need to borrow.

However, 5 million public sector workers will continue to suffer wage freezes. 
And for the legions of low paid workers, a 3% rise in the minimum wage in 
October will likely be eaten up by higher rents and coping with cuts in 
benefits. Can the rest of the private sector workforce keep the tills ringing 
and by virtue of buoyant demand, manufacturers in rude health? Unlikely.
 