
You have to get used to being invisible as an anaesthetist. A large percentage 
of the public has no idea that we’re medically qualified. I’ve been asked how 
many GCSEs you need to be an anaesthetist. In fact our training is as long as 
that of a surgeon. It takes seven years of specialist studies after you’ve 
already completed two years of basic general training; and that’s after five or 
six years at medical school.

Patients always remember the name of their surgeon, never that of their 
anaesthetist. But it’s still a hugely rewarding job. We’re everywhere in the 
hospital. In theatre obviously, but also in intensive care, on the wards, in 
the emergency department, and in the pain clinic, with those who are really 
suffering. We assess people’s fitness for surgery, how likely they are to 
suffer complications, and support them through the operation itself and into 
the postoperative period.

If there’s an emergency during an operation the team looks to the anaesthetist 
for leadership. If you panic, it spreads

When you first start anaesthetising patients early on in your career it’s 
terrifying. You know that if you get it wrong you might kill someone. Our drugs 
stop people breathing and it’s our job to take over that function. Even after 
nine years I still get a frisson of nerves in some situations. I hide it 
though; it’s an important part of the job to stay calm at all times. If there’s 
an emergency during an operation the team looks to the anaesthetist for 
leadership, as the surgeon is often too focused on fixing the immediate 
problem. If you panic, it spreads and the team loses the ability to function 
efficiently.

Anaesthesia is a very safety-oriented speciality; we’ve led the way in 
reducing patient harm by looking at human factors, using simulation training 
and reporting “near misses”. By sharing episodes where a patient has nearly 
come to harm, we hope to address the causes and prevent actual harm from 
occurring in the future. We’ve embraced ideas from aviation and other 
high-reliability industries about how a team functions effectively. We try to 
flatten the hierarchy in theatre so that the least qualified individual can 
raise concerns without feeling intimidated. This makes it especially 
frustrating when patients come to harm after they leave your care because the 
rest of the system is struggling to cope.

There are so many gaps in rotas of doctors, nurses and the wider healthcare 
team, and the proposedjunior doctor contract changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/03/junior-doctors-desert-nhs-over-contract-bma-mccourt>
 will only make this worse. The outlook for patients who suffer complications 
after surgery is determined not by the presence of the complication, but by how 
quickly it is picked up and dealt with. This simply can’t happen when workloads 
are too high.

I look after one patient at a time. This ability to offer a premium level of 
care is one of the reasons I became an anaesthetist in the first place. On the 
wards each doctor will be responsible for up to 30 people a day, and even more 
at night. I can see with each heartbeat what the patient’s blood pressure is in 
the operating theatre; on the wards, it might only be checked once every four 
hours.

The speciality is a broad church, so there is room for all personality types. 
But given the precision involved there is perhaps a tendency to obsessive 
traits. I’ve worked with colleagues who have a 10-minute ritual for putting in 
an intravenous cannula that had to be completed in the correct sequence. Our 
postgraduate exams are renowned for being tricky but they are really a test of 
commitment. We’re experts in physiology, pharmacology, and physics; we have to 
know about everything from cellular respiration to how our drugs work, to the 
internal workings of a defibrillator.

NHS 'in perpetual winter of Narnia' as waiting list reaches record 3.9m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/08/nhs-perpetual-winter-waiting-list-record-bed-blocking>
Patients are usually nervous when they arrive in my anaesthetic room. It’s an 
exercise in trust to place your whole life in the hands of others. Every 
anaesthetist will have their spiel, some small talk to distract the patient 
from their imminent surgery. I ask them about family, talk about their 
favourite place to visit, what they do for a living. I modify my “going to 
sleep” talk depending on the small talk that’s gone before. If they love 
travelling, I’ll talk about a white sandy beach, with crystal clear waters, a 
gentle breeze. The more nervous they are, the longer they take to go to sleep. 
Many young, usually male, patients have commented as the drugs take effect that 
it feels just like a Saturday night. I’ve also been asked if I liked to have 
sex in a vest – I decided not to pursue what he meant by that when he woke up.

Every anaesthetist has a secret weapon when working in the operating theatre. 
We always work with an assistant, who might be a nurse or an operating 
department practitioner (ODP). The very best of them could do my job without 
thinking twice, but they choose even greater anonymity than the anaesthetist 
enjoys. Many a time I’ve had my bacon saved by an astute ODP. Some appear to 
have powers of extrasensory perception; I turn to ask for something and there 
it is in my hand.

I’ve also worked with many theatre colleagues with a wicked sense of humour. 
Before my first unsupervised operating shift, I confessed to the ODP that I’d 
never worked alone before. He paused and stuttered that neither had he, it was 
his first day at work, being newly qualified. I spent the entire day terrified 
that some disaster would befall us, and we wouldn’t be up to the challenge. At 
the end of the day he came clean – he’d been doing the job for 20 years.

Frustrations creep in to the job when the system fails. I often arrive at 
7.30am (30 minutes before my shift begins), so I can find space on the pre-op 
ward to see my patients in private, find out their history and take the time to 
address any concerns. It’s then immensely distressing when operations are 
cancelled due to lack of beds, or lack of notes, or the surgeon’s been double 
booked, or you are moved to another job at short notice. Anaesthesia can also 
become routine; it’s a far cry from the early days of the speciality when 
unpredictable drugs were used without monitoring. If the patient is fit, it’s 
rare for them to come to harm from a general anaesthetic.

The secret life of a truck driver: at the sharp end of what the EU means, I 
want out | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/05/secret-life-music-business-truck-driver-tom-jones-driving>
It is important to have other interests to distract from the stresses, strains 
and occasional boredom of the job. In my spare time I’m a volunteer doctor for 
the ambulance service. Being under a car in a ditch in the rain at 2am is very 
different from the bright lights of the operating theatre. Some of my 
colleagues are real polymaths. There are painters, musicians, novelists, as 
well as some quite serious sports people. The coffee room in the morning is the 
preserve of the middle-aged man in lycra. We see every day the damaging effects 
of too little aerobic fitness, so we’re staving off our own mortality.

The best bits? Reassuring nervous patients, rendering labouring women 
pain-free with the magic of epidural analgesia and, of course, merciless 
surgeon baiting. I’ll ask if they need me to Google instructions for the 
operation, or if they’ll be finished before new year. We say there’s a 
blood-brain barrier between the surgeon and the anaesthetist: they’re the 
blood, and we’re the brains.

• Are you a private tutor, a plumber or a mental health nurse? We want to hear 
your candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on 
submitting your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 