
A very rare thing is happening this week: hundreds of millions of people 
across the world are undertaking a massive economics experiment. True, hardly 
any of us think of it as such. Instead, we pledge to lose weight, give up the 
demon weed or just to get along with our mothers-in-law. But each of these New 
Year resolutions are exercises in attempting to change what we do – and as such 
are voyages deep into social science.

Your pledge to lead a healthier and happier life is terrain on which the 
economists have firmly planted their flag. The US professor and economics 
bloggerTyler Cowen 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/MRevUniversity/status/722523468319821825> claims: 
“Understanding economics can help you make better decisions and lead a happier 
life.” Wander into any bookshop and the economics section will be full of 
paperbacks promising to explain how and why single people choose to get 
married, send children to expensive private schools or deal drugs. Perhaps 
titles such as Freakonomics and the Undercover Economist can be accused of 
being pop. But consider the late Gary Becker, who received the Nobel prize for 
economics in 1992 for extending “the sphere of economic analysis to new areas 
of human behaviour and relations 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/1992/press.html>
”. His trademark was to look not at “the economy” but to train his microscope 
on matters of daily life – racial discrimination, child-rearing, even suicide.

Economists are often accused of treating humans as perfectly rational and 
far-seeing. That is a little unfair – but only a tad. As Michelle Baddeley, 
professor of economics at University College London, writesin her new book 
<https://global.oup.com/academic/product/behavioural-economics-a-very-short-introduction-9780198754992?cc=gb&lang=en&>
: “Most economists describe people as mathematical calculators – able easily 
and accurately to add up the money costs and benefits of their choices in 
pounds and pence, dollars and cents – and without worrying about what others 
around them are doing.” That can’t be said of Becker,who kicked off his Nobel 
lecture with these words 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/1992/becker-lecture.pdf>
: “I have tried to pry economists away from narrow assumptions about 
self-interest.”

Becker looked for the rationality that underlay phenomena such as racism: this 
was part of what made him such a controversial figure. But, however imaginative 
his approach, it is of only limited use in determining why we break our 
resolutions – or, put another way, why we don’t do what we know we should. 
Economists do study decision-making and indeed resolutions. Much of what they 
say is of great help in fighting January’s ground war of noble spirit versus 
weak flesh: announce your commitments, perhaps attach a financial incentive to 
observing them. But what economists are less good at is providing a convincing 
explanation of whythe majority of us break our resolutions 
<http://www.statisticbrain.com/new-years-resolution-statistics/> – why we fail. 
Those explanations are best provided by psychology and sociology – the award in 
2002 of the economics Nobel to psychologist Daniel Kahneman for his (together 
with Amos Tversky) seminal work on “human judgment and decision-making under 
uncertainty” is an implicit acceptance of the limits of economics. There’s 
nothing necessarily wrong with that. Mainstream economics struggles to 
integrate behavioural insights into its models. The gulf may be too big – and 
it is best to stop trying to bridge it but instead acknowledge the limits of 
economics.

In his General Theory, John Maynard Keynes often delves into psychology: the 
“beauty contest” of investment, the “animal spirits” needed for 
entrepreneurialism. These and other subjects he left as areas of “uncertainty” 
rather than attempting what today’s bankers would do and quantify them as 
risks. This is a more limited economics, but also a more honest form. Almost a 
decade after a crash that so few of them foresaw, economists would do better to 
own up to what they don’t know rather than chucking in their tuppen’oth into 
subjects outside their ken. So when, as seems statistically likely, you break 
your January resolution, take this crumb of comfort: you and millions of others 
have proved again the need for a more modest economics.
 