
Today marks five years since I was ordered into military confinement while 
deployed toIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> in 2010. I find it 
difficult to believe, at times, just how long I have been in prison. Throughout 
this time, there have been so many ups and downs – it often feels like a 
physical and emotional roller coaster.

It all began in the first few weeks of 2010, when I made the life-changing 
decision to release to the public a repository of classified (and unclassified 
but “sensitive” ) documents that provided a simultaneously horrific and 
beautiful outlook on the war in Iraq and Afghanistan. After spending months 
preparing to deploy toAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> in 2008, switching to Iraq in 
2009 and actually staying in Iraq from 2009-10, I quickly and fully recognized 
the importance of these documents to the world at large.

Chelsea Manning reveals threats of 'disappearing' at Guantánamo Bay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/27/chelsea-manning-threats-disappearing-guantanamo>
I felt that the Iraq and Afghanistan “war diaries” (as they have been dubbed 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/07/25/wikileaks-afghan-war-diary_n_658743.html>
) were vital to the public’s understanding of the two interconnected 
counter-insurgency conflicts from a real-time and on-the-ground perspective. In 
the years before these documents were collected, the public likely never had 
such a complete record of the chaotic nature of modern warfare. Once you come 
to realize that the co-ordinates in these records represent real places, that 
the dates are our recent history and that the numbers represent actual human 
lives – with all of the love, hope, dreams, hate, fear and nightmares with 
which we all live – then you cannot help but be reminded just how important it 
is for us to understand and, hopefully, prevent such tragedies in the future.


A few months later, after spending months poring over at least a few thousand 
classified US diplomatic cables, I moved to also have these documents released 
to the public in the “cablegate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-us-embassy-cables>” archive. After 
reading so many of these documents – detailing an exhaustive list of public 
interest issues, from the conduct of the “global war on terrorism” to the 
deliberate diplomatic and economic exploitation of developing countries – I 
felt that they, too, belonged in the public domain.

In 2010, I was considerably less mature than I am now, and the potential 
consequences and outcomes of my actions seemed vague and very surreal to me. I 
certainly expected the worst possible outcome, but I lacked a strong sense of 
what “the worst” would entail. I did expect to be demonized and targeted, to 
have every moment of my life re-examined and analyzed for every possible 
personal flaw and blemish, and to have them used against me in the court of 
public opinion or against transgender people as a whole.

When the military ordered me into confinement, I was escorted (by two of the 
friendliest guys in my unit) to Kuwait, first by helicopter to Baghdad and 
finally by cargo plane. It was not until I arrived at the prison camp in Kuwait 
that I actually felt like I was a prisoner. Over the succeeding days, it only 
got worse as the public and the media began to seek and learn more about what 
happened to me. After living in a communal setting for about a week, I was 
transferred to what amounted to a “cage” in a large tent.

After a few weeks of living in the cage and tent – not knowing what my charges 
were, having very limited access to my attorney and having absolutely no idea 
of the media firestorm that was beginning to swirl in the world outside – I 
became extremely depressed. I was terrified that I was not going to be treated 
in the dignified way that I had expected. I also began to fear that I was 
forever going to be living in a hot, desert cage, living as and being treated 
as a male, disappearing from the world into a secret prison and never facing a 
public trial.

It didn’t help that a few of the Navy guards delivering meals would tell me 
that I was was waiting for interrogation on a brig on a US cruiser off the 
coast of the horn of Africa, or being sent to the prison camps of Guantánamo 
Bay, Cuba. At the very lowest point, I contemplated castrating myself, and even 
– in what seemed a pointless and tragicomic exercise, given the physical 
impossibility of having nothing stable to hang from – contemplated suicide with 
a tattered blanket, which I tried to choke myself with. After getting caught, I 
was placed on suicide watch in Kuwait.

After being transferred back to the US, I was confined at the now-closed 
military brig at the Marine Corps base in Quantico, Virginia. This time was the 
most difficult for me overall, and felt like the longest. I was not allowed to 
have any items in my cell – no toothbrushes, soap, toilet paper, books, paper 
and on a few occasions even my glasses – unless I was given permission to use 
them under close supervision. When I was finished, I had to return these items. 
At night, I had to surrender my clothing and, despite recommendations by 
several psychiatrists that I was not deemed suicidal), wear a “suicide 
prevention” smock – a single-piece, padded, tear-proof garment.

Eventually, after public outcry regarding the conditions of my confinement at 
Quantico andthe resignation of PJ Crowley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/13/pj-crowley-resigns-bradley-manning-remarks>
, the former press secretary of the Department of State, I was transferred to 
medium custody and the general population at an Army prison. It was a high 
point in my incarcerated life: after nearly a year of constantly being watched 
by guards with clipboards and having my movements controlled by groups of 
three-to-six guards while in hand irons and chains and limited contact with 
other humans, I was finally able to walk around and have normal conversations 
with human beings again.

The government pressed forward with charges of “aiding the enemy” – a 
treasonable offense under the US constitution – and various charges under the 
Espionage Act of 1917 and the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. Over nearly two 
years of hearings, I witnessed firsthand just how much the the government was 
willing to invest in my prosecution: the stacks of money spent; the gallons of 
fuel burned; the reams of paper printed; and the lengthy rolls of personnel, 
lawyers and experts.

For over 100 days, I watched the lawyers who prosecuted my case present me as 
a “traitor” and “enemy of state” in court and then become friendly people 
giving greetings and making chit-chat out of court. It became clear to me that 
they were basically just decent people doing their jobs. I am convinced that 
they did not believe the treason arguments they made against me – and was, even 
as they spoke them.

The verdict and sentencing at the end of my court-martial was difficult to 
predict. The defense team seriously worried about the aiding the enemy charge 
and the very wide range for a sentence, which was anything between “time 
served” and life without parole. After the judge announced my 35-year sentence, 
I had to console my attorneys who, after years of hard work and effort, looked 
worn out and dejected. It was a low-point for all of us.

After years of hiding and holding off because of the trial, I finally 
announced my intent to change my name and transition to living as woman on 22 
August 2013 – the day following my sentencing – a personal high point for me, 
despite my other circumstances. However, the military initially declined my 
request to receive the medically-mandated treatment for my diagnosed gender 
dysphoria, which is to live as a woman and receiving a regular regiment of 
estrogen and androgen blockers. Just like during my time at Quantico and during 
my court-martial, I was subjected to a laborious and time consuming legal 
process. Finally, just under four months ago – but nearly a year and a half 
after my initial request – I began my hormone treatment. I am still fighting 
for the right to grow out my hair to the military’s standard for women, but 
being able to transition remains one of the highest points for me in my entire 
life.

It can be hard, sometimes, to make sense of all the things that have happened 
to me in the last five years (let alone my entire life). The things that seem 
consistent and clear to me are the support that I receive from my friends, my 
family and the millions of people all over the world. Through every struggle 
that I have been confronted with, and have been subjected to – solitary 
confinement, long legal battles and physically transitioning to the woman I 
have always been – I manage not only to survive, but to grow, learn, mature and 
thrive as a better, more confident person.

 