
You wouldn’t believe some of the stuff customers complain about. I’ve been 
sworn at because the prices are up 10p from last week. The buns are burnt, the 
fries are cold, the chicken is greasy, and they can’t find the bacon on their 
burger. In the six years I’ve worked for thisfast-food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fast-food> chain, I’m pretty sure 
I’ve heard and seen almost everything. I’ve pulled important documents out of 
bin bags, found porn magazines in the toilets, and witnessed numerous food 
fights involving pickles and onions.

The secret life of a Eurocrat: ‘I feel trapped in a gilded cage’ | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/23/secret-life-eurocrat-gilded-cage-eu-uk-stay>
I initially applied to work here because I was 16 and needed to fund my mobile 
phone credit habit. What started out as a Saturday job has continued as 
part-time work as I complete my degree. Much the same as for others my age, 
affording a student lifestyle is difficult, and I couldn’t survive without the 
money I make serving up snacks.

My expectations of the job were about the same as the reality. It’s a 
repetitive existence, and this is the biggest downside. Constantly serving up 
the same meal over and over again while wearing an ill-fitting uniform is 
tedious. But there are a lot of perks and not just the ones that you’d think. 
Yes, I get free food on my break and a significant discount when off the clock, 
but my company also organises group events such as bowling and paintballing so 
we can let off some steam. There are also opportunities for training, 
apprenticeships and even extra GCSEs, so you can climb the ladder if you wish.

Speaking of the food, everyone assumes I’d be sick of it by now. But to me all 
food is delicious, no matter how many times I’ve eaten it before, and there’s 
enough variety on our menu to allow different choices every day. Unfortunately, 
I have put on weight since I started. Let’s face it: if you eat fried food 
every day, you’re going to pile on the pounds. It’s amazing how quickly I got 
used to everything being greasy: it just feels natural now, as horrible as it 
sounds.

The war against processed food has spawned a barrage of claims on our 
production chain. But if it’s so disgusting and unhealthy, why do people keep 
coming back for more? Because it tastes good? Yes, but also because there is a 
guilty pleasure in convenience. The legal ramifications of lying about food are 
monstrous, but it doesn’t stop our critics from claiming that we’re lying about 
our practices to the unsuspecting public.

I’m on a zero-hours contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/zero-hours-contracts> but if I ever need 
an extra shift I can ask the scheduling manager and they’re more than willing. 
Plus theliving wage has come in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/the-national-living-wage-and-what-it-means>
, and although I’m not yet 25, in the future I will be set to gain a sizeable 
rise from the legislation, if I’m still here.

The way my hours swing sometimes does a number on my sleeping patterns: I go 
from working until midnight on Friday to starting at 7am on Sunday, and doing 
this five times a week during the summer holidays gets tedious, not to mention 
the ache your legs develop after nine hours on your feet.

The secret life of a professional poker player: I’m on the fringes of society 
| Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/secret-life-poker-player>
An average shift consists of moving stations two or three times, from till to 
kitchen to dining area; cleaning equipment, emptying the bins more times than 
I’d care to count, and – worst of all – dealing with difficult customers. But 
there is always someone to chat to through the menial jobs and a great sense of 
camaraderie, which makes the work feel a lot less pointless. Many of us find it 
difficult to be away from our mobiles, and resort to hiding them on our person 
to check on the sly, which the managers hate.

I think all fast-food workers would agree that the worst part of the job is 
arrogant customers. Customers who think they know exactly how to do your job, 
or blame you for something you might have had nothing to do with, or lose their 
temper over getting the wrong drink with their order. Our complaints policy is 
pretty forgiving, and we always try our hardest to make customers feel as 
though they’ve been compensated, but some people just can’t be pleased.

After six years, I can let the bad customers slide off my back most of the 
time, although there is the odd one who really gets under my skin. These tend 
to be lads who think they know it all and can engage you in hurtful banter 
that’s really just insulting your looks or your character to make themselves 
feel better.

The best part of my job is the nice customers. People who pop in at the same 
time every morning to grab breakfast on the way to work or late at night on 
their way home. There is a sense of community between the regulars, as odd as 
it might sound. I’ve seen customers make friends and support one another 
through hard times: sickness, bereavement, mental illness. And what brought 
them together was popping into our cafe to get a cup of coffee.

It’s not the most glamorous job in the world, but somebody’s got to do it. And 
really, I’m proud that I have worked so long in a job that many couldn’t stick 
a few months in. In fact, I believeeveryone should work in fast food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/28/life-waiter-waitress-zizzis-tips>
 for at least a short time. I have learned so many life lessons about how to 
deal with people and how to be positive in the face of extreme negativity. 
Working in fast food can definitely help you to get out of a pickle.

• Are you a prison warden, a bra fitter, a baker? We want to hear your candid 
accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your 
story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 