
The entertainment industry is a difficult place in which to carve out a 
career, and attempting to navigate this patriarchal, charlatan-filled landscape 
is all the more trying as a young female. I am a successful DJ, play all over 
the world and have won various awards for my work. I love what I do. But I 
loathe the music business.

Dance music <https://www.theguardian.com/music/dance-music> for the most part 
is a boys’ club: tech geeks pressing buttons in darkened rooms, or ultra-macho 
pseudo rock stars strutting their stuff, accessorised by half-naked podium 
dancers. As such it is an unregulated, unadulterated hub of misogyny. Of course 
a few token women break through but you only need to look at a festival or club 
lineup to see how infrequently it happens.

I am relatively well-known and have worked in the business for almost a 
decade, filling clubs, doing the festival circuit and touring with some of the 
biggest names on the scene. And yet I have experienced repeated incidents of 
chauvinism and condescension, especially when trying to discuss my fees and 
terms with those behind the scenes. It’s a dog-eat-dog industry and although 
there is a veneer of camaraderie, it is merely that. If you don’t fit into the 
lads’ gang, life is much more difficult. And there’s no such sorority among 
female DJs.

Where are all the female DJs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/19/female-djs-annie-mac-eclair-fifi>
You may ask why I continue to work in a field in which I find the conditions 
so unpleasant. Simply because nothing compares to the buzz of mixing tracks, 
bouncing around on stage for hours on end, and the energy and oneness I feel 
with the crowd. Engaging with thousands of strangers who are “having moments”, 
transcending social barriers, and making memories through the joy of music is 
my high. Of course I enjoy the afterparties too, but I don’t involve myself in 
any negative aspects of the scene. Drugs are out there and young people are 
prone to experiment but they’re not as prominent as they once were.

I eat, sleep and breathe my career. I follow a strict regime of running, 
resistance training and yoga to ensure that I am performance-fit and have the 
stamina to keep up with a young and energetic crowd. The late nights and 
travelling take their toll but I can always catch up with sleep on my time off.

I don’t have children yet and certainly have no plans to in the near future; I 
don’t think kids would exactly fit my lifestyle. In a competitive industry you 
are often forced to make sacrifices. Usually it’s friendships and relationships 
that suffer, although thankfully most of my social circle is understanding and 
supportive. I’ve missed quite a few weddings and birthdays due to work 
commitments but I always try to make it up to people. Fortunately I have a 
partner who works in the industry too so we know how to deal with each other’s 
hectic schedules.

Sexism on repeat: how the music industry can break the cycle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/11/music-industry-sexism-kesha-dr-luke-miles-kane>
There has been a huge upheaval over the last few years, in which many serious 
female DJs have been displaced. It used to be your sound rather than your looks 
that mattered. Now as well as battling institutionalised misogyny, the few of 
us that do exist have to contend with a gross sexualisation of the job.

There is now an array of glamour models flooding the market as “DJs”. As a 
result of technological advances, such as the use of laptops and USBs, many of 
these pseudo-DJs don’t need to know anything about music or mixingin order to 
get a gig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jun/26/paris-hilton-dj-nowhere-hide>
. They can turn up and press a button on a prerecorded mix that will play for 
them all night – the disc jockey equivalent ofMilli Vanilli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/feb/16/musicnews.film>. This 
devaluation of genuine skill, and the sexualisation of a career that people 
like me pursue due to a passion for music rather than posing, is seriously 
depressing and has led to some awkward encounters.

At the beginning of my career, my technical ability was often called into 
question but after many years in the business and a proven track record, it 
would now be difficult for anyone to contest my skill. I started out on vinyl 
and was a total purist before moving to CDs, which I’ve stayed with ever since. 
It often costs a small fortune in extra baggage charges to bring my CD wallets, 
but at least they are lighter than lugging around my vinyl collection.

I hope not to dissuade any wide-eyed young hopefuls about venturing into a 
career in entertainment, but rather forewarn them. For all the negative aspects 
of working in the industry there are a multitude of perks. Aside from the fact 
that you are doing something you truly love, there is the travel, the five-star 
hotels and the excitement of meeting your musical heroes. It is rarely boring, 
but you do need a seriously thick skin to survive.

The secret life of an engineer: Blights on the landscape make my eyes light up 
| Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/25/secret-life-industrial-engineer-britain-industry>
In fact, due to the barrage of misogynistic nonsense and less than 
preferential treatment, I recently constructed an alter ego for all my business 
dealings. Prior to this, my own negotiation attempts were perceived as “bossy” 
and I have been referred to as a “diva”, both behind my back and to my face.

So I conjured up a representative in the shape of “Dave”. Since the creation 
of Dave I’ve more than doubled my fee and have significantly bettered my terms 
and conditions of work. Dave is a blokey, white, middle-aged man who speaks in 
a way I should be able to but the industry makes impossible. Dave has become 
renowned among my peers and associates as a wonderful manager. After seeing my 
success, some fellow artists have even approached me to ask if I could put in a 
word for them, in the hope that he might represent them too.

As much as I would love to reveal to the world that I am the orchestrator of 
my own success, I think I will have to wait, either until I am retiring from 
music or there is a radical feminist revolution. But my contemporaries should 
keep in mind the age old adage: behind every great man is a great woman.

• Are you a carpenter, an oncologist or an estate agent? We want to hear your 
candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting 
your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 