
There is no humour quite like that found in a social work office. It is dark, 
inappropriate, and completely necessary in order to survive the grind. Our desk 
is awash with sugar, caffeine and good intentions. The long hours and 
fluctuating stress levels are a nightmare for eating regularly, and many people 
coast along on a diet of biscuits, fizzy drinks and an endless round of 
birthday cakes. It helps though after yet another urgent call-out, on top of a 
court appearance you didn’t expect that day, to know you can eat something from 
the filing cabinet and then decide conspiratorially with your workmates whether 
you’ll bother logging it on whatever weight management app is doing the rounds.

I couldn't last as a social worker but the children will haunt me forever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/dec/07/social-worker-children-haunt-acute-stress>
It is wise not to drink on a school night because you never know what the next 
morning will bring. On a typical day, this can involve an unannounced home 
visit to see if a violent ex-partner has moved back in, followed by a meeting 
to decide the next steps in supporting parents whose eight-year-old still isn’t 
in school. The afternoon could be spent working out what to do about a young 
client who has cancelled a meeting, presumably so they can see the person you 
fear is taking advantage of them, before driving across the city in rush-hour 
traffic to meet some prospective adopters and see if they might be the right 
match for a one-year-old who cant be rehabilitated home.

I chose social work because I wanted to do a job that meant I didn’t just 
skate on the surface of life. I had a good start myself with loving attentive 
parents, and I realised that my own strong foundation was the reason I could 
generally deal with life in all its seasons. Our families – because all social 
workers feel they are “ours” – often start out with no foundation to speak of, 
and it’s a race to fill the gaps somehow, with professionals, services, other 
family members and friends all trying to repair, bail water and pull together 
to keep them afloat.

When people find out what I do, they invariably respond by saying, “Oh, I 
couldn’t do that,” followed by a slightly longer than comfortable pause, and 
then a quick consolatory “but it must be very rewarding”. I have to admit to 
not conceding that last point very often because it’s said with such 
well-meaning hope. I just can’t bear to explain what rewarding actually means 
as a social worker. We don’t get to shout about the success stories, we have no 
right to broadcast those. Rewarding is a family doing OK, that’s it, and that 
is no one’s business but theirs.

The fear of missing something dogs you, day in and day out. It is the voice in 
your head at 3am

Social work <https://www.theguardian.com/education/socialwork> is all about 
relationships – and your skill in navigating these will make or break your 
career. You have to get used to being let down by people, and to letting people 
down yourself, because it’s impossible to meet everyone’s needs. It’s like 
having multiple browser screens open constantly, day and night. Even when you 
do go home and attempt to shut off, you know that the children on your caseload 
keep living their reality, however horrendous, and that it can all fall apart 
at any time.

I’ve sat on excrement a fair few times. It’s never easy to point out to 
someone that their dog has left a deposit on the sofa, but all you can hope for 
is that they recognise why that it is not OK. But my lowest moment was probably 
breaking the news to a child that their mum had been caught shoplifting again, 
so they wouldn’t be going home with her as she had promised. High points tend 
to be when young people come out of their shell over time, eventually talking 
about what is going on in their lives; or the occasional epiphany when a parent 
realises what they can do to change.

When I first started out it was normal to help those who required a lower 
level of support, such as families needing help sorting out their finances and 
getting hold of basics like beds for their homes, but now it’s as if these 
cases have vanished. Of course, the families and the need are still there, but 
there’s no room to help them on our caseload, so they are left to other 
overstretched services whose budgets are being slashed. Colleagues who have 
been around longer than me say that this is the worst they’ve known it to be in 
terms of poverty. How can we expect people to start addressing behavioural 
issues when they can’t feed their kids or put shoes on their feet?

Drug-using parents are the cases I dread the most. Trying to help people in 
the grip of addiction while simultaneously assessing what the impact on their 
children may be is heartbreaking. When a child answers the door and you go 
inside and see in their parents’ eyes that they are using again, your heart 
sinks. We have lots of tools to try to help children come to terms with their 
parents’ addiction, but nothing can heal the sense of rejection when drugs are 
put first, drugs take all the money, drugs get all the love.

The decision to take a child away from their parents is made between social 
workers, their managers, in some areas a panel, and then ultimately a judge. It 
is simultaneously the worst decision you ever have to be a part of and one of 
the most rigorously considered. If a child needs to be removed in urgent 
circumstances, everything else stops until that child is safe. It can 
ultimately be a relief that they are out of harm’s way, but when we know that 
moving a child itself causes damage it is a very difficult decision.

Social workers, please learn from my experience in care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/aug/03/social-workers-learn-from-experience-care>
The fear of missing something dogs you, day in and day out. It is the voice in 
your head at 3am, the thought that distracts you from your own children’s 
bath-time, the thing that rises up on a Friday evening when the weekend looms 
long yet you can’t help but wonder how that child is, what they are enduring 
away from the safety and observation of school.

My biggest regret is always when I move jobs and have to leave people behind. 
There is never a good time to leave a case and put them in a position of having 
to start from scratch with yet another social worker. But we are humans too, 
and sometimes have to move on.

• Are you a jobcentre worker, a chef or a panto actor? We want to hear your 
candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting 
your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 