
Adrian Bussone’s research focuses on how people living with HIV can 
self-manage their health using technology. Here’s what her day looks like:

I start my day...

At 6.30am. As a PhD student I can choose my own hours, but I find that I work 
better in the morning. I get up, take a shower and listen to a podcast while I 
get ready. I really like Reply All – it’s an entertaining tech podcast.

On my way to work, I stop at the Exeter Bakery for my morning coffee and then 
catch the bus to the University, arriving at around 8am.

My PhD is focused on… 

People living with chronic diseases, how they monitor personal health data and 
use it to manage their health. HIV is a complex disease and there’s a lot to 
keep track of. My PhD explores what information people monitor in order to live 
long, healthy lives, how they record it and ways for technology to make this 
easier.

My working day…

Is spent trying to find the answers to my research questions. Typical tasks 
include running studies and then writing up the results for conference 
publication. I’ve just finished a study where I interviewed people living with 
HIV to find out what types of information they need to keep track of. I’ll then 
analyse the data to find trends and start to work out what can be done to 
support them.

I spend a lot of time reading academic papers to see what other people have 
done, to find opportunities for further research and work out how I can add to 
the existing knowledge. My aim is to make an impact in industry – not just come 
up with theory but to do something that will help people and benefit their 
lives.

Alongside my research, I also do some teaching. I take tutorials and seminars 
for Masters students and help out with the marking of undergraduate work.

My hours are flexible. Sometimes I’ll be at work for ten hours, sometimes I’ll 
leave at 2 or 3pm. A PhD means I’m in complete control of what I do and when.

Why I decided to do a PhD…

I actually started out at art school and have a bachelors degree in fine arts. 
I went on to work for a company designing medical devices, which is where I 
realised my love of research, and working in a health-related field. I found 
out about some of the courses City offers, and applied to do a Masters here.

After I had completed my Masters I just wanted to learn more so I applied for 
a studentship and was delighted when I was accepted. It means I have funding 
for three years to work on my PhD.

How I chose my research topic… 

I’m interested in health and how people stay healthy. I read as much as I 
could on that topic and tried to find something that hadn’t been done yet. I 
realised no one in the field of Human Computer Interaction had really looked 
into HIV so there was an opportunity for my research to be able to help people.

After narrowing down a topic area I started doing small studies to identify 
the problem. From early results I was able to create new studies and narrow the 
realm of research down until it became really specific.

The people I work with… 

Are a really strong community. We’re all working on different projects, but we 
socialise together and chat about our work. It’s a really cool working 
environment – you end up learning a bit about everyone else’s subjects too. The 
person who sits opposite me is studying trust and reviews and one of the team 
is looking into how you can use scent to send subliminal messages.

After work

Sometimes we’ll all go to the pub for a drink together. Other days I’ll go 
home to relax. I like turning my brain off with a TV show or fiction book. I 
recently finished Catch 22, which I loved. I still do random art projects now 
and then, a painting, a drawing or some cross-stitch.

City University London offers a wide range of postgraduate courses designed to 
take skilled students into a diverse range of careers. Adrian studied theMSc 
Human-Computer Interaction Design 
<http://www.city.ac.uk/courses/postgraduate/human-computer-interaction-design> 
at City, University of London which also houses theCentre for Human-Interaction 
Design <http://www.city.ac.uk/centre-for-human-computer-interaction-design>, a 
leading research centre in the UK.

 