
We are fixing the roof while the sun is shining. It’s a soundbite that has 
servedGeorge Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> well 
down the years and he’s still using it as the rationale for the government’s 
deficit reduction plan. The chancellor says he is taking advantage of the good 
times, putting the public finances in the sort of shape that would make the UK 
more resilient to recession than it was back in 2008.

This proved to be a powerful message during the election campaign because 
Labour’s lack of economic credibility with voters stemmed from the idea that 
Gordon Brown spent and borrowed too much, leaving the economy vulnerable when 
the financial crisis broke.

The reality is that Britain would have suffered a stonking downturn in 2008 
whatever the state of the public finances. The sheer size of the City in 
relation to the rest of the economy meant Britain was going to feel the full 
effects of the financial meltdown. A more valid criticism of the last Labour 
government was that at the end of a long upturn that started under the previous 
Major administration the economy was so unbalanced and heavily reliant on an 
unsustainable build up of private debt.

It is worth recalling that when Osborne became chancellor five and a half 
years ago that he had two big objectives. The first was to repair the hole in 
the public finances, which is still very much a work in progress. The other was 
to shift the centre of gravity of the economy back towards making things for 
export. This remains a pipedream.


Hang on a bit, Osborne and his supporters would say – the economy is growing. 
Britain makes more cars than it ever did, and the plants making them are some 
of the most productive in the world. Business investment is growing. Exports 
are bound to take time to pick up given the travails of the eurozone.

All the above is true, but provides only a partial picture. The latest growth 
figures showed that the economyexpanded by 0.5% in the third quarter, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/27/uk-gdp-growth-slows-george-osborne>
 but both manufacturing and construction contracted. Net trade – imports 
growing faster than exports – subtracted a record 1.5 percentage points from 
growth between July and September.

Despite the welcome pickup in business investment, the main driver of growth 
has been consumer spending, which has been boosted by low interest rates, the 
fall in inflation caused by lower oil prices, and a modest acceleration in 
earnings. The consultancy CapitalEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> notes that this is “not the 
ideal shape for the recovery” and it can say that again. The current recovery 
looks like all the previous recoveries.


Again, the chancellor would have an answer. Household debt is lower than it 
was back in 2008 and shows no sign of getting out of control. The Bank of 
England has been given new powers to monitor the financial system to make sure 
bubbles don’t appear.The independent Office for Budget Responsibility is 
forecasting steady non-inflationary growth 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/economic-fiscal-outlook-november-2015/> 
until the end of the decade. Concerns about the shape of the recovery simply 
reflect the gloomy disposition of economists and economic commentators.

The history of the past 40 years suggests that the Cassandras of the dismal 
science have been right to issue their warnings. What have often looked like 
solid and sustainable periods of growth have, with startling rapidity, turned 
into raging booms. That was true of the mid-1980s and the mid-2000s when the 
line from first Nigel Lawson and then Gordon Brown was that everything was 
under control.

There is, of course, always the chance it will be different this time. It is 
possible, if not entirely plausible, that a new golden age of manufacturing is 
about to dawn and that the UK’s current account is about to go into the black 
after 33 consecutive years in the red. But it would be unwise to bank on it.

Indeed, as a fascinating new paper from the Centre for Business Research in 
Cambridge <http://www.cbr.cam.ac.uk/publications/special-reports/> shows, it 
would only require relatively minor deviations from the OBR forecasts for the 
UK economy to be in serious trouble early in the next decade.
 The ratio of house prices to UK disposable household income. Photograph: CBR 
The argument goes as follows. Recent rapid jobs growth will come to an end due 
to a combination of rising wages, higher interest rates and public sector cuts. 
Real government spending will be reduced by higher than expected inflation. 
Businesses will be put off investing due to a lack of effective demand. Trade 
will continue to be a drag on growth.

All this has three consequences. The first is that growth is lower than the 
OBR is forecasting, making it impossible for the chancellor to complete his 
repair job on the public finances. Instead of a small surplus by the end of the 
parliament, there is a deficit of 2% of GDP.

The second is that there is a growing gap between the UK’s actual level of 
output and the level that would have been achieved had the pre-recession trend 
continued. The third is that the only thing that prevents the economy from 
diving back into recession in 2018 and 2019 is the high level of household 
borrowing.
 Household debt to UK disposable income ratio. Photograph: CBR 
As per usual, in other words, there will be a choice between extremely low 
growth and debt-fuelled growth. In the Lawson boom of the 1980s, the ratio of 
house prices to disposable income per head peaked at 12; in the Brown boom it 
peaked at 14. The CBR forecasts it hitting 17 by 2020, a third above where it 
was before the crisis and double its level in 1996, when house prices troughed 
at the end of the property crash that followed the Lawson boom.

The paper argues that two alternatives would be reflation at either the global 
or the domestic level, with governments borrowing for investment. Neither 
option looks likely since they would require governments to tolerate higher 
levels of debt and inflation. There has been no real global economic 
cooperation since 2010 and the prospect of the UK “going it alone” is remote in 
the extreme.


“There is a dilemma for UK macroeconomic policy,” the CBR paper notes. 
“Fast-rising household debt is needed to maintain a reasonable rate of growth 
in consumers’ spending and GDP in a world of government debt reduction and in a 
context of slow growth in world trade, itself caused by debt-reduction policies 
especially within the eurozone. The problem is that financial ratios and house 
prices eventually become stretched well beyond historic experience and probably 
beyond sustainability.”

No “probably” about it. If the economy pans out in accordance with the CBR 
forecasts, there will be a colossal housing crash that will rip through the 
banks and threaten a repeat of 2008.John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, says 
he is sick of hearing Osborne 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/economy/2015/11/john-mcdonnell-interview-we-re-going-destroy-osborne-s-credibility>
 say the roof is being fixed while the sun is shining. There is an obvious 
riposte. Know any other good gags, chancellor?

 