
Tickets for the best seats at the hotly anticipated US hit musical Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> will cost £200 each when it opens 
in London later this year, reigniting a debate about West End theatre ticket 
prices.


The producers of the London staging of the Pulitzer prize-winning show, which 
will begin previews at the the Victoria PalaceTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in November, have revealed details 
of ticket prices. Perhaps inevitably, the eyes of many theatregoers were drawn 
to the cost of the “premium” seats, which will initially be £127.50 and £190, 
rising to £137.50 and £200 apiece from 7 December.


This is not an all-time high for West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend> theatre ticket prices: in 2015, 
premium seats to see The Book of Mormon were being officially sold for £202.25 
each, while another show that year, Elf, had a top ticket price of £240.


Nevertheless, some theatre fans have taken to message boards to complain. On 
the TheatreBoard website, Theatrelover wrote: “£200 for a premium ticket?!? 
They obviously think the demand will be good, I would NEVER pay £200 for a 
show!”


Meanwhile, stuartmcd said: “The premium tickets are definitely expensive, 
however, they know that people will pay that money. The rest of the ticket 
pricing is pretty normal and isn’t really much different to other big West End 
shows.”

The show’s London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> producer, Cameron 
Mackintosh, said he wanted to “protect patrons from paying highly inflated 
prices” and give the widest possible audience the chance to see Lin-Manuel 
Miranda’s hip-hop musical, which has won 11 Tony awards. To that end, he said, 
he had designated 295 seats per performance to be priced at £37.50 or less, 
with the public also having the opportunity to buy a limited number of tickets 
on the day or a week in advance via separate lotteries for £20 and £37.50 each 
respectively.


He said: “Excluding premium tickets, our top-price theatre ticket will be an 
all-inclusive £89.50. No additional charges will be permitted.”


In 2004, London’s most expensive theatre ticket, for The Producers, cost £49, 
which means top prices have quadrupled in little more than a decade.


Top-price premium tickets for the two-part Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, 
which opened in London last July, are £99.50 per part.


Nevertheless, on Broadway, where Hamilton is still running, such is the demand 
for tickets that the best seats have been selling for $849 (£700) each – so 
some New Yorkers may feel it is more economical to fly to London to see the 
show.


Mackintosh said he was determined to combat the “unauthorised profiteering” of 
third-party resellers and ticket touts, so was pioneering a paperless ticket 
system for Hamilton. No physical tickets will be issued in advance. Instead, on 
arrival at the theatre on the day of the performance, people will be asked to 
swipe their payment card to gain admission.


Priority booking for the West End production opens on 16 January, while 
general booking begins on 30 January. The first performance will be on 21 
November.

 