
Theresa May has been accused of “raiding the budgets” set aside by local 
authorities to help disadvantaged children in order to fund the government’s 
manifesto pledge to double the amount of free childcare for working families.

Local authorities currently receive government funds for 15 hours of free 
childcare for three- and four-year-olds. This will increase to 30 hours from 
next September.

Under the present system, local authorities have been able to pay extra cash 
to schools with nurseries from that budget because they employ qualified 
teachers and are disproportionately used by poorer families. They have also 
been able to set aside extra funds to ensure children from the most 
disadvantaged families get more than 15 free hours.

However, local authorities will now no longer be able to offer additional 
funding above a set hourly rate per child, it is claimed. Instead, there will 
be a requirement to pass on 95% of centrally provided funds directly to 
childcare providers. Those affected by the new policy will include 17 local 
authorities that now offer some of their families extra hours, including 
Wandsworth, Redcar, Surrey and Nottingham.

The new offer of 30 hours of free childcare, which was part of the 
Conservative manifesto at the general election, is available only to working 
families, so any child from an unemployed family currently getting more than 15 
hours will lose that extra support. About 80% of three-year-olds from the most 
disadvantaged areas currently attend childcare with a qualified teacher or 
early years professional.

By preventing local authorities from paying “quality supplements” it is likely 
that schools will either need to reallocate funds from the main school budget 
or relegate the status of their school nursery.

Dr Kitty Stewart, associate professor of social policy at the London School of 
Economics, said the policy threatened to move cash away from disadvantaged 
children to pay for the childcare costs of better-off families. “The 
significance of these restrictions cannot be overstated,” she said. “I think 
it’s that they are desperately trying to deliver the 30 hours of free childcare 
pledge. They need more money, otherwise they can’t provide it, and are having 
to raid the budgets that are currently going to non-working families or those 
who are disadvantaged.”

Lucy PowellMP, chairwoman of the all-party group on nursery schools and 
nursery classes, said: “Investing in early years is not just about childcare 
for working parents, important as that is. It’s also critical to closing the 
education inequality gap that can already be very wide before children arrive 
at school.” A DfE spokesman said councils could still offer additional cash to 
child care providers from their wider budget. He said extra support for 
disadvantaged families was provided through universal credit and the pupil 
premium.
 