
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has indicated 
that she expects the Conservative manifesto to include a target to cut net 
migration, despite the concerns of senior colleagues and the failure to meet 
the goal of reducing it to “tens of thousands” in the current parliament.


Her comments came after figures showed net migration increased to 298,000 in 
the year to September and former cabinet minister Ken Clarke called for the 
policy to be scrapped as it would be impossible to reach the target without 
damaging the economy.

MPs call for end to indefinite detention of migrants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/03/mps-call-end-indefinite-detention-migrants>
But the home secretary insisted that in the general election manifesto “the 
idea of the net migration target will still be there”, and stressed the 
importance of the issue for ministers across Whitehall.

“I think we will keep the target,” she told the Times.

“It is important because it is about not just dealing with those coming into 
the system but also about making sure that those people who shouldn’t live here 
actually leave.

 Signalling the need for a cross-government effort she said: “Obviously the 
Home Office is responsible for UK visas and immigration, the Border Force and 
immigration enforcement but actually immigration is an issue that touches 
across government departments and has a whole number of different aspects.

“It affects issues around jobs, questions of illegal working, access to 
housing, education, the NHS. It touches all government departments and I think 
that’s the thing that’s important.”

May also indicated she had faced a battle with officials to get them to accept 
that immigration could cause problems.

“There was a problem with the orthodoxy in Whitehall when we came into 
government in 2010,” she said. “It was the idea that immigration by definition 
was good – in that automatically if you’ve got more people, GDP goes up. Of 
course, GDP per head doesn’t necessarily go up – so they didn’t look beyond 
that point.”

Former home secretary Clarke has suggested globalisation had made the 
immigration target impossible to meet, while Lady Warsi, an ex-Tory party 
chairwoman, said it was “unrealistic”.

Downing Street insisted Cameron’s “ambition” to reduce net migration below 
100,000 remained.

The prime minister’s official spokesman told a regular Westminster media 
briefing: “You won’t be surprised to know that he takes a different view from 
Ken on this one. It won’t be the first time that he and Ken haven’t had exactly 
the same views.”

The spokesman said the PM’s views on the need to reduce annual net migration 
below 100,000 had not changed since a speech in November, when he said that it 
remained an “ambition”, even if it was not possible to achieve it during this 
parliament.

Cameron said in November: “The ambition remains the right one, but it’s clear 
it’s going to take more time, more work and more difficult long-term decisions 
in order to get there.”

The spokesman confirmed that this remained the PM’s view, adding: “He thinks 
the UK would be a better and stronger country with net migration in the tens of 
thousands. Those are the reasons he has given before and they haven’t changed.”

Shadow home secretary Yvette Cooper said: “Who is Theresa May kidding? Even 
her own colleagues are saying her net migration target is in tatters. No-one 
will believe a word she or the prime minister says on this, after they promised 
‘no ifs, not buts’ to meet their chosen target last time, yet instead net 
migration is three times the level they promised.

“Theresa May is taking people for fools by trying the same trick again. This 
massive gap between Tory rhetoric and reality just undermines trust in the 
immigration system. Labour has always said having a net migration target which 
treats all immigration the same was the wrong approach.


“We need a smarter system of controls for different kinds of migration so 
that, for example, we can benefit from overseas university students who bring 
billions into Britain but restrict low skilled migration. And we need much 
stronger enforcement of the rules to cut illegal immigration.


“Immigration is important to Britain but it needs to be controlled and managed 
so the system is fair.

“Labour has set out a series of sensible reforms to strengthen our borders, 
reform benefit rules so people can’t claim for up to two years and clamp down 
on those who exploit immigration to undercut jobs and wages.”

 