
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has approved a 
£20m funding boost for women’s refuges and new guidance that obliges councils 
to accommodate women from outside their local area who are fleeing violent 
partners.

The communities secretary, Sajid Javid, is expected to confirm on Friday that 
local councils, working in partnership with specialist charities, will be able 
to bid for a share of the funds to provide “accommodation-based support”.

The money is the first tranche of £40m promised at last year’s spending review 
for tackling domestic violence by the end of this parliament. The government 
said it hoped the funding would help significantly increase the number of 
places available in refuges.

Bidders will only be awarded a share of the funds, which will cover 2017 and 
2018, if they can show they will collaborate with providers across different 
local areas.

Official guidance to councils about the services they should provide locally 
will appear in a new document, Priorities for Domestic Abuse Services, which 
has been developed in collaboration with charities.

Some cash-strapped councils have been forced to cut back on non-statutory 
services as their grants from central government have been reduced, leading to 
a wave of warnings that refuges face closure.

Women’s charities have also warned that those fleeing domestic violence can 
sometimes be turned away when they seek refuge outside their local area.

Women’s Aid, which the government has consulted about its plans, recently 
warned that 17% of specialist women’s refuges had closed since 2010 and that 
more than 155 women a day were being turned away from refuges because there was 
not enough suitable places available.

Friday’s announcements, which will form the latest part of the government’s 
violence against women and girls strategy, aims to shift the emphasis from 
crisis response to prevention.

Asked for a comment, a spokesman for the Department for Communities and Local 
Government said he would not comment in advance of an official statement on 
Friday.

Downing Street is keen to show the government can still press ahead with the 
social reforms May has suggested she would prioritise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/13/prime-minister-theresa-may-pledges-to-build-a-better-britain-video>
 despite the formidable challenges of managing the process of Brexit.

However, a series of policies that had been trailed by David Cameron before 
the EU referendum, including a “life chances strategy”, are yet to see the 
light of day.

May has taken an interest in tackling domestic violence since she was home 
secretary, and it is an issue her key adviser, Fiona Hill, is known to feel 
strongly about.

In her speech to the Police Federation this year – before becoming prime 
minister – she said: “Let me be absolutely clear. Domestic abuse is a crime. 
Sexual assault is a crime. Child sexual abuse is a crime. Modern slavery is a 
crime. And the victims and survivors of those crimes deserve to be heard now, 
just as they should have been years ago, and they deserve justice, just as they 
did then.”

Separately, May has temporarily exempted women’s refuges from planned changes 
to housing benefit rules which could have forced many more to close. The move 
followed pressure from campaigners including backbench Labour MP Jess Phillips. 
However, it is unclear what will happen when this three year exemption ends.
 