
It’s almost difficult to remember a time when shopping centres and public 
spaces weren’t expected to be wheelchair friendly – we take lifts and ramps for 
granted now and complain if they’re not in place. But for the 700,000 people on 
the autistic spectrum in the UK, there’s still a long way to go before public 
areas are “autism-friendly”.

The National Autistic Society’s TMI (Too Much Information) campaign highlights 
some of the problems faced by autistic people. As the charity’s newVR experience
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/jun/13/the-vr-experience-that-will-open-your-eyes-to-the-world-of-an-autistic-person>
 shows, public spaces such as shopping centres can be particularly trying for 
someone experiencing the sensory overload effect associated with autism.

Autism heroes: Guardian readers send in their stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/may/24/autism-heroes-guardian-readers-send-in-their-stories>
To this end, the NAS has launched the Autism Friendly Award, a new standard 
for buildings and facilities. The award champions spaces that commit to 
ensuring that autistic visitors feel welcome and safe. Signups include 
businesses large and small, from airports and sports arenas to hairdressers and 
small shops.

The Roman Baths complex in Bath, which welcomes more than 1m visitors each 
year, is one recipient of the award. It provides quiet areas, appropriate 
lighting and sound control. Even its text and visual information was designed 
by a student with Asperger syndrome.

Kate Smith, visitor services manager at the baths, says: “It was all his own 
experience of going round the site, so he was able to write in detail the 
things that alarmed and astonished him.” These things included sudden smells, 
the staff announcing the guided tour or a mist jetting out across the monument 
to keep it moist.

“We also provide pictures in advance so visitors can see what to expect. Staff 
are trained in being observant so if someone looks uncomfortable they can help. 
It’s about being sensitive. Our mission is to enable anybody and everybody to 
enjoy the site,” says Smith.

And last week, intu Trafford Centre in Manchester was formally recognised as 
the UK’s first autism-friendly shopping centre. A local autism charity, the 
Together Trust, has been working with intu on a range of measures including 
autism-friendly shopping centre guides – which inform shoppers of quieter 
opening times and quiet spaces; specially designed alert cards; and dedicated 
staff training. Working with the National Autistic Society, intu plans to roll 
out these initiatives to all its shopping centres nationwide.

Alexander Nicoll, intu’s director of corporate responsibility, says: “As a 
business we want to make sure everyone feels safe and welcomed. Shopping 
centres are public places and we have been working for years to ensure ours are 
accessible to all. We’re also aware that they are large places with lots going 
on. This can be daunting to a variety of people.”

Staff members are trained to recognise when someone is displaying autistic 
behaviour, and provide support to them and their families. The centres also 
offer literature, cards and wristbands, which can alert staff to autistic 
visitors. This training is in place to be delivered across all intu centres 
within the next two years.

At intu Braehead in Glasgow, a trial quiet hour has been introduced to reduce 
potential stress. During this time, retailers participate by turning off music 
and any flashing lights to create a quieter and calmer atmosphere.

Nicholl says: “The most important thing for us is that this is not a flash in 
the pan. It’s a holistic exercise in educating staff and the public.”

Other companies thinking of following suit might note that it’s also good for 
business. The company says that as a result of the programme it’s seen a 
significant reduction in customer complaints from autistic people and an 
increase in positive reviews.


You can make a difference: sign the National Autistic Society’s petition 
<http://bit.ly/autism-employment-gap>, which calls on the government to take 
decisive action to double the number of autistic people in work.
 