
One of the features of recordings that qualify for the “legendary” tag is that 
there seems no end to the anecdotes surrounding why they turned out this way 
rather than that. InExploring Life On Mars? (Monday, 10pm, Radio 2) we hear 
David Bowie’s demo of the English lyrics he wrote for the French hitComme 
D’Habitude <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GME3fMeK5ts> in 1968. This must 
have been the cheapest demo ever: to save session fees Bowie actually sang over 
the original. His lyrics weren’t taken up. Instead they decided to use Paul 
Anka’s, which is how the English version came to be My Way. Bowie was rueful, 
because he thought he’d missed out on a once in a lifetime windfall. He thought 
he’d make up for it by writing a big ballad for his next album. Which is how
Life On Mars? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v--IqqusnNQ> ended up on 1971’s 
Hunky Dory, the sleeve note explaining it was “inspired by Frankie”. The 
presenter of this exploration is Martin Kemp. The heavy lifting is done by 
producer Tris Penna, who calls upon Rick Wakeman, who played piano on the 
record, Ken Scott, who produced it, plus old friends Wendy Kirby and Dana 
Gillespie, who remember when Bowie was just another scuffling hopeful.

Asa Briggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/15/lord-briggs-of-lewes-asa-briggs-obituary>
: The Last Victorian Improver (Saturday, 8pm, Radio 4) is Tristram Hunt’s 
account of the life and legacy of the great historian of the Victorian era who 
died in 2016. This includes his 1951 road trip round Syria and Turkey in a Ford 
Zephyr with his student, one Rupert Murdoch. It also has recorded contributions 
from other distinguished grammar school peers such as Denis Healey, who 
modestly explains, “I went into Parliament to stop the third world war. I don’t 
know if you’ve noticed but I’ve succeeded.”

If you’re not planning to listen to Radio 4 in the coming year, you could make 
up for it by listening to the first few minutes ofJake Yapp Saves Humanity in 
28 Minutes (Saturday, 10.30pm, Radio 4). Here, you get a clear idea of the 
workings of programmes such as Poetry Please with Roger McGough (“one side of 
A4 read out over half an hour”) and Woman’s Hour (“we present a singer who’s 
got a great backstory but sings pretty dismal tunes”). Oh, and how do you 
recognise aRadio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4 listener? 
“They’re people who cut things out of the Guardian and give them to relatives.”

The Reformation (Weekdays, 9.45am, Radio 4) sees Diarmaid MacCulloch make the 
point that in the 16th century it would have taken a considerable exercise of 
imagination not to believe in God, and that the atrocities visited on so-called 
apostates today have nothing on what went on during this turbulent time.

In A Chip Off The Old Block (Friday, 3.45pm, Radio 4) Simon Day plays a 
footballer-turned-pundit who finds himself gazing across a chasm 
of misunderstanding when working with a ghost writer. The story is written by 
Arthur Mathews of Father Ted and Toast Of London fame.
 