
Ever since Thomas Jefferson hit the ball out of the park with “life, liberty 
and the pursuit of happiness”, America’s political leaders have been in 
competition to hit another rhetorical home run.

Inauguration Day is the obvious platform on which to launch their zingers. 
Both FDR (“the only thing we have to fear is fear itself”), and JFK, borrowing 
from Kahlil Gibran (“ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can 
do for your country”), used their inaugural speeches to make their pitch. The 
president is also required to rise to the occasion at moments of national 
tragedy. Ronald Reagan was the master of this. Yes, he had great speechwriters 
like Peggy Noonan, but there was no one to touch him for delivery of great 
lines.

On other occasions, yet-to-be presidents (Barack Obama), sitting presidents 
(Abraham Lincoln), and retiring presidents (George Washington) have borrowed 
the fierce voltage of American political oratory to electrify their audiences – 
and fuse themselves with history.

Obama did that last week, during his farewell speech in Chicago, when he 
quoted from, and then riffed on, George Washington’s valedictory warning to his 
supporters to preserve freedom and self-government “with jealous anxiety”. In 
the conduct of American life, the president’s job is to be positive and 
optimistic. Not surprisingly, Obama chose not to follow the example of 
Eisenhower in his farewell warning of 1961.

Barack Obama

Keynote address to Democratic convention (2004)
“There’s not a liberal America and a conservative America – there’s the United 
States of America. There’s not a black America and white America, and Latino 
America and Asian America – there’s the United States of America.”

Abraham Lincoln

Gettysburg Address (1863)
“Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a 
new nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men 
are created equal … This nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom 
and … government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish 
from the earth.”

Abraham Lincoln

Second inaugural address (1865)
“With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right as 
God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in, 
to bind up the nation’s wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle 
and for his widow and his orphan, to do all which may achieve and cherish a 
just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.”

George Washington

Farewell address (1796)
“The unity of government which constitutes you one people is also now dear to 
you … but … it is easy to foresee that, from different causes and from 
different quarters, much pains will be taken to weaken in your minds the 
conviction of this truth,” Washington warned, saying that his audience should 
reject “the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our 
country from the rest, or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together 
the various parts”.

Dwight D Eisenhower

Farewell address (1961)
“In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of 
unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial 
complex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and 
will persist.”

Lyndon B Johnson

Voting rights speech (1965)
“What happened in Selma is part of a far larger movement which reaches into 
every section and state of America. It is the effort of American Negroes to 
secure for themselves the full blessings of American life. Their cause must be 
our cause too. Because it is not just Negroes, but really it is all of us who 
must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice. And we shall 
overcome.”

Ronald Reagan

After the Challenger shuttle disaster (1986)
“The crew of the space shuttle Challenger honoured us by the manner in which 
they lived their lives. We will never forget them, nor the last time we saw 
them, this morning, as they prepared for their journey and waved goodbye and 
‘slipped the surly bonds of earth’ to ‘touch the face of God’.”

Ronald Reagan

Brandenburg Gate speech (1987)
“General secretary Gorbachev, if you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for 
the Soviet Union and eastern Europe, if you seek liberalisation: come here to 
this gate. Mr Gorbachev, open this gate! Mr Gorbachev, tear down this wall!”

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> might not be at 
so much of a disadvantage here. Many of his predecessors nailed the core of 
their message in fewer than 140 characters.
 