
Rightwing populists from Donald Trump to British Brexiters to French National 
Front presidential candidate Marine Le Pen are all playing the nationalist 
card. They are ﬂaying a liberal internationalist world order that has 
hemorrhaged the jobs of the domestic working class for the proﬁts of a ﬁnancial 
elite.

In response to the right’s success, many progressives yearn to advance a 
full-on populist message of their own. This populist left (both in the US and 
in Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour party) addresses the same domestic anxieties as the 
right, holding out hope for a return to a buoyant national economy, 
diﬀerentiating themselves by promising a fairer distribution of wealth and 
reduced carbon footprint.

But this nationalist approach to left populism is limited. While both Bernie 
Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> and Hillary 
Clinton opposed the TPP, neither oﬀered an alternative vision of the world 
economic order. Indeed, by generally identifying the international economic 
marketplace as the source of job loss and inequality, political populism – of 
the right and the left – severely restricts the range of remedies at our 
disposal, leading many to propose false solutions or no solutions at all.

We must rethink globalization, or Trumpism will prevail | Thomas Piketty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/globalization-trump-inequality-thomas-piketty>
For one, if the economic problem is located somewhere “out there” in other 
countries, then why should voters not want to close borders against people as 
well as goods? The fears implicit in populist nationalism tend to stoke 
rightwing solidarity around “God and home and country.”

Second, the diagnosis is wrong. There was no “golden age” in which we 
prospered by our own bootstraps, without reliance on others’ labor or their 
products. Populists tend to contrast the depredations of present-day 
“globalization” with the period of relative economic abundance and opportunity 
lasting roughly through the postwar years of 1946-1973.

But that era, too, contained a complex international economic order – jobs in 
Iowa and Wisconsin have long been linked to world markets. The US – including 
the labor movement – pushed for more open trade (and the Bretton Woods 
institutions that sustained it) in those years precisely because American 
wealth and jobs depended on markets and natural resources abroad.

To be sure, as new platforms of production, transportation and communication 
opened up, the global tide of commerce decimated the old industrial working 
class while driving a stake of insecurity through much of the working 
population. Yet, as the global economic order has turned harshly against worker 
interests, why can it not turn again?

How can the left respond to the global resurgence of far right populism? | 
Jason Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/24/how-can-the-left-respond-to-the-global-resurgence-of-far-right-populism>
Progressives must not cede discussion of the world economy either to the 
liberal globalizationism promulgated by Thomas Friedman and Mark Zuckerberg or 
the pseudo-protectionism associated with Trump and Le Pen. While the former 
accepts the current slide of the western working class as inevitable, the 
latter proposes only arbitrary and authoritarian countermeasures.

Instead, we need to push for a new architecture of international trade, 
investment and technology transfer that puts worker representatives at the 
decision-making table. Moving forward, international trade deals – in principle 
a good thing – must bring wages in cheaper-labor countries into closer 
alignment with those of their developed-world trading partners.

There is a yearning in many of us to explore and interact with the larger 
world; those who share this yearning are a far larger force than those who 
would retreat into narrow, parochial spheres of living. Given our instant 
connections, our tangled supply chains, our interrelated spirals of innovation 
and debt, the idea of retreat to protected national enclaves – racial, 
political or economic – is the darkest of illusions.

The original socialist internationalism centered around Karl Marx and 
Friedrich Engels began with small groups spread across many nations. Today, we 
need similar citizen initiative from a variety of sources – discrete “identity” 
groups, religious communities, labor unions, professional associations – to 
push a worldwide democratic agenda.

To be sure, we must now engage locally, coming to the aid of those most in 
need. Our immediate struggles, however, should not detain us from building a 
brighter future. Amid disappointment, even despair, at the revanchist impulses 
infecting our scared nation, the power of civil society still beckons to make 
connections between communities and across borders.

This piece originally ran in the January 2017 edition of In These Times. 
<http://inthesetimes.com/article/19759/trade-tpp-populist-internationalism-left-isolationism-globalization>
 