
A recent study 
<http://www.aon.com/attachments/human-capital-consulting/2015-Trends-in-Global-Employee-Engagement-Report.pdf>
 from Aon Hewitt revealed that among 250 international organizations, those 
that reported the highest levels of employee engagement demonstrated a 58% 
higher return for shareholders. With results like this, employee engagement 
seems to be the key to a successful company.

However, a similar report by the Hay Group 
<http://www.haygroup.com/uk/press/details.aspx?id=7184> revealed that low 
employee engagement is costing the UK £340bn per year. As many as 8% of 
employees surveyed identified themselves as “completely demotivated” with 
another 24% identifying as “coasting.

This lack of engagement is punctuated by existing gender pay disparities, the 
widening age gap and other challenges that undermine how employees view 
themselves and their company..

The result is an erosion of organizations’ ability to retain and cultivate 
fresh talent, this leaves remaining employees less committed, more isolated, 
and ultimately less likely to be a high performing team.

To counter this, many organizations are looking to creative structures to 
boost engagement and connection among their people.

Elevated levels of personal responsibility lead to better performance. A 
recent survey in the Netherlands showed thatprofessional carers who worked in 
self-managed teams 
<http://interlinks.euro.centre.org/model/example/NeighbourhoodCareBetterHomeCareAtReducedCost>
 delivered a better service than those in traditional working structures. .

So how do you create a collaborative culture?

1. Know Thyself

Whether you are an executive, a team lead, or an individual contributor, 
understanding who you are and what drives you to be your best is a principle 
foundation for any basis of leadership. Before you can encourage your team to 
take responsibility for themselves, first you need to take a long look at 
yourself. Take some time to work out what motivates and drives you, what your 
values are. When you know this for yourself you’ll know how to help your team 
find their passions, and connect those to their role.

In the “co-active leadership model” designed by the Coaches Training Institute 
<http://www.coaching-courses.com/>, this is known as “leading within”. Not only 
does this give us the internal foundation and fortitude to understand who we 
are, our skills, and our capacities, but it also provides us a basis from which 
to interact and empower our colleagues to do the same.

2. Create the Vision

Our organizations begin and end with our people. When you can offer them an 
inspiring vision for how your company’s work enhances their lives, and the 
lives of others, we connect to our teammates on a far more intimate level.

Leading from the front in this way speaks to people’s passions and inspires 
them to step forward in their own leadership toward the good of the company.

3. Call Forth the Best in Others

Once you’ve set an inspiring vision and have got your own values and 
principles clearly in focus, you are now better suited to understand what 
motivates your team, and how that fits with your company’s wider vision. When 
you know what drives people, you know how to direct that energy. .

This form of leadership, however, requires trust. You have to trust that your 
employeeshave the company’s best interest in mind. This doesn’t mean leaving 
them to their own devices, everyone needs a support network around them, but it 
does mean giving them responsibility for their own success and trusting them to 
act on this.

Through these elements an environment where better employee retention and 
enhanced productivity lives begins to appear. The culture of collaborative 
leadership is also marked by greater willingness to share ideas, communicate 
openly, and foster innovation. Together this leads to a team which can respond 
to changing working environments with ease, and who are ready to face any 
challenge.

Karen Kimsey-House is the co-founder and CEO of The Coaches Training Institute 
 <http://www.coaching-courses.com/>(CTI). You can follow her on Twitter 
@kkimseyhouse <https://twitter.com/kkimseyhouse>
 