
Touts and others who sell large numbers of tickets to concerts and other 
events at inflated prices may have to be officially licensed if laws on resales 
continue to be flouted,a government-commissioned review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/525885/ind-16-7-independent-review-online-secondary-ticketing-facilities.pdf>
 has suggested.


It has also recommended that secondary-ticketing websites – a sector dominated 
by Seatwave, Viagogo, Get Me In and StubHub – should be taken to court if they 
do not comply with rules brought in last year to protect consumers.

In the wake of a growing outcry over the reselling of tickets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/21/ticket-tout-criminalised-inflated-prices-secondary-ticketing>
 at vastly inflated prices, the government announced an independent review of 
how the secondary-ticketing market is working.


For Radiohead’s London show on 26 May, £65 tickets are being offered for sale 
on Viagogo for £3,900, while in February it emerged that seats at Adele’s 
London shows were being offered for up to £24,000 each.

 The review panel, chaired by Professor Michael Waterson, has now published 
its conclusions and recommendations.


The rules introduced in 2015 require anyone reselling tickets via a 
secondary-ticketing website to provide details of the block, row and, 
crucially, seat number, as well as the face value and information about any 
restrictions.

But campaigners and consumer bodies such as Which? claim the websites are 
failing to ensure that the required information is provided when people list 
tickets for sale.


The review states that at the moment, the secondary-ticketing sites “are 
seemingly falling short” when it comes to ensuring compliance with the 
provisions in the act. It is recommending that a lead body, such as National 
Trading Standards, “should carry out a concerted investigation of compliance, 
followed by action coordinated with the police”.


It is also recommending that enforcement action and, if necessary, court 
proceedings be taken where rule breaches are found to have taken place, and 
that the websites need to take more responsibility and undertake better checks 
to identify traders, as opposed to ordinary members of the public using the 
sites to sell the odd spare ticket.


The review states that if within a reasonable time, no progress has been made 
by the secondary sites on compliance and the identification of traders, the 
government should consider “alternative approaches”, which might include a 
requirement that those selling more than a certain number of tickets be 
licensed by an official body.


Ticket brokers are required to be licensed or registered in a number of US 
states, and the review says: “This is a model the government may wish to 
consider for the UK if a licensing regime proves necessary to protect consumers 
and public trust in secondary ticketing.”

 