
Timeshare owners who have fallen victim to fraudsters offering to sell their 
contracts in exchange for a fee are being targeted a second time by the same 
crooks promising they can obtain compensation – for a further fee of at least 
£500.

Timeshares, also known as "fractional ownership", became popular in the UK in 
the 1980s when waves of Brits snapped up shares in holiday apartments at 
European coastal resorts, typically in Spain and Portugal. According to the 
latestEuropean Timeshare Industry Report 
<http://www.rdo.org/vacationownership/researchandstatistics.htm?NewsID=73>, 
Britons and the Irish form the largest market in Europe, with 589,653 timeshare 
owners out of a European total of 1.5 million.

People buy a share in the property for a set number of weeks each year, 
usually paying a one-off lump sum. In return they get the right to use their 
annual weeks in the apartment, either for a fixed number of years or, more 
commonly, "in perpetuity". On top of the lump sum, timeshare owners must pay 
annual maintenance charges, which often increase substantially each year.

Contracts written in perpetuity are difficult to break. Many retired timeshare 
owners are locked into paying high annual fees for an entitlement to holiday 
properties they do not want. In many cases, these are passed on to family 
members when the original purchaser dies.

The problem is exacerbated because timeshare contracts are notoriously hard to 
sell. The company that sold the timeshare may agree to buy it back, or a resale 
company might find a new buyer – but the price owners get is usually much lower 
than the one they paid. Worse, bogus resale companies are prolific, offering to 
find a buyer if owners give them an upfront payment, then disappearing with the 
cash.

This happened to Craig Williams and his wife Jacquie from Kinross, who have a 
timeshare at the Moness resort in Aberfeldy, Perthshire. The couple were 
cheated out of £500 in 2006 by a company called Yacht Trading. It failed to 
find a buyer for the Williams's timeshare and never paid back their £500. Yacht 
Trading was wound up in the high court in early 2008, following a government 
investigation.

Recently the Williams were again contacted by a timeshare-related company, 
this time called Asset Accountancy Services (AAS). The company claimed it was 
in a position to retrieve the money the couple had lost in the Yacht Trading 
scam.

"The salesman told us there was a £4.5m pot of money available to compensate 
people who had been conned and promised us £2,717.10, which was a lot more than 
we had lost," Williams said.

"I instantly thought it must be a scam, even though the guy on the phone was 
professional and gave us his company registration number to reassure us. He 
also gave my wife the number of the 'Legal Time Share Advisory Bureau' in 
Gateshead, which he said was some kind of government body for timeshare 
organisations. But when we rang it later, the woman on the line did not sound 
very authentic."

The Legal Time Share Advisory Bureau does not appear to have any kind of 
presence on the internet and when AAS called back, Williams challenged the 
salesman. "The man said it wouldn't have a website because it was a government 
body." He then asked the couple to buy £500 in vouchers from online payment 
service Ukash to cover administration fees, and to call the claims management 
company back with the voucher codes. Williams suspected they would never see 
the £500 again if they proceeded.

"At that point I said it all sounded like another scam. He asked who I was so 
I pretended I was a trading standards officer, at which point he began getting 
aggressive, especially when I wouldn't give him my name. He must have figured 
it out because at the end of the call he said: 'You're nothing but a twat. 
We've got your wife's number now so we'll make sure she gets lots of calls.' It 
was very threatening."

David Hunter, chief executive of Ukash, said: "We're aware and clearly 
concerned about fraudulent activity of this type but, for us it's impossible to 
differentiate between genuine and malicious transactions."

He said if consumers reported a fraudulent transaction to Ukash within eight 
hours, there was a 50% chance they could stop it going through. He advised 
people to check theUkash security tips 
<http://www.ukash.com/uk/en/security-tips.aspx> for more safety advice.

Double-scamming of victims is nothing new. In early March we reported on 
victims of telephone fraudsters selling bogus energy-saving devices, who were 
being targeted by the same people claiming to offer compensation. Trading 
standards warned that the bogus "claims management companies" were offering to 
secure up to £3,000 in compensation in return for an initial outlay of £300.

Asset Accountancy Services gives an estate in Colchester as its address, but 
according to Companies House the company has changed premises five times since 
November 2011. When the Observer tried to get in touch, the phone line was dead.

A spokesman for the Timeshare Association <http://www.tatoc.co.uk> (Tatoc), a 
consumer association that can help with resales and timeshare problems, said 
Asset Accountancy was a name that had only recently cropped up. "We've had a 
few calls about this one now, but all these firms are completely bogus and 
consumers need to stay away," he said.

"They start off asking for £350 to £500 upfront, but then they will come back 
and claim they have retrieved £20,000 of compensation for a consumer before 
demanding £3,000 to £4,000 in order to 'pay the tax'. This is where the real 
sting takes place. "These tend to be companies who were involved in the 
original reselling scam, suddenly popping up as a legal recovery specialist a 
few years later – that's how they have their list of potential targets."

A new EU directive 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32008L0122:EN:NOT>
, which all member states had to adopt by February 2011, bans resale companies 
from levying charges until the actual sale has taken place or the contract has 
been otherwise terminated. This will help put a stop to widespread fraudulent 
activity from resale predators, but will do little to prevent bogus companies 
from contacting previous victims.

The directive also includes rules that might help protect buyers and their 
families being lumbered with timeshare contracts indefinitely. For example, 
traders must provide comprehensive pre-contractual information so consumers can 
make an informed choice prior to being bound by any contract, and there is a 
universal 14-day cooling-off period during which consumers can pull out of the 
deal at no cost.

Grace Kerr, a property lawyer at Birketts solicitors 
<http://www.birketts.co.uk/>, said: "It's very difficult to break a timeshare 
contract written in perpetuity. The new EU directive will help as it offers 
greater protection for new purchasers, but existing owners have few options. 
They can try selling to someone else or handing back ownership to the timeshare 
organisation (some are better than others and will allow this, usually if the 
owner is over 75 or unable to use their timeshare), or renting their weeks to 
someone else, which might help ease the burden.

"Failing that, they could walk away and simply stop paying the fees, but this 
would be breach of contract and they would probably face legal action. That 
only leaves the option of claiming misrepresentation, if they can prove they 
were told the purchase was something it is not, such as an investment, which 
might work. If the timeshare property is in the UK, the Trading Standards 
Institute might be able to help."

Tatoc warns against directly contacting any company that promises to cancel 
your timeshare agreements at low cost. It advises timeshare owners to call its 
own helpline (Tel 0845 230 2430) to check first.Citizens Advice 
<http://www.adviceguide.org.uk/england/your_world/travel_index_ew/timeshare_and_holiday_clubs.htm>
 says anyone thinking of selling their timeshare should talk to one of its 
advisers, and also recommends Tatoc.

Craig Williams said that he had contacted us to ensure that no vulnerable 
people fall victim to the double-dip scam. "If I can help stop one granny from 
being scammed out of her money, it will be worth telling my story," he said. "I 
wonder how many people got caught out on the day we were cold-called."
 