
Enter the special exhibition room at the Morgan Library 
<http://www.themorgan.org> in New York between now and June and, if you are a 
British visitor, you will immediately be struck by something that our own 
increasingly petulant and divided little country lacks. Lincoln Speaks: Words 
That Transformed a Nation is the title of an exhibition highlighting Abraham 
Lincoln’s remarkable oratory. Even the insular British know a bit about the 
importance of the two inaugural speeches Lincoln delivered in 1861 and 1865, at 
the dawn and the close of his nation’s civil war, and at the dedication of the 
Gettysburg war graveyard midway through the conflict. Thanks toDaniel Day-Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/25/oscars-2013-daniel-day-lewis-lincoln-actor>
, we may even imagine we can hear the tone of voice in which those words were 
delivered.

What this superb exhibition in New York brings home, however, is the sheer 
importance to America’s survival of Lincoln’s hard-honed talent with words, not 
just on those great oratorical occasions but day to day, in his private 
discourse with his generals, political allies and rivals. In today’s argot, he 
was a brilliant communicator, and it is no surprise that the film that 
accompanies the New York exhibition soon features another skilled, though 
unquestionably lesser, practitioner of the art – Bill Clinton.

Lincoln’s great skill was to speak simply. He searched for language that was 
spare, colourful and accessible to all. He was well read, the Bible and 
Shakespeare in particular, but did not lace his speeches with classical 
allusions, as his contemporaries William Gladstone and Benjamin Disraeli did. 
Nor did he pile on the verbal folderols and tarradiddles in the way his rival 
Stephen Douglas liked to do.

Lincoln’s political case relied on reason rather than emotion. He liked it 
dry, clear and cogent, but he liked colloquialism too. As Harriet Beecher Stowe 
put it, Lincoln’s language always had “the relish and smack of the soil”. An 
aide tried to get him to withdraw the phrase “sugar-coated” from a speech once, 
on the grounds it was undignified. Lincoln would have none of it. He was also a 
great pruner:the Gettysburg address 
<http://www.abrahamlincolnonline.org/lincoln/speeches/gettysburg.htm>, perhaps 
the best-known political speech in English of all time, is less than 300 words 
long and took as little as three minutes to deliver.

The great cause to which Lincoln gave his life 150 years ago next month was 
the preservation of the union. And it is the eloquence with which he pursued 
that cause that is the most striking thing about the New York exhibition to any 
contemporary British visitor. For the preservation of the union is again a 
living cause, not something from history. Our union is deeply vulnerable today, 
not in the same way that America’s was a century and a half ago, and not, thank 
goodness, on the battlefield as theirs was. But it is threatened fundamentally 
nevertheless, asthe polls made clear again this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/04/snp-set-for-56-of-59-scottish-seats-in-general-election-poll-suggests>
. In the war for this union, words, reason and poetry arguably matter more than 
anything.

Neither David Cameron nor Ed Miliband has displayed any talent for the job of 
national orator

If, in the coming years, Britain proves to be a house divided against itself, 
as with the rise of nationalism it may, it will also require someone to fill 
Lincoln-sized shoes if the house is to continue to stand, both within these 
islands and in the union with Europe. Does such a master of language exist? 
Neither David Cameron nor Ed Miliband,for all the importance they attach to 
speeches <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v37/n05/david-runciman/notes-on-the-election>, 
has displayed any talent for the job of national orator, let alone of national 
healer and unifier. They won’t even debate with each other.

The words Lincoln used in his first inaugural address have a particular 
resonance in today’s troubled United Kingdom. With only a little allowance, he 
could be talking about us: “We can not remove our respective sections from each 
other nor build an impassable wall between them. A husband and wife may be 
divorced and go out of the presence and beyond the reach of each other, but the 
different parts of our country can not do this. They can not but remain face to 
face, and intercourse, either amicable or hostile, must continue between them. 
Is it possible, then, to make that intercourse more advantageous or more 
satisfactory after separation than before? Can aliens make treaties easier than 
friends can make laws? Can treaties be more faithfully enforced between aliens 
than laws can among friends?”

Lincoln finished that speech with these words: “We are not enemies, but 
friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained it must not 
break our bonds of affection. The mystic chords of memory, stretching from 
every battlefield and patriot grave to every living heart and hearthstone all 
over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the union, when again 
touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature.”

When he ran for election in 1860 and gave that speech in 1861, Lincoln knew he 
had a country to save. I am not certain, in 2015, that either of the men about 
to contest the premiership know that they too have a country to save and 
rebuild. What is clear, though, is that someone somewhere in British public 
life has to make a Lincoln-like effort to inspire the better angels of our own 
nature and to try, again and again, to halt the current fissiparous abandonment 
to our worse ones. We are not enemies either. Here surely,Michael Sheen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/02/michael-sheen-defends-nhs-against-bland-politicians>
, is something to believe in.

Unless this happens, our house may not stand for long. The chances of that 
producing a “more advantageous or more satisfactory” outcome are tenuous at 
best. Who can give believable voice to what needs to be said? It is hard to 
think of the statesman or woman with the standing to speak for our union. 
Perhaps an archbishop can attempt it. Perhaps a poet. Where, and who, is our 
Lincoln?
 