 On a perfect Edinburgh spring morning, the Liberal Democrats were holding 
their press conference al fresco in the royal botanic gardens. The backdrop was 
the great bulk of Salisbury crags, set off by the spires and statues of the 
city.
It was impossible to concentrate on what Jim Wallace was saying; all one could 
contemplate was the setting. Here truly was one of Europe's capital cities yet 
it was not going to be a capital, at least not a real one. Two days hence,
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> will vote for its 
parliament. But however well or badly the Scottish nationalists do, 
independence has receded to vanishing point.

There is no will for it. And there never was. The Scots wanted two things: 
they wanted the Tories to stop bossing them around, and a parliament of their 
own to give them a buffer against a future English elective dictatorship.

Now both have happened, and the voters seem unsure of what they want next. It 
is making this election curiously flat. The nationalists have never been 
anyone's real enemy, as proved by the 1997 election when Scotland coalesced 
behind whichever party could best beat the Tories; they would have voted Loony 
if it had made tactical sense.

But where is the auld enemy now? There are still blue meanies in Edinburgh, 
but these are a new type of traffic warden. At 8.30am, as the Libs were 
spouting, the Tories were apparently not even out of bed. The truth was not 
that but worse: their phone was ringing unanswered because both directory 
inquiries and the London press office were giving out a discontinued number. 
(How can the bairns be frightened with the threat that Thatcher is coming to 
get them, if the Tories can't even give out the right number?)

David McLetchie, leader of the Scottish Conservatives, is an Edinburgh 
solicitor plucked from the 'voluntary' wing of the party (as opposed to the 
compulsory wing), to hold his own against three leaders with decades of 
frontline experience Wallace, Alex Salmond and Donald Dewar. His experience of 
politics until now had been one hopeless candidacy against Robin Cook in 1979.

But on handicap, he has not done badly. He has not been exposed as an idiot, 
and the Scottish Conservatives, with no seats at Westminster at all, are no 
doubt grateful for small mercies. He believes they are making political 
progress as well. He has to.

He is standing for Edinburgh Pentlands the seat of Malcolm Rifkind until he 
lost to Labour in the 1997 bloodbath and his constituency office has a sign in 
the window saying 'Meek Scottish Conservative', which I think is a poster for a 
city council candidate, though it could be part of the Tories' re-invention 
('You talked, we listened') as a party of penitents. They may not win the 
election, but they will eventually inherit the earth.

Actually, under the PR system, Mr McLetchie is near-certain to be elected via 
the party list even if he loses the constituency vote. Mr McLetchie has been 
canvassing votes. This is, if you like, old new Edinburgh: comfortable, mature, 
inter-war bungalows for comfortable, mature, inter-war people. But as soon as 
we met anyone younger, the response was frosty. 'I used to vote Conservative 
but I voted Labour last time.' 'Can I persuade you to swing back?' 'No.'

Mr McLetchie accepts these knock-backs phlegmatically, aware of the problem. 
About 1.5 per cent of the electorate die every year, which means 3 per cent 
have gone since 1997, and 7.5 per cent go during a five-year parliament 
inevitably, that will include a hefty bunch of his supporters.

Margaret Smith, the Lib Dem in Edinburgh West, said a minister of the kirk 
told her: 'I've been seeing a lot of the local Tories lately.' 'Why's that?' 
she asked, alarmed. 'I've been burying them at the rate of three a week.'

In Edinburgh West, the Conservatives' task is theoretically harder. This was a 
seat lost to the Lib Dems by 7,000 in 1997. But here the former MP is standing 
again. And this is no ordinary MP. This is Baron Selkirk of Douglas, standing 
as James Douglas-Hamilton, best- known as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton QC (son 
of the 14th Duke of Hamilton), former minister of state at the Scottish office 
and, by general consent, The Most Courteous Man in Scotland.

When he had a female chauffeur, Lord James regularly startled her by leaping 
out of the car and insisting on opening the door for her.

But the best Douglas-Hamilton story concerns a polite conversation he had with 
a civil servant. The young man said that he had a flat in an Edinburgh suburb, 
a bit small but very pleasant, quite a nice area for the kids and handy for the 
shops. 'Ah, yes,' said Lord James, 'and where do you live weekends?'

The most unexpected fact about Baron Selkirk is that he was a boxing blue used 
to rules stopping any competitor getting too much of a pummelling. PR by itself 
may not be enough to end the pummelling of Scottish Conservatism.

Even if they gain the odd seat this time, time is ravaging their electoral 
base.
 