
Justine Greening <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening> is 
facing a growing revolt from fellow Conservative MPs over the government’s new 
funding formula for schools.


The education secretary announced proposals in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/england-school-funding-formula-justine-greening-education-secretary>
 that will see cuts for nearly a third of schools which, between them, serve 
more than 2 million pupils. Almost 11,000 schools in England will gain extra 
money from 2018-19.

A number of prominent Conservative MPs, including the chairman of the 1922 
committee, Graham Brady, are expecting Greening to review the plans which will 
see schools in their constituencies are thousands of pounds worse off every 
year.

The Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> only 
have a working Commons majority of 14 and the interventions from influential 
Tory backbenchers over funding highlight the battle Theresa May’s government is 
also likely to face over grammar schools proposals.

Under the funding plans, more than 9,000 schools in England will lose funding, 
with money moving from schools in London and other urban centres that have been 
well funded in the past to schools in areas that have received less money.

Brady, the MP for Altrincham and Sale West, said the formula would not work as 
planned and predicted it would have to be changed.

Better schools, no money required? The Tories’ maths doesn’t add up | Lola 
Okolosie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/progress-schools-tories-maths-london-england-justine-greening>
 “Every secondary school in Trafford [which covers Sale and Altrincham] will 
lose funding, even though it is one of the places famously underfunded for 
education,” he said. “The whole point was to even out historical disparities.”

The former foreign office minister and East Devon MP Hugo Swire said he was 
disappointed that some schools in East Devon would lose funding.

“This would clearly be entirely unacceptable and I will be raising this matter 
in parliament,” he told the Exmouth Journal.


Fiona Bruce, the Tory MP for Congleton, said the funding scheme was 
“shocking”. She told MPs in a debate before Christmas that funding for schools 
in her constituency would fall from £4,158 per pupil to £4,122, leaving them 
among the “very worst-funded schools in the country”.


“Imagine my heads’ consternation when they discovered that their funding will 
not increase, but actually drop. I use the word consternation; they used the 
word outrage.


“No wonder that within 48 hours of the announcement no fewer than five 
headteachers came to my constituency office to express their utter dismay.”


The Conservative MP for Bexhill and Battle, Huw Merriman, said the funding 
formula was unfair.


“More schools are worse off than better off [in my constituency]. I’m still 
struggling with the overall objective of what this is seeking to achieve. I’m 
now going back to the schools minister to say: ‘I don’t get this and I don’t 
think it’s particularly fair,’” he told the Huffington Post.


An analysis by the National Union of Teachers and Association of Teachers and 
Lecturers found the hardest-hit schools would be those with children from 
working but low-paid families – the “just about managing” families who May 
vowed to help when she entered Downing Street.


The unions’ study showed primary schools with the highest number of children 
from these families faced funding cuts of £447 per pupil per year between 
2015-16 and 2019-20, while those with the lowest number faced cuts of £297.


Angela Rayner, the shadow education secretary, said: “The chickens are coming 
home to roost now for the Tories, as we warned they would.


“The truth is that the vast majority of schools are going to lose out from 
this cack-handed new formula. That will mean fewer teachers in the classroom – 
with the possibility of compulsory redundancies for staff – as schools struggle 
to make the cuts being demanded of them.


“The National Audit Office have already forecast an 8.5% cut across the board 
which will have terrible consequences on the quality of education being offered 
to our children. Justine Greening needs to think again.”

A Department for Education spokesman said: “The proposals we are currently 
consulting on will mean an end to the postcode lottery in school funding.


“Under the proposed national schools funding formula, more than half of 
England’s schools will receive a cash boost in 2018-19. This will help to 
create a system that funds schools according to the needs of their pupils 
rather than their postcode.


“Under the proposals, small rural schools – which typically face higher costs 
as a result of their size and location – will gain on average 1.3%. Small 
primary schools in sparse communities will see even larger gains of 5.3% on 
average.”

 