
Leading Tories are demanding change to government education policy and an 
easing of cuts, amid predictions that councils in Conservative-run heartlands 
will soon be unable to provide school places for all the children in their 
areas.

The growing concerns of Tory MPs and council leaders are being relayed to 
ministers by the Conservative-led Local Government Association, which is 
calling on the government to hand back powers to councils so that they can 
expand schools or open new ones. The alternative, it says, will be a crisis of 
provision across the country. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/apr/06/school-places-crisis-labour>

Such a move would require a major U-turn in government policy. In the last 
parliamentMichael Gove,  <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> 
while education secretary, imposed restrictions on councils’ ability to force 
academies to expand, arguing that headteachers should be free to run their 
schools as they wished.

He also said that where new schools were needed, councils should seek sponsors 
for “free schools” – which are funded by central government but not run by the 
local education authority.

Last week, however, Cheryl Gillan, the MP for Chesham and Amersham, whose 
constituency is experiencing rapid housing growth, was one of several Tories to 
voice concerns in parliament. She said Buckinghamshire county council had 
warned that it could not “provide the key infrastructure that is required for 
new schools and additional places”.

She insisted that her main message was about the need for more funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/01/local-government-association-cannot-cope-further-cuts>
, but made it clear that more flexibility was needed to ensure places could be 
created where they were needed. “I thought our policy was supposed to be all 
about responding to demand,” she said.

Other Tory MPs who voiced concerns about looming shortages of places in their 
areas were Steve Baker (Wycombe) and Kevin Hollinrake (Thirsk and Malton). Nick 
Gibb, the schools minister, insisted that enough money was being provided to 
councils to ensure sufficient school places.

The shadow education secretary, Lucy Powell, said: “With such big rises in 
demand, the provision of new places needs proper planning and co-ordination. 
The government’s fixation with free schools as the only solution is stopping 
extra places being provided where they are needed. They should free up local 
authorities to open and expand good and outstanding schools as required. 
Otherwise we will continue to see many more children without any school place, 
and many, many more crammed into over-large class sizes and being put in 
unsuitable accommodation.”

One of the main criticisms of Gove’s “free school” programme has been that 
many of the more than 400such schools established so far are not in areas of 
acute need, but where people wish to set up a new school. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jul/07/free-schools-education-gove-twigg-warwickshire-northamptonshire-bradford>

The Local Government Association says that in areas of need, councils will 
often struggle to find people to sponsor “free schools” and believes that local 
councils are “uniquely situated” to manage demand.

Roy Perry, the Tory leader of Hampshire county council and chair of the LGA’s 
children and young people board, said councils had created 300,000 extra 
primary school places by expanding class sizes, converting non-classroom space 
and diverting money from vital school repair programmes, but now needed to be 
able to expand schools or establish new ones to meet demand.

“If they [schools] are not willing to expand, then powers to create new 
schools should be returned to local authorities themselves if they are unable 
to secure high-quality free school sponsors in their communities,” Perry said.

In its 2015 election manifesto, the Conservative party promised 500 new free 
schools by 2020, which they said would create 270,000 new school places. But 
Labour argues that there is no guarantee that they will be built in places 
where demand is highest.

To cater for 615,000 additional pupils expected by 2020, each of the 500 free 
schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/free-schools> would have to have 
an average of 1,230 pupils – when the median primary school size is between 200 
and 300 pupils, whereas the median secondary school is between 900 and 1,000 
pupils.

There are currently 304 free schools, with an additional 116 in the pipeline. 
According to the NewSchools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> 
Network, a government-funded body, these 420 free schools will provide more 
than 235,000 places if they are full. Many of these schools have been 
significantly undersubscribed.

A department for education spokesman said: “Despite rising pupil numbers, 95 
per cent of parents received an offer at one of their top three preferred 
schools last year and any suggestion to the contrary is nonsense.

“Instead of scaremongering, the LGA need to ensure they use the funds provided 
by Government to secure enough places. Councils are responsible for ensuring 
there are sufficient school places in their area, and we expect them to plan 
effectively and make good investment decisions.

“Where local authorities identify the need for a new school they are required 
by law to invite proposals for a new free school and then forward these to the 
Department to decide on the options. We would encourage councils to work with 
RSCs, using their combined local knowledge, to identify top sponsors for new 
schools in their area, and are confident there is sufficient quantity of 
quality sponsors to meet demand. We encourage all good academies to grow, to 
help give every child the world-class education they deserve.”
 