
Families who are “just managing” will have the chance to buy their homes after 
25 years of paying rent, under government plans being considered.

A new type of tenure, to be called “buy as you go”, is expected to be 
announced as part of a major revamp of the housing market at the end of this 
month. Buyers will not need to have paid a deposit or require a mortgage but 
will build up equity in their homes over time.

The policy is set to be unveiled during the chancellor’s autumn statement, 
with details to be published in a housing white paper shortly afterwards.

It is understood that the National Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> Federation has told ministers 
that housing associations will be able to build 335,000 homes in the next four 
years, including a significant number on a “buy as you go” tenure, if given 
some additional funding, and the freedom to shuffle current capital injections 
from government into the project.

The rents paid by people in “buy as you go” homes would be around 90% of the 
market rate in the local area, with the split between rent and equity payments 
changing over time until the tenant eventually owns their home outright.

Private renters generally pay about 47% of their take-home pay to landlords, 
so that many aspiring homeowners on a low wage currently have no chance of 
saving a deposit.

A report published on Saturday by Savills revealed that a shortage of 
available homes to rent has already pushed up rental prices.

Tenants in London face a 25% rise in rents over the next five years while the 
average increase in the rest of the country is set to be 19%.

Senior government sources said Downing Street was determined to improve the 
lot of long-term renters, and that Theresa May has told cabinet that it is her 
priority. On the steps of No 10, in her inaugural address as prime minister, 
May said her government would be “driven” by the interests of the“just managing 
... working around the clock” and yet finding life “a struggle” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/statement-from-the-new-prime-minister-theresa-may>
.

The development comes as Labour releases new figures showing that the drop in 
homeownership since 2010 has been worst for young people in the north of 
England.

Housing associations added to Bank's bond-buying scheme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/04/housing-associations-added-bank-england-bond-buying-scheme>
The figures from the government’s English Housing Survey show that between 
2010 and 2015 the number of homeowners in the north of England has dropped by 
more than 130,000 – two-thirds of the decline across the country. Younger 
households in the north have been hardest hit with 90,000 fewer homeowners 
under 45 in Yorkshire, and 100,000 fewer in the north-west.

The shadow housing secretary, John Healey, said: “Six years of failure on 
housing under the Tories have meant a big drop in homeownership for young 
people right across the country, with the fall sharpest in the north of England.

“This is no longer just a problem for London and the south-east, but a 
national problem that requires new national leadership. Short-term gimmicks 
from Conservative ministers over the last six years were too often designed to 
give theConservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> a 
poll boost rather than real support to first-time buyers on ordinary incomes. 
Young people are now paying a price for this failure.”

A YouGov poll last year found that 52% of private renters earning the living 
wage or less wanted to own their own home but did not think that they would 
ever be able to do so.

A government spokesman declined to comment on “speculation”.

• This article was amended on 6 November 2016. An earlier version stated that 
it was understood that the National Housing Federation had said housing 
associations would be able to build 335,000 ‘buy as you go’ homes. This has 
been corrected.
 