
A Conservative MP faces a two-day suspension from the Commons and has been 
ordered to apologise for leaking details of a report on consumer credit to the 
payday loans companyWonga <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wonga>.


Justin Tomlinson, who until July was the junior disabilities minister, has 
been recommended to be suspended for two days by theCommons committee of 
privileges 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/privileges/>
 and told to make a personal apology to the house.

The MP did so immediately after the report was published, telling the Commons 
he had fully cooperated with the inquiry.

“Mr Speaker, I reiterate my apology, and I am very grateful that this house 
has allowed me to make this apology at the earliest possible opportunity,” he 
said. John Bercow, the Speaker, replied: “That’s the end of it.”


The committee’s investigation found that in May 2013, when Tomlinson was a 
member of the Commons public accounts committee (PAC), he used a personal email 
address to email a Wonga employee a draft report of a then-ongoing inquiry into 
the consumer credit market.


The Wonga employee, who had given evidence to the PAC inquiry, responded with 
comments from him and a colleague about the report, describing them as “areas 
we thought the committee might want to focus on”.

An exchange of emails followed about suggested changes to the report, after 
which Tomlinson got in contact with a PAC staff member, setting out the 
amendments, but not divulging their origin.

The investigation said Tomlinson, the MP for North Swindon, had immediately 
accepted he had made an error, and had apologised to the PAC.

Tomlinson had initially been supportive of a private member’s bill put forward 
by the Labour MP Stella Creasy to curb the activities of payday lenders, but 
eventually voted with the government.


Creasy, the MP for Walthamstow who sat on the PAC with Tomlinson, said: “I am 
disappointed to hear about this incident and cannot understand why Justin, if 
he was interested in strengthening legislation and helping those suffering at 
the hands of payday lenders, decided to send this document to Wonga instead of 
the Citizens Advice or other charities which work with those who have struggled 
to repay their debts.”

The affair was further complicated by the fact that two years before the email 
exchange, Tomlinson had helped arrange for Wonga to provide £30,000 of 
sponsorship to his local football club, Swindon Supermarine.


After the emails, in 2014 and 2015, the chairman of the club, Jez Webb, made 
six donations to his constituency party, which totalled about the same sum.

The inquiry report by Kathryn Hudson, the parliamentary commissioner for 
standards, said Webb had not been chairman of the club when the Wonga deal was 
negotiated, and there was no evidence the money was connected. Tomlinson had 
told the inquiry that the similarity between the sponsorship and donation 
amounts was a “horrible, horrible, coincidence”.

 The report was, however, highly critical of the MP’s actions. The report’s 
conclusion 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmprivi/672/67203.htm#_idTextAnchor008>
 said they amounted to “a substantial interference” in the work of the PAC.

Tomlinson told the inquiry he had not been given any formal training on the 
work of Commons committees, although he conceded he should have known sharing 
the draft report was a mistake, especially as it was protected by a password 
and had a “restricted access” marking.

The MP said he had used a private email as parliamentary staff had access to 
this inbox and “could be the ones to forward it to the newspapers or to other 
people”.


Hudson did say she found it “difficult to understand” why Tomlinson said he 
did not think the suggested changes to the report were Wonga’s view, as the 
Wonga employee made it clear he had consulted someone else and was putting 
forward the views of the company.

In mitigation, the committee found Tomlinson did not seek to have Wonga’s 
views explicitly shape the report. The MP has described his actions as the 
“result of my own naivety and stupidity” over the confidentiality of committee 
papers. The report added: “We are concerned that a member of a select committee 
was able to be in such a position.”


The privileges committee only has the power to recommend a suspension from 
parliament. This will be debated and voted on as soon as parliament returns on 
10 October after the party conference season.
 