
Conservative council leaders are warning they face a £600m black hole in 
budgets to improve struggling schools after the government last week pulled the 
plug on its education bill.

With council budgets already under severe pressure after years of austerity, 
some say they may need maintained schools to contribute from their own 
shrinking budgets, while others may be forced to cut support services they 
provide to local schools, leaving them vulnerable to decline.

The threat to school improvement services comes as Ofsted’s chief inspector, 
Sir Michael Wilshaw, described England’s schools as “mediocre but getting 
better”, giving the education system a rating of “6.5 out of 10”.

Local authorities – including Conservative-run county councils in Kent, 
Hampshire and Buckinghamshire – say they have been left in limbo by the 
government’s axing of educational services grants worth £600m ahead of passing 
the bill that would have curtailed the role of local authorities in maintaining 
community schools in England.

But the demise, announced to parliament by education secretary Justine 
Greening last Thursday, of the education for all bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/29/what-does-dropping-of-education-bill-mean>
, means councils will still be legally required to run school improvement 
services next year and meet other costs, such as maternity cover for teachers, 
but without funding from central government.

Education bill scrapped after series of reversals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/27/government-drops-education-bill-after-series-of-reversals>
Martin Tett, the Conservative leader of Buckinghamshire county council, 
condemned the government’s failure to coordinate its funding and support for 
the many state schools that have not become academies.

“What we now have is a situation where the grant is being removed but the 
responsibilities will remain, particularly the statutory responsibility with 
regard to school improvement. And councils at the moment – particularly 
upper-tier councils, like county councils – are very financially stretched,” 
Tett said.

“This is a massive issue for us, because we have an important role in school 
improvement – not only supporting schools that require improvement or are in 
special measures, but actually stopping schools from reaching that stage in 
first place, by intervening early in a preventative approach.That costs money 
and, at the moment, that money is disappearing.”

The cuts will affect the bulk of the more than 20,000 state schools in England 
which are still maintained by their local authorities, rather than the fewer 
than 5,000 academies which are funded directly by central government.

Research by the County Councils Network – representing 37 unitary authorities 
and county councils – has found that more than two-thirds of academies choose 
to purchase school improvement services from their local authority, meaning 
that academies also rely on council support in many places.

Paul Carter, the Conservative leader of Kent council, said his county would be 
losing £4.5m in school support services when the grant was withdrawn next year. 
“Local government is having the most challenging time under public expenditure 
restraints and £4.5m, even for a local authority the size of Kent, is another 
mountain to climb,” he said.

“We have made a very strong case to government that the money needs to be put 
back in the jar, because the impact on schools improvement will be 
disproportionate, especially in primary schools, which are really quite brittle 
and rely on the support of good local authorities.

“In Kent, our proportion of primary schools that are good or outstanding is 
above the national average but, if you go back 10 years ago, that wasn’t the 
case. It’s because of a sustained campaign to help and support primary schools 
improve, which they have done. It’s a great success story.”

If the grant was not renewed, Carter said the council was looking at a plan to 
meet the costs by asking maintained schools for more than £2m, intensifying the 
squeeze on school budgets whose own income has been frozen.

In Buckinghamshire, Tett says there are “no spare millions” to support schools.

“The reality is that all local councils are so financial stretched at the 
moment. The idea of effectively subsidising the education services grant from 
roads or pavements or other maintenance budgets is just not going to happen,” 
he said. “It can’t; we don’t have any spare money in our budget at all.

“The government has to, in my view, either remove the statutory 
responsibilities or restore the funding. It can’t leave us in limbo, where we 
have responsibility but no money. The obviously better outcome, in terms of 
schools and children, is that government restores the funding.”

The council leaders’ fears chime with comments made by Wilshaw 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b081wrqg/the-andrew-marr-show-30102016> 
on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show on Sunday, in which he said that the English 
school system was “in intensive care in the 70s, 80s and much of the 90s”.

But reforms since then “have made a big difference; we’ve got a much better 
education system now”, Wilshaw said. “The big ‘but’ is that we’re not there 
yet; we’re not with the best jurisdictions in the world. We’re not there with 
the South Koreas and the Shanghais and some of the really good European 
nations. We’ve got a lot to do to catch up.”

New grammars would harm British schools, says Ofsted chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/30/grammars-harm-british-schools-says-ofsted-chief-michael-wilshaw>
Wilshaw, who steps down as chief inspector of schools in England at the end of 
the year, repeated his view that opening new grammar schools would hinder 
further improvements.

“If you have grammar schools, you take away the most able children from the 
all-ability comprehensive set-up. And I speak as an ex-head of a successful 
inner-city comprehensive school, an academy, in Hackney. I needed those top 20% 
to lift everyone up,” he said.

Wilshaw added that tackling regional underperformance and reforming skills 
education were more urgent tasks than opening new grammar schools.


A spokesperson for the Department for Education said more pupils were now in 
good or outstanding schools than previously, but that more needed to be done.
“We will scrap the ban on new grammar schools and allow them to open where 
parents want them – with strict conditions to make sure they improve the 
education of pupils in other schools locally,” the DfE said.


A new report funded by Knowsley council – which has the lowest GCSE results of 
any authority in the country – argues that its region requires a “northern 
teaching premium” to attract more qualified staff, including incentives such as 
paying off teachers’ student debts, higher wages, subsidised housing and 
greater opportunities for professional development.

 