
A tougher stance by the Home Office towards overseas students studying at 
British universities could cost the country up to £2bn a year, according to 
forecasts published by the Higher Education Policy Institute.

Its report also found that UK higher education could increase revenue from 
higher fees for foreign students after Britain leaves the EU. But the potential 
gains would be wiped out if the government insists on tightening student visa 
numbers.

Nick Hillman, director of Hepi, said: “Were the Home Office to conduct yet 
another crackdown on international students, then the UK could lose out on £2bn 
a year just when we need to show we are open for business like never before.

Related: Anxious international students turn away from UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/04/anxious-international-students-turn-away-from-uk>

“Removing international students from the net migration target would be an 
easy, costless and swift way to signal a change in direction.”


The study, which examined the forces affecting international study at British 
universities , estimates that 20,000 potential students could be deterred by 
further efforts to restrict student visas, as part of its larger strategy of 
forcing down immigration.

While universities would lose almost £500m a year in fees from 20,000 fewer 
international students, the UK as a whole would lose a further £600m a year in 
the lost spending outside of fees, such as rent and food.

But the largest loss would be the more than £900m a year foregone in what the 
report calls “the detrimental impact on universities’ supply chains” through 
lost spending – the multiplier effects of what the analysts describe as 
“indirect and induced effects on the wider UK economy associated with this 
source of export income”.

Alistair Jarvis, deputy chief executive of Universities UK, representing the 
higher education sector, said: “This report provides a stark warning of the 
potential economic loss associated with policies that restrict European or 
international student numbers. If universities are to continue to boost the 
economy and benefit communities, they need the right support from government.”

John Pugh, the Liberal Democrat education spokesperson, accused the government 
of damaging universities through “populist pandering”.

“Brexit already poses a huge risk to our world-leading universities, the 
government should aim to mitigate this damage not increase it,” he added.

Earlier, a committee of MPs heard warnings from university leaders that Brexit 
risked setting British universities back decades, with other EU countries 
already actively looking to poach talented staff and students.

Asked about the probable impact of a hard Brexit, Prof Alistair Fitt, the 
vice-chancellor of Oxford Brookes University, said: “It would probably be the 
biggest disaster for the university sector for many years.”

Prof Alastair Buchan, the University of Oxford’s incoming head of Brexit 
strategy, said: “We need to be leading, and we have been leading as 
universities in the past 10, 20 years. Thirty or 40 years ago we weren’t, when 
we joined the EU. To lose that would be absolutely shooting ourselves in the 
foot – we must not do that.”

Buchan, the dean of Oxford’s medical school, takes up his new role on 20 
January. His seniority and the status of the post is a clear sign of the 
gravity with which Oxford and other universities are treating the potential 
impact of the UK leaving the EU.

The Hepi report, which was compiled in conjunction with the consultancy London 
Economics, argues that while students numbers could fall in the event of 
Brexit, with EU students no longer given access to the same terms as British 
students, incomes at institutions such as Oxford could actually rise because of 
the higher fees charged to international students.

But Catherine Barnard, a professor of EU law at the University of Cambridge, 
told the education committee hearing that the early signs were of a decline in 
student numbers, including those from outside the EU.

She cited a survey by Cambridge of potential international students who did 
not take up a place, with a number of respondents mentioning “anti-immigrant 
sentiment” as one reason.

“Particularly in the field of maths, the German universities are really 
looking to tap into the pool of talent that we are getting from Hungary and 
Poland,” Barnard said.


Buchan told MPs that the Brexit department and the Department for Education 
had no way of communicating with universities about the problems they faced.


“In the Department for Exiting the European Union, there is no structure of 
who we can talk to, there’s no base camp, there’s no one responsible for 
research or education in universities,” he said.

“Likewise, in the Department for Education, there’s nobody really responsible 
for leaving the EU. So there’s a real need to see who is the channel or the 
portal for information.”
 