
Homebuyers and remortgagors will face tougher checks before being granted a 
mortgage under new rules for lenders that come into force on 26 April.

The changes, which follow the City regulator's mortgage market review (MMR), 
will see would-be borrowers asked to give more detail about their spending when 
they apply for a home loan.
George Osborne (@George_Osborne) 
Changes to the mortgage market will help stop irresponsible lending. Part of 
plan to build resilient economy & avoid mistakes of past
 <https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/statuses/459598201985982465> April 25, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/statuses/459598201985982465> 
Borrowing will be based on how much they have left after regular expenditure, 
rather than on their income, and lenders will have to check that people can 
still afford repayments if interest rates rise.

Lloyds Banking Group, which is the country's biggest mortgage lender and 
offers mortgages through Halifax, Lloyds Bank and Bank of Scotland, said the 
changes meant interviews with new customers could take around 15 minutes 
longer, taking the average length up to around two hours.

It said the additional questions would be focused on imminent changes to their 
lives that can be backed up with evidence. For example, this could relate to 
someone planning to cut back on their working hours or take out a loan.

The regulator behind the new rules, the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> (FCA), said 
they would "hardwire common sense into the mortgage market", and prevent a 
return to irresponsible lending that took place in the runup to the credit 
crisis.

Some lenders adopted the rules earlier this month, but the changes will mean 
that anyone who applied for an agreement in principle on a loan several weeks 
ago, or who has applied for a mortgage and wants to make a material change – 
perhaps borrowing more – will have to start the application process from 
scratch.

Some experts have warned that people who would previously have been able to 
get a mortgage will now be rejected, and that the housing market could slow 
down while lenders bed in changes.

Peter Williams, executive director of the Intermediary Mortgage Lenders 
Association which represents lenders offering loans through advisers, said 
affordability and responsible lending had already become "common themes" in the 
marketplace.

"MMR represents a seismic shift in mortgage regulations, but also the end 
product of a gradual process since the recession to focus in on affordability 
and responsible lending," he said.

"The last 12 months have heralded the welcome return of consumer confidence to 
the mortgage market. MMR is another important milestone in the continuing 
recovery and careful handling will ensure that customers are better off for it."

Kevin Nagle, property partner at law firm Shakespeares, said the government 
had given with one hand through the Help to Buy scheme "and is taking away with 
the other".

He added: "Borrowers will be understandably concerned about having to share 
details of their spending habits with their lender and first-time buyers could 
be put off at the first hurdle if they are refused a mortgage because their 
earnings are not considered reliable enough on paper or because they are 
thought to be spending too much on nights out."

The new rules will not effect mortgages used to fund purchases of rental 
properties. The FCA has warned that it will keep a close eye on the sector to 
ensure buy-to-let deals are not used by homebuyers trying to get around the 
stricter checks.

The FCA's new rules mean: 

• Self-certification mortgages are banned – lenders will have to check how 
much you earn, rather than trusting your word. These have died out since the 
credit crunch anyway.

• Interest-only mortgages are still allowed, but only where there is a 
"credible strategy for repaying the capital". This will mean most lenders won't 
take the sale of the house as repayment vehicle.

• Lenders will stress-test affordability. As well as checking you have enough 
disposable cash to repay the mortgage at its current interest rate, they will 
make sure you do at a higher rate – typically around 7%. This will apply to the 
first five years of the deal.

• Mortgage sales will need to be advised – lenders' staff will have to be 
qualified and will not just be allowed to sell home loans without assessing 
customers.

All you need to know about MMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/apr/12/need-mortgage-new-rules-lenders-check>
 