
A transitional arrangement for the UK’s departure from the EU would pose fewer 
risks to financial stability and cause less complexity for the City firms 
impacted by Brexit, a deputy governor of theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has said.

Speaking to the Treasury select committee, Sam Woods indicated details of that 
arrangement would be needed within nine months of article 50 being triggered. 
That formal process of leaving the EU is expected to be started in March.

Earlier this week,the chancellor, Philip Hammond, told the committee that the 
government would probably seek a transitional deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
 in order to avoid disruption that could risk financial stability.

Asked about this on Wednesday, Woods said: “I think it would reduce the risks. 
It seems to be just as true for the rest of the EU … as it is for the UK. It’s 
in the interests of all parties to have a reasonable implementation phase.

“It’s a question of the sooner the better. I wouldn’t want to be sat here in a 
year’s time a transition not having been agreed.”

He told MPs that the Bank of England was being kept informed of contingency 
arrangements being drawn up by City firms which were most likely to be badly 
affected by not being able to continue doing business in continental Europe in 
the same way as now. Firms could roll these out in a “small number of months”, 
said Woods.

A transitional agreement would be beneficial for the firms which might be 
affected, particularly what he described as trading banks and those operating 
in the wholesale markets.

“Without exception those firms who are affected directly would all like to see 
a transition period. The smoother the adjustment ... the lower are likely to be 
risks to financial stability and safety and soundness,” Woods told the 
committee.

He also referred to his time as part of the team which devised the banking 
reforms outlined by Sir John Vickers in 2011,and which require banks to 
ringfence their high street operations from their investment banks by 2019 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/12/vickers-report-banks-given-until-2019>
.

“The harder the border ... the more complex are likely to be the structures 
the firms adopt … that would be a step backwards. The more complex the firm the 
more difficult it is to manage, the more difficult it is to supervise and the 
more difficult it is to resolve,” said Woods.
 