
How do you make more money out of a public transport service that people have 
begun using less without putting up fares? This conundrum was explored during 
Wednesday’s meeting of theLondon Assembly budget and performance committee 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/moderngov/documents/s61128/2017-18%20GLA%20Group%20Budget.pdf>
, which examined Transport for London’s budget for 2017-18. The service in 
question was the bus service, which has lately seen a fall in passenger numbers 
following many years of vigorous growth. Intelligent probes were launched. 
Interesting responses ensued.

The basic problem is worsening congestion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/jun/06/london-cannot-afford-a-bus-service-slowdown>
, which has been slowing the time bus journeys take and putting people off 
using them. That is a bad thing because when buses move freely and reliably 
they convey large numbers of people very efficiently and bring in large amounts 
of money that TfL badly needs, especially when its reliance on income from 
fares is increasing. At the same time, London mayor Sadiq Khan has pledged to 
freeze TfL fares for four years and introduced a new bus fare,the hopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/12/sadiq-khan-launches-hopper-fares-for-london-buses>
, which enables two different buses to be taken for the price of one within a 
60 minute period. This is already causing TfL to forego revenue it would 
otherwise have gathered.

So how come TfL reckons that bus passenger numbers will stat to go up again 
during the next few years and contribute to TfL’s challenging budgets holding 
together? The Green Party’s Siân Berry wondered how a projected 20% increase in 
income from buses could be secured while at the same time more road space is to 
be allocated exclusively to cyclists and pedestrians and the number of cars and 
other motorised traffic clogging the roads is expected to remain the same.

The answer from TfL commissioner Mike Brown was that an array of “reliability 
schemes” to “ensure that buses get the priority they need, and allow them to 
keep flowing round the centre particularly at crucial junctions” would help a 
lot. The tidy sum of £200m is earmarked for this work and 148 interventions are 
planned for this year, he said, following 77 last year. These aren’t all about 
putting in bus lanes which, as Berry pointed out, isn’t practical on every 
road. Brown explained that small interventions, such as adjusting traffic 
signals, can make “a massive difference during the day”.

Acknowledging the financial importance of getting the bus service back on the 
road to growth, he said: “The logic is quite simple. You don’t need to increase 
the number or frequency of buses in central London to increase volume.” The 
trick is to get services running consistently on time: “Then people want to use 
them more.” Brown struck a bullish note: “I’m confident we can have a 
semi-revolution in terms of bus journey times in central London and continue to 
support [the service’s] growth in outer London.”

The bus-centred section of the meeting also included Mayor Khan’s deputy for 
transport, Val Shawcross, explaining that the arrival of Crossrail and the 
forthcoming Oxford Street pedestrianisation scheme would mean some central 
London bus routes being curbed and the resulting spare capacity “being released 
to areas of high demand elsewhere. We know there are areas of middle and outer 
London where we really do need it. That is guaranteed growth, in a way”.

The hopper fare came under inspection too, primarily from Lib Dem AM Caroline 
Pidgeon, a long time champion of the one-hour bus ticket idea. She wondered if 
its early popularity meant that TfL was likely to lose more revenue as a result 
than it had anticipated, with awkward implications for its budgets down the 
line. Again, Brown was upbeat, saying he believed that the value the hopper 
represents will help entice more people to use buses in time.

That’s just a taste of the exchanges at the meeting. A webcast of the whole 
thing can be foundhere 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/budget-and-performance-committee-2017-01-04>. The 
discussion of the bus service begins from about 11 minutes in.

 