
After post-truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries>
 comes post-sense. The curt utterances of Donald Trump recall those of the 
oracle at Delphi, except that its enigmas were clever. The president-elect’s 
latest140-hieroglyph message on nuclear weapons 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/811977223326625792> is either daft 
or dangerous – and therefore both.

So far in foreign policy, Trumpism has included welcome signs of realpolitik. 
The new man has hinted at scepticism towards interventionism, a questioning of 
Nato, a re-evaluation of Vladimir Putin and a pause to globalisation. These are 
fine, except that they have been unsystematic turns of phrase, mere trips off 
the tongue. Yes, presidents elect can fly kites, but there needs to be some 
sign of string.

Trump wants America to “greatly strengthen and expand its nuclear capability 
until such time as the world comes to its senses regarding nukes”. How does 
that parse? Trump’s acolytes outside the tent says it means he cares about 
nuclear proliferation. But who says it does? And how is the world meant to 
react?

It will hardly do so by disarming. The essence of deterrence is to reply to 
strength with strength. Since Trump’s tweet was in response to Putin’s similar 
tub-thumping earlier in the week, “the world coming to its senses” is the last 
thing that will happen. Trump has already said he regards Japan, North Korea 
and other states going nuclear as “inevitable”. The best that can be said is 
that this is just another display of machismo.

Whatever Trump or Putin says in this childish “willy-waving”, they must know 
that nuclear weapons have no role in modern conflict. They are useless against 
terrorists, who are undeterrable and anyway pose no existential threat to 
western states. They are beyond cruel in “wars among the peoples”. Civil and 
border disputes have to be fought with conventional weapons. From the Falklands 
to 9/11, nuclear weapons have deterred no aggressor, toppled no dictator. They 
are not so much unthinkable as pointless.

Obama at least tried to de-escalate nuclear competition 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/obama-how-we-can-make-our-vision-of-a-world-without-nuclear-weapons-a-reality/2016/03/30/3e156e2c-f693-11e5-9804-537defcc3cf6_story.html?utm_term=.fdb4063d7d56>
. He sought to refocus America’s defence (which should be called attack) policy 
on technology and battlefield sophistication. That is what policy demanded. 
Perhaps the calmest answer to Trump is that, if he wants to waste yet more 
billions of dollars, who cares?

The real question is who will curb this man – or at best distinguish between 
the pertinent ideas and the senseless? The easy answer is the system. As Obama 
found, the lumbering giant that is American foreign policy has a mind of its 
own. It means well but is slow-moving, conservative and militarily inept.

Trump has sworn to fight the system, and surrounded himself with tough guys to 
help him. I doubt that they will win. But a nuclear arms race with Russia is a 
dire echo of the 20th century at its worst. It is wasteful, stupid and sets a 
terrible example to the world.
 