
America’s standing in the eyes of many Europeans has been dealt an immense 
blow by this week’s election. The magnetic effect of the US onEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> has always been drawn from the 
strength of its values – tolerance, individual rights, democracy – arguably 
more so than its cultural symbols, Hollywood movies, Coca-Cola or the iPhone.

With the election of Donald Trump, a man who has declared he’s in favour of 
torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/donald-trump-ohio-rally-isis-torture-tpp-rape>
 andkilling the families 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/12/03/politics/donald-trump-kill-terrorist-families-war-crime/index.html>
 of terrorist offenders, and who shows admiration for autocrats, many Europeans 
woke up on 9 November feeling that the America they admire had been taken from 
them.

America was never perfect by any means. No democracy is. But the erosion of 
America’s image as a democracy capable of underwriting a shared liberal world 
order, combined with the worst instincts this risks amplifying within Europe’s 
own political discourse, represents the biggest threat to the west as we have 
known it in the last seven decades.

It’s a fair bet that Angela Merkel, an East German and Europe’s most powerful 
and respected leader today, immediately felt the daunting contrast between two 
9 Novembers – one the anniversary of thefall of the Berlin Wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/berlinwall>, full of hope, the other, when 
Trump sealed his victory, full of anxiety. Back in 1989, when joyful crowds 
broke through the wall, the symbol of Europe’s division and the oppression of 
entire nations, Merkel went to Berlin’s Bornholmer Strasse crossing to the 
west. As a politician, Merkel has often spoken of the importance of American 
values to her personally, and to Europe. In 2009 she gave a speech to the US 
Congress – the first German chancellor to do so since Konrad Adenauer in 1957 – 
in which she spoke of her “enthusiasm” for “the American dream” where “the air 
is full of the spirit of freedom”.

So it was no surprise that this 9 November, her first reaction to Trump’s 
election was so calibrated and forceful. She listed the “common values” that 
bindGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and the US together: 
“Democracy, freedom, as well as respect for the rule of law and the dignity of 
each and every person, regardless of their origin, skin colour, creed, gender, 
sexual orientation or political views.” She then added: “It is based on these 
values that I wish to offer close cooperation.”

It was a remarkable statement, one that no other German chancellor has ever 
had to make – or indeed felt obliged to. In essence, Merkel set conditions on 
cooperation with the US president. She seemed to put values before the question 
of alliances – or at least, to rank them just as highly. And this, coming from 
the leader of a country whose very democracy and institutions are historically 
owed to America’s postwar political engineering in Europe.

I can think of no other example of a German leader taking the United States so 
openly and bluntly to task on the question of respecting values. Well, 
actually, there is a one precedent: in 2006, when Merkel first travelled to 
Washington as chancellor, she made a point of criticising Guantánamo, calling 
for the camp’s closure and for respect for rule of law, before meeting with 
George W Bush.

Merkel is well aware that if today the US enters a dark and unfathomable era 
of illiberalism, the fallout in Europe will be immense, and the foundations of 
the European project, already badly shaken, will be in even greater danger. She 
acted last year as a guardian of the principle of international asylum. And she 
is deeply concerned about the risk of France being swept away by the Marine Le 
Pen phenomenon. Now, she is calling for Europe’s powerful ally to be true to 
the essence of transatlantic bonds: values, not just institutions, military 
hardware or trade.

If the US is no longer able to give the right cues, those in Europe who want 
to save whatever can be saved of liberal democracy find themselves wrong-footed 
and weakened. Equally, if America cares no longer for the values that are meant 
to be enshrined in the EU project, then Europe’s capacity to show resilience in 
the face of forces that want it dismantled is instantly diminished. It only 
takes one look at the way European demagogues and extremists have applauded 
Trump’s election, and another look at how it was greeted in Moscow, to know 
this problem of perception, the question of America’s image and its link with 
Europe, is essential.

There is of course much speculation about Donald Trump’s foreign policy. No 
doubt, his rhetoric has been worrying. But there are as yet more unknowns than 
knowns. What we do know for certain is that Trump’s success has wrecked the 
notion that the American nation wholeheartedly stands for the values of liberal 
democracy. And this is happening at time when those values are being 
increasingly questioned in Europe. Trump has cast a dark shadow on America’s 
reputation, adding to the blow suffered by liberal values as a result of 
Britain’s referendum.

This is why the dread felt now by so many Europeans is as overwhelming as the 
excitement and optimism which seized everyone on that other 9 November, 27 
years ago: 1989 was not just a victory for Europeans but a victory for America 
and its values. The US had not only guaranteed the security of western European 
countries since the second world war, it had played a crucial role in 
consolidating democracy and reconciliation. There simply would never have been 
a European project, without America’s engagement and interest.

If there is now a threat hanging over the west, it comes first and foremost 
from the danger that this psychological and political link with America might 
break. This disappointment is arguably bigger than fears that Nato defence 
guarantees might evaporate overnight. This is why, on the day after America’s 
election, Merkel was right to speak of values rather than of alliances. She, 
very likely, had that 9 November anniversary in mind.
 