
This week, vaccine skeptic Robert F Kennedy Jr announced that he’d been 
nominated 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-to-meet-with-proponent-of-debunked-tie-between-vaccines-and-autism/2017/01/10/4a5d03c0-d752-11e6-9f9f-5cdb4b7f8dd7_story.html?utm_term=.f4b27812d300>
 by President Elect Donald Trump to chair a commission on vaccine safety. A few 
hours later, the transition team issued a statement saying that that Trump was 
“exploring the possibility of forming a committee on autism”. Last summer, Trump
met with Andrew Wakefield 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/11/trump-met-prominent-anti-vaccine-activists-during-campaign>
, who lost his medical license and was found to have producedfraudulent research
 <http://www.bmj.com/content/342/bmj.c7452> linking vaccines to autism. Whether 
Trump is creating a commission on vaccine safety or autism, the message is 
clear. Trump is offering prominent support to the conspiracy theory that 
vaccines cause autism.

The science on vaccines is very clear: they are safe and effective. Vaccines 
do not cause autism. It’s a waste of our tax dollars to rehash this issue yet 
again. Vaccines are one of the greatest triumphs of modern medicine. Let’s 
consider measles, just one of many vaccine-preventable diseases. Before 1963, 
when the measles vaccine became widely available, 3-4 million Americans got 
measles each year, of whom 48,000 were hospitalized, 4000 developed 
encephalitis resulting in long-term brain damage, and 4-500 died. The country’s 
population has almost doubled since that time.

Trump and others have advocated delaying and spacing out vaccinations. But 
it’s important to understand that vaccination schedules are based on our 
scientific understanding of the immune system and disease transmission. A 
mother passes antibodies to her baby through the placenta as well as breast 
milk, thereby protecting her child against some infections. These antibodies 
don’t last forever. If you vaccinate a baby too early, the mother’s antibodies 
prevent the vaccine from taking effect. But if you wait too long to vaccinate, 
you leave the child unprotected. For example, studies have shown that by six 
months of age, over 95% of infants have lost the protection of their mother’s 
antibodies to measles.

At least until now, we’ve reaped the benefits of high vaccination rates: far 
less measles than in other parts of the world. When a disease becomes less 
common, the probability that you’ll come into contact with it goes down, 
actually giving us more wriggle room in our vaccination schedule. The measles 
vaccine also works a bit better if you wait until 12 months of age. But if you 
wait to vaccinate against measles until you’ve got a walking, talking toddler 
who’s around other kids, you’re putting that child at risk. Moreover, in the 
past two decades, more and more parents have chosen not to immunize their 
children, so much so that vaccination rates in some parts of the country are 
well below those seen in much poorer developing countries.

Parents want to do what’s best for their children. But in many cases, parents’ 
attitudes about vaccination have little to do with their understanding of the 
science and are driven by their distrust of the government on the right and the 
pharmaceutical industry on the left. Lack of trust in government – specifically 
its ability to create and sustain well-paying jobs in this country – helped 
elect Trump. As distrust in public institutions rises, conspiracy theories 
abound. Saying “I don’t believe you” is a way of saying “I don’t trust you,” no 
matter how much science there is to support a specific policy or course of 
action.

This isn’t the first time we’ve seen conspiracy theories proliferate about 
medical science – and it won’t be the last.

I spent two months as an aid worker in Guinea during the Ebola epidemic. In 
that time, I learned far more about the politics of science and medicine than 
about the virus itself. West Africans have very little trust in their public 
institutions – for good reason. These are among the most corrupt, least 
democratic nations in the world. And they have reason not to trust foreigners: 
a long history of slave trading followed by the stripping of natural resources 
for the profit of multinational corporations. We heard on the news that West 
Africans resisted recommendations about hand washing, safe burials, contact 
tracing and quarantines. On the ground, they told me that public officials were 
using the epidemic for political purposes and that expats were mercenaries. Yet 
we in the West dismissed their cynicism as primitive superstition.

President Elect Donald Trump has been a vocal proponent of numerous other 
conspiracy theories – about climate change, the media, our elections, Obama’s 
place of birth, the government’s role in the 9/11 attacks, the Deepwater 
Horizon oil spill, and the deaths of White House deputy counsel Vince Foster 
and Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia – to name just a few. As these false 
stories circulate, people lose trust in all institutions, especially the 
government and the media.

For now, Americans still trust scientists to act in the public’s best 
interest. We have a duty to live up to their trust. The lives of many 
Americans, our country’s future and the world’s are at stake.
 