
Each year, on the third Monday in January, US public schools close to observe 
the birthday of Martin Luther King Jr 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Luther_King_Jr._Day>. At some point 
during the preceding week, most schoolchildren attend a Martin Luther King Jr 
Day assembly, a pregnant pause between classes designed to remind students of 
the black trauma and black greatness in America’s DNA, the gravity of King’s 
sacrifice, and, most pressingly, the persistent relevance of his mission. The 
purpose is not just to honour, but to remember. A good MLK Day assembly ought 
to emphasise that our work is not done, particularly this year, just days 
before America’s first black president hands the nation over to an oligarch 
endorsed by the Ku Klux Klan who “won” his office largely throughvoter 
suppression in black and Latino communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/donald-trump-voter-suppression-campaign-north-carolina-florida>
.

My stepdaughter’s high school held theirs last week. “We just had an MLK 
assembly,” she texted me as she filed out of the auditorium, “and it was the 
biggest steaming pile of shit.” I held out the phone to show my husband. She 
doesn’t swear in front of us. The featured speaker, she said, was a white man – 
a classmate’s grandfather – who supposedly saw King deliver his famous I Have a 
Dream speech. According to my kid, he told the assembled students that Black 
Lives Matter is “too exclusive”, and “all lives matter” was more in line with 
King’s message. The room exploded into cheers. My daughter, a mixed-race girl 
in a mostly white school, refused to clap. (Later, some white friends would 
make fun of her for it: sure, the speech was “weird”, but why was she so 
upset?) The white man concluded his remarks by declaring that it would have 
been King’s dream for the Seattle Seahawks to defeat the Atlanta Falcons in the 
then-upcoming National Football League playoff game. The assembled crowd nearly 
collapsed with delight. (The Seahawks lost.)

Mississippi city faces backlash after calling MLK Day ‘Great Americans Day’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/biloxi-mississippi-great-americans-day-tweet-martin-luther-king-jr>
She says that a white teacher took the mic and added something along the lines 
of: “People say our school is not very diverse, but that’s not true. We have 
one of the most diverse schools I’ve ever seen!” To illustrate her point, the 
white teacher played a video of, in my daughter’s words, “a bunch of white kids 
talking about how different they were because they could, like, cross their 
eyes weird”. There were reportedly three black kids in the “diversity” video, 
only two with speaking parts. No black people spoke live at the assembly. 
“Really?” my husband joked. “Black people don’t even get to keepMartin Luther 
King <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king>? I was sure we 
had that one nailed down.”

A suburban public high school is hardly a litmus test for all of humanity or a 
bastion of sophisticated pageantry, but one would expect administrators to at 
least try to centre black people’s voices on the one day our nation has set 
aside for them. Their failure to even graze that generously low bar reveals 
something much more insidious than overt, explicit racism: certain white 
Americans believe that you can have a discussion about race that is 
post-racial; that black people do not necessarily need to be centred in the 
struggle for black people’s equality.

Rightwing lawmakers don’t need to outright replace MLK Day with KKK Day 
(although, fun fact: in Alabama, Arkansas and Mississippi,King shares his 
holiday with Confederate general Robert E Lee 
<http://www.al.com/news/birmingham/index.ssf/2017/01/google_apologizes_for_citing_r.html>
). It’s much simpler and more effective to hollow out and rebrand King’s words 
to mean whatever you want them to mean. Get used to Trumpism that looks like 
liberal boilerplate. Certain predators figured out years ago that it’s far more 
efficient to be a parasite. “Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice 
everywhere,” can sound a lot like, “Reverse racism is real,” in the mouth of a 
disingenuous propagandist. “Hate cannot drive out hate; only love can do that,” 
can easily read as, “Be nice to white people and never criticise them,” to 
fragile ideologues.

This deliberate erosion of meaning is how civil-rights hero and US congressman 
John Lewis – who knew and worked with King –came to be publicly scolded by 
comedian Rob Schneider 
<http://jezebel.com/rob-schneider-generously-educates-rep-john-lewis-on-ma-1791270985>
 (who, to his credit, has worked as botha European and a domestic gigolo 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001705/>). Affronted by Lewis’s stated opinion 
that Trump’s presidency is not “legitimate”, Schneider birthed this remarkable 
tweet: “Rep. Lewis. You are a great person. But King didn’t give in to his 
anger or his hurt. That is how he accomplished & won Civil Rights.”

We don’t have to imagine how King might have felt about such a lazy perversion 
of his ideas, not to mention the self-evident delusion that civil rights have 
been “won”. He wrote the definitive evisceration in 1963’sLetter from 
Birmingham Jail 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/1963/04/martin-luther-kings-letter-from-birmingham-jail/274668/>
:
 “I have almost reached the regrettable conclusion that the Negro’s great 
stumbling block in his stride toward freedom is not the White Citizen’s 
Counciler or the Ku Klux Klanner, but the white moderate, who is more devoted 
to ‘order’ than to justice; who prefers a negative peace which is the absence 
of tension to a positive peace which is the presence of justice; who constantly 
says: ‘I agree with you in the goal you seek, but I cannot agree with your 
methods of direct action’; who paternalistically believes he can set the 
timetable for another man’s freedom; who lives by a mythical concept of time 
and who constantly advises the Negro to wait for a ‘more convenient season.’ 
Shallow understanding from people of good will is more frustrating than 
absolute misunderstanding from people of ill will. Lukewarm acceptance is much 
more bewildering than outright rejection.” 
One of the most jarring revelations of Trump’s transition has been that 
American democracy, to some still-unplumbed degree, operates on the honours 
system. Does Trump have to abide by anti-nepotism statutes? Eh, maybe. Will he 
be required to divest from his business interests? He probably should, but, 
shrug. Aren’t there rules against monetising the presidency? Weird – turns out, 
nobody knows! Doesn’t it matter if a president vows to persecute vast swaths of 
the people he has been elected to represent? Not if he says over and over that 
he’s the best! Ivanka’s nail beds look like blushing baby almonds – she can’t 
really be that bad!

In Trump’s America, meaning is fluid. There are no standards. There are no 
limits. It doesn’t matter what you do; it only matters what you say you do. 
That’s how Trump can proclaim himself the “least racist person on earth” while 
running for president on an explicitly racist platform. That’s how he can 
insist “nobody respects women more than me” in response to a tape of him 
confessing to sexual assault. That’s how the GOP can strip affordable 
healthcare from millions of people in the name of “helping” them. That’s how 
white kids making funny faces can represent “diversity”, and a celebration of 
one of our greatest black radicals can turn into an “all lives matter” rally.

Don’t fall for it. Don’t be nice, be right.
 