
Successive British governments refused to cap super-high interest rates, which 
is how we allowedWonga to charge its poor borrowers up to 5,853% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/08/wonga-banned-tv-ad-interest-rate>
. Then this week Google shocks everyone by banning adverts for payday loans 
above 36% APR. It tells you a lot about who really runs the world today.

The search engine giant is not banning the products itself, and they may still 
appear on results pages. It also looks as if the 36% may only apply to the US, 
but however it works this is a big blow to the pricey loan peddlers. I typed 
“instant loan” into Google this week, and half of the ads, taking up most of 
the top half of the screen, were from payday loan companies pushing loans at 
more than 36%: Sunny was at 979% (that will wipe the smile off anyone’s face), 
and UK Loans had Satsuma at 1,575%.

The credit card companies are off the hook, though. Google says “revolving 
lines of credit” such as credit cards are exempt from its 36% limit. In any 
case, when I searched for cards for people with less than perfect credit 
history, I found ads for Capital One’s Classic card at 34.9%, the Aqua card at 
35.9%, and Marbles at 33.8%. I suspect Google has set the 36% level to make 
sure it still captures ad revenue from most credit card deals in the developed 
world.

But let’s not be churlish. This sort of move brings Google back to its former 
“Don’t be evil” corporate days, and is a welcome turnaround from a few years 
ago. In 2013 and 2014 we exposedthe plague of “copycat” websites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2014/feb/01/google-do-right-thing-copycat-websites>
 fooling people into paying over the odds for free or low-cost government 
services. People tapping “driving licence renewal”, “Ehic card” or even “HMRC 
tax” into Google were lured to sites where they were ripped off by as much as 
£500.

Shamefully, Google dragged its heels on the subject, and only after intense 
pressure from us and government bodies did it take the ads down. By banning 
most payday loan ads – it comes into force on 13 July – Google is likely to be 
taking a much bigger hit on its revenue. It may also change the marketplace, 
with providers incentivised to cut their rates to more sensible levels.

Google must know its brand is no longer loved, and needs to be more consumer 
friendly. “Financial services is an area we look at very closely because we 
want to protect users from deceptive or harmful financial products,” it now 
says, and who would argue with that?

But Google, while you’re at it, can you remove some other niggly ads as well? 
Type in “Ryanair” and at the top is always an annoying “Ryanair Flight on 
eDreams” link. Click on it and you are almost guaranteed to pay more for your 
flight (eg: £39.70 for a Ryanair flight to Dublin versus £25.19 on Ryanair’s 
own site, paying by a Visa debit card). Please get rid of it. It’s only cheaper 
if you have a Maltese pre-pay card (yeah, right).

That’s my Google niggle. What is yours?

We’ve had enough of the silence on TalkTalk’s data breaches


Surely it is time for the Information Commissioner’s Office to break its 
silence on what happened at TalkTalk last year? So far we know that there were 
a string of data breaches, and at least 157,000 customers had their accounts 
accessed. We also know a significant number of customers have been conned by 
fraudsters who ring up posing as TalkTalk staff. This week I took a call from 
yet another victim who had just lost £2,000. TalkTalk has repeatedly denied any 
liability, but how much longer can it keep up this position – ethically, if not 
legally?

This week we learned that the fall-out from the data breach contributed to 
TalkTalk posting profits down by half to £14m. The victims are now waiting for 
the ICO to rule on what really happened at the media organisation in 2015, at 
which point they may start their claims to be reimbursed for their considerable 
losses. And if TalkTalk persists in blocking their claims, then class action 
lawyers won’t be far behind.

• This article was amended on 16 May 2016. It previously said that AvantCredit 
was a payday lender. This is incorrect and so has been removed.
 