
Yaseen Aslam. James Farrar. Remember those two names, because they are 
giant-killers. This summer the men took on not just one £50bn multinational, 
but an entire business model. On Friday,they won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
.

As minicab drivers for Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>, 
Aslam and Farrar were deemed to be self-employed. The status meant they were 
denied the most basic rights that other workers take: no minimum wage, no sick 
pay, no paid holiday. But as an employment tribunal judge heard over several 
days in July, that classification was both wrong and unfair. And he agreed.


Uber loses right to classify UK drivers as self-employed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
The obvious thing to say about Anthony Snelson’s ruling is that it is huge. It 
poses an existential threat to Uber in Britain. It will also send shockwaves 
through a string of companies using the same business model to do everything 
from delivering takeaways to providing cleaners to couriering court documents.


Most of all, it is a massive boost for all of us who want a fairer jobs market 
– and a big slap in the face for the government. For most of the past six 
years, ministers have turned a blind eye to the growth in bogus 
self-employment, zero-hours contracts and Sports Direct-style agency work. They 
have preferred instead to celebrate the record employment numbers as proof that 
austerity is doing the trick. Just before the last election, Nick Clegg 
claimed: “If you want a glimpse of the sort of worker that will thrive in the 
new economy, you need look no further than the growing numbers of self-employed 
people.”


On this subject too, the hapless Lib Dem was wrong. The idea that the swelling 
army of self-employed Britons are all budding SurAlans and Bransons, swigging 
lattes and toting MacBooks, is for the birds. Serious labour-market analysts 
agree that a large number of those now in self-employment are there as a last 
resort. And many believe a big chunk should not even be classed as 
self-employed. As with much else in our insecure labour market, firm numbers 
are hard to come by. But the Citizens Advice Bureaux believe that the reserve 
army of bogus self-employed may number around half a million.


For some Britons, self-employment doubtless means freedom. But for others, it 
means the freedom to be exploited, deprived of rights – and to be underpaid. 
According to recent research from the Resolution Foundation, the typical self 
employed Brit is now earning less than when John Major was prime minister.

For the likes of Uber, self-employment is hugely profitable. The giant company 
has 40,000 drivers working for it in Britain – and as long as they are 
self-employed they are almost cost-free. On that basis, Uber can keep on adding 
to its fleet of drivers for next to nothing, and thus rack up ever more 
passengers and squeeze out competitors.

But as the judge found on Friday, Uber drivers are not self-employed at all. 
They have little of the liberty you might expect, but are instead interviewed, 
recruited and controlled by the firm. Uber sets their default driving routes. 
Uber fixes the fares. Uber instructs them on how to do their job and runs a 
disciplinary procedure. The drivers work for Uber – not the other way round.

As the ruling observes, the company and its highly-paid boosters do their best 
to cloak this relationship in the language of chummy marketing and hi-tech 
piety. They use the term “gig economy”, when what they mean is casualised 
labour. They claim to be “disrupters”, when what they’re really disrupting are 
our labour laws. And Uber still markets itself like a plucky underdog when it 
is now worth $62.5bn – more than Tesco and Barclays put together – and numbers 
among its public affairs and public relations people the former advisers to Ed 
Balls and Michael Howard. Pretending to be the future, it is really the past: a 
cab company that relies on its drivers being cheap and available. Except your 
local cab firm doesn’t have the lobbying muscle or the Westminster contacts.

Uber confirmed that it will appeal against the decision, and you can expect 
this case to keep the courts busy for a few months. Other businesses that have 
copied the Uber model will be watching anxiously. And so will their workers.

A few months back, I interviewed a courier called Mags Dewhurst, whose job is 
biking urgent medical supplies to hospitals around London. Like most other 
cycle couriers and drivers, she’s also classified as self-employed; she’s also 
fighting to change her status. Next month she will be battling her company, 
CitySprint, in court.

Dewhurst has a strong case. She wears a uniform with a logo, clocks in with a 
controller each morning. And then: “For 50 hours each week, I’m told what to 
do.” She’s been impatient for the Uber verdict, knowing that it will be of huge 
symbolic importance for her own case. On Friday afternoon, I texted her: How 
pleased are you?

Her reply: “On a scale of 1-10? A GAZZILLLLION.”
 