
British consumers continued to splash out on new cars in August, extending the 
record unbroken run of sales growth to two-and-a-half years.

New car sales were 9.5% higher than August 2013, with 72,163 vehicles 
registered, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT).

It marked the 30th consecutive month of growth in new car sales, the longest 
since records began in 1959 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/uk-car-industry-longest-period-sale-growth-1959>
, with consumers spurred on by cheap finance deals and a desire for more 
fuel-efficient models.

August is typically one of the quietest months for new car sales, falling just 
before the September plate change and accounting for abound 3% of annual sales. 
September usually accounts for about 18% of new car sales each year.

Economists said growth in August sent a positive signal about the industry's 
short-term health but warned that weak wage growth and the prospect of rising 
interest rates may start to weigh on the car market.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said: "The economic 
fundamentals still look largely positive for the motor industry which will 
hopefully fuel ongoing healthy car sales – although the growth rate is highly 
likely to ease back given double-digit growth both in 2013 and over the first 
eight months of 2014.

"One concern for car manufacturers is that extended low earnings growth could 
become a constraint for private car sales while some consumers will also be 
worried by the prospect that interest rates will start to rise before long."

The Bank of England is expected to raise interest rates in the early months of 
next year. Rates have been on hold at an all-time low of 0.5% since March 2009 
in response to the financial crisis.

Wage growth has lagged behind inflation for much of the past six years, with 
persistent falls in real pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/13/fall-uk-wages-bittersweet-rising-employment>
.

Such pressure on household finances has not been reflected in the new car 
sales data. A total of 1.53m new cars have been registered in 2014 so far, 
10.1% more than at the same stage last year.

Last month, the SMMT raised its 2014 forecast for new car sales for the second 
time this year. <> It now expects sales to jump 8.1% to 2.45m, underpinned by 
cheap finance deals and a better-than-expected economic backdrop, with 
unemployment falling faster and consumer confidence at higher levels.

The Ford Fiesta was the bestseller in August, followed by the Ford Focus and 
Vauxhall Corsa, mirroring the top three best sellers in the year to date.

Mike Hawes, SMMT chief executive, said buyers were snapping up "enticing deals 
on a wealth of advanced new products".

He added: "The UK's performance in the context of Europe is particularly 
impressive, with growth consistently ahead of the rest of the EU for the past 
two years. As the UK market starts to find its natural level, we expect to see 
the growth level off during coming months."

David Raistrick, UK automotive leader at Deloitte, said there were other risks 
to the new UK car market, as well as rising borrowing costs.

"Aside from a potential interest rate rise, the biggest challenge facing the 
automotive retail sector will be the impact of the increasing numbers of nearly 
new used vehicles returning to the market.

"This could detrimentally affect residual values with the knock-on effect that 
the used-vehicle purchase becomes a more competitive proposition – bringing an 
element of balance back to the industry."
 