
The vote for Brexit has created a “challenging period of uncertainty and 
adjustment”Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> policymakers have 
said.

In a quarterly update on the health of the financial system on Thursday, the 
Bank’s policy makers also said the UK’s withdrawal from the European Union 
would not be used as a way to reduce regulation on the banking sector.

The Bank also conducted its annual assessment of the help-to-buy scheme, which 
ends its three-year course at the end of 2016, and said its closure would not 
lead to mortgage lending drying up or an increase in the size of deposits 
required to gain a home loan.

The financial policy committee, chaired by the Bank’s governor Mark Carney, 
focused on the risks posed by Brexit and the “high degree of political and 
policy uncertainty in many advanced economies”.


Shares rally and pound jumps after divided Fed leaves US interest rates on 
hold – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/22/shares-rally-pound-federal-reserve-bank-of-england-live>
The record of the FPC meeting 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/033.aspx> on 20 
September shows the members regard the outlook for financial stability as 
challenging.


It said there is a risk that borrowing costs could rise and that households 
will not be able to make debt repayments. Commercial property prices have 
fallen and transactions are at their lowest level since 2009, the FPC said, 
citing the heightened uncertainty about the economic outlook following the 
Brexit vote.

Amid speculation that the withdrawal from the EU will lead to a rewriting of 
regulations, the policymakers said they were committed “to robust prudential 
standards in the UK financial system”.


“This will require a level of resilience to be maintained that is at least as 
great as that currently planned, which itself exceeds that required by 
intentional baseline standards,” the FPC said.


The Bank said that since the vote to leave the EU on 23 June the pound had 
fallen sharply and that while this would help the country’s current account 
deficit it could lead to higher borrowing costs.


“The risk remains of a fall in overseas investors’ appetite to invest in the 
United Kingdom. Any disorderly adjustment in capital flows would be associated 
with tighter funding conditions for the UK real economy,” the FPC said.


Bond yields – in part because of the quantitative easing programme introduced 
after the Brexit vote – are low, which could make the market
vulnerable to sharp adjustments.

The Bank is looking at China - where lending growth is high compared with the 
size of the economy - and will say more in November when the results of stress 
tests on banks are published. On Sunday, international banking body the Bank 
for International Settlements had said thatearly warning of financial 
overheating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/18/central-bankers-group-bis-stark-warning-world-economy>
 – the gap between credit and GDP – hit 30.1 in China in the first quarter of 
this year.

While fallout from the Brexit vote is being closely watched by Threadneedle 
Street, the Frankfurt-based European Central Bank said the outcome of the 
referendum has been largely of domestic rather than international significance.

While the vote for Brexit shocked markets, the outcome was shortlived, the ECB 
said in itslatest economic bulletin 
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-bulletin/html/eb201606.en.html>. “In the 
United Kingdom, uncertainty surrounding economic policy rose. The impact on 
other countries has been more modest, suggesting that the vote on EU membership 
has resulted in a regional – rather than a global – shock. Nonetheless, other 
factors may also be contributing to the higher levels of political and policy 
uncertainty seen in other countries, particularly in the United States and 
China,” said the central bank for the 19 members of the euro.

The ECB said market volatility after the Brexit vote had largely been 
contained, with expectations that central bankers would ease monetary policy 
and governments ease austerity.
 