
British companies are grappling with higher costs and bracing for further 
pressure in the months ahead as the start of Brexit talks threatens to drag the 
pound down further and ramp up the price of imports to the UK.

Reports from the manufacturing and construction sectors on Monday point to a 
sharp rise in the prices paid for materials by firms in Britain and worries 
that their profit margins will be squeezed as they decide how much of those 
higher costs they can pass on to customers.

Manufacturers’ organisation EEF flagged up higher costs in its latest survey 
of 281 senior executives 
<https://www.eef.org.uk/resources-and-knowledge/research-and-intelligence/industry-reports/executive-survey-2017>
 although it found companies were generally upbeat about their own prospects in 
2017, with hopes for improved sales.

In the report, the EEF said: “Companies have experienced a surge in input 
costs, which soared to multiyear highs. As the weak pound is expected to 
prevail, cost pressures will be gradually feeding through into higher consumer 
prices in the year ahead.”

Separate research by the Federation of Master Builders found 70% of the 232 UK 
construction companies it polled had recorded an increase in material prices 
owing to the pound’s fall since the Brexit vote.

Sarah McMonagle, director of external affairs at the group, said: “Thousands 
of smaller building firms are grappling with the rising cost of materials 
caused by the depreciation of sterling since the EU referendum.

“Anecdotally, construction SMEs [small and medium-sized enterprises] are 
already reporting an increase of 22% in Spanish slate and a 20% increase in 
timber. A quarter of all materials used by the UK construction industry are 
imported – this is significant and underlines the vulnerability of the industry 
to sudden fluctuations in the strength of our currency.”

Economists have warned that the pound faces further swings on foreign 
exchanges with the triggering of article 50 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-forex-poll-sterling-idUKKBN14Q1FI>, expected 
by the end of March, to kick off formal talks to leave the EU. Some predict the 
effects of the pound’s weakness will lift headline inflation in the UK from1.2% 
on the latest reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
 to as high as 3% by year end.

The EEF’s poll noted pressures from other sources in 2017. With voters going 
to the polls in France, Germany and the Netherlands, as well as Donald Trump’s 
presidency marking a change of direction in US politics, a large proportion of 
manufacturers said their companies faced more risks than opportunities in 2017. 
Almost half, or 46%, said risks outstripped opportunities while 23% said there 
were more opportunities than risks.

EEF’s chief economist, Lee Hopley, said: “There is a real sense that there are 
way more risks than opportunities out there, obviously that is exacerbated by 
Brexit but we are not going to leave the EU in 2017.”

Hopley said that despite their worries and with big questions over what kind 
of trade deal the UK would end up securing, manufacturers were generally 
hopeful of better sales this year and were still investing in productivity 
improvements.

“The message we are getting from manufacturers is you can’t afford to sit on 
your hands for 18 months,” she said.


The survey also showed a rise in the proportion of firms that think the UK was 
a competitive place to base a manufacturing business in the next 12 months.

“For the next 12 months at least, respondents are positive, on balance, about 
the UK as a place to manufacture. Whilst this is encouraging, it could reflect 
perceptions about the current attractiveness of other locations, with 
unpredictability not just a UK phenomenon,” the report said.

Companies were less upbeat about their profitability as they get to grips with 
higher costs, Hopley said. The pound’s sharp fall since the Brexit vote hasmade 
imports such as fuel and metals more expensive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/uk-economy-ends-2016-on-high-but-rising-import-prices-bite>
. On the other hand, some firms have reporteda boost to exports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/01/weak-pound-boosts-uk-manufacturing-steep-import-cost-rise>
 as the weak pound makes products and services cheaper in overseas markets.


The Construction Products Association (CPA) suggested its members had 
experienced higher prices and were expecting further increases. Among those 
companies that made “heavy side” materials such as steel and bricks 78% 
reported an increase in annual costs. Among those making “light side” products 
such as insulation and lighting, 71% had seen an increase.

Rebecca Larkin, a CPA senior economist, said: “Rising costs of imported raw 
materials continue to be a primary driver of cost inflation, but there is now 
an indication that currency weakness is filtering through to higher energy and 
fuel costs too.

 “The impact of Brexit on the construction industry is, as yet, unclear, but 
it is unlikely this year will be as buoyant as last unless government is able 
to provide greater certainty and the industry is able to manage cost pressures.”
 