
For the second month running the UK’s headline figure for inflation – the rate 
of increase in prices for goods and services – is negative.In October, prices 
were 0.1% lower than 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/nov/17/stock-markets-bounce-back-uk-us-inflation-live#block-564af36ee4b0e98c91b0d0d7>
 a year ago – the first time ever that the consumer prices index (CPI) has 
fallen in two consecutive months.

While September’s figure is used to determine benefits rises, October’s is not 
so important in that respect. But the rate of inflation could still have an 
impact on your finances.

For consumers, the fact that prices are not rising may seem like a good thing 
at first glance, but the low inflation environment has implications that make 
the story less straightforward.

The wider economy

Opinion is split among economists as to the causes of this deflation and its 
implications for the economy. Paul Hollingsworth, UK economist at consultancy 
CapitalEconomics <https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>, believes 
this is a temporary blip. “We doubt that we are entering a new era of 
zeroflation or noflation,” he says. “Indeed, inflation looks set to pick up 
around the turn of the year as we reach the anniversary of previous sharp falls 
in oil prices.”

In the meantime, he takes the view that the mild deflation seen in recent 
months is essentially good, driven by lower energy prices, rather than 
symptomatic of weakness in the domestic economy. “It is good because it boosts 
households’ purchasing power and lowers firms’ day-to-day running costs,” he 
says. “At the moment, households are getting a considerable boost to their 
spending power due to the fall in the prices of petrol, utilities and food.”


In contrast, economist Professor Steve Keen from Kingston University believes 
even mild deflation is bad news. “Deflation is only benign — or even beneficial 
— in a world in which no one has any debt. Bizarrely, this is the world that 
conventional economists actually imagine we live in, since their models have 
ignored debt. With debt, deflation amplifies your indebtedness, which is what 
happened drastically during the Great Depression.”


Keen is convinced deflation will be here for decades, just like in Japan. And 
he predicts that we are headed for full-blown deflation if the government 
follows the path of austerity. “On current policy settings, I’d say it’s 
guaranteed, but it won’t be a runaway process,” he says. “Instead, it will 
taper to a level in the zero to -2% range. This again has been Japan’s 
experience. Some mild inflation has resulted whenever the government has run a 
fiscal stimulus, only to peter out back into deflation when the stimulus was 
removed.”


Both agree that a prolonged period of deflation would be bad news for the 
economy. Hollingsworth says it could alter households’ inflation expectations 
and persuade people to delay their spending in anticipation of lower prices in 
the future.


 “It could also cause firms to become less certain about future profits, and 
so delay investment decisions, or cut nominal pay growth for workers to keep 
real pay constant,” he adds. “What’s more, it could also cause asset prices 
more generally to fall.”

 Keen also stresses that with UK firms and households carrying a lot of debt 
(175% of gross domestic product), “households and firms will be reluctant to 
finance any new spending with new credit, so investment in particular will slow 
down as will economic growth”.

Winners and losers

 The most immediate implication of continued deflation is that it makes an 
interest rate rise less likely – in the short term this is good news for 
borrowers, but not for savers.

But in a long-term deflationary environment, those carrying debt would find 
the real cost of servicing those debts increasing. Keen explains: “1% deflation 
on a 3% mortgage rate means you have to give 4% of your real income to the 
bank.”

 This is likely to be compounded by increasing unemployment, particularly in 
sectors where pricing power is low, such as steel, or those that rely on 
discretionary consumer spending.

 Even for those in work, incomes could drop given the pressure for cuts in 
wages and overtime as businesses seek to reduce costs to maintain profit 
margins in the face of falling demand and prices.

Of course, there will be some winners from deflation. Ann Pettifor, director 
at Prime Economics, says: “Disinflation or outright deflation benefits those on 
fixed incomes, as they’ll be able to buy more goods and services as prices fall.


“It is also good for creditors. This is because while price increases can fall 
below zero, effectively turning negative, interest rates for loans and 
mortgages cannot. So while wages or incomes may fall, interest rates (once they 
hit the 0% level) will effectively rise relative to these falls.”

Patrick Connolly, from financial adviser Chase de Vere, points out that 
deflation could be good news for savers. “Since interest rates were reduced to 
0.5% in March 2009 savers have been faced with the prospect of earning paltry 
returns on their cash savings. However, while savers may feel disadvantaged in 
absolute terms, in a deflationary environment they are at least making money in 
real terms.”

But for those using their pension to buy an annuity, low inflation is bad 
news. “Annuity rates are determined by gilt yields and longevity,” says 
Connolly. “In a deflationary environment, the return offered by fixed interest, 
including gilts, become more attractive and so it is likely that prices will 
rise and yields will fall. This would be bad news for somebody looking to take 
out an annuity.”

What to do with your money


Broadly speaking, people should try and reduce their exposure to debt and 
maximise their cash savings.


Those with large mortgages in relation to the value of their properties should 
consider ways of reducing their debt ratio, perhaps by using savings to pay 
down the loan or downsizing their property. Alternatively, it may make sense to 
restructure the mortgage and any other loans by remortgaging. Kay Ingram, an 
independent financial adviser at LEBC, says: “Fixed rates are very low now and 
if you’re going to fix now is a good time to do so.”


Ingram says buy-to-let landlords should be especially mindful of the future 
cost of their debts in a scenario where house prices and rents may cease to 
increase year on year and may even fall. “Property investors who are not cash 
buyers need to be aware that a deflationary market will increase the illiquid 
nature of property investments, the time taken to sell and realise capital is 
likely to increase, so only those who can afford to wait to realise their 
investment can afford this risk.”


Investors


 Stock market investors should also take particular care to avoid companies 
with excessive debts in a deflationary environment. For as demand falls so will 
their profits, leaving them vulnerable to banks calling in loans or refusing to 
increase them.

 Kay Ingram from independent financial adviser LEBC, says falling prices and 
lower interest rates mean that investors who are interested in income are 
likely to find fixed-interest investments, corporate bonds and gilts are more 
attractive than cash. But she warns: “In part, though, the extra earned 
compared to cash will simply reflect the increased risk of default and so 
capital losses could increase if deflation is persistent.”

Singapore-based investment guru Jim Rogers says only stable bonds and cash 
will do well in deflation. “You have to be certain you are in the right 
currency and, if you buy bonds, hold sound bonds that will pay the interest and 
prinicipal. Government bonds are usually okay.”

 