
The gap between Britain’s rich and poor fell sharply last year after a boost 
to the incomes of the poorest 20% and a squeezeon the richest fifth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/rich-lists>.

The Office for National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics> said median 
disposable income for the poorest fifth of households had risen by £700, or 
5.1%, in the year to April 2016, while the richest fifth of households saw 
their incomes fall by £1,000, or 1.9%, over the same period.


But official figures revealed 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/personalandhouseholdfinances/incomeandwealth/bulletins/householddisposableincomeandinequality/financialyearending2016>
 a growing “generational divide” after they showed the main driver of rising 
standards among low-income groups was a boost to state and private pension 
payments.

Typical working households were £345 a year worse off than before the economic 
crisis, according to the ONS in 2016 – the same as the previous year. 
Middle-income working-age households saw their incomes grow by just 1% last 
year.

Pensioner households were £656 better off after a 3.1% rise in median incomes, 
from £21,114 to £21,770.
 Pensioners are biggest income gainers in year to April 2016 Photograph: 
Resolution Foundation and Office for National Statistics 
Anti-poverty campaigners also said the breakdown of incomes into large groups 
failed to capture the soaring earnings of the super-rich and executives in the 
top 1%.

A report last week by the High Pay Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/04/uk-bosses-will-make-more-by-midday-than-workers-will-earn-all-year-fat-cat-wednesday>
 named 4 January as “Fat Cat Wednesday” after it calculated that the average 
FTSE 100 boss earned more than £1,000 an hour, meaning it took less than three 
days to earn the UK average salary.

The figures, which show a fall in income inequality to levels last seen in 
1986, were welcomed by Philip Hammond, who said measures to support 
lower-income groups were having a positive effect on income equality.


The chancellor said a rise in the income tax threshold to £11,000 had saved 
many families on low incomes as much as £1,000 in tax since 2010. A series of 
measures, including further freezes to fuel duty, another rise in the personal 
allowance, banning fees charged by letting agents and increasing the “national 
living wage”, would hand full-time workers another £500 each this year.

Overall, the ONS found that the median UK household disposable income of 
£26,300 in the year ending April 2016 was £600 higher than the previous year 
and £1,000 higher than the pre-downturn value of £25,400 in 2007/08, after 
accounting for inflation and changes in household composition.

An ONS senior statistician, Claudia Wells, said a strong rise in pensioner 
incomes was behind much of the increase in incomes, especially of those in the 
bottom 40%.

“Household incomes are above their pre-downturn peak overall, but not everyone 
is better off. While retired households’ incomes have soared in recent years, 
non-retired households still have less money, on average, than before the 
crash,” she said.


The Resolution Foundation said weak income growth for working households had 
led to a growing “living standards divide” between them and pensioner 
households and among pensioners themselves, with inequality among the retired 
at its highest level since 2001-02.

Matt Whittaker, the thinktank’s chief economist, said: “2016 was another 
strong year for living standards, particular for poorer households. Strong 
employment growth, low inflation and rising pensioner incomes over recent years 
have helped drive inequality down to its lowest level in nearly 30 years.

“However, the last three years of growth have come back off the back of a 
living standards squeeze so deep that typical working-age families are still 
£345 poorer than they were before the financial crisis. And with employment 
plateauing, productivity growth refusing to budge and inflation rising, the 
risk is that this mini boom won’t continue.”

The ONS calculates disposable incomes based on the 5,000 households that 
respond to its its living costs and food survey.

Wells said it was not possible to publish a breakdown to the lowest and 
highest 1% because the number of households in the sample would be too small.

“It is well known that the survey doesn’t capture the very lowest and highest 
earners. But it is a reliable and long-running series that goes back to 1977 on 
a consistent basis,” she said.

Wanda Wyporska, executive director of the Equality Trust, said: “It is still a 
national scandal that the UK remains one of the most unequal countries outside 
the developing world. We’ve just seen Fat Cat Wednesday illustrate the 
persistent and obscene gulf in incomes between the richest and the rest of us.


“Research shows more equal countries enjoy better physical and mental health, 
better educational outcomes and lower levels of violence. Given all evidence 
suggests current government policies will further expand this vast inequality, 
we desperately need our politicians to acknowledge this and change course, to 
truly make it a shared society.”
 