
Animal feed imported from South America for the UK's meat and dairy industry 
is causing the destruction of tropical rainforests and increasing greenhouse 
gas emissions, a new study reveals.

Friends of the Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/friends-of-the-earth> said half the 
soy imported to the UK to feed livestock could be replaced – with home-grown 
alternatives such as oil seed rape, sunflower seeds or beans, and grazing on 
grass and clover – at a lower environmental cost.

FoE is calling on the government to use EU subsidies to reward farmers who use 
environmentally friendly practices, such as grazing animals at a low density 
and on uplands. The campaign group also wants to see farmers paid a fair price 
by supermarkets for producing quality meat, and says consumers should be 
encouraged to reduce their intake of meat and dairy – with the emphasis on 
less, but higher-quality food.

According to its report, Pastures New, a reliance on soy imported from South 
America is leading to forests and grasslands being cleared for soy plantations, 
or for beef ranching which has in turn been displaced by other soy farms.

Sandra Bell, senior food campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: "Many 
people choose British milk and meat without realising that animals in our farms 
munch on feed produced by destroying wildlife and rainforests in South America.

"Animals should be born, bred and fed British – but pressure from supermarkets 
and biased EU subsidies force farmers to rely on damaging imports. The 
government must listen to growing calls for it to restore a thriving meat and 
dairy sector by helping farmers switch to planet-friendly practices."

According to a 2008 report by the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation 
<http://www.fao.org/docrep/010/a0701e/a0701e00.HTM>, livestock contributes 18% 
of global greenhouse gas emissions, through changes in land use as well as 
gases from the animals themselves.

The Friends of the Earth study suggested half the soy imported for animal feed 
into the UK could be replaced with home-grown alternatives which would use 
around 8% of the country's arable land.

Less intensive grazing on UK land helps store carbon in the soil and boost 
wildlife, while growing protein crops can fix nitrogen in the ground, reducing 
the need for chemical fertiliser.

But low prices for soy, the financial risk of switching crops and a lack of 
incentives for the greener alternatives to intensive farming stand in the way 
of a move towards more environmentally friendly animal feeds, the report said.

Friends of the Earth said uplands farmers, whose land is suitable only for 
grazing, not for growing crops, did not get adequate support from the 
government.

The organisation claimed EU support for intensive livestock farming was worth 
£700m while the new subsidies for uplands farmers were worth only £25m. 
Subsidies for growing protein crops such as peas are set to end in 2012.
 