
Britain’s ravers are falling out of love with nightclubs, according to new 
research that shows the number of people walking through the doors of dedicated 
dance music venues has fallen 23% in five years.

As the nightclub industry reels from what insiders call an “ongoing war” by 
regulators, revenue fell by more than a fifth between 2010 and 2015, with 
Britons spending about £300m less in the sector than they did five years ago, 
analysts Mintel said.

Even though an estimated half of venues have closed within the past decade, 
dance music industry figures insisted the scene is in rude health, with people 
instead choosing all-day events in parks, raves in pop-up spaces and festivals 
for their weekly freakout.

Mintel found that the number of visits to nightclubs had fallen from 149m in 
2010 to 115m in 2015, while nightclub revenues fell from £1.49bn to £1.18bn 
over the same period. It forecast a further 16% fall in spending by 2020 to 
just £982m.

The top three issues most likely to put clubbers off were the cost of entry 
(46%), expensive drinks (46%) and crowding (43%).

Duncan Dick, editor of dance music title Mixmag, suggested that more people 
were choosing alternative places to rave, at events such as the Sunfall 
festival in Brockwell Park, south London, and the Mint festival in Leeds.

“This has been a summer of hundreds of daytime events, with DJs and dancing 
and drinking and fun, and there’s only a finite amount of people in the world; 
that’s possibly had an effect on the numbers of people going to dedicated 
nightclubs,” he said.

“There’s also pop-up spaces. It seems this summer like every building site or 
roundabout in London for one has been taken over by some kind of daytime event, 
every rooftop or every multi-storey car park, so at the moment that’s what 
people seem to like.”

However, Dick added, regulatory pressure from local authorities and police had 
taken its toll on the nightclub scene, with theclosure of Fabric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/fabric-closure-alarm-future-london-nightlife>
 in London just the latest example. Theclosure of the huge Glasgow venue the 
Arches in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/10/glasgow-arches-club-goes-into-administration-and-is-set-to-close>
 was also likely to have had an effect, he suggested.

“I wonder if you added the 5,000 people that probably went to the Arches every 
weekend back into that [data], you could see what the closure of one amazing 
cultural centre and brilliant nightclub can have,” he said.

Despite sounding a positive note on changing tastes, Dick did lament the lack 
of regular nightclubs such as the Blue Note and theElephant and Castle pub in 
London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/04/south-london-birthplace-of-uk-garage-to-be-turned-into-estate-agents>
, which nurtured the developing drum’n’bass and UK garage sounds in the 90s.

Mintel research analyst Rebecca McGrath said: “Fabric’s recent closure, 
alongside other high-profile closures in recent months, highlights the 
increased regulatory pressure faced by nightclubs, as well as the competition 
they face from late-night bars and pubs.

“High entry fees and drink prices are having a negative impact on people’s 
clubbing experiences, with many opting to purchase alcoholic drinks in other 
locations, including at home, before they get to a club.”
 