
The British research base which first discovered the hole in the ozone layer 
is to close for the winter amid concerns it could fall into a giant ice chasm.

Scientists will be removed from the Halley VI research station 
<https://www.bas.ac.uk/polar-operations/sites-and-facilities/facility/halley/>, 
which is run by the British Antarctic Survey and is situated on an ice shelf, 
between March and November as a “precautionary measure” because of fears it 
could slide into an encroaching fissure.

Epic Antarctic voyage maps seafloor to predict ocean rise as glacier the size 
of California melts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/totten-glacier-antarctic-voyage-to-map-seafloor-hobart-invstigator>
The centre, based on the floating Brunt ice shelf, will be relocated inland to 
a safer area, 14 miles (23km) from its present site upstream of a previously 
dormant ice chasm that began to show signs of growth in 2012. Experts say the 
growth of a new crack 10 miles north of the station means they are unable to 
predict what will happen to the ice during the Antarctic winter.


The organisation said while there was no immediate risk to its 88 staff at the 
station the new crack “presents a complex glaciological picture” and that it 
would be extremely difficult to evacuate during the winter if the ice shelf 
fractured.

Tim Stockings, director of operations, said Halley VI, which was to be 
occupied by 16 staff over the winter months, was designed specifically to move 
inland if required and that the relocation was going well.

He said: “This challenging engineering project is scheduled to complete as 
planned by early March 2017. We want to do the right thing for our people. 
Bringing them home for winter is a prudent precaution given the changes that 
our glaciologists have seen in the ice shelf in recent months.”

He added: “Our goal is to winterise the station and leave it ready for 
reoccupation as soon as possible after the Antarctic winter.”

The second crack to the north of the station was first spotted in October 
2016. Since then glaciologists have monitored its growth using a network of GPS 
instruments that measure the deformation of the ice, together with European 
Space Agency satellite imagery and on-site drone footage.

While they have run computer models and created bathymetric maps 
<http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/bathymetry.html> to determine whether or 
not a large iceberg will calve, they say they are unable to predict with 
certainty what the impact could be on the ice shelf.

The BAS said it was confident of mounting a fast uplift of personnel during 
summer months should the fracturing of the ice shelf occur. However, access to 
the centre by ship or aircraft is extremely difficult during the winter months 
when it is dark 24 hours a day, with extremely low temperatures and the sea 
frozen.

The station is a platform for global Earth, atmospheric and space weather 
observation in a climate-sensitive zone. Crucial research carried out at the 
base includes studies such as the impact of extreme space weather events and 
climate change. Halley VI has also taken ozone measurements continually since 
1956 when the team first discovered the Antarctic ozone-layer hole in 1985.

Temporary containerised facilities have been set up at the site to keep 
projects going during winter until the team is moved to the new location next 
summer.

 