
Health officials, police and civic leaders in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> are pressing ahead with plans to open 
the UK’s first “fix room” for heroin addicts.


The controversial proposals to set up a facility where addicts can inject 
their own heroin were approved in principle by amulti-agency committee 
<http://www.nhsggc.org.uk/about-us/media-centre/news/2016/10/full-business-case-to-be-developed-for-pilot-safer-drug-consumption-facility-heroin-assisted-treatment-in-glasgow/>
 on Monday before a final decision is made next year.

Support in Glasgow for a so-called “safer consumption facility” based in the 
city centre, has grown steadily after a surge in HIV infections last year among 
the most chaotic users.

The committee heard that 400 to 500 addicts are believed to be street-users – 
the most at risk – with used needles discarded by them in streets, parks, car 
parks, public toilets and tenement stairs. The city saw a spike in drug-related 
deaths last year of 15%, particularly among older long-term addicts.

The Glasgow City Integration Joint Board, which includes council leaders, 
local police commanders and health board officials, also approved in principle 
a plan to offer clean medical–grade heroin to some users at the same site.

“Given the scale and persistence of public injecting in Glasgow, these 
problems are likely to persist or worsen unless new approaches to 
harm-reduction are considered,” the committee was told by the Glasgow City 
Alcohol andDrugs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/drugs> Partnership, which 
is leading on the project.

The proposals, which still need a detailed business case, costings and an 
operational plan to be agreed, met with hostility from some drugs experts and 
clear signs of scepticism from Scotland’s chief law officer, the lord advocate, 
James Wolffe, and Scottish ministers.

The backers of the scheme admitted that setting up a fix room would need 
special legal approval from the lord advocate to make it compliant with the 
Misuse of Drugs Act 1972. Without any exemption from prosecution, addicts could 
find themselves risking arrest for using the facility.

The lord advocate’s officials were irritated by claims in an official report 
on the proposals that “discussions to allow the proposals to proceed are at an 
advanced stage” with both the Crown Office and Scottish government. That was 
rejected by both bodies, with sources indicating that their involvement in the 
scheme was at a very early stage and their support not guaranteed.

A Crown Office spokesman said: “The lord advocate will carefully consider any 
detailed proposal [that] is made, taking into account the public health and 
criminal justice implications.”

Aileen Campbell, the public health minister, said this plan was not being 
backed by Scottish ministers and, before it could go ahead, it needed legal 
authority from the lord advocate. “The Scottish government has no plans to 
introduce drug consumption rooms or heroin-assisted treatment,” she said.

The committee was told there was a clear economic and social case for the 
scheme, which has been mooted in the past for Brighton and Doncaster. Fix rooms 
were in widespread use in Europe, Canada and Australia, with that international 
evidence “consistently demonstrating the highly cost-effective nature of both 
safer consumption facilities and heroin-assisted treatment services”.

It reduced risky injecting behaviour; minimised harm from overdoses; increased 
addicts’ access to preventative healthcare; and cut criminal activity. That 
reduced costs for hospitals, GPs services, policing and the city generally.

In a statement Susanne Millar, chair of the city’s alcohol and drug 
partnership, said the go-ahead “enables us to build a robust business case 
[that] will support this service. We believe it will improve the health of the 
target population as well as benefit local communities and businesses that are 
currently adversely affected by public injecting”. The scheme is being backed 
by an influential drug-users charity, the Scottish Drugs Forum.

But Professor Neil McKeganey, an expert in drugs policy with the Centre for 
Substance Use Research <http://substanceuseresearch.org/> in Glasgow, said the 
scheme was highly flawed. There was a clear risk it would fail to cut heroin 
abuse and deaths: there was no clear evidence it would work. The same promises 
had been made for widespread access to methadone as a heroin replacement but 
that had failed, he said.

McKeganey was dubious that workers in this unit would have the skills or 
inclination to pass drug users on to projects to help them quit heroin. The 
fast majority of addicts wanted to become entirely clean, he said. “It’s a bit 
like going to McDonalds and expecting a referral to Burger King,” he said. “It 
is entirely legitimate to ask for the evidence that this scheme is going to 
work effectively, and in Glasgow.”
 