
Girls in skirts and boys in trousers. This has been the strictly gendered 
story of school uniform since long before the days of Tom Brown putting on a 
top hat and tails to learn his times tables or the girls of Hamlet of Radcliff 
school pitching up instarched aprons with gloves (seriously) 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-29047752>. Now the rules appear to be 
relaxing, as 80 state schools across the UK, including 40 primaries, have
introduced gender-neutral policies 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/new-school-rules-let-boys-wear-skirts-bngqxz2wb>
 allowing girls to wear trousers (which, beyond the school gate, many of us 
have been doing for at least a century) and boys to wear skirts.

“We introduced the policy more than a year ago,” Paula Weaver, headteacher at 
Allens Croft primary school in Birmingham, tells me. The school is thought to 
be the first state primary in the country to make their uniform policy 
explicitly gender-neutral, changing the wording and linking in staff, governors 
and parents.

In practice, what does this mean? “That children are expected to wear uniform, 
but they can wear whatever part of that uniform they want,” is her no-nonsense 
answer.

For other schools it’s about removing references to a pupil’s gender in 
uniform dress codes. “This year we’ve gone from a girls’ uniform and a boys’ 
uniform to a skirt uniform and a trousers uniform,” explains Liana Richards, 
deputy head teacher at Uplands Community College, a state secondary in East 
Sussex. “It’s about recognising the rights of students who feel they might not 
fit into the binary genders. It’s less of a big deal to the students than you 
might think. We haven’t seen that much difference yet, although some girls have 
made the conscious decision to wear the trousers uniform, which has to be worn 
with a tie.”

The move is part of a government-funded drive to support LGBT+ children in 
schools and be more open to children questioning their gender or sexual 
identity. It follows the decision in January by the 170-year-old private school 
Brighton College toscrap uniform rules for trans pupils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/20/brighton-college-axes-uniform-dress-code-accommodate-transgender-pupils>
. Research byEducate and Celebrate <http://www.educateandcelebrate.org/>, a 
charity giving LGBT+ inclusive training to school staff, found that 53% of 
schools don’t teach about LGBT+ relationships and 49% don’t teach the 
definitions of lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans+.

Allens Croft and Uplands Community College are two of a number of primaries 
and secondaries designated a “best practice school” by Educate and Celebrate 
for, among other things, its gender-neutral uniform policy. “It’s in line with 
the ethos of our school,” Weaver explains. “It ties in with our equality work 
around homophobic and transphobic bullying and eradicating the negative use of 
the word ‘gay’. We believe that children have the right to express their own 
identity in a way that is most comfortable for them.”

Has there been any backlash from parents? “None at all,” she insists. “The 
thing is, we’re not insisting on anyone doing anything. It’s not about 
influencing children. It’s about giving them choice.”

What about the pupils? Are they turning up in every uniform combination under 
the sun? Apparently not. “We still have the battle with children who don’t wear 
uniform,” she notes. “We still have more trouser-wearing across the board than 
boys wearing skirts. But that’s about what’s seen as acceptable in society and 
you know what? We need to work on that, too.”



 