
Train fares in Britain will go up by an average of 2.3% next year, the rail 
industry has announced. The figure is the average increase across all rail 
tickets and will take effect from 2 January.

Lianna Etkind of the Campaign for Better Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> condemned the increase, warning that 
some passengers were “finding themselves priced off the railways”.

She said: “The train operating companies and the government need to work 
closely together to provide fairer, simpler and cheaper fares making sure 
people are always sold the cheapest ticket available.

“Between 1995 and 2016 passengers have seen average fares increase by 23.5% 
and much more needs to be done by train operators and the government to give 
them a truly affordable railway.”

Etkind accused the government of dragging its feet over the introduction of 
flexible season tickets with “fair discounts” for the 8 million part-time 
workers across the UK.

“It is not right that part-time workers have to buy expensive one-off tickets, 
or season tickets, which they then waste on the days they don’t work,” she said.

Paul Plummer, the chief executive of the Rail Delivery Group, which represents 
train operators and Network Rail, said: “We understand how passengers feel when 
fares go up, and we know that in some places they haven’t always got the 
service they pay for.

“Around 97p in every pound passengers pay goes back into running and improving 
services. Fares are influenced by government policy, either through 
government-regulated fares such as season tickets or as a result of the 
payments train companies make to government.

“This money helps government to support the biggest investment in our railway 
since Victorian times.”

Mick Cash, the general secretary of the Rail, Maritime and Transport union, 
said the announcement was “another kick in the teeth for British passengers”, 
adding that travellers in the UK paid some of the highest fares in Europe “to 
travel on rammed out and unreliable trains”.


“Once again the rip-off private train companies are laughing all the way to 
the bank as they whack up fares and axe staff in all-out dash to maximise their 
profits,” Cash said. “This culture of private greed on Britain’s railways has 
to stop and RMT will step up the fight for a publicly owned railway where 
services and safety are the priority, not corporate profits.”

Alongside the fares announcement, the government said that some of Southern 
rail’s long-suffering passengers in the south of England would be repaid the 
equivalent of a month’s travel.

More than 84,000 passengers will be compensated to recognise the huge number 
of delays, cancellations and disruption on the network in recent months. The 
chaos has partly been caused by strikes over changes to the role of conductors 
and high levels of staff sickness.

Season ticket holders will be able to claim a refund for the equivalent of a 
month’s travel. Passengers with an annual ticket will be able to claim the 
one-off payout against their 2016 ticket, and it can be paid directly into 
their bank account.

Customers claiming against quarterly, monthly or weekly tickets must have 
bought travel for at least 12 weeks between 24 April and 31 December to be 
eligible.

The government said GTR, the parent company of Southern, had the details of 
most season ticket holders and would be inviting them to log on to a website to 
claim compensation. The company will also be able to consider proof of purchase 
from people claiming a payout who have not previously registered.

The rail minister Paul Maynard said: “Getting Southern rail services back on 
track is a priority for the government and I know that what passengers want 
most is a reliable service. But when things do go wrong it is right that we 
compensate people who have not had the service that they deserve. This is a 
gesture in recognition of the problems people have faced.

“We’re working hard to get Network Rail and Southern to improve this network 
and get this railway working the way people expect. We are investing record 
amounts in improving our railways and we need everyone in the rail industry, 
including the unions, to work together to deliver for passengers.”
 