
Unsecured borrowing through loans and credit cards from Britain’s banks is 
rising at its fastest rate since before the financial crisis, according to 
research.


The British Bankers’ Association (BBA) said the value of new consumer credit 
taken on in November was 5.7% higher than a year previously, the highest since 
March 2007.


Meanwhile, new mortgage borrowing has risen to its highest level for seven 
years.

On Tuesday, the Office for Budget Responsibility warned households 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/22/economy-concerns-as-household-debt-rises-to-40bn-in-latest-figures>
 had moved from the black into the red, and the BBA’s figures, published on 
Thursday, show that borrowing has risen more quickly than saving.

The growth in new consumer credit has been driven by a pick-up in credit card 
spending and in borrowing through personal loans and overdrafts. Personal loan 
rates have reached record lows in recent months, and banks have been offering 
their most creditworthy customers their best ever deals.

The BBA said £1.7bn-worth of new lending was made through personal loans 
during the month, in line with the previous six months’ average, while new 
spending on credit cards totalled £9.5bn.

Once repayments were taken into account, new borrowing was up by £713m, from 
£422m in October, putting it at its second highest level since 2007.

 Gross mortgage lending hit £12.8bn during the month, in line with October’s 
figure and 28% higher than a year ago. The two months have seen lending at its 
highest level since the summer of 2008, when the credit crisis was taking its 
grip on the housing market.

The BBA said personal deposits into accounts were up by 3.2% year-on-year, but 
there had been a net outflow of £485m from Isas.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said the figures tied 
in withofficial data showing a 1.7% rise in retail sales in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/17/black-friday-discounts-drive-surge-uk-retail-sales>
.

He added: “The pick-up in unsecured consumer credit in November follows on 
from data from the Office for National Statistics showing that the household 
savings ratio dipped to 4.4% in the third quarter of 2015, which was the equal 
lowest rate since 1963.


 “This will fuel concern that consumers are borrowing more and saving less to 
finance their spending, which is likely a consequence of relatively high 
consumer confidence and extended low interest rates. This is something that the 
Bank of England needs to keep a close eye on, and it does appear that some MPC 
members are becoming more worried.”
 