
The number of EU students applying for places on some of the most sought-after 
courses in the UK’s leading universities has dropped by 9%, according to Ucas, 
which administers university entry.

Brexit fears may see 15% of UK university staff leave, group warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/25/brexit-may-force-15-of-staff-at-uk-universities-to-leave-warns-group>
The data applies to a limited number of courses with an earlier application 
deadline of 15 October but the marked decline in interest from EU students will 
lead to fears about the damaging impact of theBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> vote on the UK’s 
universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/22/uk-universities-mull-eu-campuses-in-new-era-of-uncertainty>
.

The data was published on Thursday and relates to applications for all courses 
at Oxford and Cambridge universities, as well as applications for medicine, 
dentistry and veterinary courses elsewhere, beginning in September 2017.

Nicola Dandridge, chief executive of Universities UK 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/>, said the full picture would only become 
clear after the main January deadline, which usually makes up 90% of total 
applications. But she linked the decline in applications to uncertainty over 
government financial support for EU students. “This fall does, however, 
highlight the importance of ensuring that prospective European applicants are 
made fully aware of the fees and financial support arrangements well in advance 
of the applications window,” she said.

“The Ucas process for accepting applications for 2017 opened on 6 September 
but the government guarantee on fees and financial support for EU students for 
2017 entry was not provided until 11 October, only days before the October 
deadline. To avoid future uncertainty, we need the government to extend these 
transitional arrangements now for EU students considering applying for courses 
starting in 2018. These prospective European students will soon be starting to 
consider whether to apply to study at British universities.”

Just days before applications closed this month, the government finally issued 
a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/11/eu-student-funding-in-uk-to-remain-same-in-2017-despite-brexit-vote>
 reassuring EU students hoping to begin their studies next year that they would 
continue to be entitled to the same terms and conditions as home students, with 
£9,000 fees and access to the student loan book for the duration of their 
studies.

Many in the sector complained the intervention was too late and are now urging 
the government to eliminate future uncertainty for potential students fromEurope
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> by extending the offer further.


The 9% decline brings to an end the recent trend for increasing numbers of EU 
applications to UK universities. Numbers applying for courses governed by the 
15 October deadline have dropped by 620 to a total of 6,240 – reversing an 8% 
increase at the same point last year and a return to 2015 levels.

Contrary to the overall trend, Oxford University said it had seen a 1% 
increase in applications from EU students and a 4% increase overall to more 
than 20,000 for 2017 entry, with international applications up too. A 
spokesperson said: “While there has been understandable uncertainty around the 
implications of the UK’s exit from the EU, we are confident that students from 
the EU continue to see Oxford as a welcoming and attractive option for 
undergraduate study.”

Cambridge University reported a decline in applications from EU students, down 
from 2,652 last year to 2,277 this year, in the context of an overall increase 
in applications to 16,875.

A university spokesperson said: “We are disappointed to see a reduction in EU 
undergraduate application numbers on last year, which reflects the considerable 
uncertainty felt by these students due to the EU referendum. But we still 
received more applications from the EU this year than we did in 2012, and 
Cambridge remains an attractive place for EU students to study.”


The total number of applicants for places in this round of applications has 
gone up 1% since last year, with figures for international students holding up, 
despite uncertainty about future visa arrangements and warnings from the Home 
Office of a clampdown.

A government spokesperson said: “It is too early in the application cycle to 
predict reliable trends. But the overall increase in applicant numbers is 
positive – and suggests even more students will be able to benefit from higher 
education next year.”

Mary Curnock Cook, Ucas chief executive, also welcomed the overall increase in 
applications. “This is an encouraging increase in applicants to the October 
deadline courses, particularly given the 2% decrease in the 18-year-old 
population. We will be watching the numbers of EU applications in the run-up to 
the January deadline, especially now that the government has confirmed 
arrangements for continuing access to student loans for 2017 courses.”

Dr Wendy Piatt, director general of the Russell Group, said the latest Ucas 
figures were broadly back in line with where they were in 2014. “While it is 
too early to know the reasons for the decline, we would be concerned if EU 
students were deterred from applying to our world-class universities because of 
Brexit.”
 