
When Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> set up 
Ukip it was to campaign for an EU referendum. I asked him at the time what he 
would do if he got one. He said he would try to win it. And what would he do if 
he won, or if he lost? Either way, he said, his job would be done. He would go 
down to the pub. Farage has been as good as his word.

Ukip was no more than Farage’s vehicle. It was not really a party but a lobby 
group for a single issue, that of securing a popular vote on whether or not to 
stay in the EU. It has achieved that aim.

Ukip’s purpose is fulfilled. The leader who gave it direction and distinctive 
personality has departed for the promised pub. The party should disband. Its 
work is done.

The Ukip conference commenced with the assumed pretence that it is a “proper 
party”. Yet it is already displaying the symptoms of purposelessness that comes 
when any association has departed from its reason for existing.

It is like Nato in Afghanistan. The party’s leadership campaign is riven with 
faction. The candidates, pygmies alongside Farage, appear universally 
unappealing and ill at ease with each other. Mass defection seems likely to 
occur. Stopping that will be the chief task ofthe new leader, Diane James. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/16/ukip-conference-nigel-farages-last-speech-as-leader-politics-live>

To survive, a modern party requires not just a cause. It needs to be able to 
distribute the rewards of patronage and power to its members. It needs the 
smell of power, not just of influence. Ukip never was able to build up a group 
of MPs, as have the Liberal Democrats even in their worst hours. It has a 
presence, but no hold, in local government. There is no core group of loyalists 
to hold it together.

The prevailing narrative is that Ukip is still needed to hold the May 
government to the Brexit cause. But the government has shown not the slightest 
intention of retreating from Brexit, however hard progress may be in that 
direction. The job of guarding Brexit has been taken on by a more substantial 
body, both in parliament and in the country: that of the overwhelming majority 
of the Tory party.

Ukip has lost that capacity to dictate policy. The electorate stole it away 
and handed the task to the Tories.

May is clearly determined to leave no room to critics on her right wing. She 
has been adamant throughout the Brexit debate that she will meet the central 
Ukip demand, of regaining control of Britain’s borders and bringing a limit to 
mass immigration. If she fails, it will not be for want of trying.

In addition, she has astonished even her own supporters by seizing Ukip’s most 
eccentric policy, a return to the 1950sand a separatist secondary education 
system 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/education/2016/09/full-text-theresa-mays-speech-grammar-schools>
. To want to divide Britain’s teenage population – one-third, two-thirds – on 
lines of “ability” and religion and, de facto, on income and social class is a 
move so retrogressive that Ukip should disband in May’s honour on this cause 
alone. The bulk of Ukip’s support over the past five years has come from people 
indistinguishable from the present prime minister.

Ukip came into being in the steps of the short-lived Referendum party 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Referendum_Party>. It has always occupied the 
vague, single-issue role on the party’s right that the Greens have occupied on 
Labour’s left.

The party’s fate is now to descend into the grimy fringes of British politics. 
Farage often spoke of the nightmarish members he had attracted, even as he 
succeeded in scuppering the old British National party.

As moderate Ukippers return to the Tory fold, the party will be left with its 
least attractive faction, the racists and xenophobes who were so often Farage’s 
curse: men and women whose sole common cause seemed to be a collective 
unpleasantness, and hatred for some perceived foe.

Last June the British people rebelled, peacefully but emphatically, against 
what it saw as the ruling class. It was a gesture of democratic defiance: to 
some, an act of mob rule; to others, a great democratic uprising. The nation is 
still reeling. That the rebellion pumped adrenalin into Ukip’s veins is 
understandable. It scored a remarkable triumph. But its job is done. It should 
respect those who gave it victory, and go.

Nigel Farage aide defects to Tories claiming a mass exodus from Ukip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/nigel-farage-aide-says-ukip-supporters-have-flocked-to-tories> 