 Liverpool Institute of Performing Arts logo Photograph: PR 
LIPA was the brainchild of Sir Paul McCartney, who wanted to save the site of 
his former school, and Mark Featherstone-Witty, who wanted to provide training 
for people intent on entering showbusiness. Approximately £20m was initially 
invested in creating the institute, which opened in 1995. LIPA is a small, 
specialist institution with approximately 790 students. It provides education 
and training for performers and those who make performance possible, and 
currently offers eight undergraduate degrees in performing arts subjects. Its 
curriculum is designed to give graduates a sense of the business side of the 
industry as much as the creative aspects.

Fees
£9,000 for full-time undergraduates in 2015-16.

Bursaries/Scholarships
LIPA provides a £500 bursary for all students from England, Northern Ireland, 
Scotland and Wales who can demonstrate that they are in receipt of the full 
Mmaintenance grant/special support grant. Anyone who can demonstrate this will 
receive a bursary of £500 in February of each year of their studies, provided 
they are still in attendance.

LIPA also offers a £1,000 care leaver bursary to students from the UK who are 
under-25 and who can demonstrate that they have been in care prior to their 
16th birthday for a period of six months or more.

Accommodation
The institute doesn't have any of its own accommodation, but has partnerships 
with local providers. Availability is excellent for all first-years, with a 
choice of halls of residence-style accommodation within five to 10 minutes' 
walk of LIPA. For 2015-16, prices range from £85-150 a week.

Facilities
The grand grade-II listed building houses world-class facilities, including 
two performance spaces. A new £10m building opens in September 2015 and 
includes an additional studio theatre, new dance studios with rafter high 
ceilings for aerial dance, dedicated lighting studio, and enhanced costume 
store. Across both buildings there are recording studios and music practice 
rooms, acting studios, and classrooms. The learning resources centre provides 
books, e-books, CDs, DVDs, journals and e-journals, as well as ICT and study 
support facilities.

Transport
Liverpool is a transport hub with good access by road via the M62, by 
intercity rail to Lime Street station, and by air from Liverpool John Lennon 
and Manchester airports.


Contact
Tel: 0151 330 3000
Email: admissions@lipa.ac.uk
Web: lipa.ac.uk <http://www.lipa.ac.uk>
Accommodation: 0151 330 3084
 