 bpp logo Photograph: BPP 
BPP University <https://www.theguardian.com/education/bpp-university> is part 
of BPP Professional Education, one of the UK's largest training providers. It 
has been awarded both Highly Trusted Sponsor and University status, and, in 
2007, was granted degree-awarding powers. Specialising in career-focused 
degrees in accountancy, business, finance, law, management, psychology and 
healthcare, BPP draws on more than 35 years of experience to provide students 
with both expertise and practical knowledge. Undergraduate students at BPP have 
a choice of start dates, from September, January or May, in a range of UK 
cities.

Fees
£6,000 for home/EU students on three-year undergraduate degrees in 2015-16.

£9,000 for home/EU students on two-year accelerated degrees in 2015-16.  

Scholarships
BPP University have numerous scholarships that undergraduate students can 
apply for. Some scholarships will cover the full tuition fee where as other 
will contribute towards your fees.

Accommodation
BPP doesn't have its own halls of residence. However, the accommodation office 
offers support and advice to students and has links with more than 50 halls of 
residences around the country. BPP has a Find-a-Room database and runs 
housemate-mixer events to help students find suitable accommodation close to 
their study centre.

Facilities
Each building is a professional workspace with modern facilities featuring the 
latest technology, live webcast lectures and recorded lectures available 24/7 
online. BPP University has its own mock courtrooms for law students and clinic 
spaces for health students – where theory is transformed into practice. 
Business students benefit from innovative office spaces, conducive to 
creativity and teamwork. 

Transport
BPP has centrally located study centres in a number of UK cities – all easily 
accessible from the main railway stations. Undergraduate degrees are currently 
offered in Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds, Abingdon (near Oxford) and London.

Contact
Tel: 020-3131 3438
Email: admissions@bpp.com
Web: bpp.com/ug <http://www.bpp.com/ug>
Accommodation: accommodation@bpp.com
 