 Kingston and St George's logo 
The faculty of health, social care and education is run jointly by Kingston 
University and St George's, University of London. It offers a range of courses 
in nursing, midwifery and child health, radiography, social work, paramedic 
science, rehabilitation science, biomedical science and continuing professional 
development.

It operates from three sites in south west London – Kingston University's 
Kingston Hill and Penrhyn Road campuses and St George's Hospital in Tooting.

Fees
Fees range from £5,980 for some master's courses to £9,000 for some 
undergraduate programmes.

Bursaries/Scholarships 
Most home and EU undergraduate students undertaking healthcare courses within 
Kingston and St George's faculty of health, social care and education receive 
NHS bursaries to cover up to the full cost of their tuition fees.

Courses fully funded by the NHS include BSc (Hons) in nursing, midwifery, 
physiotherapy, therapeutic radiography and diagnostic radiography, MSc in 
physiotherapy and postgraduate diplomas in nursing and midwifery.

Those studying for an MA in social work may also be eligible to receive NHS 
bursaries which will contribute to part of their fees.

Facilities
Students can take advantage of the expansive learning resources centre in 
Kingston and a comprehensive medical library at St George's, University of 
London.

The skills labs at the Kingston Hill campus offers students the chance to 
train in a realistic hospital environment.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> also learn through role play, 
with health service users and shared learning with student doctors, paramedics 
and other healthcare professionals. Radiotherapy students hone their clinical 
skills in a simulated cancer treatment room, completing practical elements of 
their course in a virtual environment for radiotherapy training (Vert) suite.

Up to 50% of course work can be spent on clinical placements working in 
hospital, primary care and community settings.

Contact 
Web: healthcare.ac.uk <http://www.healthcare.ac.uk>

Kingston University campus (Kingston Hill), Faculty of Health, Social Care and 
Education
Tel: +44 (0)20 8417 5739

Kingston University campus (Penrhyn Road):
Tel: +44 (0)20 8417 2399

St George's, University of London campus:
Tel: +44 (0)20 8725 2247
 