
The Guardian University Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/university-awards> turn 
five in 2017 – and each year we’ve seen the number of entries grow as 
universities recognise the impact a Guardian award has on their reputation in 
the sector, and on student recruitment.


Winning a Guardian award highlights a university’s achievements to the 
website’s 8 million daily readers around the world. Of those readers, one in 
five describes themselves as a student - exactly the people who need to know 
which universities are doing an especially great job.


League tables and the government’s new Teaching Excellence Framework are all 
about metrics. University statisticians pore over data as their institutions 
jockey for position. But these awards recognise qualities and achievements that 
can’t be reduced to columns of numbers.


Decide where you shine

All you have to do is pick a category in which you believe you stand out. The 
categories honour excellence in everything from teaching practice to beautiful 
buildings, and the awards offer universities a seal of approval for their most 
outstanding work.

We invite entries from UK universities and university professionals across 14 
categories, which are shortlisted and evaluated by an expert panel. We also 
invite nominations for the sector’s Inspiring Leader 2016 2017, voted for by 
readers of the Guardian Higher Education Network. Anideas bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/series/university-awards-ideas-bank-2016>
 of all winning and shortlisted entries will be published on the Guardian 
website after the ceremony.

Entry fee:
Early bird from 16 November to 977-31 December: One entry £199 + VAT

New year special offer from 1-13 January: One entry £199 + VAT

Full rate after offers expire: One entry £249 + VAT

Multiple entries (after first entry) £150 + VAT

Please note that a booking fee will also apply.

Timeline:
7 December: launch date

6-31 December: early bird period

1-13 January: special offer on entries

3 February: applications close

March: shortlisted applicants will be notified after the judging lunch on 1 
March

 March: ceremony in central London, date to be confirmed

Good luck!
 