



Going overdrawn on a current account without permission can now be up to four 
times more costly than taking out a payday loan, according to new research from 
consumer bodyWhich? <http://www.which.co.uk>


The organisation said its findings showed that regulators needed to crack down 
on “punitive” unauthorised overdraft charges that were causing harm to 
vulnerable customers.


Which? suggested that unauthorised overdrafts were now more expensive than 
payday loans, which are notorious for their high interest rates: Wonga charges 
a representative APR of 1,509%.


However, the UK’s largest consumer body said unauthorised overdrafts can be 
“much more costly” when people are borrowing for the short term – up to 12.5 
times more if the period in question is just 24 hours.


This is linked to the fact that in January 2015 the Financial Conduct 
Authority (FCA)introduced price caps on payday loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/02/payday-loans-caps-fca>, with 
interest and fees capped at 0.8% per day of the amount borrowed.


This means someone taking out a £100 payday loan for 28 days and paying it 
back on time will never pay more than £22.40 in fees and charges.


However, with no such caps in the current account market, if that individual 
had borrowed the same amount via a high street bank’s unauthorised overdraft, 
he or she would face a bill of £90 at NatWest and its parent, Royal Bank of 
Scotland.


With NatWest and RBS, if a customer goes into unauthorised overdraft by more 
than £10, they are charged a fee of £6 for each day they remain in that 
position, capped at £90 per “charging period”. A charging period runs from 
month to month.

With charging structures differing from bank to bank, there is a wide 
variation in the amounts charged when customers go into the red without 
permission. At Barclays the equivalent cost would be £29.75, whereas at 
Santander it would be £67, said Which? Meanwhile, Lloyds, HSBC and TSB would 
each charge £80.


A spokeswoman for Which? said the charges could be even higher if interest 
payments or possible unpaid item fees were included, or the money was borrowed 
over two monthly charging periods, because the maximum charge related to the 
charging period and not how long the money was borrowed for.


Which? said that when it came to borrowing £100 for just one day, the charges 
imposed by some high street banks were 12.5 times higher than the amounts 
payday lenders were allowed to charge. The FCA cap for one day would be 80p, 
compared with £10 for the Lloyds classic account.

The Which? spokeswoman said it was calling for unauthorised overdraft fees to 
be set at the same level as authorised overdraft charges, and for the FCA to 
review overdraft charges in the context of other forms of credit.


Alex Neill, Which? director of policy and campaigns, said: “People with a 
shortfall in their finances can face much higher charges from some of the big 
high street banks than they would from payday loan companies. The regulator has 
shown it’s prepared to take tough action to stamp out unscrupulous practices in 
the payday loans market, and must now tackle punitive unarranged overdraft 
charges that cause significant harm to some of the most vulnerable customers.”


RBS’s response to Which? was that it encouraged all its customers to get in 
touch if they were going to enter unarranged overdraft territory, regardless of 
the amount or the length of time. It added: “This is an expensive method of 
borrowing, and there could be a number of alternative solutions, such as 
putting an arranged overdraft in place, and the costs are considerably less. 
Our Act Now Alert service would alert the customer to being in unarranged 
borrowing and that they should take action.”


Lloyds’s response was that “the vast majority” of its customers who used their 
overdraft remained within their planned limit in an average month.

 