
The United States and China have unveiled a secretly negotiated deal to reduce 
their greenhouse gas output, with China agreeing to cap emissions for the first 
time and the US committing to deep reductions by 2025.


The pledges in an agreement 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/11/11/us-china-joint-announcement-climate-change>
 struck between President Barack Obama and his Chinese counterpart, Xi 
Jingping, provide an important boost to international efforts to reach a global 
deal on reducing emissions beyond 2020 at a United Nations meeting in Paris 
next year.

China, the biggest emitter of greenhouse gases in the world, has agreed to cap 
its output by 2030 or earlier if possible. Previously China had only ever 
pledged to reduce the rapid rate of growth in its emissions. Now it has also 
promised to increase its use of energy from zero-emission sources to 20% by 
2030.

The United States has pledged to cut its emissions to 26-28% below 2005 levels 
by 2025.

The European Union has already endorsed a binding 40% greenhouse gas emissions 
reduction target by 2030 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/24/eu-leaders-agree-to-cut-greenhouse-gas-emissions-by-40-by-2030>
.

Speaking at a joint press conference at the Great Hall of the People, Obama 
said: “As the world’s largest economies and greatest emitters of greenhouse 
gases we have special responsibility to lead the global effort against climate 
change. I am proud we can announce a historic agreement. I commend President 
Xi, his team and the Chinese government for their making to slow, peak and then 
reverse China’s carbon emissions.”

He said the US emissions reductions goal was “ambitious but achievable” and 
would double the pace at which it is reducing carbon emissions.

“This is a major milestone in US-China relations and shows what is possible 
when we work together on an urgent global challenge.”

He added that they hoped “to encourage all major economies to be ambitious and 
all developed and developing countries to work across divides” so that an 
agreement could be reached at the climate change talks in Paris in December 
next year.

Xi Jinping said: “We agreed to make sure international climate change 
negotiations will reach agreement as scheduled at the Paris conference in 2015 
and agreed to deepen practical co-operation on clean energy, environmental 
protection and other areas.”

China’s target to expand energy from zero-emission sources to around 20% by 
2030 was “notable”, a White House statement said. “It will require China to 
deploy an additional 800-1,000 gigawatts of nuclear, wind, solar and other 
zero-emission generation capacity by 2030 – more than all the coal-fired power 
plants that exist in China today and close to total current electricity 
generation capacity in the United States.”


The UN’s climate chief, Christiana Figueres, said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2014/nov/12/united-states-and-china-reach-landmark-carbon-emissions-deal-live#block-546344cee4b04484e85793c2>
: “These two crucial countries have today announced important pathways towards 
a better and more secure future for humankind.”

Herman Van Rompuy, the president of the European Council, and Jean-Claude 
Juncker, the European Commission president, urged other countries to show their 
hand on emissions cuts: “We welcome the announcement today by the presidents of 
the United States and China on their respective post-2020 actions on climate 
change.

“The announcements to date cover around half of the global emissions. We urge 
others, especially the G20 members, to announce their targets in the first half 
of 2015 and transparently. Only then we can assess together if our collective 
efforts will allow us to fulfil the goal of keeping global temperature 
increases well below 2C.”

The new US goal will double the pace of carbon pollution reduction, though the 
Republican-controlled Congress is likely to oppose Obama’s climate change 
efforts.

The US Senate’s new Republican leader, Mitch McConnell, was quick to criticise 
the Beijing pact. “This unrealistic plan, that the president would dump on his 
successor, would ensure higher utility rates and far fewer jobs,” he said.

Administration officials argue the new target is achievable under existing 
laws.

 Emissions of G20 countries. Photograph: Nick Evershed/Guardian Australia 
Frances Beinecke, president of US-based environmental group the Natural 
Resources Defence Council, said: “These landmark commitments to curtail carbon 
pollution are a necessary, critical step forward in the global fight against 
climate change. We look forward to working with both governments to strengthen 
their efforts because we are confident that both can achieve even greater 
reductions.”


Senior US administration officials said the commitments, the result of months 
of dialogue between the world’s top two carbon emitters, would encourage other 
nations to make pledges and deliver “a shot of momentum” into negotiations for 
a new global agreement set to go into force in 2020.


 Tao Wang, climate scholar at the Tsinghua-Carnegie Center for Global Policy 
in Beijing, said: “It is a very good sign for both countries and injects strong 
momentum [into negotiations] but the targets are not ambitious enough and there 
is room for both countries to negotiate an improvement.

“That figure isn’t high because China aims to reach about 15% by 2020, so it 
is only a five percentage point increase in 10 years, and given the huge growth 
in renewables it should be higher.”


Andrew Steer, president of the World Resources Institute, which promotes 
sustainable resource management, said the announcements would “inject a jolt of 
momentum in the lead up to a global climate agreement in Paris”.

“It’s a new day to have the leaders of the US and China stand shoulder to 
shoulder and make significant commitments to curb their country’s emissions,” 
he said.


Li Shuo, of Greenpeace East Asia, said the announcement showed that the 
world’s “two biggest emitters have come to the realisation that they are bound 
together and have to take actions together”.

At the Warsaw climate talks in 2013 nations were encouraged to draw up 
post-2020 climate plans by the first quarter of 2015, ahead of the final 
negotiations for a post-2020 global pact late in the year.

The White House statement said: “Together the US and China account for over 
one-third of global greenhouse gas emissions. Today’s joint announcement, the 
culmination of months of bilateral dialogue, highlights the critical role the 
two countries must play in addressing climate change.

“The actions they announced are part of the longer range effort to achieve the 
deep decarbonisation of the global economy over time. These actions will also 
inject momentum into the global climate negotiations on the road to reaching a 
successful new climate agreement next year in Paris.”
 