
The United States was catapulted into a worldwide diplomatic crisis today, 
with the leaking to the Guardian and other international media of more than 
250,000 classified cables from its embassies, many sent as recently as February 
this year.

At the start of a series of daily extracts from the US embassy cables – many 
designated "secret" – the Guardian can disclose thatArab leaders are privately 
urging an air strike on Iran <http://gu.com/p/2yc4g> and that US officials have 
been instructed to spy on the UN leadership.

These two revelations alone would be likely to reverberate around the world. 
But the secret dispatches, which were obtained byWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>, the whistleblowers' website, 
also reveal Washington's evaluation of many other highly sensitive 
international issues.

These include a shift in relations between China and North Korea, high-level 
concerns over Pakistan's growing instability, and details of clandestine US 
efforts to combat al-Qaida in Yemen.

Among scores of disclosures that are likely to cause uproar, the cables detail:

• Grave fears in Washington and London over the security of Pakistan's nuclear 
weapons programme, with officials warning that as the country faces economic 
collapse, government employees could smuggle out enough nuclear material for 
terrorists to build a bomb.

• Inappropriate remarks by Prince Andrew about a UK law enforcement agency and 
a foreign country.

• Suspicions of corruption in the Afghan government, with one cable alleging 
that vice-president Zia Massoud was carrying $52m in cash when he was stopped 
during a visit to the United Arab Emirates. Massoud denies taking money out of 
Afghanistan.

• How the hacker attacks which forced Google to quit China in January were 
orchestrated by a senior member of the Politburo who typed his own name into 
the global version of the search engine and found articles criticising him 
personally.

• Allegations that Russia and its intelligence agencies are using mafia bosses 
to carry out criminal operations, with one cable reporting that the 
relationship is so close that the country has become a "virtual mafia state".

• The extraordinarily close relationship between Vladimir Putin, the Russian 
prime minister, and Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian prime minister, which is 
causing intense US suspicion. Cables detail allegations of "lavish gifts", 
lucrative energy contracts and the use by Berlusconi of a "shadowy" 
Russian-speaking Italiango-between.

• Devastating criticism of the UK's military operations in Afghanistan by US 
commanders, the Afghan president and local officials in Helmand. The dispatches 
reveal particular contempt for the failure to impose security around Sangin – 
the town which has claimed more British lives than any other in the country.

The US has particularly intimate dealings with Britain, and some of the 
dispatches from the London embassy in Grosvenor Square will make uncomfortable 
reading in Whitehall and Westminster. They range from political criticisms of 
David Cameron torequests for specific intelligence about individual MPs 
<http://gu.com/p/2yb99>.

The cables contain specific allegations of corruption, as well as harsh 
criticism by US embassy staff of their host governments, from Caribbean islands 
to China and Russia. The material includes a reference to Putin as an 
"alpha-dog" and Hamid Karzai as being "driven by paranoia", while Angela Merkel 
allegedly "avoids risk and is rarely creative". There is also a comparison 
between Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and Adolf Hitler.

The cables names Saudi donors as the biggest financiers of terror groups, and 
provide an extraordinarily detailed account of an agreement between Washington 
and Yemen to cover up the use of US planes to bomb al-Qaida targets. One cable 
records that during a meeting in January with General David Petraeus, then US 
commander in the Middle East, Yemeni president Abdullah Saleh said: "We'll 
continue saying they are our bombs, not yours."

Other revelations include a description of a near "environmental disaster" 
last year over a rogue shipment of enriched uranium, technical details of 
secret US-Russian nuclear missile negotiations in Geneva, and a profile of 
Libya's Muammar Gaddafi, who they say is accompanied everywhere by a 
"voluptuous blonde" Ukrainian nurse.

Clinton led a frantic damage limitation exercise this weekend as Washington 
prepared foreign governments for the revelations, contacting leaders in 
Germany, Saudi Arabia, the Gulf, France and Afghanistan.

US ambassadors in other capitals were instructed to brief their hosts in 
advance of the release of unflattering pen-portraits or nakedly frank accounts 
of transactions with the US which they had thought would be kept quiet. 
Washington now faces a difficult task in convincing contacts around the world 
that any future conversations will remain confidential.

As the cables were published, the White House released a statement condemning 
their release. "Such disclosures put at risk our diplomats, intelligence 
professionals, and people around the world who come to the US for assistance in 
promoting democracy and open government. By releasing stolen and classified 
documents, WikiLeaks has put at risk not only the cause of human rights but 
also the lives and work of these individuals."

In London, a Foreign Office spokesman said: "We condemn any unauthorised 
release of this classified information, just as we condemn leaks of classified 
material in the UK. They can damage national security, are not in the national 
interest and, as the US have said, may put lives at risk. We have a very strong 
relationship with the US government. That will continue."

The US ambassador to Britain, Louis Susman, said: "We have briefed the UK 
government and other friends and allies around the world about the potential 
impact of these disclosures … I am confident that our uniquely productive 
relationship with the United Kingdom will remain close and strong, focused on 
promoting our shared objectives and values."

Sir Christopher Meyer, who was British ambassador to the US in the Blair 
years, thought the leaks would have little impact on diplomatic behaviour. 
"This won't restrain dips' [diplomats'] candour," he said. "But people will be 
looking at the security of electronic communications and archives. Paper would 
have been impossible to steal in these quantities."

The state department's legal adviser has written to the founder of WikiLeaks, 
Julian Assange and his London lawyer, warning that the cables were obtained 
illegally and that the publication would place at risk "the lives of countless 
innocent individuals … ongoing military operations … and co-operation between 
countries".

The electronic archive of embassy dispatches from around the world was 
allegedly downloaded by a US soldier earlier this year and passed to WikiLeaks. 
Assange made it available to the Guardian and four other news organisations: the
New York Times <http://www.nytimes.com/>, Der Spiegel 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/> in Germany, Le Monde 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/> in France and El País <http://www.elpais.com/global/> 
in Spain. All five plan to publish extracts from the most significant cables, 
but have decided neither to "dump" the entire dataset into the public domain, 
nor to publish names that would endanger innocent individuals. WikiLeaks says 
that, contrary to the state department's fears, it also initially intends to 
post only limited cable extracts, and to redact identities.

The cables published today reveal how the US uses its embassies as part of a 
global espionage network <http://gu.com/p/2ybzj>, with diplomats tasked to 
obtain not just information from the people they meet, but personal details, 
such as frequent flyer numbers, credit card details and even DNA material.

Classified "human intelligence directives" issued in the name of Clinton or 
her predecessor, Condoleezza Rice, instruct officials to gather information on 
military installations, weapons markings, vehicle details of political leaders 
as well as iris scans, fingerprints and DNA.

The most controversial target was the UN leadership <http://gu.com/p/2ybzj>. 
That directive requested the specification of telecoms and IT systems used by 
top officials and their staff and details of "private VIP networks used for 
official communication, to include upgrades, security measures, passwords, 
personal encryption keys".

PJ Crowley, the state department spokesman in Washington, said: "Let me assure 
you: our diplomats are just that, diplomats. They do not engage in intelligence 
activities. They represent our country around the world, maintain open and 
transparent contact with other governments as well as public and private 
figures, and report home. That's what diplomats have done for hundreds of 
years."

The acting deputy spokesman for Ban Ki-moon, Farhan Haq, said the UN chief had 
no immediate comment. "We are aware of the reports."

The dispatches also shed light on older diplomatic issues. One cable, for 
example, reveals, thatNelson Mandela was "furious" when a top adviser stopped 
him meeting Margaret Thatcher <http://gu.com/p/2yche> shortly after his release 
from prison to explain why the ANC objected to her policy of "constructive 
engagement" with the apartheid regime.

"We understand Mandela was keen for a Thatcher meeting but that [appointments 
secretary Zwelakhe] Sisulu argued successfully against it," according to the 
cable. It continues: "Mandela has on several occasions expressed his eagerness 
for an early meeting with Thatcher to express the ANC's objections to her 
policy. We were consequently surprised when the meeting didn't materialise on 
his mid-April visit to London and suspected that ANC hardliners had nixed 
Mandela's plans."

The US embassy cables are marked "Sipdis" – secret internet protocol 
distribution. They were compiled as part of a programme under which selected 
dispatches, considered moderately secret but suitable for sharing with other 
agencies, would beautomatically loaded on to secure embassy websites 
<http://gu.com/p/2yc2q>, and linked with the military's Siprnet internet system.

They are classified at various levels up to "secret noforn" [no foreigners]. 
More than 11,000 are marked secret, while around 9,000 of the cables are marked 
noforn.

More than 3 million US government personnel and soldiers, many extremely 
junior, are cleared to have potential access to this material, even though the 
cables contain the identities of foreign informants, often sensitive contacts 
in dictatorial regimes. Some are marked "protect" or "strictly protect".

Last spring, 22-year-old intelligence analyst Bradley Manning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bradley-manning> was charged with leaking 
many of these cables, along with a gun-camera video of an Apache helicopter 
crew mistakenly killing two Reuters news agency employees in Baghdad in 2007, 
which was subsequently posted by WikiLeaks. Manning isfacing a courtmartial 
<http://gu.com/p/2ycvm>.

In July and October WikiLeaks also published thousands of leaked military 
reports fromAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/the-war-logs> and 
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq-war-logs>. These were made 
available for analysis beforehand to the Guardian, along with Der Spiegel and 
the New York Times.

A former hacker, Adrian Lamo, who reported Manning to the US authorities, said 
the soldier had told him in chat messages that the cables revealed "how the 
first world exploits the third, in detail".

He also said, according to Lamo, that Clinton "and several thousand diplomats 
around the world are going to have a heart attack when they wake up one morning 
and find an entire repository of classified foreign policy is available in 
searchable format to the public … Everywhere there's a US post … there's a 
diplomatic scandal that will be revealed".

Asked why such sensitive material was posted on a network accessible to 
thousands of government employees, the state department spokesman told the 
Guardian: "The 9/11 attacks and their aftermath revealed gaps in 
intra-governmental information sharing. Since the attacks of 9/11, the US 
government has taken significant steps to facilitate information sharing. These 
efforts were focused on giving diplomatic, military, law enforcement and 
intelligence specialists quicker and easier access to more data to more 
effectively do their jobs."

He added: "We have been taking aggressive action in recent weeks and months to 
enhance the security of our systems and to prevent the leak of information."
 