
The US military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> in 
Afghanistan has confirmed that dozens of civilians were killed during a special 
forces raid near the northern city of Kunduz last year, but ruled that the US 
troops had acted in self-defense.

The investigation followed claims that civilian deaths resulted from 
airstrikes called in to support Afghan and US forces who came under fire in the 
province’s village of Buz-e Kandahari. The strikes targeted two seniorTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> commanders.

The two Taliban figures, responsible for violence in Kunduz the previous 
month, were killed in the operation.

Taliban bombings kill at least 30 people near Afghan parliament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/taliban-bombings-kill-people-near-afghan-parliament-kabul>
According to a US military statement, the investigation “determined, 
regretfully, that 33 civilians were killed and 27 wounded” as troops responded 
to fire from “Taliban who were using civilian houses as firing positions”.

After the raid, Kunduz residents carried over a dozen corpses of the dead, 
including children and family members of the Taliban fighters, toward a local 
governor’s office in a show of rage.

“Regardless of the circumstances, I deeply regret the loss of innocent lives,” 
the statement quoted Gen John Nicholson, commander of US forces inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. “On this occasion the Taliban 
chose to hide amongst civilians and then attacked Afghan and US forces.”

“I wish to assure President [Ashraf] Ghani and the people of Afghanistan that 
we will take all possible measures to protect Afghan civilians,” Nicholson 
added. “We will continue to assist the Afghan security forces in their efforts 
to defend their country.”

But a Kunduz province official told the Associated Press that the Afghan 
civilian death toll in the US military inquiry was lower than what local 
authorities had found.

“More than 50 people, including women and children, were killed in the Afghan 
and US forces’ attack in Buz-e Kandahari,” said Toryalia Kakar, a deputy 
provincial council member.

Kakar urged the United States to compensate the victims’ families, who he said 
not only lost their loved ones but also saw their homes and property destroyed 
in the airstrikes.

The Taliban briefly overran the city of Kunduz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/taliban-capture-kunduz-major-blow-afghan-government>
 in September 2015, in a show of strength by the insurgents that also 
highlighted the troubles facing local Afghan forces, 15 years after the US-led 
invasion of the country. The Taliban captured and held parts of Kunduz a year 
earlier as well, before the city was fully liberated weeks later with the help 
of US airstrikes.

In the 2015 operation, a US air force special operations AC-130 gunship 
attacked a Kunduz hospital run by the medical charity Doctors Without Borders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/kunduz-afghanistan-attack-medecins-sans-frontieres>
, killing 42 people. Sixteen US military personnel, including a two-star 
general, were later disciplined for what American officials described as 
mistakes that led the strike. Doctors Without Borders has called the attack a 
war crime and demanded an independent investigation.

After the firefight last November, Ghani criticized the Taliban for using 
women and children as “a shield” during the raid in Buz-e Kandahari. He also 
announced a local investigation had begun.

The US military statement further added that its investigation had “concluded 
that US forces acted in self-defense” in the joint Afghan-American raid in the 
village.

“As an indication of the ferocity of the fire faced by friendly forces from 
the Taliban-occupied houses, two US soldiers and three Afghan Army Commandos 
were killed,” it said. “In addition, four US soldiers and 11 commandos were 
wounded.”

The raid also killed 26 Taliban fighters and wounded around 26 other 
insurgents, the US military report said.

However, Kakar, the Kunduz official, disputed that death toll, saying not more 
than 10 Taliban fighters had died.

The investigation concluded that US air assets used the minimum amount of 
force required and that the civilians who were wounded or killed were probably 
inside the buildings from which the Taliban were firing. In addition, the US 
military said a Taliban ammunition cache was struck and exploded, which also 
destroyed multiple civilian buildings and may also have killed civilians.

“It has been determined that no further action will be taken because US forces 
acted in self-defense and followed all applicable law and policy,” the 
statement concluded.

Nato’s combat operations ended in Afghanistan at the end of 2014, a move that 
put Afghan forces in charge of the country’s security. Since then, Afghan 
forces have suffered heavy casualties battling the Taliban, which has tried to 
expand its footprint across much of the country. Nato and US casualties have 
been few.
 