
The US defence secretary has announced that 200 more military personnel will 
be sent to Syria to strengthen the fight againstIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> in its stronghold of Raqqa.


Speaking at talks on Middle East security, Ash Carter said Barack Obama had 
approved deployment of the extra troops, who would include special forces 
trainers, advisers and bomb disposal experts.

Three hundred US special forces are already in Syria working with a coalition 
of Kurdish and Arab fighters who are attempting to capture the city. TheSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> Democratic Forces (SDF) has been 
gaining ground in areas north of Raqqa, the caliphate’s Syrian capital. The US 
has mostly been supporting the effort through airstrikes.

Carter also made one of his most direct attacks yet on other Middle Eastern 
countries for not lending more military muscle to the fight against Isis while 
complaining about American efforts.

In a speech on Saturday at a security conference in Bahrain, Carter said the 
additional troops would “continue organising, training, equipping, and 
otherwise enabling capable, motivated local forces” to take the fight to Isis.

He went on to criticise America’s Middle East partners for failing to help in 
the broader campaign to defeat the group and counter-extremism. He suggested US 
politicians had been irritated by what he saw as disingenuous criticism from 
“regional powers here in the Middle East”.

Carter said: “I would ask you to imagine what US military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> and defence leaders think 
when they have to listen to complaints sometimes that we should do more, when 
it’s plain to see that all too often, the ones complaining aren’t doing enough 
themselves.”

He said it was not unreasonable for Washington to expect regional powers who 
opposed extremism in the Middle East to do more to help fight it, “particularly 
in the political and economic aspects of the campaign”.

Carter noted how many Sunni-led Gulf countries had expressed concern about the 
spread of Iranian influence in the region.

“The fact is, if countries in the region are worried about Iran’s 
destabilising activities – a concern the United States shares – they need to 
get in the game. That means getting serious about starting to partner more with 
each other, and investing in the right capabilities for the threat.”

He added that Russia, Syria’s main ally, had “only inflamed the civil war and 
prolonged suffering”.

Carter said Obama had approved the extra troop movements last week. It is 
thought they are needed in the urgent efforts to train Arab volunteers who are 
joining the Raqqa push.

“By combining our capabilities with those of our local partners, we’ve been 
squeezing Isis by applying simultaneous pressure from all sides and across 
domains, through a series of deliberate actions to continue to build momentum,” 
he said.

The military push is complicated by the role played by local Kurdish fighters, 
the most effective US partner against Isis in Syria, but who are viewed by 
Turkey, a US ally, as a terrorist threat.

Meanwhile, the US secretary of state, John Kerry, was in Paris on Saturday 
meeting European and Arab foreign ministers to discuss Syria, a conflict he 
described as the worst catastrophe since the second world war.

He was due to hold talks afterwards with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei 
Lavrov, a day after admitting to US embassy staff in Paris that he was “tired” 
of trying to negotiate with the Russians over the civil war in Syria.

“I know people are tired of these meetings. I’m tired of these meetings,” 
Kerry said. “And people are sort of: ‘Oh, another meeting. OK. This one will 
end the same way the other one did.’ I get it, folks. I’m not born yesterday. 
But what am I supposed to do? Go home and have a nice weekend in Massachusetts 
while people are dying? Sit there in Washington and do nothing? That’s not the 
way you do business.”

Kerry has struggled to make progress since Russia intervened militarily to 
prop up Bashar al-Assad’s regime. On Friday in Aleppo, pro-regime forces were 
claiming to occupy 85% of the city, much of which has now been reduced to ruins.

Lavrov announced on Wednesday a temporary “humanitarian pause” to the 
bombardment of Aleppo to allow civilians to leave, and on Thursday 10,500 fled 
the city. The UN special envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, said on Saturday 
that an estimated 100,000 people remained, squeezed into an “ever-shrinking” 
pocket of resistance to Assad’s forces and without access to food, water or 
medicine.

De Mistura said the expected government victory in Aleppo would not end the 
war, as has been predicted. “A serious discussion about the future political 
set-up of Syria” was the only way to achieve peace, he told BBC Radio 4’s Today 
programme.
 