
Virat Kohli <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/virat-kohli> spoke engagingly 
for 10 minutes before sweeping out of the room and down the wide concrete 
stairs at the Maharashtra Cricket Association Stadium, trailed by an 
ever-thickening swarm of hangers-on, and drawing from somewhere a 
Beatlemania-style barrage of squeals as he emerged briefly into the light 
before heading out to the middle for practice.

It seems fair to say there is not another cricketer quite like Kohli, if only 
because there never has been. Even other modern Indian heroes – the endlessly 
revered Sachin Tendulkar, the punchier, poppier MS Dhoni – have been distinct. 
Even Kohli, set as ever on a furious upward curve, has never been at quite the 
same state-of-the-art level of Kohli-ness, preparing to take the field as 
India’s official one-day captain for the first time and unchallenged as the 
most thoroughly glossed and superstar-ish athlete cricket has produced.

Alastair Cook to be given more time to decide on England captaincy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/england-captain-alastair-cook-to-meet-andrew-strauss-on-friday-cricket>
England’s players have already suggested that they do not have any special 
plans for Kohli on the one-day leg of this tour. It is to be hoped this is 
simply pre-series bluff. Not having special plans for Kohli: this doesn’t sound 
like a plan at all. Even in the gloomy concrete press-room hutch at the 
Maharashtra stadium there was an undimmable high wattage about India’s captain.

The fittest man in cricket positively glows these days, charming his way 
through the questions like some preternaturally glossy creature from the 
over-world. It is tempting to compare Kohli to a Premier League footballer, but 
he is more like the best American sports figures, willing to talk not just 
about the game ahead, but also about tactics and stats and team-mates and fears 
and hopes and feelings. It is a brilliant lesson in how to be a star.

Kohli was asked if he would feel the burden of captaining in all three 
formats. “I haven’t felt the burden at all,” he replied, looking, if not the 
least burdened late-20s megastar in the world, then certainly up there. “I have 
felt in the past people have created limitations in their own head, in terms of 
what they can or can’t do,” he added, a reply that seemed to catch something of 
his spaceman qualities, the sense of a cricketer who really has carried a 
clear, light space around him for the past few years.

IPL places in the balance as England prepare for hectic ODI schedule
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/indian-premier-league-england-odi-schedule>
When Kohli walks out to bat against England here on Sunday, he will do so as 
part of that modern breed of elite 50-over batsmen. Only the greatest of them 
all, Viv Richards – with smaller bats, bigger boundaries and against the 
dominant culture – has scored as heavily and as quickly in 50-over cricket. For 
now, Kohli is part of breakaway group, along with AB de Villiers, Hashim Amla, 
Dhoni and others, who have taken ODI batting to new levels with averages over 
50, strike rates in the 90s or near, and a sense of other gears and modes 
beyond the accepted norms.

Right now, Kohli is operating at a rare level. In his past 13 ODIs he has 961 
runs at 87.36, with four hundreds at a strike rate around 90, all against the 
world’s other top teams, Australia, South Africa and New Zealand. In all forms 
of international cricket since last October, he has 1,240 runs at 112.

India have a fine one-day batting lineup, albeit with some places still 
settling down. In a slight moment of double-take, Yuvraj Singh and Dhoni will 
bat at five and six. The hugely talented KL Rahul could open. But the captain 
remains the real key.

Not that England will approach this series in anything other than their new 
fearless mode. They can even claim to have dismissed Kohli for a first-ball 
duck – caught Tredwell, bowled Bresnan – the last time they faced him in an 
ODI, in India four years ago. Watching the current one-day team practising 
their well-honed range hitting in the middle, sending the occasional ball 
clanging into the seats, it was clear what a grizzled bunch of white-ball 
global travellers these players are now.

Sunday’s opening ODI will be England’s 28th game of short-form cricket in less 
than a year, a period of rapid and ongoing evolution. Perhaps the most 
surprising part of the pre-match press conference was the culture-switch of 
hearing Eoin Morgan talk about England’s commitment to playing fearless 
attacking cricket, while Kohli mused on the need to rein things in during the 
middle overs and build a platform

“The group of players we have are very outgoing, they’re very expansive and 
explosive,” Morgan said. “They do what they say they’re going to do and stick 
to their natural game, which is quite an aggressive game.”

Indian pitches and Indian expertise are another challenge, although the need 
to attack against the spinners might force these England batsmen into playing 
slow bowling rather better than the Test team. Sam Billings and Jonny Bairstow, 
top-scorers in the two warm-up games, are likely to miss out while Liam 
Plunkett is fit to play.

Likely England team for first ODI v India, Sunday 15 January

Roy, Hales, Root, Morgan, Stokes, Buttler, Ali, Woakes, Rashid, Willey, 
Plunkett
 