
I hold an annual rail season ticket from Spalding to London (via Peterborough) 
withVirgin Trains <https://www.theguardian.com/business/virginrail> East Coast. 
Last year this cost £7,816, excluding underground travel. In theory, season 
ticket holders can reserve seats up to 12 weeks in advance, for which they fill 
in a spreadsheet and send to Virgin. However, this department appears to be 
only available via email. It is supposed to respond to requests within seven 
days, but sometimes I’ve had to chase it for up to a month. When someone 
responds, they simply say the train I reserved was full and to take a different 
one, which is not convenient.

For the last month my reservation was marked as from Newark rather than 
Peterborough – two stops before I get on. This has meant that almost every day 
I end up standing.

I called customer services, which told me to contact the online services team, 
which told me to call customer services. I even joined Twitter to try and get 
an answer, but all they could do was advise me to find the train guard to 
reclaim my seat. However, there isn’t a guard to be seen, partly because there 
are so many people standing it’s impossible to pass through. I have also 
visited the travel centre at King’s Cross, which advised me that a manager 
would be in contact, but weeks later I’ve heard nothing.

I do not understand how an operator can be so incompetent and unaccountable 
while charging so much.SK, Spalding, Lincolnshire

It is shocking that you pay nearly £8,000 a year for a regular commute, only 
to be forced to stand – and your tale reflects high levels of dissatisfaction 
across the country. When we checked with passenger groupTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> Focus to find out what practice is 
across all rail operators, we (and it!) were surprised by the differing 
policies.

The vast majority (with the exception of East Midlands) accept season ticket 
reservations, although you cannot reserve places on many busy suburban commuter 
journeys. Operators such as Greater Anglia and Virgin Trains West Coast, 
meanwhile, only accept bookings a week at a time. We’ve even heard of cases of 
operators charging season ticket holders for reservations, which adds insult to 
injury.

You have since received an apology from Virgin and the rather ambiguous offer 
of a pair of free tickets to travel anywhere on its eastern network. Not very 
appealing if it’s your usual train journey to work.

A spokesperson said: “We are sorry SK has struggled to get a seat reservation. 
We are looking into our processes and how we can improve them, but 
unfortunately some of our trains are extremely popular and it might be 
difficult to reserve a seat at peak times.”

Surely this is an area crying out for reform.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 