
A few weeks ago we covered the case of GC of London who had forgotten their 
disabled person’s railcard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/13/lost-railcard-paid-more-ticket-no-refund>
 while on a Virgin West Coast train between Manchester Piccadilly and London 
Euston. They had to buy two new tickets at full price (an eye-watering £201.85 
each compared with £35.65 for the advance tickets with the railcard).


GC found their railcard at the end of the journey but, despite sending in a 
claim for a refund, was denied this by Virgin. The operator also refused to pay 
up after we intervened, saying it was company policy. However, the case 
triggered howls of outrage from other readers and the passenger groupTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> Focus, and Virgin subsequently 
issued a full refund.

The Department for Transport has since announced changes to ticketing policy 
that give more flexibility in the cases of passengers who have made a mistake. 
These will come into force in March. Virgin has also changed its policy on its 
West Coast line (it was the case on the East Coast since the start of the 
franchise) and will automatically refund the cost of the new ticket if the 
person finds their railcard after the journey and takes it to their local 
ticket office.

A Virgin Trains spokeswoman said: “We are constantly looking to improve the 
experiences of our customers and understand that sometimes mistakes can happen, 
like forgetting or misplacing your railcard on the day of travel. In this 
situation, you will still need to purchase a new ticket to travel, but we have 
introduced a policy to refund the cost of the new ticket when customers take 
their railcard and proof of purchase for the tickets to the ticket office.”

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 