
On hearing about the health secretary Jeremy Hunt’s suggestion that tech 
companies should prohibit young people from sexting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/jeremy-hunt-proposes-ban-on-sexting-for-under-18s>
, I couldn’t help but roll my eyes. Even at the best of times younger people 
feel that politicians don’t really understand them, and on the sticky subject 
of sexting, Hunt is way out of his depth.

At school I, like many of my peers, felt that sex education missed any kind of 
practical information regarding the kind of activity that some had already 
started engaging in. I can remember them getting us to put a condom on a 
banana, but nothing about consent, sexting or pornography.

I recently went to speak to a group of sixth-formers about relationships, how 
prepared they felt for leaving home and going to university, and whether there 
were still any unanswered questions they had about sex. On this last point the 
answer was a resounding yes.

Hunt’s proposal brings to mind the abstinence-only sex education programmes 
taught in the US

When I asked where they got most of their information about sex, 
unsurprisingly they told me Google was their go-to source, and after that, it 
was their peers. But there was an embarrassed silence when I asked if they felt 
they could talk to teachers or parents about it.

When I mentioned this to some colleagues and friends who have teenagers, I saw 
a similar look of discomfort on their faces. It was surprising for me to hear 
many of them say that they didn’t feel like their kids were at an age where 
they needed to have too much sex education thrust upon them.

If you ask me, it’s the parents and politicians who are naive on this subject. 
You just have to see what young people are posting on social media to have an 
idea about how teenagers are engaging with images and technology on more 
private platforms. A lot of teenagers don’t even really talk about “sexting” as 
a phenomenon, let alone an issue – it’s just an extension of what you might see 
on social media.

No Jeremy Hunt, you can't use tech to ban sexting for the under-18s | Jonathan 
Haynes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/jeremy-hunt-cant-use-tech-ban-sexting-stop-cyberbullying-under-18s>
If you take a moment to look at the accounts of people such as 19-year-old 
Kylie Jenner, who has80 million followers on Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/kyliejenner/?hl=en> and has been the face of 
designers – including Topshop and Puma – targeting teenagers, you can get an 
idea of what influences young people every day.

Sexting, like real sex, comes in many forms, and people can get pretty 
creative with it. A suggestive snap via Snapchat can be classed as sexting, 
even if it’s not got anything in it that would go against Facebook’s image 
guidelines. One headteacher I spoke to told me that it was difficult to cope 
with the levels of sexting going on at his school, where cases were reported to 
teachers on a weekly basis. He told me that on the spectrum they had been made 
aware of provocative pictures of young girls in underwear or boys in the 
changing room, all the way to much more sexually explicit images.

For education institutions trying to police this, it can be difficult to draw 
a line, but an outright ban on young people engaging in sexting is just not an 
option – and technologically impossible, asJonathan Haynes points out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/jeremy-hunt-cant-use-tech-ban-sexting-stop-cyberbullying-under-18s>
. Hunt’s proposal brings to mind the abstinence-only sex education programmes 
taught in the US. There isno evidence 
<http://www.advocatesforyouth.org/topics-issues/abstinenceonly/769-abstinence-only-until-marriage-programs>
 to show that young people who are taught this are less likely to delay sexual 
activity or have fewer sexual partners than those taught in other ways.

We know young people are going to experiment sexually – and that they will do 
so via mobile phones shouldn’t come as a shock. Parents and teachers have a 
responsibility to understand how young people are engaging with technology if 
they’re going to be able to keep them safe from abuse, exploitation and 
blackmail.

Jeremy Hunt proposes ban on sexting for under-18s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/jeremy-hunt-proposes-ban-on-sexting-for-under-18s>
Apps like Snapchat and Instagram have features that allow pictures to be sent 
that will be displayed on the recipient’s phone for a certain number of seconds 
before disappearing. This creates a false sense of security for those who think 
that it protects them from having their images saved and shared. But there are 
several ways to get around this, including filming the image on the phone with 
another camera or simply screenshotting it. I’ve heard of incidents, especially 
but not exclusively involving boys, where images have been forwarded on to 
friends or used to blackmail people into doing things they don’t want to.

It was particularly worrying that one of the teenage girls I spoke to 
expressed her concerns about the onus being on the girls to take responsibility 
when it comes to everything related to sex. “They tell us, don’t share 
pictures, don’t have sex and don’t be stupid, but they never say anything to 
the boys about respect, trust or anything like that.”

And it’s not just girls who are suffering from an outdated, out-of-touch 
approach to the issue. There have been several incidents involving boys being 
cautioned by police or put on the sexual offenders’ register 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/04/sexting-teenagers-selfie-criminal-record-sex-offenders-register>
 for sending and saving explicit images with other underage peers.

In all the discussions I’ve had on the subject, it was a comment made by an 
18-year-old boy that really stuck in my mind. He told me he thought sending a 
racy image was like “a 21st-century love letter”, adding that he thought it was 
nice to share something intimate with someone you want to be intimate with. His 
friends may have giggled at this but they also nodded in agreement.

When you speak to young people directly, you can see that sexting doesn’t 
necessarily have to be a dirty word.
 