
An 89-year-old war veteran who placed an advert in his local paper to find a 
job to stop him “dying of boredom” has said he is hoping for a happy ending and 
part-time work.

Joe Bartley, from Paignton in south Devon, placed the ad in the Herald Express 
twice last month. It reads: “Senior citizen 89 seeks employment in Paignton 
area. 20hrs+ per week. Still able to clean, light gardening, DIY and anything. 
I have references. Old soldier, airborne forces. Save me from dying of boredom!”

Loneliness is making older people ill. Working together, we can tackle it | 
Izzi Seccombe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/03/loneliness-older-people-ill-working-together-local-authorities>
Bartley told the Guardian the reaction to his advert has been “blinkin’ mad”, 
adding that he was in danger of becoming a celebrity.

“When I first put in the ad, I thought it was just an old guy looking for work 
– I don’t really see what is strange about that,” he said. “But have I now 
reached celebrity status? That might worry some people, but it doesn’t worry 
me. I’m rather chuffed in a way.”

Bartley has lived alone since his wife Cassandra died two years ago. “I miss 
my wife dreadfully, and when you live on your own there is no one to speak to. 
Since she died I’ve moved into a flat and it’s a big block. Once you walk into 
that flat it’s like solitary confinement.”

Bartley, who is originally from Liverpool but has lived in Devon for more than 
50 years, has no children and he is in not in regular contact with his late 
wife’s family. Since the advert went out he has been contacted by an old friend 
in North Devon, and hopes others might see his story and get in touch.

“I like reading, and I’ll watch a bit of television but there’s a lot of guff 
on these days. I just got bored stiff with nothing to do, and I thought even 
though I am 89 I can still work. I can work a hoover, I can clean tables, some 
gardening - anything really.”

Older people delaying retirement to change careers or start a business
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/13/older-people-delaying-retirement-change-careers>
Bartley has already taken phone calls from two different “lady callers”, who 
offered him odd-job work, but not the regular part-time work he is looking for. 
“One wanted a wardrobe put together, and another lady said she needed two rooms 
painted – but I told them it’s regular work I’m after.”

The veteran, who was member of the Airborne Forces and served in Palestine 
after the second world war, said he wanted regular work to be able to pay his 
bills. “I wanted at least 20 hours and then I can cover the rent. I get housing 
support, which is great, but I want to be my own man and pay my own way.”

The pensioner served in the army for 11 years, joining just before the end of 
the war when he was 18. “I did enjoy the comradeship, but then I sometimes 
wonder if it was a bit of a waste of my life, when I think of what else I could 
have done.”

How to ‘train’ for retirement: seven tips from a retiree
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/shortcuts/2016/sep/28/freedom-pass-hair-dye-volunteering-how-to-retire-in-style>
He then trained as a signwriter. “It was a good trade that went out of the 
window with plastic signs. I’ve still got all my old gear, but my hands are a 
bit stiff these days,” he said.

Although the offer of regular part-time work has not arrived yet, Bartley is 
hopeful that he will find work that will use his skills, keep him occupied and 
introduce him to new people.

“I’m really glad I put the advert in, hopefully something good will come of 
it,” he said. “The thing that has always kept me going is my sense of humour. I 
like a laugh – and I like a happy ending.”
 