
I, like Hugh Muir (Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/31/intolerant-post-brexit-britain-history-hate-crimes>
, 31 December), have enjoyed Linda Hervieux’s recent book Forgotten: The Untold 
Story of D-day’s Black Heroes. Her research on how the Welsh people greeted the 
black GIs was reinforced by Ralph Ellison, who later in 1952 published his 
landmark novel Invisible Man. Ellison spent some time in Britain in the US 
merchant navy during the war. His travels took him to Swansea, Cardiff and 
Barry in South Wales, and in 1944 he fictionalised his real experiences in a 
short story called In a Strange Country. He remembered the “warm hospitality of 
a few private homes” and a Red Cross club in Swansea where the ladies prepared 
“amazing things with powdered eggs and a delicious salad from the flesh of 
hares”. His time there was rounded off by a “memorable evening drinking in a 
private men’s club where the communal singing was excellent”. Of course many 
British people hoped that the war would soon be over and therefore the stay of 
the black Americans would be short. A few years later, when the first permanent 
black residents made their way here, the attitudes of some people began to 
change.
Dr Graham Smith
Shrewsbury, Shropshire

• Jessie Prior may have been “a Welsh woman who had never seen a non-white 
person before”. She would, however, have known of Paul Robeson and his close 
connections with Wales before the second world war through his singing, his 
films and his support for the Welsh miners during some very hard times. He was 
respected and loved throughout Wales.
Gwyneth Pendry
Caergybi, Ynys Mon

• I was an evacuee in Camborne in Cornwall from 1940 to 1945. As the war 
progressed, forces arrived from the UK, the US, our European allies and the 
Commonwealth and empire whose collective aim was to ensure thatD-day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/d-day> was a success. We would not have won 
the war without this help.

Among the many nationalities there were black GIs, serving in segregated 
units. All the forces were treated with respect and kindness.

I had the opportunity to hear all the black choirs from their segregated 
units. The Cornishmen sang in a stately, serious, hymn-like way but, in 
complete contrast, the black Americans had all the rhythms of Scott Joplin, 
George Gershwin and the jazz age. The movements of their bodies in time with 
their voices turned the Methodist chapels where they performed from sedate 
places of nonconformity into palaces of swing. I was hearing negro spirituals 
for the first time.

Cornwall being a musical place, the black GIs were not only praised for their 
performances but were offered the food special to Cornwall. We noticed their 
good manners and I know now that the surprise on their faces confirmed that 
they did not expect white people to treat them as equals and brothers.

It was not long after the second world war when racists reappeared with the 
common use of signs saying “no blacks and Irish” and the letters KBW, meaning 
“Keep Brixton White”. So many people believe there is an original British race 
and do not accept that all of us are descended from immigrants, making us a 
mongrel race who speak a mongrel language. Not only have we emigrated to many 
parts of the world to create an empire but we have also moved many other races 
around the world for our economic benefit.
Bill Coughlan
Chelmsford, Essex

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 