
A package of measures intended to help customers save £92 a year by switching 
their bank accounts has faced criticism for failing to do enough to encourage 
competition among the high street banks.

After two-year investigation into the sector, the competition watchdog said 
technological advances that helped the development of Uber and Google Maps 
would make it easier for customers to compare bank accounts and should 
encourage customers to shop around.

The £5m investigation by the Competition and Markets Authority – first 
announced in July 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/18/banking-sector-review-watchdog-finance-competition>
 when former Labour leader Ed Miliband was vowing to create new banks – is 
intended to kickstart competition in a sector where only 3% of personal and 4% 
of business customers switch to a different bank in any year.

It also tried to tackle the £1.2bn a year the banks make from unarranged 
overdraft charges, as customers with overdrafts find it more difficult to 
change accounts. Banks will be required to send alerts to customers going into 
the red and set a monthly cap on such charges, which some campaigners argue are 
higher than those levied by payday lenders such as Wonga.

But Alex Neill, director of policy and campaigns at consumer watchdog Which?, 
said: “It is disappointing that the monthly charge cap is not actually a cap 
and banks will be allowed to continue to charge exorbitant fees for so-called 
unauthorised overdrafts, rather than protect those customers that have been 
identified as among the most vulnerable.”

The CMA stepped back from breaking up the big four – Lloyds Banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group, Royal Bank of Scotland, 
HSBC and Barclays – which control 77% of the current account market and more 
than 80% of small business accounts.

The key plank of the proposals is the adoption of new technology in 2018 that 
will enable customers to see hidden charges applied to their accounts, allowing 
them to shop around for the best deal. This might eventually happen through the 
creation of a “digital app” or a sophisticated price comparison website – but 
this “open banking” technology will need to be developed.


Alasdair Smith, who chaired the investigation and has faced criticism in the 
past for holding back from tough reforms, said: “We are breaking down the 
barriers which have made it too easy for established banks to hold on to their 
customers. Our reforms will increase innovation and competition in a sector 
whose performance is crucial for the UK economy.”
Banking investigations 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=banking_investigations>
The CMA said that personal customers could save £92 on average a year by 
switching provider, with savings of around £80 a year on average available for 
small businesses. “Larger savings are available for overdraft users – for 
example, personal customers who are overdrawn for one or two weeks every month 
could save £180 per year on average,” the CMA said.

The use of free-if-in-credit banking – in which customers do not pay a fee for 
services if they do not go overdrawn, but do not receive interest on their 
balances – by the big four is often criticised as impeding competition. This is 
because it can make it difficult for customers to see how much they are paying 
for their banking services in hidden charges.


Spanish-owned TSB – once part of Lloyds – wanted customers to be sent monthly 
bills to tackle this. Paul Pester, chief executive of TSB, said: “The CMA has 
played right into the hands of the big banks and missed a golden opportunity to 
enable people across the UK to get a better deal from their banks.”

Banking watchdog to announce measures to boost competition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/08/banking-watchdog-to-announce-measures-to-boost-competition>
MPs were also unimpressed. The Treasury select committee will call the CMA to 
give evidence in the autumn and Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs 
the committee, said the MPs would not give up on trying to find ways to give 
customers more choice.

“Until people are able to find out how much their bank charges them for their 
current account, millions of customers will be denied genuine choice in retail 
banking. There’s a lot to digest but, based on what I’ve seen so far, I’m not 
optimistic that the CMA’s remedies will get to the heart of the problem,” said 
Tyrie.

Rachel Reeves, a Labour MP who sits on the committee, will ask the Financial 
Conduct Authority to consider measures similar to those imposed on payday 
lenders to cap charges on overdrafts.

The measures that were rejected 

Breaking up banks

The CMA concluded there was insufficient evidence that the current structure 
of the industry was hurting competition. The separation of TBS from Lloyds 
Banking Group and the troublesome split of 300 Williams & Glyn branches out of 
Royal Bank of Scotland were “expensive” and “high disruptive” for customers. 
Both those divestments were demanded by the EU as a result of the taxpayer 
bailouts.

Ending free-if-in-credit banking

The CMA concludes this works well for many customers. The real problem is 
whether customers can work out if they are getting the best deal.

Easing capital requirements for mortgages 

New banks need to hold more capital for lending than established players. Two 
members of the inquiry group thought this could be a barrier to entry but it 
was rejected on the grounds that it was not appropriate to create “regulatory 
uncertainty” given work already being undertaken by the Bank of England.
 