
It strikes me as rather weird that after Barrymore’s coming out, there have 
been serious discussions about whether the genre of light entertainment can 
tolerate an openly gay performer. Many light entertainers have been 
identifiably camp, though increasingly, camp has become dissociated from 
sexuality itself. Much of popular TV, from Richard And Judy to The Big 
Breakfast, is incredibly camp and nowhere is there more evidence of this than 
on children’s TV.


Like most working mothers, I use television as a childminder, but I also watch 
a lot of children’s TV with my kids. As other ‘homeworkers’ no doubt realise, a 
really bad day is when you have seen both the lunchtime and teatime repeat of 
Neighbours. Many of the programmes are excellent, but why is there scarcely a 
male TV children’s presenter around who is not as camp as hell? Best of all are 
Andi Peters, Toby, who does the links from his closet, sorry cupboard, and the 
gorgeous boys - one blonde, one brunette - who should be in a Take That video, 
but in fact present Blue Peter. To behold them in their Timberlands, lumberjack 
shirts and aprons for the obligatory spot of ‘one they prepared earlier’ is 
indeed worth the licence fee. Little did we know when we were little ourselves 
and sniggering over jokes about Peter Pervert and John Noakes how it would all 
turn out. Nor could we have known that Valerie Singleton and John would be 
sending themselves up even more than we ever did, 20 years later in margarine 
adverts.

I am not, of course, suggesting that these hunks are anything but straight 
down the line, simply the camp aesthetic is everywhere. One reason might be 
that it enables the pushing of a kind of sexiness that is still unthreatening. 
Andi Peters is, according to my daughter, the best interviewer in the world 
‘because he is so nice to everybody’. And Andi can flirt with Emma on Live And 
Kicking, even talking about her underwear, because we know he is so loveable. 
Emma Forbes and Zoe Ball (of Fully Booked, 8.30am Saturday, BBC1), good-looking 
chicks, play the straight men to these zany guys.

Elsewhere, children’s TV steers away from fluffy lovebunnies and provides some 
impressively hard-edged drama.Byker Grove 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byker_Grove>, probably best known for spawning 
pop sensationPJ and Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec>, returned this week 
(BBC1, 5.05pm). Loosely centred around a youth club in Newcastle, Byker Grove 
takes on everything from would-be model Charlie’s teen angst at having to wear 
braces, to Amanda struggling to cope with being a teenage mother. Having 
already been through drug rehabilitation, Amanda is having difficulties with 
the responsibilities of motherhood when the social workers (‘We just want to 
talk to you, Amanda’) come knocking. Who could resist a programme in which the 
other kids in her hostel gather around them and start slowly chanting 
‘Fa-scists! Fa-scists! Fa-scists!’ in deep Geordie accents?

Newsround, long since detached from John Craven, has also grown up. With just 
five minutes a day, it knock spots off many of the efforts aimed at adults. It 
is, as my children say, ‘news without the boring bits’. It sets its own agenda, 
reporting on issues such as Rwanda long before they get mainstream news 
coverage. It explains the background with remarkable ease. Let’s face it, would 
you like to put Bosnia in context in just three minutes in a way that made 
sense to the average eight-year-old?
 