
As a drought-inducing El Niño settled over southern Africa in 2016, the 
animals of Hwange national park inZimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zimbabwe> faced desperate water shortages.

During a heatwave in October, conservation worker Prince Sansole spotted an 
elephant partially submerged in a muddy pool. His movements initially looked no 
different from the water games routinely played by the giant creatures. Only a 
closer look revealed that the young bull was in trouble, struggling to get up. 
His limp trunk kept dropping back into the water, unable to catch a fresh 
breath.

A postmortem later revealed that the elephant had succumbed to heat stroke on 
arrival at Chamabonda waterhole, after days of searching in vain for water amid 
the heat and sand.

But thanks to an emergency effort by a local conservation group, water is now 
reaching at least 8,000 elephants and up to 10,000 other animals.

Alerted by the predictions of drought, the Victoria Falls-based Bhejane Trust 
started drilling and setting up solar-powered boreholes in the park in May last 
year.
 This bull elephant collapsed in a drinking trough at Chamabonda pan, Hwange. 
He died of heat stroke. Photograph: Bhejane Trust 
Hwange’s animals rely on an artificial supply of water developed in the 1920s. 
But since the early 2000s, Zimbabwe’s government has let pumps and pipes slide 
into disrepair. When the rains last failed in 2005, hundreds of elephants died.


“Between August and October, the [water security] situation was dire,” said 
Trevor Lane, chair of the Bhejane Trust. “We struggled to cope with the very 
high numbers of animals that congregated daily at the waterholes, and there 
were plenty of elephants which cluttered up the little available water, making 
it unusable for other animals.”

Now the trust operates and maintains a network of 34 boreholes, in 
collaboration with the parks authority, GroupElephant.com and theConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> & Wildlife Fund. “At a 
rough calculation, we are now pumping slightly over 1m litres of water daily,” 
Lane said.

Replacing diesel-powered engines with solar and windmill powered units has 
reduced daily operating costs. Previously, Hwange needed at least 14,000 litres 
of diesel a month.

All forms of human settlement are prohibited within designated park areas, 
meaning the refurbished water sources are not used by farmers and villagers 
also hit by the drought. A government act also discourages the sharing of water 
sources in order to minimise human-wildlife conflict.
 Borehole drilling. Hwange national park, September 2016. Photograph: Bhejane 
Trust 
The Parks and Wildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> 
Management Authority (PWMA) of Zimbabwe blames the collapse of the network of 
diesel-powered water pumps, boreholes and pipelines that supplied the watering 
pans in Hwange on the withdrawal of US and EU donor support in protest at 
president Robert Mugabe’s violent farm seizures early in 2000.

According to the PWMA, at least 80 elephants died 
<https://www.newsday.co.zw/2013/01/21/80-elephants-succumb-to-drought> of 
drought-related causes in 2012. Many more animals have died in Hwange’s 
drought, including 620 Cape buffaloesthat died in 2015 alone 
<http://www.financialgazette.co.zw/zimbabwes-national-parks-authority-to-destock-as-drought-ravages-wildlife/>
.

The parks authority has also blamed the water crisis in Hwange on a bloated 
elephant population. It isnow estimated 
<http://www.zimparks.org/index.php/mc/176-live-sales-of-elephants> to be almost 
54,000 against a normal carrying capacity of just 15,000.

A few months ago, the authority announced the capture and relocation of nearly 
100 elephants from Hwange to Chizarira national park in Binga to ease the 
pressure on water sources. At least 30 of those elephants weresubsequently sold 
to Chinese wildlife parks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/23/zimbabwe-ships-live-elephants-to-wildlife-parks-in-china>
.

Zimbabwe Conservation Task Force chair Johnny Rodrigues dismissed the claim of 
over-population as a government excuse to justify the continued capture and 
export of animals to Chinese zoos.

“In Hwange and all of south-western Zimbabwe, drought is not a calamity, but a 
perpetual condition,” said Rodrigues. “As such, a normal government would have 
a permanent plan to resolve it. But drought will continue to affect Hwange 
because the government is more interested in plundering, rather than in 
conserving the wildlife there.

“If anything, government officials are too busy cutting million-dollar 
wildlife trade deals with the Chinese who pay to plunder our animals,” he said.

In May this year, the parks authority advertised for prospective buyers “with 
the capacity to acquire and manage wildlife” to buy animals from the country’s 
10 national parks to ease pressure on water resources.

PWMA spokeswoman Caroline Washaya-Moyo did not respond to a request for an 
interview on the Hwange wildlife water security problem.

 Elephants next to a borehole. Robins camp, Hwange, October 2016. Photograph: 
Bhejane Trust 
Lane said the number of elephants in Hwange national park had grown in the 
last few years as more cross from Botswana to search of water during the dry 
season, which runs between July and November.

“The water infrastructure in Botswana is collapsing due to lack of maintenance 
since the introduction of a hunting ban there in 2014. As a result, more 
elephants are crossing the border into Hwange, where water security has 
improved,” he said.

Lane said the recent heavy rains, which fell across north-western Botswana 
late in December, had replenished a seasonal network of natural water pans, 
triggering the annual western-bound elephant migration and helping to alleviate 
pressure from Hwange’s game water sources.

“They will not be back in Zimbabwe until around April next year, and with the 
pressure off, we will focus on consolidation through the maintenance of 
existing water points so that they can support more animals in the future,” he 
said.
 