
Trump wants to break up Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
; Theresa May wants to help him. After May’s speech on Tuesday, the new defence 
line of the left and centre will be clear. We can and must own the Brexit 
decision, implement it without rancour, and then fight: to remain inside the 
single market, or seek substantial access to it.

But that also means implementing the express desire of the majority to end 
free movement.In a speech last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/jeremy-corbyn-uk-is-better-off-out-of-eu-with-managed-migration>
, Jeremy Corbyn recognised that freedom of movement, though a principle of the 
EU, is not also a principle of socialism. It has undermined social justice and 
must be modified. But how?

Let’s start with the outcome we are trying to achieve. For the left, it should 
be to minimise the economic break with Europe and restore popular consent for 
migration. Britain should apply to join the European Free Trade Area (EFTA) 
and, through it, to remain inside the European Economic Area (EEA). Those who 
say that means accepting complete freedom of movement are, not for the first 
time, misleading us.

Freedom of movement has always been a “qualified right” – not an absolute one: 
that is, constrained by national conditions. Plus Article 112 of the EEA treaty 
allows us to suspend freedom of movement, for an unspecified period and 
unilaterally, due to “serious economic, societal or environmental 
difficulties”. Well, we have a serious societal difficulty: we have lost 
consent for high inward migration, and we need to regain it.

We have to do something that meets the objections of low-paid workers to wage 
suppression, that kills the lie that migrants are responsible for the crisis of 
public services and that promotes integration as the overt goal of migration 
policy, not a side-effect.

First, we should take radical measures to deter the creation of low-wage 
businesses that can only exist because of an unlimited supply of temporary 
migrant labour. Corbyn has spelled these out in his speech, but I would go 
further: laws that discourage agency work and promote sector-level wage 
bargaining and union-only recruitment agreements.

The rights of EU citizens in the UK – Brexit podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2017/jan/16/the-rights-of-eu-citizens-in-the-uk-brexit-podcast>
Next, we should make a unilateral offer: to give the 3.2 million EU citizens 
currently in the UK the unconditional right to remain, either as British 
citizens, dual nationals or permanent residents. And we should give all who 
stay the right to vote in a general election, not just the local and devolved 
assembly elections as now.

Then we ask the EU for a 10-year, temporary suspension of free movement in 
order to make one small but effective tweak.

We redesign the National Insurance (NI) system so that the state can limit the 
supply of new NI numbers in one category: private sector job offers on less 
than a certain wage (for example £18,000 a year pro-rata).

The Department for Work and Pensions would monitor the specific job markets 
that rely on low-paid immigrant workers in real time and agree quotas for new 
NI numbers with, for example, the private social care or hotel sectors. Nobody 
coming from the EU to do a public-sector job would feel a difference. Ditto for 
the self-employed (though we need a crackdown on self-employment scams). People 
moving to skilled jobs in the private sector would feel little change. And all 
citizens of the EEA could still travel, retire, buy property or study freely as 
now.

But there could be no new NI numbers issued for people seeking agency work. 
Future migrants from the EU looking for low-paid jobs would find fewer of them. 
Logically, we could expect a few slave-driving employers to go out of business. 
Those who survive would have to offer fixed-term contracts, publish their wage 
rates and play by rules agreed between employers and the unions.

The move would not discriminate against any worker currently living in the UK. 
In fact, it is designed to improve the wages and conditions of everybody on low 
pay. More than that, it gives progressives an argument-starter in pubs and on 
doorsteps where they are fighting xenophobia. If it’s cheap labour and lack of 
integration you are worried about, our proposal sorts it – and gives us a 
chance to stay inside a market of 500 million people; a chance the Tories are 
prepared to throw away.

The move should not be unilateral: it should be the subject of a final Brexit 
agreement between the UK and the EU27 that is sold enthusiastically to 
electorates, both in Britain and the EU.

In Britain this move could be the weapon with which we separate the hard-core 
racists among Ukip and Tory voters from people primarily worried about wages, 
services and cohesion.

Having made the change, we should irrevocably scrap the Tories’ sub-100,000 a 
year migration target, reducing obstacles for employers and universities 
seeking to recruit beyond the EU. And we should design a new asylum system that 
makes the rights of the refugee paramount.

Corbyn’s speech prompted charges he was “pandering to racism”. This betrays a 
profound misunderstanding of what drives opposition to free movement among 
progressive, left-minded people in the communities where Labour is rooted. Free 
movement does not just suppress wage growth at the low end. It says to people 
with strong cultural traditions, a strong sense of place and community 
(sometimes all they have left from the industrial era) that “your past does not 
matter”. It promotes the ideal worker as a rootless person with no attachment 
to place or community, and with limited political rights; whose citizenship 
resides in their ability to work alone. In case you haven’t noticed, shouting, 
“Don’t be racist!” at the Labour voters who backed Brexit, isn’t working. 
That’s because most of them are not racist.

There is no point trying to appease hardened xenophobes. Like Michael Gove, 
they are mesmerised by the narrative of imperial white supremacy. But there is 
every point in trying to do something for people whose wages have been 
suppressed by free movement and the toughest anti-union laws in Europe. Labour 
needs to spell out its alternative to free movement loudly, proudly and fast.
 