
Q My girlfriend and I got our first mortgage of £205,000 on a house in 
February 2015. The mortgage has a 30-year term and an interest rate of 2.3%, 
making our monthly repayments £790. We have made great efforts to make 
overpayments so that we are in a better position when we remortgage early next 
year.

We are looking at a remortgage of £186,000 which – assuming the house is then 
worth £300,000 – will mean that the LTV (loan to value) should be just over 
60%. We are hoping to find a mortgage with a rate of 1%.

However, since the Brexit vote, we are keen to move to the continent. My 
girlfriend is French, has just finished a PhD and will be looking for work 
soon. I am in a secure job and it will take me a bit more time to get one 
abroad. Essentially, we would like to make the move next year, but there is no 
guarantee on timescales.


If we move, we plan to rent the house out. But as we cannot be certain about 
timings we were planning initially remortgage as occupiers and then notify the 
lender once we know when the house would actually be rented out. This would 
probably mean that by the time we did let the property, there would be about a 
year left until the next remortgage – assuming we get a two-year fixed-rate 
deal when we remortgage early next year.


The question is, is this reasonable or should we be looking for a buy-to-let 
mortgage? What rate change could we expect after notifying on an occupier rate 
and would this be better than a buy-to-let rate? Also, I was thinking of 
keeping the term on the mortgage long to maximise income on the rental to help 
cover for any shortfalls or repairs needed along the way. Finally, could there 
be issues with us living abroad?JR

A Assuming the deal is still on offer when you come to remortgage early next 
year, you could find one with an interest rate of 1% – or to be precise 0.99% – 
with the two-year fixed-rate special from HSBC. This mortgage is available to 
you because you want to borrow less than 65% of the value of your home and less 
than £500,000. But the hefty £1,499 booking fee may mean that you would be 
better off looking at interest rates of less than 1.5% available from other 
lenders.


However, as your circumstances are likely to change before the fixed-rate 
period is up, I would be wary of being locked into a fixed-rate deal at all. 
Rather than being driven by interest rates, you need to look into how a lender 
will treat you if you subsequently let the house. It is reasonable to 
remortgage with the aim of getting “consent to let” from the lender, but the 
consequences of this vary. Some lenders, for example, charge an administration 
fee and keep the interest rate the same. Others will put the interest rate up 
by 1%-1.5%.

Most lenders will want to know that the mortgage meets the criteria of a 
buy-to-let mortgage even if you are not required to switch to a buy-to-let 
product. So they will want to know that the mortgage is no more than 75% of the 
value of the property and that rental income will cover the mortgage repayments 
by 125%. Another thing to bear in mind is that lenders rarely give consent to 
let within 12 months of a residential mortgage being taken out, which could be 
a problem if you do remortgage early next year and then move abroad shortly 
after.


You could also face difficulties if you move abroad before making the 
necessary mortgage arrangements because you’ll be classed as an ex-pat mortgage 
applicant. Only a few lenders – including HSBC and Skipton International – are 
willing to lend to UK expats living abroad. They won’t lend in certain 
countries, although that restriction doesn’t apply to those in the EU.

 