
Our democracy was attacked in 2016’s presidential election. Now it’s up to our 
country’s leaders to name who was responsible, find out how we were so 
vulnerable, and stand together – as Democrats and Republicans – to show we will 
do all we can to ensure we are secure going forward.

This attack came without a shot fired or a bomb dropped; instead, America’s 
longstanding tradition of having free and fair elections was hacked by a 
foreign actor, with all evidence indicating Russia’s responsibility. The attack 
was electronic, almost invisible.

But to just chalk this up to information-era antics, or to shrug it off 
because the attack helped the candidate of your choice, is to deem this 
behavior acceptable – and to cede control of our future elections to the most 
aggressive meddlers.

The American people were loud and clear in this election that the economy is 
the most important issue facing our country. But owning and bettering our 
economy depends on our ability to own and better our democracy, and to ensure 
our dialogue always belongs to us.

Donald Trump's truce with spy agencies breaks down over Russia dossier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/us-intelligence-trump-dossier-leak>
To accomplish that, we need an independent commission of foreign policy, 
national security and elections experts to set the record straight on what 
happened, and to recommend how best to protect ourselves from now on.

That’s why I and Representative Elijah Cummings – ranking member of the House 
committee on oversight and government reform – have reintroduced the Protecting 
Our Democracy Act. Since we first introduced this bill on 7 December, it has 
gained the support of all Democratic House members. Still, we continue to seek 
Republican co-sponsors because this effort must be about country, not party.

Our bill would create a 12-member, bipartisan, independent commission 
empowered to interview witnesses, obtain documents, issue subpoenas and receive 
public testimony in examining the Russian government’s attempts to use 
electronic means to influence, interfere with, or sow distrust in this year’s 
US elections.

The commission – which also would examine similar efforts by any other foreign 
governments or entities – would issue a final report including recommendations 
for future security protections to Congress and the president.

Each of the four Republican and Democratic Senate and House leaders would 
appoint three commission members, and the commission would then choose a chair 
and vice-chair of different parties. But this commission would include neither 
members of Congress nor federal employees.

Rather, appointees would devote themselves full-time to the investigation, a 
commitment that members of Congress and congressional staff would not be able 
to make. The commission would be comprised of prominent US citizens with 
national recognition and significant depth of experience in governmental 
service, law enforcement, armed services, law, public administration, 
intelligence-gathering, foreign affairs, cybersecurity and federal elections.

Senate Democrats have introduced similar legislation. The idea also is 
supported by respected leaders outside of Congress: 15 prominent intelligence, 
foreign policy and homeland security experts – including the former US 
secretary of state Madeleine Albright, former US secretary of defense Leon 
Panetta, and former 9/11 commission vice-chairman and congressman Lee Hamilton 
– issued a statement on 4 January urging the commission’s creation.

These highly knowledgeable men and women understand that our elections should 
always belong to us; that any foreign meddling must be met with bipartisan 
resolve; and that failing to act now would leave us vulnerable and normalize 
such meddling going forward.

We do not seek to relitigate last year’s election; we seek to protect all our 
elections to come. We welcome parallel and simultaneous congressional 
investigations by the appropriate committees of jurisdiction, but we fervently 
believe that only an independent commission’s investigation can rise above 
accusations of partisan bias that inevitably would accompany any Capitol Hill 
hearing.

The dire need for an independent commission is brought into even sharper focus 
by the president-elect’s ongoing and baseless accusations of bias against the 
17 US intelligence agencies which have concluded that the Russian government 
ultimately was responsible for hacks into private email systems and several 
states’ voter registration systems.

And the specter of foreign leverage over our incoming president should send a 
chill down every American’s spine. In the short term, he would do a service to 
his own presidency and to our country by releasing his personal and business 
income tax returns, as well as information on any global financial holdings.

In the longer term, restoring faith and trust in our institutions requires 
review and recommendations by an entity operating outside of those institutions.

This is no time to be immobilized by partisan finger-pointing or residual 
recriminations over campaign-trail smears. Our nation’s adversaries thrive on 
our internal discord. Just as America unites in the face of physical attacks 
from abroad, so too must we come together now to investigate and prevent 
electronic attacks on the essence of America.

Anything less is a betrayal of our dearest national values, and of the sacred 
trust we carry as a beacon of freedom to the world.
 