
Last March we flew from Gatwick to Cancún in Mexico for a 10-day honeymoon 
(booked with Thomson at a cost of £5,200) for which we had saved hard. Close to 
our destination we were told the plane was running out of fuel and could not 
wait around for the airport’s broken radar to be fixed. We were diverted 100 
miles to Mérida airport.

For five hours we sat on the runway while the pilot gave unhelpful updates. My 
husband, who is diabetic and which was made clear on the booking, had no water 
or food as there was none left. Despite ringing the call button nobody came, 
and all we were told was that the airport would not refuel us because Thomson 
had no contract with it.

We finally took off for Cancún, where our honeymoon went further downhill. The 
five-star Moon Palace resort was wonderful for three days until the masses 
arrived, when we had to queue for almost everything. No sunbeds unless we got 
up at 4am, no breakfast unless we ate at 10.30am when there was little left. 
There were long queues for dinner every night. We complained upon our return 
and have tried unsuccessfully to get a response from Thomson. Any help would be 
appreciated. KA, Horley, Surrey 

A disappointing occurrence since you explicitly said you were booking your 
honeymoon. You also did the right thing in lodging a complaint as soon as you 
got home, as many package holiday companies have a deadline. By law you have 
the right to expect that the holiday matches the brochure or website 
description – and if not, under the terms of the Package Travel, Package 
Holidays and Package Tours Regulations 1992, you would probably have a claim 
against Thomson.

Your complaint was made slightly more complicated by the fact it involved a 
flight delay (due to local radar problems and therefore not triggering 
automatic compensation under EU rules); while the second part related to the 
resort and what you considered to be services that were vastly inferior to a 
five-star hotel, boasting 14 restaurants and seven swimming pools.

After our intervention Thomson agreed to investigate (although it did not say 
why it failed to respond to your complaint), and you were contacted by a 
customer service representative who initially offered you £200, subsequently 
raised to £1,200 after further investigation. This was its final offer, which 
you accepted. Thomson said: “We are sorry to hear of KA’s experience. We have 
been in direct contact and the situation has been successfully resolved.” 
Hardly a dream honeymoon, however.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 