
I would take issue with Jonathan Freedland's suggestion that because the 
Americans lack a monarchy the inauguration of the president is imbued with a 
sacred reverence (All the conservative trappings freed Obama to frame a radical 
message, 21 January). Yes, past presidents are trundled out, there is the 
evangelical prayer, the swearing on the ancient bible, but there is a total 
absence of the stiff formality of the anachronistic ceremonies that deaden the 
putting into place of our unelected head of state.

In spite of the massiveness of the Obama event, what came across was something 
far more human: there was genuine joy and conviviality - the humour of the old 
civil rights preacher, the slight stumble with a smile of Obama as he repeated 
the oath, his daughters flashing their digital cameras as he spoke, Obama 
bending down to reassure them, the smiles and hugs, the relaxed movements of 
Michelle and Obama as they walked down Pennsylvania Avenue and the universal 
sense that those present had gained in stature for having been able to elect 
their own head of state. Oh, that it were thus in this benighted country.
P Jones
Eastington, Gloucestershire

One of the words that did not appear in Barack Obama's speech was "Gaza" 
(Words of wisdom, 21 January). As he spoke in front of the biggest crowd ever 
to have gathered to witness a political event, the battered, abused and 
forgotten masses of Gaza returned to their flattened homes to bury their dead 
in overflowing graveyards. If the hope and change promised by his presidency is 
to mean anything, he must tell America's belligerent watchdog in the Middle 
East, Israel, to "unclench its fist" and lift its barbaric blockade of the Gaza 
Strip.
Tom Wall
London

On 20 January, Obama expressed his belief that "a nation cannot prosper long 
when it favours only the prosperous". Of course, we have to wait to see how 
that sentiment translates into action in the US, but it is in stark contrast to 
Peter Mandelson's tired reference to the "politics of resentment" at the Fabian 
Society conference three days earlier (Report, 19 January), and a timely 
reminder that a succession of British governments have been unwilling to tackle 
tax avoidance schemes that benefit only the super-rich.
John Blackman
Reading

President Obama's inaugural address has been criticised for containing no 
memorable lines. These two resonate with me: "we reject as false the choice 
between our safety and our ideals" and "a nation cannot prosper long when it 
favours only the prosperous". If our Labour government had had similar vision 
they would not have been so determined to extend detention without trial to 42 
days. And if they had not been so "relaxed" about people getting filthy rich, 
we might not be in the present economic pickle.
Peter Wrigley
Birstall, West Yorkshire

What a challenge to Richard Dawkins, Polly Toynbee and all the atheists that 
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> should go to 
church before his inauguration, begin and finish it with prayer, and end his 
speech with a plea for the grace of God.
Gordon Manley
Canterbury

The inauguration of America's first female president would also have been a 
momentous and historic occasion.
Deborah Finan
Keighley, West Yorkshire

It was interesting to see that President Obama's first change was to have the 
fat lady sing first.
Tony Glister
Tynemouth

Seamus Rea (Letters, 21 January) writes: "Bush ... the nonentity is a 
nonentity once more. An irrefutable argument for democracy. Mission 
accomplished." That about 50% of the US electorate voted for him twice is 
surely an argument against democracy.
John Burns
Kidwelly, Carmarthenshire
 