
We bought a repossessed property and the completion date was agreed as Friday 
28 October. After three removal vans were loaded with our possessions we 
discovered that Lloyds, the mortgage lender to the previous owner, had not 
provided the mortgage redemption statement to the creditor selling the house.

We are a family of four, with four dogs and an elderly lady, and without 
warning we had to find somewhere to stay. We got a log cabin on a holiday park 
to accommodate us over the weekend (but had to book it for a week at £650), 
thinking we would complete on the Monday.

We didn’t. The removal company was charging us a small fortune for each day 
the vans sat loaded and idle, and on the fifth day when there was still no 
progress it put our stuff into storage, charging us £4,000 for the unloading 
and £150 a week for storage.

After a week we had to vacate the log cabin because it had been booked by 
someone else. We were again homeless and at the last minute found a cottage at 
a cost of £750 for the week. At the end of that week we were again homeless – 
and Lloyds had still not provided the certificate nor an explanation for the 
delay. We returned to the holiday park, this time paying £775 a week. We have 
only the clothes we stand up in, are running out of money as you can imagine 
due the unexpected extra costs, and are at a loss as to what to do.

The solicitors for the receiver have threatened legal action against Lloyds. 
The trustees have contacted Lloyds explaining our dire situation, but for some 
reason a simple transaction has turned into a nightmare.HD, Knaresborough, 
North Yorkshire

This is an appalling story of incompetence and neglect that, you say, has 
affected the health of your elderly relative and so far cost you £15,500.

Another three weeks dragged by after I raised your plight with Lloyds, during 
which time the bank claimed its hands were tied for reasons undisclosable due 
to data protection rules. Then, suddenly, it discovered it was because of an 
inexcusable oversight that it failed to issue the paperwork on time. “The 
property was subject to a second charge,” a spokesperson says, meaning another 
creditor had repossessed it.

“The second charge party took steps to sell the property and on 18 October we 
received a request from the seller’s solicitor to provide a redemption 
statement, enabling the sale to progress. An error in processing the 
instruction meant that there was a delay in us issuing the redemption 
statement, which held up the completion of the sale.”

It’s unlikely this error would have yet come to light without pressure from 
us. In the meantime you have spent more than eight weeks in temporary 
accommodation and been fobbed off each time you appealed to Lloyds, of which 
you are also a customer. The bank is now going to pay you £15,500 to cover your 
expenses and £6,000 for stress and inconvenience.

The good news is that you are now able to move in, just in the nick of time 
for Christmas.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 