
Britons are being told to prepare for wintry weather as a “polar maritime 
airmass” from northern Canada spreads across the country, bringing snow, ice, 
rain and freezing temperatures.

Weather warnings are in place across the whole west coast of Britain on 
Thursday, the whole of Scotland, and the whole of the south of England, with 
potential for snow showers, icy roads and pavements, the Met Office said.
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> also faces strong winds, 
gusting up to about 60mph.

Related: Snow in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2017/jan/10/snow-in-europe> 

Public Health England called on people to take action to stay warm, ensure 
they have stocks of food and vital medicine before the cold weather arrives, 
and to think about how they can help others with underlying health conditions 
and those aged over 65.

Prof Paul Cosford, director for health protection and medical director at PHE, 
said: “Keeping your home heated to at least 18C, wearing lots of thin layers 
instead of fewer thicker ones, and – if you have to head out – using footwear 
with a good grip, are all ways to deal with this weather and stay well this 
winter.”

Chief meteorologist Paul Gundersen said conditions would become increasingly 
cold and windy as polar air spreads south across the country, with widespread 
severe frosts and significant windchill.

“Wintry showers are also likely to affect many areas, most likely falling as 
snow over higher ground but occasionally also to low ground, especially where 
showers occur inland overnight,” he said.

“On Thursday, a band of rain spreading from the west across southern parts is 
likely to turn wintry during the afternoon, with the potential for heavy snow 
in places. As this clears through the evening, with clear skies there is a risk 
of a widespread frost and icy conditions quickly forming.

“With wintry weather expected across much of the UK, it’s a good idea to keep 
in touch with the latest forecast and our weather warnings.”

The coldest urban temperatures on Thursday will be in Edinburgh, where the 
mercury will struggle to reach one or two degrees, according to Emma Sharples, 
a Met Office meteorologist.

Belfast is likely to be almost as cold, while Birmingham could reach 3C. The 
London area will be marginally warmer, at about 6C, and Plymouth could reach 7C 
although a “biting windchill” will make temperatures feel much colder, Sharples 
said.

Snow <https://www.theguardian.com/world/snow> is possible as far south as 
London, as the wet weather mixes with cold air from the north.

“By the time we get through the course of [the day] the real cold air will 
have set in across all of the country and there will be probably be some snow 
lying in places as well,” Sharples said.

“Where there is a lot of snow we will get some quite cold conditions 
overnight, with very low temperatures. We could be looking at temperatures in 
the range of -5C to -10C in some locations away from towns and cities … in the 
north of England.” Further south could see temperatures falling to -5C, she 
said.

A polar maritime airmass was behind the bad weather, Sharples said. “That 
relates to where the weather is coming from,” she said. “Polar relates to where 
the air is coming from; maritime is to do with the fact that it’s coming over 
sea before reaching us, rather than being a continental airmass, which would 
mean something from Europe and over land.

“What that means is that it’s cold, because it’s coming from the polar 
regions. But as it comes across the sea it picks up moisture as well, hence 
it’s quite moist so you are getting all these showers from it rather than it 
just being dry cold.”

The cold snap comes after high winds brought travel chaos and power cuts to 
hundreds of people on Wednesday, as gusts ofmore than 90mph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/11/strong-winds-travel-chaos-power-cuts-uk>
 were recorded in parts of the country. A 93mph wind was recorded at High 
Bradfield in South Yorkshire, while Tiree was hit by a 77mph gust and South 
Uist by one of 73mph.

The strong winds caused damage across the country on Tuesday, with power cuts 
reported in Scotland and north-east England. Northern Powergrid, which supplies 
power to homes in the north-east and Yorkshire, said it had 545 customers 
without power on Wednesday morning.

The Forth Road Bridge near Edinburgh has been closed in both directions after 
a lorry was blown over at about 2am. No one was injured but the bridge is 
likely to remain closed for some time as the strong winds hamper recovery 
efforts. The lorry driver has been charged.
 