
Japan and other pro-whaling nations have defeated a proposal to create an 
sanctuary for whales in the South Atlantic.

The push to create the protected area during a biennial meeting of the 
InternationalWhaling <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> 
Commission (IWC) was defeated after 38 countries voted yes and 24 against, as 
proposals at the conference require 75% of votes to pass. Two abstained.

Although the proposal has been defeated in previous years and was expected to 
fail this time around too because of opposition by Japan, Norway and Iceland, 
conservation groups were dismayed by the result.

“There is an urgent need for us to better protect our whales, dolphins and 
porpoises. This sanctuary would have done just that and supported the growth of 
sustainable whale watching tourism and fostered much-needed research,” said 
Josh Coates, marine campaigner with the Australian MarineConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society.


 “Once again whaling nations have stood in the way of progress, despite the 
IWC’s own scientific committee approving the plan for the sanctuary.”

Greenpeace noted that the sanctuary was being blocked by countries far from 
the the South Atlantic aligning themselves with the whaling nations.

John Frizell, a whales expert with the group, said: “What is the most 
disappointing is that all these efforts are ultimately being undermined by IWC 
member countries who are thousands of miles away, not even in the southern 
hemisphere and some even on the other side of the world. Conversely, all 
members with territory in the proposed sanctuary, fully support it.”

Matt Collis of the International Fund for Animal Welfare said: “It is very 
disappointing that once again, a proposal for a South Atlantic whale sanctuary 
has been harpooned.”

Also on the agenda at the IWC meeting in Slovenia is a resolution put forward 
by Australia that would require Japan to get approval from the IWC for its 
“scientific” quotas. That move is also expected to be blocked.
 