
“When you are high, it is tremendous. Shyness goes, the right words and 
gestures are suddenly there, the power to seduce and captivate others a felt 
certainty. Feelings of ease, intensity, power, well-being, financial 
omnipotence and euphoria now pervade one’s marrow. But somehow, this changes. 
The fast ideas are far too fast and there are far too many, overwhelming 
confusion replaced by fear and concern. You are irritable, angry, frightened, 
uncontrollable, and enmeshed totally in the blackest caves of mind … It goes on 
and on and finally there are only other people’s recollections of your 
behaviour – your bizarre, frenetic, aimless behaviour …” – A patient’s account 
in Manic-Depressive Illness by FK Goodwin and KR Jamison

I have bipolar disorder, but I wouldn’t want to ‘fix’ my mind | Gavin Extence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/04/bipolar-disorder-wouldnt-want-to-fix-mind>
To be creative, energetic and gregarious – these are the things to which many 
of us aspire. Although some are lucky enough to display them naturally, the 
majority of us have to work to develop them as best we can. But what if your 
episodes of productivity, creativity and energy signify an episode of mental 
ill-health? For many people withbipolar disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/bipolar-disorder>, this is precisely the 
case. Formerly referred to as “manic depression”, bipolar disorder is 
characterised by fluctuations in mood. Episodes of depression – often marked by 
sadness, lethargy and hopelessness – can be followed by periods of elation.

In the early stages, this elation is termed “hypomania”, and this is often 
when a person is at their most inventive and sociable. If hypomania develops 
further, the person may be considered to be in the midst of a “manic” episode. 
While sharp elevations in mood may sound appealing in principle, the reality is 
that mania can be associated with a range of impulsive behaviours, including 
substance use, promiscuity and excessive spending, all of which can have severe 
adverse consequences. It can be an exceptionally high price to pay for a 
relatively short spell of confidence and ingenuity.

Although bipolar disorder – referring to the twin “poles” of depression and 
mania – is cyclical, it’s not necessarily the case that it results in 
continuously fluctuating moods; nor does everyone with the diagnosis experience 
oscillations of similar severity. Some people will experience mild elation but 
severe depressions; others will report hypomania and only mild depression. As 
with many mental health problems, two people with a similar diagnosis can 
exhibit very different symptoms.Approximately 1-3% of people 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3486639/> will display symptoms 
indicative of bipolar disorder at some point in their lives, but many also 
present with other emotional difficulties, most notably anxiety disorders.

The most significant risk factor for developing bipolar may be environmental 
stress

As with many mental health problems, we’re not sure exactly what causes 
bipolar disorder, although there is some evidence that having a parent with the 
condition increases your risk of developing it by a factor of eight (although 
the children of people with bipolar are actually more likely to develop 
unipolar depression, without episodes of mania). This suggests that, the 
possibility of inherited predisposition aside, the most significant risk factor 
for developing bipolar may be environmental stress. It’s hardly surprising, of 
course – we know that stressful life events, particularly those experienced in 
childhood, are associated withsignificantly higher rates 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3341916/> of anxiety, depression, 
post-traumatic stress disorder and schizophrenia. But, again, these are 
associations only – a substantial number of people experience multiple adverse 
life events, but not all will go on to be diagnosed with a severe and enduring 
mental illness. What appears critical is the way individuals cope with that 
adversity, and, interestingly, we might have rather less control over that than 
we like to think.

We know that optimal wellbeing is dependent on a number of factors, one of the 
most important of which is the amount of social support we have. Put simply, 
the better the quality of your relationships, the more likely you are to be 
able to manage stressful situations.The association becomes even more marked 
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/2136677?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents> as the 
severity of the stress increases.

10 things you should never say to someone with bipolar disorder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/23/bipolar-disorder-joy-10-things-you-should-never-say-to-someone-with-bipolar-disorder>
This support will look different at different life stages, of course – the 
social network you are likely to have aged 10 is likely to bear little 
relationship to the network you have in middle age. But what if it is the 
people in that network – the people who should provide support – who are 
actually the cause of, or implicated in, your distress? If you come from a 
family in which violence is perpetrated, you may not learn that relationships 
can be safe and comforting, and, in that case, you could hardly be blamed for 
avoiding them later in life. Equally, if you have a diagnosis of a serious 
mental illness, it’s likely that you’ll find it much harder to maintain 
employment and to form intimate relationships.

Given all that, it’s perhaps unsurprising that people experiencing seemingly 
uncontrollable fluctuations in mood (and who may also be dealing with the 
after-effects of trauma and other adversity) might choose to try to regulate 
their emotions in any way they can – not infrequently with drugs or alcohol. 
And while these may be helpful in reducing the variations at that point, it’s 
rarely sustainable, or without negative consequences.

Most people who have a diagnosis of bipolar and who are in contact with mental 
health services will be prescribed medication. While some will take 
antidepressants and/or antipsychotics – to reduce the effects of the lows and 
the highs respectively – many are prescribed mood stabilisers such as lithium 
or sodium valproate, and though the research shows effectiveness, they may 
cause some side-effects. Overexposure to lithium, for example, can affect renal 
function.

Psychological therapy has also been shown to augment pharmacological 
treatments and may be effective in helping people to reduce variations in mood, 
and to understand the triggers that can precipitate both depression and mania. 
Practically, this is often about monitoring your mood and reducing stress, or 
finding ways to cope with that stress more effectively. Cognitive therapy may 
also help to build people’s confidence in managing their symptoms by 
challenging thoughts such as, “I have no control over how I feel.” Most 
therapies will ask that you complete “homework” between sessions, partly to 
practise the techniques discussed with your therapist and partly so their 
usefulness in “real life” can be evaluated.

The difficulties associated with bipolar disorder will rarely affect only the 
person with the diagnosis, however: there is virtually always an impact on 
family members. While it doesn’t target the symptoms directly, family therapy
has been shown <http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=207846> 
to be effective in helping to diminish bipolar-related symptoms and to reduce 
the risk of relapse.

In short, a diagnosis of bipolar means much more than periodic “highs”, and, 
despite the perceived benefits of a slightly elevated mood, very few of the 
people I have come across with the diagnosis see it so positively. It is far 
from “untreatable”, but the road to full functioning – if it can ever be 
achieved – is likely to be a difficult one.
 