
A shirt, tie and blazer may not be the ingredients for my favourite outfit, 
but if I were given the choice, I wouldn't throw away the idea of school 
uniform. Wearing a uniform is a badge of pride, creates an identity for a 
school and is an important part of being a school student.

"Uniforms show that you are part of an organisation. Wearing it says we're all 
in this together," Jason Wing, head teacher at the Neale-Wade academy in 
Cambridgeshire, says.

"Also, if you wear your uniform with pride, it means you are half way there to 
being respectful, buying into what the organisation is all about.''

Claire Howlette, an English teacher, agrees: "Uniforms give students a sense 
of belonging to a particular school and create an identity for the school in 
the community."

My school is one of many that seem to be reverting to a more formal uniform – 
this September I will be wearing a shirt and blazer instead of my old jumper 
and polo shirt. A number of students have complained about the change, but 
general opinion is that the jumpers and polo shirts were "childish".

A school uniform teaches students to dress smartly and take pride in their 
appearance. Howlette says: "Uniforms help students to prepare for when they 
leave school and may have to dress smartly or wear a uniform."

Some people believe 
<http://www.eduguide.org/article/should-kids-wear-school-uniforms> that a 
school uniform can improve learning by reducing distraction, sharpening focus 
on schoolwork and making the classroom a more serious environment, allowing 
students to perform better academically.

Perhaps most importantly, a uniform means students don't have to worry about 
peer pressure when it comes to their clothes. When everyone is dressed the 
same, worrying about what you look like isn't so important. There is no 
competition about being dressed in the latest trend, which would put a great 
deal of financial pressure on students and parents. Potential bullies have one 
less target for their insults; it's hard to make fun of what someone is wearing 
when you're dressed exactly the same.

In America, where a majority of schools do not have a uniform, roughly 160,000 
children <http://www.makebeatsnotbeatdowns.org/facts_new.html> miss school 
every day due to fear of attack or intimidation by other students. This might 
not be directly linked to what they're wearing, but having a uniform can be a 
safety net for many students who might otherwise suffer from bullying. A strict 
uniform gives the impression that rules are strict too, perhaps helping 
maintain a sense of order at school.

Although wearing a school uniform is less expensive than buying a whole 
wardrobe of outfits, uniform can still be pricey. Many schools have a specific 
supplier, and wearing cheaper alternatives can result in punishment if the 
black skirt you're wearing isn't exactly the right black skirt. Finding uniform 
that fits you, especially if you're limited to one shop, can also be a struggle.

Recently the Liberal Democrats held a conference 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-24095539> about the cost of school 
uniforms across England. The education ministerDavid Laws is to issue new 
guidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/sep/23/uniform-cost-schools-education-in-brief>
 to end the practice of using a single uniform supplier, enabling parents to 
shop around for uniform. If schools decide to change their uniform, for example 
with a new emblem or colour, changes should be restricted to one or two items, 
preferably with sew-on logos. Changing from a one-supplier system could help 
families with the cost of school uniform.

Although it might seem a shame to miss out on those two years of dressing as 
you like at school, I welcome the smart dress code. Not only does it make 
getting dressed each morning a lot easier, but it sets sixth formers up as role 
models for younger students, and that's important.

Macy Vallance, a year-eight student, says: "I like uniforms because everyone 
is the same and no one can be left out by the way they are dressed. Our new 
uniform looks smarter, which is good."

My uniform might not be what I would wear in my own time, but it gives me a 
sense of belonging, takes away the pressure of what to wear and deters the 
bullies. School uniform isn't fashionable, but that's exactly why I think it 
should be here to stay.
 