
Studying law abroad at the University of Valencia in Spain has been an 
eye-opening experience for me. As someone who doesn’t speak Spanish fluently, 
being immersed in new traditions and festivals proved difficult at first, but 
it has turned into an invaluable life experience.

According to a report by the British Council 
<https://www.britishcouncil.org/voices-magazine/spanish-speak-language-400-million-people>
, Spanish is the second most widely spoken language in the world, with 400 
million native speakers as of 2010. So it’s no wonder that so many students are 
choosing Spain or South America as destinations for their year abroad.

Spain was the most popular destination country for Erasmus students, with 
40,202 incoming students in 2013 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-14-476_en.htm>, according to a 
report by the European Commission, which funds the programme.

The 10 most affordable cities for students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gallery/2016/feb/02/the-10-most-affordable-cities-for-students>
I’m sure not every international student studying in Spain will have the same 
experience as mine. Spanish universities are as diverse an any other country’s, 
after all. But here’s what I’ve learned so far from studying at a Spanish 
university.


Student-lecturer relationships are less formal – and all the better for it

One of the first things I noticed was the informality of the classes. 
“Lecturers and students often call each other ‘tio’, which translates roughly 
in English as ‘mate’,” says Lizzi Gold, 20, a chemistry student at the 
University of Bristol, who was also struck by the casual nature of lectures at 
Salamanca University.

“Professors in Spain will make an effort to memorise every student’s name, 
which we don’t see much of in the UK,” she adds.

After becoming accustomed to PowerPoint presentations, handouts and recorded 
lectures, stepping into the Spanish lecture theatre felt like I was travelling 
back in time. Our class was greeted by a cheery professor, a blackboard, a 
piece of chalk and a giant yellowing computer, which we later discovered didn’t 
actually work.


Seminars are lively, heated debates

Another thing I noticed about my Spanish university early on was the constant 
debate and argumentative nature of seminars. At Bristol, where I study, 
questions from our esteemed law professor are met with frightened silence and 
students afraid to speak up for fear of being wrong.

By contrast, my seminars in Spain resemble lively debates with opinions and 
questions being shouted across the classroom. It’s refreshing to encounter 
students who are eager to question and challenge their lecturers, rather than 
simply accept their viewpoint. After a while, you start wondering who’s 
teaching whom.

The exam process couldn’t be more different

When it comes to exams, you may as well forget your years spent essay planning 
and writing; end of year examinations often consist of 15-minute oral exams. 
Similarly with coursework, UK students are used to strict adherence to word 
limits and referencing. However, upon asking my Spanish professor about the 
word limit for my most recent piece of coursework, I was told that there was no 
word limit, and I could write as much or little as I felt like. To me, this was 
unheard of.

Travel broadens the mind, but can it alter the brain?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/18/travel-broadens-the-mind-but-can-it-alter-the-brain>
Alice Cottle, 21, a French and Spanish student from the University of 
Sheffield studying at the University of Valencia, was also surprised by the lax 
coursework requirements. “One of our teachers was surprised at the number of 
students apologising for submitting their coursework a few minutes late. He 
said that if he had received them days or even weeks later, no penalties would 
be applied,” says Cottle.


It’s not all work – Spanish students definitely know how to party

Having made the mistake of going out at midnight in my first week, as we would 
in the UK, I quickly discovered that many clubs don’t actually open or are 
completely empty until around 2am.

As well as adjusting to my new surroundings, I realised I’d have to completely 
re-adjust my body clock to cope with the incredibly late nights and 
early-morning starts (lectures often start at 8.30am). As a result, siestas 
have become an integral and welcome part of my daily life.

While being so different from home, studying in Spain has changed my view of 
education

After studying in the UK for so long, it’s easy to become accustomed to 
solitary, independent learning. Developing square eyes from reading online 
legal journals for hours on end becomes the norm. Spain, however, has shed new 
light on the entire concept of studying.

Lax coursework guidelines, the informality of classes and the chance to 
deliver your own opinions allows for more freedom and innovation in your 
learning process. Once your Spanish starts flowing more freely, you begin to 
appreciate and understand the culture of Spain in a way you hadn’t grasped 
before.

Not so long ago, students wouldn’t have been offered the opportunity to study 
in another country. While this experience isn’t exactly what I expected and has 
been difficult at times, I’ve learned invaluable lessons and I would recommend 
it to anyone.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 