
There is much uncertainty about what Brexit means for students, both those 
from the UK and from the European Union. We know because we’ve received a huge 
number of emails and tweets asking us about the topic since the referendum in 
June.

We’ve found the answers to your most frequently asked questions, from funding 
and loans to careers and visas, and the future of studying abroad.

‘How will the vote affect my chances of getting a decent job?’

For UK students, this will largely depend on how exit negotiations with 
Brussels go, and whether a snap general election is called. Most experts 
predict a slowdown in the British economy – and perhaps even a recession – 
which would negatively affect job prospects.

The National Union of Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students>
 (NUS) released a statement on the subject, which says: “If some form of free 
movement remains, it could be that broadly the same opportunities will exist as 
now. If not, then much will depend on the visa and immigration rules put in 
place.

“In the short term, the British economy has notably weakened – the full 
picture is still emerging but it would seem recent graduates now face a tougher 
job market with fewer vacancies.”

‘I want to study abroad. Will tuition fees in European universities be 
affected?’

Fees for British students will be the same as those paid by other EU students 
until the UK officially leaves. There is less certainty about what will happen 
after Brexit, especially if Britain leaves the European Economic Area (EEA).

For example, Maastricht University in the Netherlands recently stated that, if 
Britain leaves, its tuition fees “might” rise, from thecurrent rate of £1,600 
to between £6,300 and £8,360 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/student/student-life/finances/brexit-maastricht-university-warns-uk-students-to-apply-as-soon-as-possible-while-tuition-fees-are-a7119231.html>
. Maastricht is also setting up a task force to monitor the impact of Brexit on 
its British students, whose numbers have quadrupled in the past five years to 
nearly 500.

But it’s important to consider different EU countries separately: a change to 
fees is unlikely in Germany, for example, since study there is free to students 
of all nationalities. In other EU countries, though, individual governments or 
institutions may take a harsher stance on British students’ fees.

‘Can EU students still get student loans?’

The government has said there will be no change for EU nationals currently 
receiving student loans – they will keep receiving funding until the end of 
their courses.

The Student Loans Company and Universities Wales say that the same holds for 
all students applying for student finance in England and Wales for the 2016-17 
academic year. This includes loans to cover tuition fees, loans and grants for 
maintenance, and some other grants and allowances, including the new 
postgraduate loan.

EU students attending universities in Northern Ireland are still awaiting 
confirmation.

‘What will happen to UK scholarships/bursaries for EU students?’

EU nationals currently in receipt of bursaries in England and Wales will 
continue to receive them until the end of their course. However, the 
scholarships and bursaries offered by universities may change as institutions 
set their own eligibility rules.

It’s possible that EU students could be treated as non-EU international 
students are now, with no fee cap and no form of student support from any part 
of the UK. The NUS advises students to speak to their universities about 
changes that are anticipated as a result of the vote.

‘What does Brexit mean for research funding?’

UK scientists dropped from EU projects because of post-Brexit funding fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/12/uk-scientists-dropped-from-eu-projects-because-of-post-brexit-funding-fears>
Russell Group universities received more than half a billion pounds a year in 
EU investment in 2014-15 
<https://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/media/5417/russell-group-universities-and-the-european-union.pdf>
 and the future of that funding, while not immediately affected, could be in 
doubt after Brexit.

Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute, warns that it 
is possible that some courses will “no longer be viable” without the funding 
that EU students bring, since their numbers are expected to fall after Brexit.

The NUS agrees: “UK universities receive a disproportionate share of EU 
research funding. Brexit, therefore, could mean less funding to universities 
and less opportunities for postgraduate study if we are no longer able to 
participate in the European research network.

“Non-EU states including Norway and Switzerland are part of the network, so it 
is not impossible – but some UK universities have already reported European 
partners pulling out of joint funding bids due to the uncertainty about the 
future.”

As for the EU’s biggest research funding scheme, Horizon 2020, the referendum 
result has had no “immediate” impact, according to Carlos Moedas, the European 
commissioner on research and innovation.

‘How will Erasmus be affected?’

Erasmus+ has stated that there will be “no immediate change” to the UK’s 
participation in programme and the UK National Agency will continue to manage 
and deliver it across the country.

The organisation confirms: “All participants and beneficiaries should continue 
with their Erasmus+ funded activities and preparation for the published 
application deadlines in 2016 and 2017.”

‘What impact would Scottish independence have on students who want to study 
there?’

If Scotland remains in the EU, it will have to continue letting EU students 
come for free but could discriminate against English students, according to 
Nick Hillman.

“If Britain and Scotland had associate membership of the EU, for example, it’s 
not an absolute impossibility that they’d have to let English students come in 
for free as well. If Scotland was not in the EU, they could do anything they 
want,” he adds.

The Scottish government and Universities Scotland have issued a joint 
statement saying: “We want to reassure EU students that there has been no 
change in current funding arrangements and that eligible EU students already 
studying in Scotland or commencing their studies in the coming months will 
continue to benefit from free tuition and, for those who meet the residency 
requirement, associated living cost support.

How can universities prepare for a post-Brexit world?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/28/how-can-universities-prepare-for-a-post-brexit-world>
‘As an EU student, am I still welcome to study in the UK?’

Amid concerns of increasing incidences of hate crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/11/police-blame-worst-rise-in-recorded-hate-on-eu-referendum>
 in Britain, many universities have issued statements to reassure EU and 
international students.

Professor Sir David Greenaway, vice-chancellor of the University of Nottingham 
and chair of the Russell Group, says: “We simply will not tolerate abuse of 
this sort and any student or staff member who experiences racism or xenophobia 
on or off our campuses can be assured this will be taken extremely seriously.

“Now more than ever we should ensure our campuses are places where diversity 
is welcomed, cherished and respected.”

‘When Brexit goes ahead, am I going to be the only European left at my 
university?’

The government says that there will be “no immediate change” to the status of 
EU students. But whether the numbers of students from the EU studying in 
British universities remains constant is uncertain, and depends on what happens 
to freedom of movement when Britain leaves the EU.

And what about when you graduate? Theresa May has refused to rule out the idea 
of sending EU nationals currently living in the UK back to Europe – and has 
been accused ofusing them as a bargaining chip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/03/theresa-may-eu-migrants-pawn-brexit-talks-tory-leadership-race>
 in assuring the rights of UK citizens who live in Europe.

‘Will I need a visa to study abroad?’

Brexit has sparked an identity crisis in UK universities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/30/brexit-has-sparked-an-identity-crisis-in-uk-universities>
This all depends on negotiations and the decisions of individual foreign 
governments, but Nick Hillman predicts that universities abroad would “campaign 
hard to let British students come without visas”.

The Department for Business, Skills and Innovation, when asked directly about 
the possibility of students needing a visa, did not give any indication as to 
how likely it would be.

‘I was thinking of studying abroad in a few years’ time – should I go now 
instead?’

The situation is not going to change for at least two years, as the procedure 
to leave the EU takes at least that long.

An NUS spokesperson says: “If you are an EU student wishing to study in the UK 
and are able to commence study in that period, it may be worth considering 
doing so. The charity UKCisa has detailed information on funding and 
immigration rules for international students and it will be worthkeeping an eye 
on their website <http://www.ukcisa.org.uk/>.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 