
Who cares what men wear? Not even men! In 2011, when Boris Johnson was mayor 
of London, he opened London Fashion Week, and when asked what he was wearing at 
the launch, replied: “I don’t know … a suit.” When a woman in politics can be 
this nonchalant about her clothes, we might really be getting somewhere. Until 
then, we are cursed to spend far too much time hearing and thinking about 
Theresa May’s “bitter chocolate”leather trousers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/morgan-cut-from-meeting-with-may-after-criticising-pms-leather-trousers>
. I already have. Some observations: they are too wipe-clean and too flappy; 
leather flapping round your ankles is not right, if you ask me; and her 
Burberry trainers seem a bit weird too. But as I don’t have to wear any of it, 
I really don’t care. I am liberal like that! I let other people dress 
themselves without staging an intervention or calling the police.

Nicky Morgan cut from meeting with PM after leathering £995 trousers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/morgan-cut-from-meeting-with-may-after-criticising-pms-leather-trousers>
May wore the trousers recently for a magazine shoot, and they have apparently 
been judged byNicky Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan>, 
former education secretary, to have been too extravagant. They cost nearly a 
grand, and the argument goes that only someone out-of-touch would spend that 
much on clothes.

These poor trousers have been working overtime: soft leather worn by a hard 
Brexiter. In fact, they’ve been working so hard that they now seem to have 
taken on a whole independent life of their own and are involved in a spat with 
a Mulberry bag – also allegedly expensive – owned byNicky Morgan 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4023082/Nicky-Morgan-attacked-PM-995-leather-trousers-950-Mulberry-bag.html>
. One day children will be heard asking: “Where were you in the great leather 
goods war, Mummy?”

Or of course they won’t, because all this is simply dressing up a row over 
Brexit between May and a significant part of her party, who want a much softer 
Brexit than she appears to be pushing for. Boris Johnson is allowed a serious 
spat with May, based on international relations, specifically diplomatic ties 
with Saudi Arabia. But May and Morgan’s actual disagreement is being reduced by 
all around them to some fashion slapdown.

Given that Morgan has vowed to be ‘a thorn in May's side', not much love 
appears to be lost between the two of them

Given that May sacked Morgan as education secretary the minute she could, and 
Morgan has vowed to be “a thorn in her side”, not much love appears to be lost 
between the two of them. Texts from May’s aide, Fiona Hill, to Morgan, about 
not wanting her in a meeting – one text ended “so there” – are utterly 
childish, but so are Morgan’s remarks about never having spent as much on an 
item of clothing as May has spent on her posh trews.

The ensuing sanctimony about how much people receive in jobseeker’s allowance 
each week misses the point that male politicians regularly spend this kind of 
money on clothes. David Cameron apparently had suits costing more than £3,000. 
Women’s clothes are always frippery, luxury and always deemed unsuitable by 
someone, somewhere. No wonder Hillary Clinton and Angela Merkel developed their 
own uniforms – the pantsuit and the black trousers with interchangeable jacket 
respectively. May likes to signal something beyond her straight-edged 
locked-down persona through her shoes, asymmetrical necklines and block 
colours. This is potentially as near as we might get to a clear sense of her 
personality.

The sniping here about clothes is proxy for something else. Mutual dislike and 
political disagreement, something that goes on every day of the week in 
politics, has been given legs by its treatment as essentially female behaviour.

Theresa May sidesteps question about £995 leather trousers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-sidesteps-question-about-995-pound-leather-trousers>
Now that Morgan has been seen with that Mulberry bag, which also apparently 
cost nearly a grand, we must read this latest leather item as a terrible blow 
to the soft Brexit position that Morgan represents. Or something. A bag is 
never just a bag. Remember the obsession with Margaret Thatcher’s handbag? What 
did she keep in there? What Freudian treasure trove do women hide in their 
purses? Morgan’s roomy bag now signifies some vast hypocrisy.

So, by their leather items ye shall know them. I am glad to see the future of 
Europe is being fought through a war of accessories. All of it is a huge 
displacement activity as the reality sinks in that we have years ahead of being 
bored rigid by Brexit.

Forget the trousers. This is about how May handles dissent in her own party. 
Banning Morgan and her bag from meetings just makes her look insecure and 
over-defensive. May can wear a tutu or a wetsuit, made of leather or not, but 
she is going to need a much thicker hide if she is going to hold her party 
together.
 