
UK to censor online videos of 'non-conventional' sex acts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/23/censor-non-conventional-sex-acts-online-internet-pornography>
A government bill will give authorities the power to block websites that 
publish videos portraying a range of sexual acts that they believe are not 
appropriate for British eyes. How did we get here?
By thinking of the children. The 2015 Conservative manifesto promised to “stop 
children’s exposure to harmful sexualised content online”, a widely supported 
measurethat is to be fulfilled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/23/censor-non-conventional-sex-acts-online-internet-pornography>
 by the government’s digital economy bill, currently on its way through the 
Commons.

The bill requires pornographic websites to implement strong age-verification 
controls that force users to prove they are over 18. But at some point during
the bill’s drafting 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/cbill/2016-2017/0087/amend/digital_rm_rep_1123.1-7.html>
, a sentence was slipped in that gives a regulator powers to act against sites 
“making prohibited material available on the internet to persons in the United 
Kingdom” – a clause that has somehow escaped any debate.

This might all have been inconsequential, since ministers had held back from 
including website blocking in the original bill, and most pornographic material 
online is hosted overseas, outside British jurisdiction. However, after stern 
criticism at committee stage, and the threat of a Tory backbench rebellion, the 
government announced last Saturday that it would back an amendment to add 
website-blocking to the bill.

Who is going to enforce the restrictions?
In October the British Board of Film Classification, a non-profit organisation 
that already classifies films for cinema and DVD release, accepted an 
invitation from the Department for Culture, Media and Sport to become the UK’s 
age-verification regulator. At the time, the DCMS said the BBFC would be 
responsible only for the first stages of the regulatory framework, and 
enforcement would be carried out by another regulator.

But the situation has since become more confused after the government’s 
statement of support for website blocking suggested that it would be the BBFC 
itself that would direct ISPs to “block access to rogue sites”.

What will be banned?
The BBFC has told the Guardian it would be required to check if websites 
contain the kind of pornographic content it would normally refuse to classify. 
In practice, that means that R18 – the BBFC’s most liberal classification, 
applied to pornographic works that can be shown in licensed cinemas or sold in 
licensed sex shops only, to adults only – will be the benchmark for what is 
acceptable.

There is no definitive list of acts proscribed by the R18 classification. 
Although it is based on the Crown Prosecution Service’s guidelines for the 
Obscene Publications Act, in practice it draws tighter lines. Most notoriously, 
the BBFC refuses to pass videos including female ejaculation that touches 
sexual partners, believing it to be equivalent to urination during sex, which 
is considered obscene.

Other acts that are verboten, but have come to be considered fairly 
mainstream, include the insertion of whole hands into anuses or vaginas (known 
as “fisting”), scenes showing participants so comprehensively bound and gagged 
that they cannot indicate a withdrawal of consent, and face-sitting – which is 
exactly what it sounds like. Sex during menstruation would also be banned, 
since it breaks rules about bleeding. Of course, the rules also restrict a 
great deal of content that many people would find horrifying.

What are the objections?
Critics say that it is not the government’s place to police what kinds of 
consenting sex can be watched by adults. Sexual fetishists say they are 
unfairly targeted by the BBFC’s censorship, which would sweep their particular 
sexual tastes back into the underground.

Restricting niche porn sites is a disaster for people with marginalised 
sexualities | Pandora Blake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/niche-porn-sites-sex-spanking-website-videos-pornography>
There has also been particularly strong kickback from some feminists, who say 
that BBFC proscriptions on female ejaculation and sex during menstruation 
discriminate against women by proscribing female bodily functions. Furthermore, 
bondage, domination and sadomasochism often find expression as female 
domination and, since similar laws were brought in to cover British-based sites 
in 2014, female pornographers have often found themselves facing legal action.

It is also claimed that the rules are not consistent. Consumption of male 
ejaculate is fine, but not female, and although acts implying strangulation or 
choking are banned, videos showing women gagging on erect penises are 
apparently OK. Some critics say many of the rules constitute an attack on 
female sexuality.

Others say this goes beyond pornography, and that it is the first example of 
any liberal democratic country creating an internet censor. The fear is what 
such a framework could go on to be used for.

What precedent is there for this?
The UK – and in fact the English-speaking world – has a history of drawing its 
rules of censorship much more tightly than continental Europe.James Joyce’s 
Ulysses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/04/most-dangerous-james-joyces-ulysees-kevin-birmingham-review>
 had to be first published in Paris then smuggled into Britain. When Radclyffe 
Hall’s lesbian romanceThe Well of Loneliness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jan/02/books.gayrights> was published in 
1928, James Dougal, the editor of the Sunday Express, led a successful campaign 
for its suppression, saying: “I would rather put a phial of prussic acid in the 
hands of a healthy boy or girl than this novel.”

Despite gradual liberalisation over the course of the 20th century, helped 
when the Obscene Publications Act finally allowed a defence of artistic merit 
against charges of obscenity, by the 1990s Britain still had far more stringent 
censorship than countries such as Germany or Denmark. All that changed with the 
internet, which allowed information to be streamed straight into people’s homes 
from around the world without restriction. Until now.
 