
They are the Brits who bought their dream holiday home in Cyprus, but have 
seen it turn into a nightmare, with property prices falling and the cost of the 
monthly mortgage repayments soaring after they were persuaded to take out loans 
in Swiss francs. Last month a shock rise in the value of the Swiss franc made 
the mortgage burden even more unbearable – and has left investors in despair.

Many buyers are now taking legal action in Cyprus, claiming they were mis-sold 
mortgages and misled by developers and solicitors. Some even face the threat of 
losing their UK homes.

Those affected include Neil Mellis, who joined forces with three friends to 
buy an off-plan villa located in a development just outside the coastal city of 
Paphos. They already owned a holiday home in Florida which was generating a 
decent rental income, so they decided to take the plunge on a place in Cyprus.

“In hindsight we should have thought: ‘This is all too easy’, but hindsight is 
a wonderful thing,” says Mellis, 53, a married father-of-two who lives in 
Inverurie, near Aberdeen. In 2006 he and one of his friends were flown out to 
Cyprus and put up in a hotel, and Mellis says he thinks the developer was 
trying to prevent them talking to anyone else. He said: “We were taken to their 
bank, their management company, their solicitor, et cetera.” They signed the 
purchase contract in December that year, paying 184,000 Cypriot pounds for a 
three-bed property that had yet to be built.

Mellis says they were given lots of assurances about the great service they 
would receive from the property management company and how there had been “lots 
of interest from holiday companies ready to give us good weekly rates [for 
letting the property out]”.

But alarm bells started to ring when the property’s completion date was 
delayed by eight months and, when it was finally finished, Mellis and the 
others encountered problems. A fault with the air conditioning caused a major 
damp problem, the original management company was no longer there and the 
promised rental income never materialised. Mellis says they were left with a 
property that was effectively uninhabitable and unrentable. But this was just 
the start of their troubles.

Mellis is one of thousands of Brits who bought a property in Cyprus using a 
Swiss franc mortgage between around 2003 and 2008. At the time, banks in Cyprus 
were persuading people this was the best thing to do, on the grounds that the 
interest rates were lower and because the Swiss franc was deemed to be a stable 
currency, says Neil Heaney, who runs Judicare, a legal services firm that 
specialises in helping people try to recover their money when an overseas 
property purchase goes wrong.

“We were told at the time that it was the safest currency and the 
most stable in Europe,” adds Mellis, a paper merchant.

That advice from the banks backfired spectacularly when the Swiss franc soared 
in the wake of the global financial crisis of 2007-08. Many buyers saw their 
mortgage repayments rocket; Mellis’s jumped from around £450 at the outset to 
£750.

And to make matters much worse, the Cyprus property market then began its long 
collapse. After notching up some impressive price rises, property values 
started tumbling in 2009 and have been falling ever since. According to the 
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS), whichpublishes a Cyprus 
property price index 
<http://www.rics.org/us/knowledge/market-analysis/rics-cyprus-property-price-index/>
, the average cost of a three-bed house in Paphos fell from €460,000 in 
December 2009 to €343,000 in December 2014, a 25% drop.

Other towns and cities have seen bigger falls. In both Limassol and Larnaca, 
average house prices have plunged 37% over the same period. Meanwhile, scores 
of developers have gone bankrupt. “Some clients are paying loans for houses 
that they have never received,” says Heaney, a former professional footballer.

Then, in the middle of last month, the British buyers were dealt a new blow 
when the Swiss central banksurprised everyone by abandoning its attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/15/currency-markets-switzerland-franc>
 to peg the franc against the euro. That sent the Swiss franc soaring once 
again – it initially leapt an unprecedented 30% against the euro.

“Many people who took out Swiss franc mortgages for properties in Cyprus did 
so simply because the interest rate was lower, and they say they were never 
warned of the currency risks,” says Richard Gorrill at overseas mortgages 
specialist Conti, based in Hove, East Sussex.

He adds: “Foreign currency mortgages can work for the right person and under 
the right circumstances, but you must understand the risks. If exchange rates 
go against you, your monthly repayments go up and the total amount of the 
mortgage debt also rises.”

Where such a loan can be useful is when a British investor owns a property in, 
say, France or Spain, which is rented out locally. As the rental income will be 
in euros, it may therefore make sense to take out a euro mortgage. However, if 
it is a second/holiday home that is being used exclusively or mainly by you and 
your family, or you rent it out to UK holidaymakers who pay you in sterling, 
then the mortgage borrowing should be in sterling.

“Generally speaking, it makes sense for an overseas mortgage, and the income 
used to service the mortgage repayments, to be in the same currency, thus 
avoiding exchange rate issues,” says Gorrill.

So what’s the next step for people such as Mellis? He decided to sign up with 
Judicare, which represents more than 200 buyers and is pursuing litigation in 
Cyprus, with the first trials provisionally set for the spring. It believes it 
will be able to challenge the legality and validity of the mortgages and claims 
it has uncovered “irregularities” which may mean the loans can be cancelled. 
For example, Mellis was advised that in their case, the “power of attorney” 
they signed, to give the lawyer in Cyprus the power to act on their behalf, was 
not valid as two of the four buyers were not present and have never been to 
Cyprus.

Mellis and his friends were advised to stop paying the mortgage so they 
weren’t seen to be “giving in” to the banks. That triggered “demands and 
threats”, he says. “We could potentially lose our houses and our assets in this 
country if they come after us. That was our worry. We are challenging them, but 
all the time the interest and penalties are accruing.”

Heaney says: “Our clients feel as though they have been let down by everyone: 
the banks and IFAs who misadvised them and the lawyers who failed to protect 
them. People were sold a dream home in a beautiful country with manageable 
monthly mortgage instalments. Many believed rental income would help with the 
costs of the property, but they didn’t take into consideration currency 
fluctuations or the tough economic climate.

“It’s pretty horrendous,” he adds. “This has had a devastating impact on these 
people.”

Tips for buying abroad


Taking out a foreign currency mortgage can be a hazardous business, but for 
the right people in the right situation, they can work. The current strength of 
the pound against the euro, combined with low mortgage rates, has led to a 
resurgence of interest among Brits in the French property market.

With the pound this week hovering close to €1.35, a €200,000 home in France is 
now coming in at under £150,000 compared to £175,000 in 2013, when the pound 
was worth just €1.14, says overseas mortgage specialist Conti. It says France 
has accounted for almost half of its mortgage enquiries in recent months, 
though it’s not renovated farmhouses in the Dordogne or apartments on the coast 
that are top of buyers’ lists, but ski properties in the Rhône-Alpes region, 
which includes resorts such as Chamonix, Morzine and Les Gets.

When buying overseas, follow the same general principles you would if you were 
buying in the UK. Take independent advice from an English-speaking lawyer who 
isn’t connected to the seller/estate agent/developer. And bear in mind all the 
other costs: “Lawyer’s fees, local and national taxes, insurance and so on can 
often add at least a further 10%,” says Conti.
 