
What do you do when your children have moved beyond piggy banks but aren’t old 
enough for a fully fledged current account? The good news is that there are a 
number of “youth” bank accounts on the market that can help teenagers, and 
those fast approaching their teens, obtain their first debit card, learn about 
budgeting and take their first steps towards financial independence.

However, which provider you choose will depend in part on how much financial 
freedom you want your offspring to have. Are you happy for them to have their 
own debit card which they can use in shops and online? Or would you rather they 
were limited to a cash card that can only be used to withdraw money from ATMs?

Aside from the youth accounts offered by high street players, there are also a 
growing number of products available that combine a prepaid debit card with a 
smartphone app. These are likely to appeal to parents keen to retain control 
over what their children do with their cash – for example, they want to be 100% 
sure they are not buying things that they shouldn’t be, or spending too much on 
iTunes. But the downside of these card-app combos is they all involve a fee.

“By getting used to running their own financial affairs youngsters will 
hopefully adopt money-management skills that will stand them in good stead 
later in life,” says Andrew Hagger of financial websiteMoneyComms 
<http://moneycomms.co.uk/>. “Teenagers are far more tech-savvy than their 
parents these days, and they’ll have no qualms about banking online and by 
smartphone, and using the likes of Apple Pay or Android Pay as a means of 
payment.”

Standard youth accounts

Many banks offer these. Typically they are available to children aged 11 and 
above, making them a good home for pocket money or cash earned from jobs.

They work in a similar way to adult current accounts, but do not offer an 
overdraft facility, so a youngster can only spend what they have in their 
account and won’t get any nasty surprises, says Charlotte Nelson at financial 
data websiteMoneyfacts.co.uk <http://moneyfacts.co.uk/>. And there are usually 
no fees or charges.

Many of these accounts pay in-credit interest, though some may take the view 
that a table-topping interest rate isn’t their main priority because they will 
only be keeping relatively small sums in the account.

It's important to shop around and not necessarily stick to the same provider 
as the parent or guardian

One account that might appeal to Guardian readers is the FlexOne offered by 
Nationwide building society, which has mutual (as opposed to plc) status, which 
means it is owned by and run for the benefit of its 14 million-plus members. 
FlexOne is aimed at those aged between 11 and 17, though it can be held up to 
the age of 23. There is a promise from Nationwide that it won’t charge anything 
for using the account, and customers can choose either a cash card for taking 
money out of ATMs, or a contactless Visa debit card that can also be used in 
shops, online and over the phone. The account can be managed via Nationwide’s 
mobile app and pays 1% credit interest on balances up to £1,000, plus offers a 
linked regular savings account paying 3.5%. (I should disclose that both my 
teenage daughters have had a FlexOne account for almost two years and they have 
been a success.)

Santander offers the 123 Mini Current Account for those aged between 11 and 
18, where again there is the choice of a cash card or a Visa debit card. You 
earn interest once you have £100 or more in the account.

Meanwhile, both Lloyds Bank and TSB offer an Under 19s Account, paying 1.5% 
and 2.5% interest respectively on balances up to £2,500. These accounts can be 
opened by those aged 11-17 and 11-18 respectively, and both offer the choice of 
a Visa debit card or a simple cash card.

HSBC’s offering is called MyAccount and is for children aged 11-17. A Visa 
debit card is automatically provided, though the bank says that if for any 
reason this is not wanted, it can stop one from being sent out.

Meanwhile, Barclays has an account for those aged 11-15 paying 0.25% interest, 
with a choice between a contactless debit card and a cash card, as well as one 
for 16-19-year-olds.

Halifax has Expresscash for 11- to 17-year-olds which pays 1.51% interest and 
comes with a Visa debit card, as doesNatWest’s Adapt account for those aged 
11-18, which pays 1%. TheCo-operative Bank does not have a youth account, but 
people can apply for its current account once they turn 16.

The opening requirements for these accounts vary, with an adult sometimes 
needing (or wanting) to be involved. Nationwide’s FlexOne, for example, can be 
opened online or in branch, though an adult must be present to open the account 
in branch for children under 16, while applications can only be made online for 
those aged 14 and over.

Nelson says that when choosing a youth account, “it’s always important to shop 
around and not necessarily stick to the same provider as the parent or 
guardian”. Hagger adds: “These current accounts aren’t marketed particularly 
aggressively by our banks and building societies, which is a shame as they are 
a must-have for today’s 11- to 17-year-olds who seek financial independence and 
the chance to pick up some valuable money-related life skills along the way.”

Card and app products

There are several of these and they all work in a similar way, with a prepaid 
Mastercard or Visa for the child alongside a mobile app. Typically, parents put 
money into their child’s card account, and the app enables them to monitor 
transactions. Three of the main providers areOsper, which is aimed at eight to 
18-year-olds and their parents, and which has been endorsed by TV presenter 
Davina McCall;goHenry, for those aged between six and 18; and nimbl, for eight 
to 18-year-olds.

These offer quite a few advantages – for example, you can often “lock” the 
card if it has been lost or stolen, set spending limits etc. But these parental 
controls come at a cost: Osper is free for 30 days, then costs £2 per child per 
month, billed annually; goHenry is free for two months, then is £2.49 per child 
per month; and nimbl is free for three months, then £10 per card per year. In 
some cases there are even extra fees on top of this – for example, nimbl 
charges 49p per ATM withdrawal in the UK (the first one each month is free).
 