
"Welfare suicides don't exist. Suicide is a mental health issue." That line, 
by the former Labour official Luke Bozier, pretty much sums up the standard 
rightwing response to the websiteCalum's List <http://calumslist.org/>. 
According to its founders, the aim of Calum's List is "to list the number of 
deaths where welfare reform has alleged to have had some culpability, and to 
make the best effort possible to work towards reducing this death toll." 
Bozier's Twitter comments were a gloss on blogposts byThe Spectator's Isabel 
Hardman 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/coffeehouse/politics/2012/july/welfare-suicides-are-awful-but-theyre-still-a-red-herring>
 and the Telegraph'sBrendan O'Neill 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/brendanoneill2/100168469/this-exploitation-of-suicidal-people-is-a-new-low-for-campaigners-against-welfare-reform/>
.

There's more than a whiff of Freud's "kettle logic" (I didn't borrow your 
kettle; when I borrowed the kettle it was already broken; when I returned the 
kettle it wasn't damaged) about the cluster of incompatible arguments that 
these three presented against Calum's List. Their principal claims were as 
follows. The suicides have not been caused by the changes, and therefore to 
mention them is an act of opportunistic exploitation; if suicides have been 
caused by the reforms, this is no reason to abandon them; the problem is not 
the reforms themselves but how they are managed (ie those forced back to work 
should be given adequate support); suicide is not a rational act, which means 
that it can have no political significance.

I don't wish to argue here about whether or not specific cases of suicide were 
caused by the new legislation. But I do want to contest the bizarre idea that, 
in principle, suicides could not be adduced as evidence against the changes in 
the welfare system. If people dying as a consequence of the implementation of 
measures cannot count as evidence that the legislation has detrimental effects, 
what would?

O'Neill displays a strangely judgmental attitude towards suicide, arguing 
suicide "is not a rational response to economic hardship; it is not a rational 
response to having your benefits cut". This is a spectacular case of missing 
the point: for many of those suffering from mental illnesses, the capacity to 
act rationally is impaired, which is one reason that they need to be protected. 
As for the idea that those returning to work should receive proper support, the 
lack of such support is the issue. Atos, the agency responsible for testing 
whether claimants are fit to work, has seen a large number of appeals against 
its judgments upheld. And who can have faith the government will properly 
support those returning to work when it entrusts the transition to a 
discredited agency such asA4e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2012/apr/24/a4e-emma-harrisons-charity-feels-the-heat>
?

But there's a more general problem here. Some of the rightwing commentators 
condemning Calum's List have deplored the "politicisation" of mental illness, 
but the problem is exactly the opposite. Mental illness has been depoliticised, 
so that we blithely accept a situation in which depression is now the malady 
most treated by the NHS. The neoliberal policies implemented first by the 
Thatcher governments in the 1980s and continued by New Labour and the current 
coalition have resulted in a privatisation of stress. Under neoliberal 
governance, workers have seen their wages stagnate and their working conditions 
and job security become more precarious. As the Guardianreports today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jul/15/suicide-rise-older-men>, 
suicides amongst middle-aged men are on the increase, and Jane Powell, chief 
executive of Calm, the Campaign Against Living Miserably, links some of this 
increase with unemployment and precarious work. Given the increased reasons for 
anxiety, it's not surprising that a large proportion of the population diagnose 
themselves as chronically miserable. But the medicalisation of depression is 
part of the problem.

The NHS, like the education system and other public services, has been forced 
to try to deal with the social and psychic damage caused by the deliberate 
destruction of solidarity and security. Where once workers would have turned to 
trade unions when they were put under increasing stress, now they are 
encouraged to go to their GP or, if they are lucky enough to be able to be get 
one on the NHS, a therapist.

It would be facile to argue that every single case of depression can be 
attributed to economic or political causes; but it is equally facile to 
maintain – as the dominant approaches to depression do – that the roots of all 
depression must always lie either in individual brain chemistry or in early 
childhood experiences. Most psychiatrists assume that mental illnesses such as 
depression are caused by chemical imbalances in the brain, which can be treated 
by drugs. But most psychotherapy doesn't address the social causation of mental 
illness either.

The radical therapist David Smail argues that Margaret Thatcher's view that 
there's no such thing as society, only individuals and their families, finds 
"an unacknowledged echo in almost all approaches to therapy". Therapies such as 
cognitive behaviour therapy combine a focus on early life with the self-help 
doctrine that individuals can become masters of their own destiny. The idea is 
"with the expert help of your therapist or counsellor, you can change the world 
you are in the last analysis responsible for, so that it no longer cause you 
distress" – Smail calls this view "magical voluntarism".

Depression is the shadow side of entrepreneurial culture, what happens when 
magical voluntarism confronts limited opportunities. As psychologist Oliver 
James put it in his bookThe Selfish Capitalist 
<http://www.selfishcapitalist.com/selfish.html>, "in the entrepreneurial 
fantasy society," we are taught "that only the affluent are winners and that 
access to the top is open to anyone willing to work hard enough, regardless of 
their familial, ethnic or social background – if you do not succeed, there is 
only one person to blame." It's high time that the blame was placed elsewhere. 
We need to reverse the privatisation of stress and recognise that mental health 
is a political issue.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<https://twitter.com/commentisfree>
 