
“Brace yourself,” a friend warned on Facebook last week. “The new school 
uniform pictures are coming.” Sure enough, my social media feeds are now 
saturated with pictures of sheepish children posing awkwardly for their parents 
before their first day of the new school year, wearing crisp uniforms.

Now let’s be clear: I enjoy these pictures. I like seeing how distant friends’ 
children are growing and changing. I also like getting visual confirmation that 
the adolescents who have been slouching on my sofa all summer casually shooting 
people on Call Of Duty now have something else to occupy their days – at least 
until half-term.

That first day of school photo: tyrannical, stressful and emotional | Peter 
Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/07/first-day-at-school-stressful-emotional-facebook>
For Matthew Tate, the new head of Hartsdown Academy in Margate, Kent, school 
uniform has proved more of a headache. He made headlines nationally this week 
by standing at the school gates andturning away students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/06/police-called-school-pupils-sent-home-wrong-uniform-hartsdown-academy-margate>
 whose uniform wasn’t up to standard: 50 of them on the first day of term, 20 
the day after. Angry parents calledhim a Nazi 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/hartsdown-academy-head-says-compared-8783314>
, and complained of Gestapo tactics, which goes to show that we really should 
place more emphasis on history in the national curriculum. Hitler murdered 
millions of people, simply because they were Jewish, or otherwise failed to 
comply with his exacting standards; Tate was trying to stamp his authority by 
sending home kids who were wearing trainers. Can you spot the difference there?

It is true that it might have been a little harsh to send students home on 
their first day. Perhaps a warning letter would have been more diplomatic, 
giving harassed and cash-strapped parents a few days to go to the shops and get 
their kids kitted out correctly. The start of term can be a financial 
nightmare, and it has beenreported 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/parents-targeted-back-school-loans-8762566>
 that a company in the Midlands is offering £300 loans to help with 
back-to-school expenses – at an eye-watering interest rate equivalent to 200% a 
year. But it is also true is that nearly 900 students in an economically 
disadvantaged part of Kent did manage to turn up in the required outfit: in an 
interview, the beleaguered head claimed that in previous years, some students 
had been bullied for turning up in full uniform.

All of which might imply that I’m all for school uniforms. I am not. I hated 
mine. My teenage skin reacted badly to nylon – still does, probably, though I 
haven’t tested that for decades – and the hideous synthetic blouses my school 
imposed on me left me with two, equally devastating choices: festering acne on 
my back, or my mum’s triumphant solution, a thick cotton BHS vest.

Uniform can also help with discipline, it gives the school an identity and 
hopefully pride

The argument is that uniform levels the playing field, making all students 
look the same. This is nonsense. The well-off kids are the ones with the 
fashionably-cut skirts and trousers and expensive shoes, while the poorer kids 
are marked out by their scuffed Primark footwear or the worn, ankle-swinging 
trousers they outgrew months before. And no matter how minutely the school 
tries to stamp it out, individuality always finds an expression. There are many 
ways to knot a tie, to adjust a skirt, or casually sling a sweater round your 
shoulders, and these tiny signifiers speak volumes in the closed, 
claustrophobic world of school.

But nonetheless, research has shown that uniform can be effective. It takes 
away the pressure of deciding what to wear in the morning, and removes at least 
some of the peer pressure to wear expensive brands. Banning short skirts, high 
heels and tight trousers gives our children some respite from being 
oversexualised, and obsessively body conscious.

Uniform can also help with discipline, it gives the school an identity and 
hopefully pride, and it helps to identify intruders more easily, as well as 
truants: the head at my son’s old school in Hackney managed to boost attendance 
considerably, just by riding around the area on his bike at 9am, rounding up 
uniformed students wandering off in the wrong direction.

Debate: should schools send pupils home for wearing the wrong uniform?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/sep/08/debate-should-schools-send-pupils-home-for-wearing-the-wrong-uniform>
Detractors often point out that Scandinavian schools are consistently ranked 
amongst the best in the world, and that uniforms are never required there. But 
there are plenty of other things they don’t have, either. Constant testing of 
children. League tables. Crumbling school buildings. Instead, Denmark, Norway, 
Finland and Sweden spend more on education as a proportion of GDP than almost 
any other country. In the UK, education has long been used as a political 
football, the constant fiddling leaving teachers running to keep up with 
forever-moving goalposts. Theresa May, with herplans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/06/grammar-schools-government-will-publish-plan-end-ban-weeks>
 to reintroduce grammar schools (which Scandinavians also somehow do without), 
is just one of a long, long line.

Hartsdown Academy is rated by Ofsted as a good school. As he starts his new 
job, I’d imagine Matthew Tate, like most headteachers, is striving against the 
odds to attain that coveted excellent grade. We can criticise him for clinging 
to his zero-tolerance uniform policy as some sort of magic bullet. But unless 
we’re willing to fund schools properly, give teachers the resources they 
deserve, and prioritise ensuring every child has a truly equal chance to learn 
and find their talents, what else has he got?
 