
According to BBC boss Tony Hall, iPlayer needs to be reinvented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/bbc-iplayer-faces-complete-overhaul-in-tony-halls-future-proofing-plans>
 with new technology such as voice recognition and artificial intelligence to 
stay ahead of “rapid growth by our competitors”. 

He didn’t name them, but those competitors are Netflix and Amazon which have 
in a relatively short space of time, elbowed their way into the TV market. From 
Stranger Things and The Crown onNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> to The Grand Tour and Transparent 
on Amazon Prime, online-only shows have become core components of what we watch.

But while both Netflix and Amazon have invested heavily in content, it was the 
quality and simplicity of their technology that provided the foundation of 
their success.iPlayer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/iplayer> may have led 
the online TV revolution, but it has since fallen behind in features and 
usability.

BBC iPlayer faces complete overhaul in Tony Hall's future-proofing plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/bbc-iplayer-faces-complete-overhaul-in-tony-halls-future-proofing-plans>
Hall is obviously aware of this, but for all his ambition, there are a host of 
reasons why theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> will find it 
difficult, if not impossible, to make iPlayer as good.

The first problem is data, which is vital in getting personalisation and 
recommendation right. Netflix has more users globally – upwards of 86 million 
and growing – whose viewing habits help refine its systems. Amazon has data 
from across its retail and other businesses that has already made it a leader 
in recommendations (it has also sold millions of Amazon Echos, which gives it a 
big lead in the voice recognition tech that the BBC wants to add to iPlayer).

But much of the time, the BBC doesn’t even know who is watching. Unlike with 
Netflix and Amazon, there is no required sign-in for iPlayer. The BBC is trying 
to persuade people to use a single sign-in system called BBC ID, which would 
let it personalise and recommend content across all its platforms. There are 
plans to make sign-in compulsory but no set time frame and doubts about whether 
it will be possible across all the platforms iPlayer needs to be on.

And then there are the technical challenges of making any radical changes to 
iPlayer. As a publicly funded, public-service broadcaster, the BBC has a duty 
to be available as widely as possible. That means making sure iPlayer is 
compatible with services such as Sky, Virgin and YouView, plus smart TVs and 
many other devices.

Adding new features or even making the way video is delivered more efficient 
risks breaking earlier versions or making it incompatible with older devices 
and services.

And here, the BBC is a victim of its own success. Not only is it funded by the 
licence fee, but it has also become a cornerstone of British culture. That may 
make it a well-loved institution but it also means if iPlayer suddenly stops 
working on your two-year-old smart TV half way through Strictly Come Dancing, 
you’re going to be a lot more annoyed than if you have to switch over to your 
laptop to finish the latest episode of The OA on Netflix.

And not only does the BBC have extra hurdles to overcome, it also has less 
cash to do it.

Netflix’s research and development spending in 2015 was $650.8m (£530m), more 
than five times the £105m the BBC spent on development and its research 
department in 2015/2016. Amazon doesn’t break out its R&D, but as of the end of 
its 2015 financial year it had more than $620m in tax breaks, and said this was 
primarily what it spent on research.

Meanwhile the BBC is facing budget cuts amounting to more than £700m (some of 
which will be offset by increases in licence fee funding). It simply can’t 
match the cash the digital behemoths are willing to spend.

Yet there is one thing that gives the BBC an advantage over its digital-only 
competitors that might be more important.

While Netflix and Amazon have huge budgets to pay for shows – it is estimated 
they will spend a combined $9bn on content by 2020 – the BBC, through a 
combination of established relationships, long-running series and the fact it 
still broadcasts live to millions, retains an appeal to producers that is hard 
for the tech firms to match. It also still makes its own shows, and is for the 
most part pretty good at it.

That Netflix and Amazon are prepared to spend so much money on acquiring 
content underlines the fact that it’s what you watch, not how you watch it, 
that matters. And when it comes to what people want to watch, for the moment at 
least, the UK wants to watch a lot of what’s on iPlayer.
 