
Name: The timeshare.

Age: In its mid-50s.

Appearance: Dead on its feet.

What? The timeshare is dead? But I’m part of a lovely little scheme. You’re 
one of a dying breed, then. Brits are cancelling their timeshare plans in 
droves, at a rate of six a day. 

But why? The world is a huge expanse of unexplored crevices, my friend. It’s 
yours for the taking. Why anyone would prefer to return to the exact same villa 
in the exact same week of every year is beyond me.

But it’s a nice villa, near a shop. The beach is 10 minutes away, and we know 
where all the plug sockets are. Get with the programme. Even the chief 
executive of the Timeshare Association says the current system is “in 
the doldrums”.

But we agreed to it years ago, and I think it’s contractually binding for 
ever, so even my great-grandchildren will have to go to this villa until they 
die. You might want to get that looked at, actually. Last year, the EU ruled 
that about 12% of all timeshare schemes were illegal, which means you might be 
due a refund.

We’re free! We’re finally free! Congratulations. You are now one of the 
thousands of holidaymakers finally unshackled from the tyranny of the timeshare.

'Leisure credit' – why you should beware timeshare's successor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/may/11/leisure-credit-timeshare-holidaymakers>
Ooh, where should we go next then? Well, ahem, have you heard about the 
points-based timeshare?

No, but do tell. A bunch of timeshare resorts have pooled together, and your 
investment buys points that you can exchange for stays in any of them.

Wouldn’t it be easier to just book a different holiday each year? No, you see, 
you don’t get any points on a regular holiday, do you? You know what everyone 
loves?

Points? Points! One year, you could go skiing, the next year, you could have a 
cruise. The whole world is open to you, and all it takes is a multi-year 
financial commitment on your part.

This still sounds a bit restrictive. It’s not! It’s just points. Points are 
great, right? Points never did any harm to anyone.

Great! Where do I sign? Just let me dip this quill into virgin blood …

Do say: “The timeshare is dead.”

Don’t say: “Long live the timeshare.”
 