
The first thing to say about Boxing Day is that its origins have nothing to do 
with boxing, or with putting used wrapping paper into boxes, or with boxing up 
all your unwanted presents, or indeed with football, horse racing, hunting, 
shopping, going for icy mass swims in the sea, or any of the other activities 
that now characterise the day after Christmas and act as an antidote to the 
languor that descends on households at around teatime onChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> Day. The origins of Boxing 
Day lie not in sport, but in small acts of kindness.

It is generally accepted that the name derives from the giving of Christmas 
“boxes”, but the precise nature of those boxes and when they were first 
dispensed is disputed. One school of thought argues that the tradition began in 
churches in the Middle Ages. Parishioners collected money for the poor in alms 
boxes, and these were opened on the day after Christmas in honour of St 
Stephen, the first Christian martyr, whose feast day falls on 26 December.

Why is Frozen so popular? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Lucinda 
Everett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/google-autocomplete-why-frozen-film-so-popular>
Some suggest the tradition is even older than that, dating back to the 
Christianised late Roman empire, when similar collections were supposedly made 
for the poor in honour of St Stephen, but the evidence is sketchy. All we can 
say for certain is that at some point St Stephen’s Day became associated with 
public acts of charity.

It was no accident that Good King Wenceslas, who was actually a Duke of 
Bohemia in the 10th century, risked life and limb on a freezing winter night to 
feed some wretched peasant who had chosen a most inclement evening to gather 
winter fuel. His fabled act of generosity took place on the Feast of Stephen, 
on which day it was a Christian’s duty to help those less fortunate than 
oneself. Or, as the somewhatlaboured words of the hymn have it 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SQVUMG6LZGM>: “Therefore Christian men be 
sure, / Wealth or Rank possessing, / Ye who now will bless the poor / Shall 
yourselves find blessing.”

The problem in terms of dating when the Feast of Stephen became the day for 
alms-giving and box-opening is that the Good King Wenceslas hymn, which was 
written by John Mason Neale, dates from 1853. As with most things to do with 
Christmas, it was the Victorians who fleshed out the meaning of Boxing Day. The 
Oxford English Dictionary dates the term to the 1830s. Neale clearly recognised 
the association of the day in the public mind with charity, and in 1871 St 
Stephen’s Day was designated a bank holiday. What had previously been an 
amorphous tradition now, thanks to the structured minds and myth-making 
tendencies of the Victorians, became a seasonal necessity.

As part of this seasonal beneficence, some employers in the Victorian period 
gave Christmas boxes to their staff. In large households, after serving their 
employers on Christmas Day, domestic staff were allowed time off on Boxing Day 
to visit their own families, and went off clutching Christmas boxes full of 
leftover food. That at least is the suggestion, though there may be an element 
of Downton Abbeyish wishful thinking here. Scrooge’s attitude (pre-reformation) 
to Bob Cratchit’s paid holiday on Christmas Day – “A poor excuse for picking a 
man’s pocket every twenty-fifth of December” – may have been more 
representative.

The tradition of giving Christmas boxes to tradespeople is now disappearing – 
a reflection of our atomised society

What is undeniably true is that the practice developed of people giving 
Christmas boxes – commonly a small gift or some money – to tradespeople who had 
provided them with good service in the course of the year. The Victorians may 
have given the name to Boxing Day, but this tradition predates the 19th 
century. It was certainly prevalent in 17th-century England, as the entry in 
Samuel Pepys’ diary for19 December 1663 attests 
<http://www.pepysdiary.com/diary/1663/12/19/>. “By coach to my shoemaker’s and 
paid all there,” he reports, “and gave something to the boys’ box against 
Christmas.”

The tradition of giving Christmas boxes to tradespeople was still extant a 
generation ago but is now disappearing – a reflection of our increasingly 
atomised and anonymised society, and of the move away from a social structure 
based on deference and patronage. For better or worse, Christmas really isn’t 
what it used to be.

Boxing Day is primarily a British tradition, and the UK has exported it to 
Australia, Canada and New Zealand (in each of which it has become primarily a 
shopping and sporting day). The term is little used in the US, and 26 December 
is not usually a federal holiday, though it is this year because Christmas Day 
falls on a Sunday. The 26th is a holiday in western Europe, but most countries 
designate it the “second day of Christmas” rather than Boxing Day.

Just to complicate matters, eastern orthodox Christian countries celebrate St 
Stephen’s Day on 27 December. They do not associate it with Christmas boxes 
nor, coming from the chillier parts of Europe, do they plunge headlong into 
frozen seas and lakes. They go to church, eat and drink copiously, and watch 
the telly instead. How very sensible.
 