
More than 30 million Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> users 
live in countries where the service is unavailable without the use of 
location-masking software, giving the company a hefty financial incentive not 
to crack down on members who use the technological loophole to watch content 
not authorised for their country.

The figures, which come from market research firm GlobalWebIndex, show that 
Netflix has more than 20 million users in China alone, all of whom must connect 
through virtual private networks (VPNs), as the streaming video provider has 
not yet launched in the country.

Not every Netflix “user” is a subscriber to the service, however. 
GlobalWebIndex surveyed almost 200,000 individuals across 32 markets, and asked 
how many of them had watched Netflix in the previous month using a VPN. A 
significant proportion of those saying they had will have watched at a friend’s 
house, or been sharing a username with others – indeed, as of October 2014, the 
company had 16 million international members, significantly less than the total 
number of users of the service.

“Account sharing is pretty widespread,” says Jason Mander, Head of Trends at 
GWI. “Our numbers are always going to be higher than the number of paying 
subscribers.”

Nonetheless, he says that the figures show that Netflix would be “be shooting 
themselves in the foot if you blocked considerable levels of traffic coming 
from outside your official countries … the fact that it’s already talking to 
them and getting money from them is a good thing.”

And it seems Netflix agrees: the company’s chief product officer emphatically 
denied rumours that it had been cracking down on VPN users at this year’s 
Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas.

“The claims that we have changed our policy on VPN are false,” said Neil Hunt. 
“People who are using a VPN to access our service from outside of the area will 
find that it still works exactly as it has always done.”

Netflix can’t welcome VPN users too openly, however, since the company’s 
fraught relationship with content providers hinges on them enforcing 
international restrictions. “I think the tension here is that it’s not a 
problem for Netflix per se,” says Mander. “The actual studios might be much 
more concerned about it. But by the nature of how a VPN works … it’s very 
difficult to tell if someone’s using one.”

One of the outcomes of the Sony Pictures hack has been evidence of just how 
much Hollywood studios care about VPN usage, as emails from 2013 show a Sony 
exec complaining that “Netflix do not closely monitor where some of their 
subscribers are registering from and don’t take steps to counter circumvention 
websites that allow people… to subscribe illegally”. He specifically cited 
Australia and South Africa as countries without legal Netflix services despite 
high penetration. GWI’s figures show that 5% of internet users in those nations 
accessed the service in the last month.

Mander says that accessing better entertainment content is “by far the most 
common” reason for using VPN services. “Beyond that, accessing social networks 
is big in places like China. Then there’s quite an important group of people 
who are using them to hide their identity, particularly in France, Germany and 
the UK.”

• Netflix denies crackdown on VPN users 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/05/netflix-denies-crackdown-on-vpn-users>
 