
Ask Kweku Adoboli <https://www.theguardian.com/business/kweku-adoboli> why 
bankers do not go to jail, and he would no doubt look surprised. A London-based 
trader at the Swiss bank UBS, Adoboli was jailed in November 2012 for what 
police described as the biggest fraud in UK history. He racked up £1.2bn of 
losses through secretive trades – and at one point those trades could have 
forced UBS to take a £7bn hit, enough to bring down the Swiss bank.

He is not the only banker to have been incarcerated. Nick Leeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2002/feb/07/1> – jailed in Singapore for 
bringing down Barings in 1995 – is now on the after-dinner speaking circuit. In 
August, he announced free trading programmes intended, he said, to “help people 
not make the same mistakes I did”.

Tom Hayes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/23/jailed-libor-trader-tom-hayes-must-pay-878000-pounds>
 is behind bars, serving 11 years after being convicted for rigging Libor 
interest rates. Four former Barclays bankers have also been jailed for 
conspiring to fraudulently rig global benchmark interest rates.

But those who ask why bankers have not gone to jail are probably thinking of 
the 2008 banking crisis and, with the anniversary of the collapse ofLehman 
Brothers <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers> approaching (15 
September 2008), the question may once again be at the front of people’s minds. 
After Lehmans collapsed, more than £65bn of taxpayer funds were pumped in to 
Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) and Lloyds Banking Group and a rescue package put 
in place for Bradford & Bingley. Northern Rock had been nationalised earlier in 
2008.

Goldman Sachs to pay $5bn for its role in the 2008 financial crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/11/goldman-sachs-2008-financial-crisis-mortagage-backed-securities>
Kenneth Peasnell, distinguished professor of accounting at Lancaster 
University management school, suggests that this question “is driven by a sense 
of unfairness, there being one rule for the rich and powerful and another for 
the rest of us … The wealthy seem to get a slap on the wrist for not paying 
their taxes while the single mother gets locked up for cheating on benefits”.

As the banking crisis was unfolding, the main focus of the policymakers 
appears to have been keeping the banks afloat rather than trying to apportion 
blame. The official report into what went wrong at RBS, published in 2011, 
concluded that “multiple poor decisions” were at the root of its collapse. None 
of those “multiple poor decisions” were crimes. At the time of the publication 
of the report, Lord Turner, then the chairman of the now defunctFinancial 
Services Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-services-authority-fsa>, said: 
“The fact that no individual has been found legally responsible for the failure 
begs the question: if action cannot be taken under existing rules, should not 
the rules be changed for the future?”

He was not necessarily talking about criminal prosecution but more about the 
City regulatory regime under which individuals are authorised to work in 
certain financial roles and can be banned from holding particular positions or 
fined.

Eventually prosecutors examined RBS, and in May this year – eight years after 
the bank was bailed out – concluded that there was insufficient evidence of 
criminal behaviour to bring charges against the bank or former employees.

In situations where there have been attempts to launch criminal proceedings 
against banks, there is evidence that politicians have become anxious about the 
possible impact on financial markets. In July, a US congressional report 
revealed that George Osborne, when he was chancellor, warned the US government 
that criminal charges against HSBC could lead to global financial disaster. His 
intervention, on which he has not commented, took place four years ago when 
HSBC – the UK’s biggest bank – was being investigated by the US authorities for 
allowing terrorists and drug dealers to launder millions of dollars.

Some countries have jailed bankers for cases arising out of the crisis. In 
Ireland – which pumped €64bn into its banks and later had to be bailed out 
itself – three bankers were sentenced in July: former Irish Life & Permanent 
chief executive Denis Casey; Willie McAteer, former finance director at the 
failed Anglo Irish Bank; and John Bowe, former head of capital markets at Anglo 
Irish Bank.

In the wake of the crisis, Iceland appointed a special prosecutor, Ólafur 
Hauksson, to examine the collapsed Kaupthing, Landsbanki and Glitnir banks. He 
has been bringing charges of market manipulation, fraud, embezzlement and 
fraudulent loans.

During the banking crisis, the main focus of the policymakers appears to have 
been keeping the banks afloat

Robert Jenkins, a former Bank of England policymaker who is now a senior 
fellow atBetter Markets <https://bettermarkets.com/> said: “During the crisis, 
[there was] a misplaced judgment on the part of authorities that prosecution 
would undermine further confidence in the banking system.”

The UK did not set up a special commission or appoint an Icelandic-style 
prosecutor after the 2008 crisis. But in 2012, following the outrage caused by 
the Libor rigging scandal, Conservative MP Andrew Tyrie chaired the 
parliamentary commission on banking standards. The MPs and peers who sat on the 
commission were charged with looking at the culture of the UK banking sector 
and seeing if lessons could be learned about corporate governance.

Peasnell argues that public outrage is not enough to send bankers to jail. “A 
crime has to have been committed. Making a reckless or stupid investment 
decision does not in itself qualify,” Peasnell said.

Tyrie’s parliamentary commission on banking standards led to the prospect of a 
seven-year jail term for reckless misconduct. It is yet to be tested – and 
there is scepticism about whether it would put any bankers behind bars in the 
future.
 