
The government could bring in radical changes to the benefit appeal process, 
including a shift away from “in-person” hearings, with judges instead making 
many decisions based solely on written evidence, telephone calls or video 
conference. The proposed changes – which areopen to consultation until the end 
of this month 
<https://consult.justice.gov.uk/digital-communications/transforming-our-courts-and-tribunals>
 – are part of a wider bid to digitise the justice system, but a range of 
social security tribunals could be the first services to be moved online.

Disabled people are being wrongly denied benefits. I help get them back | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/12/disabled-people-benefits-appeal>
Claimants wishing to appeal against a benefit decision now do so either 
through paper submissions or by physically attending a tribunal. The Ministry 
of Justice (MoJ) says that non-physical appeals will only be done where 
appropriate and that support will be put in place to assist claimants to use 
the new digital system, including access to paper channels for those who aren’t 
able to go online. But disability advocates fear that a move from in-person 
hearings could result in fewer appeals being upheld.

“We get 90% success when the appeal’s in person. On paper, even with us 
involved, it’s barely 50% success,” says Michelle Cardno, founder and lawyer at
Fightback 4 Justice <http://www.fightback4justice.co.uk/>, a not-for-profit 
group offering appeal advice and advocacy. “So it would be detrimental for 
claimants,” she adds

Although the MoJ states it does not collect data on the outcomes of different 
types of hearing,research by the University College London Judicial Institute 
and the Nuffield Foundation in 2013 
<http://www.nuffieldfoundation.org/sites/default/files/files/Tribunal_decision_making_vFINAL.pdf>
 found claimants almost three times as likely to win an appeal for disability 
living allowance (DLA) after an oral hearing than paper alone (46%, compared to 
17%).

In principle, Laura Jones, whose depression and anxiety means she struggles to 
leave her house in Kent, is exactly the type of person who should benefit by 
not giving evidence in person. Yet she lost her paper appeal last October to 
claim the standard rate mobility component of personal independence payment 
(PIP). Jones, 55, who asked for a real name not to be used, also has arthritis, 
fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome.

She says: “The further I walk the slower I get, and the pain gets so bad that 
I can’t sit. I can’t use stairs and struggle with slopes and hills. I have to 
support my arm when I walk to relieve some of the pain in my neck so I can’t 
carry bags.” She adds that she would struggle to walk20 metres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/10/disabled-people-fairer-test-mobility-pip>
 repeatedly, reliably and in a safe manner. “I can’t use aids because arthritis 
in my fingers prevent me from gripping as some of the fingers don’t bend 
properly and a constant grip would make my hands go numb,” says Jones. “I do 
think not attending went against me,” she says of the appeal process. “The 
panel basically said I was exaggerating. How could they possibly know this as 
they’ve never met me?”

Without the disabled person sitting in front of them, a panel can’t see for 
themselves how bad their condition is

Cardno says that without the disabled person sitting in front of them, a panel 
can’t see for themselves how bad their condition is. “If the claimant is there 
to put it across in person, no matter how tough it is for them, that’s so much 
better,” she says.

Steve Donnison, co-founder of Benefits and Work 
<http://www.benefitsandwork.co.uk/>, a not-for-profit benefits advice resource, 
explains: “Appeal panels have to make a decision about the honesty and 
credibility of an appellant. It’s far easier for them to make this judgment if 
the claimant is in front of them answering their questions.”

This disadvantage is exacerbated by the fact, which advocates stress, that 
many claimants appealing a decision aren’t actually aware of the criteria for 
being eligible for benefits. “And when the appeal is by paper, the tribunal has 
no way of filling in the gaps in the evidence,” Donnison adds. “So they can’t 
make an award.”

It gives an insight into what claimants are already up against that Cheryl 
Thomas, professor of judicial studies at UCL and co-author of the Nuffield 
research, adds that the quality of the paperwork provided to the tribunal is 
often poor. “There’s nothing on the form for disability appeals that tells 
people they should include evidence of their medical history,” she points out.

Significantly, the government is also considering changes to the composition 
of tribunal panels themselves that will see the removal of a panel member with 
direct experience of disability from appeals for disability living allowance, 
PIP, and attendance allowance. These appeals are currently heard by a judge, a 
medical member and someone who either has a disability or cares for someone who 
does.

PIP is a disaster for disabled people. At last the full horror is emerging | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/pip-disaster-disabled-access-report-benefits>
Cardno believes that such a move will see the success rate for in-person 
appeals plummet. “I’ve seen that panel member steer the judge so many times. A 
simple thing like, if it’s said the claimant’s able to go shopping, the judge 
may make assumptions for a simple ‘yes, I can go to a supermarket’ and not 
explore further. But a panel member who is disabled themselves is more likely 
to explore a little more [to] establish if a person is able to do something 
such as shopping for the majority of the time instead of as a one-off, or odd 
times. They have more understanding that people push themselves through pain to 
try and do ‘normal’ everyday things. ”

Any steps that could further stack the odds against claimants would be 
particularly controversial in light of the ongoing, widespread problem of long 
delays and flawed assessments for both PIP and employment and support allowance 
(ESA).

Latest figures from the MoJ show that PIP appeals in April to June 2016 were 
up 91% on the same period the previous year. While less than a quarter of 
housing and council tax appeals were upheld at tribunal, and less than half of 
jobseeker’s allowance appeals, between April to June tribunal panels overturned 
65% of PIP assessments, 60% of ESA and 57% of DLA decisions. This success rate 
comes despite cuts to local welfare advice services which mean that many 
disabled people, who are often already struggling with mental health problems 
and physical or learning disabilities, are having to fight benefit appeals 
alone.

Back in Kent, Jones’s health has worsened. She has been reassessed for the 
standard rate of PIP, but was rejected again in June. This time her local law 
clinic has persuaded her to appeal at a tribunal, rather than just sending in 
written evidence. “They said I have a better chance of winning [in person],” 
she says.

Without her benefit, she can’t afford to replace her car with an automatic and 
using a clutch causes her back, hip and knee pain. “I’m more and more of a 
recluse now,” says Jones.

An MoJ spokesperson says: “We have a world-leading legal system and are 
investing over £700m to reform and digitise our courts and tribunal services to 
deliver swifter and more certain justice. We are consulting on proposals to 
make tribunals more flexible, so they can be composed according to the needs of 
the individuals involved, while still allowing members with specialist 
knowledge to take part in cases where necessary.”
 