
Home is a place of warmth and comfort. It’s a refuge in winter, a space to 
snuggle down and wrap up. But winter is also a great time to open your home to 
friends and family, welcoming them in from the cold to enjoy great food, 
delicious drinks and good times. That’s when your hospitality must be firing on 
all cylinders, your decor primed to make your guests feel at home and the 
ambience perfectly pitched to facilitate comfortable socialising.

To celebrate warm and welcoming abodes, Vaillant is here to help with its 
“home is where the warmth is” campaign. Vaillant is one of the UK’s leading 
boiler manufacturers, innovating how we warm our homes since 1874, from water 
heaters to the combi boiler. Vaillant is a pioneer in renewable heating 
technology.


Interior design tips: how to create a ‘warm’ room
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/vaillant-warmer-homes/2016/nov/25/interior-design-tips-how-to-create-a-warm-room>
“Home is where the warmth is” showcases a series of features and photo 
galleries to inspire your interiors, celebrate hospitality and help you create 
a welcoming home this winter. You can find out which colour schemes add warmth 
to your des res, check out six interior trends that create a welcoming vibe and 
pick up tips on hosting from the experts.


Vaillant is also offering a fantastic prize for one lucky reader: a Vaillant 
ecoTEC boiler and app-enabled vSmart controller, plus £2,500 of John Lewis 
vouchers. The ecoTEC range combines future thinking with stylish design. The 
lucky winner’s boiler will be matched to their home and personal requirements, 
including a standard flue and installation up to the value of £2,000.

The vSMART app control system allows you to control your boiler via a 
smartphone app available on Android and Apple iOS. This intelligent app starts 
to understand your home’s needs from the second you install it. Using weather 
data and its weather compensation feature, it tells your boiler how hard it has 
to work to get your home to its required temperature. You can even tell it what 
time you wake up or when you get in from work, so you’ll always have a warm and 
cosy home when you need it.

If you want a place that’s always warm and welcoming, with the ability to 
control your heating and hot water anywhere, anytime, this fantastic prize will 
take your home to the next level.


For your chance to win, simply enter your details below.


Terms and conditions

 * Qualification 
1.1 Subject to clauses 1.2 and 1.3 below, Vaillant Group UK Limited (Vaillant
), in conjunction with the Guardian newspaper, part of the Guardian Media Group 
(Guardian), provides this Guardian Free Vaillant Boiler Prize Draw promotion (
Promotion), which is open to residents of the United Kingdom, who are over the 
age of 18 years (Applicant, and the term Applicants shall be interpreted 
accordingly). For the avoidance of doubt, for the purposes of this Promotion, 
the United Kingdom includes the Channel Islands, Isle of Man and Northern 
Ireland (Territory). 


1.2 The Promotion is not open to any Applicant who is, at any time during the 
period indicated in clause 1.3 below, an employee of:

(a) Vaillant; or
(b) the Guardian; or
(c) any other member of Vaillant’s group of companies; or
(d) any other member of the Guardian’s group of companies; or
(e) any marketing services agency, handling house or other company involved 
directly with the administration of the Promotion;

 or any member of any of such employees’ households.

1.3 The Promotion begins on 25 November 2016 and expires at 11:59pm on 28 
February 2017 (Period), unless extended or terminated by Vaillant or the 
Guardian at any time. Any such extension or termination shall be set out by 
Vaillant on its website atwww.vaillant.co.uk <http://www.vaillant.co.uk/> (
Vaillant Website) and/or on the Guardian website at www.theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international> (Guardian Website). 

1.4 To qualify for the Promotion the Applicant must, in the Territory and 
during the Period, go to the Guardian Website and:

(a) follow the entry instructions specified for the Promotion; and
(b) provide their full name, postal and email address, and telephone number;

(Entry, and the terms Entries, Entrant and Entrants shall be interpreted 
accordingly).

1.5 For the avoidance of doubt:

(a) no purchase is necessary to enter the Promotion or win the Prize; and
(b) each Applicant may only make one Entry for the Promotion. 

2 The Promotion

2.1 The Entrant may be required, upon request by Vaillant at any time, to 
provide further documents:

(a) in support of their Entry; and/or
(b) in accordance with these terms and conditions (Conditions); and/or
(c) in accordance with the requirements of registration set out in clause 1.4; 
and/or
(d) in accordance with clause 3.6. 

2.2 Any Entry made and/or received by the Guardian outside the Period will be 
deemed invalid for the Promotion.

2.3 Early, late, illegible, incomplete, invalid, defaced or corrupt Entries 
will not be accepted. An Entry made using a different method or technique from 
the method set out in clause 1.4 above will not be accepted. No responsibility 
can be accepted where any Entry is not validly registered for any reason.

2.4 Vaillant will be entitled to collect, store and use the email address, 
name, telephone number and postal address of the Entrant who opts in to agree 
for their details to be shared as a result of this Promotion, in accordance 
with these Conditions and Vaillant’s privacy policy, as provided from time to 
time at the Vaillant Website.

2.5 By making an Entry, Entrants who opt in agree to be bound by these 
Conditions.


2.6 Vaillant reserves the right to change the qualification conditions for the 
Promotion. Vaillant shall exercise reasonable endeavours to notify the Entrant 
of any such changes and shall do so via the Guardian Website.

2.7 Vaillant regrets that it is unable to accept any method of entering the 
Promotion other than as set out in these Conditions.

3 The Prize and winning Entry

3.1 The prize shall be as follows:

(a) one (1) Vaillant ecoTEC boiler; and
(b) one standard Vaillant flue; and
(c) one Vaillant vSMART control; and
(d) £2000 worth of boiler installation costs;
(e) £2,500 worth of John Lewis vouchers

(Prize).

3.2 For the avoidance of doubt, if the winning Entrant’s boiler installation 
costs, including applicable VAT:

(a) are less than £2000, the Prize will include payment of those installation 
costs in full; or
(b) are more than £2000, the Prize will include payment of £2000 only, towards 
those costs, and the winning Entrant must meet any shortfall.

3.3 Vaillant may in its absolute discretion substitute cash value for the 
Prize or offer an alternative prize of equal or greater value with any other 
manufacturer or provider. The care, maintenance and warrantee for the 
installation of the Vaillant boiler will be the soul responsibility of 
Vaillant, as will the care and maintainance of the boiler following 
installation. Any issues with the installation or boiler are singularly the 
responsibly of Vaillant.

3.4 Subject to clause 3.3 above, the Prize is subject to availability, is 
non-transferable and there are no cash alternatives.

3.5 There will be one Prize and the winning Entrant shall be chosen at random 
by the Guardian, at 2pm on 22 February 2017 (Draw). 

3.6 The winning Entrant shall be notified by email by Vaillant within 15 
business days of the Draw.

3.7 The winning Entrant must:

(a) respond to the Guardian within 48 hours of notification by Vaillant; and
(b) provide any other documents and/or other necessary information, requested 
by the Guardian from time to time.

3.8 If the winning Entrant:

(a) fails to respond within 48 hours of being notified in accordance with 
clause 3.6 above; or
(b) fails to provide all relevant documents to the Guardian in accordance with 
clause 3.7 above; or
(c) in any other way contravenes these Conditions;

 then the winning Entrant’s Prize will be forfeit and the Guardian will be 
entitled to select another winning Entrant. Any winning Entrant who forfeits 
their Prize will not receive any payment or compensation of any kind.

3.9 The Prize will be sent to the winning Entrant by recorded delivery, within 
2 months of compliance by the Entrant in full with the terms of clause 3.7 
above.

3.10 Where any part of the Prize is delivered by post, it will be delivered to 
the address provided by the winning Entrant in accordance with clause 1.4 
and/or 3.7 above. Vaillant accepts no responsibility for any non-receipt of 
notification of delivery address or incorrect delivery of the Prize.

3.11 It is the Entrant’s responsibility to ensure that the contact details 
provided to Vaillant in accordance with clause 1.4 and/or 3.7 are up to date 
and/or correct. Vaillant accepts no responsibility for delivery and/or email to 
the wrong address in the event that the Entrant failed to update their details, 
or such details being inaccurate.

3.12 The name and county of residence of the winning Entrant will be made 
available to those individuals who send a request enclosing a stamped addressed 
envelope marked for the attention of Vaillant Group UK Ltd Marketing Department 
to Guardian Free Vaillant Boiler Prize Draw Promotion, Vaillant Group UK 
Limited, Nottingham Road, Belper, Derbyshire DE56 1JT, and this information may 
at Vaillant’s discretion be published on the Website.

3.13 The decisions of Vaillant in respect of any and all aspects of the 
Promotion will be final and binding.

4 Privacy, copyright and intellectual property

4.1 Entrants have the right to opt in or opt out of sharing their data with 
Vaillant or third parties of the Guardian. For all opt in Entrants, Vaillant 
may keep the Entrant informed of Vaillant’s products and services by email, 
post and/or telephone, in accordance with:

(a) the consents provided by the Entrant to Vaillant from time to time; and
(b) its privacy policy, as set out on the Website from time to time. 

4.2 The Entrant may write to Vaillant at the address provided in clause 3.12, 
if they do not want to receive any information in accordance with clause 4.1 
above, or alternatively email Vaillant atinfo@vaillant.co.uk 
<mailto:enquiries@vaillant-advance.co.uk>. 

4.3 The Entrant expressly authorises Vaillant to provide the Entrant’s details 
to third parties, or such part(s) of their details as is necessary, to comply 
with these Conditions, and/or any applicable law.

4.4 The Entrant acknowledges that Vaillant and/or other members of its group 
of companies are the owner of any and/or all Intellectual Property Rights 
relating to the names, logos, trade marks, products, services, get-up, van 
livery, trade dress, labels, stickers, promotional leaflets, flyers and posters 
used in the Promotion from time to time (Marketing Materials). For the 
avoidance of doubt, in these Conditions, Intellectual Property Rights means any 
and/or all patents, utility models, rights to inventions, copyright and 
neighbouring and related rights, moral rights, trade marks and service marks, 
business names and domain names, rights in get-up and trade dress, goodwill and 
the right to sue for passing off, rights in designs, database rights, rights to 
use, and protect the confidentiality of, confidential information (including 
know-how and trade secrets) and all other intellectual property rights, in each 
case whether registered or unregistered and including all applications and 
rights to apply for and be granted, renewals or extensions of, and rights to 
claim priority from, such rights and all similar or equivalent rights or forms 
of protection which subsist or will subsist now or in the future in any part of 
the world.

4.5 The Entrant acknowledges that any Marketing Materials provided to the 
Entrant by Vaillant, any member of Vaillant’s or the Guardian’s group of 
companies, and/or any other marketing services agencies, handling houses or 
other companies involved directly with the administration of the Promotion in 
accordance with these Conditions, may contain Intellectual Property Rights. The 
Entrant’s licence, if any, to use any such Marketing Materials and/or any of 
the Intellectual Property Rights, is solely for the Entrant’s benefit and the 
Entrant is prohibited from sub-licensing, assigning, transferring and/or 
dealing with any such Intellectual Property Rights and/or Marketing Materials 
in any way.

4.6 The Intellectual Property Rights in the Vaillant name and logo are owned 
by Vaillant GmbH, a company registered in Germany whose registered office is 
Berghauser Str. 40, Remscheid, Germany, 42859.

5 Liability

5.1 Nothing in these Conditions shall limit or exclude Vaillant’s liability 
for:


(a) death or personal injury caused by its negligence, or the negligence of 
its employees, agents or subcontractors;
(b) fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation;
(c) breach of the terms implied by section 2 of the Supply of Goods and 
Services Act 1982 (title and quiet possession); or
(d) breach of the terms implied by section 12 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979 
(title and quiet possession); or
(e) defective products under the Consumer Protection Act 1987. 

5.2 Subject to clause 5.1 above:

(a) Vaillant shall under no circumstances whatever be liable to the winning 
Entrant in respect of the choice, quality, relevance and/or appropriateness of 
the Prize, and/or any injury or damage caused by or arising from their use of 
the Prize; and
(b) Vaillant’s total liability to the Entrant in respect of all other losses 
arising under or in connection with any Entry made under the Promotion and/or 
the Prize, whether in contract, tort (including negligence), breach of 
statutory duty, or otherwise, shall in no circumstances exceed the value of the 
Prize.

5.3 The Entrant shall keep Vaillant indemnified against all liabilities, 
costs, expenses, damages and losses (including but not limited to any direct, 
indirect or consequential losses, loss of profit, loss of reputation and all 
interest, penalties and legal costs (calculated on a full indemnity basis) and 
all other reasonable professional costs and expenses) suffered and/or incurred 
by Vaillant as a result of or in connection with any claim made against 
Vaillant by a third party arising out of or in connection with the Promotion, 
to the extent that such claim arises out of or is contributed to by the breach 
by the Entrant and/or its employees, agents or subcontractors of these 
Conditions.

5.4 The terms implied by sections 13 to 15 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979 and 
the terms implied by sections 3 to 5 of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 
1982 are, to the fullest extent permitted by law, excluded from these 
Conditions.

5.5 Vaillant is not responsible or liable for any technical, hardware, 
software, server, website, or other failures or damage of any kind to the 
extent that this prevents the Entrant from or otherwise obstructs the Entrant 
from participating in the Promotion.

5.6 The Entrant shall be liable for any and/or all taxation liabilities that 
may arise under or in accordance with the Entrant’s participation in the 
Promotion (Tax Liability). For these purposes, Tax Liability shall include any 
and/or all of the following:

(a) income taxes, including any taxes arising from benefits in kind;
(b) National Insurance;
(c) any other United Kingdom taxes; and
(d) any other relevant corporate tax or other tax liabilities. 

6 Fraud and other events

6.1 Vaillant reserves the right to audit each Entry to ensure that these 
Conditions have been met and to request reasonable additional information, and 
supporting documents, regarding an Entry.

6.2 Vaillant reserves the right to modify or discontinue, temporarily or 
permanently, the Promotion with or without prior notice due to reasons outside 
its control including, but not limited to, anticipated, actual or suspected 
fraud.

6.3 Vaillant shall not be liable for any failure to comply with these 
Conditions where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable 
control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, acts of God, 
adverse weather, fire, flood, computer virus, mobile phone failures, bugs, 
sabotage, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political unrest, 
riots, civil commotion or unrest, terrorism or supervening legislation. 
Accordingly, Vaillant may in its absolute discretion vary or amend the 
Promotion and the Entrant agrees that no liability shall attach to Vaillant as 
a result.

6.4 Submission of a false, incorrect, misleading or fraudulent Entry, 
information or other supporting documentation may result in disqualification 
from this Promotion and/or all future promotions run by Vaillant and in the 
Entrant being subject to prosecution.

7 General

7.1 The parties agree that the Conditions constitute the entire agreement 
between them, and supersede all other drafts, agreements, arrangements and 
understandings between them, and any terms contained in any of the Marketing 
Materials.

7.2 The Promotion and these Conditions shall be governed by the law of England 
and Wales.

7.3 The Entrant and Vaillant irrevocably submit to the non-exclusive 
jurisdiction of the courts of England and Wales. However, if the Entrant is a 
consumer:

(a) living in Scotland, the Entrant may also bring proceedings in the Scottish 
courts; or
(b) living in Northern Ireland, the Entrant may also bring proceedings in the 
Northern Irish courts.

Please retain a copy of these Conditions for your reference.
 