
Holidays are precious. If you’re looking for a brilliant 2017 break full of 
culture, great food and adventures, it’s worth taking another look at France 
and Spain.

Perhaps you’ve holidayed in these countries before, flying down to the Côte 
d’Azur, or booking a package holiday in southern Spain – many of us have. But 
if you long for something different – rugged beaches and coastal wildlife, 
beautiful walks and cycle routes, or a great golfing holiday with your own 
clubs in tow – consider a vacation with Brittany Ferries; whether it’s camping 
on France’s Atlantic coast, exploring the diverse countryside in Brittany and 
Normandy, or discovering the unspoiled beauty of Spain’s northern coast.


To make it easy for you to enjoy a holiday of a lifetime, Brittany Ferries is 
giving you the chance to win a prize voucher worth £1,000. The prize includes 
return sailings with your car from Portsmouth, Poole or Plymouth, to France or 
Spain, plus your choice of accommodation.

If you chose to stay in France there’s a huge range of accommodation options 
across the country, from a chic hotel to a family-friendly campsite, a modern 
apartment to a cosy cottage. Alternatively, in Spain, you could stay in a casa 
or parador, getting away from it all in a picturesque village with breathtaking 
views of the northern Spanish countryside. Because you can take your car, 
adventure seekers can load up with their bikes, fishing rods or golf clubs – 
much easier than paying for all that extra baggage on a flight.


Perfect for couples or a family, sea travel adds an extra dimension of 
enjoyment. As a Brittany Ferries passenger, you can sample cuisine prepared by 
French chefs, catch a movie or dance the night away on an overnight journey. 
Ferries on selected sailings even include a swimming pool and spa treatments.


If you need any more inspiration, use the Brittany Ferries trip planner 
<http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/trip-planner> to help choose your ideal 
break.

Enter your details below for your chance to bag the prize. 

Terms and conditions

 * The Brittany Ferries prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to residents of 
the UK aged 18 and over.

 * The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family 
members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize 
Draw. 
 * Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions. 
 * To enter the Prize Draw you must fill in the form with your details. No 
purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or 
otherwise in connection with the Prize Draw, please email us at
competitions.glabs@guardian.com <mailto:competitions.glabs@guardian.com> with 
“Brittany Ferries competition” in the subject line. 
 * Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winner shall be the 
owner of the email address from which the selected winning entry is sent. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, 
misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical 
or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. 
 * The Prize Draw closes at 23:59 on 31 March 2017. Entries received outside 
this time period will not be considered. 
 * The winner will receive a Brittany Ferries voucher to the value of £1,000. 
The voucher can be redeemed against ferry crossings or a ferry-inclusive 
holiday. Brittany Ferries holidays are on offer in France, Spain and Portugal. 
The voucher can not be used to book holiday accommodation without the ferry. 
The winner will be able to redeem the voucher against any travel or holiday in 
2017. If the booking they make is of a greater value they can pay the 
difference. No refund or credit will be given if the booking is of a lesser 
value. Standard Brittany Ferries conditions of booking will apply. Details are 
athttp://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/information/holiday-conditions 
<http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/information/holiday-conditions> and 
http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/information/ferry-conditions. 
<http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/information/ferry-conditions.%C2%A0> Only 
one winner per household. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs 
associated with the prize that are not expressly included in the prize.

 * The winners will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries 
received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will take 
place on or after 7 April 2017. 
 * The winners will be notified by email on or after 7 April 2017 and given 
details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM within 
14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be forfeited 
and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with the 
process described above (and that winner will have to respond to notification 
of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a 
winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, 
the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select 
another winner. 
 * The prize will be sent to the winner by 5 May 2017. 
 * The name and county of the winner can be obtained after 5 May 2017 by 
sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian Labs, 
Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. 
 * The prizes are non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for 
cash or any other prize. 
 * GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize of 
similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available. 
 * The winners may be required to take part in promotional activity related to 
the Prize Draw and the winners shall participate in such activity on the 
Promoter’s reasonable request. The winners consent to the use by the Promoter 
and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Prize 
Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and name 
for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, 
and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its 
related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material 
without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Prize 
Draw, all entrants consent to the same. 
 * The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply 
to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at
https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and for the 
purposes outlined in paragraph 12 above. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize 
Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or 
damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from 
participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize 
Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal 
injury resulting from its negligence. 
 * GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no 
correspondence will be entered into. 
 * GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside 
its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure. 
 * The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
English courts. 
 * Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU.  