
Urgently needing some new glass for windows in my house, I Googled local 
window companies, and found one called Emergency Response Group.

I gave the measurements and it quoted me £400 to replace six windows. I agreed 
as I needed the work doing fast. It took my card details, which would be 
charged once the windows were replaced.

When the glaziers showed up they said two of our windows needed safety glass 
(something not mentioned on the phone) and that they would have to come back. 
They suggested this would happen within the next week.

We then heard nothing, so I assumed they had lost interest.

Later that month I checked my credit card statement and £54 had been debited 
by Emergency Response Group, which said this was a “cancellation fee”. I wasn’t 
told about this fact before and, more importantly, I hadn’t cancelled.

After about 20 fruitless phone calls, I just want my £54 back, but am 
getting nowhere.KM, Hale, Cheshire

Google this company directly by name and you will soon see that you are not 
the only person to be frustrated after hiring this Essex-based firm, 
which appears to subcontract much of its work.

It has a 1.2/5 Google star rating and the recent, highly critical comments 
posted by customers would not inspire anyone to hand over their credit card 
details to this firm.

I asked the company about your experience and it claimed that it had called 
you with the new price for the extra work and, rather strangely, that it had 
not heard from you. As a result it had charged you its £54 call-out fee, which 
it says is clearly set out in its terms and conditions. It has now offered to 
refund half that as a gesture of goodwill.

In your shoes I would be inclined to take the partial refund, put it down to 
experience and find another firm to replace the windows.

It is always worth reviewing unheard-of companies before signing up – a 
further 30 seconds on the web would have saved you a lot of time and 
wasted effort.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 