
“Wanted – successful women entrepreneurs running fast-growing companies”. You 
would think that an advert like this would have hordes of women making contact 
wouldn’t you? Well, that’s not the case.

A few years ago I was involved in an initiative whose target market was women 
entrepreneurs running fast-growth companies. My role was to find these 
businesses to see how they could be supported in raising capital, and gaining 
access to mentors to help them during their growth journey. However, the 
problem was that we could not find many women who identified with this 
description. The traditional advertising routes were not working, so I set out 
to check if the lack of interest meant that they actually didn’t exist.

What I discovered surprised me. There were many women who had ambitious growth 
plans and whose businesses were generating annual revenues well in excess of 
£250,000 – but they did not categorise themselves as a “fast growth company”. 
In fact, it took a little time during the conversations for them to recognise 
how successful they actually were. I would begin with getting to know them as 
individuals and find out what their passions were; why they started up their 
business and what progress they had made to date. Then I would enquire what 
their future plans were, and what they hoped to gain as a result of that 
success. In other words, I started with where they were now, and slowly 
uncovered what they were moving towards.

As a result of these conversations I realised that in every case, the 
businesses did qualify as fast growth, and the business owner was focused and 
driven to achieve further success. What I had uncovered was that the women did 
not identify with the label used and had not come forward as a result. So the 
language seemed to matter.

More recently I have been delivering a series of talks on the subject of risk, 
and using therisk type compass 
<http://www.suestockdale.com/services/assessment-tools/> as a way to help 
leaders to appreciate that risk-taking can look quite different depending on 
your risk disposition. For those that are warier and prudent, or more risk 
averse; stating ambitious growth aspirations for their company may seem highly 
uncomfortable. While they are perfectly capable of getting that outcome, how 
they express their ambitions may be somewhat different to those who are more 
adventurous and carefree, and more comfortable with risk-taking.

I describe these differences using the story of climbing a mountain. If I was 
to ask the more risk-averse woman to climb a mountain, their immediate reaction 
is likely to be, “no that’s too difficult, I can’t do that – you should ask my 
friend Jo, she likes adventures”.

However, if I said, “let’s go out for a walk, and enjoy the fresh air, we can 
have a chat along the way – it might get a bit uneven under foot, so come 
prepared” they are likely to turn up with enthusiasm and the correct footwear, 
then before they know it we have walked half way up the mountain! Two ways to 
achieve a similar outcome, but different language used to motivate the 
individual depending on what words resonate with them.

TED talk superstar, Amy Cuddy also talks about how language can have an impact 
on action in her recent book, Presence. She recalls her desire to become a 
runner and that she repeatedly failed in her New Year resolution because in 
every run she did, she felt like a failure against her ideal of someone who was 
self-disciplined, fast and able to complete marathons. Eventually she took a 
different approach. She just resolved to run once. She dropped the long term, 
aspirational goals, and just set out to make running a positive experience. 
Rather than focusing on what she believed she could not do, she focused on what 
she could do and linked it to something she enjoys, which is travel. So now 
when she travels for work, so goes for a short run to experience a little more 
of her new environment in a different way.


Cuddy uses the term “self-nudging” to describe this approach. Along with her 
Harvard colleague Alison Wood Brooks, they arranged a seminar on the topic, 
aiming to discover more about the psychological hurdles that stop people from 
performing well. What they learned was that when we reframe anxiety as 
excitement, the better we are likely to do.


Brooks carried out experiments with people using three different stressful 
situations and found that those who took a moment to reframe their anxiety as 
excitement outperformed the others. Self-nudging, is about focusing on each 
moment in front of you, rather than the end outcome, to slowly nudge yourself 
towards being bolder.

So what does this mean for those who are working in the field of women’s 
enterprise support? I think it means that language matters. We are so used to 
talking about aspirational end goals – startup to IPO, fast growth to exit, 
making a million, that maybe some thought should be given to “being the best 
you can be in your business today” mantra. Reflecting on “what is” as well as 
“what could be” using real-time feedback as a means of motivating oneself 
without being pressurised into defining what the end outcome should be.

The UK government formed a behavioural insights team focused on implementing 
changes in processes and systems to nudge people. They have had successes in 
the areas of car tax and income tax, so perhaps they should now turn their 
attention to developing some nudges to encourage more women to start up and 
grow their businesses, or encourage more diversity in the workplace. We can all 
think about how to encourage people to make different choices based on how 
options are presented, so maybe a little more thought about the words you are 
using can make a big difference.

Sue Stockdale is an executive coach, author and motivational speaker and 
tweets as@SueStockdale <https://twitter.com/SueStockdale>
 