
Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> suffer considerably 
higher levels of work-related stress, anxiety and depression than men, with 
workplace sexism and familial responsibilities providing additional career 
pressures, a leading psychiatrist has said.

It comes as official figures show that women aged 25-54 are more stressed than 
their male colleagues 
<http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/stress/stress.pdf?pdf=stress>, with 
this pressure peaking for those aged 35-44, when many women are juggling family 
responsibilities, such as caring for children and elderly parents.

Dr Judith Mohring, lead consultant psychiatrist at Priory’s Wellbeing Centre 
in the City of London, said women were under constant, intense pressure, with 
company restructuring, lack of managerial support and balancing work and family 
life leaving them feeling drained.


Women faced additional workplace pressures, such as having to prove they were 
as good as men, not being valued or promoted, unequal pay, and being expected 
to “look the part”, added Mohring, who treats many female professionals.

Female managers in male-dominated fields sometimes found the strain 
intolerable, and their stress levels were also rising because families were 
more reliant on their income, she added.

Mohring called for companies to offer women more flexible working and better 
career security and progression. She said: “If companies and organisations are 
genuinely interested in making their loyal and talented female staff feel less 
stressed – and I sometimes question if they are – then allowing employees 
wherever possible to work from home is an important step forward.

“Women are also unhappy about lower pay than men, job insecurity and lack of 
potential for career progression. And when push comes to shove, in a 
restructure they often feel that not having had the time to network with senior 
– often male – bosses puts them at disproportionate risk.

“Endemic uncertainty is built into many workplaces, and women often bear the 
brunt of that. In truth, many of these changes in organisations actually 
achieve very little and raise stress rather than productivity – which in itself 
is counter-productive.”

From the age of 25, women feel much more stress than men, and this continues 
throughout their working lives, according to figures published by the Health 
and Safety Executive.

The data for a three-year period up to 2016 also showed that men aged 16-24, 
25-34 and 35-44, had “significantly lower rates of work-related stress” than 
the average. Those with the highest rates were men aged 45-54, but the rate was 
“not statistically significant”, the HSE report noted.

By contrast, women aged 25-34, 35-44 and 45-54 were all statistically higher 
than average, with statisticians attributing this partly due to the fact that 
they predominate in some of the most taxing frontline roles, such as teaching 
and nursing.

The HSE added: “The occupations and industries reporting the highest rates of 
work-related stress remain consistently in the health and public sectors of the 
economy. The reasons cited as causes of work-related stress are also workload, 
lack of managerial support and organisational change.”

The report also showed that work-related stress, depression and anxiety 
accounted for 37% of work-related ill health and 45% of days lost in 2015-16.

The HSE figures are based on the Labour Force Survey which interviews 38,000 
households quarterly. The survey is the government’s primary employment dataset.

Statisticians said the stress figures “represent a broadly stable trend over 
recent years”, which Mohring suggested showed that not enough has been done to 
give women equality in the workplace.

Some 200,000 men reported work-related stress averaged over the past three 
years compared to 272,000 women, according to the HSE’s figures. This means 
women were 1.4 times more likely to suffer from stress, anxiety and depression.

The total number of cases of work-related stress, depression or anxiety in 
2015-16 among both men and women was 488,000, a prevalence rate of 1,510 per 
100,000 workers. The number of new cases was 224,000, an incidence rate of 690 
per 100,000 workers. The total number of working days lost due to this 
condition in 2015-16 was 11.7m days, equivalent to an average of 23.9 days lost 
per case.
 