
The Scottish government should scrap the legal requirement for two doctors to 
approve a termination, effectively decriminalising the procedure, and consider 
regulating abortion drugs for use by women in their own homes, according to a 
report by a coalition of women’s rights organisations.

With abortion law devolved to Holyrood as part of the Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> Act 2016, the report argues that the 
SNP government must now “be bold in creating a distinctive approach” by 
removing it from criminal statute and regulating it like any other healthcare 
procedure.


The campaigners – including Amnesty Scotland, NUS Scotland and Scottish 
Women’s Aid – are calling on politicians to “make a woman’s legal right to 
choose a reality” by removing the two doctors rule.

Under UK law abortion is permitted for non-medical reasons up to 24 weeks and 
with the permission of two doctors. The SNP reaffirmed its commitment to 
current legal protections and to maintaining time limits in line with the rest 
of the UK in its spring manifesto.

But the report insists it is time to go further, arguing: “There is an 
opportunity within the devolution of abortion law to develop a distinct 
Scottish approach to women’s reproductive health and the strengthen women’s 
rights.”

Since the devolution of abortion law was announced last November, some 
pro-choice campaigners have raised concerns about the risk of anti-abortion 
groups exploiting cross-border differences.

Others have suggested the surge in political engagement, particularly among 
women, brought about by the 2014 independence referendum campaign could bolster 
any forthcoming drive to extend abortion rights in Scotland.

On a visit to Dublin two weeks ago, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon,
said her government would explore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/sturgeon-confirms-scottish-talks-on-free-abortions-for-northern-irish-women>
 how to allow Northern Irish women to obtain free access to abortions in 
Scotland’s NHS hospitals.


Abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> is legal in Northern 
Ireland only when the pregnancy poses a direct threat to the mother’s life. The 
NHS has so far refused to pay for abortions for Northern Irish women who travel 
to Britain.

Emma Ritch, executive director of the feminist campaign group Engender, which 
spearheaded the report, said: “It does seem there is a very unique status given 
to abortion, in that it is the only type of healthcare in which this 
criminalisation exists. We would want to see decriminalisation happen so that 
abortion was regulated in the same way as any other type of healthcare.

“Any Scottish approach to abortion should be based on international best 
practice, so we could adopt a situation as in Canada where there is no criminal 
law when it comes to abortion. While the debate around time limits is not a 
focus of the report, there is no compelling evidence of a reason to have time 
limits at all. Research shows that women want to access abortions at the 
earliest possible stage, and allowing later-term abortions does not 
significantly increase demand.”

Scotland’s offer to give abortions to Northern Irish women shames Stormont | 
Patrick Corrigan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/scotland-abortions-northern-ireland-irish-nicola-sturgeon>
The report criticises NHS Scotland for lagging behind England in its provision 
of later-term abortions, with terminations for non-medical reasons not normally 
available after 20 weeks, forcing some women to travel south.

It also suggests the Scottish government should consider regulating the 
provision of medical abortion drugs to allow terminations in early pregnancy to 
be carried out at home. A total of 12,082 abortions were carried out in 
Scotland in 2015, about 80% of which took place before 12 weeks of pregnancy.


The report counters the assumption that Scottish social attitudes, influenced 
by strong religious traditions, are more anti-choice than elsewhere in the UK. 
It says that according to polling carried out in the last year, 75% of Scots 
support a woman’s right to choose.
 