
Last week I was given the “good news” that the Department of Defense will 
grant my request to see a surgeon for treatment related to my gender dysphoria. 
Although I don’t have anything in writing, I was shown a memorandum with my 
name on it that confirmed the military is moving forward with my request. 
Everything that they have presented to me leads me to believe that they are 
going to provide the care that has been recommended by my doctor. I have 
requested this for nearly a year. That same week, I was also given “bad news”: 
I may be punished for a suicide attempt in July.

Chelsea Manning faces solitary confinement and charges after suicide attempt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/28/chelsea-manning-suicide-attempt-military-charges-wikileaks>
For the past week, I have been busy preparing for my disciplinary board. This 
administrative board has the power to sentence me for indefinite solitary 
confinement. Preparing to defend yourself for a disciplinary board is time 
consuming. It takes time to research, collect evidence, and organize a defense. 
The process is rather stressful. I am facing this alone. I am not allowed to 
have a lawyer or anyone else with me.

Last week I was escorted to view the evidence before the board. There are now 
nearly 100 pages. I do not have easy access. I do not have a copy. I could only 
see it for an hour. Looking through the evidence and taking notes in a hurried 
manner was very stressful.

In the evidence, I saw a photograph of myself shortly after my suicide 
attempt. Seeing this photograph has haunted me for the past week. It has 
disturbed me. It sends a chill down my spine. This hurt me more than any 
physical injury or hardship I have lived through. This process has forced me to 
relive one of the worst moments of my entire life.

I saw the face of a woman who had given up. I saw the face of woman who, for 
years, has politely asked, formally requested, and desperately begged for help.

I am not alone in my struggle. Suicide pervades the trans community. The risk 
among our trans siblings with no or inadequate treatment is staggering. In 
comparison with the general population, the risk is a full order of magnitude 
higher. While a specific suicide rate among trans prisoners is not available, 
it is estimated to be significantly higher than among the community outside.

I lack the words to describe how concerned my family and friends are about 
this board. I lack the words to express how deeply pained I am about this board 
and the fact that the government is pursuing my punishment so aggressively. How 
am I supposed to explain this to my family? How am I going to explain this to 
future generations when they look back and ask how I could have been punished 
for my own desperation? I have absolutely no idea. I have no idea how to 
explain it at all.

 * In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In 
the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be 
found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html> 
 * This discussion will be premoderated
 