
How did you become a screenwriter?

I have always loved film. I read English at Cambridge and feel privileged to 
have had that time to study literature so thoroughly. But somehow all the 
stories I felt inspired to write played out in my mind as films. I've never 
been compelled to write a novel or a stage play, although I spent a decade 
after graduating producing theatre in the West End. Unsurprisingly, I was drawn 
to the work of playwrights who also work in film:Kenneth Lonergan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kenneth-lonergan>, Neil Labute, David Mamet 
and Sam Shepard. I join those who believe that if Shakespeare were alive today, 
he'd be a screenwriter.

Through my producing I knew a lot of people in the film industry, which helped 
to get my work into the right hands. And I was lucky that some of those who 
read my scripts liked them and then further opportunities came my way.

I met my writing partner (and now husband) Joe Shrapnel in 2005 and what began 
as a mutual editing service quickly became a collaboration. Things changed for 
us – we improved each other's work. We haven't stopped working since then.

What does a typical day look like for you?

A military operation. Alarm goes off at 7am. I take our son to school. Then 
yoga before I hit the desk. Joe and I work together during the early stages of 
a project, when we're brainstorming and plotting. We put together a very 
detailed outline before going off to separate rooms to write. Usually, we work 
on different scenes and sequences, or one of us writes, the other researches. 
Then we'll swap pages and rewrite each other. We'll do a last pass together 
before sending the script in.

One of us will be there for our son's bath/story time at 6pm, while the other 
finishes up or takes calls from Los Angeles. Then, typically, Joe will cook 
dinner and we'll go over pages, discuss problems and work out what we're doing 
tomorrow. There's nothing more liberating than a fresh perspective when your 
brain is locked. After dinner, there might be time to watch a film. I'm a 
member of Bafta so get sent the screeners, which means I can catch up with the 
year's crop. But on a school night I'm in bed by 10.30 or 11pm. It's a very 
different lifestyle from my years as a producer, but I believe routine is 
essential for a writer.

More often than not, one or both of us needs to work over the weekend. We 
always have deadlines to meet and it's hard to switch off when you're freelance.

What has been the proudest moment in your career?

I'm always proud when someone I respect admires our work. A few years ago, we 
had the opportunity to pitch an idea to Ridley Scott. Since then we've worked 
with him on four projects. He has been a real champion for us and we feel 
privileged to have learned so much from him.

But there's nothing more exciting than watching the cameras roll on a scene 
you've written. Suddenly, this private and personal thing is taken and made 
real by all these talented cast and crew. It's like watching a dream you've had 
made manifest.

Do you have any advice for anyone wanting to follow your career path?

Love what you do because it won't always be easy. Write every day. It's like 
any other form of exercise – if you leave it too long between sessions, it's 
going to hurt. And you get flabby.

Read. Read screenplays. Joe taught me that. He's read every screenplay you can 
think of and now I'm trying to catch up.

Also, be practical. When Joe's working he tends to blank out the world 
(emails, phone, friends, bills). He just has to go in the zone and he can't be 
interrupted. I am better at compartmentalising and so I tend to take care of 
the business side of things. We have to carve out time for meetings and pitches 
and that's a very important part of what we do. Managing yourself and your 
career is vital.

What would be your dream commission?

I'm happy to say we're doing them! We've been fortunate recently to work with 
some very talented people on some great stories.

Insiders often claim that the film industry can be quite a sexist place, has 
that been your experience?

Not at all. Not when I was producing and not now I'm a writer. But Joe and I 
come as a team so there's always a man in the room. We tell people I write the 
action and Joe writes the love scenes. The truth is we both do a bit of both.

Do you think the industry needs to take steps to encourage more women into 
writing, directing and other behind the camera roles?

I don't believe in positive discrimination. It might be naive, but I feel if 
you have drive, ambition, talent and some luck then you'll succeed regardless 
of your gender. Women currently hold powerful positions in many of the major 
studios, and there are brilliant and successful female screenwriters working 
across the genres.

But there are comparatively few female directors and cinematographers. I don't 
know if that's because fewer women are attracted to those roles or if it's 
difficult for them to be taken seriously. Either way, our business would 
certainly benefit from more Kathryn Bigelows.
 