
Ignorance is bliss 

Not knowing about things is the new knowing about things. Most experts insisted
withdrawal from the EU would bring a lot of pain for the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/02/europe-eu-uk-economy-small-businesses>
 and very little else. This being an unwelcome downer, a great enthusiasm for 
the idea that sheer weight of informed insight tends to squash common sense out 
of a person sprang up. So-called “experts” were in fact just partisan peddlers 
of self-interested elitist cobblers, too clever to see what every true Brit 
knows instinctively – that when Britain unites to beat the world, the world 
stays beat.

Nobody really likes the EU 

Even as an unwavering remainer, I often drifted into long minutes when I found 
critiques of the EU more persuasive than paeans to it. In fact, paeans to it 
were in notably short supply, largely because so much time was spent patiently 
rebutting the wilder misrepresentations among the critiques. Again and again. 
And again. Penny Mordaunt, in a closely fought contest, wins most lying liar 
among liars, forher claim that the UK would not be able to veto Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/22/david-cameron-defence-minister-penny-mordaunt-lying-turkey-joining-eu>
 joining the EU. So, well done her. Positive visions of the EU were often 
sentimental – the family of European man holding loving hands across the 
continent. More realistic arguments – the world has giant troubles and we can’t 
escape them by turning away – were sobering rather than inspiring.

The digested referendum campaign: Immigration! Economy! Immigration!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/23/digested-eu-referendum-campaign>
The eurozone is a joke

Absolutely no one in Britain defends it. I doubt anyone in Europe actually 
knows how to. Not much united the two sides in Britain’s polarised debate. But 
devout gratitude to God and Gordon Brown that we didn’t join the euro was very 
much the order of the day, because nobody on the planet seems to have the 
smallest clue how to sort that lot out. Good luck, guys.

Free movement is a big political problem

The idea of Europe is basically that a huge single market with free movement 
of people will facilitate industrious mingling until prosperity reaches every 
nation. The essential problem is that the footsoldiers of this grand, 
multi-generational experiment – hard-up migrants – are often expected to pitch 
up and compete for scarce resources against hard-up non-migrants. It’s tricky 
to explain to people that they have to share what little they have so that 
people thousands of miles away in some unspecified future can one day be as 
lucky as they are. Well, it’s hard to explain it if you don’t want doors 
slammed in your face.

The Tories are a mess

It’s plain that the referendum was promised in order to solve two difficulties 
for David Cameron. First, the threat from Ukip to his party; and second, the 
threat to his leadership from his party’s Eurosceptics. His thinking was 
unbelievably short-term and survivalist. The idea of two-party politics is that 
each party is a broad church. The Conservatives no longer seem broad enough to 
contain the range of rightwing views. The Tories may be in power, but they’re 
also in trouble.

Labour’s a mess

Labour is in trouble too and seems happy for the moment to be quite a narrow 
church. It was during this campaign that we first sawJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/22/corbyn-final-pitch-referendum-voters>
 really beginning to grapple with the realities of compromise. Had Corbyn still 
been a backbench MP, it’s hard not to assume he’d have been doing what he 
mostly used to do, and criticising the Labour leadership from the left. Still, 
cometh the hour, cometh the man. But he cut a lonely figure. The big beasts of 
the Tory party may have been kicking lumps out of each other, but at least 
there were some to see. No one from Labour emerged as a figure able to inspire 
the public (leaving aside the horrific exception of Jo Cox). The moderates are 
playing a waiting game and the longer they wait, the more marginal their party 
is going to start to seem.

Our own democracy’s a bit dysfunctional too

Despite the disarray within both parties, our first-past-the-post system is 
designed to ensure that one of them will hold the balance of power – even if 
they’re too rubbish to win outright – and in the process eviscerate any naive 
smaller parties who imagine they can Change Things. It’s funny, really, that 
we’ve spent all these weeks discussing the lack of democracy in Europe when our 
own democracy is so rickety and etiolated. Sure, we can kick our leaders out if 
we don’t like them. But, more and more, people don’t like the alternative 
either. This is known by experts and elites as “voter apathy”.




The right can’t see the appalling sight the left sees

Nigel Farage’s notorious “breaking point” poster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
 looked to a lot of people like fascist propaganda. To others, however, this 
was hysterical leftie nonsense. Far from a reference to Nazi Germany, it was a 
reference to refugee-welcoming Christian Democrat Germany, which takes in 
refugees as if it’s a sovereign state, even though said refugees can then 
become citizens of Europe and thereby move freely around the continent, 
sexually assaulting women as they rove. People and politicians denouncing it, 
even Brexit darlings such as Gove and Johnson, were simply another bunch of 
experts too addled by intellect to understand a very simple message. Which is 
that refugees are obviously the scum of the earth. Unless they’re good at 
sport. Or at medicine. Or at being rich.

We plucky Brits can do anything – though it helps if you’ve got some colonies 
and some slaves – hell, a lot of slaves

The left can’t see the appalling sight the right sees

A few days ago a heartwarming story 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/06/what-story-niqab-wearing-welsh-speaker-tells-us-about-what-we-want-hear>
 started doing the rounds. A man on a bus told a woman in a niqab that she 
should speak in English in England. Another passenger – a doughty grandmother, 
of course! – told the man that the niqab-wearer was in Wales and was speaking 
Welsh. What a fortuitous illustration of fabulously integrated migrants and 
horrible, racist Englishmen! How great that it arrived just as the referendum 
was reaching its final stages! The right looked on in disgusted wonder. They 
knew the left was packed with credulous fools. But these guys were so pumped up 
with confirmation bias that they might as well be economists.

Britons never, never, never, shall be slaves

Oh, God. Is that offensive? No. It’s PC gone mad. We plucky Brits can do 
anything if we put our minds to it. It helps if you’ve got some colonies – 
hell, a lot of colonies. And some slaves – hell, a lot of slaves. But it’s not 
necessary. Anyway, mass migration is bad now. Have you seen the US, Australia 
and Canada? Characters totally changed by Too Many Migrants. The natives are 
too primitive to have a breaking point though, so it’s all good.
 