
A 14-year-old girl who said before dying of cancer that she wanted a chance to 
live longer has been allowed by the high court to have her body cryogenically 
frozen in the hope that she can be brought back to life at a later time.

The court ruled that the teenager’s mother, who supported the girl’s wish to 
be cryogenically preserved, should be the only person allowed to make decisions 
about the disposal of her body. Her estranged father had initially opposed her 
wishes.

During the last months of her life, the teenager, who had a rare form of 
cancer, used the internet to investigatecryonics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/cryonics>. Known only as JS, she sent a 
letter to the court: “I have been asked to explain why I want this unusual 
thing done. I’m only 14 years old and I don’t want to die, but I know I am 
going to. I think being cryo‐preserved gives me a chance to be cured and woken 
up, even in hundreds of years’ time.


Cryogenics: does it offer humanity a chance to return from the dead?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/18/cryogenics-does-it-offer-humanity-a-chance-to-return-from-the-dead>
“I don’t want to be buried underground. I want to live and live longer and I 
think that in the future they might find a cure for my cancer and wake me up. I 
want to have this chance. This is my wish.”

Following the ruling, in a case described by the judge as exceptional, the 
body of JS has now been preserved and transported from where she lived in 
London to the US, where it has been frozen “in perpetuity” by a commercial 
company at a cost of £37,000.

The girl’s parents are divorced. She had lived with her mother for most of her 
life and had had no face-to-face contact with her father since 2008. She 
resisted his attempts to get back in touch when he learnt of her illness in 
2015.

The judge, Mr Justice Peter Jackson, ruled that nothing about the case should 
be reported while she was alive because media coverage would distress her. She 
was too ill to attend the court hearing but the judge visited her in hospital.

Jackson wrote: “I was moved by the valiant way in which she was facing her 
predicament. It is no surprise that this application is the only one of its 
kind to have come before the courts in this country, and probably anywhere 
else. It is an example of the new questions that science poses to the law, 
perhaps most of all to family law … No other parent has ever been put in [the] 
position [of JS’s father].”

He added: “A dispute about a parent being able to see his child after death 
would be momentous enough on its own if the case did not also raise the issue 
of cryonic preservation.”

Experience: I’ve paid for my body to be frozen when I die
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/oct/24/experience-paid-for-body-to-be-frozen-when-i-die>
Since the first preservation by freezing in the 1960s the process has been 
performed only a few hundred times. The body has to be prepared shortly after 
death, ideally within minutes. Arrangements then have to be made for the body 
to be transported by a registered funeral director.

“The scientific theory underlying cryonics is speculative and controversial, 
and there is considerable debate about its ethical implications,” Jackson said. 
“On the other hand, cryopreservation, the preservation of cells and tissues by 
freezing, is now a well-known process in certain branches of medicine, for 
example the preservation of sperm and embryos as part of fertility treatment.
Cryonics <https://www.theguardian.com/science/cryonics> is cryopreservation 
taken to its extreme.”


The judge said the girl’s family was not well off but that her mother’s 
parents had raised the money. A voluntary UK group of cryonics enthusiasts, who 
were not medically trained, had offered to help make arrangements.


Co-operation of a hospital was required. “This situation gives rise to serious 
legal and ethical issues for the hospital trust,” the judge observed, “which 
has to act within the law and has duties to its other patients and to its 
staff.”


The hospital trust in the case was willing to help although it stressed it was 
not endorsing cryonics. “On the contrary, all the professionals feel deep 
unease about it,” the judge said.


The Human Tissue Authority <https://www.hta.gov.uk/> (HTA), which regulates 
organisations which remove, store and use human tissue, had been consulted but 
said it had no remit to intervene in such a case.

“The HTA would be likely to make representations that activities of the 
present kind should be brought within the regulatory framework if they showed 
signs of increasing,” Jackson said.


The HTA said: “We are gathering information about cryopreservation to 
determine how widespread it is currently, or could become in the future, and 
any risks it may pose to the individual, or public confidence more broadly. We 
are in discussion with key stakeholders … and the possible need for regulatory 
oversight.”

The government may need to intervene in future, Jackson said: “It may be … 
events in this case suggest the need for proper regulation of cryonic 
preservation in this country if it is to happen in future.”

I’m glad cryonics is legal – we should all have rights over our bodies | Simon 
Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/cryonics-may-absurb-but-glad-legal>
Inquiries made of American authorities revealed that there was no prohibition 
on human remains being shipped to the US for cryonic preservation, providing 
certain provisions were made.

During the course of the 14-year-old’s case, the father changed his mind and 
told the court: “I respect the decisions [my daughter] is making. This is the 
last and only thing she has asked from me.”

A child cannot make a will and the court had to decide where the girl’s best 
interests lay. The judge concluded that allowing the mother to make a decision 
about her daughter would be in her best interests. The girl died peacefully 
knowing that her body would be frozen, the judge recorded.

The Department of Health said: “Cases such as this are rare. Although there 
are no current plans for legislative change in this area, this is an area we 
will continue to keep under review with the Human Tissue Authority.
 