
The scale of the UBS Libor-rigging is breathtaking. According to the reports 
from UK, US and Swiss regulators, nearly 2,000 requests for the Japanese yen
Libor <https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor> to be manipulated were 
documented, in instant messages, emails and by telephone. Almost every one of 
them was suspicious.

How many requests were made orally can only be guessed at. The extent of the 
rigging raises a number of questions and observations: this wasn't a mad moment 
for the traders involved. It went on for years – 2005 to 2010 – firstly to 
generate profits and later to cover up the bank's financial problems. It was 
simple – it was not picked up by five internal audits, despite corrupt payments 
being made to people outside the bank. It was standard behaviour – about 40 
traders were involved.

It also proves that Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> – 
whose top three executives were ousted as a result of the scandal – was not the 
worst offender.

At UBS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ubs> the bosses have already been 
replaced – not as a result of this shocking behaviour but as a consequence of 
another scandal altogether – the £1.5bn losses run up by recently jailed London 
trader Kweku Adoboli.

There is more to come – RBS has also 'fessed' up to wholesale dishonesty in 
its Libor dealings and is negotiating the financial price it must pay. Six 
other financial firms are also in the frame.

One striking element of the cross-border settlements is the level of fines 
considered appropriate by the UK regulator and the whopping penalities slapped 
on these wrongdoers in the US.

UBS has to write a cheque for £160m to the Financial Services Authority – 30% 
of the UK watchdog's annual budget, which is provided by a levy on firms 
regulated.

Another £40m will go to the Swiss regulator, Finma. But £740m is on its way to 
the US department of justice and the Commodities Futures Trading Commission.

At Barclays the £290m fine was split £230m/£60m in favour of the US regulators.

Why the vast difference for the same offences? The answer is simply that they 
started in different places. The FSA is ramping up its fines. Offences after 
2010 now attract fines of up to 20% of the revenue of the particular business 
unit.

At least, since April of this year, the public purse now benefits.

Think of it as a welcome tax on errant bankers.
 