
1. Don’t take pictures of your presents. Christmas is a minefield of 
potentially botched etiquette, and social media only makes it worse. And, 
clearly, the crime one can commit is making a fuss online about all the stuff 
you have been given. Look, we get it. You got a lot of presents this year. What 
are you, six? Ask yourself why you are doing this. Is it for likes? Is that it? 
How much extra validation do you need anyway, you weirdo? Someone just bought 
you a nice coat, and that should be enough. Now go away and think about what 
you’ve done.

2. It is acceptable to post a photo of your family in lieu of sending 
Christmas cards. Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
cards are a pain in the bum, which is why you didn’t send any this year. They 
are expensive and bad for the environment, and there’s a good chance you’ll 
forget someone and then feel bad about it for ever. Instead, just take a 
picture of you and your loved ones, caption it “Merry Christmas”, and stick it 
on Facebook. It has exactly the same effect. Don’t worry about friends and 
relatives who don’t have Facebook. They don’t deserve your kind gestures.

3. Stop checking your phone all the time. Not only is it rude to spend 
Christmas Day staring blankly into the palm of your hand, but also it invites 
scrutiny you just don’t need. This is bitter experience talking here. I spent 
a lot of time on my phone one Christmas when Twitter was relatively new, and 
then had to spend the bulk of the day trying to explain to my family what 
Twitter was, what the point of it was, and why it wasn’t a stupid waste of 
everyone’s time. It is a stupid waste of everyone’s time, but that’s not the 
point.

4. In fact, put your phone away completely. Your phone is junk today. The only 
emails you’ll get will be horrific “Merry Christmas from GlaxoSmithKline! 
Here’s 5% off your next bulk purchase of Poligrip Ultra!” marketing 
newsletters, and all they’ll do is make you angry because they’re actively 
flushing the spirit of Christmas down the toilet. Just put it away. I promise 
you won’t miss anything.

5. Don’t Instagram your dinner. Instagramming dinner in a fancy restaurant I 
get. But leave Christmas dinner alone. What’s that? You’re having turkey, 
potatoes and vegetables? Well, guess what? So is literally everyone else. So 
don’t bother showing us. If I wanted to endlessly endure a slow trickle of 
gravy, I’d move three doors down from the cat-food factory.

6. No creepshotting drunk relatives. Yes, sure, it’s funny that your 
grandfather ate too much pudding and fell into the Christmas tree and the dog 
pulled his trousers down, but that doesn’t mean you have to take a photo of it 
and show it to the world. Certainly not without asking his permission first. 
Where photos are concerned, treat your relatives like strangers on the bus. 
Would you publish a photo of a stranger on a bus? You would? You monster.

7. You are permitted to tweet, but only infrequently on Christmas afternoon. 
Christmas afternoon is a wasteland. You’re too full to move, and too drunk to 
try, and this is the time of day where all the carefully observed politeness 
about basic acceptance flies straight out of the window. By 4pm, your dad will 
have started to tell the room loudly why Brexit was a good idea, and this will 
be your time to escape down the rabbit hole of the internet. Forget about likes 
or favourites or retweets, you should spend this time passive-aggressively 
howling at a wall of uninterested strangers. The survival of your family 
depends on it.

8. Don’t complain about any of this on Twitter. This is an important one to 
remember. If you see loads of people Instagramming their potatoes or tweeting 
about all their presents, or committing any other sort of festive social-media 
crime, keep it to yourself. Because if there’s one thing that ruins Christmas 
more than self-absorption, it’s pedantry. There’s a time and a place for that 
sort of behaviour, and that’s in a newspaper article that you’re getting paid 
to write.

@stuheritage <https://twitter.com/stuheritage>
 