
What is it? South Korean drama in perfect microcosm.

Why you’ll love it: Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> is 
dripping with South Korean television programmes. There are about 25 of them at 
any time on the service, and they’re all desperate to be watched.

However, a couple of points about South Korean dramas. First, they require 
gigantic investment. To pick an example at random,Go! Mrs Go! 
<http://gb.imdb.com/title/tt3598796/> (“Bong-sil lives with her husband 
Jun-seok. Jun-seok brings her a gift from a business trip and she feels happier 
than ever”) is 36 episodes long, and only two of those come in under an hour. 
That’s more than a day and a half of non-stop viewing, just to watch a show 
about a middle-aged woman getting a present. It’s a huge, off-putting 
commitment if you’ve never watched South Korean TV before, which brings me to 
my second point ...

To understate wildly for a moment, South Korean dramas take some getting used 
to. They’re cheesy and sentimental, and the plots often pivot on moments so 
unbelievable that you’ll slap your forehead in exasperation. They’re absurdly 
chaste. They often recap things that literally only just happened. There’s 
usually something mystical or supernatural involved. They operate on a 
frequency that just seems baffling to western viewers. Once you’ve fallen in 
line with all their tics and quirks, there’s a good chance you’ll begin to love 
South Korean television. But that won’t happen immediately.

So let’s treat 9 Seconds – Eternal Time as your perfect starter show. Not only 
does it contain almost every single element traditionally found in South Korean 
dramas, but it’s short. It’s only seven episodes long, and each episode lasts 
only about 15 minutes. The whole thing is done in less than two hours. It takes 
no commitment to watch. You’d be silly not to at least try.

The story, then. 9 Seconds – Eternal Time is about So Ra, a withdrawn 
schoolgirl who moves to Gyeongju fromSeoul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/seoul> after her parents divorce. Her 
neighbour is Yoo Chan, a talented photographer with apremature macular 
degeneration <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macular_degeneration>. The pair 
slowly get to know each other and, as they help each other overcome their 
problems, they fall in love. Oh, and there’s also a magic camera that can pause 
time, but let’s not dwell on details.

You really need to stick with this one. The first half of the series is pure 
boy-meets-girl teen sap, strung along on a procession of go-nowhere side plots. 
But then, just when you get used to the show’s meandering pace, something 
happens and the series flies off into orbit. Without giving too much away, 
things suddenly become much more ambiguous and dreamlike, before the ending 
plunges into full-blown melodrama.

This isn’t a perfect programme by any means – almost half of one episode is a 
recap of the previous episode, which isn’t great – but it’s a good place to 
start. I was initially nonplussed by it but, by the end, I was completely on 
board. Hopefully you’ll feel the same. If you do, you can graduate to something 
more full-on, such as the profoundly sentimental and unstoppably South Korean 
This Is My Love. And if you don’t? That’s fine, too. You’ve lost only an hour 
and a bit of your life. I wasted more time than that trying to get intoMr Robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot>.

Where: Netflix

Length: Seven episodes of roughly 15 minutes each.

Stand-out episode: Episode five, where the slightly aimless courtship between 
So Ra and Yoo Chan takes a sudden – some might even say baffling – turn towards 
heartbreak.

If you liked 9 Seconds – Eternal Time, watch: Beating Again (Netflix), Playful 
Kiss (Netflix).
 