
Three 16-year-olds from Afghanistan have begun a hunger strike in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> in protest at the slow process of 
being reunited with their families in the UK, according to a refugee legal 
organisation.

Three weeks after the demolition of the Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> camp, several charities say there is 
rising anxiety among the 1,600 children and young people who were dispersed to 
disused elderly people’s homes and youth hotels across France without being 
given information about their future.

The Red Cross and Save the Children have called on the Home Office to urgently 
provide basic information to children and French hostel staff about the 
expected timescale for processing applications to come to the UK.

The three boys from Afghanistan who are on hunger strike have been trying to 
get permission to join relatives in the UK for several months, and had been 
living in tents in Calais for more than six months, according to Laura 
Griffiths, a senior field manager forSafe Passage UK 
<http://safepassage.org.uk/about-us/>. “It is a sign of their desperation at 
being forgotten,” she said. The organisation was in regular contact with the 
boys since they stopped eating last week and was trying to convince them to 
stop the protest, she said.

Most Calais camp child refugees ‘traumatised and depressed’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/05/child-refugees-calais-traumatised-and-depressed>
Elsewhere, at least 20 children have become so concerned at the absence of 
information that they have run away from the centres where they have been 
rehoused, hoping to continue their attempts to come to the UK illegally by 
smuggling themselves on to lorries.

The 1,600 children and young people who were dispersed from Calais to about 60 
hostels across France on 2 November were accompanied by two Home Office staff 
members on each bus, but the British officials left most centres as soon as the 
buses arrived at their destination, according to refugee charities who are in 
contact with the children.

Since then most have had no explanation about the process under way, nor given 
any clarity about how long they will have to wait before their asylum claims 
are examined.

Home Office staff have returned to some centres to start interviews, but have 
not revealed when decisions will be made, according to charity staff.

Volunteers from HelpRefugees, who have visited eight centres, said there were 
translators in only two of them, and concluded that “overall it is a negative 
picture”. They said they had met two boys who voiced suicidal thoughts, and 
many others who were distressed by not knowing what was happening. They were 
aware of 22 children who had already left three of the centres they visited. 
They also noted that centres which were well run, with access to translators, 
had less of a problem with runaways.

“Most kids are already suffering from anxiety having been taken from Calais 
without any information and now they are in centres with still no information,” 
Benny Hunter of HelpRefugees said. “They feel safe, they enjoy the showers, but 
the lack of information is breeding anxiety. Our biggest concern is that this 
distress and lack of information is driving children to leave centres.”

Last of Calais refugee children evacuated as camp clearance ends
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/calais-refugee-children-evacuated-as-camp-clearance-winds-up>
Thirteen-year-old Wasilkareem Y, from Afghanistan, was taken on a 12-hour 
coach trip to a centre in Talence, a suburb of Bordeaux in south-western 
France, with about 30 other boys from Afghanistan aged between 12 and 17. He 
was interviewed last week for about eight minutes by a Home Office official 
about his application to join his maternal uncle in Southampton. He described 
the process as “disorganised” and said he had been called back to answer 
questions again after officials had apparently got his forms muddled with 
someone else’s.

“They registered two of us with the number 75. I said, ‘why are you 
interviewing me twice?’ They said they had lost the paper. They were asking 
very simple questions that we have answered before.”

There was no information about when the applications would be approved or 
rejected. “All the boys were asking, when will there be a result. They said, 
‘We are not sure when you will have a reply,’” he said.

Meanwhile, he and the other boys in the centre were struggling with the 
boredom. “We can have a bath or a shower, and it is warm at least. In Calais it 
was not warm. But there is nothing for us to do. There are no activities, no 
school, no chance to learn anything. You just sit in your room and wait,” he 
said.

He said that because none of the boys spoke French and the staff did not speak 
English, they were communicating through Google Translate on staff members’ 
phones. “People feel unhappy and angry,” he said.

After visiting one of the reception centres,, Karl Pike from the Red Cross, 
said the children were “extremely anxious”, and called on the Home Office to 
provide urgent information to the children about the timescale for the 
consideration of applications to come to the UK.

“They need some reassurance that the process is going to happen; that would 
help avoid them going missing. What would also clearly help if something 
official-looking was sent to the centres stating when the Home Office is coming 
back,” he said. “We were surrounded by children with a lot of questions.”

The Home Office said it would not be providing any time frame for the 
decision-making process. A spokesperson said that officials needed to “continue 
to ensure the right checks have been made on these young people for their 
safety and the safety of others. This means assessing their ages, confirming 
their identities and eligibility to come to the UK and running security checks. 
The French authorities have committed to supporting minors as we make these 
essential checks”.

The treatment of Calais camp children isn’t just neglectful – it’s abusive | 
Bronwen James Crowther
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/calais-camp-children-refugees>
Save the Children said it was aware that some children were leaving the 
centres because they did not understand what was happening, and the charity has 
also called on the Home Office to give children a clearer sense of when they 
might be told about their future. Safe Passage, which is conducting a census at 
all 60 centres, said there was particular concern at the absence of information 
in any language understood by the children.

The frustration expressed by children in France is echoed by some councils in 
the UK, who had rushed to make beds available for unaccompanied asylum-seeking 
children, and have been frustrated at the delay in transferring children from 
France.

In a detailed report on eight centres, HelpRefugees workers said the quality 
of the centres varied considerably. In the better reception centres there were 
appropriate translators, activities, French lessons and well-qualified staff; 
children in these centres described themselves as “very lucky”.

In other centres, however, children had not been given winter clothes, and 
some still only had flip-flops. In one, children had made themselves a cricket 
bat but did not have a ball. The most common complaint, beyond lack of 
information, was boredom. Many centres had no television, and no lessons or 
activities for the children.

During their research at an interview centre near Grenoble, two HelpRefugees 
volunteers overheard a Home Office official requesting by telephone to a 
colleague in London that all British staff be taken out of the centres before 
the results of the asylum applications were announced. The official was heard 
to request “we want to get teams off the ground before answers come through in 
case tensions emerge”, according to Hunter and colleague Rosie Pope.

The official was overheard to add: “The expectation is that the Home Office 
are clearing out the centres; we’re not taking as many as the French think … 
you’ve got your frontline staff in the middle of the battlefield; it’s going to 
cause so much tension.”
 