 Sally Smith remembers one of the last conversations she had with Jane, her 
20-year-old daughter. 'What looks better, Mum, trainers or shoes?' Jane asked, 
hobbling around her mother's bedroom with one of each on her feet.
Both agreed trainers looked better with the white boiler suit she had borrowed 
from her mother's wardrobe. Jane was off to a party. Sally didn't see her 
daughter again but she was handed back the boiler suit, stained grey by dirty 
Thames water, several weeks after Jane's body was dragged out of the river. 
Jane, an extrovert aerobics teacher, was one of the 51 who died when the 
Bowbelle sand dredger collided with the Marchioness pleasure boat near 
Southwark Bridge on Saturday August 20 1989.

The collision happened at around 1.30am and Jane's watch smashed at 10 to two. 
She was a strong swimmer and her mother believes she may have hit something and 
knocked herself out. Her body wasn't found until the following Thursday.

Sally Smith has aged dramatically in the five years since her daughter's 
death. Pictures taken before show a youthful 45-year-old with the pretty, 
dark-haired daughter she affectionately called Bean. Sally's hair went white 
almost overnight and she has put on three stone in weight. 'I got very partial 
to chocolates and brandy. Comfort eating, I suppose.

'When Jamie, Bean's boyfriend, called early on the Sunday morning, I knew she 
was dead. There was never any doubt in my mind. They say a mother has a special 
intuition and it's true. I felt cheated that I was not allowed to identify her 
because her hands had been removed.' The coroner claimed he had no 
fingerprinting equipment and said it was easier to remove the hands from some 
of the bodies and to despatch them elsewhere. He is no longer on the case but 
the victims' relatives have never forgiven him. Sally was eventually shown 
pictures of Jane's body, after she had put considerable pressure on the coroner.

'You won't recognise her,' he warned. 'I bore her,' Sally said. 'I'd know her 
anywhere.' The week before Jane died, she and her older brother Paul were 
helping decorate the house ready for Jane's 21st birthday party in September. 
Sally, divorced from Jane's father six years previously, remembers: 'Bean was 
putting some pictures up and she said: 'I won't be here for ever, you know. 
You'll have to get used to doing these things without me.' The other odd thing 
was that her skin broke out in psoriasis the day she died. She hadn't had it 
since she was a child. It's usually stress-related, so I asked if she was 
worried about anything and she said no. She was a happy girl, full of life. 
Perhaps something within her just knew.'

The stairway of Sally's home is covered in photographs of Jane and of her 
idol, James Dean. 'I still feel her presence around the place and I miss her 
very much,' Sally says, 'but I've had to come to terms with the fact that she 
will never be with me again. That's the hardest part. It's like having both 
your arms cut off. I could never replace Bean - I even miss the arguments,' she 
adds, smiling.

'She did all the usual things teenage girls do: didn't tidy her room, brought 
friends home for tea and toast, ate all the biscuits. We'd both shout a bit but 
then she'd give me a big hug.'

Sally 'had a big row with God' after Jane died. 'I thought, he's really 
ballsed this one up. What did I ever do that was so bad that this should 
happen? Now all my anger is gone. I'm not an angry sort; I've just got to live 
with it, haven't I?'

Sally was counselled after the disaster and now counsels bereaved people 
herself. 'Any loss is painful and that pain never goes. I always get very tired 
at this time of year. You are determined that August won't be different from 
other months but the fighting against it tires you out. The grief is like an 
old wound that opens and closes. Sometimes, if I do something silly, I think, 
Bean would have giggled at that. Or I'll catch a smell that reminds me of her, 
or hear a sad song she liked, and the tears pour down.' The experience has made 
Sally 'more of a day-to-day person. You never know what's round the corner.' 
Initially, she became over-protective of Paul but she has now managed to break 
the habit of looking out of the window every time he leaves the house to see 
what he is wearing. 'That way, if I had to identify him, I knew I could.'

EILEEN DALLAGLIO, whose 19-year-old daughter Francesca was the youngest to die 
on the Marchioness, has channelled all her anger into campaigning. The disaster 
has had neither a proper inquest nor a public inquiry and Eileen is determined 
to change that. The coroner implied that certain members of the Marchioness 
Action Group were unhinged and the inquest was never completed.

'I wonder if he might not have felt slightly unhinged if he'd just lost a 
daughter,' Eileen says. After years of campaigning, a new coroner was appointed 
last month. Relatives and survivors will soon know whether the inquest is to be 
re-opened, and Eileen is hopeful that the real cause of the 51 deaths will come 
to light.

'Both the owners of the Marchioness and South Coast Shipping, who owned the 
Bowbelle, were infested with sloppiness,' she says. 'The Bowbelle's helmsman 
had a hearing aid and bifocal lenses, for God's sake. The truth has got to come 
out sooner or later.' On a more personal level, Eileen says: 'For five years, I 
have had no laughter in my life and no physical contact with my husband because 
all of that just dies. I've been living like a robot and it took four years to 
come out of the shock. It was an extremely painful time; I believe I nearly 
died when I lost Francesca. But I have to be positive now. Justice needs to be 
done.' Eileen grew up in the East End, one of 10 children raised to respect a 
strict moral code.

'When Francesca died, it was as if everything I had grown up to believe in had 
turned against me - like if you did something bad, you were punished. It made 
me question everything.

'The message we got from the Government after the accident was that private 
enterprise must be allowed to flourish at whatever cost. And South Coast 
Shipping is still doing business, still running those sand dredgers up and down 
the Thames. It's a disgrace.'

The most poignant things to Eileen now are the flashbacks she has of treasured 
moments with her daughter. 'The other week, I saw a little girl who was the 
spitting image of Francesca when she was a child. Her mother was plaiting her 
hair in exactly the same way I used to when Francesca went to ballet. Sometimes 
I'll see a teenager who looks like her and I catch my breath. It is still 
extremely hard to accept that I will never, ever see my daughter again.'
 