
After a performance of All My Sons at Sydney Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Company on Wednesday, as the 
audience applauded the magic that comes when great writing collides with great 
performance, Eryn-Jean Norvill stepped forward and quietened us all.

 Standing on the Roslyn Packer stage, she delivered a version of the same 
speech that was happening at curtain calls in every major theatre venue all 
over New South Wales. She spoke of thedevastating cuts to the Australia Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/23/a-state-of-desperation-battlers-of-the-arts-reflect-on-australia-council-bloodbath>
 which had trickled down to the small to medium arts sector, and then explained 
that each member of the cast we had just been watching had developed their 
talents on smaller stages around the country.

National day of action: art and theatre join forces to make culture an 
election issue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/15/arts-organisations-join-forces-to-make-funding-cuts-an-election-issue>
 The backbone of this speech was written by actor, playwright and arts 
advocate Kate Mulvany, as part of I Stand With the Arts, a national campaign
launched on 17 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/15/arts-organisations-join-forces-to-make-funding-cuts-an-election-issue>
 to make the arts an election issue, and restore government funding that has 
recently been cut. Over the past three weeks, the curtain call speech has been 
delivered to nearly 80,000 people.

“We are so proud of the conversations we get to have with you, our audiences,” 
it begins, “but we in the arts industry are in a battle for our existence at 
the moment, so I just ask for one more moment of your time to ask for your 
assistance.

“On May 13 this year 50% of small to medium arts companies did not receive 
funding as a result of the government’s cuts to the Australia Council. Many of 
those small to medium companies will shut their doors forever – 1,300 of our 
arts workers are expected to lose their jobs. A generation of artists will be 
lost …

“We need you to show those that decide on the fate of our industry just how 
many people are invested in the arts. The arts is not just about the artists. 
It’s about you. ... If our industry suffers, then so do you.”

 As she delivered her appeal to the audience, I remembered watching Norvill in 
the 24 Hour Play Project at Griffin theatre; I remembered her first mainstage 
performance in Sam Strong’s The Boys, back in 2011. Standing on stage with her 
at the STC was Josh McConville, who also started at Griffin in Patricia 
Cornelius’s The Call. Chris Ryan – also in the All My Sons cast in front of me 
– was in that same production.

Standing alongside them as Norvill spoke was the great Robyn Nevin and John 
Howard, who are of the generation that started out creating Australian work at 
the Stables theatre – and who probably helped build the benches we still sit on 
at Griffin.

Australia Council cuts: theatre companies lament ‘dark days’ for arts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/16/australia-council-cuts-theatre-companies-lament-dark-days-for-arts>
 That curtain call was a snapshot of the finely wrought theatre ecology that 
has been evolving in Australia over the past 50 years. That ecology creates the 
art that feeds the spirit of this nation. And in that moment at Sydney Theatre 
Company, you could feel that the whole audience understood.

 In the foyer after performances in each of these theatres, performers and 
venue staff have been handing out postcards addressed to local MPs, for 
audiences to sign. An e-campaign was launched at the same time, and all up more 
than 15,000 voters have sent messages of support for the arts to their local 
MPs since 17 June.

I saw audiences sharing pens, furiously scribbling their addresses and 
postcodes on postcards. I saw the Belvoir office knee deep in cards collected 
from around the country. I watched as they were dropped off in politicians’ 
offices, delivering a message that needs to be heard. And I now feel weirdly 
hopeful.

 It may be that the campaign has been preaching to the choir, but that is how 
you get them to sing. And boy it is a beautiful sound.

 Whatever happens on Saturday, the coming together of visual artists, 
musicians, dancers, poets and theatre makers with all our audiences has been a 
remarkable moment in the history of creativity in this country. And we will 
build on this moment.

We have spoken directly to nearly 80,000 people around the country in just 
three weeks. Imagine what we will achieve when we speak like this for a year.
 