
This afternoon I have to undertake a secret mission. The object? Two dresses 
and two glass tumblers that I purchased online in the Anthropologie sale. The 
destination? Greenwich post office. The challenge? To sneak out of the flat, 
pick up the goods, then sneak back in and get the dresses into my wardrobe 
without my husband seeing me and saying: “Woman, what is wrong with you? You 
could wear a different dress every day and not have to do any laundry until 
November! After Christmas, you now have more Bella Freud jumpers than I have 
jumpers full stop!Stop spending money!” 


To be fair, he has never complained about how much of my income goes on 
clothes, but when I showed him a recent bargain from Asos – a full-skirted 
dress made from the same sort of fabric they use for wetsuits – I saw a light 
die in his eyes. His most obsessive internet searches are for beautiful, 
reasonably priced coastal cottages that we might buy and live in; mine are for 
beautiful bags that cost half as much as a house deposit.

Yes we should teach our kids about money, but how exactly escapes me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/12/teach-kids-about-money-pockey-money-savings>
Our financial attitudes are totally different and, although we’re not big 
fighters, sometimes I can feel the tension building. Deep down I feel my 
husband’s attitude is the “right” one, and I am a terrible, frivolous person 
for wanting to spend my cash on what is basically a dressing-up box. But 
knowing this doesn’t make me stop. It simply makes me feel like a naughty child 
who wants to see how far she can push the grownup before he loses it.

I’m not the only one who finds that their partner brings out the worst in 
them, money-wise.

My friend Laura, 32, admits: “My boyfriend earns more than me and spends 
lavishly, and I feel like I’m always trying to rein him in. I was fairly frugal 
before we got together, but he drives me to extremes – like making a fuss about 
buying own-brand jam when we’re doing supermarket shopping. I guess I’m worried 
that he wouldn’t know how to cope without having a decent income, and I’m 
generally so anxious that something awful is around the corner that I think we 
should somehow be preparing by saving 20p on marmalade.”

Couples counsellor Alan McPherson explains that money issues are one of the 
biggest sources of conflict for his clients. “But it is not money itself that 
is the issue, but the values we have placed on it. The two people in a 
relationship have usually experienced totally different parenting styles and 
associated psychological experiences. I encourage them to tell each other what 
money means to them, how money was shared in their family home, the issues with 
money that the family experienced growing up, and how their parents advised 
them to handle their money.”

This strikes an uncomfortable chord, as I realise, aged 30, that I’m still 
using money as a means of rebellion. When I was growing up my parents 
disapproved of excessive spending and always encouraged me to save before I 
bought. My dad was the working parent and the one more inclined to treat and 
spoil, but my mum was managing a household budget that she didn’t feel she was 
earning. She was the voice of reason, the spokesperson for delayed 
gratification, and the one from whom I would hide new purchases, sneaking up 
the stairs to my bedroom with a carrier bag stuffed up my jumper. History 
repeats itself.

Also, I was a teenager at the dawn of the millennium when designer labels and 
status-driven purchasing were at their peak. My husband was born in the 1970s 
during a time of record unemployment, and spent the 90s in the US performing in 
bands with his friends and taking any jobs that would keep body and soul 
together. Creativity was the priority and displays of wealth were a bit 
suspect. “I remember coming back to the UK for a visit,” he says, “and all 
anyone over here would talk about was house prices and the property ladder. At 
the time it was baffling. But the idea of having a home that you live in – not 
a property with a constantly escalating value – appeals the most to me. If I’m 
going to spend my cash on anything, I think it should be that.”

Having an honest, open chat about where our money values come from makes me 
think there is hope for us. Psychologist Jessamy Hibberd advises: “Don’t wait 
to discuss these issues – it’s good to talk about them as they come up in the 
relationship. It’s a starting point, gives you something to fall back on and 
takes the pressure off. Talk about it when you’re feeling calm, sharing how you 
feel and listening to each other will help you understand the other person’s 
point of view and explain your own.”

But what if you have put off discussing things calmly, and you and your 
partner are sitting on an emotional Isa filled with years of money fights? 
McPherson advocates “fair fighting” and making sure you know how to stop the 
argument before you start it: “Agree to a mutual ‘stop’ signal beforehand, so 
you can both calm down.”

My friend Dan, who has been married for five years, says: “Money was always an 
issue between my wife and me – I think because our parents all had horrible, 
expensive divorces. Since I started using a meditation app I have got much 
better at discussing specific issues rather than saying ‘Youalways do this!’. 
I’m a bit more focused on what is actually being said and less likely to start 
ranting mindlessly.”

Do you need financial therapy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/05/do-you-need-financial-therapy> 
He adds: “Also, when we’ve gone out for dinner to talk about a money problem, 
we always end up fighting because sitting face to face feels so 
confrontational. But we’ve discovered that we have some good, productive 
discussions when we’re out walking together. I think there’s something about 
being side by side that reminds us we’re both on the same team, and it’s a 
relaxed way to say what’s on our minds without shouting it into each other’s 
face.”

Hibberd also says that if you are both working towards the same financial 
project, it’s easier to find middle ground. She advises that it’s well worth 
“agreeing on a financial goal or talking about what you both plan to do so you 
are both signed up to the same ideas. There will be disagreements, but disagree 
agreeably. Respect each other’s opinion if you can’t find a way to compromise, 
and work out how it can be resolved.”

We’ve been putting Hibberd’s advice into practice as we plan our honeymoon in 
Hawaii. We both have the same goal – the holiday of a lifetime – and we’re 
learning to work together and make the compromises that will make us both 
happy, economising where we can in order to splurge on treats. I’m resisting 
the temptation to blow my holiday budget on luxury swimwear. For every bikini I 
don’t buy, we can see another turtle.

Some names have been changed.
 