
The 'Ndrangheta mafia from southern Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> made more money last year than 
Deutsche Bank and McDonald's put together with a turnover of €53bn (£44bn), a 
study has claimed.

The study by the Demoskopika research institute detailed the international 
crime syndicate's sources of revenue, including drug trafficking – which 
brought in an estimated €24.2bn – and illegal garbage disposal, which earned it 
€19.6bn.

The southern Italian mafia earned the equivalent of 3.5% of Italy's gross 
domestic product (GDP) last year, said the report based on analysis of 
documents from Italy's interior ministry and police, parliament's anti-mafia 
commission and the national anti-mafia task force.

The 'Ndrangheta is thought to have about 400 key "operatives" in 30 countries, 
but its activities are believed to involve as many as 60,000 people worldwide, 
the report said.

Extortion and usury last year brought in a substantial €2.9bn, while 
embezzlement earned the mafia €2.4bn and gambling €1.3bn. Arms sales, 
prostitution, counterfeiting goods and people-smuggling were less lucrative, 
bringing in less than €1bn together.

The 'Ndrangheta – whose name comes from the Greek for courage or loyalty – has 
a tight clan structure which has made it famously difficult to penetrate.

With its network of hundreds of family gangs based around the southern region 
of Calabria, it is even more feared and secretive than the Sicilian mafia.

Its roots go back to a criminal association specialised in gambling, the 
Garduna, which was created in the Spanish city of Toledo in 1412.

It spread to Calabria, one of Italy's poorest regions, and started building up 
as a crime network based on kidnapping for ransom.

Pope Francis last week called on Italy's mafia groups to "stop doing evil" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/22/pope-francis-warns-mafiosi-to-repent-or-end-up-in-hell>
 as he met relatives of their victims to demonstrate the Catholic church's 
opposition to organised crime.

"There is still time to avoid ending up in hell, which is where you are going 
if you continue down this path," he warned mafiosi, telling them to relinquish 
their "blood-stained money" which "cannot be taken into paradise".
 