
“Our role is not to punish. The punishment is the prison sentence: they have 
been deprived of their freedom. The punishment is that they are with us,” says 
Nils Öberg, director-general of Sweden’s prison and probation service.

Öberg, 54, is giving the annual Longford lecture on penal reform 
<http://www.longfordtrust.org/lecture_details.php?id=18> in London tomorrow, 
where he will explain how, in stark contrast to the UK, Sweden is closing 
prisons and reducing the prison population.

Since 2004, Swedish prisoner numbers have fallen from 5,722 to 4,500 out of a 
population of 9.5 million, and last year four of the country’s56 prisons were 
closed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/11/sweden-closes-prisons-number-inmates-plummets>
 and parts of other jails mothballed. In contrast, the prison population in 
England and Wales is 85,000 out of a population of 57 million.

With reoffending rates at about 40% – less than half of those in the UK and 
most other European countries – does he attribute this success to the country’s 
effective policies on prisoner rehabilitation? “We obviously believe that it is 
part of the explanation; we hope we are doing something right. But it’s going 
to be very difficult to prove that scientifically. We are increasing our 
efforts all the time,” he says.

Last year a “national client survey” of several thousand Swedish prisoners was 
undertaken in order to identify the issues that have affected their criminal 
behaviour. “The survey did not bring up any surprises, but it gave us 
confirmation of what we have learned from experience – that it is not one 
problem that our clients face, but two or more, sometimes as many as seven or 
eight different ones, including perhaps drugs, alcohol and psychiatric 
problems. And these problems did not just appear overnight. These are things 
that have developed over years. Most of the sentences in this country are 
relatively short. The window of opportunity that we have to make a change is 
very small, so we need to start from day one. Our strategy is to cover the 
whole range of problems, not just the one problem.”
 Sweden’s high-security Kumla prison Photograph: Marc Femenia / TT/Press 
Association Images 
Unlike England and Wales, where since 2004 anyone convicted by the courts is 
categorised as an offender, the implication in the Swedish model is that 
sentenced individuals are still primarily regarded as people with needs, to be 
assisted and helped. As well as having rehabilitation at the heart of its penal 
policy, the other huge difference between the Swedish and UK approaches is the 
role of politicians.

Chris Grayling, the justice secretary, has recently introduced measures that 
amount to “a ramped-up political emphasis on punishment rather than real 
rehabilitation” in prison regimes, according to Juliet Lyon, director of the 
Prison Reform Trust. These include forcing prisoners to wear uniform, banning 
books being sent to prisoners, and turning off cell lights at 10.30pm in young 
offender institutions.

Öberg says: “A politician who tried something like that in Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> would be thrown out of office. It 
would be a breach of our constitution – in our system that is the forbidden 
area. When we exercise authority over individuals, a politician cannot 
interfere with the administration process. In reality, there is a dialogue – 
politicians will tell me and my colleagues what they expect and we will do our 
best to achieve those goals. We have a very clear division of labour between 
the government and public administration.

“An individual politician cannot interfere with the running of our business. 
The government sets goals in a yearly letter of intent, and then the 
responsibility for the work is entirely ours.”

But what about public opinion in Sweden? Is there less desire for retribution 
than in the UK? “There is a lot of anger among the Swedish public when it comes 
to crime and criminals,” says Öberg. “But, regardless of what public opinion 
may be at any one time, whatever you do in the justice sector, you have to take 
a long-term perspective. You cannot try something one day and then change it to 
something else the next day – that would be completely useless. The system in 
our sector is set up to implement long-term strategies and stick to them.”

He adds, however, that the country’s well-educated population appreciates that 
almost all prisoners will return to society. “So when you go into a political 
dialogue, there is a fair amount of understanding that the more we can do 
during this small window of opportunity when people are deprived of their 
liberty, the better it will be in the long run.”

Is he hoping his Longford lecture will provide some helpful advice that may 
assist the UK government with its prison difficulties,ranging from 
overcrowding, staff shortages and a 69% increase last year in self-inflicted 
death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/21/rise-prison-suicides-growing-jail-population-staff-shortages>
?

“I’m very excited to be giving the lecture. But I will be very careful about 
giving anybody any advice. We can try to share our experiences and perhaps 
inspire each other a little bit, recognising that the preconditions for 
carrying out our work are very, very different.

My ambition is to try to tell a story about how we have come to the 
conclusions that we have, and explain why we have made the choices that we have 
made. It has to do with whether you decide to use prison as your first option 
or as a last resort, and what you want your probation system to achieve. Some 
people have to be incarcerated, but it has to be a goal to get them back out 
into society in better shape than they were when they came in.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 54.

Lives Stockholm.

Family Married, three children.

Education Sollefteå Gymnasium, Sweden; Harvard University, Kennedy school of 
government, USA; political science degree; Uppsala University, Sweden, MSc/Phd, 
political science.

Career 2012–present: director-general, Swedish prison and probation service; 
1999–12; various director-general roles, Swedish ministry of justice; 1995–99; 
civil servant, Swedish commissioner, European commission, Brussels; 1991-95; 
officer and analyst roles, Swedish security service; 1988–90: consultant, 
International Foundation; 1986-88: administrative director, Alva and Gunnar 
Myrdal’s Foundation: 1983–85; consultant, Swedish Red Cross and other NGOs.

Interests Sailing.
 