
The number of children living in temporary accommodation this Christmas, 
including in bed and breakfasts, has risen by more than 10% since last year to 
124,000, according to the latest government figures.

The numbers of children forced into temporary housing in the run up to 
Christmas have described as “shocking” by the country’s leading charity for the 
homeless.

The data, released by the Department for Communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government, also 
reveals a rise of more than 300% since 2014 in the number of families in 
England who are being housed illegally (for more than the statutory maximum 
period of six weeks) in B&Bs by local authorities, because they cannot find any 
alternative places.

Campbell Robb, Shelter’s chief executive, said: “The latest figures show that 
councils are increasingly struggling to help homeless families.

“But the number of children placed in B&Bs illegally is truly shocking, and 
there’s a worrying rise in families moved away from their support network to a 
new area. We know first-hand the devastating impact this can have on their 
lives.”

He blamed a “perfect storm” of welfare cuts and rising rents, together with a 
lack of social andaffordable housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/27/the-big-issue-affordable-housing-green-belt>
, that was creating impossible pressure for local authorities.

“Councils know that neither option is acceptable but increasingly find 
themselves with no alternatives,” he said. “Welfare cuts have made private 
rents unaffordable and that – combined with unpredictable rent rises and a lack 
of genuinely affordable homes - mean many families are struggling to get by.

“With the loss of private rented homes the single biggest cause of 
homelessness, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/17/homeless-families-bed-and-breakfast-england-dclg>
 it’s no wonder that’s so many families are turning to their council, desperate 
for help.”

The figures, which were released without any publicity 10 days before 
Christmas, reveal that the number of children across all of Britain who are 
homeless and living in temporary accommodation has reached 124,000. In the same 
period last year, the figure was 109,000.

The number of households that have become homeless after an eviction over the 
last year is up 12% compared to a year ago at 18,820 while the total number of 
households in temporary accommodation has risen to 74,630, up 9% on a year 
earlier. While 21,400 homeless households have been moved away to a different 
council area – a 15% rise in the last year.

Chloe Taylor, 23, her partner Iain Hudson, 22, who is a full time mechanic, 
and their two children Bentley, aged 1, and Belle, 2, were placed in a bed and 
breakfast in Poole, Dorset, by the local council two weeks ago after finding 
themselves homeless after a temporary stay at her parents’ home.

“We now face spending the Christmas period with all of us in one small room 
without any proper washing facilities,” she said.

“The people who own it are very nice but it is just not suitable for a family. 
There is not even enough space for the children’s presents. It is that bad.”

Shelter’s examination of the data also revealed that 1,300 families with 
children were in B&Bs longer than the legal limit of six weeks between July and 
September this year. This compared to 1,050 in the same period last year and 
407 in 2014.

A spokesman for the communities department appeared to acknowledge that some 
councils were breaking the law. “While the number of households in temporary 
accommodation is below the 2004 peak, the law is clear that households with 
dependent children should only be accommodated in B&B in an emergency and then 
for no longer than six weeks.

“There are councils who are successfully reducing the number and length of 
time families spend in B&B accommodation – we expect areas in similar 
situations to follow their example.”

Robb added: “If Theresa May wants to deliver on a the promise of a country 
that works for everyone, then in the short-term her government has to review 
the level of housing support available to make sure it reflects the actual cost 
of private rents. But in the longer term, the only way to turn things around is 
to build more genuinelyaffordable homes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/27/the-big-issue-affordable-housing-green-belt>
that they can actually afford to rent or buy.”
 