
Martha Plimpton is an Emmy-winning actor and pro-choice activist. She 
currently stars inThe Real O’Neals <http://abc.go.com/shows/the-real-oneals>. 
Her friendRebecca Carroll is a Guardian US writer, author and critic-at-large 
for the Los Angeles Times. They emailed about politics, feminism and art

Rebecca: You’ve been really outspoken about your pro-choice views 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/07/those-decry-abortion-condone-gun-violence-anti-woman-not-pro-life>
 in the past, so we should start this conversation with a fresh 
acknowledgement: Donald Trump is now the Republican candidate, and he’s also 
arguably a misogynistic freak show of a person who has a ton of supporters. His 
campaign is broadly about prioritizing money over humans. In the event that he 
wins, how do we keep humans at the forefront of US?

Martha: Oh, lordy. Well, I don’t believe he has a chance in hell of becoming 
president. I really do not. I just think it’s beyond comprehension. Beyond Bush 
II. Beyond the beyond. It’s not going to happen, so I won’t even go there. Not 
because I’m in denial – I literally think there is no data of any kind to 
support that kind of doomsday planning as far as Trump is concerned.

I’m not being a partisan here. I love a good contest, but there will not be 
one in this election. We are about to have our first female president, I really 
don’t care whatTim Robbins says 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/news/275126-tim-robbins-rallies-for-sanders-in-wisconsin>
.


Rebecca Carroll: In The Real O’Neals you play Eileen, Agnes’ daughter. Eileen 
is kind of a control freak trying to reassess her life, which involves being 
far more open-minded than she has been raised to be, especially since her 
Catholic conservative mother is racist and homophobic.


The first thing I thought after watching the show was: how come Eileen evolved 
to eventually embrace things that her religion does not (gay people, divorce, 
black and brown people) and Agnes didn’t?

Martha Plimpton: Generational differences are pretty important here. Exposure 
to new things, especially within your own family, forces a kind of acceptance 
you never thought you could one day accept. And the more people come out, or 
demand to be respected and treated as equals, the more likely it is that change 
is coming to your house.

That’s the case with my character, Eileen. Our show is essentially focused on 
ideals of forgiveness, empathy, love and acceptance, but it’s a TV show. It’s a 
heightened reality made to entertain and hopefully move people enough to 
contribute to the understanding that homosexuality is normal.

On some level, we’re hoping that Eileen’s journey will be encouraging for 
other parents who may be struggling with their views on LGBT issues. We want 
them to know that it is possible to change, and that it can be a joyful 
experience too.

My own personal thoughts on this might be a little more informed by the darker 
aspects of human beings. I know how hard forgiveness, or even tiny little 
forward motion, can be. I also know it takes a long, long time to come, and 
that the penny doesn’t always drop.

Rebecca: On the subject of forgiveness – for all its difficulty to embrace and 
offer in a meaningful way, lots of folks are quick to say that forgiveness sets 
you free. But I actually feel quite free in my anger. I don’t know what or who 
forgiveness serves.

I don’t forgive my fifth-grade teacher for being racist. I don’t forgive the 
grown man who messed with me when I was six. I forgive immaturity in myself and 
my friends, and I forgive some mean things we said to each other – but I feel 
like people who do awful things don’t get to have my forgiveness. Is that evil?

When you keep women’s health, bodies and sexualities a secret, then it’s much 
easier to fool people with bogus laws

Martha: “Is that evil?” Haha! No, of course I don’t think you are capable of 
evil. I relate to this mostly in that I don’t equate forgiveness with the 
erasure of anger or a sense of injustice. They can and often do exist and 
thrive in parallel relation to one another. In a weird way, for me, they go 
hand in hand. But now we’re getting into almost esoteric levels of subjective 
thinking ...

Rebecca: Speaking of esoteric, why do some people still think feminism is akin 
to witchcraft? I struggle to reconcile how men wouldn’t want women to be able 
to keep our reproductive organs healthy. The Senate andstate 
<http://mic.com/articles/127036/texas-gov-greg-abbott-just-cut-the-state-s-medicaid-access-to-planned-parenthood#.tgVrLFl4f>
 plans to defund Planned Parenthood is just unbelievable. Y’all know we don’t 
just get abortions at Planned Parenthood, right? We get pap smears and breast 
cancer checks and STD checks that allow us to safely continue the human race.

Martha: It’s so weird and I have no idea, though of course there are theories. 
The ability to “create life”, whatever that means, might play a part in this. 
(As if there’s not a man always definitively involved in that endeavor!) But 
somehow, women are the ones who get in trouble for it.

As far as reproductive health goes, we know that a woman who becomes pregnant 
is not suddenly, magically possessed by another entity that automatically owns 
her. No – she is a self-contained and autonomous human in the process of slowly 
building another human.

When you keep women’s health, their bodies, their sexualities and their 
biological processes a secret, or try to isolate them from the greater human 
experience as something “other” and “weird” and “dirty”, then it’s much easier 
to fool people with bogus laws that pretend to be protecting them but are 
actually depriving them of their liberty.

There are so many gradations to sexism, and so many mitigating and aggravating 
factors for a sexist person to use as a sort of bread crumb trail back home to 
Fearville. But we know what happens to bread crumbs in the forest. Birdies come 
and foil your plans. So, feminists are the birds eating the crumbs in that 
fairy tale metaphor, I guess.

Why some people want to do this, I will never know. What matters more to me is 
that they are winning. Their reasons are less interesting to me than what we 
are intending to do about it.

Rebecca: For me, the truth is that women are more powerful than men – and I 
say this with all due respect to men. I should probably be more egalitarian, 
but I think women represent the very model of humanity. We are – and of course 
I’m generalizing – emotionally sophisticated, intellectually curious, 
physically strong AF, and know how to channel our vulnerabilities into 
revolutionary acts (hi,Lemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/beyonce-lemonade-jay-z-explainer>
). But how do we better harness this power?

Martha: I hear you, but personally, it doesn’t quite sit right with me to 
associate the ability to be pregnant or “create life” with female power. I 
think that’s the point I’m trying to make. That’s a myth we accept because it 
reads and is experienced as the only power we do have in the eyes of the 
patriarchal structure. Not that it gets us maternity leave or childcare, 
because we are so powerful we don’t need it, I guess?

But many, many women cannot conceive or have children, or simply choose not 
to, and they are just as inherently powerful and physically realized as those 
who do. Right? So when we buy into that, we’re agreeing on some level that 
pregnancy, or the ability to be pregnant, is a strata of human value that is 
separate from the human value of anyone.

Maybe I’m an equality purist in this way, but that’s a huge part of the 
problem in my own view. We are no more, nor less, powerful than the person 
beside us, regardless of our physical attributes, and that is the foundation of 
equality and civil rights.

Rebecca: My god, when you say we are no more powerful than the person beside 
us – I have to disagree. You are far more powerful than the person beside you 
on the subway going to work at the sandwich shop in Grand Central. I am more 
powerful than the person beside me on the subway going to work at Forever 21 in 
Union Square. Right? I mean it would be dense and obtuse to not recognize this.

Martha: Yes, in social terms of course you’re right. I meant in terms of the 
natural rights and value and capabilities of all human beings. This is the 
basis of civil rights work, legislation and activism. This basic truth, that 
all human beings are of equal value and carry the same inherent power to move, 
live, thrive. Yet we largely don’t recognize or accept this, and we subvert 
this truth constantly and systemically, which is why we need civil and human 
rights movements and advocacy.

Rebecca: That’s fair. One more question. You are a celebrity. It’s weird to 
ask this because you are my friend, but what do you think is the morally 
comfortable place for a celebrity to talk about politics?
Martha: I don’t know how my moral responsibilities are altered by my job, but 
I accept that some people think they are. I am a citizen and also a performer 
by trade, and sometimes that means I have a means of communicating on a bigger 
scale. But it doesn’t alter my moral responsibilities.

Anyway, morality is subjective. I’m more interested in the ethics and 
responsibilities of being a decent human being.
 