
"Act like a penguin and you will be accepted as a penguin," Frank Todd, our 
expedition ornithologist, briefed us as we buckled our life jackets and 
prepared to go ashore.

Dropping anchor in South Georgia's Bay of Isles, we filed off the gangway into 
eight-man Zodiac boats. Mine was the first to fill and we sped away with the 
engine revving loudly, leaving a swell of icy water in our wake.

Crisp air filled our lungs as we bounced across the chop towards Salisbury 
Plain – a bay which, except for the broad valley sweeping through it, bears 
little resemblance to its English namesake.

As we raced towards the shore, it came alive with frantic fur seals that 
lurched in the shallows, splashed in the surf and wriggled up the beach behind. 
We were heading for a fur seal holiday camp and, with zoom lenses already 
extended, there was a flurry of camera clicks from the boat.

Having left port in Argentina, I'd spent the past week-and-a-half rocking and 
rolling across the Scotia Sea with 100 other passengers on board the 340ft M/S 
Expedition.

For most passengers – an assortment of Canadians, British and Antipodeans, 
aged 16 to more than 60 – the real appeal of this expedition was the white 
continent. Seduced by the mouthwash-blue glaciers and petrified seas of the 
BBC's Frozen Planet documentaries, we were a party eager for ice. But, with our 
18-day cruise heading to the Falkland Islands and South Georgia first, we'd 
have to wait until day 16 to set foot on Antarctica.
 Lucy makes new friends in South Georgia 
No nature programme could ever have prepared us for the experiences that lay 
ahead: as we cruised ever closer to the end of the earth, the gin-clear waters 
our ship was sailing in would become choked with ice, like an ocean of melting 
mojitos. At times, the surface of the sea would appear to freeze over entirely, 
slowing our progress to walking pace, as the bow of our ship pushed at the pack 
ice until it fissured enough to let us through.

We would see icebergs five times the size of our ship, pocked with sun spots 
and fractured with wound-like crevices that glowed sapphire-blue inside. 
Weddell seals with frosted lashes, contorted coastlines encased in ice 
sculptures, research stations with no running water, and washed-up whale bones 
the size of fallen trees … all this, and more, awaited us in Antarctica.

"You may as well see it all though, if you're coming this far south," was a 
phrase that regularly got batted around at meal times, when guests justified 
booking this multi-stop tour rather than the "Antarctica-only" option.

But the Falkland Islands had been much more than a filler. We'd seen giant 
albatrosses feed chicks the size of terriers, watched spouting whales, and 
walked barefoot across white sand beaches. And now, after three full days at 
sea, South Georgia already seemed set to exceed expectations.

As we entered the shallows, the engines of the boat were cut and the air 
filled with the purrs and grrrrs, snivels and sneezes of seal pups – a constant 
murmur beneath the barks and snorts of their parents, who lolloped along the 
water's edge.

Swinging our wellie-booted feet on to the beach, we heaved the Zodiacs ashore 
as a squad of seals shuffled over on their fore flippers and cautioned us with 
low growls and sharp yellow canines.

As I waggled a trekking pole in defence, a party of well-dressed penguins 
paraded through a swarm of seal pups and waddled down the beach to welcome us. 
One particularly smart adult stepped forward and casually waved a wing at the 
scene behind him.

As I followed his gesture, my jaw began to drop – and kept dropping.

King penguins adorned the dunes in their thousands, packed out the plain 
beyond, and sprawled up the hillside until their silvery silhouettes merged 
into the horizon.
 There were more than 100,00 penguins on Salisbury Plain, South Georgia 
We had arrived at one of the biggest penguin parties on the planet. More than 
100,000 of them populated the scene, and were bathed in a pool of golden light 
that radiated across the rookery like a warm glow. But searching the sky for a 
break in the clouds, I saw nothing but a solid mass of grey mist over the bay – 
a typical South Georgian sky.

"I think they look better in poor light," Frank commented from behind me. 
"They really shine, don't they?"

I nodded in agreement, suddenly realising it was their yellow-tinged chins 
that were giving off the glow.

Mesmerised, I picked my way across the pebble beach towards the colony, taking 
care not to squash the seal pups that fidgeted about my feet and doing my best 
to avoid their pugnacious parents.

As pups gave way to penguins, growls and purrs turned to twitters and trumpet 
calls, and the musky odour of seal fur was replaced by the fusty smell of 
feathers.

Like a busy market, the colony was in a constant state of murmur and mutter. 
Every few minutes, the hubbub was cut through by groups of adults who would 
stretch their throats skywards, raise their beaks above the throng, and give a 
chorus of trumpet calls that echoed across the plain.

Their calls were answered by the squeak and whistle of indignant chicks, who 
sat in thick, fur coats, awaiting their next feed of fish. These infants take 
more than 14 months to go from fur ball to fully watertight and, until then, 
are beach-bound and at the mercy of the petrels and skuas, circling above.

Distancing themselves from their squeaking siblings, adolescents waddled 
around the rookery in various stages of moult, the remains of their baby fluff 
clinging to their lower bellies in pubescent fashion or adorning their crowns 
with unfashionable crops.

In contrast, their parents stood in perfect penguin plumage, their tuxedo 
coats acting as natural wetsuits, and each appeared to be wearing a set of 
carrot-coloured earmuffs over a velvet-black hood – handsome markings which 
seemed to afford them inner confidence.

Seeing the next boat of tourists arrive on the beach, I set off to find a 
quiet spot to take it all in. But as I clambered across the dunes, I had the 
feeling I was being followed and turned to find I had a penguin in tow. Up to 
my waist in height, he wobbled along with his head down, webbed black feet 
slipping across the stones.
 The M/S Expedition anchored off South Georgia 
"They are prone to being groupies," Frank had warned us during our briefing. 
South Georgia's penguins have little reason to fear us. The only humans to 
settle on the island were the whalers, who came and went in the 1900s, and had 
little interest in penguin meat. Apart from the odd explorer, penguins have 
never been hunted by man, and their only visitors these days are groups of 
tourists and a scattering of scientists. Consequently, it appears, fear has 
been replaced with fascination.

Finding a vacant mound of tussock grass, I sat down and let out a contented 
sigh. I had been unprepared for the sheer scale and overwhelming purity of 
South Georgia and now I was here, the stirring beauty of this virgin wilderness 
was almost too much to take in.

Gazing out across the bay, where immense glaciers licked down to the sea, and 
our ship lay dwarfed by the ice-clad peaks beyond, I heard a shuffle of stones 
behind me and soon found my feathered follower standing by my shoulder.

His khaki-coloured eyes level with mine, the penguin followed my gaze out to 
sea, nodding his head as we took in the scene together. The pair of us stayed 
like that for a while, listening to the whimper of seal pups and watching the 
tide tickle the shoreline.

"Act like them, and you will be accepted by them," I smiled to myself. I'm 
sure he was thinking the same.

• Lucy Grewcock won in the adventure holiday category in the 2011 competition. 
The trip was provided by G Adventures (0844 272 2040,gadventures.co.uk 
<http://www.gadventures.co.uk/trips/spirit-of-shackleton/XVSHSX/2013/>). Its 
20-day Spirit of Shackleton trip costs from £7,689pp, including 18 nights on 
board the M/S Expedition, a night in Ushuaia, excursions and all meals. Flights 
from Heathrow to Ushuaia with LAN (lan.com <http://www.lan.com>) cost around 
£980
 