
I've been a district nurse in the Bristol area, like Frankie, since 2010. Most 
of the nurses in my team watched the first episodes of this BBC drama, glad to 
see a programme on what we do. But it's definitely for entertainment only: many 
aspects fall wide of the mark. I've kept watching, but some of the team are so 
frustrated they've given up.

In the first episode, we saw Eve Myles, as Frankie, visiting a man to 
administer insulin and noticing signs of dementia. This is something we often 
encounter, and the programme accurately reflected the judgments we make about 
whether a patient needs further assessment, or is safe to stay home. But 
there's no way a nurse who had been knocked down and threatened with a knife 
wouldn't file a report. There's a clear system in place – to ensure both our 
safety and the patient's.

Another storyline, in which Frankie gets involved with a pregnant woman and 
her ill daughter, was completely unlikely. We're not midwives: there's no way 
we'd be measuring a woman's bump, or rushing to her bedside to help deliver the 
baby – and we certainly don't have consultant paediatricians on speed-dial. If 
we were worried about a child, we'd speak first to the parents, then refer them 
to their GP. I'm concerned people will think our powers of referral are greater 
than they are.

A patient said to me the other day: "You look just like Frankie, don't you?" I 
don't really, although I do have dark hair – but it's true that, like Frankie, 
I'm dedicated to the job. She's had 12 appointments in a day, which is pretty 
accurate – my record is 14. The progamme has also tried to reflect the cutbacks 
happening across theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. We've not 
felt the bite quite yet, but it's good to raise awareness, so people understand 
why there might be delays in referrals or treatment.

I've never missed a surprise birthday party – or a proposal – because I was 
with a patient, as Frankie does, but the job does put a strain on your personal 
life and your emotions. We never let patients see it, though: what worries me 
most about the show is seeing nurses snap at their patients – even shout at a 
man for not keeping his house tidy. No nurse I know would ever treat a patient 
like that.• Rachel Cooper is a district nurse for North Bristol NHS Trust. 
Frankie is on BBC1 on Tuesdays.
 