
I had no idea, before seeing this film, that buyers' clubs had existed. It's 
based on the real-life story of Ron Woodroof, a Texas rodeo rider who discovers 
he has Aids, and sets up a members' group to provide drugs that are unavailable 
in the US. It's an interesting reminder of the atmosphere of fear and anxiety 
that surrounded HIV and Aids in the 1980s. I'm sure most of us can remember 
those adverts in Britain: the tombstones, the reminders that ignorance could 
kill.

AZT was, as the film shows, one of the first drugs to be trialled as an Aids 
treatment. It gets a pretty bad press in the film, but it is actually still 
prescribed to patients with Aids, although at a much lower dose: a large amount 
can have serious side effects, as we see here with one character, Rayon, whose 
symptoms just get worse. Aids treatment today is much more about finding the 
right combination of drugs, just as Woodroof's buyers do, though in a much more 
scientific manner, of course.

The film is good at showing how hard it is to establish the efficacy of a new 
drug. Double-blind clinical trials, like those in the film, remain the best way 
to establish a drug's credentials: you need to make sure that neither patient 
nor assessor know whether they have the real drug or the placebo. I'd be 
worried, though, if I heard of patients being paid to split their dose with 
someone else, as Rayon does.

The US Food and Drug Administration is shown to have been very much in favour 
of AZT. Here in the UK, we have a highly regulated system of checks and 
balances to ensure that drug regulators aren't in the hands of big pharma. Drug 
companies might meet with individual doctors, but there are strict guidelines 
about the incentives doctors can accept and what companies are allowed to do.

You still get Americans travelling to Mexico to buy drugs: I once walked from 
San Diego to Tijuana and saw all the pharmacies there for myself. The internet 
has widened the problem: we see patients buying medication online here in the 
UK, too. It's a very worrying trend. If you get medication from anywhere other 
than a legitimate supplier – a pharmacy, a hospital, a supermarket or a 
high-street shop – you can't know what it is or how safe it might be.
 