
No one watching this comedy by Pedro Almodóvar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/05/im-so-excited-review>, set on a 
plane bound for Mexico from Madrid, would have trouble separating what's meant 
to be funny from what actually happens. Flight attendants obviously don't get 
drunk, and we don't tolerate passengers taking drugs or having sex in the 
cabin. But what surprised me was that some aspects of the film do resemble 
reality – or something like it.

I can imagine three attendants doing a dance routine to a song like I'm So 
Excited <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TPpgmXaGS-I> – in fact, two colleagues 
recently did some cheerleading routines at our hotel. As for getting drunk – I 
can't say we don't feel like it sometimes, especially on long, boring flights. 
Some flight attendants make "crew juice": a cocktail of leftover alcohol slops 
to drink on the bus from the airport to the hotel.

One of the passengers in the film is a dominatrix with an attitude problem. 
Nothing any of the flight attendants can do is good enough. You do come across 
people like that. I remember trying to calm down one woman at the airport gate 
for an hour and a half: she was angry because the flight was delayed.

Several of the passengers in the film join the mile-high club. I have seen 
that happen, though not as often as you might think. I'm not that bothered if a 
couple slips off to the toilet together, as long as nobody notices. I do find 
it a bit gross, though – why would you want to put your bum down in a dirty 
bathroom? As for a man happily admitting to being a drug mule – I once saw 
someone I was sure was being used to smuggle drugs, and she certainly wasn't 
happy about it.

In the film, the plane is circling over Spain, trying to make an emergency 
landing. I was once in a similar situation: taking off from New York, we 
realised there was a problem with the landing gear so we had to circle for 
hours, dumping fuel. It was frightening, but that's only happened once in 15 
years. Still, I don't think this would be a good film to show in-flight.
 