
Let's just quickly get this out of the way. There are no contemporaneous 
documents about Jesus. The gospels were written a minimum of 30 years after his 
supposed death.Paul <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saint_Paul>, author of much 
of the New Testament and Christianity's architect, never met him. It's 
reasonable to say that the Bible is not agenda-free. And early non-biblical 
evidence is by the Jewish historianJosephus 
<http://www.bede.org.uk/Josephus.htm>, who also never met Jesus. The 
authenticity of his writings on Jesus, specifically Testimonium Flavianum, has 
been continually challenged for centuries. Hearsay is almost always 
inadmissible in a court of law, and yet 2,000-year-old hearsay – and there is 
no other way to describe it – is the basis of a 2 billion-strong club, with not 
so much as an "objection!"

That's the baggage I take into week two of the Alpha course at St Mary's in 
Islington. Course leader Toby tells us that the first half of the course is 
more about the practical aspects ofChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity>, the second half the 
spiritual. He shows us myriad images of Jesus from around the world: Indonesian 
Jesus, looking a hell of a lot like Vishnu, tall African jumping Jesus looking 
a lot like a Maasai, Japanese Jesus, and so on.

Here in the west, we think of Christ as being a lean long-faced white guy with 
a centre parting and lank hair: basically, a hippy. How curious, especially 
when the Bible contains no physical description of its main character. If I say 
"Frankenstein", I bet you'll be thinking of a flat-headed bolt-necked green 
terror, despite the fact that this monster belongs entirely to Universal 
Pictures and not Mary Shelley.

Somehow, the range of icons of Jesus is given as support of his existence, 
rather than as parsimonious opposition. The gospels, Josephus and more is 
presented not as I just did with scepticism, but as proof. This evidence is 
news to everyone taking the course, it seems not because they are doubtful, but 
because it is simply unknown. This de-churched group, who posses a cultural 
background knowledge of Jesus, are fascinated, but uncritical.

This is learning from Christians, not about Christianity. It doesn't seem 
appropriate or polite to get into a niggly spat about historical evidence, 
especially as I am attempting the course as a participating observer rather 
than a saboteur. But it bothers me that the assertion goes so unchallenged. 
Mike, a church layman who helps on the course, adds that the recording of 
Christ's baptism and crucifixion is further proof: events so shameful to early 
Christians that unless real, would have been expunged from the legend. This is 
known as the "criterion of embarrassment 
<http://en.allexperts.com/e/c/cr/criterion_of_embarrassment.htm>". To me this 
is a daft, ass-backwards argument. If you want to show someone as humble, have 
them submitting to humble things.

On balance, I think a man called Jesus probably did exist and he formed the 
basis for Christianity. But I also think that the teachings of the biblical 
character Jesus are much more interesting, so in some ways I am grateful that 
we are getting this out of the way in the second week. Surely his words are 
more important than his fact?

Well, no. Mike spells out that it is central to their faith that he was 
utterly real, a physical incarnation of God. He has to have existed, and died, 
or else Christianity is meaningless. Mike goes on to state that no one really 
seriously challenges the historicity of Jesus. So this all leads me to ask this 
question: if I followed the actions of Jesus to the letter, loved my neighbour, 
turned the other cheek and generally was a good egg, but at the same time 
regarded him as simply a mythical archetype of goodness and the Golden Rule – 
if I did all that, come judgment day, could I enter paradise?

No one has an answer. Toby believes that doesn't necessarily condemn me to 
hell, but probably does prevent access to heaven. Mike looks shifty: I think he 
disagrees. Toby quotes CS Lewis: "Christianity, if false, is of no importance, 
and if true, of infinite importance." I would have thought that the physical 
truth of Christ's life shouldn't matter, because the message is the same, 
whether he lived or not. But if the reality of his existence is central, then 
the historicity is essential. If Alpha dictated that Christ's existence were 
simply a matter of faith, then I would have no beef. But by straining so hard 
to back it up with facts, hearsay as they are, the whole case falters.

This seems to me a bizarre way for a religion that claims to be inclusive to 
proceed. I cannot join, because I won't close my eyes. Christ has to have lived 
for Christianity to be true. Why does it have to be this way? We find out next 
week in "Why did Christ die?"
 