
When I was halfway up Everest, there were moments when I wished I was 
somewhere warm – just like the characters inthis fun Disney cartoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/08/frozen-film-review-disney-animation>
 about two princesses, Anna and Elsa, whose kingdom has been thrown into 
eternal winter. But you have to love winter to be a mountaineer – and cold, 
mountainous environments are incredibly beautiful. The illustrators have done a 
nice job of capturing that beauty.

Trekking across the snow in a dress and high heels like Anna isn't exactly 
practical, though. I'd have fitted her out with a proper pair of boots, but it 
is good to see a Disney film about a strong female character. I wouldn't say 
I've had to struggle to be taken seriously as a female mountaineer – I've had a 
lot of respect – but there certainly aren't many women in mountaineering.

Anna and the other characters have bravery and perseverance, exactly the 
qualities you need to be a successful mountaineer. I was 21 when I climbed 
Everest last year: it took more than a year of training and it was painful. But 
it was worth it.I do motivational speaking 
<http://www.molliehughes.co.uk/index.html> about the climb and I'm even 
thinking about going back to try the north ridge.

In one scene, Anna and her friends are attacked by wolves. That's a real 
hazard if you're trekking in places like Canada and the US - along with attacks 
by bears. But there are no animals at high altitude. I must admit I have 
sometimes been very tempted, like Anna, to stop and build a snowman. Everest 
isn't really the place to do that though: it's a serious environment. 
Snowman-building would have felt inappropriate.

Magic is at the heart of Frozen and mountaineering can also be a really 
magical experience. There's an area on Everest, right after base camp, called
the Khumbu icefall 
<http://www.environmentalgraffiti.com/mountains/news-khumbu-icefall-death-trap-mount-everest?image=6>
, that is utterly magical: it's where the Khumbu glaciers come down through the 
valley, creating these crazy, beautiful ice sculptures. It's a scary, dangerous 
place, but it's also very beautiful. I don't think any of the Disney landscapes 
were based on real places like this. But I do wish the mountains in the film 
were real – I'd love the chance to climb them!
 Anna and companion Kristoff tackle the wintry landscape of Frozen. 
Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Frozen is out now
 