
It's such a wide-ranging topic it's difficult to cover it all in one program. 
I have OCD around contamination and checking, and intrusive thoughts. 
Socialising becomes almost impossible: I can't have people back to the house if 
you're saying to them, "Don't touch that." It's very costly – I was spending 
five hours a day washing my hands, using four bottles of handwash a day. It 
used to take me two hours to wash my hands in order to get the clothes out of 
the machine; I had visions that if I had any chemicals on my hands that got on 
the clothes, they would burst into flames. It's so outlandish, and yet it seems 
so real to me. The cruel thing is that the very thing I find the most 
difficult, doing the washing, is the very thing the OCD creates plenty of.

It got to the point where I was sitting on a tiny sitting-room table, because 
that was easy to clean off, rocking backwards and forwards, frightened to touch 
anything, to talk to anybody, to do anything. That's what it showed on the 
programme – one minute the guy is going to university, the next he's stuck in 
the toilet all the time. And the lass who was frightened of harming others, I 
can relate to myself. I can stand at the bus stop and be petrified that I'm 
accidentally going to push someone in front of a bus – I'm not going to, and 
that isn't in my thoughts, but the OCD plays on your worst fears.

I found the editing a bit strange – it jumped all over the place. But then I 
suppose that's the way a lot of people with OCD's minds work. One minute I'm 
concentrating on getting the washing out of the machine, then I think: "No, 
I'll make sure I turned the tap off in the kitchen." Your mind is jumping 
backwards and forwards.

It's nice to see how other people approach their OCD – I think we can bounce 
ideas off each other. At one point it looked like they weren't going to get 
through, and then they turned a corner and they do succeed. It gives everyone 
hope.

• Trudy Angus is a volunteer for OCD Action
 