
Senate Republicans staged an unprecedented blockade of Barack Obama’s 
nomination to fill the US supreme court seat left vacant by theunexpected death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/14/antonin-scalia-supreme-court-legacy-opinions-partisan-america>
 of Justice Antonin Scalia. This gamble could have failed, allowing Hillary 
Clinton to nominate a younger and more liberal justice than Merrick Garland.

Instead, from their perspective, it was a huge success. Republicans will now 
maintain control of the court. And depending on how many nominationsDonald Trump
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> gets, very rightwing 
Republican justices could be in control of the supreme court for more than a 
generation.

US voters in their own words: ‘A country split in two and at rock bottom’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/us-voters-respond-donald-trump-win-president>
The first question arising from all this is what kind of justices Donald Trump 
will nominate. The answer to this question is actually straightforward: pretty 
much the same kind of justices any Republican president would nominate. Some 
anti-Trump conservative intellectuals have fretted that Trump cannot be counted 
on to nominate conservative justices, but there’s little basis for that belief. 
Trump’s proposedlist of judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/18/donald-trump-supreme-court-list-conservative-judges>
 was a standard-issue conservative wishlist, and there’s no reason to think it 
doesn’t reflect how Trump will act in office.

And of course, while a Republican Senate is unlikely to be a very effective 
check on Trump’s worst excesses, it will be an effective check on any 
moderation in appointments. A Republican Senaterejected 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=4976787> George W Bush’s 
nomination of Harriet Miers as insufficiently reliable or qualified, and they 
would do the same thing in the highly unlikely event that Trump nominated a 
justice who doesn’t come from the Federalist Society wishlist.

The best-case scenario for Democrats, then, is that Trump gets only one 
nomination. Replacing Scalia will not, in itself, transform the court. Scalia 
was a reliable conservative, and the moderate Republican Anthony Kennedy will 
remain the median vote. Replacing Scalia will still have some bad immediate 
effects, though – the court will now almost certainlyact to cripple unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/29/antonin-scalia-america-transformed-unions-supreme-court>
, for example. But at least Roe v Wade and the federal right to same-sex 
marriage will remain safe.

Trump could have a much longer-term impact on the court, however. Given how 
favorable the Senate map is for Republicans in 2018, he will almost certainly 
have a window to get nominees confirmed throughout his first term. One of the 
court’s Democratic-appointed justices, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, is an 83-year-old 
survivor of pancreatic cancer. Another, Stephen Breyer, is 78. Both might be on 
the court in 2021, but you wouldn’t want to bet too much on it.

And, frankly, it’s hard to avoid the conclusion that they acted irresponsibly 
by not resigning when Barack Obama still had a Democratic Senate before the 
2014 midterms. It is very possible that this decision will mean that Ginsburg’s 
sterling legacy of advancing gender equality and civil liberties will be undone 
by her decision.

A great deal could also turn on how Anthony Kennedy, the 80-year-old moderate 
Republican, perceives Trump. Typically, one would expect a justice in Kennedy’s 
position to resign and allow a president from his party to choose his successor 
even if he’s physically able to remain on the job. It’s possible that Kennedy 
is disdainful of Trump’s brand of Republicanism and doesn’t want his landmark 
rulings on LGBT rights overruled. Or he may, like so many Republicans have, 
treat Trump as a normal Republican and allow him to pick his successor.

If Trump could appoint between two and four justices, the impact would be 
extraordinary. A very conservative Republican bloc would control the court, 
possibly for decades. A woman’s constitutional right to an abortion would be 
extinguished. The national right to same-sex marriage would also be likely to 
go. The civil liberties of citizens would be severely diminished. The rights of 
workers will be seriously curtailed, and American business will act with fewer 
regulatory constraints.

The next Democratic government would face a supreme court that takes a narrow 
view of federal powers. And by allowing money to swamp elections and vote 
suppression by state legislatures, a Republican supreme court would continue to 
tilt the political playing field in favor of the Republican Party.

Donald Trump might be president for only four years. But even that is probably 
enough time to produce a supreme court that would have a huge policy impact on 
American politics long after he has left office.
 