
Donald Trump’s promise of an early US-UK trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/no-10-welcomes-donald-trumps-pledge-for-a-speedy-uk-us-trade-deal>
 has been greeted with relish by those hoping Britain will “take back control” 
when it leaves Europe. But the history of transatlantic trade talks suggests it 
could lead to the opposite: swapping one diminution of sovereignty for another.

If this happens, there could be an even greater set of compromises involving 
everything from drug prices and food safety to yet more distant legal 
jurisdiction.

Related: Brexit rush for US trade deal could force tough concessions, say 
critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/brexit-rush-for-us-trade-deal-could-force-tough-concessions-say-critics>

The logical starting point for any negotiation is likely to be the stalled 
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) deal between the US and 
the EU. Backed by the British government, it was controversial among many 
campaigners in the UK andEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>
, because it was seen a template for how multinational businesses wish to erode 
national regulations in favour of a more unfettered market access.

For a small market like the UK with higher standards of consumer, employee and 
environmental protection than the US, a future trade deal is more likely to 
involve American corporations demanding that the British conform to their 
product standards than the other way around. This is likely to raise a string 
of issues in several areas:

Environment

Trump is deeply resistant to measures to tackle climate change and, judging 
from his own plans for the US Environmental Protection Agency, may have limited 
tolerance for other green rules if they are seen to get in the way of trade 
liberalisation.

If US energy companies successfully push for open access to the UK markets, it 
could harm the nascent renewable energy industry here. Similarly, American 
agriculture lobbyists will push for fewer restrictions on pesticide and 
herbicide use or the labelling of genetically modified organisms. If Britain 
resists, its farmers may simply get undercut by less-regulated rivals across 
the Atlantic.

Related: Sterling skids to three-month low on hard Brexit concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/16/sterling-skids-to-three-month-low-on-hard-brexit-concerns>

Health

A big fear during the TTIP negotiations was that US insurers and health 
providers would undermine the NHS by pressing for open access to the UK 
“market” in medical care. “A rushed trade deal with Trump may give ministers 
cover for their dangerous Brexit strategy but it will not hide the risk that 
this could be a Trojan horse for NHS privatisation,” warned the shadow health 
secretary, Jonathan Ashworth on Monday.

Drugs

Without other European voices to provide balance, an even bigger threat could 
come from an alliance of big pharmaceutical companies demanding that 
intellectual property rights for drugs are extended and that higher regulatory 
barriers are erected for generic alternatives. Trump has promised to tackle 
high drug prices but NHS finances would be devastated if UK costs ever come 
close to approaching those in America. “What we would get is much the same as 
TTIP except without the tempering factors that come from other EU countries,” 
said Jean Blaylock, policy officer at Global Justice, a campaign group that led 
resistance to TTIP. “What we call consumer protection and environmental 
regulation, they call non-tariff barriers.”

Farming

Another area of consumer protection where there is a big gap between British 
and US standards is in farming. Many US beef exporters will not be able to 
benefit from newly-liberalised UK markets unless they succeed in bringing our 
rules closer to theirs on hormone-treated cattle. Similarly, as former deputy 
prime minister Nick Clegg has already warned, controversial US practices such 
as washing raw chicken in chlorine would appall many British shoppers. That is 
to say nothing about the future of small-scale British farming if it has to 
compete head-on with the vast prairies of the US midwest.

Related: What do you think Theresa May should say in her Brexit speech? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/what-do-you-think-theresa-may-should-say-in-her-brexit-speech>

Disputes

Trade lawyers often point out that international deals, especially covering 
non-tariff barriers in services, are worthless without some arrangement for 
dispute resolution. In the EU single market, aggrieved parties can ultimately 
appeal to the European court of justice for redress – much to the chagrin of 
whose would prefer UK courts were in charge. Most modern trade deals, such as 
TTIP or the Canadian CETA deal, propose so-called investor courts instead, 
where companies seeking to sue national regulators receive arbitration from 
secretive panels of commercial lawyers rather than public courts. A UK 
government seeking, for example, to tackle City bonuses or financial stability 
in future may find it needs to check with Washington first rather than Brussels.
 