
The AA, best known for rescuing motorists whose cars won’t start, is to offer 
fee-free mortgages to its breakdown cover customers.

Following a tie-up with the Bank of Ireland, which already supplies mortgages 
for the Post Office, the AA has launched a range of fixed-rate loans mostly 
aimed at existing homeowners looking to move to their mortgage to a cheaper 
deal.

The company, which was listed on the stock exchange by its private equity 
owner in 2014, is initially offering five deals, all fixed for between two and 
five years. Borrowers will be offered loans of up to 90% of their home’s value, 
with the rates ranging between 2.08% and 3.78%.

Mortgage experts said only the four-year deal at 2.48% could be termed a best 
buy, but the lack of fees meant the products would appeal only to those looking 
to switch a small mortgage.

The AA’s home emergency and central heating emergency and repair cover are 
included in the package free for 12 months. Members will also receive a 15% 
discount on AA home insurance, but will have to buy breakdown cover if they do 
not already have it.

Michael Johnson, director of financial services at the AA, said: “Lots of 
people are on mortgage deals where they are spending far more than they need 
to. This could be down to a combination of high fees and a lack of information 
stopping them from switching to a better deal. We want to help our members by 
removing hidden costs and providing simple, straightforward mortgages, with all 
standard upfront fees included.”

He added that building on the firm’s motoring heritage, the company would 
offer members a “mortgage MOT” service, which gave them the chance to see if 
the AA could save them money.

However, Rachel Springall, of financial analyst Moneyfacts, said the AA had 
entered the mortgage market in the midst of a fiercely competitive price war.

“It’s great to see extra competition on the market and the fact these deals 
charge no product fee will be appealing to borrowers looking to keep upfront 
costs down,” she said. “Unfortunately, some of the rates are not as appealing 
as it seems, particularly if borrowers have a large loan.”

David Hollingworth, of mortgage broker London & Country, agreed that for many 
borrowers there would be cheaper deals in the market.

“The AA is offering no-fee products with free valuation and legal work for 
remortgage – these look most likely to appeal to those looking to review their 
current deal, especially those with smaller mortgages looking to switch,” 
Hollingworth said. “Most lenders will offer a range of rate/fee combinations so 
it’s important for borrowers to consider the best overall value rather than 
focus on rate or fee alone.”

The mortgage launch comes a year after the AA announced its partnership with 
Bank of Ireland’s UK division, and adds mortgages to credit cards, savings 
accounts, cash Isas and personal loans. It first began offering savings 
products in 2004 before the business was sold by then owner Centrica.


 * This article was amended on 23 August to clarify details of the mortgages 
being offered by the AA. An earlier version said the deals would only be 
available up to 60% of a property’s value, instead of 90%.
 