
 Seven years after Kevin Rudd launched Australia’s first free TV channel for 
school-aged children, ABC3 is evolving into a dedicated app and broadcast 
channel called ABC Me.

 It’s the first channel rebrand since the ABC dropped the name ABC1 and 
reverted to ABC in 2014.

 Guardian Australia understands the rebranding of digital channel ABC2 will 
follow soon, more than a decade after its launch in 2005.

 Designed for the older child, ABC Me will offer a personalised app which the 
over-fives can tailor with their favourite shows and topics and watch on a 
tablet. An app for smartphones will be launched at a later date.
 New logo for ABC ME which is changing from ABC3. Photograph: ABC 
 Preschoolers already have Kids iview, a wildly popular internet TV service 
that was launched last year and is the leading video on demand service for 
children four and under.

 Play School, Giggle and Hoot, Angelina Ballerina and Peppa Pig are all 
favourites with the ankle-biter set and the companion ABC Kids Play app was 
included in Apple’s best of 2015 collection.

 But until now the older children have only had ABC3 and they’ve been watching 
catch-up TV on the main ABC iview platform – which is really designed for 
adults.

 Since it was launched in 2009, ABC3 has produced award-winning Australian 
drama including My Place, Dance Academy and Nowhere Boys as well as the 
children’s news show Behind The News and plenty of animation.

 But budget cuts by the Abbott government had seen a reduction in the level of 
new Australian content on the channel.

 The ABC head of digital, Rebecca Heap, said audience research showed this 
preteen age group wanted to watch programs on their devices when it suited them 
rather than be tied to linear television schedules.

 “ABC Me is a response to the changing habits of the audience,” Heap says. 
“It’s not just a broadcast audience any more they expect it to be on tablets 
and, in the upper-end of the age group, on smart phones.

 “Iview is there for this audience but it’s more than just having the content 
there. There is a real opportunity to tailor the content to them.

 “While ABC3 is a great part of iview – it gets 6m program plays a month – 
they need a more tailored experience.

 “We’re a trusted brand and we make sure the experiences are safe, it’s 
freedom within boundaries.”

 Parents can set which shows they will allow their children to watch in a 
hidden part of the app.

 Older children are more likely to watch on a device than on broadcast TV, 
which explains why ABC3’s audience numbers are very low, sometimes too low to 
show up in ratings figures.

Triple J executive on Hottest 100 date change: ‘Sometimes the majority has to 
stand up for the minority’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/16/triple-j-executive-on-hottest-100-date-change-sometimes-the-majority-has-to-stand-up-for-the-minority>
 The ABC3 channel reaches 56% of five-to-12-year-olds each month compared to 
ABC Kids which reaches 78% of under-fives every month.

 The low ratings for ABC3 have led to industry speculation the broadcast 
service will one day be wound down to a digital only service, in much the same 
way as BBC 3 in Britain.

For now the broadcast channel is staying put, but ABC Me would be the first 
broadcast channel the corporation would axe in favour of a digital-only 
service, sources say.

 ABC3 was set up with an injection of $67m from the Labor government in the 
2009 budget, unlike News 24, which was funded by internal savings.

 The ABC now has four channels: ABC, ABC2, ABC Me and ABC News 24; and earlier 
this year all were available to stream live on iview.
 