
Telemarketers were instructed to target jobseekers with promises of “a 
successful future” and big increases in their earning capacity if they enrolled 
in vocational education and training (VET) courses, the competition watchdog 
alleges.

Acquire Learning and Careers is accused of using unfair tactics and making 
false or misleading claims when it promoted courses to job applicants between 
July 2014 and March 2015.

ACCC widens action against recruiting practices of private training colleges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/20/accc-widens-action-against-recruiting-practices-of-private-training-colleges>
The company contends the allegations are “historical” and it has been working 
to improve its compliance over the past 18 months.

In proceedings launched in the federal court, the Australian Competition and 
Consumer Commission (ACCC) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-competition-and-consumer-commission>
 said the company’s telemarketers were provided with a training document that 
urged them to “talk to and engage as many customers as possible and book the 
maximum amount of enrolments possible and end up receiving the biggest salary 
possible”.

The telemarketers, known as career advisers, were allegedly provided with a 
script to use when they phoned people who had applied for advertised jobs.

“We are all about helping people land their dream job and most importantly 
finding that job in your local community,” the script said, according to ACCC’s 
statement of claim filed in the Victorian registry of the federal court.

“After everything we’ve discussed I’m going to assume this is something you’d 
want to take advantage of, correct? If yes: fantastic! It’s my job to get that 
organised for you; it’s just done through a quick online enrolment form ... If 
unsure: but you do want to find employment, correct? But you do want a better 
job, correct?”

The statement of claim says telemarketers were provided with answers to a list 
of frequently raised objections, including: “This is something that will enable 
you to have a successful future and stability in your life ... I think you 
should give it a go for at least a couple of months, correct? ... Statistically 
people who do this course are earning an extra $10,000 per year on average ... 
I have done this course before and trust me, you can do it!”

ACCC: jobless Indigenous man unaware of debt from training college course
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/24/accc-jobless-indigenous-man-unaware-of-debt-from-training-college-course>
Telemarketers were also allegedly provided with the line: “All we want to do 
is give you the piece of paper you deserve so that you have the right to 
success like everyone else.”

Acquire is accused of breaching consumer laws by engaging in “unconscionable” 
conduct, including taking advantage of the vulnerability of job applicants and 
not adequately explaining the debt the students would incur under the VET 
Fee-Help scheme.

The ACCC chairman, Rod Sims, said telemarketers were accused of signing 
consumers up to courses without taking into account their individual 
circumstances and allegedly misleading consumers about their suitability for 
the course and how the course would improve their employment prospects.

“Acquire earned commissions from telemarketing to prospective students,” he 
said. “The students did not receive the promised employment prospects and were 
left with a significant VET Fee-Help debt.”

The company says it no longer uses the versions of the documents referred to 
in the ACCC’s statement of claim

Acquire’s managing director, John Wall, said the company would “continue to 
work with the ACCC to address any allegations about past conduct which are not 
in line with our current compliance and review systems”.

Wall said the company hoped to achieve a settlement with the ACCC. 

“Over the past 18 months, we have taken measures that have led the industry in 
lifting compliance standards and the ACCC has been informed of these 
developments,” he said.

“These proceedings relate to alleged historical matters and are not a 
reflection of Acquire Learning’s current practices which, we firmly believe, 
represent an industry-leading approach to regulatory compliance and student 
fairness.”

Wall said the company had established disciplinary processes to address any 
compliance breaches by staff and rigorous controls over who staff could 
contact. It had also put in place a customer commitment checklist that must be 
completed and signed by students to ensure they understood the facts relating 
to courses.

The federal court proceedings are the fourth VET-related case the ACCC has 
launched in the past few months, although the previous three have targeted 
particular private colleges rather than a single broker. Acquire was said to be 
acting on behalf of various registered training organisations.
 