
In June 2011, Guardian News & Media announced a new strategy that would 
accelerate its transition to digital publication platforms and address the 
financial challenges created by the decline of print sales. The plans outlined 
by editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger and Guardian Media Group CEO Andrew Miller 
were, to say the least, bold: the Guardian would put digital publication first 
– a radical step for an organisation dependent on print revenues – and seek 
£25m in cost savings over five years to fund its transformation.

As groundbreaking as the new strategy was, many questioned whether GNM could 
implement it successfully. It called for a fundamental review of how the 
Guardian's journalists work and how the paper thinks about its content. It 
called for a root-and-branch review of all of GNM's operations, with a focus on 
costs and shifting resources into emerging digital platforms.

Above all, it was immediately clear to all that the strategy meant asking our 
people to embrace a digital future earlier than their peers at other companies 
– while the strategy outline in 2011 is designed to run until 2017, immediate 
action was crucial to its success.

One year on and the strategy is having the expected impact. GNM's publications 
reach more people than ever before and theguardian.com is now the third most 
read newspaper website in the world according to analysts at ComScore). The 
Guardian and the Observer reach more people in Britain than any other quality 
title: 5.8 million every week according to Kantar Media. Embracing digital has 
given GNM audiences that it could not have dreamed of even five years ago.

Financially, the development of new digital revenue streams helped GNM to 
maintain its revenues in the financial year ending 1 April 2012 – a remarkable 
achievement in a brutally competitive market scarred by the ongoing decline of 
print. Investing in digital meant that losses increased, but this had been 
accounted for in the plan, and the strength of parent company Guardian Media 
Group combined with the financial success of new digital ventures ensured that 
GNM could continue to fund its growth.

GNM's people rose to the challenges posed by the strategy. Journalists learned 
new ways of working, using digital technologies to enhance reporting and 
presentation and abandoning the constraints of the daily print news cycle. 
Their commercial colleagues built new businesses and pushed old ones online. 
Everyone considered what they were spending in the company's name, 
understanding that every penny would count and would go towards ensuring that 
GNM not only survived the digital disruption but thrived on it.

This, however, is just the beginning. The first phase of the five-year plan is 
complete and has been a success, but there are more challenges to come and some 
painful decisions to be taken. GNM's headcount remained steady through the past 
year at just over 1,500, but, if the company is to fund the next stage of its 
development, it needs to make more savings, and that will inevitably mean 
losing some valued colleagues.

Editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger, briefing staff on GNM's progress in July, 
said: "We have to accept that we can't do everything, that being open means 
working with others where they have expertise that we do not and focusing on 
what we do best, those things that we are really here for. This is a big change 
and we will have to be smaller to do it, to fund our transformation and ensure 
the Guardian's continued existence. There's no getting away from it."

In August, GNM's editorial staff were offered the opportunity to take 
voluntary redundancy, and Rusbriger and Miller were clear that headcount needs 
to be reduced by between 70 and 100 if cost targets are to be achieved. The 
offer of voluntary redundancy closes in mid-September.

On the commercial side of GNM, several departments have been restructured, and 
the process of getting the company to the right size, with resources shifted to 
digital growth areas, will continue.

Miller said: "In an ideal world, would we be doing this? No, of course not, 
but the world is very challenging at present and the truth is that we, like all 
other newspapers, face a stark choice: change or die. The changes we are making 
are at times very painful, but there is no realistic alternative."

These changes can already be seen in Guardian Media Group, which has reduced 
its headcount to 35. Miller said: "We have been working to streamline our 
management, to remove duplication between GMG and GNM and to ensure that we 
have an efficient, flexible leadership team for both companies. We are not done 
yet, but I am pleased with the progress we have made."

Change, however, is not just about reducing headcount and shifting resources. 
It is also about helping our people to succeed in the digital era and working 
to ensure that the Guardian's traditional commitment to fairness and respect in 
the workplace is at the heart of the organisation in the future.

In the past year, GNM has taken a survey of its people to identify which 
digital skills need developing through training and mentoring. We have 
redoubled our commitment to diversity in the workplace, addressing some 
imbalances within GNM and becoming more powerful advocates for diversity across 
industries.

We have re-launched our engagement surveys to helps us better understand how 
GNM's transformation is affecting people. We are changing the way that 
performance is assessed to improve our support for individual development.

The strategy announced in 2011 has a long way to go, and there are many more 
changes to come. The challenge is holding fast to the values that the Guardian 
has always advocated while ensuring that it can adapt to digital. Miller summed 
it up this way: "We have to change the way that we do things, but we can never 
change what we are."
 