 The attack on the Babri Masjid mosque was well-planned. After months of secret 
preparation, a group of Hindu zealots climbed the three domes of Ayodhya's most 
famous Muslim place of worship and set to work. Using sledgehammers and 
chisels, they started to demolish the elegant 16th-century building.
They were watched by cheering crowds - and by politicians who are now in 
India's coalition cabinet, which is led by the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya 
Janata party (BJP). The demolition, on December 6, 1992, changed everything in 
Indian politics. For most Indians, the destruction marked one of the bleakest 
days in the country's history. But for India's increasingly strident Hindu 
rightwing, it meant unfinished business.

Ayodhya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya>, a sleepy temple town in 
the northern state of Uttar Pradesh, is revered by Hindus as the birthplace of 
Lord Rama, but also has a sizeable Muslim minority that stayed in India after 
partition. The Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) claimed that a temple originally 
stood on the site but been demolished to make way for the mosque.

The VHP launched a mass mobilisation campaign to get rid of the Babri Masjid 
and build a temple to Lord Rama. The Hindu activists managed to knock down the 
mosque, but the temple was never built. Underlying the party's objectives was a 
darker theme: thatIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> was a Hindu 
country which had no place for Muslims.

Since 1992, Ayodhya has become a virtual fortress, guarded by 1,500 security 
staff and surrounded by razorwire. This is not surprising: 3,000 people were 
killed at the time in communal riots. Yet the supreme court shows no sign of 
coming to a swift decision on whether the Hindu or Muslim camp has a better 
claim, knowing that any verdict is likely to be explosive. For several years 
now the VHP has sponsored a stone-cutting workshop near Ayodhya to make pillars 
and other ornaments for use in that unbuilt temple. But in early January the 
leadership of the VHP made it clear it would go ahead with construction by 
March 15, regardless of a stay by the supreme court on all construction work.

Thousands of Hindu activists, including those burned to death in Wednesday's 
train attack, have started to gather at Ayodhya. Many are now camping in tin 
shacks on the edge of town. Even before the riots, the prime minister, Atal 
Bihari Vajpayee, found himself in a tricky position. His party had campaigned 
in the past for a Hindu temple to be built on the site.

The VHP, which now threatens his government with disaster, comes from the same 
ideological camp. Mr Vajpayee says he is in favour of the temple, but opposes 
it being built by force. But the strategy failed to bring dividends during last 
week's elections in Uttar Pradesh, where the BJP was comprehensively routed by 
the opposition.

Mr Vajpayee has told the VHP to abandon its temple campaign in the interests 
of the country. So far his plea has been ignored. It remains to be seen whether 
he or his one-time allies will win.

"There was a lot of disgust at what happened among sensible, reasonable 
Hindus," Professor Zoya Hassan, a political analyst at Delhi's Jarwarhalal 
Nehru University said. "I don't think they want a return to 1992 or the 
communal violence in which thousands of people were killed. The BJP's stock is 
very low. Its main constituency, the middle-class, is disenchanted. There has 
been a change since September 11 and I don't think the government will allow 
the temple to be built."
 