
Guardian News & Media (GNM) believes it is important to carry out regular and 
focused legal training for its editorial staff. Historically, the editorial 
legal department has provided regular training sessions for editorial staff on 
all aspects of media law and the multifarious legal and ethical issues arising 
from the obtaining and publishing of information.

It has become even more important, following the revelations about phone 
hacking, that journalists are fully aware of their obligations under codes such 
as the Guardian's editorial policy and the PCC's Editors' Code of Practice, as 
well as the requirements of the civil and criminal law.  

In July 2011, the prime minister announced a two-part inquiry led by Lord 
Justice Leveson, the first part of which is to inquire into the culture, 
practices, and ethics of the press, with a view to making recommendations on 
the future of press regulation and governance consistent with maintaining 
freedom of the press and ensuring the highest ethical and professional 
standards.

Leveson opened the hearings on 14 November 2011, saying: "The press provides 
an essential check on all aspects of public life. That is why any failure 
within the media affects all of us. At the heart of this inquiry, therefore, 
may be one simple question: who guards the guardians?"

The inquiry has already exposed some bad journalistic practices. It is even 
more vital now that we do our best to make sure that all our editorial staff 
are committed to acting ethically and within the law, while also ensuring that 
they have the confidence to undertake genuine investigative journalism.

In the past year, members of the editorial legal department, in conjunction 
with GNM editorial staff, have run training sessions for editorial staff on 
topics ranging from the Bribery Act to using the Freedom of Information Act.

There have also been workshops on the use of sources – on, for example, 
protecting them and the use of anonymous sources – and substantiation, looking 
at issues around verification and accuracy.

Given our move to become a digital first company, the department has also run 
sessions on user-generated content, including what is meant by "publication", 
s.1 of the Defamation Act and the E-commerce Regulations.

There have been regular refresher sessions on libel and privacy, and contempt 
and court reporting. We have also had an external speaker in to talk about 
crime and the media, looking at some of the criminal offences affecting media, 
in particular terrorism and phone tapping. 

Beyond workshops, the editorial legal department circulates legal warning 
notices whenever we receive them; for example, where reporting restrictions are 
brought to our attention, or when the PCC send out a warning notice.

Since 2009, we have emailed a weekly newsletter to all GNM editorial staff, 
summarising the main legal issues of interest to have arisen in the week. It 
also lists significant legal cases and summarises any complaints that we have 
received.
 