
Adam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith> was a very good 
special adviser (spad). That is not just my verdict, but that of all four of 
the other former Labour advisers whom I consulted on the severed right-hand man 
of Jeremy Hunt, who has just taken his turn in the Leveson inquiry spotlight.

Like me, Smith left his so-called spad position at the age of 30, after coming 
into this weird line of work very young. As with all of us, the bundle of bumf 
he got on his first day probably included the civil service code, but beyond 
that he will have had virtually no guidance – still less formal training – on 
how to do this baffling, ill-defined but powerful job.

In a department with thousands of officials whose rise and fall were plotted 
by the permanent secretary, he was one of only two hand-picked aides who owed 
total loyalty to the secretary of state. It was up to him to figure out how to 
navigate this. Time and again, at Leveson, he demonstrated that he had done so 
rather shrewdly.

He described his role as being a "buffer", an "early-warning system" and the 
"eyes and ears" of his boss, words that will have resonated with every spad who 
has ever endeavoured to keep inconsequential dross or poisonous papers off the 
overladen ministerial desk. That is always the aim; the question is how to go 
about it. Smith's evidence suggests that he applied three sensible principles.

First, recognise that spads are hopelessly outnumbered, and go with the grain 
of the department – at least, most of the time. Labour adviserJo Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/feb/16/media.byers> (she of "a good day to 
bury bad news" infamy) came a cropper because officials regarded her as the 
enemy. Smith, by contrast, ensured the department understood him and were
"generally aware" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/25/adam-smith-contact-news-corp-leveson>
 of his dealings. It is evident, too, that he treated the well-mannered 
mandarins respectfully. Like many permanent secretaries, Sir Humphrey Appleby 
tried to park political advisers at the wrong end of some mile-long corridor. 
By contrast, DCMS boss Jonathan Stephensexpressed warm regard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/may/25/downing-street-jeremy-hunt-adviser>
 on his departure and stuck his neck out to ensure that the official statements 
did not overstate the young man's misdeeds.

Second, recognise that part of a spad's value comes from operations performed 
in the half-light. Do the things the minister wants to, but cannot, do in the 
unforgiving spotlight, whether that is giving a controversial briefing to the 
press or managing a tricky stakeholder. Push the rules as far as you can, but 
never step beyond them. Some of Smith'sall-night texting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/24/frederic-michel-adam-smith-texts?newsfeed=true>
 with News Corp's Frédéric Michel overstepped the line, although he never 
expected these would see daylight. Besides, he probably never had proper 
instruction on the implications of Hunt's quasi-judicial role in relation to 
the company's bid for BSkyB. Certainly, I never got that at the old DTI, where 
such decisions were more routine.

Third and most importantly, never forget that every ounce of spad power flows 
from the boss. Try freewheeling, and you soon get caught. In my earliest 
spadding days, I once pushed a personal hobby horse against the financial 
service industry further than the boss might have done. But the civil service 
exists to do the secretary of state's bidding, and it has an excellent nose for 
what this is – as I soon found out. Smith strikes me as the sort who would not 
even be tempted to chance his arm. Whenever the inquiry's counsel, Robert Jay, 
asked for his "personal view" he looked genuinely baffled.

A model adviser is devoid of any opinions beyond his boss's, and Smith showed 
his full range of spad skills today. Depending on the question, he could deploy 
a shrewd grasp of detail, useful memory lapses or economy with (but never 
dangerous disregard for) the truth. But there is a contradiction here. The 
better an adviser Smith showed himself to be, the more ludicrous it is to 
imagine that he would have tangoed closely with News Corp without the say-so of 
his still-unsacked boss.

• For legal reasons, this article will not be open to comments
 