
The government's early defence of Jeremy Hunt against the barrage of criticism 
over his apparent closeness to News Corp centred on the charge thatFrédéric 
Michel <https://www.theguardian.com/media/frederic-michel>, News Corp's 
in-house lobbyist, had exaggerated, even outright distorted, accounts of his 
contact with Hunt and his team. The resignation on Wednesday of Adam Smith, 
Hunt's long-term special adviser, appeared to undermine this argument, with 
Smith himself admitting that his "activities at times went too far".

An analysis of text messages and emails exchanged 
<http://www.levesoninquiry.org.uk/evidence/?witness=frederic-michel]> between 
Michel and Smith – and those subsequently sent from Michel to James Murdoch and 
other News Corp top brass relaying Smith's remarks – show that Michel was 
largely passing on an accurate summary of the intelligence he was receiving 
from Hunt's camp.

As Michel himself admits in his witness statement 
<http://www.levesoninquiry.org.uk/evidence/?witness=frederic-michel> to 
Leveson, he frequently implied to Murdoch he had spoken to Hunt himself (JH), 
when in fact his contact was almost always Smith. But the fact remains that the 
information Michel was relaying was more often than not a fair precis of what 
Smith had told him in an SMS or email, often just a few minutes previously.

On 2 February 2011, for example, Michel receives a text from Smith informing 
him that the Office of Fair Trading was leading on News Corp's bid for BSkyB. 
Smith writes at 11.53am: "Oft leading but if they ask for ofcom help they will 
provide it." Less than half an hour later, Michel emails Murdoch saying: "Just 
got news from JH. He confirmed that for him OFT was leading, but if they ask 
for Ofcom's help, they will provide it."

It is clear from the correspondence that Smith and Michel have a good, 
mutually trusting relationship. When, on 4 February 2011, Michel texts Smith 
asking for a look at the "Enders and Slaughter docs" – a reference to critical
reports 
<http://www.endersanalysis.com/content/publication/news-corp-proposed-takeover-bskyb>
 compiled by analysts assessing the impact of News Corp owning BSkyB outright – 
Smith replies three minutes later, saying: "I haven't actually got them at the 
moment. Officials just told me about them. Don't mention them to anyone like 
oft etc. If we need them I'll show you."

Seven minutes later, Michel emails Murdoch saying: "He [presumably Hunt] has 
received enormous pressure from Enders and Slaughter/May to take into 
consideration their evidence into the OFT process. They both wrote documents 
against every possible remedy." Michel then slightly underplays his hand, 
managing Murdoch's expectations by saying: "I am trying to get the docs but it 
might be difficult." This when Smith had told Michel that he was in principle 
willing to share the documents.

On another occasion, on 30 June 2011, Smith gives Michel a tip about that 
day's parliamentary questions, saying Labour MPs Tom Watson and Ivan Lewis had 
tabled urgent questions about the BSkyB bid. Smith then updates Michel as to 
the times the questions will be asked – presumably so that News Corp can tune 
into BBC Parliament.

Afterwards, Michel texts Smith to give his opinion on the parliamentary 
session, congratulating Hunt on a "solid performance!" He then asks Smith 
whether a decision on the bid "can be made during recess". Smith replies within 
the hour, saying: "It can be made in recess. Jeremy keen to do it before it 
possible though."

Ten minutes after receiving that text, Michel emails Murdoch to say: "JH just 
told me that he was very keen to make the final decision before the 18th July. 
If needed his clearance CAN be made during recess but he is very keen to make 
it before that."

When not discussing business, Smith and Michel make jokes and share 
pleasantries – "Enjoy golf", texts Michel to Smith at one point. They appear to 
enjoy trading secrets. "We can't tell journalists that can we!" texts Smith to 
Michel on 20 May 2011, when confirming that the BSkyB deal was expected to be 
cleared (presumably by Hunt) by 24 June 2011.

On 2 June 2011, Smith wants to let Michel know he is taking a lot of flak for 
News Corp. He says: "Over the last few days I hv been causing a lot of chaos 
and moaning from people here on your behalf." Three minutes later, Michel 
relays to Murdoch: "JH just called. He said that over the last few days he has 
been causing a lot of chaos and moaning from people at DCMS [Department for 
Culture, Media and Sport] on our behalf."

But despite this apparent comradeship, Michel is not above threatening Smith. 
On 6 June, he texts to say Hunt needs to "get some answers from Pinsent asap". 
Pinsent Masons was the law firm engaged by the DCMS for work relating to News 
Corp's proposed acquisition of BSkyB. Michel then warns Smith: "James is not 
making anymore commercial concessions. We are through with it. Might even exit 
the process if consultation doesn't take place next week. Very serious. Fred."

Smith replied, saying: "That's your call obviously and not something that 
would change jeremys thinking."

Two hours later, Michel emails Murdoch to say, among other things, that he had 
"floated the threat that if this were to go on for more weeks, we could decide 
at any moment to withdraw. He listened, said … a threat to withdraw would not 
influence his views or judgment."
 