
Ruth, my kind and unflappable bereavement counsellor was looking a little 
“flappy”. Tall, in her 50s, with grownup kids and a gentle, reassuring manner, 
she was struggling to believe her ears and not slop her coffee to my worries: 
“How will people react if I sell the house, buy a Ferrari or am seen cavorting 
in the hot tub with a swimsuit model?”

OK, so this was a stretch. Swimsuit models were never lining up for my 
attention or hot tub when I was single / younger / less emotionally battered 
and actually it’s an old, plumbed-in Victorian roll-top bath in the garden. 
However I was dramatising for impact, such is my alarm at my emerging status as 
widower of the parish.

Where I live is pretty prosperous and families with children are the norm. 
Crossing the road, you play “Frogger” between Ocado deliveries and seven-seater 
Volvos. Sure, there are divorces and deaths but being single with kids makes 
you stand out. Add the tragedy of it being death, not divorce, that has created 
one’s singledom and the spotlight shines brighter. Overlay the death of one’s 
wife and the status of widower is akin to being a lighthouse on a dark night 
that someone has stuck a roman candle up.

I feel, as never before, a sense of visibility and vulnerability. As a family 
we’re in danger of being defined by Helen’s death, our loss public property 
like a pregnant woman’s bump seems to be. Don’t get me wrong, people have been 
so very kind and supportive, and their love helped me avoid the 
whisky-until-you-forget route in the early days. However, I now get a sense 
that all I do is viewed by some people through the lens of Helen’s 
life-limiting illness and early death.

It’s as if there’s a script of behaviours for the bereaved, the “Miss 
Havisham” rules. This comprises a set of unwritten and therefore 
unchallengeable edicts to govern my new, unwanted status. I am pretty sure, 
however, that not only do these rules not include much merriment, they almost 
certainly involve a long period in the wilderness where adult flirting, random 
child rearing, new relationships, sex or, indeed, anything that is not a linear 
progression of a middle England version of Victorian mourning will be frowned 
upon.

I’m not saying that I feel there’s a Greek chorus looking on who think they 
have a right and remit to critique my behaviour but … sorry, yes, that’s 
exactly how I feel. Not everyone by any means, and not the obvious candidates, 
but some for sure.

This challenges my screaming desire to seize life by the lapels and behave if 
not badly then unexpectedly. Why would I try to live out the same life I would 
have had with Helen, just a more miserable, lonely and unfulfilled version of 
it?

It’s not what she would want, nor what Millie and Matt will need. For the 
moment, what matters is stability and sweating the small stuff until things 
have settled down, but change will – and should – come.

My lovely divorced friend, Jo, who has been by herself for years with her two 
boys, brought home to me the fact that being sole grown-up-in-charge means 
things can happen very fast, “Being the only adult in the house frees you make 
decisions and move quickly if you want to – faster indeed than people around 
you are used to, or can sometimes accept. It can make you a talking point.”

I would never have chosen to be alone but I see the power it brings – a not 
unattractive freedom to make quick, big decisions that will carry the kids away 
from their grief by creating a new life – not just the old one without Mum. So 
bereavement is empowering me to deal with bereavement, which is an unexpected 
and morbidly virtuous circle.

Ruth’s silence is now deafening. Seeing her adrift in a sea of uncertainty I 
throw her a lifebelt: “Ruth, by any chance are most of the people you visit a 
lot older than me?” She smiles wryly and replies, speech returning: “Much older 
and usually women. For widows in their 80s, the topic of swimsuit models in hot 
tubs is not as common as one might think, Adam!”

I suspect I may need to keep writing my own script.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym
 