
Not even a questionable referee’s decision could bring drama to the game. In 
front of a disappointing crowd of 19,071 people at Adelaide Oval, Adelaide 
United andMelbourne Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-victory> played out an 
uninspiring scoreless draw.

Friday Focus: testing times lie ahead as A-League season XI gets under way | 
Joe Gorman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/09/friday-focus-testing-times-lie-ahead-as-a-league-season-xi-gets-under-way>
In what has become an all-too familiar theme in the A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>, the major talking point of the 
match was the referee. On 72 minutes Peter Green gave Leigh Broxham a second 
yellow card for a decidedly soft elbow to the neck of Adelaide midfielder 
Isaias Sanchez, leaving Victory with 10 men for the last 20 minutes. And yet a 
listless Adelaide could not convert their numerical advantage to the scoreboard.

Much of the pre-match build up focused on new Adelaide coach Guilleme Amor and 
the Spanish style he has promised to continue after the departure of Josep 
Gombau to New York. Yet the Reds played none of the slick passing football that 
we have come to expect from them since Gombau arrived two seasons ago.

There were signs of life from Marcelo Carrusca, Jimmy Jeggo and Sergio Cirio, 
but otherwise Adelaide appeared sluggish and disinterested – on 10 minutes 
Cirio beat his man down the left and flashed the ball across the face of goal, 
but new signing Mate Dugandzic simply watched on rather than attack the far 
post.

While Amor sat bolt upright and unmoved on the sideline, his opposite number 
Kevin Muscat was his usual excitable self, barking instructions, pacing along 
the technical area and cajoling the referees assistant. And it was Muscat’s 
side that took the initiative for much of the game.

Victory’s attacking trio of Fahid Ben Khalfallah, Besart Berisha and Kosta 
Barbarouses were lively but lacked polish.

Ben Khalfalah was the standout, immediately getting the better of his marker, 
Michael Marrone, and then repeatedly terrorising him down the left flank. 
Victory’s first two corners came as a result of Ben Khalfalah’s efforts, the 
first yellow card of the match was a Marrone foul on Ben Khalfalah on 14 
minutes, and the best chances of the first half all involved the Tunisian.

Both Bozanic and Berisha had early chances, snap shots from inside the box 
which sailed over the bar, while Victory’s Brazilian midfielder Guilherme 
Finkler fizzed a shot just wide.

Berisha really should have put the visitors ahead on 22 minutes, but he wasted 
Ben Khalfalah’s slide-rule ball with a poor second touch which ruined the 
one-one-one chance. It was an off night for Berisha, who bungled a similar 
chance on the hour mark, crossing his lines as he bore down on goal.

Adelaide might have had more shots in the first half, but it was Victory that 
appeared the most dangerous. Both sides had relative newcomers in between the 
posts – it was John Hall’s run-on debut for Adelaide while Danny Vukovic made 
his first A-League appearance since his move from Perth Glory. Yet in a sign of 
the game’s caginess, neither goalkeeper was forced to make a save in the first 
45 minutes.

When called into action, Hall held his own. Five minutes after half-time he 
making a sharp save to deny a vicious Barbarouses shot from inside the penalty 
area. Strong in the air and decisive off his line, just after the hour mark 
Hall pulled off a decisive save to deny Finkler from close range.

Barbarouses had two more chances within moments of one another. The first 
found the back of the net, after a Berisha ball split the Reds defence, however 
it was disallowed for offside. His second crashed a shot from range off the 
post.

A final chance fell to Cirio in added time, but Vukovic made a smart save to 
send the Reds fans home disappointed. As one punter yelled when the crowd was 
announced: “We should have stayed at Hindmarsh!”

“I didn’t think Peter Green got the decision right,” said Muscat post-match. 
“Considering if you follow the game as well, the player he’s playing against 
[Isaias], every challenge he always hit the deck.”

Despite the send off Muscat said he was disappointed that Victory didn’t win 
the game, and took aim at Adelaide’s players for trying to influence the 
decision, saying that “it didn’t really feel like we were in Australia”.

Amor, meanwhile, said that he was “very satisfied” with the result and refused 
to comment on the red card. “As a rule I prefer to not to judge the performance 
of referees,” he said. “It’s obvious that they are human beings and they try to 
do a good job. Obviously they call it as they see it, sometimes they make 
mistakes.”
 