
The Manchester aeroplane which has twice in the last week essayed a landing on 
Helvellyn, to be driven back twice by unfavourable weather - first by fog and 
then by a gale, - yesterday achieved its aim and perched for a while on the 
very summit of the mountain. The aeroplane was piloted, under dual control, by 
Mr. Bert Hinkler, the well-known test pilot, and by Mr. J. Leeming, the 
Manchester aviator, by whom the enterprise was originally planned.


Helvellyn from the air: GNM Archive teaching resource July 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2015/jul/01/helvellyn-from-the-air-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-july-2015>
Yesterday’s flight, when it was generally understood that the attempt had been 
indefinitely postponed, came as a surprise; the two airmen set out from 
Lancaster without declaring their intentions, and were fortunate in the 
circumstances not only in making their landing on the mountain, but in finding 
an unexpected witness to their achievement waiting to receive them.


Plans had been made for the first attempt a week ago, under which prepared 
landing places would be marked out and fires lit to give the airmen a key to 
the wind. On landing the airmen were to find an organised welcome. But under 
the surprise conditions of yesterday’s flight there was no one on the mountain 
by pre-arrangement. It happened, however, that a professor of Greek from 
Birmingham University was climbing Helvellyn yesterday for his own amusement; 
he had reached the summit just about the time that the aeroplane arrived - at 1 
35 pm, - and its pilots secured from him a certificate of the success of their 
enterprise. The certificate thus given by Professor E. R. Dodds, and brought 
back by the aeroplane, was in the following terms:

I hereby certify that an aeroplane - GEBPH, pilots Bert Hinkler and John 
Leeming - landed on the summit of Helvellyn on December 22, 1926.

The first attempt to make a landing on Helvellyn, which was undertaken to show 
the adaptability of modern aircraft and the possibility of landing in strange 
places, was made on Wednesday of last week. Two aeroplanes were engaged, one 
flown by Mr. Leeming and the other by Mr. Hinkler, but they were driven back by 
fog before reaching Helvellyn. The day before yesterday the two pilots again 
started from the Woodford aerodrome in Cheshire in one Avro-Gosport machine, 
with dual control, but only a reconnaissance flight was made, and, having 
trouble with plugs, the airmen stayed the night at Lancaster. It was from 
Lancaster that the successful attempt on Helvellyn was made yesterday morning, 
and it was made without warning, in case the weather should interfere and the 
light prove a disappointment.

Original Test Surpassed
In the circumstances the flight might be described as something more of a 
success in what it set out to do than if the first flight had been completed. 
The first flight would have established the ability of the aeroplane to land on 
a mountain side, but it would have been on ground which had been to some extent 
prepared, and on which danger points had been marked out.

Brink of a Precipice
The landing itself seems to have been a fairly peaceful and comforting 
experience. It was made on higher ground than had been marked out, because 
there seemed no difficulty in coming down on the summit. And after circling 
three times in a descending spiral over the mountain the aeroplane came to the 
ground at a distance which Mr Leeming puts at 20 or 30 yards from the edge of 
the Striding Edge precipice.

Brought to a standstill, it threatened to run back down the hill - a danger 
averted by the engine being kept running on a fairly full throttle until Mr 
Leeming could jump out and find stones to put behind the wheels. After about 
twenty minutes’ chat with Professor Dodds, securing his written witness to the 
landing, and taking a few photographs, the airmen took off over Striding Edge 
about the point where it directly overlooks Red Tarn, taxi-ing up the hill with 
difficulty, but gaining flying speed just in time to see their machine over the 
precipice. They returned to Windermere, where the need for petrol brought them 
down in a field, and were back at the Woodford aerodrome in the early evening.

This is an edited extract, read the full article 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/12/17/1450374639808/Helvellyn-23-Dec-1926-001.jpg>
 