
American conservatives have been engaged in a long war against the 
constitutionality of affirmative action at public universities and other 
institutions. The latest battle reached theUS supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> on Wednesday, as the 
justices once again heard oral arguments in Fisher v University of Texas, the 
challenge to the school’s affirmative action program.

Supporters of what is still frequently a necessary policy have reason to be 
pessimistic. Meanwhile, students who have benefited (or are perceived to have 
benefited from) such programs have reason to be outraged, after US supreme 
court justice Antonin Scalia essentially argued that they might not be equipped 
to profit from admittance to certain high-quality institutions.

Early in the arguments, Scalia asserted that “there are­­ there are those who 
contend that it does not benefit African­ Americans to get them into the 
University of Texas where they do not do well.” Scalia’s apparent assumption, 
albeit one that he attributed to others, that African Americans admitted under 
affirmative action programs must be unqualified is offensive in itself – and 
particularly offensive given how marginal the qualifications of the plaintiff, 
Abigail Fisher, were.

As the 5th circuit court of appeals observed 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/will-supreme-court-shred-affirmative-action> in its 
opinionupholding the UT affirmative action program 
<http://www.ca5.uscourts.gov/opinions%5Cpub%5C09/09-50822-CV2.pdf>, Fisher 
almost certainly would not have been admitted even if UT used strictly 
race-neutral admissions criteria. The argument that colleges should not even 
consider the racial diversity of its student body in order to give white 
applicants with poor qualifications a very slightly better chance doesn’t 
strike me as a very compelling one.

And I must have missed Scalia condescendingly suggesting that Fisher would 
have been better off at a less-demanding school.

Then, responding to arguments that ending affirmative action would make the UT 
campu less diverse, Scalia asserted that “Maybe it ought to have fewer [African 
American] students”, adding: “I don’t think it stands to reason that it’s a 
good thing for the University of Texas to admit as many blacks as possible.”

Justice Samuel Alito, at least, was more subtle in his condemnation of 
affirmative action and even attempted to address the potentially negative 
consequences of eliminating such programs. He repeatedly referred to (formally) 
race-neutral means of increasing diversity on campus as possible mitigation, 
such as the Texas policy that guarantees admission to students finishing in the 
top 10% of every public high school classes. Alito’s questions implied that 
taking diversity into account when choosing the remaining pool of students did 
not provide any added value to the university.

The first problem with this argument, as the the 5th circuit opinion put it:

With its blindness to all but the single dimension of class rank, the Top Ten 
Percent Plan came with significant costs to diversity and academic integrity, 
passing over large numbers of highly qualified minority and non-minority 
applicants.

Choosing the entire student body, rather than just a portion of it, through 
rankings (even compensating for class sizes) would be problematic; not 
considering racial diversity when choosing the rest of the student body could 
severely reduce diversity.

Worse, as Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg pointed out in her questions, the Top 
Ten Percent plan can provide a reasonable facsimile of affirmative action only 
if the courts assume thatde facto school and residential segregation will be 
persistent.

As she said, Alito’s suggestion would make diversity in higher education 
“totally dependent upon having racially segregated neighborhoods, racially 
segregated schools, and it operates as a disincentive for a minority student to 
step out of that segregated community and attempt to get an integrated 
education.”

The response of Gregory Garre, who argued on behalf of the University of 
Texas, to Alito’s line of questioning was also devastating:

I don’t think the solution to the problems with student body diversity can be 
to set up a system in which not only are minorities going to separate schools, 
they’re going to inferior schools.

UT’s admissions policies should not be premised on the idea that Texas’s 
children will permanently attend segregated and unequal schools because the 
supreme court is no longer willing to seriously enforce Brown v Board of 
Education; their admissions offices should be able to take race into account 
directly, not indirectly.

And, as Garre pointed out, when the University of California’s Berkeley and 
Los Angeles campuses were required to end affirmative action, “diversity 
plummeted” at those schools. The problem is that “race neutral” admissions 
criteria are anything but race neutral in practice. Existing racial inequities 
inevitably affect students’ grade point averages, standardized test scores, 
extracurricular activities and the other criteria that selective schools use to 
choose among applicants. Simply knowing what colleges are looking for itself 
gives applicants a significant edge, and this knowledge is not equally shared 
across the socioeconomic spectrum.

Affirmative action in public higher education has been hanging by a thread for 
a while. In 2003, the US supreme courtupheld the University of Michigan law 
school’s affirmative action program but struck down the undergraduate one 
<https://www.oyez.org/cases/2002/02-241>. However, the swing justice in the 
former case, Sanda Day O’Connor, has since left the court. The current swing 
justice, Anthony Kennedy, has never once voted to uphold an affirmative action 
program, although he alsorefused to declare them categorically unconstitutional 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/30/us/supreme-court-will-reconsider-affirmative-action-case.html?_r=0>
.

Scalia and Alito were inevitable votes to vote against UT anyway; the vote in 
doubt is Kennedy, and his arguments didn’t give observers many clues about how 
he would vote. At one point, he complained that because the 5th circuit did not 
return the case to a lower court the US supreme court has “been denied the 
advantage and the perspective that would be gained if there would be additional 
fact-­finding under the instructions that Fisher sought to give” – making it 
seem like he still doesn’t even want to decide the case.

The argument that affirmative action programs are the constitutional 
equivalent of racial classifications intended to uphold a racial caste system 
hasalways been weak on both textual and historical grounds 
<http://theweek.com/articles/442098/behind-newest-attempt-supreme-court-strike-down-affirmative-action>
. If the US supreme court rules otherwise in the Fisher, not only will “ lesser 
schools”, as Scalia termed them, not benefit from increased African American 
admissions, schools like UT and African American students will both suffer – 
and the Fishers of the world won’t win either. They’ll just lose their last 
excuse for their own mediocrity.
 