
A “polite and gentle” 14-year-old boy from Afghanistan has been killed in a 
hit-and-run incident on the motorway leading toCalais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> port, highlighting the extreme risks 
that asylum-seeking children take every night as they attempt to join relatives 
in the UK.

Child refugees in limbo in Calais 'because of Home Office delays'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/14/child-refugees-in-limbo-in-calais-because-of-home-office-delays>
The boy was trying to climb on to the roof of a lorry that had slowed as it 
approached the port in the early hours of Friday morning, according to 
eye-witnesses. They said another child was attempting to pull the boy on to the 
moving vehicle, but he lost his grip and fell onto the road, where a car hit 
him. The driver did not stop.


Calais-based charities say his death was the 13th fatality near the port this 
year, and that he was the third child to have died. The boy is understood to 
have had a brother in the UK, and consequently a right to travel to the Britain 
legally. An application for papers to allowhim to be transferred had been made 
several months ago, but progress was so slow that he began trying to stow away 
on lorries at night.


“We try dissuading them from taking these risks, but it falls on deaf ears. 
They are so desperate to get on with their lives, to be rejoined with their 
families just 30 miles away,” said Jess Egan, a volunteer at the migrant camp 
in Calais who knew the dead boy. His name is not being released, because family 
members in Afghanistan are not aware of his death.


Egan said the boy, who had been in Calais for five or six months, “loved being 
with his friends, playing football and listening to music”. “We would often 
have conversations about how much he wanted to be in the UK, in school, and to 
get on with his life,” she said. “But he was stuck in the camp, in awful 
conditions.”

Hungry, scared, and no closer to safety: child refugees failed by Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/child-refugees-calais-failed-by-britain>
There are more than 900 unaccompanied asylum-seeking children living in 
second-hand tents and wooden shacks in Calais, according to a survey conducted 
by the charityHelpRefugees <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>. Many have family 
in the UK, and some are as young as eight. Many of make several attempts to get 
into the UK every week.


Alf Dubs, the Labour peer who persuaded the government earlier this year to 
introduce legislation promising sanctuary for some unaccompanied child refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/16/pressure-grows-on-theresa-may-to-admit-3000-lone-refugee-children-to-uk>
, said he was shocked by the death. Since the so-called Dubs amendment in the 
Immigration Act was passed, no children have been transferred to the UK under 
it provisions, despite a campaign to get a substantial number of them moved in 
time for the start of the school year.

“The government must speed up the process of identifying the children eligible 
to join family members already in the UK and start the procedures to discover 
children eligible under the Immigration act,” Dubs said. Because so little 
progress has been made on implementing his amendment, few people are aware of 
their rights in terms of claiming asylum “which means the people traffickers 
can persuade people to choose the risks of getting on the back of a lorry in 
preference to trying the legal and safer method.”


Labour’s Yvette Cooper, who is campaigning for Britain to give asylum to more 
unaccompanied refugee children, said: “This is shocking, heartbreaking news. 
This is the third child from the Calais ‘jungle’ to die this year. The French 
and British authorities cannot keep dragging their feet and ignoring the 
urgency of this. While governments dither and delay, children are suffering and 
even losing their lives.”


Britain is still failing child refugees in Europe. We must help them – and 
fast | Alf Dubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/04/britain-failing-child-refugees-europe-help-them-fast>
Friends of the dead boy were “shocked, upset, angry that this has happened to 
someone in their community”, Egan said. Volunteers who work with the children 
have persuaded many of those without family in the UK to seek asylum in France, 
but local facilities for caring for children are often full, and unable to 
house new arrivals.

Even those who know they have a legal case to travel to the UK, continue to 
take the extreme risks of attempting the crossing because they have little 
faith that their case will be successful. “The system that doesn’t work,” Egan 
said. “It takes months and months.”

“Many other children witnessed his violent death. He had already started the 
legal process for family reunification, but he had been waiting for so long he 
lost faith in the system and thought his only option was to risk his life in 
order to finally reach safety,” said Annie Gavrilescu of the charityHelpRefugees
 <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>.

Neha Shah, another volunteer who knew the dead boy, said he was polite and 
gentle and “very determined in everything he did, especially learning English. 
He spoke often and with admiration of his brother who is in the UK.”


'They are falling apart': the fate of lone children in Calais' refugee camp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/29/they-are-falling-apart-the-fate-of-lone-children-in-calais-refugee-camp>
Lorry drivers are becoming increasingly concerned about the risks of driving 
near the port, because large number of children and adults attempt to hide in 
vehicles every night. When police find children attempting to stow away they 
send them back to the camp. Many report having been hit with police batons and 
sprayed with teargas.

Laura Padoan, a spokeswoman for the UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR), said: “We 
remain deeply worried about the situation of vulnerable refugee children living 
in precarious situations across Europe. With colder weather approaching, it’s 
now crucial that transfers of unaccompanied refugee children who can benefit 
from the Dubs amendment are fast-tracked.

“This will require the UK and the other relevant governments in Europe to 
substantially pick up the pace in identifying those children in need of 
protection in whose best interest would be to come to the UK and transferring 
them here as a matter of urgency.”

 