 Of all the abuses women have endured since (as the weathermen say), records 
began, there can be none so starkly brutal and so cynically male-serving as the 
ritual mutilation of the female genitalia. The mutilation is literally and 
metaphorically hidden from the public eye.
Those who do it, those to whom it is done and those outside who know it is 
done all too often collude in a conspiracy of silence engendered by an odd but 
very potent combination of ignorance, custom, shame, poverty and academic 
aloofness. Men demand it: women comply: officialdom at worst denies it and at 
best transfers its practice to hospitals; international agencies are reluctant 
to become involved; and anthropologists discuss it with the detached interest 
they might accord to little green persons from Mars.

The subject is fraught. It so easily arouses a morbid sexual sensationalism 
that, like the sexual tortures it closely resembles, women to whom it has 
happened are reluctant to talk. But a few brave African women and their 
supporters in the West are beginning to speak out, to protest, to demand 
legislation and an end to the suffering and health hazards involved.

Such mutilations concern all women, not only because the practice is a blatant 
assault on human rights but because it is, in its way, a caricatured version of 
attitudes that have their echo in our experiences. And it happens, most 
pathetically, to little girls.

The male's insistence on the virginity of his wife is hardly an attitude 
buried in the dust of history in Britain. I dare say a really keen researcher 
could root out remnants of the virginity rite in various remote corners of this 
isle. Like Hackney, say, or the trackless wastes of Berkshire. Its male-serving 
basis is obvious and we have a good idea of its emotional mainspring - the old 
masculine fear of the insatiable woman who, once introduced to the wonders of 
sex, will instantly become a nymphomaniac rampant on any old bed.

So the physical manifestation of these worldwide male attitudes should come as 
no thunderclap from the blue. Our own gentil parfit knights buckled their 
ladies into iron chastity belts before they took off to enlighten the heathen. 
Some Africans do the equivalent today, only in their case women's flesh is 
used, which is even more effective than iron.

There are two general types of mutilation. One is the excision of the labia 
and clitoris (clitorectomy or circumcision) and the other is the sewing up of 
the labia (infibulation). In some tribes only one is practised, in others both. 
Experts trace these "operations" as far back as the Pharaohs of ancient Egypt 
and infibulation is still often called "Pharaonic circumcision."

Jenny left her home in Somalia and came to this country when she was 16. She 
is a beautiful girl, tall and lean and full of humour. Her parents were both 
Somalian, but her father was Christian and disapproved of the general Somalian 
habit of infibulation. So her mother had it done while he was away.

"I was seven years old when my mother told me I would have 'halaays' in two 
days. I was so scared, my heart began to go bang bang bang, I couldn't eat 
anything. I thought I would run away from home, but they came too early, they 
came at six o'clock in the morning and I was still in bed."

The women who arrived were neighbours, with no knowledge either of nursing or 
of hygiene. One was old and four were young and strong.

"They took me from my bed and the women held me and one sat on my legs. First 
they peeled the skin off the clitoris and then the old woman made two cuts 
right along inside the lips. The knife was so sharp I could hear it cutting the 
flesh. The pain was terrible - I can't explain to you how terrible. Then they 
pushed three long thorns that they get from a bush through the lips to hold the 
two cuts together.

"After that, they tied my legs together and put me back in bed. The old woman 
came and took the thorns out after three days and I was supposed to stay in bed 
for seven days, until the cuts healed together and closed. But I couldn't bear 
it: I got up on the fourth day and fell down and the wounds broke apart."

The old woman was summoned again. Jenny knew she was doomed to endure the 
operation again and she rushed out of the house to try to get help.

"I saw this man passing and I thought, because my father disapproved, so would 
he. I got hold of him and I clung and I screamed, don't let them. But he said 
they've got to and he pushed me back. After the second time of cutting I was 
very ill, the wounds were infected and I lost a lot of blood.

"I was frightened even to drink water because it hurt so to urinate. My father 
was very angry when he came home and he nearly left my mother over it but, in 
spite of that, my younger sister had it done too. Only she was four years old 
and I envy her for that. She was too young to remember it as I do."

The idea behind this torture is, of course, to ensure viginity by almost 
complete closure - the smallest aperture becomes a cause of sad pride among the 
girls. Jenny says all her friends had it done, that neighbours talk if the 
mother leaves it too long, that she knows girls who asked for it if it did not 
happen before they were 10, and that a friend of hers has just had it done on 
her own 4-year-old daughter.

"The women think they are lost if they don't, that they will have no proof of 
virginity and then no man will marry them. Young men today feel just the same, 
I know one who sent his daughter back to Somalia for the operation and be was 
born in England. Mothers don't think about it, they just do it. You must marry 
and, if possible, the husband will have money so that he can look after the 
family later on. He expects a wife who is closed.

Naturally enough, first intercourse is, again, a time of pain and fear. 
Jenny's mother belonged to a generation of women whose husbands expected, quite 
literally, to rip them open on the wedding night, Today this is done with a 
knife but intercourse must take place the same day and continue frequently 
thereafter, to make sure the labia stay apart. Wedding bed as battlefield, the 
bloodstained sheets a proof of victory.

Even more horrifying is clitorectomy, the complete cutting out of the 
clitoris, an ordeal Jenny was spared. There is an account of this in a book 
entitled La Cite Magique et Magie en Afrique Noire, published in 1972, but it 
makes such appalling reading that I shall spare you. Suffice to say that 
extreme and lengthy suffering is inflicted on small girls who, apart from 
anything else, cannot afford to lose much blood without risk to their lives.

One reader of a Senegalese magazine, Famille et Developpement relates in an 
issue last year how the practice was carried out on her elder sister, a girl 
much loved in her village. She bled from early one morning and died "apres une 
nuit d'angoisse" early next morning, leaving her parents and friends prostrate 
with grief. The reader says that though circumcision continued after this, the 
festival associated with it was abandoned, so distressed was everyone by the 
fate of her sister.

"The circumcision no longer has the magic aura of the past. It continues but 
we know it will come to an end, and on that day I shall be the first to 
rejoice. I would not want others to lose their much-loved daughters and sisters 
like that, stupidly, a flower that one crushes carelessly."

But in the same issue, clitorectomy is defended by another reader. I quote 
excerpts, roughly translated:
 "The suppression of circumcision to me doesn't seem to me a necessity for 
these reasons. A non-circumcised woman has more appetite for sex than a 
circumcised woman. It would be difficult for a husband regularly to satisfy all 
his wives. The consequence is infidelity, source of family instability. And if 
the husband really wishes to accomplish this work, there goes his health. A man 
is not a machine."

And the gentleman ends by saying, "One has also remarked that in countries 
where circumcision is not practiced, debauchery is the rule." His logic is 
irrefutable. No clitoris, no pleasure: no pleasure, no straying wife.

For the past two years, the American newsletter WIN (Women's International 
Network) has been campaigning against female circumcision with great 
dedication. The editor, Fran Hosken, has found it very difficult to collect 
facts because all concerned have their own reasons for concealment, and the 
reaction from those in high places is one women have come to recognise in many 
other contexts. That? Oh, come now, that doesn't happen any more. Confronted 
with evidence, a shrug. Well, it doesn't happen much any more. Confronted with 
more evidence, OK, all right, so it happens. It's not my business.

But Ms Hosken, in the admirable way of American women, has soldiered doggedly 
on. She turned up at Vancover's recent Habitat conference and protested to the 
Somali delegate, among others. Yes, his wife and daughters were infibulated. 
No, no one wants to change these customs, there are other priorities. She 
explodes on paper: "The Socialist/Communist revolution that continues in 
Somalia is run by men alone. They proclaimed equal rights on the outside while 
mutilating their own female children in an organised way at public expense in 
the public hospitals. How can women respect such 'revolutions' and their 
leaders?"

In this summer's issue of WIN, there is a formidable bibliography on the 
subject and an account of a systematic letterwriting campaign mounted on 
maternity hospitals and health clinics in Africa maintained by religious bodies 
and welfare organisations.

So far, the letters have been ignored, though a Mr Tanumildjaja, senior 
adviser to the Family Welfare Programme if UNICEF, says he shares WIN's deep 
concern and is making an effort to discourage the practice. The World Health 
Organisation appears to have been, strangled by its own red tape.

The most telling research is by a Belgian doctor, who says infibulatlon is 
practised on the southern coast of Arabla, throughout Somaliland, in Kenya 
(Kenyatta wrote approvingly of it in his autobiography), in Ethiopia, the 
Sudan, and southern Egypt. Excision and clitorectomy take place in a broad band 
reaching from Kenya and Ethiopia to the west coast parallel to the equator.

The doctor's chilling account of the 15 or so daily operations in Somalia's 
capital city hospital makes clear that there is no religious rite involved, and 
this is confirmed 'to me by an Englishman who had recently visited the country.

"There's no doubt about it." he said. "It's a straightforward business deal, 
nothing to do with rites of passage and all that mumbo-jumbo. A girl must marry 
as well as possible, men will not marry, her without the operation, and so she 
is forced to have it."

An article in Tropical Doctor, October 1975, written by an Irish consultant 
obstetrician and gynaecologist, gives a list of short and longterm results of 
circumcision. There are fatalities due to shock and haemorrhage. There is 
infection, damage to adjacent tissues, urinary disturbances, chronic pelvic 
sepsis. Infertility sometimes results. Obstetrical complications are frequent 
because a woman cannot give birth normally. First, the scar tissue must be cut 
and then resewn, and this is usually done by village women without anaesthesia 
or sterile instruments. The newborn sometimes sustain brain damage.

The article also documents more countries wholly or partially concerned - 
Ghana, Nigeria, Zaire, Congo, Katanga, Sierra Leone, Mozambique, many Bantu 
tribes in Central ond South Africa, Brazil, Mexico, Peru, Moslem areas of Asia, 
Mali, Upper Volta, Niger, Mauritania. Senegal, Uganda, Dahomey, Tago. Nor is 
the list complete. African women asked the World Health Organisation in 1960 to 
compile records of the areas where circumcision is practised, but they refused.

Ms Hosken attempts to estimate how many women are affected. The population of 
Africa is more than 360 millions, of whom half are women. Thirty million women 
are town dwellers and probably exempt, which leaves 150 million rural women. 
Experts believe at least one third of Africa is involved in the ritual. So she 
comes to a figure of about 10 million African women who are circumcised in one 
way or another.

"There are," says WIN, "few epidemics that take such a terrible, continuous 
toll. Yet no African health department nor international health institution, 
including WHO and UNICEF, consider the death, torture and permanent maiming of 
female children their concern." I give Jenny the last word.

"Just because it is our custom does not mean we like it or that we do not mind 
the pain. Voting women would be very pleased if it was stopped by law. 
Otherwise, the change is very slow."

· This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 Years 
of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 