
Rafael Marques, an Angolan human rights activist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/11/angola-forty-years-on-from-independence-lacks-freedom>
, has asked the country’s attorney general to revoke the appointment of 
Africa’s richest woman, Isabel dos Santos, as head of Sonangol, accusing 
president José Eduardo dos Santos of acting unconstitutionally by putting his 
daughter in charge of the state energy firm, after the shock sacking of its 
board.

Angolan president puts daughter in charge of state energy company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/03/angola-president-daughter-isabel-ds-santos-state-energy-company-sonangol>
Isabel dos Santos already owns a 25% stake in Unitel, Angola’s first private 
mobile phone operator, and is a major shareholder in several other big 
companies inAngola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> and Portugal.

President Dos Santos, who came to power in 1979, appointed his daughter to 
head Sonangol in June by presidential decree in a shake-up that cements his 
dynastic grip on power in the oil exporter. “With matters of natural strategic 
resources, the president cannot change the rules as he pleases. He must seek a 
request from the parliament. He did not do that and, therefore, the reforms on 
Sonangol are unconstitutional,” the award-winning reporter and campaigner 
Marques said, adding that he has filed three requests with the attorney 
general’s office. “The appointments as a consequence of these reforms are also 
unconstitutional as they are illegal. The president uses his decrees to award 
state contracts to his family,” he said.

Angola, currently Africa’s top oil producer because of supply outages caused 
by militant attacks in Nigeria’s Niger Delta, said in April it would 
restructure Sonangol to increase efficiency and profitability.

English-educated Isabel dos Santos is worth an estimated $3bn (£2.09bn). The 
average wage in Angola is just under $2 a day. In a rare interview with 
Reuters, the 43-year-old pledged to bring openness and efficiency to the 
40-year-old company that is frequently criticised as opaque and unwieldy.

“Our objective is to increase the revenue, efficiency and transparency of the 
company,” she said. “We want to implement governance rules similar to the 
international standards.”

State media said experts from PricewaterhouseCoopers and Boston Consulting 
Group would be brought in to assist in the shake-up at the firm, a pillar of 
Angola’s economy.

Some foreign oil firms have welcomed the appointment, brushing aside concerns 
about political motives. “The government has acted. It is clear the direction 
they want to go. I am always optimistic. I certainly support the direction 
Sonangol is taking,” Chevron’s managing director for Angola, John Baltz, said 
last week.

However, one senior Johannesburg-based banker told Reuters the appointment 
could make it more difficult for international banks to do business with 
Sonangol, given the perception of nepotism it creates.

President Dos Santos’s mild, inscrutable public demeanour belies his tight 
control of the former Portuguese colony, where he has overseen an oil-backed 
economic and construction boom in the wake of a devastating 27-year civil war 
that ended in 2002. The collapse in oil prices has hit the economy hard, 
sending the currency to record lows against the dollar, and has seen the 
government seeking IMF assistance.

She dismissed suggestions it was her family connections, rather than business 
acumen, that led to her appointment after the surprise dismissal of the 
Sonangol board.

On 9 June, a group of lawyers led by David Mendes and Luis Nascimento 
challenged the manner of her appointment, saying it went against public probity 
laws. The lawyers also presented their concerns to the supreme court.

Angola’s main opposition party, the Union for the Total Independence of Angola 
(Unita) requested on Tuesday that parliament open an inquiry into the business 
of Sonangol.

President Dos Santos, who rarely appears in public or gives interviews, said 
in March he intended to step down as president in 2018 but gave no reason for 
his decision and did not name a preferred successor.
 