
It was the only gig in town where you had to be on the guest list to get out 
rather than in. And while the chapel at HMP Brixton, south London, may not have 
quite the capacity of the Albert Hall or the cachet of Koko, this week it 
hosted one of those shows likely to be remembered by every one of its extremely 
select audience.

The Alabama 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-3>, whose song Woke 
Up This Morning gave The Sopranos its theme tune, took their eclectic music 
behind bars at the invitation of the prison's governor, Paul McDowell. The band 
are not from Alabama - they're local and there are more than three of them - 
but the reception from the 100 or so inmates could not have been warmer if they 
had been bearing personal pardons from the Queen.

From the opening bars of a specially adapted version of Johnny Cash's Folsom 
Prison Blues - "I'm stuck in Brixton prison!" - lead singer Larry Love, all 
dark glasses and bonhomie, established a rapport with those who might identify 
with the song's lines "I know I had it coming/I know I can't be free". The 
band, which included Rock Freebase on guitar, Harpo Strangelove on harmonica, 
and the Rev Errol T and the Rev B Atwell both on vocals - possibly not all real 
names - ran through a repertoire which included Rehab and U Don't Dans 2 Tekno 
Any More.

When the band's youngest and smallest member, Devlin Love, concluded with her 
interpretation of John Prine's haunting Speed and The Sound of Loneliness - 
final line "out there running just to be on the run" - inmates cheered.

Anniversary

But the concert was not about giving a bunch of Brixton's 800 residents, most 
of them on remand, a jolly afternoon's break. It coincided with the 30th 
anniversary of Rock Against Racism (RAR) and was part of that organisation's 
reincarnation at a time when the far-right BNP is active and seeking votes at 
the May 1 local elections. The band came in under RAR's auspices, as McDowell 
is committed to fighting racism in a prison with about 60 nationalities.

"The roots of this go back all the way to my involvement as a teenager in the 
Anti-Nazi League and on the periphery of RAR," said McDowell, whose musical 
influences include the Ramones, Patti Smith, Joy Division and A Certain Ratio. 
"I have always had an interest in race relations and I've been able to 
cross-pollinate that in terms of my professional life as a prison governor. 
We're using entertainment to get some key messages across about racism and 
diversity. We don't have segregation here [as in many US prisons] and we work 
very hard to ensure that is not the direction we end up going."

The other reason for the band's visit was to help publicise the Jail Guitar 
Doors programme, through which instruments are given to prisoners to encourage 
them to learn to play.

The project, named after a Clash song, was set up in memory of Joe Strummer. 
Some of the donated guitars bear the legend This Machine Kills Time, a play on 
the old slogan Woody Guthrie scrawled on his guitar, This Guitar Kills 
Fascists. Inmates were also shown a film about the JGD programme, complete with 
shots of one former prisoner who got to play alongside Billy Bragg at 
Glastonbury when the organisation was launched last year.

Geoff Martin, who works on both projects, and was in Brixton for the concert, 
said that he thought music could be a powerful weapon against racism. "We want 
to get this message out to as many people as possible," he said. "I think some 
of the people from 30 years ago need to re-engage and we need to get young 
people engaged as well."

Fantastic

So what did the captive audience think? "Fantastic," said Antonio. "I thought 
the crowd here would have been sceptical, but they weren't. What did I think of 
their choice of songs? Appropriate, in a word. They were really out for the 
interests of the prisoners. What can I say - it lifted me."

Another prisoner, Mikey, was also impressed. "It was wicked. I had never heard 
them before but they make you laugh and the vibes were great."

Tony Bodnar, a prison officer whose mother was a jazz singer and who himself 
plays in a blues and rock band, will be one of the instructors in the guitar 
programme. "There is a lot of negativity around in prison and this is one way 
to make a difference."

Larry Love said the band would be performing another concert for RAR at the 
slightly more accessible Brixton Academy at the end of April. "You know there 
is a disproportionate number of black people in prison, so it's part of the 
struggle. And we hate the BNP too."

Inside tracks

It may have been 1957 when Elvis Presley starred in Jailhouse Rock and made 
the combination of music and prison hip, but the real link was established by
Johnny Cash, the Man in Black. With a carefully cultivated outlaw image, 
despite only a few days behind bars, Cash performed atFolsom prison in 
California in 1968 along with his band, the Tennessee Three. The following 
year, he performed atSan Quentin. The concept travelled to Sweden in 1972 when 
Cash treated inmates atOsteraker prison to I Walk the Line. Since then, 
countless bands have played in jails. The Alabama 3, whose new album is the 
appropriately named Hits and Exit Wounds and who embark on a UK tour next 
month, are the latest in a long line of British performers to entertain 
inmates, includingBilly Bragg and Mick Jones from the Clash.
 