
You just took my parking space!” If you don’t believe in fate you probably 
believe in chance. Sometimes it’s good, sometimes not, as any Monopoly player 
will testify. So it plays out as I’m walking away from the car when the voice 
repeats, “Oi – you took my fucking parking space!”

I realise that the bloke in his early 20s, girlfriend in tow, is addressing me 
and I go full-on middle England peacemaker, “Sorry. I didn’t see you, but 
you’ve got a space, OK?” looking towards his car.

With hindsight, I was a bit thick. My 20-year-old Audi had recently been sold 
and replaced with a newer, sporty soft top, which, although 12 years old and a 
lot less costly than shouty boy’s hatchback, shines like a beacon for the 
envious. I’d noticed people were less accommodating in traffic than when I’m in 
my Volvo, but nothing prepared me for what happens next.

I walk past him towards my appointment with a tin of Eating Room Red paint in 
the DIY store but as I do so he grabs my shoulder, spinning me violently using 
his superior weight and height.

I’ve never really been in an adult fight despite years of karate with the 
kids. I remember the martial arts teacher making clear early on that karate is 
largely about not fighting. It’s more the art of running away with menaces – 
reacting only to aggression and seeking as few blows/actions as possible to 
disable your opponent so you can run away. You seek to avoid a fight because 
you know it is likely to end in hospital or court.

This reflects the fact that, despite being a fun family activity for a 
Saturday morning, karate is an all-in and very vicious martial art. Other than 
a minor scuffle with a drunk at work, I’ve never been close to using it, but do 
so now, in the car park, with surprising calmness.

I carry his momentum through to hit him in the side of the neck rather harder 
than I may have intended

Using the momentum he’s created in spinning me and deflecting the fist coming 
towards my glasses, I carry his momentum through to hit him in the side of the 
neck rather harder than I may have intended, which was very hard.

Down he goes, silently and, to me, rather surprisingly. Then the really 
frightening bit happens. My calmness vanishes. Seeing him lying there, I’m 
overcome by possibly the greatest rage I’ve ever felt. I want to follow him 
down to the ground with fists and feet and really hurt him.

Luckily for him, but even more so for me, and for the kids, his girlfriend 
starts screaming, “You’ve killed him, he’s fucking dead,” over his still-inert 
form. It’s like she’s thrown an ice bucket over me and, far from running away, 
I stick around to check he’s OK. It’s a dicey decision, as it could all have 
kicked off, but the situation is defused by his girlfriend, who proves yet 
again that nothing is predictable in relationships. She starts shouting again 
but this time at her now groaning beau.

“You arsehole, you picked that fight and got what you deserve. You were 
already parked. Wanker!”

He is clearly OK physically, but under a siege of a different sort, so I say 
goodbye and leave.

Afterwards, I’m a bit shaky about the whole thing. Not only does it show how 
things can turn in a second – he could have knifed me – but also that the level 
of anger I felt was crazy. What might have happened had this man’s girlfriend 
not brought me to my senses bodes badly – the last thing the kids need is me in 
prison for ABH or worse.

How much more extreme would my reaction have been had Millie and Matt been 
under threat? I’m hopeful it won’t happen again and feel I’ve crossed another 
milestone of understanding – myseething anger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/04/anger-bad-for-health-has-uses>
 was all about the injustice of such a first-class tosser even being alive when 
Helen isn’t. I may have needed it to happen some time, and it is, hopefully, 
done.

It emphasises that I really need the counselling I’ve signed up to. I’ve been 
very lucky that this time my Chance card read, “Get out of jail free”.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/MrAdamGolightly>
 