
After the recent Sony email hacking, I’m thinking it might be time to ditch 
the medium altogether and go back to good old phone conversations. Instead of 
firing off angry emails, it’s time to air our grievances ear to ear, just like 
we used to in 1994, sitting at a desk that held only a quality pen in a 
holster, a swinging metal ball ornament and one of those smart leather 
blotting-paper holders bound in leather. Good times.

Because it’s increasingly clear that typing out our deepest feelings in 
electronic format and pressing send might not be the best option.

Everything is captured forever in the cloud these days and that cloud is now 
dripping with our ugliest thoughts. I feel as though it’s pretty much 
guaranteed that everything we’ve written and wish we hadn’t is eventually bound 
to rain down on us – like bird poop, only less lucky.

A simple phone conversation might save a thousand future shames.

The problem with going back to using a telephone, is that I, like many others, 
have become phone-phobic. While I bang away on an mobile device all day with my 
lumpy fingers, voice my opinions every two seconds on social media and feel 
deep anxiety unless my phone is within three metres of my vicinity, I hardly 
ever use the thing for its original purpose – to talk to people.

And I rarely get calls. When my phone does ring, I fear the worst has 
happened, and often don’t answer. The phone on my desk at work never rings 
either. Everything, but everything, is done over email. A call seems slightly 
archaic; like the Rachel cut or carbs.

Things were different once. As a child, I was addicted to the telephone. It 
was a link to the outside world. There was only one phone in our family home 
and if it rang all the kids would run and fight to see who could get to it 
first. Most kids practised their phone answering technique, just like we did 
our written signatures for all of those cheques we were going to write in the 
future. And we grew up with parents who put on “phone voice” – a little posher 
than the regular one they used to yell at us to clean our rooms.

Answering the home phone was a daily game of roulette. Any given call could 
either be a best friend wanting to discuss the latest episode of Beverly Hills 
90210, or a boring adult trying to get hold of our parents who had already 
drilled us to say: “I’ll check to see if they’re here”. We only learned to 
distrust phone conversations as we got older.

If the Sony hacking revelations reveal anything, it’s that of all the millions 
of emails sent in every workplace every day of the week, if someone wants to 
find one of them offensive, it’s probably there for the picking and will be 
easier to pick at in the future.

So, in the spirit of trying to hang less skeletons up in my personal online 
cupboard, I’m going to try and call more in 2015, instead of emailing or 
sending a text. I might even gain those few extra hours spent replying to every 
work or party plan 75 times before any consensus is reached. And I’ll start 
turning over my new leaf by phoning friends rather than messaging them on 
Facebook or Twitter this Christmas. Pity most of them probably won’t pick up.
 