
On Sunday nights at 6pm, for most of my childhood, our family would gather in 
front of the TV to watch Countdown. All four ratty kids would fidget 
incessantly, yelling at each other to “shaddup”, before settling down to inhale 
the latest music clips and live performances.

I would marvel wide-eyed and dream of dancing along like the teenagers in the 
studio audience, who usually looked slightly confused, as if they’d been bussed 
in from a nearby shopping centre to make up the numbers on the promise of a 
free bag of mixed lollies. Like half the performers, the audience seemed to 
have no idea what they were doing there. But everyone had great hair.

Countdown was my weekly dose of fantasy. Our family lived in a small town 
called Red Cliffs, more than 500km from the nearest capital city. We didn’t 
have a music store (and the internet was still years away from being available 
at home).

But we had Countdown. It was our connection to the outside world. Glamorous 
Elton John and his bizarre glasses visited our lounge room from London, raunchy 
Madonna from New York, and sexy Duran Duran from a yacht or hairdressing salon 
somewhere in the Bahamas, and that bloke who looked like Ian from accounting 
who got lucky, Phil Collins, made regular visits. A cavalcade of stars, it 
seemed at the time.

Countdown provided my formative music education, too. I will never forget 
watching AC/DC’s Jailbreak clip, peering from behind the couch in fear as bombs 
went off around a scary-looking skinny bloke wearing jeans so tight it looked 
as though he’d smuggled a small ferret that was busting to get out via the zip, 
while he told us about getting out of the big house. It may explain my penchant 
now for blokes who look as though they’re on their first day on parole from 
Long Bay jail.

When 40 Years of Countdown <http://iview.abc.net.au/collection/472> screened 
on Sunday, my social media feeds were dripping in nostalgia. It was nice to see 
that I wasn’t the only one who taped the show religiously on a tape recorder, 
pushed up to the TV speaker. Those were hi-tech, heady times.

Pre-teens aren’t known for their critical thinking, so Countdown may not have 
been as consistently wonderful as my hazy memory recalls (and let’s be honest, 
today’s version would probably be full of One Direction and Katy Perry 
performances that would drive most of us completely nuts). But it was a shared 
experience. Kids made parents watch, and most kids watched, unless they were 
one of those households that chose Young Talent Time instead. Our house didn’t 
associate with those houses.

Shared TV experiences aren’t so much a thing now days, unless you count 
sporting events and reality TV show finals.Television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> itself is such a different 
beast; entire households tuning in for one program is almost unheard of. Most 
of us watch our own things on our own devices in our own time.

It is sad to think that there won’t be anything like Countdown again. TV execs 
are the first to say that no one watches live music on TV anymore. That it 
doesn’t rate. And they’re probably right.

But given the groundswell of support for Countdown, surely it might be the 
time to try again? Plus, if something like this isn’t made available on the box 
soon, the kids of today are going to struggle to find something to get all 
misty-eyed over in 40 years – unless they collectively remember the white wine 
tears that Mum shed while watching The Bachelor, or the elation they felt as 
the final bathroom was revealed on the 74th season of The Block.
 