
Holiday flights could be disrupted by more industrial action as 1,500 baggage 
handlers, check-in staff and cargo crew working at 18 airports across the UK 
are set to strike over the Christmas weekend.

Members of the Unite union employed by Swissport, who work on behalf of 
airlines at airports including Stansted, Luton, Gatwick, Leeds-Bradford, 
Manchester, Cardiff, Belfast, Glasgow and Edinburgh, intend to walk out for 48 
hours on 23 and 24 December. Cargo workers at Heathrow could also take action.

Birmingham, Southampton and Newcastle airports, whose check-in and baggage 
handling are entirely operated by Swissport, could be among the worst affected.

More than 2,500 BA cabin crew could go on strike over Christmas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/british-airways-strike-pay-heathrow-christmas-ba>
Talks to avert the strike could still take place, as Unite called on 
Swissport’s management to go to negotiations at Acas to stave off the Christmas 
travel disruption.

Unite members voted by 62.5% to reject a three-year pay deal. The unionsaid 
the offered barely keeps pace with inflation, while eroding terms and 
conditions, including freezing overtime payments.

Oliver Richardson, Unite’s national officer for civil air transport, said 
members were taking action as a last resort. He said: “We appreciate that this 
is a very busy time of year at the UK’s airports and that’s why we are calling 
for the company to engage in constructive talks under the auspices of Acas to 
resolve this dispute.”

Unite has Swissport members at Aberdeen, Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, 
Bournemouth, Cardiff, Doncaster, East Midlands, Edinburgh, Gatwick, Glasgow, 
Heathrow, Leeds-Bradford, Luton, Manchester, Newcastle, Southampton and 
Stansted.

Airports said they would have plans in place to minimise any effect to 
passengers’ journeys. A Newcastle airport spokesperson said: “We hope that the 
matter is resolved in the near future but, if the action goes ahead, then we 
have plans in place to minimise any disruption.”

A spokesman for MAG, which owns airports including Manchester and Stansted, 
said: “We are aware of this potential action and are contacting the airlines 
which use Swissport to understand their contingency plans to minimise any 
disruption were the strikes to go ahead.”

At Gatwick, Swissport only handles flights for Virgin Atlantic, whose 
passengers could potentially be affected bya parallel dispute involving the 
airline’s pilots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/virgin-atlantic-pilots-industrial-action-ppu-union>
. The pilots have voted to take industrial action short of a strike in a row 
over union recognition, with an overtime ban starting on 23 December.

Their union, the PPU, said the action would see a removal of “pilot goodwill”, 
with members working strictly to their contract. It said: “It is possible that 
this may leave some flights not covered for the duration of any action, which 
has the potential to continue indefinitely.”

The PPU, formed entirely of Virgin Atlantic pilots, was launched three years 
ago as a breakaway from the TUC-affiliated British Airline Pilots Association 
(Balpa).

Air passengers could also be affected by a potential strike by British Airways 
cabin crew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/british-airways-strike-pay-heathrow-christmas-ba>
. More than 2,500 members of the airline’s mixed fleet at Heathrow voted to 
strike over pay, but have yet to give formal notice of industrial action.
 