
A battle is brewing between the broadcasters over Friday Night Project star 
Alan Carr <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-carr>.

The comedian's exclusive deal with Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> finishes at the end of the year 
and it is understood he is in negotiations to extend it for another couple of 
years.

However, sources at ITV say that the new director of television, Peter 
Fincham, is also interested in the talents of Carr - who won best live stand-up 
at this year's British Comedy Awards.

The BBC's entertainment department has also approached Carr to make some shows 
for them, but does not want to sign him on an exclusive basis.

Former BBC1 controller Fincham has been on a talent charm offensive since he 
became the ITV director of television earlier this month.

He is renowned for his ability to understand and woo presenters, but so too is 
his rival, the Channel 4 director of television, Kevin Lygo.

One industry expert pointed out that Channel 4 has nurtured Carr - it gave him 
his own show, Alan Carr's Celebrity Ding Dong - and it might prove too hard for 
ITV to prise him from his exclusive deal.

He said: "Carr is very talented and he can do mainstream ITV. But I suspect he 
might stay at Channel 4 for a while longer."

Described by one critic as, "the spiritual son of Frankie Howerd", Carr has 
built up a big following through both television and stand-up. His debut DVD 
sold more than 500,000 copies and stayed at number one in the comedy charts for 
almost three months.

He has been nominated for a Bafta, along with co-host Justin Lee Collins, and 
the pair are about to return to Channel 4 this summer with The Sunday Night 
Project.

In an interview with the Observer last month Carr said he is most comfortable 
being mainstream and insisted he is not cutting edge, asking: "What's the 
point?"

A BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> spokeswoman said: "We are not in 
a bidding war for Alan Carr."

A spokesman for Carr declined to comment.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 