
Alan Carr and Michael McIntyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-mcintyre> have topped the list of 
nominations for this year's British Comedy Awards, with three each.

Hosted by Jonathan Ross after his absence last year following the "Sachsgate" 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/nov/21/british-comedy-awards-angus-deayton>
, the awards will see McIntyre and Carr go head to head in both the best comedy 
entertainment personality and entertainment programme categories.

BBC1's hit family sitcom Outnumbered, written by Andy Hamilton and Guy Jenkin, 
has received five nominations, including one for best sitcom, and all three of 
the show's child stars are up for an award.

Ramona Marquez is in the best female comedy newcomer category for her role as 
Karen, against Rebekah Station and Tanya Franks from BBC3's Pulling.

Tyger Drew-Honey and Daniel Roche – who play Jake and Ben – have been 
nominated for best male newcomer, alongside the Guardian columnist Charlie 
Brooker.

Claire Skinner, who plays the children's mother Sue, is up for the best 
television comedy actress, along with Ruth Jones for her performance in BBC1's 
Gavin and Stacey Christmas Special, and Katherine Parkinson from Channel 4's 
The IT Crowd.

Brooker is also in the running for the best television comedy gong for his E4 
zombie comedy Dead Set, alongside BBC3's Pulling special and Psychoville, 
BBC2's comedy from The League of Gentlemen duo Steve Pemberton and Reece 
Shearsmith.

Simon Bird – who won best male comedy newcomer last year – is this year 
nominated in the best television comedy actor category for playing the hapless 
Will in E4's cult comedy The Inbetweeners. Bird will square up to Peep Show's 
Robert Webb and Gavin and Stacey star Rob Brydon.

The best sketch show contenders are BBC1's Harry & Paul, Channel 4's The Kevin 
Bishop Show and BBC2's That Mitchell and Webb Look.

Meanwhile, the best comedy film award will go to either Sacha Baron Cohen's 
Bruno, Armando Iannucci's The Thick of It spin-off In the Loop or bachelor 
party film The Hangover.

Ross said of his return to the awards: "I'm delighted – it's the most 
prestigious awards show in the world. Obama may have a Nobel prize. But he's 
not even in the running for best entertainment personality. It's that 
prestigious."

The awards will be broadcast on ITV1 in December.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 