
Alan Plater, who has died of cancer aged 75, was one of a handful of writers, 
includingJack Rosenthal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/may/31/guardianobituaries.broadcasting>
, Dennis Potter andSimon Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/aug/07/simongray.theatre>, who truly 
made a difference on British television in the golden age of comedy, drama 
series and the single play. Like the other two Alans – Bennett and Bleasdale – 
his name guaranteed a quality of humour, heart and humanity, usually matched by 
high standards of acting and production values. And like them, he was 
definitely "northern".

He wrote 18 episodes of the BBC's pioneering police series Z Cars between 1963 
and 1965, and 30 episodes for its sequel, Softly Softly. His gift of writing 
supple, salty dialogue for working-class characters was similarly displayed in 
Oh No, It's Selwyn Froggitt (1976-77), a series developed from his own single 
play and starring Bill Maynard as the inept handyman with the thumbs-up 
catchphrase "Magic!"

Plater's other television work included his beautiful adaptation of Olivia 
Manning's Balkan novels, Fortunes of War (1987), a mini-series starring Kenneth 
Branagh and Emma Thompson; The Beiderbecke Affair (1985) and its sequels, The 
Beiderbecke Tapes (1987) and The Beiderbecke Connection (1988), starring James 
Bolam as a woodwork teacher and Barbara Flynn as his ecologically minded 
partner in the English department; and the brilliant Channel 4 series A Very 
British Coup (1988), based on Chris Mullin's novel about an uncompromising 
socialist prime minister changing the world – or at least trying to.

The jazz-loving, heroically cigarette-smoking, Hull City-supporting Plater was 
a populist all-rounder with more than 300 assorted credits in radio, 
television, theatre and films (his screenplay for DH Lawrence's The Virgin and 
the Gypsy, directed by Christopher Miles in 1970, is probably his best) as well 
as journalism, six novels, broadcasting and teaching. He was always busy, and 
always writing.

In his native Hull he started the Spring Street theatre, home to John Godber's 
Hull Truck company – the new building in the centre of the city will surely be 
an appropriate testament to him. When asked to define his nationality, Plater's 
stock response was: "Geordie by birth, Yorkshire by upbringing and now a 
metropolitan sophisticate." The latter indicates the self-deprecating tone he 
adopted when contemplating his own place in the media jungle.

He was born in Jarrow, in Tyne and Wear, but his family moved to Hull in 1938. 
He was educated at Kingston high school, where Tom Courtenay became a lifetime 
friend. He trained as an architect at King's College in Newcastle, and worked 
in an architect's office for three years before declaring himself a writer in 
1961. He could always draw lovely cartoons in the clean linear style of Saul 
Steinberg.

An early television play, A Smashing Day (1962), was adapted for the stage at 
Stoke-on-Trent in 1965. The theatrical version was produced byPeter Cheeseman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/apr/29/peter-cheeseman-obituary>, a 
kindred spirit, and had added music by two young assistant stage managers in 
the company, Ben Kingsley and Robert Powell. On the back of the music, the 
Beatles' manager Brian Epstein took the play to London, where it flopped 
resoundingly. Success in the provinces and failure in London was a pattern that 
recurred, and Plater always ascribed it to snobbery and cultural dislocation. 
He probably had a point. His signature play was Close the Coalhouse Door in 
1968, adapted from Sid Chaplin's stories, a piece crowded with incident from 
the history of the Durham miners and framed by a golden wedding anniversary 
party. With wonderful music by Alex Glasgow, the show was a cult hit in 
Newcastle but a feeble flop in London.

In a renewed mood of political hostility, Plater wrote a badly received 
opening show for the new Leeds Playhouse in 1970, Simon Says!, which was an 
unapologetic, wholesale attack on the British ruling classes; a string of 
British prime ministers were perfunctorily shot dead on stage in the last scene.

His work always soared when he incorporated elements of the surreal, as 
exemplified in the work of one of his heroes, Spike Milligan, or indeed his own 
juggling and acrobatic act, the Forty-Four Flying Fletchers, in his student 
days. The acrobatics were minimal, the juggling invisible. The act always began 
with an announcement that, unfortunately, 41 of the Flying Fletchers had been 
rendered indisposed with a pulled muscle: "Here are the other three." Plater 
and two pals then marched on to the stage in string vests, baggy shorts and 
false moustaches. When they took their bows after an hour or so of invisible 
juggling, a hail of tennis balls rained down from the flies. They usually 
performed with a deaf drummer.

Something of this spirit informed his deliriously funny adaptation of Bill 
Tidy's Fosdyke cartoon strip in the Daily Mirror. Plater's job, said Tidy, was 
to glue his balloons together, and this he did in The Fosdyke Saga (1975) at 
the Bush theatre in London and its sequel, Fosdyke Two, the following year. 
Both shows, directed by Hull Truck founder Mike Bradwell, toured with great 
success, but neither made it to the West End. The first show concentrated on 
the growth of the tripe industry during the first world war, and the actor 
Philip Jackson claimed a place in the Guinness Book of Records, as it was then 
known, for playing 22 characters, including a prison warder, King George V, a 
sausage dealer, the Salford Ripper and Baron von Richthoven.

Jazz was the cornerstone of Plater's life. He decamped to Chalk Farm, north 
London, from Hull in 1984, and virtually lived in Ronnie Scott's jazz club with 
his second wife, Shirley Rubinstein, from whom he was inseparable. They held 
their wedding reception on the premises. He prefaced his 2006 autobiography, 
Doggin' Around – the title, too, of his 1994 film about a crotchety jazz 
pianist played by Elliott Gould – with an open, explanatory love letter, 
almost, to Duke Ellington. He was hooked the moment he heard Mood Indigo on his 
grandparents' wireless set at the age of five: "Something about it made my 
ears tingle."

Even more so than with Potter, music is woven into his writing as both direct 
quotation and a means of extending his own dramatic arguments. Bix Beiderbecke, 
funnily enough, didn't make it into his all-time top 10: Ellington, Louis 
Armstrong, Jelly Roll Morton, Johnny Hodges, Lester Young, Dizzy Gillespie, 
Charlie Parker, Billie Holiday, Ella Fitzgerald and Charles Mingus. All of them 
pop up in his work, and the big-band spirit informed his television play The 
Last of the Blonde Bombshells (2000) in which Judi Dench played a veteran 
saxophonist recapturing wartime glory days by chasing down her old colleagues 
in an all-girl band.

Plater was once asked how he managed to attract a cast including Dench, Ian 
Holm (playing the drums in drag), Leslie Caron, Cleo Laine, Billie Whitelaw, 
Olympia Dukakis, Joan Sims and June Whitfield. "They read the script," he 
replied, no doubt lighting up another fag. The show was rewritten in diminished 
form for the theatre, but it wasn't half as good, nor as wonderfully cast.

Plater's agent for many years was the terrifying Peggy Ramsay, whom he 
memorialised in his Hampstead theatre play, Peggy for You (1999), with Maureen 
Lipman giving one of her greatest performances, ruling the roost in her 
St Martin's Lane eyrie with the eccentric hauteur of a mad Russian empress.

He produced some joyous work in recent years for Barrie Rutter's Northern 
Broadsides company in Halifax, and Peter Maxwell Davies's St Magnus festival in 
Orkney, a place he loved as deeply as anywhere in Britain. His Elizabethan 
comedy Sweet William (2005) for Rutter was a tremendous knees-up set in the 
Boar's Head, following "wee Willy Shaggers of Stratford town".

A trilogy of community plays at St Magnus began with a dramatisation of George 
Mackay Brown's Greenvoe in 2000 and continued with Barriers in 2002 andTales 
from the Golden Slipper <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/jun/21/theatre3>
 in 2007. The latter was a celebration of a famous Orcadian character, Willie 
Farquhar, who kept a shebeen on the island from the war years through to the 
1960s, when the authorities closed him down. Maxwell Davies wrote the music.

Plater was always suspicious of theories about writing, preferring to glean 
his ideas and material from everyday conversation in pubs and clubs, where he 
was the most convivial company imaginable. "I'm only human and therefore not 
without faults," he said, "but at least I don't stink up the place with arcs 
and paradigms. My approach to dramatic structure is to play Duke Ellington's 
1940 version of Harlem Air Shaft, which contains all you need to know about 
dramatic structure, if you have ears to listen."

Plater was appointed CBE in 2005. His final TV drama, Joe Maddison's War, with 
a cast including Kevin Whately, Robson Green and Derek Jacobi, is in 
post-production for ITV.

He married Shirley Johnson in 1958, with whom he had two sons and one 
daughter. They divorced in 1985. The following year he married Shirley 
Rubinstein, with whom he has three stepsons. They all survive him, along with a 
legion of grandchildren.

• Alan Frederick Plater, dramatist, born 15 April 1935; died 25 June 2010
 