
Sunday Night Project presenter Alan Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-carr> has signed an exclusive deal 
with Channel 4 believed to be worth more than £3m over two years after the 
broadcaster fought off interest from rivals.

The deal with the comedian will run from January 2009 to December 2010 and 
gives Channel 4 exclusive rights to all Carr's UK television output.

Both ITV and the BBC were interested in signing the 32-year-old comedian, with 
ITV reported to have been prepared to stump up £2m over two years.

As part of his new deal, Carr will continue to host The Sunday Night Project 
alongside Justin Lee Collins and will also return for more series of quiz show 
Alan Carr's Celebrity Ding Dong.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> said the new deal would 
also include other major prime time series currently in development.

A source said Carr had decided to stay at Channel 4 because he was "incredibly 
happy" there, although he hadn't ruled out moving to a more mainstream channel 
after his new contract finishes. Channel 4 said it was "thrilled" he was 
staying at the broadcaster.

"He is one of the funniest men on TV," said Andrew Newman, the Channel 4 head 
of comedy and entertainment. "We look forward to developing his TV career over 
the next two years while making him an even bigger star."

Carr, who was named best live stand-up at this year's British Comedy Awards, 
added: "I'm absolutely thrilled to be spending two more glorious years at 
Channel 4. It's a civil ceremony made in heaven."

Carr's exclusive deal with Channel 4 was due to finish at the end of the year, 
prompting a bidding war between rival broadcasters.

The new ITV director of television, Peter Fincham, was understood to be 
interested in Carr while the BBC's entertainment department was also thought to 
have approached him to make shows, although it did not want to sign him on an 
exclusive basis.

Described by one critic as "the spiritual son of Frankie Howerd", Carr has 
built up a big following through both television and stand-up comedy.

His debut DVD sold more than 500,000 copies and stayed at number one in the 
comedy charts for almost three months.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 