
Albania qualified for Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>, their first major tournament, 
after a 3-0 away win over Armenia clinched second place in Group I above 
Denmark on Sunday sparking wild celebrations across the country.

Wales’ Chris Coleman: reaching Euro 2016 not about legacy but keeping it up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/11/wales-chris-coleman-euro-2016-aaron-ramsey-france>
Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> finished behind the 
group winners, Portugal, but above Denmark, who will await their play-off fate, 
in the final group standings to reach next summer’s tournament in France.

Portugal, who won 2-1 away to Serbia, have 21 points, Albania 14 and Denmark, 
who had finished their matches, 12. Serbia andArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> finished with only four and two 
points each.

Germany made to sweat by Georgia but Max Kruse goal seals qualification
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/11/germany-georgia-euro-2016-match-report>
Albania went in front after nine minutes thanks to an own goal by Armenia’s 
Kamo Hovhannisyan and they added further goals through the defender Berat 
Djimsiti and substitute Armando Sadiku.

Across Albania and in Kosovo, the mainly ethnic Albania state where some of 
the players were born, fireworks lit up the sky before the match ended. People 
streamed on to the streets after the final whistle, waving flags and driving 
around town.

“This qualification is historic,” Albania’s FA president, Armando Duka, said. 
“We did not deserve the defeats at home [to Portugal in September and Serbia on 
Thursday]. We do not have a team of superstars, but they have heart and a 
collective spirit.“

Referring to the 2-0 home loss against Serbia, their Italian coach, Gianni De 
Biasi, added: “It was not easy after the defeat with Serbia. We felt the 
pressure, but the boys played extremely well. I wish the country grows having 
these boys as an example.

“Few people believed we could have made it in the beginning, but we all made 
it. We all contributed to this achievement. The renewal of my contract is 
automatic. The figures need to change though.”

Armenia had the first chance when Yura Movsisyan’s powerful free kick pierced 
Albania’s wall and was saved by Etrit Berisha.

The opener came after the midfielder Odise Roshi’s deflected strike set up 
Migjen Basha inside the area. His shot came off the goalkeeper Gevorg Kasparov 
and Hovhannisyan turned the ball into his own net trying to stop a charging 
Shkelzen Gashi.

In the 23rd minute, Djimsiti touched a free-kick from Ledian Memushaj into the 
net to give Albania a 2-0 half-time lead.

Heckled by their fans at the break, Armenia played better in the second 
period, launching several dangerous attacks, with Marcos Pizzelli striking a 
powerful shot in the 71st minute.

However, Albania sealed the victory in the 76th when striker Sadiku fired home 
inside the area from a pass by Roshi.

“When I first started playing for Albania 12 years ago, I never thought this 
day would come but we always tried and now have managed to do it thanks to the 
willpower of this group, this fine generation of players,” said the captain, 
Lorik Cana.

Albania had a rollercoaster qualifying campaign, which included two bruising 
politically-fragile encounters with Serbia, who beat Albania with two goals in 
added time.

The previous fixture in Belgrade was abandoned after a drone flying a banner 
depicting the so-called Greater Albania was flown over the stadium, provoking a 
brawl among the players and the invasion of the pitch by some Serbia fans.

Albania were given three points on appeal by European the governing body UEFA 
and Cana added: “Despite beating us on Friday, Serbia will now watch us in 
France drinking beer in front of the TV.”
 