
Australia is not a country of many Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> traditions. Prawns on the 
day can be pretty usual, families who insist on a hot lunch on a 30-degree day 
are still common enough while the rest of the country is enjoying cold ham, and 
Santas are still expected to dress in the full red suit.

But thanks to Australia’s extreme distances (my in-laws live the distance from 
Budapest to London away from my parents) and fewer jobs that shut down at 
Christmas, a quasi-tradition is orphan’s Christmas. Not permanent, but 
seasonal: Christmas away from family with friends or acquaintances or nobody.

Everything feels wrong. There’s no grandfather handing out the presents. And 
sometimes there are no presents

My first Christmas away was when I was living three hours from home but had to 
work on the day, so after work I sat in my apartment complex’s pool and watched 
a holidaying family splash around and smile at me pityingly.

I was 18 and felt incredibly grown up in that cute way a teenager can find 
something as mundane as grocery shopping for themselves thrilling. Not only had 
I worked Christmas Day, I was alone. Two years later I was working again and my 
flatmates, all from Adelaide, could not afford the trip from Queensland for the 
holidays. It was my first proper orphan’s Christmas.

We had an ordinary barbecue and drank too much with nobody to tell us not to. 
Driving to the orphan’s Christmas from work I was pulled over by police who 
noticed the expired registration sticker on my car but in the spirit of 
Christmas decided to let me go without running the car through the system. (I 
recently told two Aboriginal men this story and they looked at each other 
before bursting into laughter: “That actually happens to white people?!”)

Since then I have spent Christmas in Ireland; at the beach with my boss; and 
once in my hometown being threatened by my mother that she will tell our dad 
about our bad behaviour in mass.

First Dog on the Moon's Christmas observance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/first-dog-on-the-moons-christmas-observance>
An orphan’s Christmas isn’t always the answer to a family-less Christmas. 
Psychologist and health centre director Suzanne Leckie, from Sane Australia, 
says loneliness is common at Christmas and it has been a hot topic for months 
on the organisation’s forums.

“There’s an enormous amount of loneliness,” she said. “People are alone 
because they literally don’t have friends or family, but sometimes people are 
lonely because they are forced into company with family and friends where they 
don’t feel accepted.

“We recently had a forum about whether to ignore Christmas. For some people 
that’s a better choice. Rather than thinking people are nestled with family 
having a lovely time, just treat it as a day with better food, or a day where 
you just treat yourself. We’ve been calling it ‘reclaim Christmas’.”


Leckie suggests people could take advantage of the empty streets and enjoy 
places that are usually packed.

Naturally there’s an app called Orphan Christmas 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-02/tinder-for-christmas-website-launched-today/8088474>
, an Australian not-for-profit that allows people to invite others who don’t 
have friends or family close by to come over for Christmas.

Several bars and restaurants are advertising orphans’ Christmas specials, 
although not often on the big day. On Facebook In Londona Muslim-owned 
restaurant has invited the homeless and the elderly 
<http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/world/muslimowned-restaurant-offers-free-christmas-meal-for-homeless-and-elderly-20161208-gt6ltm.html>
to dine for free on Christmas Day.

Being away from home for Christmas is a discombobulating thing. 

After 18 years of doing the same thing every Christmas – being surrounded by 
more than 30 aunts, uncles and cousins – there is suddenly just you waking up 
in a house with a tree branch hastily decorated with twinkling lights. The 
roads are empty, and people biting into luscious meals cheerily greet you as 
you pass their house while you have butter on toast for a late breakfast.

Then there is the strange intimacy with the ragtag group of people you end up 
sharing this exalted day with. Usually an orphan’s Christmas is an eclectic 
smattering of colleagues, friends and acquaintances’ cousins. Can this really 
be Christmas? Everything feels wrong. There’s no grandfather handing out the 
presents. And sometimes there are no presents.

Christmas away from home throws off the final shackles of your childhood. You 
find yourself among other adults, and everything has changed. You realise you 
can go weeks without hearing either of your parents’ voices, you choose what to 
eat at every meal, and nobody cares if you wear a hat or sunscreen when you’re 
outside.

All these impossibly grown-up things you had imagined for so long, and now you 
are alone at Christmas and you realise: I’m an adult.

I much prefer going home for Christmas.

What’s your experience of being apart from your family at Christmas? Tell us 
in comments below.
 