
Back at the start of the month, South Africa’s head coach, Allister Coetzee, 
was asked about the “aura” of his side. The Springboks had lost five of the 
nine games they had played since the last World Cup,going down to Ireland in 
Cape Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/south-africa-ireland-first-test-match-report>
, Argentina in Salta, Australia in Brisbane, and New Zealand in both 
Christchurch and Durban,the last of those a 42-point thrashing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-championship-match-report>
, the worst defeat they had ever suffered at home. “The Springboks will never 
lose their aura,” Coetzee said, “definitely not.” Coetzee, who spent 22 years 
playing the game and another 20 coaching it, takes the long view. Just look at 
England over the last 12 months, he said. The wheel will always keep turning.

South Africa’s latest defeat, 37-21 to England at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/england-south-africa-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, means they have lost five of their last six. Asked how he felt about that 
aura now, Coetzee picked out one thing that he felt gave him some hope. “When 
the Springboks give up, that’s when they will have lost their aura,” he said. 
He admired the way they rallied from 30-9 down in the final quarter, through 
tries by Johan Goosen and Willie le Roux. “When the team doesn’t give up, when 
they keep fighting, I draw comfort from that.” It all sounded a little hollow.

England v South Africa: five things we learned from the autumn international | 
Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/13/england-south-africa-autumn-international-rugby-twickenham>
What the Springboks need now, Coetzee said, is a win. “You can work as hard as 
you want, but you need to believe you need to win.” They will likely get one 
next week, when they play Italy in Florence, since the Italians have never been 
within 16 points of beating the Springboks. After that they finish their tour 
against Wales in Cardiff. Coetzee said there are two things his team will be 
working on between now and then. One was their line speed. He felt they were 
simply too passive in defence. And the other was their error count, which was 
too high, especially when it came to handling England’s kicking game. “These 
are things we can fix and things we need to fix quickly.”

The hard truth, and Coetzee knows this all too well, is South Africa’s larger 
problems will not be nearly so easy to solve. There are three challenges. The 
first is that Coetzee feels he has to change the way the team play. When he 
took on the job in April, Coetzee explained that he wanted South Africa to 
evolve their style. “We have to be a bit smarter,” he said. “We must look at 
our speed of movement on attack and see how quickly we can get into position 
and how quickly we can use our hands.” In the last two years the Springboks 
have scored 58 tries in 24 games, compared with Australia’s 84 in 27, 
Argentina’s 92 in 28, and New Zealand’s 136 in 26. Their crash-ball tactics 
look out of date.

This, at least, is a change everyone can agree on. Beyond that, though, lie 
two intractable difficulties. The first is the player drain. There are reckoned 
to be as many as 300 South African professionals playing overseas, drawn, in 
the large part, by the wages they can earn playing in Europe and Japan. The 
South African Rugby Union is taking measures. It has changed its central 
contract system so that it bears the brunt of the costs rather than the 
provincial unions, a move that it hopes will free up funds which can then be 
spent on salaries.

So far this has not stemmed the flow and another 45 players signed for 
overseas teams earlier this year. At some point, the SARU may have to take a 
more drastic measure and reinstate its policy of refusing to pick overseas 
players. The last SARU president, Oregan Hoskins, hinted that he was 
considering this but deferred the decision to Coetzee, who was clear that he 
wanted to be able to pick every available player. Hoskins resigned in August 
and his successor, Mark Alexander, has a still more pressing matter at the top 
of his to-do list: transformation.

The SARU has been wrestling with this ever since South Africa were readmitted 
to the international game in 1992. The government has lost patience with their 
slow progress, and in April the sports minister, Fikile Mbalula, announced that 
it would no longer “beg for racial transformation” but would seek, instead, to 
force it through. The SARU wants to host the 2023 World Cup, and Mbalula has 
been clear that the government will only support the bid if transformation 
speeds up. By 2019, the Springboks’ aim is that at least half their squad will 
be nonwhite, which would bring them into line with the national age-group teams.

Coetzee, who handled this challenge brilliantly at the Stormers, is a good man 
for the job. He will need to be. Because as low as England were last year, as 
poor as France still are, as under-resourced as Australian rugby is, and as 
high as expectations remain in New Zealand, right now being head coach of the 
Springboks looks like the hardest task in the sport. Right now the wheel is on 
a downward swing. Slowing it, stopping it, shifting it up again, is going to be 
a back-breaking work.
 