
Feeble though it is, we've talked extensively and interminably about the 
evidence for the historicity of Jesus during this course. My sense is that a 
man called Jesus probably did exist, and he was the basis of Christianity; but 
to assert that as truth so forcefully seems like folly. Today, we're on a 
subject which makes that evidence look like a complete readout of his genome, 
coupled with a signedbirth certificate <http://twitpic.com/g8cmp>.

It is central to Alpha, and evangelical Christianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity>. There is no point in my 
skirting the issue here: faith healing is unequivocal quackery.

Mike, a church layman leads us. His views are less nuanced and more 
conservative than Toby's, and he is more prone to Christian platitudes. He 
declares that one of the gifts of the Holy Spirit is faith to fight cynicism 
and unbelief. What a strange circular statement that is. He goes on to tell of 
his own family history of medical traumas. Mike tells us he was cured of 
epileptic fits by the laying on of hands. Others join in with stories of 
varying degrees of affliction, from the relatively trivial to the devastating. 
All are replete with a crucial device: defying medical expertise.

All these tales of human suffering deserve utmost compassion. But the tragedy 
is only exacerbated by the belief that the divine will cure them. And when 
cures do coincide with prayer, false credit is voluntarily given. Several 
phenomena are at play here: false reporting of illness, misremembering of 
recovery, spontaneous remission, and the all important placebo. These effects 
of the latter two are real, and we should work to understand and maximise their 
power. The only way we will make progress in these mysteries is with science. 
That beautiful service theCochrane Collaboration analysed 
<http://www.cochrane.org/reviews/en/ab000368.html> the effect of intercessory 
prayer on health, and found no significant results. For example, they divine 
"no clear effect of intercessory prayer on death". I guess Mike might not be 
aware of these data. Instead he doles out the kind of get-out clause that only 
the most blindly faithful could: "even death can be healing."

Toby had rather gleefully been teasing this session in recent weeks, as a 
retort to my vocal sceptical and scientific bent. After all, for eight weeks 
now I've been engaged in dialogue about a subject for which I can only ever be 
an enthusiastic hobbyist. The session becomes a discussion about the nature of 
science, and is largely directed at me. Fair enough, we're on my turf, I've 
done this before.

I try very hard to defend the ultimate beauty in the scientific method. They 
accuse me of having faith in science. I try to explain that the process by 
which scientific knowledge is gained does not require it, but if there is any 
faith in the scientific method itself, it is borne of unlimited instances where 
it has worked. The tone is mildly antagonistic, and casually anti-science: 
"there are many things we don't understand. Science doesn't know everything", 
someone clucks. Yes, that's right, otherwise it would stop, and I'd be out of 
work. Where once there was ignorance, science has placed knowledge. We shall 
see if I served my master well.

Why does evangelical Christianity rely so heavily on healing? One of the 
course books -"Questions of Life" - witters on about the many stories of 
healing in the New Testament. It spells out that everyone can do it, not just 
JC, and it is your Christian duty to do so. Other justifications are laid out 
in the session: 1) as a sign of God's kingdom; 2) as a foretaste of heaven, 
which is disease free; 3) as spiritual warfare against attack by demons. The 
question of why God doesn't heal more often is asked repeatedly by my 
classmates, but addressed with the universal religious cop out: "it might not 
be part of his plan" says Mike. In other words, He moves in mysterious ways.

Although I am an atheist, and see no truth in supernature, I recognise the 
need for religion, the comfort of faith, and the historical, political and 
cultural trappings of the church. But it bothers the hell out of me that a 
growing movement of Christianity so openly welcomes a specific return to 
pre-enlightenment thinking, where it is better to believe than wonder. Leave 
aside for one moment the totality of evidence that faith healing has no 
physical effect above the placebo; leave aside the ample evidence that faith 
healing can havea negative and dangerous effect on personal 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yd85SaoNssc&feature=related> and public health; 
why would a modern church so proactively promote something indistinguishable 
from magic (which it so vociferously berates)?

I believe the answer is two-fold. First, Alpha is an anti-intellectual 
movement, one that values experience and feelings over thought: it appeals on 
an emotional, not cerebral, level. Second, even though Alpha evangelicals are 
not biblical literalist fanatics, it is basically because the Bible tells them 
so. In his book "Searching Issues" Alpha's alphaNicky Gumbel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/aug/28/religion-christianity>
 has a chapter on science and religion. It is specious, weak, and quote-mined, 
and concludes with this: "We need science and scientists. Our civilisation owes 
a great deal to their work. But more than that we need Christianity and we need 
Jesus." Welcome to the dark ages.
 