
The Italian economist Guido Brera warns we’re all complicit in a great deceit. 
Millennials have been robbed of what might have been previously considered 
their rights, including free education and an affordable place to live; instead 
they are distracted and satiated (to varying degrees) by fast food, fast tech 
and fast fashion.

This trio comes at a massive ecological and human cost. Aiming to be part of 
the solution, retailer H&M launches World Recycle Week on 18 April. It plans to 
capture 1,000 tons of unwanted clothes during the week. Popstar M.I.A. will 
launch a video for the brand on environmental impact , and the brand will 
invite customers to drop off old clothes so H&M can “recycle them and create 
new textile fibre, and in return you get vouchers to use at H&M. Everybody 
wins!”

Do they? Crunch the numbers and H&M’s claims seem fanciful. Technical issues 
with commercial fibre recycling mean that only a small percentage of recycled 
yarn is used in new garments. Using publicly available figures and average 
clothing weights, it appears it would take 12 years for H&M to use up 1,000 
tons of fashion waste.

Meanwhile if 1,000 tons is recycled, that roughly equates to the same amount 
of clothes a brand of this size pumps out into the world in 48 hours. Then 
there are the voucher schemes, which often fuel more purchasing.

I may be a fool to let my heart get crushed by corporate green marketing, but 
it’s not just the audacity I object to: it’s the timing. H&M’s Recycle Week 
clashes exactly with the grassrootsFashion Revolution campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sustainable-fashion-blog/2015/apr/14/can-a-hashtag-change-the-fashion-industry>
. This was founded by Derbyshire hat designer Cary Somers and ethical clothing 
maker Orsola de Castro to commemorate the anniversary of theRana Plaza disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/01/rana-plaza-collapse-dozens-charged-with-murder-bangladesh>
.

They campaign on issues like living wages and transparency in the supply 
chain, but it’s kept brilliantly simple, keeping the spotlight on some of the 
most exploited workers on the planet.

Last April’s Fashion Revolution got huge traction on social media (124 million 
impressions of the hashtag alone). In particular everyone loved the 
#haulternatives, vloggers subverting the YouTube Hauler phenomenon (where young 
consumers show off their fast fashion purchases). Putting an ethical spin on 
things, haulers used vintage, fairtrade and charity shop buys.

H&M will now use the same idea for World Recycle Week. The brand insists this 
is a coincidence: Fashion Revolution is adamant that the clothing giant is 
trying to steal its thunder. “The outrage is actually that it is 
disrespectful,” says De Castro. “We’re remembering the carnage, not staging a 
carnival where people go around dressed in fashion waste.

“When you focus on pushing an initiative that’s about buying and consuming 
more, you do nothing to challenge the idea of garment workers as machines.”

To some this may sound an eccentric turf war, but it’s much more important 
than that. Fashion Revolution is one of the only chances an active engaged 
citizen – note the reprieve here from the term “consumer” – gets to challenge 
the fast food, fast tech, fast fashion, hegemony without interference from 
corporations. It must not be hijacked and greenwashed.
 