
Amal Clooney, prominent human rights lawyer, has today started advising the 
Greek governmentin its bid to reclaim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/13/parthenon-marbles-hollywood-amal-alamuddin-george-clooney-greece>
 the Parthenon Marbles. Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin, acquired the 2,500 
year old classical Greek sculptures in the early 19th century through a 
possibly-dodgy deal with the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire. Having always 
intended them for display in the British Museum, they were placed there in 
1816, where they remain to this day.

Greece has been making efforts to get them back for a while, to which the 
British respond with arguments like “but then we might have to give back all 
the other stuff we’ve pillaged” and “what if they get damaged”, which seems 
weak when you consider that Elgin’s original transport ship actually sank on 
the way home and the Marbles had to be retrieved by a team of divers. It’s the 
world’s most famous case of cultural restitution, and I will follow it with 
keen interest.

Oh, and also, Amal Clooney, née Alamuddin, recent bride of famous actor George 
Clooney,has possibly changed her last name 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2791458/george-clooney-s-wife-amal-changes-law-firm-s-website-arrives-greece-case-getting-married.html>
 to either Alamuddin-Clooney or just straight up Clooney. Predictably, everyone 
is losing their minds.

Whether or not women take their husband’s name upon marriage fires up 
feminists like almost nothing else. The couple’s celebrity status adds fuel to 
the blaze, as well as Alamuddin Clooney’s status as a high flyer in her own 
right. As a broad generalisation, the two sides boil down to “that’s 
patriarchal nonsense in obvious need of rejection” and “leave her alone, it’s 
none of your goddamn business”. These positions crop up again and again in 
feminist debate over everything from leg-shaving to breastfeeding, but name 
changing has become a totemic issue that has us grabbing our torches and 
pitchforks at a moment’s notice.

The real problem is that a conception of feminism centring individual choice 
runs into problems when we consider that all of our choices are mediated by 
language and culture. This is true for everybody: nothing that we do or say can 
spring fully-formed from an inner well of volition, unmediated by social 
forces. The way we conceive of agency is itself influenced by what we’re taught 
about our own subjectivity. Of course it’s a two-way street, and critical 
awareness of how we’re shaped by norms enables us to tinker with and change 
them according to what we think should be happening.

Resisting widely-accepted norms involves varying levels of inconvenience and 
risk, from women getting funny looks on the bus if they’ve not shaved their 
legs all the way through to rape and murder for more grave “transgressions”. 
This is where the structurally relevant choice lies: how will I navigate a 
social space that assumes I will take my husband’s name? How much effort am I 
willing to make?

For an issue as materially trivial as name-changing, it’s just a waste of time 
to pick over one person’s motivations for doing it. We’ve been having this 
fight on permanent loop for decades, and it’s been an embarrassing diversion 
from more important considerations. On top of this, the feminists who tend to 
fruitlessly perpetuate The Issue That Must Not Be Named are often unacceptably 
ignorant of cultural perspectives other than their own, which are frequently 
(although not exclusively) white, middle-class and liberal.

Naming practices are deeply embedded traditions with very long histories, and 
they differ significantly depending on the culture to which you belong – even 
the subcultural context, ethnic, socio-economic, familial or otherwise, within 
one country’s borders. The political valences attached to taking your husband’s 
name are different for different groups of women, but the arguments we hear 
most centre the perspectives of feminists with a prominent platform.

Unsurprisingly, these feminists belong to the same white, middle-class, 
liberal group for whom name-changing is a crucial issue of personal identity, 
tied up with career concerns, symbolic ownership of children, and 
self-reflexive displays of autonomy.

There’s nothing wrong with keeping your maiden name for these reasons. But 
refusing to acknowledge other perspectives indicates arrogance, and 
universalising this one, highly particular set of values risks de-legitimising 
other values and choices that might be just as crucial for different women.

The conversation, if we must continue having it, should shift away from 
aggressive dialectic and towards respectful sharing of narratives. Only through 
asking, listening, and reflection can we identify which issues stand in the way 
of all women being able to select options that are best for them, their 
families and their communities.
 