
He was, as he put it, "just a bloke from English theatre" but it was Sam 
Mendes's night at the Oscars.American Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-beauty>, the first film directed by 
the British director, swept the board, winning best picture, best director, 
best actor, best screenplay and best cinematography awards at a ceremony which 
also managed to celebrate transexuality and abortion rights.

Sam Mendes said hello to all his "friends watching in his flat in Primrose 
Hill" and Pedro Almodovar listed all the saints to whom his sisters had lit 
candles to ensure his victory in the best foreign language film category for 
All About My Mother before being dragged off stage by Antonio Banderas for 
exceeding his time limit. "We live in a different culture," he told the 
audience, explaining that in Spain it was already "six years in the morning."

The ceremony lasted slightly less time, but by the end of it most of the 
predicted winners had thanked their parents, spouses and visionary producers, 
and headed off for the far more testing task of getting past security and into 
the post-Oscar parties in Beverly Hills.

The success of American Beauty was the undoubted theme of the night, even if 
it had been predicted for the last three months, but there were other 
highlights, not least the attendance of Annette Bening who was due that very 
day to give birth to her and husband Warren Beatty's fourth child. (Cue many 
jokes about productions.)

Hilary Swank won the best actress award for her part in the $2m independent 
film, Boys Don't Cry, based on the true story of a woman who passed as a man 
and was murdered because of it. She used her acceptance speech to call on 
people to "celebrate our diversity".

One of the loudest rounds of applause for the night went to the man who 
described theOscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> ceremony as a 
"meaningless, self-serving meat parade": George C Scott, who died last year, 
appeared in the In Memoriam spot which honours film business people who have 
moved on.

The man who had already picked up more Oscars than anyone on stage was there 
as guest of honour: Willie Fulgear, the 61-year-old freelance salvage worker 
who found 52 of the 55 stolen Oscars in LA's Koreatown last week, looked more 
of a star with his snappy fedora than many of the real ones.

Britain done well. Michael Caine made a suitably urbane acceptance speech as 
he took the best supporting actor award from Dame Judi Dench: "I'm basically up 
here as a survivor," he said. Phil Collins won best original song Oscar for 
You'll be in My Heart from Tarzan, and the first Oscar of the night, for 
costume design, also went Britain's way.

Lindy Hemming who designed the spectacular outfits for Mike Leigh's 
Topsy-Turvy made a gracious and brief speech of thanks that "our little film" 
had been honoured. The orchestra accompanied her on to the stage with The Lord 
High Executioner from the Mikado, hinting that this might be the night when 
death row (The Green Mile features an electric chair execution) really made it 
big. That was not to be.

But Topsy-Turvy provided the audience with another more humane acceptance 
speech after Christine Blundell and Trevor Proud took the make-up Oscar. "Mike 
Leigh, top guy," said Ms Blundell. "Thanks to the rest of our team. Thank you." 
And that was it. No wonder the audience, steadying itself for three hours of 
tears and dedications applauded so loudly.

The Matrix took Oscars for the sound, visual effects and editing, and Sleepy 
Hollow for art direction. The first of the acting awards went, as predicted, to 
Angelina Jolie, for her supporting role in Girl, Interrupted.

Alexandre Petrov who won the Animated Short Oscar made what is believed to 
have been the first acceptance speech in Russian. One Day in September beat the 
critics' favourite, Wim Wenders's Buena Vista Social Club to the documentary 
feature award.

Before the ceremony, the actresses had had to face the traditional Mastermind 
questions on their way down the red carpet: "who made your dress?" "Why did you 
choose that colour?" Some television crews, unable to be heard above the din, 
held up signs with instructions: "Please spin around!" They may have got more 
than they bargained for when one dress-wearer spun round to reveal Trey Parker, 
the husky co-writer of animated film South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut, who 
had come in drag. They might have got even more than they bargained had he and 
his colleague Mark Shalman won the best song prize for their scatalogical Blame 
Canada.

There was an honourary Oscar for Polish director Andrzej Wadja presnted by 
Jane Fonda who was welcomed "home" by Billy Crystal. The Irving Thalberg award 
went to Warren Beatty, who said that he regarded it as a greater prize than the 
White House in which direction many of the audience had hoped he might have 
been heading.

Politics made a brief appearance. Billy Crystal referred to the Robin Williams 
film about a robot who wants to become a human being: "it's called the Al Gore 
story". To show balance, he suggested that the list of winners of the awards 
was the best-kept secret in America - "with the possible exception of what 
George W Bush did in the 70s" (a reference to the question the Texas governor 
is often asked about whether in his youth he had used recreational substances 
not manufactured by Nike.) John Irving received cheers when he paid tribute the 
National Abortion Rights League in his acceptance of best Oscar for the adapted 
screenplay of The Cider House Rules.

The building next door to the Shrine in this slightly run-down part of LA is 
the 32nd Street school carries a bold injunction to its students on one wall: 
"live, learn, recycle." Doubtless words that any of the night's disappointed 
producers are even now taking to heart.
 