
What is it? A high-stakes, high-school documentary series of quiet distinction.

Why you’ll love it: The mostly African-American seniors of 
Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School in South Carolina (or OW – oh dubya – for 
short) are followed by a British film crew in their final year. The next 12 
months could change their lives but attendance is slipping, violence is a 
problem and some of the students have tough family situations. Watching this 
heart-tugging series in the context of Donald Trump’s impending presidency 
raises the stakes horribly. If some of these students started out at an 
arguable disadvantage, you’re left to wonder what hope there is of social 
mobility in a country run by someone born to privilege with no understanding of 
struggle.

Into the chaos comes new principal Stephen G Peters, one of those 
inspirational teachers who will not rest until he has shepherded every single 
one of them safely through the gates, prepared for what lies ahead.

Last Chance U: is this the best sports documentary series of all time?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/02/last-chance-u-american-football-sports-documentary>
We have been spoiled with on-screen inspirational teachers in the UK thanks to 
several series of the excellent Educating … series (Essex, Yorkshire, etc), 
famous for their use of discreet camera rigs and the apparent naturalism that 
can offer. This is no different when it comes to access, but the students and 
teachers here are perhaps more aware of the cameras and it actually helps the 
narrative. At the start, the students are keen to perform, to be noticed and to 
leave their mark. The cool boys sneer and talk in soundbites: “This ain’t no 
fairytale,” says Rendull, the basketball captain who has just got his 
girlfriend pregnant. The way some of the participants try to mythologise their 
own stories in the early episodes gives way to something less guarded and more 
open as graduation day approaches.

It feels as if the producers have played the long game here, spending time 
with their subjects over months, gaining their trust, putting them at ease. 
Vernon is the only male cheerleader at OW and, estranged from his mum since he 
came out as gay, he has moved in with best friend Breezy and her mother. But 
his dreams of college in New York are threatened by his inability to stay away 
from mischief.

Sneaker-obsessed TJ is a regular high school dandy, always well turned-out and 
determined not to end up like his dad, who is currently serving time in prison. 
But his conviction that he will rise above expectations is at constant war with 
his own anger. And often, the anger wins. Assistant principal Dr Hall has built 
a special relationship with him but can she keep him on the path to graduation? 
Meanwhile, Jalena is aiming high and wants to become an engineer so she can 
ease the burden of debt on her single father. She applies to Ivy League 
colleges, full of hope and a resolve to do something good with her life.

The relationships are incredibly touching but never schmaltzy. The show is a 
delicately filmed and edited thing, which keeps its distance and allows the 
emotion to speak for itself. Every participant is treated with careful, 
considered respect and the skill of the filmmaker (Marcus Plowright) is in 
drawing real feeling from their situations without resorting to head-patting 
sympathy. This is helped by Alexander Parsons’ impressive score, mixing tinges 
of the music the kids listen to with his own emotive arrangements. Six episodes 
of hope, just when it’s needed.

Where: BBC Three on iPlayer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/p04b9k5l/american-high-school-straight-outta-orangeburg-1-the-quest-to-be-the-best>
.

Length: Six 45-minute episodes, four available now, with a new one every 
Tuesday.

Stand-out episode: Episode two, in which we hear about Vernon’s backstory and 
his friendship with Breezy.

If you liked American High School, watch: Last Chance U 
<https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80091742> (Netflix),  Educating Yorkshire 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/educating-yorkshire> (All 4), Friday Night 
Lights (DVD).
 