
During Thursday’s debate, the two candidates for the Democratic nomination 
were offered the opportunity to engage one another’s ideas for the path forward 
on healthcare reform. In the last few weeks, Bernie Sanders has advocated for a 
“single payer” system to replace the Affordable Care Act, whichHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> has said has no chance of 
passing Congress and would mean scrapping a flawed but useful system that could 
instead be reformed.

At the debate, Clinton stated that she had been “fighting for universal 
coverage” for many years, but that rather than starting over from scratch that 
“we should build on what we have”.Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> countered, correctly, that 
every other liberal democracy has provided universal healthcare for much less 
money than the US spends, and that the American system still falls far short of 
this standard.


Here’s the thing: they’re really both right. Sanders is correct that while the 
Affordable Care Act was a major progressive achievement, the American 
healthcare system still insures too few people for far too much money, and 
considerably more needs to be done. And Clinton is right that the it’s possible 
to build European-style healthcare out of the framework created by the ACA.

The key to fixing our system, though, is to understand that single-payer is 
far from the only model – and it’s not the same as “universal coverage”.

Since Sanders released his single-payer plan, it has come under attack from 
some critics 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/bernie-sanders-health-plan_us_569ff110e4b076aadcc50807>
 for being vague and unrealistic; his supportershave responded 
<https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/01/vox-bernie-sanders-single-payer-ezra-klein-matt-yglesias/>
 that expecting a high level of policy detail in a campaign proposal is 
unrealistic. Sanders defenders have a point: campaign policy proposals that 
make implausibly optimistic assumptions and ignore downsides are more the rule 
than the exception.

The details of the 2008 Democratic candidates’ proposed healthcare proposals 
were important then because there was a reasonable chance that something would 
actually pass; the same cannot be said for the chance of passing a major 
overhaul in 2017.

The problem with Sanders’s single-payer proposal isn’t that it is too vague to 
allow voters to assess its feasibility and its flaws. The problem with his plan 
is that it reinforces the idea that European-style universal healthcare is 
synonymous with “single payer”; that is simply untrue. There are models that 
deliver similar or better results than single-payer systems, and they are more 
politically viable within the American system.

In terms of viability, it’s vital to understand the massive economic 
disruption that implementing single payer in this day and age would cause, and 
how that would make it a political non-starter regardless of which party 
controlled Congress. As Paul Starrargued recently 
<http://prospect.org/article/false-lure-sanders-single-payer-plan> in the 
American Prospect, when President Harry Truman proposed universal health 
insurance, healthcare costs were only 4% of GDP; had the US gotten single payer 
then, healthcare would be much less costly today. Since then, however, 
healthcare costs have ballooned, and that makes a public takeover of the health 
insurance industry far more difficult.

From the Social Security Act t <http://prospect.org/article/fear-and-new-deal>
o the Affordable Care Act, major progressive reform in the US has always 
involved compromises to buy off vested interests. And, even in countries where 
there are fewer institutional mechanisms to thwart change, medical lobbies have 
serious influence. Even with the advantages of a political system that makes it 
easier for major reforms to pass, nationalized healthcare was able to pass in 
the UK only because Labour Health Minister Aneurin Bevan“stuffed the mouths” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/features/the-birth-of-the-nhs-856091.html>
 of medical practitioners “with gold”. It’s one thing to do that in the UK in 
1948; the amount of gold that would have to be stuffed into the millions of 
mouths of the American health industry to make single payer viable in the 21st 
century would require insanely high (and obviously politically unsustainable) 
levels of taxation and would also defeat much of the purpose of converting to 
single payer in the first place.

To implement a single-payer healthcare system from scratch in 2017 would mean 
not only nationalizing the insurance industry, but severely cutting payments to 
doctors, hospitals and other areas of the healthcare industry if it were to 
bring any cost savings. A lot of people working for politically powerful 
lobbies would be thrown out of work or bankrupted, and many others would be 
looking at whopping pay cuts; that would never be politically viable even if it 
was desirable as policy.

To put it another way, single payer in the contemporary US faces intertwined 
political and policy problems that are insurmountable. The effects of the lack 
of cost controls in the American system for decades can’t be undone overnight.


Still, the fact that single payer is probably politically unviable shouldn’t 
stop anyone from focusing on single payer as a long-term goal if it was the 
only way of achieving real universal healthcare. But it’s not.

Many liberal democracies, including Switzerland, France and Germany, have 
achieved true universal coverage with hybrid public/private models. The 
Netherlandsactually changed 
<http://www.commonwealthfund.org/topics/international-health-policy/countries/the-netherlands>
 its single-payer system to a hybrid system in 2006. When compared to 
single-payer Canada, the hybrid models in general rank better in quality and 
efficiency and are as or more equitable. And like single-payer,they deliver 
better results 
<http://www.vox.com/2014/6/16/5812898/five-ways-the-american-health-care-system-is-literally-the-worst>
 for far less money than the US spends.

Particularly given that there’s no way that single-payer would be as cheap in 
the US as it is in Canada, single payer is probably less desirable than the 
hybrid model even if we ignore the former’s political unfeasibility.

But Sanders and Clinton are right that, in the long term, something at least 
approaching European-style universal healthcare is possible. Many countries 
have built excellent healthcare systems out of better versions of the ACA 
model: expanded (and in the case of Medicaid, improved) public insurance 
combined with better-regulated and subsidized private markets. Progress can be 
made towards this incrementally, as Clinton has proposed; it can be done in 
another big statute but it doesn’t have to be.

If we’re going to get to universal coverage, though, liberals need to get 
beyond conflating “single payer” and “European-style healthcare.” (And I’ve 
been as guilty of that as anyone.) Universal health coverage is a case in which 
Sanders’s idealism and Clinton’s realism can in fact end up in the same place.

But when thinking about Sanders’ as-yet vague healthcare reform proposal, 
progressives who want reform – and maybe even Sanders himself – need to be 
committed to its goal of universal coverage rather than being strictly 
committed to any particular path like “single payer”.
 