 Yesterday's blasts took place only hours after the publication of a 
long-awaited report on Ayodhya - the temple town in north India, which has long 
divided Hindus and Muslims.
In 1992 thousands of Hindu zealots tore down the 16th-century Babri mosque in 
the town, claiming it had been built on the site of an earlier Hindu temple 
sacred to Lord Ram, Hinduism's most important deity. The incident led to 
rioting acrossIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, with several 
thousand killed.

It also propelled the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) to power 
- which exploited a wave of Hindu sentiment overAyodhya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya> to defeat India's Congress party. 
Since then Hindu extremists have claimed that they were entitled to destroy the 
mosque - because India's former Muslim Mughal rulers did the same when they 
swept into India in the 15th century.

What happened in Ayodhya was merely a case of righting an historical 
injustice, they argue. Yesterday's report by the archaeological survey of India 
(ASI) appears to support them - and claims that a Hindu temple did indeed exist 
on the disputed religious site long before the mosque.

The report deals a blow to India's Muslim community - and appears to be a 
belated blessing to Hindu vandals who plunged India into a communal crisis.

Secular historians are likely to dispute the ASI's conclusions. The BJP has 
stuffed academic institutions and bodies with its own supporters - and has even 
been accused of altering school text books to support its pro-Hindu version of 
history. It was not clear last night whether the bomb blasts in Bombay were 
provoked by the report - or whether the timing was a coincidence.

India's supreme court has been pondering its own verdict on the Ayodhya affair 
for several decades now. The court has yet to rule on whether a new Hindu 
temple can be constructed on the ruins of the old mosque - something that 
India's prime minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, and most of his cabinet support. 
Until the court decides, the issue will continue to poison Hindu-Muslim 
relations.
 