
The African Medical and Research Foundation (Amref) has been forced to tighten 
up its financial monitoring practices following concerns over the distribution 
of money for the water component of the Katine project in north-eastUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>.

The move follows two incidents where the handling of money paid by villagers 
to Amref for the construction of boreholes and the payments made to builders on 
complex contracts by the NGO were not sufficiently monitored by Amref's country 
office in Kampala.

The Guardian has learned that money collected in January by Amref's water 
officer from two water source committees to part-fund new boreholes was not 
paid into the Katine project account for around three months. The money was 
collected from the villagers at the beginning of the year, and the officer had 
written a receipt for it. However, the money was not paid into the bank until 
the end of April and after several requests to do so had been made.

Amref's Uganda country director, Joshua Kyallo, said the water officer "had 
insisted that he had had no ulterior motives" for not banking the money.

"There appeared to be considerable confusion regarding the timing and 
processes for collecting the money and management received divergent points of 
view from the various parties involved," he added.

The Guardian understands there is still some confusion about whether the full 
amount has been paid in and/or properly credited by the bank and Amref has been 
asked to investigate further by Katine's sub-county chief, James Obore.

More recently in the summer, the same water officer took a cash advance of 
Ushs 1,605,000 (£459) from Amref to cover the construction costs of two new 
shallow wells at Oderai and Ogwolo villages – a common practice among staff. 
Payments were made to the builders in instalments after each stage of the work 
was completed and to tide the builders over for ongoing expenses.

However, problems arose when builders didn't receive as much money as they 
believed they would be getting in the first installment. The builders 
complained that they were not paid the amount for which they had been asked to 
sign. The UShs 1.6m cost had only been agreed verbally between the water 
officer and the construction company, so there was no written documentation to 
refer to when the contractors complained.

The contractors interpreted this as a sign of dishonesty but, according to 
Amref, the water officer "made them [the contractors] sign for the money to 
expedite the accountability process, but kept it in good faith and intended to 
pay them after all works were finished as a control measure".

The contractors also claimed for an unbudgeted sum arising from the cost of 
using their own watering pump when another pump hired by the water officer had 
arrived broken.

The water officer disputed the amount of their claim and refused to pay, 
prompting the builders to threaten to stop work.

To ensure work continued on the project, the water officer then agreed to pay 
the contractors what they were claiming. Meanwhile, the dispute was referred to 
Amref's Kampala office.

At a meeting with Amref the officer agreed to pay the Ushs 1.6m he had been 
allocated back into the main Katine project account. It was also agreed that he 
should have documented the process better "to avoid conflicts/confusion of this 
nature".

Amref said it has now "fully streamlined processes and procedures for 
receiving, banking and disbursing community contributions. The processes are 
fully owned and monitored by the community members and there is absolute 
transparency in the process," said Kyallo.

Any financial transaction done in the field now has to be accompanied by 
written documentation. Amref's field finance department will itself pay for 
work wherever possible and not rely on field programme managers to make direct 
payments. Strict thresholds on how much money a project manager can authorise 
have also been set. Amref said that monitoring and evaluation methods have now 
been enforced to "better challenge any quotes provided by construction workers".

Amref says no money was lost and no one has been blamed. The water officer has 
since resigned. The vacancy has been filled. Construction continues.
 