
There were a number of reasons why, when the Guardian called, I was reluctant 
to take up the offer to report on the Katine project.

Since being named CNN MultiChoice African journalist of the year in 2007, I 
had already rejected other job offers; I wanted to stay at the Observer, a 
bi-weekly paper inUganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>, and 
further my education. The thought of riding accident-prone buses on the 
back-breaking, 350km-long journey to Katine seemed prohibitively punishing. I 
also doubted that a Ugandan NGO would support my independent reporting of its 
work. And I dreaded having to regularly explain my disappearance to two 
demanding sons.

But, following much discussion – and with the support of my managing editor at 
the Observer, James Tumusiime – I was persuaded to sign up to this unusual 
project. When I met with the Guardian in Kampala in December 2007, I quickly 
realised my first big challenge would be managing the maze of relationships 
involved in the initiative, especially with Amref.

Amref staff were understandably nervous that any shortcomings might be 
reported in a way which would damage the organisation. During this teething 
period, I was regarded with suspicion and, as one man put it, as a spy for the 
donors. However, their fears were concealed behind a facade of courtesy.

A few weeks after arriving in Katine, I realised there were two Guardians in 
the sub-county: one a donor, the other a media house. Which was I representing? 
Was it the news organisation, in which case I was simply a journalist reporting 
on Katine? Or was it the donor, which afforded me power, respect and a sense of 
entitlement? Or both? I chose to simply be a journalist, leaving the "politics" 
of the partner relationship to my London bosses.

Over time, my relationship with the Amref team matured into mutual respect. 
Conversations no longer came to an abrupt end when "the journalist" entered the 
room; the team realised their office banter wouldn't make it on to the website.

There were tensions, however, especially during the second year of the project 
when, with my colleague Joseph Malinga, we started gauging the impact of 
Amref's work.

We wrote unflattering stories about the high costs of building Amorikot school 
and the stagnation of the Kadinya school construction. We questioned claims 
made in Amref's reports and highlighted the poor condition of some of the new 
water sources. Inevitably, this made Amref staff uncomfortable. It was clear 
some did not want these things reported. Sometimes we had to wait for days or 
weeks for a comment or explanation. Occasionally, the answers had not come by 
the time the story was published on the site. It was clearly difficult for 
Amref staff in the field to be under such scrutiny.

But as I leave Katine, my thoughts are of the people who used to drink dirty 
water but now have functioning boreholes; of pupils who used to sit on the 
earth in grass-thatched rooms but now sit at desks in modern classrooms and 
have a chance to read a textbook; of mothers whose babies escaped malaria 
because they received insecticide-treated bednets; of farmers who received 
improved cassava stems or benefited from loans from the savings associations 
and can now afford to send their children to better schools. All this has been 
thanks to generous donations from readers of the Guardian and from Barclays.

Of course, many villages still have no safe water, Amorikot primary school 
still has too few teachers, and I carry with me the image of a mother wailing 
beside her baby, Winnie, who had just died partly because of a chronic lack of 
malaria drugs in the health centre. Clearly Katine needs more support, but who 
will provide it?

The Katine project has demonstrated the limits to which NGOs can go in their 
efforts to support communities. The failure of the government to put medicines 
and doctors into health centres or teachers into schools has undermined the 
impact of Amref's activities.

Katine also highlights the important role the media has to play in reporting 
on NGO activities. Some of the issues we covered in Katine, such as whether the 
correct number of desks arrived at schools, or the delays building the school 
at Kadinya, would ordinarily never be reported in the media, internationally or 
locally, despite Soroti having a good number of local radio stations and a 
vernacular newspaper. I believe donors should consider supporting the 
development of independent media. Journalists should be encouraged to visit 
areas where an NGO is running a project to find out what work is being carried 
out, rather than having to rely on glossy reports. Interestingly, all the 
people to whom I spoke as I left Katine felt that the presence of Guardian 
journalists had put positive pressure on Amref to deliver.

On a personal level, Katine has changed my life. I met my wife through the 
project and we now have two wonderful children.

The project has been a challenging but fulfilling assignment. Swapping city 
life for village life every fortnight sometimes felt so disorientating that I 
wished I could be based in Katine 24/7. Other times, when I had to turn down 
invitations to official and social functions in Kampala, I felt I was missing 
out. But the warmth of the people, who embraced me like a son or a brother, and 
the appreciation and debate the Katine project has sparked around the world, 
made it all worthwhile.

As the Guardian's full-time coverage of Katine comes to an end, I begin a new 
chapter in my life, spending a year in London, studying for an MA at 
Goldsmiths. Because of the project, I've been offered the chance to further my 
education. And this time I did not need to be persuaded.
 