
I met Andre Kruger for the first time in January. We had breakfast at Milsons 
Point on a rainy morning, four days afterAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> won the Asian Cup. Yet the 
victory only warranted a passing mention. We drank coffee and talked for hours, 
connected by a shared love of football’s uniquely Australian history.


German by birth, Andre started watching the Socceroos during the World Cup in 
1974. As a young boy he asked his mother to fashion him a yellow jersey with 
the Australian coat of arms on the front and captain Peter Wilson’s number 
eight on the back. When he left school he boarded the MS Lloyd Sydney, bound 
for Australia. His first port of call was Dural, where Wilson was playing for 
Western Suburbs in the National Soccer League.

Wilson now lives a reclusive life in Wollongong, while Kruger is back in 
Germany. The pair have exchanged letters for years. Their enduring and very 
private friendship says a lot about football in Australia – a German and a 
Yorkshireman, thousands of kilometres and a generation apart, united by the 
Socceroos.

As an ardent and well-known Australia fan 
<http://www.socceroos.com.au/article/meet-the-crazy-german-andre-kruger/1gmkdurvk8jul1gxriutcf3xx7>
, in January Kruger was summoned to the FFA office, which he described as “a 
souvenir shop”. David Gallop gave him a jersey, size small; a pair of shorts, 
size XXL; and a hat which was two sizes too big. Tickets were thrust in his 
hand. But he wasn’t there for handouts. He asked why the Asian Cup wasn’t on 
display. “That’s next week,” they said. “No,” he clarified, “where’s the 
women’s Asian Cup?” The answer – “in storage” – left him deeply unimpressed.

Women's World Cup in Australia part of FFA's ambitious 20-year football plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/05/womens-world-cup-australia-football-plan>
For Kruger, the truest of believers, a man who has paid his own way to bear 
witness to the highs and lows of the Socceroos, the Asian Cup was bittersweet. 
The highlight of his trip was getting his old makeshift Socceroos jersey signed 
by Wilson. “Where is the Oceania Cup?” he wrote. “Where is the China-Australia 
Ampol Cup? Where is the Trans Tasman Cup or the Merlion Cup? The ashes box?”

According to FFA’s Whole of Football Plan, released on Tuesday, it’s all set 
to come out of storage for display at a national museum. “Football must 
establish a Football Museum to acknowledge the history of football in Australia 
and establish a strong connection between football’s present and its past,” 
says the report.

To establish a museum is to establish origins, and to establish origins is to 
belong. And for a game that has for decades been pushed to the margins by 
thinly veiled chauvinism and xenophobia, this is long overdue. But how this 
museum tells the story of Australian football will be a delicate task.

There is deep, personal investment in the game’s past. I have witnessed Ray 
Richards, the Socceroos’ toughest midfielder, brought to tears as he read aloud 
his poetry about playing with the national team in the battlefields of Vietnam. 
I have seenAndrew Dettre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/dec/12/the-forgotten-story-of-andrew-dettre-and-soccer-world>
, Australian football’s greatest journalist, choke up while recounting the 
effort that he and his colleagues put into the first national football newspaper
Soccer World. The curator must be able to respect individual ownership of 
history, and that this museum is playing catch-up.

Remember when FFA announced they had “found” the old Australia Cup? In fact 
the Cup had been rescued from the rubble of the old Hakoah Club in Bondi, and 
when it was first offered to FFA for safekeeping, they said theyweren’t 
interested 
<http://www.ozfootball.net/museum/index.php/en/archive/189-australia-cup-found-in-rubbish>
. This museum needs to be borne out of a spirit of penance, not propaganda.

The curators need to carefully balance the personal and the political. FFA 
must understand that football’s history is also the history of Australian 
migration. Football’s story has always been trans-national, with countless 
tales of resettlement and integration. The museum must not, as this 
administration and theA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> 
has done for a decade, shy away from the game’s roots in ethnic communities. 
FFA’s lust for corporate attention and the pig-ignorant view that football must 
be “mainstream” must not be allowed to distort our past.

[Football] brought me into the migrant community where I found great 
satisfaction, no prejudice, or derogatory remarks.
Charlie Perkins  Charlie Perkins, one of Australia’s greatest champions of 
multiculturalism. Photograph: University of Sydney 
Consider this. In 2005, the ethnic-backed clubs of the National Soccer League 
were forcibly relegated to make way for the new, corporate franchises of the 
A-League. “For too long,” wrote rugby league columnist Roy Masters, “the sport 
in Australia has been a kind of national orphanage, played by refugees from one 
disrupted country or another.”

Except Masters’ great uncle Judy was captain of the Australian national side 
during the 1920s. It’s unlikely Masters would consider his great uncle an 
“orphan”, nor would he consider him to be from a “displaced country”. No, these 
epithets are always reserved for the migrants who came post-WWII – the 
Europeans, the South Americans, the Asians and the Africans. If this museum 
elevates the Judy Masters over the Billy Vojteks, for example, it will do more 
harm than good.

 There is an opportunity, for the first time in years, to present football as 
it really is and was. Football should have immense pride in its contribution to 
Australian life. In 1962, the great Hungarian-Australian novelist and poet 
David Martin publishedThe Young Wife. Hailed by reviewers as a growing sign of 
Australia’s literary maturity, the book describes the struggle of Greek-Cypriot 
migrants in Melbourne. Martin’s characters, unsurprisingly, revolve around an 
ethnic-backed football club.

Football was genuinely multicultural well before multiculturalism was public 
policy. The ethnic social clubs that emerged in the post-war period provided 
some of our greatest clubs and players. Great Australians such as Charlie 
Perkins and Marin Alagich, hailed as champions of multiculturalism, found 
community and sanctuaries from racism at football clubs run by migrants. Any 
Australian football museum must reflect this truth.

There is also a considerable problem of geography. In April I had lunch in 
Rockhampton withSterling McQuire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/mar/24/cyclone-hit-football-club-different-storm>
, a proud local volunteer, player, coach and groundskeeper of Darumbul and 
South Sea Islander stock. He was proud to show me the Wesley Hall Cup, which 
stands a metre tall behind glass at the Frenchville Sports Club. Since 1895 the 
Wesley has been played continuously, making it one of the oldest tournaments in 
the country.

Should this cup, crafted in London around the time of England’s FA Cup, be 
removed from Frenchville and placed in this new museum? What merit is there is 
presenting historical items from Rockhampton or Perth or Darwin or Hobart, in 
Sydney? Should an Australian football museum be run under a centralised or 
decentralised model?

The arguments for the former will appeal to many. There is a great emptiness 
in a game that still does not have a home.Middle Park, football’s first cradle, 
has long since been demolished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/oct/23/the-forgotten-story-of-south-melbourne-at-middle-park>
. St George Stadium is ransacked, covered in weeds and graffiti. Ultimately, 
this museum should provide the game some sense of place.

It must reflect and reactivate memory, and it must speak to new and old. It 
must not add women, or migrants, or Aboriginal people as an afterthought or an 
add-on extra. It must be accessible, not just for its visitors but for students 
and historians who wish to explore new avenues of research. It must go on the 
front foot to engage with journalists and the media.

There should be exhibitions that educate and inform, and there should be both 
the marvellous and the mundane – the grand old trophies and the annual reports. 
At some point the museum must contribute to and cherish the complete 
statistical history of the various leagues and national teams. Most of all, it 
must be collaborative and it must be honest. There cannot be one single 
narrative of football in Australia. Get this right, and FFA can answer some of 
its most trenchant criticisms.

Over the past couple of years, Lou Gautier, Sir Arthur George, Leopold 
Baumgartner, Rudy Alagich and Herbert Ninaus – to name a few – have all passed 
away. Many football fans won’t know those names. Many who do might not be aware 
of their passing. That in itself shows the urgency of this project.

“The history of whole Australia is young,” wrote Kruger upon his return to 
Germany. “Maybe that’s one reason that some people don’t care. They feel they 
have no history. But one day they will regret it. And it is also not the 
decision of a few people. It is responsible for a whole country.”
 