
At the Olympic Games in Los Angeles in 1984, the rower Andy Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-holmes>, who has died of leptospirosis 
(also known as Weil's disease) aged 51, was part of the coxed four whose 
victory redefined British rowing. Holmes went on to become Steve Redgrave's 
partner in the pair, and together they won gold and bronze medals – in the 
coxless and coxed pairs respectively – at the Seoul Olympics four years later.

Holmes was born in Hillingdon, west London. His interest in rowing was ignited 
at the age of 12 at Latymer upper school in Hammersmith, where he also played 
rugby with a young Hugh Grant. Holmes was coached in rowing by Jim Clark, who 
had won a silver medal as part of the British eight at the Montreal Olympics in 
1976.

When he left school, Holmes joined the Leander club at Henley. His first 
victory at the royal regatta came in 1978 in the Thames Challenge cup. He 
competed in his first world championships two years later with a coxed four who 
led the 2km race for more than 1,200m but then failed to win a medal.

The key year in Holmes's career was 1984. British rowing had not enjoyed an 
Olympic victory since 1948, when Jack Wilson and Ran Laurie had won the coxless 
pairs, and Richard Burnell andBert Bushnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/feb/28/bert-bushnell-obituary> had won 
the double sculls.

The coxed four that was assembled for the 1984 Games was a formidable crew, 
with Redgrave at stroke, Holmes, Richard Budgett, Martin Cross and the cox 
Adrian Ellison. The Eastern bloc boycott meant that East Germany, the Brits' 
strongest rivals, did not compete that year, but the crew had already proven 
that they could beat the East German boat at the Lucerne Regatta.

At Lake Casitas in California, the British crew confirmed their standing with 
Olympic victory over the Americans. "We hadn't raced against them before," said 
Holmes in an interview with the Observer in 2006, "but we figured that if we 
stayed in touch with them early on, we would come through in the second half of 
the race – which we did." Holmes made the headlines that day because he had 
funded his Olympic effort by working as a hod carrier.

His first international partnership with Redgrave in the coxless pairs came at 
the 1986 Commonwealth Games, which they won. The same summer they won the world 
title in the coxed pairs at Nottingham, with Pat Sweeney, and in 1987 they took 
another world title in the coxless pairs at Copenhagen.

In the 1988 Olympics at Seoul, Holmes and Redgrave took gold in the coxless 
pairs and, with Sweeney, bronze in the coxed pairs. The qualifying was daunting 
enough, with the semi-finals for the two events held within 50 minutes of each 
other, but they won both of those races. In the final for the coxless pairs, on 
the Han River course, Holmes and Redgrave led from start to finish, defeating 
the Romanians Dragos Neagu and Danut Dobre by more than a second. But a little 
less than 24 hours later, though they were confident of victory, the double 
eluded them when they finished third in the coxed pairs. It was, nevertheless, 
an astonishing achievement and should logically have set the seal on their 
relationship.

However, the coxed pairs final was the last race that Holmes and Redgrave 
rowed together. They were never really close friends. The partnership had been 
built on their differences; it was an uneasy alliance. Redgrave decided to seek 
out a new partner – initially Simon Berrisford, then Matthew Pinsent. "When we 
subsequently chose to go our separate ways, the press tried to make out that 
there had been a clash of personalities," said Holmes. "But that simply wasn't 
the case. In truth, Steve and I were different people with different lives and 
we no longer speak."

Holmes's rowing career was now on hold. He tried other options, even 
attempting to contact the young Pinsent to see if he was interested, but the 
discussion never took place. He considered becoming a sculler (much as Redgrave 
had once desired) and even bought a house at Banyoles in Spain, where the 1992 
Olympics were to be held, but without a sponsor the plan was curtailed and he 
was soon lost to rowing. The trophies and medals were put in the attic. "There 
was nothing, nothing in the house that would suggest that I had anything to do 
with rowing," he later told Cross.

Holmes set up a furniture removal company and found other diversions, 
including playing as a drummer in an occasionally convened rock band. He was 
only lured back into rowing a few years ago when he became director of rowing 
at Furnival sculling club in Hammersmith and at the Langley academy in 
Berkshire.

He is survived by four children, Aimée, Camilla, Louis and Francesca, by his 
first marriage, to Pamela, and by his second wife, Gabrielle, and their 
month-old daughter, Parker.

• Andrew Jeremy Holmes, rower, born 15 October 1959; died 24 October 2010
 