
Andy Irons <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-irons>, who has been found 
dead aged 32, was a three-time world champion and the most competitive big-wave 
surfer of his generation. Surfing was in his DNA. His uncle Rick was a 
legendary figure in the sport in the 60s and his father, Phil, a surfer too. 
The fact that Andy's younger brother Bruce also took up the sport probably 
fuelled his competitive drive. "All he wants to do is win. It's why he exists. 
It's all he thinks about. Winning heats, winning contests, surf, surf, surf, 
heat, heat, heat, win, win, win," is how Bruce described his brother at the 
height of his career.

Irons – known by his initials AI – was brought up in the small town of Hanalei 
on the Hawaiian island of Kauai. His international breakthrough came in 1996 
when he was 17. Against seasoned professional surfers, and riding waves that 
were hitting 25ft, Irons won the HIC Pipeline Pro competition on the 
neighbouring island of Oahu. He had to take the day off college to compete in 
the final. The following year, he qualified for the Association of Surfing 
Professionals (ASP) World Tour.

"You could see he was something special," said David Riddle, who acted as 
coach and mentor to Irons for 20 years. "When he was on a wave, whether it was 
free surfing or in a contest, you could not take your eyes off him. You didn't 
want to miss what he was going to do next."

Irons embraced the tour and, equally passionately, the lifestyle that went 
with it. "I don't think I missed a party those first couple of years," he 
admitted later. Inevitably, his performances suffered and, at 19, Irons had to 
qualify for the ASP tour all over again.

The "Irons age" of surfing, as it has been called, lasted from 2002 until 
2004. He won three successive world championships (the first Hawaiian to win 
more than one) and his battle with Kelly Slater – the most dominant surfer in 
recent history – in the Pipeline Masters, the final event of the 2003 season, 
is considered one of the most memorable moments in the sport.

Success brought Irons considerable financial reward. He accumulated almost 
$1.5m in prize money and substantially more from his major sponsor, the 
sportswear company Billabong.

"I never even thought I could win one, let alone three [world titles]," Irons 
said last summer. "I was thinking I'd go on tour, win a contest here and there 
– whenever the waves were good. It's so hard to sustain that level for a whole 
year. It's still surprising to me that I pulled it off."

He had time to dwell on his achievements then for, at the beginning of the 
2009 season, after 12 years on the circuit and 19 event victories (he was the 
only surfer to have won every tour event), he decided to take a year out. "I 
just got burnt out," he said. "It happens. I don't want to be one of those guys 
who says they don't care, just staying somewhere in the top 10 for a few more 
years. I want to win everything or I don't even want to be there."

He was granted a wild card for his return to the tour this summer and duly 
recorded his 20th victory at the Billabong Pro at Tahiti in August. Irons was 
due to compete this week at the Rip Curl Pro Search inPuerto Rico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/puerto-rico>, but was unwell. It was 
reported that the illness was a return of dengue fever, which he had contracted 
at an earlier event. Irons decided to return home to Hawaii and stopped over at 
Dallas, where he was found dead in his hotel room.

He is survived by his wife, Lyndie, who is expecting their first child in 
December.

• Andy Irons, surfer, born 24 July 1978; died 2 November 2010
 