
Andy Holmes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-holmes> has gone and, 
right now, it feels like part of me has, too. That numbing sense of loss often 
happens with rowers who have shared the intensity of training and competition 
together. Then there is the history: we were part of the coxed four for the 
1984 Olympics which delivered Britain's first rowing gold in 36 years, in Los 
Angeles. But most of all there is the sense that a rowing legend has gone at 
the age of 51, and it hurts.

If you asked me what was really special about him, I wouldn't point to his 
achievements in the sport – considerable though his two Olympic gold medals 
were. Rather, I would remember his incredible mental and physical toughness 
which set him apart from any of his contemporaries – either before or since. 
I've been involved with the sport for almost 40 years and I've yet to meet a 
tougher man.

Andy was ruthless with his training. In the run-up to 1984 his regime 
frequently included two rows – morning and evening – sandwiched between a day's 
work as a hod-carrier. He figured that he would get fitter and stronger quicker 
if he spent a day running up ladders with loads of bricks carried in an 
outsized hod (he got paid more that way, too). From 1986 (when he started 
pairing with Steven Redgrave), he would often cycle the 30 or so miles from 
Guildford to Marlow before and after the gruelling sessions on the Thames.

That level of intensity gave him the belief that he was at least as good as 
Steve. So he would dare Steve to pull his hardest in the boat and then would 
more than match it – no matter what. That dynamic tension did not keep them the 
best of mates, but it created one of the fastest pairs combinations the world 
has ever seen.

Between 1986 and 1988 Holmes and Redgrave became the world's two greatest 
rowers – by beating everyone else who thought they might have a claim to that 
title. Thus, in 1986, they headed the top East German and Italian rowers to win 
the world coxed pairs title.

Holmes's toughness pushed them towards trying to win gold in the coxed and 
coxless pairs titles first at the 1987 world championships and then at the 
Seoul Olympics – an impossible feat really. They came back from those events 
with the coxless pairs' golds – winning the coxed events proved just beyond 
them and they took silver and bronze respectively.

In a way, that meant that Andy's second Olympic gold was tinged with 
disappointment and he never really received the recognition he deserved. When 
he and Steve split after 1988, he left the sport.

But his toughness and intensity had left an indelible legacy, not just with 
Steve but also to a new generation, who saw it was possible for a Briton to 
take on the world and win. The British rowers competing at the world 
championships in New Zealand next week know what debt they owe to Andy Holmes.
 