
Anglian Water recognises that a 21st century water company needs to take a 
lead in changing the way individuals, communities and businesses use water.

Acknowledging that such a change cannot be achieved alone, the company is 
bringing together leaders and organisations from the worlds of politics, 
regulation, business and science to find new ways to tackle sustainable water 
stewardship.

The company's strategic direction statement 2010-2035 identifies climate 
change and regional growth as its two most significant challenges.

By 2030 world water demand will increase by 30%. Over 20% of land in the 
region is below sea level and the number of new homes in the region is forecast 
to reach more than half a million by 2035.

As Anglian Water admits, water companies have traditionally built their way 
out of problems. But no amount of engineering is capable of fixing challenges 
this large. The need now is to work collaboratively, be more flexible and take 
more risks.

In October 2010 the company launched the love every drop campaign aimed at 
fundamentally changing the relationship people have with water, from turning on 
the tap to what ends up in the sewers.

The following month, the company sponsored a workshop run by the University of 
Cambridge's programme for sustainability leadership to find innovative ways to 
work collaboratively on water stewardship.

The programme's concept of collaboration is based on what it calls "innovation 
without walls", which has sparked many technological and scientific 
breakthroughs. Small groups of industry and sector practitioners meet over a 
period of time to discuss how to bring about substantive change.

The process kicks off with a workshop and the November workshop was chaired by 
Lord Selborne, chair of the House of Lords' science and technology inquiry into 
water management committee. Many senior figures from industry, academia, 
politics and the public sector also took part.

Participants were asked to explore fresh approaches to reducing the risk and 
cost of flooding; using ecosystems processes to reduce the scale of investment 
needed in sewage and wastewater treatment; promoting more collaborative water 
stewardship initiatives at landscape-level; and improving planning guidance and 
delivery.

Having agreed the need for a forum to take the next steps, a follow-up 
workshop in January 2011, again chaired by Lord Selborne, created a truly 
collaborative momentum.

The panel is now agreeing details of a local "lighthouse" project to 
understand and address all issues related to the water cycle and findings from 
this project will act as a beacon for regional and national collaborative 
initiatives.

Anglian Water is the first water company to launch an initiative like this. 
Its aim is to galvanise, engage and inspire key stakeholders in order to raise 
awareness about the value of water and campaign to change fundamentally the way 
we all use it.

It is the latest in a line of initiatives undertaken by the company and part 
of its commitment to lead the way in achieving the behavioural change that is 
needed to make sustainable water stewardship a reality.

Lorna Thorpe is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 