
The Angolan president, José Eduardo dos Santos, has appointed his billionaire 
businesswoman daughter Isabel as head of the state energy firm in a shakeup 
that cements his grip on power.

 Isabel would become chief executive after Sonangol’s board was sacked, a 
presidential decree carried on Angolan state media said.

Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola>, Africa’s top oil producer 
because of supply outages caused by militant attacks in Nigeria’s Niger Delta, 
said in April it would restructure to increase efficiency and profitability.

 Putting the 43-year-old, ranked by Forbes as Africa’s richest woman, in 
charge could mean Dos Santos is serious about reforms, but it could also be 
seen as Angola’s leader of the last 36 years laying the ground for his family 
to control the central pillar of the economy when he leaves office.

Angola's president says he's giving up 37-year rule. Should we believe him?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/angola-president-dos-santos-giving-up-power-2018-should-we-believe-him>
 Oil sales account for more than 90% of Angola’s foreign exchange earnings, 
making Sonangol by far the biggest source of dollars and state funding.

 The president’s son, José Filomeno, is chief executive of Angola’s sovereign 
wealth fund.

Antony Goldman, an independent, Africa-focused energy analyst, said: “Sonangol 
was always regarded as one of the more effective African national oil 
companies, but governance has slipped quite considerably over the past decade 
through issues where political factors played no small part.”

Of Isabel dos Santos, he said: “She’s not an engineer or necessarily an energy 
expert but she is someone with a track record of getting deals done.”

 London-educated Isabel, who denies any political ambitions and says she 
started her business career as a six-year-old selling eggs, has been a major 
investor in the domestic and Portuguese telecoms, banking and petroleum sectors.

Cobus de Hart, an Angola analyst at NKC African Economics in Cape Town, said: 
“The case can certainly be made that this is a political move whereby the 
president is strengthening his grip. But the news that global consulting firms 
will be assisting with the reform strategy is at least a step in the right 
direction.”

 One senior Johannesburg-based banker said the appointment could make it more 
difficult for international banks to do business with Sonangol, given the 
perception of nepotism it creates. “From a compliance point of view, it’s going 
to make it harder,” the banker said.

 Sonangol said in February that debt owed to foreign oil companies had soared 
and it expected a very difficult year. The Opec member imports about 6m cubic 
metres of refined products a year, according to national statistics.

José Eduardo dos Santos, 73, one of Africa’s longest-serving rulers after 
coming to power in 1979, saidin March he intended to step down as president in 
2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/angola-president-dos-santos-giving-up-power-2018-should-we-believe-him>
but gave no reason for his decision and did not name a preferred successor.

Forty years on from independence, Angola still lacks freedom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/11/angola-forty-years-on-from-independence-lacks-freedom>
 His mild, inscrutable public demeanour belies his tight control of the former 
Portuguese colony, where he has overseen an oil-backed economic and 
construction boom to rebuild a country devastated by a 27-year civil war that 
ended in 2002.

 Critics accuse him of mismanaging Angola’s oil wealth and making an elite, 
mainly his family and political allies, vastly rich in a country with 
widespread poverty.


 