
Ann Clwyd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-clwyd> has said her 
biggest regret is that she didn't "stand in the hospital corridor and scream" 
in protest at the "almost callous lack of care" with which nurses treated her 
husband as he lay dying in the University Hospital of Wales in Cardiff.

Clwyd, the Labour MP for Cynon Valley since 1984 and Tony Blair's former human 
rights envoy to Iraq, told the Guardian she fears a "normalisation of cruelty" 
is now rife amongNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> nurses. She said 
she had chosen to speak out because this had become "commonplace".

Describing how her 6'2'' husband lay crushed "like a battery hen" against the 
bars of his hospital bed with an oxygen mask so small it cut into his face and 
pumped cold air into his infected eye, Clwyd said nurses treated the dying man 
with "coldness, resentment, indifference and even contempt".

Owen Roberts died on Tuesday, 23rd October from hospital-acquired pneumonia. 
The former television director and producer had multiple sclerosis for 30 years 
and had been in a wheelchair for the previous two years. He had been in the 
flagship hospital for ten days.

"I have had nightmares about what happened," said Clwyd, speaking to the 
Guardian after initially making the claims onBBC Radio 4's World at One 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qptc>.

Clwyd said that on the Friday before Roberts died, she asked if he could have 
a bigger oxygen mask. "I was just ignored," she said. "I had to put my own 
Lypsyl on his lips because they became so chapped …by the cold air the mask 
pumped out and there were no nurses around. It was us, not the nurses, who put 
a pillow between him and the bars of the bed because the bed was too small and 
he was jammed so tightly against the bars.

"It was us again who covered him with a towel because he was cold and we 
couldn't get more than two thin blankets to cover him with. And it was us who 
put socks on his feet because they hung over the end of the too-short bed .

"I can't believe anybody calling themselves a nurse could fail to give someone 
who is very ill that kind of attention but it was completely missing," Clwyd 
added. Nobody should have to die in conditions like I saw my husband die in. I 
have tried in the past to get Bills through parliament on the welfare of 
battery hens. My husband died like a battery hen."

Clwyd, chair of the All Party Parliamentary Human Rights Group, was on the 
Royal Commission on the NHS and served on the Welsh hospital board. But she 
said that regardless of her experience and knowledge, she found it impossible 
to make her voice heard.

"It's uncomfortable speaking out and I don't like it but if I couldn't get 
anyone to listen to me, how do other people manage it?" she asked. "I want 
people to know that they can't leave things to the professionals in the NHS. 
You have to keep asking questions.

Clwyd said she "will always regret that I did not ask more questions" but that 
whenever she tried, she was ignored or brushed off.

"I was in on the day before he died from 2.30pm to 10.30pm, and I saw one, 
single ward round," she said. "When I did manage to stop a nurse in the 
corridor – they were usually too busy to stop – I asked why he wasn't in 
intensive care." She added, a nurse "told me 'there are lots of people worse 
than him' and walked off. A few hours later, I asked another nurse if a doctor 
had been to see him. She said a doctor had been – but not to see Owen because 
they knew what to do.

"From what I saw, that consisted of doing nothing," she added.

Clwyd described how Roberts' suffered bitterly from the cold air of a fan kept 
on for a patient in a neighbouring bed. His ward was full while a second ward 
across the hall was empty, she said, but nurses refused to move him on the day 
he died because, they said, the empty ward "was being kept until tomorrow".

"At eight o'clock that morning, just before he died, all the lights in the 
four-bed ward went on and somebody shouted 'Anybody for breakfast?'. It was 
obviously totally inappropriate when they knew somebody was dying in that 
ward," she said. "I really do feel he died of cold and he died from people who 
didn't care."

Clwyd said she met with a consultant two days after her husband's funeral. "We 
spent one and a quarter hours talking but he eventually said it was a nursing 
matter."

The MP is now collecting evidence from friends who visited Roberts in hospital 
to send to the hospital authorities, "My husband had been very courageous over 
the years and should have been able to die with dignity. But he wasn't," she 
said.

In a statement to the programme, the hospital's executive director of nursing, 
Ruth Walker, said they had offered to meet Ms Clwyd so that a formal 
investigation into what happened could be launched.

"We recognise how distressing it is when family members have cause to raise 
significant concerns about the quality of care their loved one received whilst 
also coping with bereavement. We take such matters extremely seriously," she 
said.

"We will not tolerate poor care which is why it is so important that each 
incident is fully investigated so that we can drive up standards and provide 
patients and their families with the quality of care they need and deserve."
 