 I gave a speech before the day of the vote, and I didn't use weapons of mass 
destruction as part of my argument - always for me the issue had been the 
torture, the rape, the executions, the disappearances, the genocide of the 
Kurds in the north and the Shi'a in the south.
There was a build-up of many months to that final vote. I was constantly 
talking to my colleagues about Indict, because from July of the previous year, 
knowing we had the evidence to indict so many of the leading members of the 
regime. I was trying to get any European country to do it - I'd been to Norway, 
Belgium, Sweden, Switzerland, talking to people in the justice departments 
there. So I was almost frantic, trying to push the alternatives to war. But I 
have to say after visiting Iraq in February 2003 I myself thought that by that 
time there was no alternative. We could have gone on for another 10-15 years 
waiting for weapons inspectors or the UN rapporteur on human rights inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> to be admitted to the country. It 
wasn't just resolution 1441, it was resolution 867, 868 - Saddam was in 
violation of all those things, and especially the human rights affronts.

Among my own constituents, apart from I think two letters opposing the war and 
some people in the constituency party too, the vast majority supported it. But 
I pass anti-war demonstrators every day on my way home from work. I know they 
are there, and I know they have strong feelings, and I know those people who 
were anti-war are still anti-war, but I don't think that has affected members 
of parliament's views - they made their minds up of their own accord. I think 
it's very good that people can demonstrate. It can be irritating at times, but 
I think it's a good illustration of how a democracy should work.

I am the vice-chair of the PLP, so I tried to organise meetings of Iraqis who 
knew what the situation was so colleagues could pose questions to them. I know 
that influenced some people. The PLP meeting on the morning of the vote was 
memorable from the point of view of the atmosphere. Blair made a very 
passionate speech saying that he believed the war was necessary, and there are 
other people who are always opposed to war whatever the circumstances. Some 
people thought the case had been made, and others thought it had not been made. 
But these meetings are very tolerant of everyone's point of view, and this was 
no exception.

In the Commons, I remember Tony Blair's speech. I didn't attempt to speak 
myself on that occasion because I'd given my speech earlier in the month, and 
so had some other people. They all had an impact.

People had asked for a vote before military action, and it's not always 
possible, but I'm glad it was on this occasion. Enough people had asked for it, 
so I think it was necessary.

The last time I was in Iraq, in December, I met elected members of Baghdad 
city council - elected by their own neighbourhoods, not selected by the 
governing council and the coalition - and one of the women members said to me: 
"It gets better day by day, though we have to be patient." I believe that is 
the opinion of the majority of the Iraqi people. Now they are free to criticise 
if they want to.

Security is still a problem, but they also believe that the problem of 
security is caused by people coming in from other countries, like Ansar 
al-Islam and al-Qaida. Those are the people who don't want a democratic, 
federal Iraq and I think most objective people believe that is the case. To be 
rid of Saddam and that oppressive regime has got to be better than anything 
else. I have no doubt at all about that.
Interview by Martin Nicholls
 