
This week I want to concentrate on just one word. That word is “annoying”. 
Because it annoys me. Somehow, negative vocabulary has been compacted in our 
family – and a few others I’ve been around – to a single adjective. I’ve 
noticed the same phenomenon watching kids being interviewed on, say, Marrying 
Mum and Dad orYoung Apprentice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/oct/24/tv-review-young-apprentice>
. People aren’t crude or selfish or cruel or impolite any more. They are simply 
“annoying”.

I wonder if this is merely a quirk of language, or whether it has a deeper 
meaning. That, in fact, one of the most deep-rooted features of modern family 
life is giving and receiving annoyance.

It was the Buddha who said, “Life is dukkha – suffering”. A better translation 
is “life is frustration”, but perhaps better still, “life is annoying”. Why is 
life annoying? Because we can’t get what we want. Not because we aren’t looking 
hard enough or trying hard enough, but because our dissatisfaction is rooted in 
the essential double binds of the everyday world.

You want a partner who has enough money, but doesn’t care about material 
things. You want a child who thinks for themselves, but who won’t constantly 
contradict you. You want a parent who gives you firm boundaries, but won’t boss 
you about. You want a handsome partner who doesn’t care about looks. You want 
an intelligent partner who won’t make you feel stupid. You want someone who is 
dreamy and creative, but knows how to put up shelves and organise a timetable.

All these things tend towards the contradictory and therefore dukkha – or, if 
you prefer, the annoying. Because annoyingness is trying to square the circle, 
craning to look at your own head, chasing your own shadow. And this is what 
families are – the deluded in search of the seamless.

How can we get out of this trap? We can try meditating for 20 minutes a day, 
but I’m not convinced that it works for longer than – well, 20 minutes. And 
that’s if someone doesn’t come into the room and ask you where their pants are.

The best solution is to drop your standards – possibly precipitously. The most 
annoyed people are the most perfectionist, and perfectionism is dangerous 
because they make everyone else, as well as themselves, feel terrible. To put 
it in biblical terms, judge not that ye be not judged.

To really find peace, you need to train yourself not to mind about stuff. Not 
so much “mindfulness” as “I-don’t-mind-fulness”. It’s an internal, not an 
external, shift. This, it should be noted, is very different from not caring 
about stuff. Not caring has an element of suppressed hostility – as in “go 
ahead and smash the telly, see if I care”. To say “I don’t mind” is more 
accepting – and convincing. Try it out in your head. “I want to cut all my hair 
off/dye it green/have my nostrils pierced.”

“Sure. I don’t mind.”

The benevolent indifference of the response means the very thing that caused 
the rebellious behaviour – your controlling instinct – is liable to disappear. 
So maybe they won’t cut, dye or pierce because it clearly won’t have the 
desired effect – to annoy you.

I do agree with what the Buddha might have almost thought – that life is, at 
its root, annoying – but I’m not sure you’re going to get around it by 
chanting, zazen or theNoble Eightfold Path 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noble_Eightfold_Path>. I think the better way 
forward lies in Zen philosophy – there’s a saying: “Be dead, be thoroughly 
dead, then nothing can trouble you.”

Which may be a depressing way of putting it, but it’s a good point. Nothing is 
that important when life is finite and the outcome is the same for us all. So 
don’t mind – because it doesn’t matter, in the long run. Just love and hope for 
the best. Of course, if you refuse to get annoyed, then it will annoy everyone 
else. But that’s part of the fun of it.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 