
New Zealand's flagship airline plans to fly planes to Antarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica> that would land on an ice runway.

But tourists wanting to travel to the frozen continent shouldn't pack their 
bags just yet. The chartered AirNew Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> flights would be for scientists 
and their support crews, and the airline said it had no plans to begin 
commercial trips.

Many countries already fly scientists to Antarctica but the flights are 
usually run by government or military agencies, or by specialised companies. 
Air New Zealand plans to use one of its regular passenger jets – a Boeing 
767-300 – for the Antarctic flights.

Airline spokeswoman Marie Hosking said the jet did not need any modifications 
and that the Antarctic ice runway has the characteristics of a regular runway 
that's covered in dry snow, much like pilots might expect to encounter at an 
airport such as Tokyo.

The airline plans to carry out a trial run on 5 October. If successful, it 
would operate two more charter flights during the upcoming Antarctic summer 
season. Planes would leave from Christchurch and land on the Pegasus runway on 
the Ross Ice Shelf, a trip of 2,090 nautical miles that takes about five hours.

Unlike existing military flights, the Air New Zealand planes could return, in 
good conditions, without the need for expensive and complicated refuelling.

The flights have been chartered by Antarctica New Zealand, the agency that 
runs the country's Antarctic programme. Flights would also carry American 
scientists as the US works collaboratively with the South Pacific nation in 
Antarctica.

Graeme Ayres, the operations manager for Antarctica New Zealand, said the 
landing strip needed to be prepared carefully so there was sufficient 
granulation to provide friction. "Obviously you can't have a slippery ice 
rink," he said. "That would be quite hazardous."

He said the planes would be able to transport about 200 scientists and support 
staff on each trip. "They have the capability to move mass numbers of people 
pretty quickly," he said. "It's a pretty exciting time."

Stephen Parker, a spokesman for New Zealand's ministry of foreign affairs and 
trade, said the country tries to limit Antarctic tourism and minimise its 
impact on the environment. "This is consistent with Antarctica's status as a 
natural reserve devoted to peace and science," he said.

Air New Zealand has never landed in Antarctica but briefly ran scenic flights 
over the continent. In 1979, one of its planes crashed into Mount Erebus, 
killing all 257 on board. That disaster has left a scar on New Zealand and a 
likely reason for the airline's decision not to return to Antarctica for more 
than three decades.

Australian company Antarctica Sightseeing Flights charters planes to run 
scenic tours over the continent. But tourists wanting to set foot on Antarctica 
must typically travel by boat. The Rhode Island-based International Association 
of Antarctic Tour Operators estimates about 35,000 tourists visited the 
continent last summer.
 