
What will I learn?
Anthropology is academia's gift to those who enjoy people-watching and 
thinking about the things we all share in common as well as the differences 
between us. Remember, it's not being nosy; it's taking an interest in other 
people's lives - what they do, how they do it and why they bother.

Anthropology is a broad subject that explores how, when and where human life 
began, and examines human behaviour, cultures, history and social organisation. 
It even attempts to answer some of the big questions about what it is to be 
human.

Degree courses will usually dip into most of these areas before allowing 
students to specialise in social and cultural anthropology or biological 
anthropology. The first takes a more sociological route, examining societies, 
economies, religions and cultures around the world; while the latter looks at 
the science behind the ways that human beings evolved and how differences 
emerged between races, for example. So, you could find yourself examining the 
music of African pygmies one day and the corporate culture of the car industry 
the next.

Some courses will allow you to combine your anthropological studies with 
programmes in cultural studies, media, history, politics, economics, art and 
archaeology, ethnomusicology or foreign language training. Many will require 
you to do a spot of fieldwork, usually in the form of a group research project.

What skills will I gain?
You should graduate armed with the tools to observe, listen and question the 
ways in which people and society act, and the ways that cultures develop and 
change.

Anthropology incorporates a number of other disciplines, so you will have also 
acquired an understanding of sociology, history, linguistics, biological 
sciences and, possibly, development studies.

You should be able to formulate an argument and articulate your opinions, 
either through oral presentations or in essay forms, and you should have 
empathy for the way other cultures and societies live.

The fieldwork aspect of your course will teach you how to design a research 
programme, work in a team, and explore ideas and present them to a wider 
audience.

What job can I get?
Jobs in the public sector are popular among anthropology graduates. You might 
consider working as a charity fundraiser or as a community or overseas 
development workers. Journalist, documentary film-maker, museum assistant, 
librarian, human resources officer and marketing agent are other options, and 
if you want to do further study you could become a social researcher, lecturer 
or information scientist.

What will look good on my CV?
• The ability to engage with cultures, populations and groups different from 
your own, and perhaps an interest in learning another language
• The ability to recognise different forms of communication and ways of 
thinking about the world.

For the full range of skills you can develop through a degree in anthropology, 
clickhere 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Education/documents/2007/04/17/Anthropology.pdf>
 (pdf).
 