
Every restaurant has a sucker table. It is the worst table in the house, the 
one where the all the suckers sit. 'Come with me, please,' says Miss 
Receptionist, as she checks you over on her internal sucker-o-meter for 
incipient signs of poverty, stupidity and generally being a nobody. If you tick 
all her boxes, and most of us do, she will then tuck the menus under her arm 
and sprint across the restaurant with you at her heels. Straight to the sucker 
table. 'Enjoy your meal!' she will cry, then retreat into the kitchen to scream 
with laughter and high five the chef. 'Sold it,' she will cry, before 
collecting all uneaten bread in the returned baskets, piling it on a fresh 
plate and delivering it straight to you.

The first step in avoiding the sucker table is knowing how to identify it in 
the first place. If it is next to the loos, on a flight path of waiter traffic 
or has a bucket placed in the centre collecting brackish fluid dripping from 
the ceiling, then it is fairly evident you are onto a dud. Yet other signs of 
impending dining doom are not so obvious. Look around you. Take a moment to 
take stock. Is there a speaker hanging above the table? Will you have to peer 
around a steel column to speak to each other? Is it draughty, ill-situated, an 
afterthought in a corridor, too small or too cramped, a bit damp, dingy and 
mingy? Is it next to a table laid up for 20, adjacent to a cutlery serving 
station or in an anteroom next to a pile of beer crates? Are you in the corner, 
facing the wall, wearing a conical cap with a D embellished on the front? If 
the answer to any or all of these questions is yes, then you are in trouble.

I should know. Bad tables are one of my specialist subjects. A daft-looking, 
roly-poly old bird like me is prime sucker-table fodder. They take one look at 
my Eazi-Squeezi lunching trousers and think; let's get that freak behind a 
pillar before she puts Alan Yentob off his tian of Dorset crab with smoked 
avocado purée.

Six years of anonymous restaurant reviewing all over the UK had me staring at 
more grotty air-conditioning grilles and blank walls than a Parkhurst lifer. 
And the further problem is that once they stick you in Siberia, they then feel 
duty bound to ignore your preposterous requests for drinks and hot food for the 
rest of the evening. Bad service always follows a bad table, like seagulls 
trailing after a sludge boat. It is a given that the worst waiters will always 
service the worst spot. So it is vitally important to avoid the sucker table at 
all costs.

Firstly, don't ever say 'can I have a nice table, please?' when you book over 
the telephone. Are you crazy? That just annoys them. It will also guarantee you 
a standard, gritted-teeth response along the lines of we'll do our best/I can't 
promise anything. This is restaurant-speak for we'll do our best to wreck your 
evening, your outfit, your confidence and your marriage, too, given half a 
chance. Or, I can't promise anything except hot soup in your lap and a view of 
the urinals for your lovely wife.

Note that restaurants will generally try to sell the worst table first. Early 
birds are always in the firing line, but the availability of so many tables as 
the session begins gives you a raft of options.

Take a good look at the room and if you are not delighted with the position 
they have chosen for you, ask to be moved, giving the reason why. Don't sit 
down, don't allow yourself to be rushed and above all be firm; otherwise you'll 
get pushed around. But be reasonable, too. It is unfair to ask for the lovely 
booth for eight in the corner if there is just the two of you, unless you 
happen to be pathologically self-important, as selfish as a stuck pig, Michael 
Winner or all of the above.

If the sucker table really is all that's on offer, you always have the option 
of walking out; a prospect that restaurants fear more and more as the credit 
crunch hits.

If a good table is paramount, consider a hotel restaurant. What some of them 
may lack in atmosphere, they make up for in terms of space and comfort.

In general, when booking order a cake, make a special wine request - anything 
that makes a bigger footprint in the reservations book is always good. If you 
are truly desperate, turn up at the restaurant with a crutch, and I don't mean 
an emotional one. Broken bones always guarantee more space, even if that might 
be one hobbled step too far.

Three restaurants without sucker tables

Saf
152 Curtain Road, Shoreditch, London EC2
 020 7613 0007

London's first gourmet raw vegan restaurant, complete with botanical cocktails 
and organic wines. The cheese is made from nut milk, the tap water is ionised 
and there's barely a carb in sight. A communal table in the middle of the room 
eases any table anxiety.

The Ritz Restaurant
The Ritz, Piccadilly, London W1
020 7493 8181

One of the loveliest dining rooms in the world, the restaurant at the Ritz has 
space to spare and not a sucker table in sight. Head chef Frederick Forster 
creates top-class dishes with the very best ingredients. High on wow factor, 
but delivers what it promises.

No Sixteen
16 Byres Road, Glasgow
0141 339 2544

A tiny, wee restaurant with about five tables; all as ramshackle as the rest. 
Equality rules among the battered green leather chairs and junkshop furniture 
at this Glasgow favourite. Friendly, with fresh, good food, nicely cooked.

· These restaurants and hundreds more are on Jan's restaurant website 
areyoureadytoorder.co.uk <http://www.areyoureadytoorder.co.uk>
 