
The latest productivity growth figures released on Monday show that for the 
fifth year in a row Australian workers have become more productive. But the 
reasons for that growth combined with the latest investment figures would do 
little to have workers cheering.

Last week the latest private new capital expenditure 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/5625.0Main+Features1Sep%202016?OpenDocument>
 figures were released showing that the amount of investment in building, 
structure, machinery and equipment once again declined – down 4.8% in the 
September quarter and down 15.6% over the past 12 months.

The decline of course was driven by falling investment in the mining industry.

This is not a shock. Pointing out that mining investment is falling is about 
as stunning as suggesting the next Star Wars movie might make a bit of money.

The fall of investment in the mining industry has now entered its fourth year 
– the peak was way back in September 2012:

 And while the investment in the non-mining sector is improving slightly, it 
is by no means enough to make up for the drop in the mining sector:

 It’s always worth remembering that just because investment in the mining 
industry has collapsed, that doesn’t mean the mining industry itself has. The 
industry is actually going gangbusters.

While mining investment has fallen 62% since September 2012, output by the 
industry has grown 32% in the same time (and output by the iron ore sector is 
up 70%) – well beyond the 10% increase in Australia’s GDP.

But that output is driven by exports of mining, rather than by investment. The 
investment in the sector was mostly for the building of the mine and the 
structures – road, rail etc needed for those mines:

 And those buildings and structure required a lot of labour.

And this brings us to the ABS’s release on Monday of its annual estimates of 
industry multi-factor productivity 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/5260.0.55.002Main+Features12015-16?OpenDocument>
.

Multi-factor productivity attempts to measure how well labour makes use of 
capital to produce their output. In 2015-16 in the market sector (ie not 
counting the public sector), multi-factor productivity grew by 0.9% – the fifth 
straight year of improving productivity:

 During the mining boom years, while our GDP was growing well above average, 
our productivity growth was as bad as it had ever been.

It was the cause of much angst among economists and policymakers. It was one 
of the justifications for the Howard government introducing WorkChoices in 2006.

But the biggest reason for the decline in productivity growth was the actual 
boom in mining investment.

It's time to focus on the redistribution of wealth to poorer workers | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/nov/29/its-time-to-focus-on-the-redistribution-of-wealth-to-poorer-workers>
The soaring prices for iron ore meant mining companies were falling over 
themselves to build new mines, and that meant investing in a lot of capital and 
employing a lot of labour in order to produce its output.

In 2005, 2006 and 2007 – when the mining boom was at its height – the mining 
industry increased investment on average by 45% each year, while annual output 
growth averaged 5.5%. In the past three years, while investment has fallen on 
average by 20% each year, output has increased by 7.8%.

It meant that during those mining boom years, despite very strong output 
growth, productivity was falling:

 The mining and the electricity, gas and water industries were the two big 
drags on national productivity – mining due to the massive investment in new 
mines, and the electricity sector due to the massive investment (some would 
argueoverinvestment 
<https://grattan.edu.au/news/the-end-of-the-gold-plated-electricity-network/>) 
in the electricity network.

The latest figures show just how poorly productivity performed in those two 
industries compared with the rest of the economy:

 But now, great news! Productivity in the mining industry is on the improve – 
up 9.7% in the past two years (the best of any industry) – and productivity in 
the electricity and gas industry is also on the improve.

But why this has occurred is a perfect encapsulation of why people feel 
disconnected with economic policies.

Productivity is something that is good for the economy and good for people’s 
lives. If we are able to produce more with the same amount of labour then that 
means (all other things being equal) that our standard of living will improve. 
If we are unable to improve our productivity then the only way our income can 
improve is if the price for the things we produce goes up.

But productivity growth can equally come from producing more or even the same 
amount, but with a smaller amount of labour.

And this is what we are seeing occur at the moment.

In the past two years, for example, the five industries which have seen the 
level of “labour inputs” (essentially hours worked) grow the most, have all 
seen their multi-factor productivity decline.

Conversely, all of the five industries whose labour inputs have gone down have 
seen their multi-factor productivity increase. And the mining industry which 
has reduced its labour input the most also has the best productivity growth:

 Ideally of course you want to see both labour and productivity increase, and 
that did occur in four industries over the past two years – led by the 
information media and telecommunication industry which had the sixth biggest 
increase in labour inputs and the fourth biggest productivity improvement.

But even there, the news is not great as most of the productivity growth came 
from 2015-16, which coincided with a 2% fall in labour input.

It’s why when economists speak of productivity improvements they think of 
standard of living, national income and GDP per capita growth, but when workers 
hear it they are much more likely to think, cuts to jobs and hours worked.

And given the data, they are right to think that. 
 