
No, says brand and entertainment publicist Mark Borkowski

After a week during which Charlie Sheen was fired from the massively 
successful Warner Bros showTwo and a Half Men and found himself with 2 million 
Twitter followers, all eager to witness every second of his compelling 
meltdown, it is clear that if anyone is fuelling Charlie Sheen's breakdown, it 
isCharlie Sheen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/charlie-sheen>. Don't 
blame the media. The media does what the media does, be it reporting from a war 
zone or scavenging among the celebrity hotspots of the world.

Sheen seems to have let drugs and hubris get the better of him. He is 
operating without PR counsel (his publicist baled out three weeks ago) and over 
the heads of wiser men. The media do not operate as a marketing or brand 
consultancy – Sheen is creating news and it would be severely remiss of news 
organisations to ignore it, especially given readers' appetites for this sort 
of story. Look at the reaction to Britney Spears shaving her head or Michael 
Jacksonwaving his baby over the balcony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZEpC2SBWZOA>.

Charlie Sheen has seen an opportunity to be taken – he is pleased that he has 
2 million Twitter followers and is prepared to play up to that and try to 
monetise it. He is fully prepared to exploit his own exploitation. The media, 
naturally enough, given the news cycle's continuous sprint for new news, want a 
piece of the action and Sheen is happy to accommodate them. Like the fox in the 
fable, Sheen has allowed the scorpion on to his back to carry it across the 
river. It may well sting him halfway across. He may well ask why it has done 
so. The scorpion – and the media – will always reply, "because it's in my 
nature".

What Sheen's manic decline proves beyond measure is the importance to stars of 
a powerful publicist, a person more vital to them, in these days of instant 
news, than a therapist. Sheen needs someone controlling his ego, shaping the 
tone of the narrative in such a way that the star is protected.

He will come to realise that the publicists he has eschewed or ousted as he 
attempts to manage his meltdown were the people getting grey hairs so he didn't 
have to. Many of the most able publicity players in Hollywood are grey well 
before their time, in the same way that the leader of a country tends to age 
rapidly on the job.

If he were to pull up sharp now and find someone willing to manage his image 
from here on in, Sheen would remain newsworthy without slithering further into 
decline. What is really pulling him into the abyss is his own disregard for 
boundaries and a clear refusal to listen to good advice. He needs to remember 
the Tom CruiseOprah moment, dancing on the sofa 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=znsXA2aTXCE>. Cruise sacked his publicist, Pat 
Kingsley, and his star quickly lost its shine. Sheen has been a bad boy for 
years, but without a gatekeeper his actions are on show for all to see. Of 
course the media are going to pounce.

The media may be rapacious, but they are simply going about their daily 
business. Face the facts of the celebrity jungle. They are more hyenas than 
lions these days – that's the price to pay for the speeding up of 
communications – and if hyenas see something in the wild that is injured and 
without protection, they will circle it and consume it. The same is true of 
Charlie Sheen and the media. Sheen is out there trying to make a fast buck on 
the huge interest in him at the moment but, without protection, there is every 
chance that he will be entirely consumed.

Yes, says psychologist and author Oliver James

Solid World Health Organisation data shows that an American is 14 times more 
likely than a mainland western European to suffer from the kind of personality 
disorder that seems to be afflicting Charlie Sheen. There are many reasons, but 
the media and consequent celebrity culture are significant. In this culture, as 
Erich Fromm put it, they are encouraged to be a "marketing character". Rather 
than as people, they see themselves as commodities whose value they seek to 
increase by any means possible.

Sheen's value can be increased by "sick" behaviour. His antics have recently 
attracted 2 million Twitter users, from which he can make significant 
advertising revenues.

Sheen, son of the famous Martin, doubtless had a troubled childhood in his 
celebrity home. If he had had the same kind of difficult childhood and 
background, but had been raised in Denmark and always lived there, I do not 
doubt that he would be a troubled soul. But there is no market for celebrity 
stories in Denmark, and no pressure to be a "marketing character". 
Exhibitionism is so frowned upon in Copenhagen that Sheen would by now have no 
friends. He would be pitied but his antics would not be considered either funny 
or newsworthy, which they are here as well as in the US.

Some years ago I appeared on a TV programme with George Best and he regaled us 
with his favourite anecdote: "A reporter asked me, 'George, where did it all go 
wrong?' At the time I was living with Miss UK, drinking champagne and a 
millionaire." That Best sidestepped the reality of his disturbed state with 
reference to possession of a certain category of woman (not a person with a 
name) and other objects is typical of the way people in English-speaking, 
capitalist societies think. It helps to explain why we are twice as likely as 
Europeans to suffer a mental illness. As long as you are rich or famous, it 
does not matter how desperate and miserable you are. There are shades of Best 
in Sheen's comment that: "The partying has been epic – what I can remember of 
it. It was entertaining as hell."

Sheen's case is an extreme example of how the media peddle a toxic 
materialistic ideology. The (nearly all rightwing) media in America, and in 
this country too, have been only too happy to sell papers or broadcasting space 
by reporting his disturbance. But these stories only sell because people in the 
UK and US have become addicted to the media's continuous recycling of 
materialist values. There is now no doubt that the kind of person who seeks 
celebrity is more likely to have a pre-existing potential for narcissistic, 
self-aggrandising behaviour. This was proved by a recent study of 200 US 
celebrities, while a 2006 study showed that, as a whole, Americans are six 
times more narcissistic than they were 50 years ago.

Denmark has narcissistic people too. But its culture – strongly reinforced by 
its media – encourages them to tone down their attention‑seeking behaviour. In 
Denmark, seven decades of low inequality, a political system that puts 
wellbeing before the profits of a tiny elite, and, above all, a much healthier 
balance between individualism and collectivist values strongly militate against 
me-me-me, febrile, personality-disordered behaviour.

Sheen's disturbance has been exacerbated by the media. That he wants the 
coverage is one of his psychiatric symptoms. That we consume stories about him 
is a sign of just how sick our society has become.
 