
Might I suggest you take a look into the labyrinthine bureaucracy of National 
Savings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> & Investments and its 
security procedures.

My experience arose from a request to pay any premium bond prizes directly 
into my bank account. Four attempts to do this were made over several months, 
all without success. These involved downloading a form from the web and posting 
the request, receiving a temporary password, and phoning the helpline and 
answering a series of security questions posed by three separate people.

Questions included my mother’s maiden name, my late father’s birthday, my 
oldest child’s middle name, my first employer and my favourite football club – 
and I don’t even like football. There were other questions too, but by then I 
had lost the will to live.

My wife and the NS&I staff were all patient, and the request may or may not 
have been finally implemented – we shall see.

On the internet I discovered dozens of similar hair-raising tales; and a 
friend told me he has been waiting for months for around £400 that NS&I has 
admitted is due to him, but for which they cannot make a single payment – it 
can only be made with about 80 cheques. No commercial concern could contemplate 
this level of incompetence.NC, Nether Alderley, Cheshire

Given the huge amount of online fraud that Guardian Money has been reporting 
on recently, we suspect NS&I fears becoming a target and has upped its security 
measures accordingly.

However, there is a balance to be struck. You certainly feel the government 
agency has crossed the line, and your treatment does sound incredibly 
bureaucratic and time consuming.

A spokeswoman tells us: “NS&I understands NC’s frustration with the issuing of 
a security form and a second temporary password; however, we can assure them 
that the correct security process was followed, and we do so to ensure the 
safety and security of all of our customers.”

She confirmed that all future premium bond winnings – if you get any – will be 
paid directly into your bank account. Good luck.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto: consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 