
 I like the way the counter staff remember my name. 

Fair enough if your bank doesn't make you pay - but has it ever occurred to 
you that they are simply reading it from your cheque book?

 The bank caters for my every need. 

The banks make their money out of people like you. Haven't you seen the survey 
in the September issue of Which? showing that you could be paying up to twice 
as much for your credit card, personal loan, mortgage, travel, buildings, 
contents and life insurance - not to mention the loss of interest on savings 
accounts - if you buy these products from your bank rather than from an 
independent provider?

 All banks are the same. 

The banks would disagree but you're probably right if your account isn't 
costing you anything and it's being run efficiently. But there are big 
differences in the cost of running an overdraft. Banks also differ in their 
approach to charging for cash withdrawals.

 I've got a bad credit record. 

Fair point. You probably will have trouble finding another bank to take you on.

 They made me open a current account when I took out my mortgage. 

Don't worry, they won't notice if you open another account with a rival bank. 
Just make sure that you leave enough of your monthly salary in your account to 
cover your mortgage repayments and any other bills.

 My bank was nice to me when I was a student. 

Yes - but are they being nice to you now? If your bank has decided that it's 
time you faced the financial reality of fees as well as interest for your 
overdraft, you're in for a shock - unless you don't have an overdraft or you 
wisely chose to have a student account with Bank of Scotland, the Halifax, HSBC 
or the Royal Bank of Scotland.

 I work for the bank. 

There's not much you can do about that - just think of the cheap mortgage. 

 I don't pay charges, there's a convenient branch near my home and office and 
free telephone banking - and I don't keep more money in my account than is 
absolutely necessary. 

You don't need to switch then.
 