
We are in the queue for the ladies' lavatories and all around Arianna 
Huffington <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington> women are 
gathering in clusters, exclaiming at the talk she has just given, admiring her 
hair, telling her she's fabulous. She has just spoken to them about the need to 
work less and sleep more and they bring forth their own stories from their 
overburdened lives. "I was in six different cities this week," one woman tells 
her. "I flew in from Buffalo this morning and when you said that we are working 
ourselves to death, I thought, 'That is my life!'" Another tells her how she's 
so overstretched that "I went to work last week and didn't realise until I got 
there that I had forgotten to put on my skirt! I had to go out and buy one from 
J Crew!"

Arianna, glamorous, approachable, smiling, laps it up. "I love the story about 
the skirt!" she says. "You should write about that for us." It sounds like the 
sort of invitation you might offer someone to submit to the parish magazine or 
the company newsletter, though, of course, when Arianna says "us", she means the
Huffington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post>, the second 
most popular news site in the world that she created from nothing and that is 
now, after a £315m deal, part of the AOL empire. "I love getting people to 
write things," she tells me. "I find stories everywhere." And then she gets out 
a bunch of business cards and starts scattering them around. One goes to the 
skirt lady, one to the Buffalo lady, one to someone who had just popped in to 
go to the loo and looks a bit startled.

And then, after a quick lipstick readjustment and a pat of the fabulous hair – 
blonded, blow-dried, almost supernaturally swishy – she's done. Which is a 
shame because hanging out in the ladies with Arianna is a masterclass in many 
things. Her assistant, panicked at the potential disruption to her schedule, 
sees the queue for the lavatories and says to me: "I'm going to have to find a 
way to get Arianna to the front of that." But Huffington doesn't queue jump. 
She waits patiently. She deploys her weapons-grade charm. But then, Arianna 
Huffington didn't get to be Arianna Huffington without knowing how to work a 
room; it is of no import that this one just happens to be the ladies. She had, 
that morning, already enraptured an audience of high-level corporate women at a 
private event for International Women's Day in New York by preaching a mix of 
self-help, female empowerment and a home-spun, can-do, go girl! chutzpah.

And, despite the fact that she has committed to this interview, and scheduled 
an hour for it, it turns out that there doesn't seem to be an hour. Or, at 
least, I am the hour that is the most dispensable in her supercharged day. Her 
latest book,Thrive: The Third Metric to Redefining Success and Creating a 
Happier Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780753555408>
, is all about reprioritising one's work-life balance in favour of life. She 
has a flight to catch to Los Angeles and, with a sinking feeling, I realise 
that I am the priority that is rapidly being reprioritised.

"We are doing the interview in the car on the way to the airport," she says. 
"Is that right?" "Well, no… your assistant said if we ran over we might finish 
it in the car," I say, but we are already walking towards the street. "How long 
does it even take to get to JFK?" I ask, more panicky now. It's mid-morning. 
There is no traffic. I wasn't expecting a heart to heart in which we shared our 
deepest longings for the future and then brushed each other's hair, but I have 
questions…about love, about life, about death. I've never actually done an 
interview in a high-speed taxi ride en route to the airport so I can't say for 
sure, but it doesn't seem… ideal. "I have come from London," I say, helplessly. 
But there is no swimming against the tide of Huffington's will. We are already 
in the car, the driver is smoothly pulling away from the kerb and Arianna is 
pulling an iPhone and a BlackBerry from her bag.

"Doesn't this count as multitasking?" I say. "I thought you hated 
multitasking."

"No, because I'm not driving," she says. "Sshh. We will make sure there is 
enough time." But first there are phone calls. "I just have to tell you I sent 
the Ronaldo thing," she says to one of her multiple assistants. "OK wonderful. 
I'll call Nika when I'm at the airport. I need to talk to her before she talks 
to Microsoft. Can you tell her that? Did you see the typo in the section that 
Tom sent? OK, OK. Wonderful."

And then, suddenly, she is there. Putting her phones into her bag, turning to 
face me, her hands calmly folded in front of her, ready and waiting for her 
first question. Except she has just answered all my first questions during the 
on-stage Q&A and there is something about her smooth unruffability, her poise, 
her world-conquering success that has me sweating and rifling the pages in my 
notebook.

Arianna looks on patiently. Or maybe pityingly? It's as if she's risen to a 
higher plane of what it is to be human or at least what it is to be a woman in 
professional life. She has banished self-criticism. She brushes off failure. In
Thrive, she writes about her struggle to subdue and contain the voice in her 
head that she calls her "obnoxious room-mate".

"How do you do that?" I ask, as I think I really ought to have got my 
questions in order. "It's not been completely eliminated," she says. "The last 
time I heard it I was doing a TV show and I was running late and I started 
hearing the voice – 'You should have left earlier. You always do that. Why did 
you do that?' It's like, that's the voice. You recognise it?"

I'm still panicking about my next question. Of course I do, I say.

"And, you know it was a legitimate thing, I should have left earlier. But now 
I can acknowledge something like that without tearing myself down. That's the 
difference. It's like, 'I made a mistake.' As opposed to, 'You are a bad 
person.'"

But then Arianna's whole life has been an act of will. She willed herself to 
Cambridge University, despite growing up Greek and poor with her single mother 
in a one-bedroom flat in Athens. She willed herself to the presidency of the 
Cambridge Union. She willed herself on to the national stage, aged 23, with a 
counter-feminist tract,The Female Woman 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Female-Woman-Arianna-Stassinopoulos-Huffington/dp/0706700988>
 – a counter-blast to Germaine Greer'sThe Female Eunuch. And it's just gone on 
from there.

She moved to New York. Married a billionaire oil magnate. Supported his 
political career. Divorced. Tried her hand at her own political career. Failed. 
Started a blog. Was ridiculed for creating a silly little vanity site. And went 
on to turn it into what is arguably the most successful blog of all time, the
Huffington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post>, a 
commentary-cum-aggregation site that changed the face of news.
 Michael Huffington with Arianna in 1994. Photograph: Mark Wilson/AP 
There is something phenomenal about Arianna. As in, she is a phenomenon. 
Female media moguls didn't exist until she was invented. Or, more accurately, 
she invented herself. (I've always used surnames in interviews but Arianna, 
like Oprah and Nigella, has ascended to first-name terms with the entire 
planet.) She's recreated herself so many times that she makes David Bowie look 
like a lazy-arsed slacker. Even her hair has bent to her incredible will, 
blow-dried into submission, though it is, she says, naturally "very very curly".

But then, who can resist Arianna? Her enemies, obviously, of whom there are 
plenty. Katha Pollitt, the columnist for the Nation, said: "I find it amazing 
anyone would take her seriously" when she launched the Huffington Post in 2005. 
Ed Rollins, her husband's political agent, called her "the most ruthless, 
unscrupulous, and ambitious person I'd met in 30 years in national politics", 
while an unnamed employee quoted byNew York magazine described her as "the 
stepmother that you just want to love but can't because you know she's pure 
evil".

But her friends are more numerous. She collects friends. Or, more likely, 
aggregates them. She is Facebook in fleshy form. "If Arianna wants to be your 
friend," said the television host Bill Maher, "I mean, give up. You're like a 
weak swimmer in a strong tide." Barbara Walters interviewed her shortly after 
she landed in New York and soon found herself jogging with her every morning. 
Ann Getty introduced her to her husband-to be, the oil scion Michael 
Huffington; Henry Kissinger noted that their wedding, attended by Gettys and 
Roosevelts, had everything "except an Aztec sacrificial fire dance".

Later, many of these, and dozens of celebrity friends and acquaintances wrote 
for her for free, burnishing the Huffington name, propelling her on to the 
international stage, helping her achieve the $315m sale price to AOL, and the 
editor-in-chiefdom of its entire media holdings.

And yet. I found Thrive unexpectedly moving in parts, despite the awful 
subtitle, (the Thirdwhat?), the self-helpy tone, the summings-up at the end of 
the chapters, and the examples of corporate naffdom that make me scrawl 
"bleugh" across it at various points. (The biggest bleugh is when she quotes 
the chief executive of Whole Foods Market at a "Third Metric" conference she 
hosts saying: "We must bring love out of the corporate closet." What?)

Six years ago, she collapsed from exhaustion and found herself "lying on the 
floor of my home office in a pool of blood. On the way down, my head had hit 
the corner of my desk, cutting my eye and breaking the cheekbone."

There was nothing seriously wrong with her. "But doctors' waiting rooms, it 
turns out, were good places for me to ask myself a lot of questions about the 
kind of life I was living."

In the ensuing months and years, she took up yoga, started practising 
meditation and, above all, made it her mission to get seven hours of 
undisturbed sleep a night. She banished electronic devices from her bedroom and 
"treated bedtime like it was an urgent appointment". So far, so middle-aged 
woman or, at least, the kind of middle-aged woman whose New York apartment is 
big enough to host a conference for 340 people although "we did have to use Jon 
Bon Jovi's terrace on the top floor for the reception".

She holidays with Tina Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/27/tina-brown-newsweek-daily-beast>
, countsOprah Winfrey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/oprah-winfrey> 
as a friend, thanksSheryl Sandberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sheryl-sandberg> (chief operating 
officer of Facebook) in her acknowledgements for her line-editing skills and 
tweets selfies with Twitter'sBiz Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/biz-stone>. I am, possibly, the least 
networked journalist in Britain and I have a vague impression that this played 
a part in my relegation to the JFK commute. (Later she tweets a photo of 
herself that morning withCarl Honoré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/jul/24/ethicalliving.creditcrunch>
, the author ofIn Praise of Slow 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Praise-Slow-Worldwide-Movement-Challenging/dp/0752864149/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1395835994&sr=1-1&keywords=in+praise+of+slow>
. "Enjoyed slowing down… to talk slowing down with @carlhonore." Ha! There is 
no commemorative selfie of our high-speed taxi ride.)

But then, that's the thing about redefining success, I suggest. Thrive is a 
book for women who have already achieved the corner office. The high-flying 
corporate ladies may have lapped it up but there are an awful lot of people out 
there simply struggling to get by.

"Well, that's the point. Whether you're struggling to put food on the table, 
or if you've just lost your job, the more we can cultivate our own strength and 
resilience, the more we'll be able to navigate our lives more effectively."

It's a pat answer. But she insists it's also true. It's not that she's 
impervious to criticism. It's more that she's completely permeable to it. It 
moves through her. "I cry a lot," she says. And then she moves on. "I deal with 
it. I don't internalise it."

And she's always been prepared to fail. "Women need to be willing to be 
rejected. Willing to fail. We women, I think, have a harder time with failure. 
We want to do everything right."

And actually, it's Arianna Huffington's failures that are the most compelling 
thing about her. "Everything that happened in my life from my children to being 
here with you now, happened because a man wouldn't marry me," she tells the 
International Women's Day audience to roars of laughter.

But it's true. The man was the polymath journalist Bernard Levin. When they 
met, she was 21; he was 42. "I fell in love with his mind. He was my mentor in 
writing." But he didn't want children and she did. And, aged 30, she left him, 
left London, putting a continent between them although they remained the 
closest of friends until he succumbed to Alzheimer's a few years before his 
death.

There's a lot that has gone Arianna's way. But there's also quite a lot that 
hasn't. She just doesn't acknowledge it. She treats life, she says, as if "it's 
rigged in my favour". She loved Levin but he wouldn't, ultimately, give himself 
to her. She married Michael Huffington amid Kissingers and Gettys who did… for 
a time. Until he announced that he was gay and they divorced. And, aged 36, her 
first longed-for child was stillborn at the age of five months. "I had never 
known a pain like this," she writes inThrive. "What I learned through it is 
that we aren't on this Earth to accumulate victories or trophies or 
experiences… but to be whittled and sandpapered down until what's left is who 
we truly are."

Women, in public life, generally, don't talk about their dead babies, their 
fertility failures, the men who found them unlovable or rejected them or walked 
away. They don't admit to crying in the course of their professional lives. And 
they don't talk about the meaning of life, its purpose, what it's all for in 
the end or not. Every time I note down some particularly vomit-inducing 
happy-clappy passage in the book, some terrible Huffington Post innovation (I 
give you the "GPS for the Soul <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/gps-for-the-soul/>
" app), I find myself taken aback by something moving: Huffington's description 
of her mother's death – she refused an ambulance and gathered her family around 
her on the kitchen floor to drink wine; Laurie Anderson's account of Lou Reed 
dying in her arms; the shock and pain of finding out her daughter had a drug 
addiction.

She treats mindfulness like it's the new curly kale superfood and cure for 
cancer combined, and, if evidence were needed that it's been well and truly 
bastardised for big business's gain, she quotes (approvingly)a Rupert Murdoch 
tweet <https://twitter.com/rupertmurdoch/status/326018361458835459>: "Trying to 
learn transcendental meditation. Everyone recommends, not that easy to get 
started, but said to improve everything!" But, ultimately, she's trying to 
inject a dose of transcendentalism into corporate life, to reshape the world 
"that men have made". And to bring some human scale into the modern workplace, 
although, arguably, it's more about making people happier with their miserable 
lot than about actually changing the political system that has created that 
miserable lot in the first place.

And, of course, it does involve a certain amount of contradiction, although 
for someone whose politics have shifted from Republican to Democrat, this is a 
trifle. There's a whole chapter inThrive on the importance of giving. She tells 
how she "tithes" 10% of her income to charity and writes of its 
transformational qualities. Though if she was so keen on giving, I point out, 
she could have given some of that AOL money to the Huffington Post's 9,000 
unpaid bloggers.
 Bernard Levin, whose refusal to have children with Huffington set her on the 
path to America. Photograph: David Reed/Corbis 
"I think that this is a misunderstanding of the internet."

It is?

"Yes, it's what platforms are. Facebook did an IPO. I don't think anybody who 
updates their Facebook profile for free expects to make any money. And when 
Tumblr sells to Yahoo, I don't see their users getting any money."

But content is an essential part of what made the Huffington Post what it is.

"Yes, but every platform is about the content. Tumblr is about the content. 
Wikipedia is about the content."

You don't think it would have been a nice gesture to give something back? A 
tithe to the poor bloggers?

"No. We're a combination of journalistic enterprise. And a platform. Nobody 
made these people blog. They blog because it has a value to them. They want the 
distribution. They want to be heard."

She shrugs. But then this has perhaps been her greatest gift: to be both warm 
and charismatic in person, to have placed her two daughters, Isabella and 
Christina, now 25 and 23, at the centre of her life, but also to be a 
hard-nosed businesswoman when required. She has no regrets but then as she 
tells me, she doesn't do regrets.

Do you ever look back and wonder what you could have done differently? I ask 
at one point. "I don't look back," she says. Oh, so you are more about looking 
ahead? "No. I don't look back. I don't look forward. I try to just be 
here, now."

And then my recorder switches itself off and I have another panic while I try 
to sort it out and in the two minutes it takes me, she has fished out the 
BlackBerry and the iPhone (there's another BlackBerry that remains in her bag 
that is the dedicated hotline to her daughters) and starts emailing and 
calling. I press record again and obediently she drops them, folds her hands 
and is ready to go. I have heard about the concept of being "present" before; 
it's hard to avoid it in a world in which mindfulness is the new Atkins diet, 
but I've never seen it quite so compellingly illustrated. Her focus is absolute.

There are only a few minutes left. And I want to ask her about Britain. 
Because what I hadn't realised until I started researching this interview was 
how prominent she had been in Britain in the 1970s. I find apiece from 1994 by 
Brian Cathcart 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/rear-window-arianna-stassinopoulos-the-siren-of-the-seventies-1443305.html>
 in theIndependent in which he says that Arianna Stassinopoulos was "an emblem 
of Britain in the 1970s to rivalNationwide and the Austin Allegro". She became 
the first foreign, and only the third ever, female president of the Cambridge 
Union, and then ascended, effortlessly, from the Cambridge student stage to the 
national one. She publishedThe Female Woman, her controversialist attack on the 
women's movement, which she claimed appealed only to "women with strong lesbian 
tendencies" and that women might want careers but they wanted children too.

She met Levin when she appeared on the panel show Face the Music, became a 
staple inPrivate Eye (it nicknamed her "the gigantic Greek pudding"). 
Meanwhile, writes Cathcart, "gossip writers catalogued her companions. John 
Selwyn Gummer… who said, 'I enjoy her company enormously.' David Mellor, an old 
Cambridge chum, was said to have sent her poetry. Simon Jenkins (later editor 
of theTimes) was linked romantically."

It's a weird collision this, to think of Arianna Huffington hanging out with 
David Mellor and John Selwyn Gummer. To think that Britain was ever large 
enough to contain her free-ranging ambition. She moved on. Or, as she puts it: 
"I metabolise experiences quickly." But even at 21, theTimes described her as 
"glamorous with lots of charm" and noted that she wore "stunning clothes" (the 
report went on to say the clothes in question were "a mauve ski suit", but 
still). She's 63 now and insists she's changed. "I'm much happier than I was 
then."

But then, in a way, she is "the Female Woman". She has had both career and 
children, though she never remarried and has not been linked with anyone since 
her divorce. "I focus on what I have," she says, "not on what I don't." On her 
daughters, her sister, her work, all of which have been there for her, in her 
life, in a way in which her father, partners, husband haven't. "I had this 
conversation with my daughter about a boyfriend after her relationship ended 
and I said, 'What do you miss about it?' And she said, 'I miss how I felt while 
I was in that relationship.' And I said, 'Well, you can give yourself that.' 
She didn't miss him. She missed who she was. These are all things we can give 
ourselves. They do not depend on a man… "

Well, I say… some things.

"Sex! Of course, sex! But you know what I am saying."

She mentors her daughters constantly, believes "that Madeleine Albright thing 
of believing there is a special circle of hell for women who don't help other 
women", and her company is a refreshing blast of freedom from female paranoias. 
She doesn't just preach female empowerment. She is actually empowered. She 
doesn't apologise for herself. In the back of a cab, at John F Kennedy airport, 
with the engine idling, I find myself basking in the sunlight of her certainty, 
her confidence.

And then she's off. "Do you have my personal email?" she asks, opening the car 
door. "I'll give you my card."

I don't feel that's such a privilege having seen you scattering them around 
the ladies' lavatories, I say. And she laughs, but she's already gone. Her 
focus has moved on. Christopher Hitchens called her ascent to media mogul as 
her "last chrysalis. The last pupation". But I wouldn't be so sure.
 