
For a busy woman, Arianna Huffington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington>, the co-founder and 
editor-in-chief of the Huffington Post, is a surprisingly committed champion of 
sleep. Not only has she developed a pre-bed ritual that features a candlelit 
bath with Epsom salts, writing in a diary what she’s grateful for in life, and 
changing into a silk nightgown, she has also written a new book on the subject,
The Sleep Revolution: Transforming Your Life, One Night at a Time 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385199/>.

But into this perfectly sleepy world of expensive soundproof windows, organic 
cotton sheets and pillows containing soporific hops has come the kind of 
problem that could cause a less becalmed woman to wake up in a cold sweat in 
the middle of the night.

For Huffington finds herself in a thorny position of conflict. Last week, Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>, the global taxi giant, announced 
that she had joined its board of directors. For a woman who lectures against 
too much work, that may be a little tricky, but that’s not the problem.

Arianna Huffington interview – 'I find stories everywhere'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/30/arianna-huffington-interview-find-stories-everywhere-huffington-post-news>
What’s troubling is that Uber is a company that, by nature of its aggressive 
market strategy, attracts a certain amount of negative news coverage. The 
question now is will that find its way on to theHuffington Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post> site, given that this 
self-styled guru of the bedroom has planted one foot in the multibillion 
dollar-rated Uber’s boardroom?

Early last month, one of the Huffington Post’s reporters alerted her 
colleagues to astory in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/07/nyregion/uber-driver-napped-as-passenger-led-highway-chase-police-say.html?_r=0>
 about an Uber driver who took a nap while his passenger took over and became 
the subject of a high-speed police chase. But the reporter received a note from 
a senior editor informing her that they wouldn’t be linking to the story 
because Huffington Post was “partnering with Uber on our drowsy driving 
campaign”.

As part of the campaign, Uber customers stood the chance of sharing a cab with 
Huffington while she conducted a sleep tutorial, a prospect that perhaps not 
all of us would find relaxing. And in any case, what better way to bring 
attention to the perils of drowsy driving than the story of a drowsy driver who 
hands the wheel to a fare, who happens not to have a driving licence and 
proceeds to accelerate to 86mph, while he catches up on some shut-eye? But the 
story didn’t run.

An internal email subsequently insisting that the editorial decision had 
nothing to do with Huffington’s Uber appointment and that, indeed, she was 
entirely ignorant of the affair. Perhaps she was, yet the situation highlights 
the complications that come with the mutual back-scratching set-up of many 
corporate boardrooms, particularly when media figures are involved.

Even in the most benign circumstances, a conflict of interest is bound to 
occur at some point. And whatever accusations have been made against Uber, they 
have seldom, if ever, involved the description benign. As theWashington Post 
put it, the episode “should end any fanciful thinking that somehow a news 
organisation can cover the news with a conflicted boss”.

The safest policy, of course, would be for senior media figures to avoid 
boardrooms altogether, unless reporting on corruption and poor corporate 
governance. But safety first has not been the approach that has led Huffington 
to earn the title as the “most upwardly mobile Greek since Icarus”.

She has never been overly troubled by the disparity between her wealth and the 
non-payment of Huffington Post bloggers

Born Ariadne-Anna Stassinopoúlos in Athens, she moved to the UK as a 
16-year-old and studied economics at Cambridge, where she became the first 
foreign – and only third female – president of the Cambridge Union. A gifted 
networker, she befriended people such as John Selwyn Gummer and David Mellor 
and even entertained the prime minister, Edward Heath.

This was the early 1970s, when feminism was first being adopted by a 
generation of aggrieved young women. But not Stassinopoúlos. In 1973, she wrote
The Female Woman, her riposte to Germaine Greer’s The Female Eunuch and an 
attack on the women’s liberation movement, which, she argued, “would transform 
only the lives of women with strong lesbian tendencies”.

Her life had been transformed two years earlier by meeting the journalist and 
broadcasterBernard Levin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/aug/10/pressandpublishing.guardianobituaries>
 on the BBC TV classical music quizFace the Music. She was 21. At 43, he was 
twice her age but, as wits noted, half her height. She fell in love and he 
became her cultural mentor, overseeing her writing. But nine years later, with 
Levin refusing to have children, she broke off the relationship and moved to 
New York, leaving behind the parochial concerns of little England and set about 
becoming an Upper East Side socialite.

It was one of many striking transformations that have shaped Huffington’s 
life. In the years since, she’s undergone more iterations than the iPhone. In 
1985, she met the Texan billionaire Michael Huffington, whom she married the 
following year. They had two children and moved to California for his political 
career. But they divorced in 1997, and a year later he disclosed that he was 
bisexual.

It was during the 90s and her marriage to Huffington that she first made a 
national impact in the US, particularly during her Republican husband’s 
unsuccessful bid to join the US Senate. At that stage of her life, she was an 
unambiguous rightwinger. In a revealing profile, theNew Yorker referred to her 
as a “Republican Spice Girl” and an “endearingly ditzy right-wing 
gal-about-town”. In 1998, she set up her first website, resignation.com, which 
called on Bill Clinton to stand down as president following the Monica Lewinsky 
scandal. But by then her transformation was already underway. She had quit the 
Republican party in 1996, recognising, she later said, that government needed 
to be more active.

Her next venture was Arianna Online, which grew out of her syndicated 
newspaper columns. Then in 2005, with Kenneth Lerer and Jonah Peretti, and the 
conservative blogger Andrew Breitbart, she set up the Huffington Post.

The site became a platform for thousands of bloggers, none of whom was paid. 
In 2011, the website was sued by the political activist Jonathan Tasini on 
behalf of these uncompensated bloggers. The suit was eventually dismissed, and 
the bloggers received nothing. However, Huffington has certainly prospered.

That same year, she sold the website to AOL for $315m. She has never been 
troubled by the disparity between her wealth and the non-payment of many 
Huffington Post bloggers. As she told this newspapertwo years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/30/arianna-huffington-interview-find-stories-everywhere-huffington-post-news>
: “Nobody made these people blog. They blog because it has a value to them. 
They want the distribution. They want to be heard.” Don’t we all, though some 
of us wouldn’t be offended by a little payment too. Notwithstanding her 
reluctance to redistribute the Huffington Post’s profits to its contributors, 
Huffington’s politics are said to have moved steadily leftwards since the end 
of her marriage, though it may be more accurate to say that the Republican 
party has moved steadily rightwards. She voiced her disillusionment inPigs at 
the Trough, the ninth of her 15 books, which took aim at George W Bush.

Nowadays, with her wealth and social position firmly established, she proposes 
a more holistic approach to life. A recent book,Thrive, laid claim to a “Third 
Metric”. It argued that the first two metrics – money and power – were not 
enough in life, for a person also needed to “create a life of wellbeing, wisdom 
and wonder”. She’s always had a “spiritual” side, going back to her Levin 
period, when they both flirted with the Bhagwan Rajneesh. But her more recent 
commitment to yoga and mindfulness came after she fell over several years ago 
and cracked a cheekbone as a consequence of overwork and lack of sleep.

Ironically, the criticism Thrive received echoed her own of women’s 
liberation: just as she suggested it only worked for lesbians, many felt it was 
a book whose insights were only really relevant to millionaire 
businesswomen.Perhaps her new book will have a more universal appeal. After 
all, even those of us who lack soundproof windows and hop-infused pillows still 
appreciate a good night’s kip. And one tip from Huffington’s life for a restful 
night is not to suffer regret. She never looks back, she says. Nor does she 
look forward. She just tries to “be here, now”, whether that’s in the 
boardroom, in the bedroom or, depending on your luck or lack of it, next to you 
in the passenger seat of an Uber cab.

THE HUFFINGTON FILE

Born Ariadne-Anna Stassinopoúlos in Athens, 15 July 1950, to a journalist, 
Konstantinos, and his wife, Elli, who devoted herself to realising her 
daughter’s dream to study at Cambridge University.

Best of Times Building the Huffington Post into one of the world’s most 
successful online news aggregators. It was sold to AOL in 2011 for $315m.

Worst of times When she was 36 her longed-for first child was still-born five 
months into her pregnancy. “I had never known a pain like this,” she later 
wrote.

What she says “Everything that happened in my life from my children to being 
here with you now, happened because a man wouldn’t marry me”, a reference to 
her relationship with the late Bernard Levin.

What others say “The most ruthless, unscrupulous, and ambitious person I’d met 
in 30 years in national politics.” Ed Rollins, her ex-husband’s former 
political agent.

 * This article was amended on 5 May 2016 to correct a pullquote that 
incorrectly referred to the non-payment of writers rather than bloggers, and to 
make it clear that an internal email rather than a press release discussed the 
Post’s decision not to run a story about an Uber driver.
 