
Media mogul turned self-help guru Arianna Huffington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington> is to leave the 
Huffington Post to launch a health-focused startup called Thrive Global to 
tackle stress and burnout.

Eleven years after Huffington co-founded the site that bears her name, and has 
changed the face of journalism, the site’s editor-in-chief and president, told 
staff on Thursday that she would be giving up her role at the media company 
after closing a funding round for Thrive late last week.

Arianna Huffington: from bedroom to boardroom with the Uber woman | Observer 
profile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/01/arianna-huffington-uber-directors-huffington-post>
She said in a statement: “When I decided to create Thrive Global, I thought it 
would be possible to build a startup and continue as editor-in-chief of the
Huffington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post>. Today, 
it’s clear that was an illusion.

“As Thrive Global moved from an idea to a reality, with investors, staff, and 
offices, it became clear to me that I simply couldn’t do justice to both 
companies.”

In a memo to staff, Huffington said she had “become more and more passionate – 
okay, obsessed – with burnout and stress and how we can reduce their impact on 
our lives”.

Her departure comes just over a decade after she founded the Huffington Post 
with Kenneth Lerer, Jonah Peretti and Andrew Breitbart, who would also go on to 
be among the most influential media figures of their generation. Peretti 
founded BuzzFeed and Lerer is its chairman, while Breitbart went on to create 
the rightwing news site that is named after him.

Kate Palmer, editorial director of lifestyle for the Huffington Post, told the 
Guardian the staff would be hearing about succession plans in an 11am meeting 
on Thursday. “Obviously it’s a bittersweet day, but HuffPo is poised to be an 
incredible leader in this space, and we’re not gonna miss a beat,” Palmer said.

In 2011 Huffington Post was bought for $315m (£243m) by AOL, which in turn was 
bought for $4.4bn in 2014 by US mobile operator Verizon. Verizon recentlyadded 
Yahoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/yahoo-to-sell-core-web-business-to-verizon>
 to its portfolio, buying the ailing internet giant for $4.83bn (£3.62bn) in 
July.


Traffic to HuffPo’s sites has dropped precipitously this year: according to 
data from web analytics firm comScore, global audience fell 23% from June 2015 
to June 2016.

Born Ariadnē-Anna Stasinopoúlou in Athens in 1950, Huffington rose to 
prominence in the 1990s as a conservative Republican presence on television, on 
the radio and in her now ex-husband Michael Huffington’s bid for one of 
California’s Senate seats in 1994. She appeared in Comedy Central’s coverage of 
the 1996 US elections as “the beautiful but evil Arianna Huffington” alongside 
“the talented but smug Al Franken” in a segment called Strange Bedfellows. 
Franken is now a Democratic US senator.

But for her namesake enterprise Huffington made a Damascene conversion. The 
site was tactically liberal from the get-go and originally envisioned as a 
competitor to conservative links page The Drudge Report. The Huffington Post 
pioneered a brand of journalism that has come to typify much of the digital 
news world – often aggregated from work from other outlets, sometimes without 
attribution orpermission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/28/cartoonist-the-oatmeal-trolls-huffpo-over-images-published-sans-permission>
, with the majority of its original material produced by unpaid contributors, 
famous or otherwise.


In a June 2012 piece in the Columbia Journalism Review, Columbia journalism 
school professor Michael Shapirocharacterized the site’s success 
<http://www.cjr.org/cover_story/six_degrees_of_aggregation.php> as a 
combination of rapid popularity, low overhead and the level of access afforded 
to Huffington by her years in politics and on television. The site pitched 
famous people a popular platform from which they could opine, which was better 
than money; to its unpaid low-level staffers, it dangled the prestige of 
appearing in print next to the famous ones.

“[I]t was up to Huffington to find the bloggers,” Shapiro wrote. “She wanted 
Arthur Schlesinger; he was a friend. So was Larry David. And John Cusack. And 
Harry Shearer.”

“When somebody writes something for us, we know it’s real, we know they want 
to write it,” HuffPo UK editor-in-chief Steve Hull told Radio 4 earlier this 
year, by way of defending the company’s practice of refusing to pay many of its 
writers. “It’s not been forced or paid for. I think that’s something to be 
proud of.”

After Huffington’s departure announcement, AOL CEO Tim Armstrong said the 
company remained committed to the Huffington Post, and looked forward to 
partnering with Thrive.

He said: “Arianna is a visionary who built the Huffington Post into a truly 
transformative news platform. Today, The Huffington Post is a firmly 
established and celebrated news source and AOL and Verizon are committed to 
continuing its growth and the groundbreaking work Arianna pioneered.”

Though she stayed on as the site’s editor-in-chief and president following 
Huffington Post’s changes of ownership, Huffington has in recent years spent 
increasing amounts of time promoting healthy living concepts such as 
mindfulness and the benefits of getting enough sleep. In her memo to staff she 
joked she would remain HuffPo’s “unofficial Sleep Ombudsman”.

Thrive, which shares a name with a book published by Huffington in 2014, 
promises to offer a range of services and support using “the latest scientific 
findings from experts in the fields of neuroscience, psychology, productivity, 
sports and sleep”.


The company is backed by a range of venture capital firms and angel investors 
led by Lerer’s Lerer Hippeau Ventures, and has been running a pilot programme 
with Accenture.

Huffington, who will serve as its chief executive, added: “As Thrive Global 
moved from an idea to a reality, with investors, staff, and offices, it became 
clear to me that I simply couldn’t do justice to both companies ... Running 
both companies would have involved working around the clock, which would be a 
betrayal of the very principles of Thrive I’ve been writing and speaking about.”

“I step down as editor-in-chief filled with gratitude for our amazing HuffPost 
team and for what we’ve built together, and for Tim Armstrong who had the 
vision to buy HuffPost five years ago and to support from day one our global 
expansion. The journey of the last 11 years has exceeded my wildest 
expectations. I’m proud of all we’ve accomplished and very confident about 
HuffPost’s future with the strongest leadership team we’ve ever had and the 
full support of AOL and Verizon.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 66

Education Girton College, Cambridge

Career 1973 author, The Female Woman 1996 writer, Politically Incorrect With 
Bill Maher (Emmy nomination_2003 activist, The Detroit Project 2005 founder, 
The Huffington Post2016 founder, Thrive Global
 