
Hispanic communities in Arizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> 
are living in a state of virtual siege, civil rights activists in the state are 
warning, as a result of little-noticed provisions in the harsh anti-illegal 
immigration law SB1070 that have already been allowed to go into effect.

On Wednesday, the US supreme court will hear oral arguments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/apr/24/arizona-immigration-law-supreme-court>
 relating to five key elements of SB1070 that were blocked by the lower courts 
in an ongoing tussle over whether the federal government or individual states 
should control immigration policy. The supreme court hearing is being seen as a 
landmark, as it is likely to set the direction of immigration law in America 
for years to come.

But on the ground in Phoenix, the capital of Arizona which has a 41% Hispanic 
population, organisations working in Hispanic neighbourhoods say that the law 
is already having a chilling effect on relations between residents and police.

In particular, two clauses of the law that were allowed to go ahead have 
encouraged police officers to take an increasingly interventionist role which 
activists say amounts to racial profiling.

The "anti-sanctuary cities" provision of section two of the law prohibits any 
Arizona official or agency from "limiting enforcement of federal immigration 
laws". Another clause in the same section allows American citizen to "sue any 
state official, agency or political subdivision for adopting a policy of 
restricting enforcement of federal immigration laws to less than the full 
extent".

Those two provisions were further reinforced by a policing order imposed in 
October 2010, shortly after SB1070 was enacted, that instructs police officers 
in Phoenix to carry out their federal immigration duties to the full. The 
policing order is expressed in almost identical language to the provisions in 
SB1070 that were allowed to stand.

The impact, say immigrant rights groups, is that the Phoenix police have 
already tightened the screws on Hispanic communities, putting thousands of 
Latino men and women in jail and then handing them over to federal officials 
for deportation even on the back of minor infringements such as traffic 
violations.

"It's a mistake to assume that because the most dangerous provisions of SB1070 
in Arizona were blocked by the court that racial profiling has gone away. We 
have a serious problem of racial profiling in the state," said Alessandra Soler 
Meetze, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Arizona.

SB1070 was signed into law by Arizona governor Jan Brewer in July 2010. It was 
the first of what has become a widely mirrored attempt at state level to put 
the frighteners on undocumented immigrants and force them to leave – a policy 
known as "attrition through enforcement".

Under the sections of SB1070 that have come into effect, police officers are 
encouraged to check on the immigration status of anyone they come into contact 
with should they suspect they are unauthorised to be in the US. Immigrant 
rights groups report that increasingly Hispanics are being carted off to jail 
should they be unable to produce a drivers licence – under Arizona law 
undocumented immigrants are not allowed to apply for driving licences.

Once in jail, their immigration status is checked, and if it is lacking they 
are handed over to federal immigration officers in private detention centers, 
awaiting deportation. Phoenix has one of the highest rates of deportations of 
any city in America, second only to Los Angeles, with up to 30 men and women 
deported every day.

"My experience is that SB1070 is already being used as a tool to get people 
into jail where their immigration status has to be checked," said Lydia Guzman, 
a Phoenix immigration advocate who headsRespect-Respeto 
<http://respect-respeto.org/Home.html>.

Guzman said that the creeping crackdown under the new law had enhanced the 
distrust of Hispanic communities in the police and forced many families to flee 
the state. Census data suggests that some 100,000 Latinos have quit Arizona 
over the past two years as a result of the combined impact of SB1070 and the 
economic downturn and lack of jobs.

Guzman is acting on behalf a family of Hispanics from the west side of Phoenix 
that has lodged a complaint of police harassment after their house was raided 
on March 31. The family was holding a birthday party for Clara Ponciano, who 
had just turned 21, and there was dancing and music with about 25 close 
relatives attending.

A neighbour called the police to report that the music was too loud. Clara's 
brother, Nestor Ponciano, told the Guardian that when the police turned up they 
bust down the door, jumped the fences at the back of the yard, and began pepper 
spraying the revellers.

Ponciano's uncle, he said, was dragged into the kitchen and beaten in front of 
children as young as three and six months old. Ponciano estimated that up to 20 
officers were involved in the operation, backed up by a helicopter, and some of 
the officers he alleged called his relatives "wetbacks" – an offensive term 
directed at undocumented Mexican immigrants.

None of the 25 guests are unauthorised to be in the US – they were all 
American citizens or permanent residents – though Ponciano is convinced that 
the raid was a product of tougher policing in the wake of SB1070. "Hispanic 
families are being picked, and if they are doing that, who's going to protect 
us from the police?"

Carlos Garcia, an immigrant rights organiser with the Puente movement 
<http://puenteaz.org/> in Phoenix, said that communities were being terrorised: 
"If someone is late home, or if their phone battery runs dry, their families 
assume they have been taken away. You can't begin to describe how that affects 
a community."

A further aggravation is the hardline policing practised over large swaths of 
Phoenix by sheriff Joseph Arpaio of Maricopa County. "America's toughest 
sheriff", as he likes to call himself, Arpaio is under federal investigation 
for racial profiling Hispanics in his regionand for alleged abuse of power 
<http://www.azcentral.com/news/articles/2012/04/22/20120422ap-newsbreak-az-sheriff-played-probe-laughs.html>
.

Wednesday's US supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court>
 hearing will focus on the six provisions of SB1070 that were blocked by lower 
courts. Foremost among them is the clause that requires police officers to 
check the immigration status of anyone they come across where there is a 
"reasonable suspicion" that they are undocumented – a green light, activists 
say, for racial profiling.

Campaigners in Phoenix fear that should the supreme court allow those 
provisions to stand, it will greatly heighten the already tense atmosphere in 
the city. Crucially, the "reasonable suspicion" clause would oblige police to 
carry out the checks, whereas under the current provisions officers are allowed 
to use their own discretion.
 