
An undercover British army soldier has claimed he bugged a hospital and 
planted listening devices in the homes of seniorSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> politicians years after the 
IRA ceasefire in 1994.

The former intelligence soldier told the Guardian that many of the tiny 
cameras and minute bugs he secreted all overNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> were still in place years 
after he left a secret military unit.

Senior Sinn Féin members, the including former IRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> hunger striker Raymond McCartney, were 
still being targeted in secret surveillance operations until the 2000s, he said.

“We put a bug into Raymond McCartney’s house because we were not sure which 
way the republican movement was going in the early part of the 21st century.”

Seán Hartnett (not his real name), who has just published a book about his 
part in the secret counterterrorism war, said republicans were “still gathering 
intelligence on the security forces in the early 2000s despite being on 
ceasefire, so we did the same on them”.

“The bug I know was planted in Raymond McCartney’s house was so sophisticated 
I would be hugely surprised if it has ever been found.”

Hartnett revealed that British military intelligence in the early 2000s hid 
tiny cameras and bugs in various places, including one inside Altnagelvin 
hospital in Derry, as part of its secret war against the Real IRA. He said many 
were probably still in place.

Hartnett’s memoir focuses on the seven years he served in the Joint 
Communications Unit NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> 
(JCUNI), formerly the controversial Force Research Unit, also known as the Det.

He alleges that one of the undercover units he was working for was prepared to 
carry out a shoot-to-kill operation against a Real IRA cell outside an army 
base in Omagh just four years after theterrorist group’s bomb attack that 
killed 29 people in the County Tyrone town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/omagh>.

The 40-year-old former military spy-technician, who was born in Cork in the 
Irish Republic, said he would not return to the UK because he feared he could 
be arrested and prosecuted for breaching the Official Secrets Act.

Northern Ireland: when Britain fought terror with terror | Ian Cobain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/09/northern-ireland-terror-shoot-to-kill>
In an interview in Ireland, Hartnett said he was certain the advanced spying 
equipment his units used to monitor Real IRA and Ulster loyalists was now being 
used to watch Islamic State terror suspects in the UK.

Although, he added, the devices he used while tracking Real IRA suspects and 
gathering “political intelligence” on Sinn Féin were now even more advanced.

“The technical advances they had made would lead even someone like me to 
struggle to pick out say a hidden camera in a parked vehicle these days,” 
Hartnett said.

He said that, just like in Northern Ireland, many of the cameras and listening 
devices hidden in homes, businesses, vehicles and other places in the rest of 
the UK would remain in place long after surveillance operations were wound 
down. “Northern Ireland is awash with bugs and secret cameras because, after 
all, we never went about taking them out when our operations were ended. The 
same will be true of any spying equipment that is planted in English cities and 
towns.”

Asked where the strangest place was that he had planted a listening device, 
Hartnett replied: “Definitely in Altnagelvin hospital in Derry. It was 2002 and 
after the Omagh bomb atrocity of 1998 the Real IRA had a resurgence. They were 
bombing again in Britain in the early 2000s; the rocket attack on MI5’s 
headquarters and the bomb at the BBC come to mind.

“There was one suspect/patient from Derry in the hospital who was being 
visited by another Real IRA operative and we wanted to know what they were 
taking about on these visits. So I was sent in personally to place the 
listening device where they were having their chats. To be honest it’s probably 
still there.”

He repeated the allegation, made in his book Charlie One, that military 
intelligence was prepared to kill two Real IRA men on their way to kill British 
soldiers at an ATM in Omagh in 2002.

“The Real IRA cell had the ATM at a garage under surveillance because soldiers 
from the nearby St Lucia army barracks in Omagh were using it to draw out cash. 
We had the team under surveillance and thanks to one our listening devices we 
had hard intelligence the Real IRA were going to use a motorbike to carry out a 
drive-by shooting as squaddies left the base to take out money at the ATM.

“I was told the plan was to surround the garage with undercover soldiers and 
open fire as the motorbike team turned up and the pillion passenger drew his 
gun. But at the last minute, the attempted hit on the soldiers didn’t take 
place because the Real IRA team couldn’t get their motorbike started. If the 
machine had started up these two men would be dead today.

“My colleagues told me they were determined to take them out as one of them 
had been responsible for the murder of a police officer during the Troubles. 
Those Real IRA pair do not realise how lucky there were.”

Hartnett said his book originated while he was undergoing therapy for 
post-traumatic stress disorder after being discharged from the undercover army 
regiment in 2005.

 “My counsellor told me to write down all my experiences of the secret war and 
having amassed so many stories of my time in the Det I realised there was a 
book in this.

“I don’t know if the British authorities will prosecute me for telling my 
story but I am not taking any chances and won’t be back in the UK again. But 
out of therapy came this book and it’s my story which I had to tell.”

 * Charlie One is published by Merrion Press
 