
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> admits that 
Granit Xhaka still needs time to adapt fully to the rigours of Premier League 
football before making the kind of impact that persuaded Arsenal to spend 
heavily on the Swiss midfielder. “He needs to adapt to the way we play and the 
tactical pace of the English game,” Wenger said. “I am confident he will do 
very well.”

The lack of regular game time has been mystifying. Xhaka has completed 90 
minutes of a Premier League game only twice sincejoining from Borussia 
Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/25/arsenal-granit-xhaka-confirm-signing>
 in the summer, a deal Wenger was very keen to push through before the European 
Championships that Xhaka went on to impress in.

The Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> manager says this 
has been a challenging period for a player who had been captain, and relied 
upon to be a mainstay, at his previous club. “That is part of the job,” Wenger 
said. “People want you to buy players but when you buy them we only pick 11 and 
not 22 and they feel sorry for the 11 who do not play. But you want them to 
compete and convince you that they can get in the team and it becomes obvious 
they have to play.”

Xhaka’s omissions from the starting lineup in recent big games against 
Manchester United and Paris Saint-Germain have been especially curious given 
the absence of Santi Cazorla. Xhaka ought to be the next best equipped to 
deliver passes between the lines from the cadre of Arsenal midfielders.

Wenger implies that part of the delay in fully unleashing Xhaka is about the 
balance of the team. “He’s more a deep playmaker I think than a box-to-box 
player. He does not get into the final third of the opposition half a lot,” 
said the Frenchman. “He is more a guy who has a fantastic pass to play through 
the lines. He gets the ball from the defenders and finds the high midfield.”

After three draws in which Arsenal’s creativity has dropped off, this Sunday’s 
fixture against Bournemouth looks like the ideal opportunity to give Xhaka a 
chance to prove his worth.

In many ways it was his arrival that hastened the decision for Jack Wilshere 
to go on loan to the south coast club. Wenger will approach Wilshere with the 
offer of a contract renewal around the turn of the year, and from what he has 
observed and reports he has heard of Wilshere’s impact, he is happy with his 
progress and believes he will again play for Arsenal.

Arsenal plan to offer Jack Wilshere extended deal in new year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/arsenal-jack-wilshere-arsene-wenger>
Of the loan, Wenger explained: “It was a human case more then a calculated 
financial case. He’s been educated here since he was eight or nine years old, 
he has gone for years through difficult periods where he didn’t play. I felt 
honestly if a guy who has been educated here has another season where he 
doesn’t play because I don’t give him the chance because I have some players 
who are fitter than him, it would be unfair.

“Jack is a special case because he came back from two years with no 
competition. You have to compete. It’s not a lack of wanting to compete with 
Jack, it’s just to give him a chance to come back to his best level.”

He added: “I let him go this season because we bought Xhaka, we have Elneny, 
Ramsey, and I thought if he doesn’t play regularly, and he wasn’t fit enough to 
be in the position to start games … so I let him go. If Jack comes back to his 
right level he will play for us.”

Not that Wenger is predicting an easy contract renegotiation. “I can assure 
you talks over a contract are always difficult. If he wants to go somewhere 
else you have to respect that,” he said. “My feeling is I want him back. He 
always said he is an Arsenal man.”
 