
On the back of a run of seven consecutive wins, Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> is urging his players to 
keep their wits about them within the pack at the top of the Premier League. He 
warns them against the perils of complacency.

“We live in a jungle where everybody wants to eat you, and you have to survive 
by keeping your vigilance,” he said. “That’s what competition is about. Every 
day you have to fight again to survive. I believe that humility is to 
understand that you start again from zero.”

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/21/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> take on Middlesbrough 
at home on Saturday hoping to extend a winning streak which currently stands at 
six in a row in the Premier League. “I feel there is more to come out from our 
team,” Wenger said. “We have the squad and we have to show that we have the 
quality. To maintain that in the team for 10 months will depend on the players, 
on me and also on injuries.”

Wenger is optimistic that the club is seeing progress in the numbers of 
injuries that have been so problematic in recent seasons. “I believe we have 
improved tremendously on the muscular injury front in the last two three or 
years,” he says. “Last year we were a bit unlucky with the knocks we got, and 
the joint injuries we got. It was down to blocks in the game. On the muscular 
front, I think we have done much better and hopefully we can continue that.

“It is not one measure, it is to analyse the level of fatigue, of recovery, 
the preparation, the prevention. Everything is a bit more scientific and maybe 
that makes you a bit more predictable to what will happen. We know the players 
very well because we have data for a few years and we can analyse when he got 
injured, the repetition of a few signs of some warnings that we can now know 
much better about them now.”

Wenger added that Danny Welbeck was ahead of schedule and should be ready to 
return in January. Shorter term, Olivier Giroud is expected to be in contention 
for Tuesday night’s EFL Cup tie against Reading, with Aaron Ramsey pushing for 
contention next weekend at Sunderland.
 