
Laurent Koscielny is a doubt for Arsenal’s opening Champions League game at 
Paris Saint-Germain on Tuesday night.During the climax to Saturday’s last-gasp 
2-1 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/arsenal-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
 over Southampton, he took a kick in the face in a melee at a corner. Two studs 
caught him either side of an eye, so the damage could have been much more 
serious. The defender had significant swelling around the eye when examined 
after the match by the club doctor. “It is a little concern,” Arsène Wenger 
said. “It’s already very swollen.”

Koscielny was outstanding, organising defensively with a new partner, the 
debutant Shkodran Mustafi, alongside him, and also scoring the equaliser with a 
brilliant bicycle kick. If he does not recover in time for the Parc des 
Princes, Wenger would be left with a central defensive partnership of players 
who are new to the club and each other in Mustafi and the youngster Rob Holding.

Santi Cazorla injury-time penalty gives Arsenal win against Southampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/arsenal-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
Wenger was full of praise for Koscielny, who is captain while Per Mertesacker 
is recovering from a long-term injury. “He is one of the most experienced 
players we have now here,” the manager said.

“He is one of the longest-serving defenders and I think he is one of our best 
players. When I think about the squad, when you choose a captain as well, you 
think of one with a good chance to play in every single game and that’s not 
easy nowadays. He has committed to the club for a long contract and he has 
always improved every year. Today he is an outstanding centre-back.”

His spectacular goal meant more to Wenger not in its execution but in its 
timing. Koscielny has a habit of scoring in pressure situations. “He doesn’t 
score that when it is 4-0 for you, he scores at 1-0 down and that’s always a 
special quality. It was his birthday and he gave himself a great present.”
 