
Héctor Bellerín is out of action for an estimated four weeks, leaving Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> with a problem at the right-back 
position the young Spaniard has excelled in.

Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> is short of 
back-up as Mathieu Debuchy has been sidelined with a calf injury, while Carl 
Jenkinson has only just returned from cruciate ligament damage. “Bellerín got 
injured in the last 10 seconds against Spurs after a very strong tackle by 
Danny Rose,” said Wenger.

That is one of the complications the Arsenal manager is considering ahead of 
this Saturday’s early kick-off against Manchester United. As far as his attack 
is concerned, Wenger feels at the mercy of the “honesty” of Alexis Sánchez when 
it comes to an injury threat and potential availability. Arsenal’s in-form 
forward, who played for Chile in midweek and was set to return to London at 4pm 
on Thursday, played despite a hamstring alert. Havingscored twice for his 
country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/alexis-sanchez-scores-twice-as-chile-come-from-behind-to-beat-uruguay>
, Sánchez’s fitness will be assessed on Friday morning before making a decision 
before the trip to Old Trafford.

“What I will consider is the risk of injury because he played while recovering 
from a hamstring injury,” Wenger said. “I’ll consider the way he feels as well. 
On that front you depend on the honesty of the player, how they feel and how 
they recover.

“We were in doubt 24 hours before the game against Uruguay. We didn’t know if 
he’d play or not. In the end they decided to play him. He texted us to tell us 
he’s in good shape after the game. He came off after 84 minutes and now we have 
to wait. I see him tomorrow morning and then I will see if he can be involved 
in the squad or not.”

Fitness permitting, Sánchez is likely to be involved from the bench, with 
Olivier Giroud expected to start at Manchester United.

Wenger added: “You have to trust the medical people from Chile. I completely 
understand that Alexis wanted to play in qualifiers – they’re not friendlies. 
Chile are not in a fantastic position to qualify for the World Cup and I 
understand that Alexis is keen to play for his country in such an important 
game. After that, it’s a difficult period in November because it’s the first 
time when some of the players have played many games. Most of the time it’s a 
decisive period in the Champions League because it’s game number five and, for 
most of the clubs it’s a very important time in the Champions League. In the 
Premier League, the first decisive games are also coming up so it’s a period 
where you can pay a heavy price. We lost important players in November for long 
periods last year.”

“We go into a period of big games, one after another. The way we deal with 
these kinds of games will be very important to our position in the league and 
our ambitions. I believe we are on a very strong run of 16 games unbeaten. We 
had a little hiccup against Tottenham at home, but now we want to start winning 
our games again, and this is an opportunity to do that on Saturday.”

As is usually the case these days, Wenger tried to avoid any verbal flare ups 
on the subject of José Mourinho. “Look, I don’t think I have to describe our 
relationship. He will fight for his team and I will fight for my team and I 
think that’s completely normal,” said the Frenchman, before saying he will 
shake hands with the man leading the opposite dugout. “Of course. I respect the 
ritual that is so important in the Premier League.”
 