
Arsène Wenger’s number crunching has led him to predict that the team who win 
the Premier League this season will need considerably more points than 
Leicester City last term.

Claudio Ranieri’s team were crowned champions with 77 points, but such is the 
renewed competitive edge that sees the current top five jostling in close 
contention, Wenger is setting his team a higher target to compete for the top 
honour.

“After nine games the first trend is set,” the Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> manager said. “It’s about 20 
points, and [the title] will be decided between 82 and 86 points. Every game is 
a fight and absolutely you need to be at your best to have a chance to win – 
for us and for everybody else it’s the same.

“We have to be really focused on details, keeping the energy inside our club 
and at the top of every game. Every single detail can get you points.”

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend's action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/premier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-weekends-action>
Wenger was in optimistic mood as he addressed Arsenal’s shareholders at the 
annual general meeting on Monday. Having been presented by the majority 
shareholder, Stan Kroenke, with a portrait made up of all the players he has 
selected during his 20 years at the club, Wenger wasted little time in trying 
to project forward. He is bullish about the prospects of his team this season, 
outlining his assessment that they are better placed to compete than they have 
been for a number of years.

“Our challenge is to compete for everything starting tomorrow in the League 
Cup against Reading. We need to fight for absolutely everything. We have a 
squad for the first time in five or six years that is more mature and better 
equipped to face the challenge for all the targets.”

Kroenke’s admiration for Wenger was obvious, and the goodwill on the top table 
gave no indication that anyone at board level has any desire to see a change of 
manager any time soon. Wenger’s deal is due to expire at the end of the season 
but a question about a new contract or any succession plan was casually brushed 
aside as an issue for another day. “At an appropriate time we will sit down 
with him and discuss the future but our current focus is maintaining the run 
and competing for trophies,” the club chairman, Sir Chips Keswick, said.

Ivan Gazidis, the chief executive, gave a speech outlining the club’s 
financial health. It was striking that they no longer rely on selling players 
for a bulk of the income – the figure for player sales has shrunk recently.

Gazidis also sounded positive on the subject of renewing deals for some of 
theirmost prized assets in Mesut Özil and Alexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/arsenal-mesut-ozil-alexis-sanchez-arsene-wenger-champions-league>
. “We have a good track record in keeping our players,” he said.

“I can assure you we will apply the same focus and rigour and diligence with 
our current squad and I think you have seen the direction of travel.”

He said Arsenal were keeping a close eye on Celtic’s experience with safe 
standing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/09/safe-standing-hillsborough-rail-seating-bundesliga-celtic>
. Mindful that there needs to be a change in government policy in England, he 
did acknowledge the club are “open minded” about the kind of rail seating 
utilised commonly in the Bundesliga and now operational at Celtic Park.
 