
They’ve been calling the past week the worst ever 
<https://dailyreview.com.au/worst-week-ever-australian-arts/42216/> for the 
Australian arts. They’re not wrong.

The sector’s fears that Catalyst – the newly introduced arts funding program 
dispensed directly by the government’s arts ministry – would become an exercise 
of political favour and pork barrelling, seem to have come true. Almost half of 
the program’s four-year budget has been announced in its first six months, with 
an extraordinary $13m in grants rushed out as the government went into 
caretaker mode last weekend.

But the real impact of Catalyst’s genesis will be felt in weeks to come, as 
the Australia Council’sdrastic funding cuts 
<http://www.australiacouncil.gov.au/news/media-centre/media-releases/australia-council-outlines-2015-16-budget-impact/>
 from the 2015-16 budget get passed on to arts organisations.

Earlier this week, over a hundred small to medium arts organisations learnt of 
the outcome of their four-year organisational funding application, in a round 
expected to carry the bulk of last year’s cuts. Todaythe news went public 
<http://australiacouncil.gov.au/news/media-centre/media-releases/australia-council-announces-112m-investment-over-four-years-in-small-to-medium-arts-organisations/>
.

As core funding, this round provides the infrastructure and framework for a 
sector that is otherwise reliant on project-to-project funding. It underpins 
the programs of over a hundred organisations, and the practice of thousands of 
artists. It allows these organisations to plan, and to create some semblance of 
job security for their employees. In many cases this funding is the difference 
between these organisations existing at all, and a massive void between the 
major arts institutions and individual artists.

After the budget: shh! Australia's era of artistic silencing begins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/commentisfree/2015/may/13/after-the-budget-shh-australias-era-of-artistic-silencing-begins>
The full effects of these cuts will be acutely felt across the next five years 
and beyond, but based on this morning’s announcement we can start to paint a 
picture of how things are looking.

Organisations such as Meanjin, Next Wave festival, Express Media – publishers 
of Voiceworks – and experimental dance company Force Majeure have all lost out 
completely. The Biennale of Sydney, Museum of ContemporaryArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, regional theatre HotHouse and 
Perth’s PICA are among the “successful” organisations also suffering losses, in 
part due to the funding round’s arbitrary $300,000 cap.

There are some winners in there too – as much as there can be winners when a 
whole sector takes such a significant hit. Sydney’s Firstdraft and Gadigal 
Music, along with Multicultural Arts Victoria and Perth’s Yirra Yaakin and PVI 
Collective, are among new recipients of the core funding – news which would 
have been met with mixed feelings for these organisations who rely on a vibrant 
sector for the success of their programs.


These losses will be felt hard across the sector, as we lose many of the 
people that genuinely square up to the Coalition government’s rhetoric – the 
agile, innovative “disruptors” – from our arts ecosystem. But the arts, 
particularly at the small-to-medium level, has always worn the badge of 
“punching above its weight” with pride, and the current landscape will surely 
strengthen that resolve.

Through a combination of passion, hard work and shared vision we get the 
benefit of a thriving arts sector, without meeting the costs of it. Right?

Wrong. Punching above your weight comes with significant risks. While money is 
stripped from organisational budgets, the pressure on organisations to continue 
doing what they’re doing will be huge. It may seem heroic when the 
business-as-usual decision is made, but organisations that continue to run 
insufficiently funded programs pass the risk onto their workers.

To start, we need not look any further than the 2016 budget’s flailing talking 
point 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/coalitions-840-million-interns-plan-illegal-lawyers-20160511-gosd1e.html>
: internships. The Fair Work Act is pretty clear on when an internship will be 
legal. Unless it’s paid at minimum wage and meets the minimum entitlements 
under the National Employment Standards, the only way an internship will be 
legal is if it’s a requirement of an education or training course authorised by 
the commonwealth, state or territory.

The recent graduate interning as your marketing coordinator to get a foot in 
the door? Illegal. The intern completing his fourth arts internship, doing 
necessary work for your gallery’s next exhibition? My bet is that’s not a 
requirement of his degree, and that’s also illegal.

There’s no hiding that a reliance on internship culture is unethical 
<http://www.dailylife.com.au/news-and-views/dl-opinion/does-the-internship-culture-favour-the-privileged-20151209-gljnvy.html>
. But it has wider implications for the arts industry too.

Relying on interns to plug staffing gaps means that those who can afford to 
work for nothing gain experience in the arts industry much faster than those 
who can’t. By and large it’s these people who rise to the top, and find 
themselves in key strategic and programming decisions in the future. This means 
the landscape of arts workers in Australia is nowhere near representative of 
the audience it hopes to meet.

Two of the focal points of policy from most government funding bodies is the 
diversification of artists and audiences – and diversifying staff, boards and 
programmers is key to that end. These aren’t just policy points or strategies 
for growth, either; to present art by and for one audience sees the arts fall 
well short of its potential to change how we live in the world. It’s also just 
really bad programming.

The Australia Council announcement is devastating to many, but internships 
aren’t the answer. Perpetuating a culture of unpaid work perpetuates a lack of 
diversity across the arts – a major concern for anyone that wants to see the 
cultural conversation continue to evolve in a dynamic and inclusive way.

That “punching above your weight” mentality threatens paid workers, too. Arts 
organisations across the small to medium sector have to take risks to survive. 
We’ll see it in the coming weeks as organisations struggle to work out how to 
run with less funding. The people carrying the weight of those risks are their 
workers: underpaid, overworked, or pushed beyond the security of their 
organisation.

With a few industry exceptions 
<https://www.fairwork.gov.au/awards-and-agreements/awards/list-of-awards>, many 
arts workers find themselves falling beyond the coverage of awards. A 
historical consequence due to poor unionisation in the arts, working award-free 
means the market determines wages. And in a market where people who can afford 
to work for free will, it’s no surprise that, for the majority of the sector, 
that market rate sits well below the average Australian wage.

Already bleak, the picture is bound to worsen. When funding to organisations 
is cut, but expectations by other stakeholders aren’t, we are building a 
structure that relies on exploitation of staff, as a shrunken workforce has to 
meet the organisation’s needs.

Sold as extra responsibility, this “privilege” of extra work and extra hours 
is isolating and exhausting in equal parts, and it often comes with poor work 
conditions and questionable job security. In a landscape like this it’s no 
wondermental health issues are common in the arts. 
<https://theconversation.com/mental-health-woes-are-rife-in-the-arts-no-wonder-54386>

Just as damaging as the classic overworked and underpaid combo is the practice 
of sham contracting. This is when someone is brought on as an independent 
contractor but ends up performing the work of an employee, with regular, set 
hours under the control and direction of the organisation. Sham contracting is 
especially common in the arts, occurring across marketing and publicity, 
programming and production. Taken on as contractors, rather than employees, 
these workers are denied their entitlements to the NES, minimum wage, 
superannuation and job security. Instead, employers name their price and sub 
out the conditions.

Lucky there’s a genuine “love what I do” approach to working in the arts, 
because in the absence of minimum pay and entitlements, being an arts 
contractor rarely delivers on the promise of “freedom” and “flexibility” we’re 
sold as part of neoliberalism’s sugar-coating of exploitation.

Captain's calls and culture war: the future of Australian arts | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/28/captains-calls-and-culture-war-the-future-of-australian-arts>
As Jeff Sparrow explained in the Guardian last year, this dystopic vision of 
the future of workis already here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/28/captains-calls-and-culture-war-the-future-of-australian-arts>
 – but organisational cuts made this week threaten to further entrench them.

As a nation, our hearts should break at the losses the arts sector will see 
flow from today’s announcement. We may rally against them but, in the short 
term at least, these are losses we need to wear. To those who will make 
decisions about what comes next: do less. Not to reflect the reality of these 
cuts is to pretend they don’t matter, and the worst thing the arts could do 
right now is push these losses back on to arts workers.
 