
He had been a fit, young man when what he thought was a case of food 
intolerance turned out to be an aggressive cancer. His surgeon performed a 
meticulous operation but cautioned him that it might still not prove enough. It 
wasn’t long before he and I teamed up to care for what would prove to be a 
terminal illness.

He was a skilled and self-taught craftsman. An acrimonious divorce had split 
the family and he decided to build a table for his young daughter. For the 
timber, he chose oak. “Unlike me, it will age gracefully.” He pictured her 
colouring at the table, later studying at it and one day, gathering her own 
children around it.

‘We soothe souls.’ How end-of-life care can make a difference | Caroline 
Collins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/13/uk-end-of-life-care-rankings-make-a-difference>
“Maybe it will tell them stories their grandfather never could.”

Chemotherapy kept him well for many months, in which his vision for the table 
began to come together and I found myself celebrating with him that he might 
just see his project through.

When the table was upright but needed a lot more work, a neighbour’s offer of 
help was declined. “I want her to know I did this all on my own.” His clinic 
visits soon became the impetus to complete another part of the job so he could 
bring photos to show me the results.

He knew his disease was progressing before the scans did; the vigorous 
polishing and waxing was taking his breath away.

“I need your help,” he announced. “I want to continue chemo just in case but 
it can’t interfere with my work.”

It was a tall order. “Personalised medicine” means tailoring the most precise 
drug to the diagnosis, not getting a huge oak table built in the nick of time. 
But we all tried. To give him productive daylight hours, I saw him early in 
clinic, the nurses sped through his treatments and palliative care visited late.

One day, he said: “I can either have chemo that isn’t working or make the 
table perfect.” Just like that. I couldn’t and didn’t argue.

Free from tests and treatments, his quality of life surged and the table 
flourished. Admiring the pictures, I asked if he’d prefer not to return to 
clinic since it took hours out of his day. He looked at me in surprise and I 
sensed, dismay.

“What’s stopping chemo got to do with seeing you?”

“You have an excellent GP,” I said reassuringly, knowing she was doing home 
visits.

“But no one knows my story like you.”

The appointments stayed and the first few times I wondered what form our 
conversations would take. With no chemotherapy-related toxicities to combat and 
his symptoms at bay, it was pointless to ask what the last session was like and 
tedious to establish if there was anything else bothering him.

The billion-word Oxford English Corpus nominates time as the most frequently 
used noun in the English language.

I decided I’d let him navigate our future conversations, which is when he 
taught me about the shared language of medicine and woodwork. I learnt about 
fixed and flexible joints, span and girth. I learnt that getting shingles 
wasn’t painful if you intended to line your roof with them. I learnt that a 
Garnier limb wasn’t a new prosthesis made by a beauty company but an engineered 
tree bolt. In between, he let slip his sorrow about his daughter, the 
renunciation of anger and his thoughts on an afterlife. Our conversations 
weren’t long or typical but somehow, they felt right.

I told him I hated seeing him fade, but in response he produced the final 
pictures of his table, beautifully finished, the ultimate tribute to his 
daughter.

“This is what I have lived for.”

I was speechless.

At our last visit, his mother wanted a word. She was a midwife, she said, well 
aware of the precious allocation of a doctor’s time. She wanted me to know that 
the last few “technically unnecessary” visits had nourished her son’s hope by 
allaying his greatest fear. “He doesn’t fear death as much as abandonment.” I 
didn’t have the heart to say how guilty I had sometimes felt admiring his 
table, torn between the desire to give him my time and the need to treat other 
patients. This was her way of acknowledging my dilemma.

Time. The billion-word Oxford English Corpus nominates time as the most 
frequently used noun in the English language. Medicine must surely make a hefty 
contribution to this nomination for there is scarcely a word that weighs more 
heavily on a doctor’s mind. Putting in an IV takes time, arguing for earlier 
surgery takes more time and explaining something properly to a patient takes 
the most time of all. Time counts during a stroke. Time is money, the 
bureaucrats chant. If only there was the time to do everything right and get 
everything right, we dream.

Discharge summaries would be clearer; communication would be smoother; 
collectively we would be better read and better behaved. In fact, it has become 
accepted wisdom that the doctor-patient relationship would be a different 
entity if we just had the time. But the truth is that time is finite and 
doctors have to figure out how to use it judiciously.

This is why I found a recent essay by a fellow oncologist especially 
instructive. Dr Christiane Voit was as impressive as they came and her 
diagnosis of ovarian cancer didn’t stop her from publishing and speaking at 
conferences that I attended.

Earlier this year, her disease progressed, allowing her to spend time with her 
five-year-old daughter, who finally had the privilege of “not having a mother 
who has to work constantly but can spend mornings in bed with her, giggling, 
cuddling, listening to the birds.”

In 15 years of medicine I've had only one conversation about euthanasia | 
Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/09/euthanasia-isnt-a-political-wedge-issue-dying-patients-deserve-better>
Writing in the Journal of Clinical Oncology, Voit lamented the ignored warning 
signs by her doctors and missed her patients but it’s what she concluded as a 
doctor-turned-patient that is most powerful.

There is something oncologists need to keep in mind: all of our patients have 
mothers and fathers, many have children, and all of them are going through this 
very tough, emotional experience that nobody ever really wants to deal with. 
Remember this.

Oncologists have all dealt with the time pressures caused by deadlines for 
abstracts and presentations, the sheer volume of clinical work, and countless 
other pressures. However, for the patient who may be facing their own 
mortality, time with their treating oncologist is critically important: they 
need it to understand their disease and to acknowledge their thoughts or fears.

Voit deteriorated and her essay was published posthumously. I wonder what she 
made of the rhetoric of patient-centred care that often stands in contrast to 
the reality of healthcare systems that favour processing patients over caring 
for them as individuals.

I wonder if the next patient who has stopped chemotherapy but wants to build a 
table for his daughter will still hold my attention. I’d like to think so, 
which is why amid the reminders about improving efficiency, I now keep a copy 
of Christine Voit’s essay on my desk.
 