
Trying on his new uniform, my five-year old son spontaneously recalled a child 
we met on a trip to Mumbai.

“How will she buy a school uniform?”

The little girl, her toddler brother in tow, was hawking garlands outside a 
famous temple. Nearby, her mother urged visitors to buy them. Seeing us emerge 
with sweet-laden arms, the little girl lost her concentration and looked 
hungrily at us. I watched as my children parted with their sweets, confused and 
taken aback that someone would beg them for food.

“I don’t think she will be going to school,” I ventured. “She helps her mother 
earn money for food and shelter.” I didn’t add that food meant one bare meal a 
day, and that shelter seemed the least appropriate way of describing their 
tattered plastic tent. And the fact that the little girl in Mumbai was 
emblematic of millions of underprivileged children around the world to whom 
turning five means nothing other than the readiness to start pulling their 
weight around household jobs.

His innocent question got me thinking about the modern-day lead up to school. 
After attending a string of orientations over the years for each of my children 
I feel as if I could write a small book about all the ways in which their 
primary school will safeguard them.

There is a reassuring protocol on things I wouldn’t even have thought of – 
after-care, chess club, prayer, Lego, discrimination, camp, bullying and more. 
I faithfully attend the sessions, don’t learn anything new, but at least am not 
labelled an “uninvolved parent”, God forbid, and it gives me a chance to marvel 
at how things have changed in just one generation.

I attended primary school in the Indian state of Bihar – if you have heard of 
Bihar, I assume it would be in the context of dangerous crime, grinding poverty 
or crippling illiteracy, the trifecta that makes Biharis everywhere, especially 
in India, the butt of jokes.

First day of school in Syria: 'With what pupils have seen, aggression is 
common'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/15/first-day-school-damascus-syria-aggression-common-education-war>
On my first day of school, I tumbled out of a jam-packed bus to join an even 
more crowded classroom. Sixty of us sat three to a small desk. The teacher 
wielded a commanding voice and a big ruler, just in case. My big bag of books 
weighed more than me – it would take me years to correct my posture.

Long school days were made longer by the girl who decided I shouldn’t share 
her friends. Nowadays her popularity combined with her barbs would be termed 
bullying, but back then I dusted her off and joyously realised that there was a 
friendless child practically everywhere I looked. In a room full of other 
opportunities, why care about one bad apple? If this was my first lesson in 
resilience, I didn’t know it then.

I remember my teacher holding my hand to teach me how to write. Noisy children 
milled everywhere, yet I held Miss Ruby’s undivided attention until the 
alphabet had been conquered. Those few magical minutes of devotion gave me 
wings to write, and years later I returned to tell her so, much to her delight.

When I think of my school, the class sizes alone would have psychologists 
salivating. If my parents had thought to ask, they would probably have been 
told to mind their own business, but like all parents, their presence at school 
was like a blue moon because they were too busy working or guarding the 
household against pests and thefts, more present dangers than upsetting a 
child’s feelings.

I attended a private school because the government school didn’t function but 
you wouldn’t use the word “amenities” and my school in the same breath. A tidy, 
basic workshop would be a better description. By modern standards there was 
little to it, but the students thrived in that environment.

Just recently in Melbourne, I met a suave Indian, “properly” private-school 
educated, who looked me up and down and asked me blunt questions about my 
education before confessing her genuine bafflement. “All the way from Bihar, 
huh? I have never met anyone like that!” I felt a little like a zoo exhibit, 
but incidentally, this is a very typical Indian response to Bihar’s 100 million 
people, who are thought to not just be backward and uncultured but also doomed 
and undeserving. When it comes to Biharis, make no mistake, the caste system 
lingers on.

I couldn’t be bothered engaging her, though I could have needled her disbelief 
by revealing that my humble school produced a Rhodes scholar, a couple of 
Fulbright award winners, brilliant scientists, a fashion designer, teachers, 
authors, businesswomen and numerous doctors and judges. Looking back, the 
success seems disproportionate.

Growing up in a lawless society with no resources for children turned out to 
be the making of our character. We came from modest backgrounds; our parents 
didn’t just struggle to pay the fees but also struggled against every 
imaginable injustice and social obstacle to educate their daughters. The school 
didn’t just produce good students but spawned a generation of thoughtful and 
hardy women with a social conscience who are making a difference right there in 
Bihar and around the world.

A sound education to shape a good individual – isn’t this what every parent 
desires for their child? To the pundits, an education in Bihar will never be 
synonymous with that good start but I look back with considerable pride and 
gratitude for mine and this is why:

The children had a collective and instinctive understanding of the 
life-changing value of an education, perhaps because we lived alongside the 
wistful children who couldn’t access it. We were eager learners, even those who 
struggled, like I often did at maths. Perseverance was fashionable and it 
delivered visible results that inspired the onlookers. We taught ourselves 
self-reliance because we had to – our teachers didn’t have time for yard duty. 
We triaged our problems and learnt to get along with a thousand children 
because there was no way out. The teachers were busy marking papers and it 
never struck us to involve our parents. We also learned to pull each other up. 
“Try harder or you will fail,” my best friend said as she crumpled another 
artwork.

To the detriment of many, there was no concept of individualised learning but 
our teachers cared about us, rejoiced in our success, and redoubled their 
efforts when we struggled. Their greatest attribute was their genuine 
investment in us – it was tangible and we wanted to earn it.

Secret Teacher: sending my boys to school taught me a lesson or two
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2014/dec/27/secret-teacher-sending-my-boys-to-school-taught-me-a-lesson>
I hope that my own children will discover some of these same elements that 
made my school days so influential. They are provided for, but I hope they 
learn to provide for themselves. The mother in me wants to shield them from 
unpleasant realities but the citizen in me wishes them insight and perspective, 
hard to come by in our lives of plenty.

I want them to understand that their right to education is a privilege 
elsewhere, one that children like the little girl in Mumbai cannot access due 
to the tyranny of circumstance. When the school tells them to be kind and 
respectful, I want them to remember that they don’t have to get on a plane to 
meet seriously underprivileged children – they exist in our midst too.

“What do you want to be when you grow up?” is a question we often ask 
children. To this, I would add, “Who will you still call thirty years from now?”

On the eve of his starting school my greatest wish is that my child will form 
some enduring friendships there. There is an old saying if you have one true 
friend you have more than your share. There is something intrinsically 
sustaining and comforting about childhood friends who grow old together.

There are no parallels between our experiences of primary school, but if my 
children’s first years create a fraction of the foundation that mine did, they 
will have been fortunate.
 