
It’s an extraordinary thing to see the typically gentle people who work in 
aged care banging drums on the street and howling outside a building. But the 
chants of “Blue Care, Be Fair” at a rally in Brisbane last week was the latest 
outpouring of growing anger at the poor conditions offered to workers in 
Australia’s aged care sector.

The immediate issue is a new enterprise agreement put to Queensland’s aged 
care workers by providers Blue Care and Wesley Mission, both of which are 
agencies of the Uniting Church.

Most of the workers banging drums in Brisbane had never taken industrial 
action before, but someone like Deborah, who I met at the demonstration, felt 
she had little choice. She explained to me that under the agreement her 
employer was seeking, she could be compelled to work up to three single-hour 
shifts in a day – with no travel time or fuel costs covered by the company.

Single women can't afford to live in the city and men can. Is that fair? | Van 
Badham and Gabrielle Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/11/single-women-cant-afford-to-live-in-the-city-and-men-can-is-that-fair>
She was joined in the crowd by Natalie – not a worker, but the daughter-in-law 
of a woman in care. Natalie, told me she felt obliged to defend the workers who 
shared the care of her loved one, and to whom she’d become close. She had 
concerns of just what kind of quality care was likely for families if care 
workers themselves are exploited, underpaid and overburderned.

Unions met with Blue Care on Tuesday. The charity has “backed down” and are 
now offering conditions where workers can be called in for two two-hour shifts 
a day – but, again, with no travel allowance, with hours extending until 8 
o’clock at night, and with the removal of a casual loading for the second shift 
that they currently receive.

Damien Davie, the United Voice union representative fighting the agreement, 
told me that the majority of workers working double shifts rarely go home 
between them, because they can’t afford the travel costs to do so. Instead, 
they hang around, and often just keep working.

The confrontation with Blue Care affects 4,500 local workers but it would be 
optimistic to consider it unique situation. There are 30,000 aged care workers 
inQueensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> alone and 
as the population ages, the national number is expanding all the time. Davie 
tells me that “slashing of conditions”, wage reductions, outsourcing and “a 
raft of job security measures” that Blue Care is trying to dispense with in the 
new agreement are typical of trends across an industry that is already 
shockingly underpaid.

“Wages in aged care are horrendous,” Davie says of what is exhausting physical 
labour, “as little as $20 an hour, and that’s for showering, feeding and 
assisting with the care of the elderly.”

And it goes without saying that the majority of aged care workers are women; 
up to 80% of the workforce, United Voice estimates. Like the ongoingcampaign to 
properly remunerate early-childhood educators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/childcare-workers-are-underpaid-because-were-women-we-are-the-working-poor>
 – a large group of whom joined their aged-care colleagues in Brisbane as an 
act of solidarity – what’s happening in aged care is an illuminating indictment 
of the both the devaluation of care work and a gendered differential applied to 
the value of labour.

“You’d expect a church organisation like the Uniting Church to be different,” 
says Davie. It isn’t.

So it’s no wonder Queenslanders are fighting – Davie tells me that that the 
outsourcing of services like cleaning and catering by similar providers in New 
South Wales has resulted in pay as little as $15 an hour. That’s less than a 
retailer would pay a Christmas casual.

That it’s Christmas, too, is an event with significance not lost on the 
protestors in Queensland. “Uniting Care are running the Christmas Appeal at 
Target this year, but they want to plunge some of their employees into poverty 
by reducing shift times, contracting out their jobs and lowering wages,” says 
Davie.

I wrote to Blue Care asking how they justified their demand to deploy workers 
on the split two-hour shifts with no loading or travel allowances, and as to 
why they are seeking to outsource some services, knowing this will drive down 
wages. Their spokesperson did not answer these questions, assuring me instead 
that the organisation “recognises staff are at the heart of all Blue Care 
services”, pledging to work with unions for “best outcomes” and letting me know 
their staff are among “some of the highest paid” in the aged care sector, “some 
classifications, up to 50% higher” than the modern award.

The union claims “above award” payments amount to $20.58 an hour. The 
spokesperson didn’t answer my question about outsourcing driving down wages.

United Voice says the usual claim made by the services is that squeezing 
workers is merely a response to a legislative environment that prefers 
“consumer directed care”. Such a claim “doesn’t wash” with the union, which 
points out that the funding big charity receives for aged care is 
overwhelmingly from the government, provided with the intent to meet a 
collective social responsibility to care for the elderly.





Howard-era deregulation of aged care funding allowed the sector to largely 
self-regulate 
<http://www.health.gov.au/internet/nhhrc/publishing.nsf/Content/276/$FILE/276%20-%20Submission%20-%20Prof%20Hal%20Kending%20Individual%20Attachment%20D.pdf>
 – and the church-run charity sector to redirect profits from these services 
back into their other activities. With anexplosion in for-profit aged care 
providers 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/the-aged-care-gravy-train-20160108-gm1y33.html>, 
charity providers have alsoadopted a corporate culture. 
<http://tools.afr.com/viewer.aspx?EDP://20091204000031831102>

“As not-for-profit organisations, they get tax free status in the community 
because they’re supposed to exist for the public good,” says Davie. “But it’s 
been so corporatised, they themselves refer to it as a business.”

Please don't cut penalty rates. It's the only way I can feed my kids and pay 
my bills | Maire O'Connor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/02/please-dont-cut-penalty-rates-its-the-only-way-i-can-feed-my-kids-and-pay-my-bills>
With working families relying more and more on external care services to 
adequately support ageing parents and other family members, attacks on pay and 
conditions, high staff turnover and understandably poor morale seriously 
compromise quality care. Says Davie: “The aged care industry already has 25% 
turnover – more insecure jobs with less wages is going to create greater 
turnover – and that’s not good for care recipients.”

This family pressure explains the presence of people like Natalie at the 
Brisbane demonstration, but it’s a consideration of the broader movement for 
workplace fairness, too.

“Aged care is an area that multinationals are eyeing off because they can see 
big opportunities for profits with the ageing population,” says Dave Oliver, 
the secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. “They’ll maximise 
their profits by compromising support and cutting wages. Our priority should be 
the quality of support we give to older Australians, not the size of the 
dividend we give to corporations.”

The consequences of this corporatised care culture should be of concern to all 
Australians. Says Oliver: “My dear old dad who passed away this year – the 
nursing home who had him there, the care from the staff – it was terrific. They 
looked after him.”

His voice strikes a rare note of softness and he adds: “I’d hate to ever see 
that level of compassionate care be diminished.”
 