
The most fanciful prediction of sci-fi lovers finally came true this week. A 
jetpack designer is preparing to float his invention on the Australian stock 
market.Star Trek <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/star-trek> is now. Beam 
us Aussies up, Scotty.

Days later, a multinational home furniture chain known for its no fuss Scandi 
design that comes with a side of meatballs (if never all the right parts), 
announced it was creating furniture that will charge all our umbilical devices, 
like smartphones and computers. No more messy cables and lost chargers and 
calls to hotels asking if the cleaner found our plug in the vacated room. All 
you’ll need to do is pop your phone down on the tabletop and, presto, job done. 
How very futuristic.

These developments do strike me as useful innovations – particularly the 
jetpack which will surely cut commuting time in half – but am I the only one 
feeling a bit misty-eyed for the related loss of those things we’re tossing 
aside in our quest to bring these futuristic dreams into reality?

I’m thinking the useless stuff; the things no one will miss. Initially. Keys 
will soon be museum pieces. But what of the keyrings purchased last minute on 
holiday as a memento of too much time spent drinking too many fluorescent 
cocktails at that too-easy-to-reach swim-up bar of the resort? Where else will 
we hang the weird little trinkets we collect like bowerbirds to remind us of 
the good times? We humans do like being surrounded by our funny little personal 
stories; our odd life markers.

ID cards will be the next. Even as I’m getting fitted up with the chip that 
does the same job, I will miss laughing at my horribly unflattering license 
picture and the haircut that continues to mock me years later because I was 
tight enough to take the 10-year renewal discount deal. Gone too the potential 
of taking down your smug business colleague with one glance at his card. “So 
you had a penchant for surf wear, shark fin necklaces and eyebrow piercings, 
Steve?” Nice.

Which brings us to wallets – no use for that bit of fluffy Mambo velcro in our 
inevitably cashless future. But what of the bank notes kept from distant 
countries once visited, the drachma and the lira and the Benjamins held on to 
wistfully in the hope that we one day might return? Or the dog-eared school 
photos of little Terry and Lisa that stare out of the plastic window like bugs 
in amber? Sometimes it’s nice to be reminded of our funny old lives. Right 
there. In a shop. On our lunch-hour.

Workspaces are probably doomed too. Companies are taking up hot desking as 
fast as starving contestants on I’m A Celebrity inhale a pizza the minute 
they’re evicted from camp. No permanent space means there’s no place for 
postcards or personal fluff. Mr Spock never had a picture of that great outfit 
he wore at Cheryl’s wedding in the Maldives tacked up to the flight deck of the 
Enterprise, did he?

Ditching the mess is how we predicted life in the future. Soon, all will be 
clean and sleek. If that’s your bag, it’s a win. Not all of us can or want to 
neaten up the rough edges of our lives. Our mess is part of us too. Plus, I 
would look terrible in a one-style-suits-all space jumpsuit. I couldn’t even 
work a onesie.
 