
When I started writing this column just over a year ago, I wasn’t sure how 
long it would last. How many questions, I wondered, would people really have 
about online dating? Answer: many! From getting started with online dating in 
middle age, to the ethics of juggling multiple online paramours, I heard about 
the anxious-making unreturned right-swipe, the ecstasy of finding partners for 
niche sexual activities and the challenge of finding partners from particular 
ethnic groups; I pondered the trouble of falling in love with people who are 
probably robots, and considered how to make your profile stand out in a field 
of shirtless Netflix fans.

Today, I’m signing off, but before I go, here are the most important things I 
learned in my year as your electronic agony aunt.

I'm 35 and I've never had a girlfriend. What am I doing wrong?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/30/im-35-never-had-a-girlfriend>
It’s not really a numbers game

Many of the emails I received were from people who were concerned that they 
weren’t getting “enough” matches, or going on a sufficient number of dates. Of 
course dating online increases the pool of people you can meet with speed, but 
it’s
not just a matter of throwing mud at a wall until some of it sticks. The fact 
that you have gone on dates with five people has zero bearing on whether 
candidate #6 will be your ideal partner.


The most important match is one of expectations

Most common in my inbox were tales of woe – from both men and women – who 
would go on dates with people they’d met on dating apps, thought it had gone 
very well, but never heard from their dates again. They were left confused, and 
wondering what had happened. In most cases, I think it was because the person 
who disappeared just wasn’t looking for anything serious. You can meet someone 
attractive who shares all of your interests, but if you’re not both looking for 
the same kind of relationship, whether that’s “marriage” or “five minutes in a 
bathroom stall”, one or both of you is very likely to end up disappointed. You 
have to make sure you’re on the same page. The earlier you do that, the better.


This is especially problematic on Tinder

Tinder was launched as a hookup app but has evolved to something that people 
use to find long-term relationships, too – I know of several real 
Tinder-sparked marriages. That said, judging from my mailbox, it seems to be 
broadly the case that among heterosexual daters, women want to use Tinder to 
find love and men want to use Tinder to find casual sex. Which is the ultimate 
mismatch. What’s the answer? Be clear about your intentions, and then everyone 
will be kinder and happier, and actually probably end up having more sex.


Everyone needs to slow down

Ask not: is this person who I met on Tinder yesterday my soulmate? But rather: 
am I having a nice time on this particular evening, and would I like to have a 
nice time with this person again? Movies may tell us that we should set eyes on 
a person and know that we love them in an instant. But expecting to know 
immediately whether someone you’ve met on your phone is the love of your life 
is unrealistic. And rejecting people because they don’t give you an instant 
desire to love them
forever in the hopes that someone else in your phone will give you that 
feeling can lead to missed opportunities.


If you hate online dating, don’t do it

Many people wrote to me at their wits’ end: they were sick of online dating, 
and wanted clear advice about how to find what they were looking for. But 
dating is a leisure activity, not a doctor’s prescription. Sometimes you just 
need a break from it. Return to it when you think: “Meeting new people will be 
fun and interesting, and if it leads to something more, that’s a plus!!” and 
not “Why haven’t I met the love of my life yet? My thumbs are so, so tired.” 
That thumb fatigue will lead you to make bad choices – for you, and for other 
people.


Online dating isn’t pathetic, and you have to believe that for it to work

Culture tends to tell us that being in a relationship is the best way to be, 
and yet it is somehow taboo to admit that you want to be with someone, and that 
you’re making an active effort to do so. Many people wrote to me about how 
embarrassed they are to be searching for love online. (To all the folks below 
the line who advised each week that people should stop looking because “love 
finds you when you least
expect it”: rest assured, many people who are using dating apps haven’t been 
expecting it for years.) This creates a strange condition whereby people who 
are looking for dates online often feel a degree of disgust for other people 
who they meet online: what’s wrong with someone if they can’t find love in the 
real world? Of course this comes from a place of self-loathing, and of course 
it does not lead to
romantic success.

People are afraid to ask for help, and that’s a mistake

Many people seem to be so embarrassed about being single that they don’t ask 
the people who could really help them change their situation: friends, family, 
the people who know and love them best and want to see them happy. That doesn’t 
mean you have to go out with your grandmother’s handsome dentist. But it does 
mean that there is really no harm in saying to your best friend: can you help 
me with my dating profile to make sure it shows me at my best? Or: can you take 
a
nice photo of me in natural daylight where I’m smiling and relaxed and
not sitting next to a drugged tiger?
No one has ever swiped right because of a drugged tiger.
Love,
Eva

 