
If Assassin's Creed <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/assassins-creed> 
IV: Black Flag's preview embargo could be compared to a horse in a stable, then 
not only is said horse frolicking in a sun-dappled meadow long after the 
proverbial door has been slammed, but the stable itself has been dismantled and 
sold for kindling.

Details about the latest instalment in Ubisoft's lucrative sandbox adventure 
series have been leaking for the past week like water from a shotgunned sieve. 
So, in light of the information already in circulation (that it's out on 
current-gen consoles and PC on 1 November), it's likely you're here to find out 
more about Ubisoft's new game beyond its release date and the fact that it is, 
itis, a glorious thing, to be the pirate king.

Yes, it turned out the rumour mill cranked into motion by gaming site Kotaku 
was bang to rights when the flags were unfurled at Ubisoft's reveal event in 
London. Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag is to be set during the golden age of 
piracy in the 1700s. It almost seems as though the publisher and myriad 
development studios trundling away on the franchise took the fans' criticisms 
and praise concerning last year's Assassin's Creed III to heart; they didn't 
really care much for the game's protagonist, but they did like the parts 
involving naval battles. Whether or not that's actually the case, players are 
in for a lot more action on the open sea and the stoical half-Brit/half-Native 
American Connor Kenway is now firmly in the franchise's rearview.

Ubisoft also revealed that Desmond Miles, the series' main protagonist who 
re-lives the past existences of his ancestral line with the use of a 
contraption called the Animus, won't feature in the new game. Details about his 
replacement are sketchy at this point, although some oblique reference was made 
to the hero being … "you". Apparently, the player will take on the role of a 
research drone working at Abstergo Entertainment, a division of the shady 
Abstergo Industries, which serves as a front for the Templar Order. You're one 
of many Abstergo employees who are using the Animus to explore past existences 
in order to seek out pieces of Eden for the Templars. The multiplayer, Ubisoft 
said, will also be wrapped in this fiction.
 Assassin’s Creed IV Photograph: Ubisoft 
On me Ed, son


The single-player mode, however, will be dominated by the franchise's newest 
hero: Edward Kenway, grandfather of Connor Kenway and scourge of the high seas. 
A privateer who turns to buccaneering when he finds himself out of work in 
1715, Kenway is described as a drunken, brash, rebellious fellow who just also 
happens to be highly intelligent and rather charismatic. While this certainly 
sounds like the sort of chap who'd happily buckle a swash after being chucked 
out of the Royal Navy, his character traits also sound cannily in line with 
those of one Ezio Auditore da Firenze, easily the most popular protagonist the 
series has had to date. The pitch for Ed Kenway's story also bears a passing 
resemblance to Ezio's as it follows his progression from devil-may-care brigand 
to committed participant in the war between the Assassins and the Templars.

Ubisoft also unveiled the world and characters players could expect to 
surround them in Black Flag. The publisher was keen to highlight that the story 
for the new game would stick to real-world events within the historical 
timeline it is set, and that players shouldn't expect anything along the lines 
of sea-monsters, mermaids or entire crews of undead pirates in possession of 
cursed gold doubloons. This element of realism, however, appears somewhat 
flexible when it comes to character-models; the likes of nefarious seafarers 
such as Blackbeard, Calico Jack and Charles Vane looked suitably scurvy-ridden, 
yet female pirate captain Anne Bonny could easily have passed for a catwalk 
model in Milan.

The game's sprawling environment, however, looks impressive in both its size 
and variety. Black Flag takes place at the fringes of the three great European 
empires of its age and, we are told, traversing it will be utterly seamless. 
This means that players will be able to sail Kenway's ship, The Jackdaw, though 
the length of it without having to watch any loading screens. The three main 
urban locations in Black Flag were Havanna in Cuba, Kingston in Jamaica, and 
the unofficial capital of the Republic of Pirates, Nassau. Presumably this 
means that free-running across rooftops, sword fights with the local 
authorities and leaps of faith from high buildings are still on the menu.

However, all in all, we were told, Black Flag features around 50 unique 
locations. Along their travels through Ubisoft's beautiful new creation, 
players will visit fishing villages, hidden coves, jungles, forts, Mayan ruins, 
deserted islands, and secluded plantations. They can even take a diving bell to 
the ocean floor to explore sunken shipwrecks. Black Flag's in-game map sounds 
like a vibrant and colourful playground, simply groaning with quests, 
collectibles and activities for the player to get stuck into.
 Assassin’s Creed IV Photograph: Ubisoft 
All aboard The Jackdaw


It's in these sections that the feature Ubisoft describes as the game's second 
character comes heavily into play: Kenway's ship, The Jackdaw. From the sounds 
of things, she's a far more involved and impressive vessel than Connor's 
galleon from Assassin's Creed III. Players will be able to upgrade, customise 
and (if needs be) repair Kenway's ship, as well as use her to take part in 
naval battles – which many players considered one of the highlights of the 
previous game of the series.

Combat on the open water sounds like a far more detailed affair in Black Flag, 
though. Not only will weather play more of a factor this time round, but The 
Jackdaw will encounter ships using varying types of attacks; some may try to 
outmanoeuvre her, while others will simply take the direct approach and ram 
into her broadside. Players can also lead boarding parties onto the decks of 
other vessels, or, if the opportunity presents itself, they can dive into the 
water, sneak aboard the enemy ship and assassinate its captain.

Players will also be able to use Kenway's Spyglass in The Jackdaw's crow's 
nest to seek out activities and side-quests, such as ships to attack, whales to 
harpoon or islands that offer the promise of buried treasure. From the sounds 
of things, these events will occur on the fly, so as to encourage players to 
explore every inch of the world the developers have created for the game.

On the surface, Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag contains some familiar beats, 
but the boatload of new content that Ubisoft has added to the mix looks 
genuinely exciting. Yes, the hero is still wearing a cowl and yes, it's likely 
the game's present-day storyline will probably remain impenetrably banal, but 
at its core, Black Flag seems to offer the prospect of high adventure on an 
epic scale. It's early days yet, but we have high hopes for Ubisoft's pirate 
yarn. At the very least, Ed Kenway promises to be better company then his 
grandson…

• This preview is based on information revealed at a press event in London. 
All travel expenses were paid for by the writer, although he did help himself 
to some complimentary orange juice and cocktail sausages on the night
 