
With his beard and robust opinions, there's something of the Old Testament 
prophet about Aubrey de Grey. But the 47-year-old gerontologist (who studies 
the process of ageing) says his belief that he might live to the very ripe old 
age of 1,000 is founded not on faith but science. De Grey studied computer 
science at Cambridge University, but became interested in the problem of ageing 
more than a decade ago and is the co-founder of the Sens (Strategies for 
Engineered Negligible Senescence) Foundation, a non-profit organisation based 
in the US.

What's so wrong with getting old?

It is simply that people get sick when they get older. I don't often meet 
people who want to suffer cardiovascular disease or whatever, and we get those 
things as a result of the lifelong accumulation of various types of molecular 
and cellular damage. This is harmless at low levels but eventually it causes 
the diseases and disabilities of old age – which most people don't think are 
any fun.

Is this the biggest health crisis facing the world?

Absolutely. If we look at the industrialised world, basically 90% of all 
deaths are caused by ageing. They are deaths from causes that affect older 
people and don't affect young adults. And if we look at the whole world, then 
the number of deaths that occur each day is roughly 150,000 and about 
two-thirds of them are because of ageing.

Why does the world not recognise this?

People have been trying to claim that we can defeat ageing since the dawn of 
time, and they haven't been terribly successful; there is a tendency to think 
there is some sort of inevitability about ageing – it somehow transcends our 
technological abilities in principle, which is complete nonsense.

And when people have made their peace with this ghastly thing that is going to 
happen to them at some time in the distant future, they tend to be rather 
reluctant to re-engage the question when someone comes along with a new idea.

Is it that our bodies just stop being so proactive about living?

Basically, the body does have a vast amount of inbuilt anti-ageing machinery; 
it's just not 100% comprehensive, so it allows a small number of different 
types of molecular and cellular damage to happen and accumulate. The body does 
try as hard as it can to fight these things but it is a losing battle. So we 
are not going to be able to do anything significant about ageing without 
hi-tech intervention – which is what I'm working on.

Ageing involves the process of metabolism, and then deterioration, and then 
pathology – is that right?

Basically, that's right. Metabolism involves a vastly complicated network of 
biochemical and cellular processes that are linked and that succeed in keeping 
us alive for as long as they do, but they have these side effects.

The side-effects start even before we are born, they go on throughout life and 
they are manifested as, for example, the accumulation of various types of 
molecular garbage inside cells and outside cells, or simply as cells dying and 
not being automatically replaced by the division of other cells. Gradually 
those changes at the molecular and cellular level accumulate and accumulate and 
eventually they start to get in the way of metabolism, and that's where 
pathology comes.

You've identified seven particular areas of cellular decay that might be 
combated. Can you give examples?

I just mentioned cells dying and not being automatically replaced, that's one. 
Another is cells not dying when they ought to – certain types of cells are 
supposed to turn over and sometimes they lose the ability to respond to signals 
that tell them to die.

A third is cells dividing too much – they may be dying when they are supposed 
to but dividing too much, and that is what cancer is.

We've known what causes cancer for some time but we are a long way from being 
able to cure it, aren't we?

I certainly don't claim that any of this is easy. Some of it is easier – but 
I've always viewed cancer as the single hardest aspect of ageing to fix.

You've talked about enriching people's lives, but isn't it the very fact of 
death that gives our lives meaning?

That's nonsense. The fact is, people don't want to get sick. I'm just a 
practical guy. I don't want to get sick and I don't want you to get sick and 
that's what this is all about. I don't work on longevity, I work on keeping 
people healthy. The only difference between my work and the work of the whole 
medical profession is that I think we're in striking distance of keeping people 
so healthy that at 90 they'll carry on waking up in the same physical state as 
they were at the age of 30, and their probability of not waking up one morning 
will be no higher than it was at the age of 30.

You've said you think the first person to live to 1,000 may already be alive. 
Could that person be you?

It's conceivable that people in my age bracket, their 40s, are young enough to 
benefit from these therapies. I'd give it a 30% or 40% chance. But that is not 
why I do this – I do this because I'm interested in saving 100,000 lives a day.

Can the planet cope with people living so long?

That's to do with the balance of birth and death rates. It didn't take us too 
long to lower the birth rate after we more or less eliminated infant mortality 
100 or 150 years ago. I don't see that it's sensible to regard the risk of a 
population spike as a reason not to give people the best healthcare that we can.
 