
When Aubrey Plaza <http://uk.imdb.com/name/nm2201555/> opens the door of her 
new house in the foothills of Los Angeles' trendy Los Feliz neighbourhood one 
rainy late afternoon in November, she is dressed for a cosy night in: leggings, 
over-sized sweatshirt, slippers.

With her Betty Boop pout and deadpan delivery, the Delaware-born daughter of 
Puerto Rican and Irish parents has been a hipster crush since she exploded on 
to the US comedy scene in 2009 with roles as a stand-up comedian in Judd 
Apatow'sFunny People <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/128103/funny.people> 
and as a surly city government employee in the NBC mockumentary sitcomParks And 
Recreation <http://www.nbc.com/parks-and-recreation/> (coming to BBC4 next year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/nov/22/parks-and-recreation-bbc4>
). But Plaza has never played a mere girlfriend or stock ingénue role, and 
admits she's less than comfortable with the idea of selling herself on her 
looks – for example, by posing for the photos accompanying this article.

"It's weird, because that's a job that some people have – they're called 
models," Plaza says as she curls up in a wooden chair at a kitchen table 
dominated by a deluxe Scrabble board while her big, friendly dog, Stevie, 
nuzzles her legs. "It's a skill that not everybody has. There's no photo-shoot 
academy. If there was, I'd probably be kicked out." As she gets up to put on 
the kettle for tea, she acknowledges that posing prettily is an unavoidable 
part of her chosen job. "I try to make it fun," she says. How? "Drugs and 
alcohol," she says without missing a beat.

In Parks And Recreation, Plaza's character, April, is described by 
curmudgeonly boss Ron Swanson as "both aggressively meanand apathetic". He 
pauses and beams. "She really is the whole package." The character's admiration 
reflects the real-world response to Plaza: she's a certain kind of guy's dream 
girl, authentically world-weary in an industry whose idea of a young female 
misfit isZooey Deschanel <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/zooey-deschanel>.

Plaza's character in Funny People was partially based on Janeane Garofalo 
<http://www.janeanegarofalo.com/> (who worked with writer/director Apatow in 
the early 1990s on The Ben Stiller Show), and the younger actor/comedian has 
continued to draw comparisons to the Reality Bites star throughout her brief 
career. But Plaza represents several evolutions down the line of women who use 
their smart mouths to critique an industry that treats pretty girls as a usable 
resource. Part of her appeal is the way she wraps up her star power in a 
blanket of knowingness so dry that it almost makes you forget about the way she 
looks.

Her parents were 20 when she was born – "I was, like, a big accident," she 
says. "We started out with nothing, but my parents worked really, really hard, 
and we kind of moved up. My mom is a lawyer now, and my dad's a financial 
advisor." She is the eldest of three sisters.

At a young age, her mum introduced her to Saturday Night Live 
<http://www.nbc.com/saturday-night-live/>. "I became really obsessed with 
comedy and improv," she says. "I wanted to be on that show for as long as I 
could remember." Plaza was not an idle dreamer: as soon as she identified SNL 
as her perfect job, she set to work investigating how to land it. "Just by 
looking at people's biographies online, I saw that a lot of them did sketch 
comedy. And I decided that's what I was going to do." In high school, she 
enrolled at an improv school in Philadelphia, the closest major city to 
Wilmington.

After school, she moved to New York to study film at NYU and take improv 
classes at theUpright Citizens Brigade <http://www.ucbtheatre.com/>. Soon she 
was performing with the likes of Rob Riggle (The Daily Show 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0115147/>), John Mulaney (later SNL's head 
writer), and her current Parks co-star, Aziz Ansari. She interned at Saturday 
Night Live in 2005, and then co-starred in a web series,The Jeannie Tate Show 
<http://uk.imdb.com/title/tt1147740/>, produced by Maggie Carey, wife of SNL 
star Bill Hader. In 2008, she finally landed an audition for SNL – and didn't 
make the cut.

"Then I was offered the part in Funny People." Plaza moved from New York to 
Los Angeles to shoot the Apatow film, assuming that she'd return to New York 
when the job ended and resume her place on the East Coast comedy scene. "And I 
never left here. I was cast on Parks And Rec andScott Pilgrim Vs The World 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135879/scott-pilgrim-vs-the-world>, and 
it was all happening back to back. So I was thinking, 'After this, I'll go 
back.' And then Parks just kept going. Which is a good thing, but it was kind 
of abrupt."

This sudden rush of success is all the more remarkable considering that in 
July 2005, when Plaza was 21, she suffered a stroke. She returned home to 
Delaware, where she underwent speech therapy, and battled anxiety attacks. 
At the end of the summer, her parents tried to convince her to take some time 
off, to focus on her health, but Plaza was determined to get on with her life. 
"It was one of the scariest things that's happened, but it never felt as if it 
was keeping me from doing anything. "If anything, it made me more aggressive 
about getting things that I want. Maybe subconsciously I was feeling it was… 
not a near-death experience, but it put things in perspective."

Plaza wouldn't have been able to accomplish so much so quickly if not for 
unusual tenacity and ambition. Her agent, she says, saw her in The Jeannie Tate 
Show, "agreed to meet me for coffee, and I just harassed her. I sent her 
everything and eventually she started sending me on auditions.

"I think people just associate me with my characters," Plaza says. "But in 
high school I wasn't like that at all. I was president of everything I could be 
president of. I wasn't, like, the weird one making comments at the back of the 
class. I was at the front of the class. I was annoying."
 On the road: Plaza in new film Safety Not Guaranteed 
Her new film, Safety Not Guaranteed <http://uk.imdb.com/title/tt1862079/>, 
features the 28-year-old in her first starring film role, and both plays on the 
expectations Plaza's fans may have of her and challenges them. She plays 
Darius, a graduate intern at a Seattle magazine who is still recovering from 
the death of her mum 10 years earlier. Desperate to, as she puts it, "eject" 
from her rut, Darius jumps at the chance to accompany two co-workers on a road 
trip to investigate a classified ad posted by a mystery man who claims to be in 
search of a partner for time travel.

The would-be time traveller is Kenneth, an intense 30-something grocer's clerk 
who claims to have built a time machine in his garage. Darius's boss convinces 
his intern to use her feminine wiles to wedge her way into Kenneth's life. 
"You're dangling my vagina out there like bait," Darius complains, but she gets 
in so deep that she falls in love with her mark.

The film was inspired by an ad in a publication geared to rural American 
survivalists, which then became an internet meme. Plaza was attracted to the 
idea of taking such a potentially easy premise for comedy and bringing depth to 
it: "It's such a thing now, people making fun of other people on the internet." 
It's a thing she has been a part of –Plaza's impression of "controversial" 
comic Sarah Silverman <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l1Sa9hXA4mo> has racked 
up nearly 750,000 views on YouTube since she uploaded it in 2008 with the 
disclaimer, "I LIKE SARAH. I am a fan of hers. For all you haters." Today, she 
says, "It's a harmless thing, but I think the movie is challenging the idea of 
that, and the idea of people being so ironic about everything all the time."

The chatty comedy builds to a spectacular sci-fi climax that, despite its 
charmingly lo-fi production values, delivers a transcendent emotional wallop. 
The director, Colin Trevorrow and his star bonded over their shared love of 
fantasy classics such as Back To The Future and Jurassic Park. "A lot of 
independent films are harsh reality checks," Plaza says, "but this is an 
independent film with a blockbuster feeling."

Trevorrow says he and Safety's writer, Derek Connolly, "were told we could get 
millions more to make the movie if we recast it with bigger names. Derek and I 
both agreed it had to be Aubrey, and never backed down." Part of the impetus 
for casting her came from wanting to perform a kind of bait-and-switch on 
audiences expecting to get a rendition of one of her cynical characters. "A lot 
of people think Aubrey has one note that she can play, and we used that to our 
advantage."

As Plaza puts it, "Sometimes I'm viewed as the poster child for irony, so it 
was cool to play against that. My job was to go on that journey, and allow 
someone who is pure and sincere to open me up to things." That same process of 
transformation, she says, "is what we want the audience to feel, in the end. 
That it's OK to believe in positivity." She cracks up a bit on that last word, 
as if she is unable to argue against irony with a completely straight face.

But she seems sincere when she says, "I love great acting, as nerdy as that 
sounds." Her idols and inspirations tend toward the old school. She gushes 
about Judy Garland: "I love her as an actress. She's amazing, and her voice, 
obviously, it's like no other voice ever. And she's funny!"

Does Plaza ever feel that she doesn't get credit for her own work, that people 
just assume she's playing herself? "Yeah!" She giggles. "But also, I don't 
blame them. In some ways, that's the ultimate compliment. If people think 
that's me, I'm really doing it well. But the movies are opportunities to show 
off other things I can do."

She tries to spend all of her time off from Parks on movie sets. She'll soon 
be seen in Roman Coppola'sA Glimpse Inside The Mind Of Charles Swan III 
<http://uk.imdb.com/title/tt2044729/>, co-starring opposite Charlie Sheen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/charlie-sheen>, which she calls "a crazy 
experience".

"I played his assistant, so it was mostly me yelling at him to get his shit 
together. So that was fun," she laughs. "I learned a lot from him. He's so 
natural, and so professional. Half the time I wouldn't know if he was talking 
to me or we were doing the scene… He's fun to be around. He's always telling 
crazy stories. And he doesn't care what anybody thinks about him. He's the 
ultimate cool guy."

She's also preparing to star with John C Reilly in Life After Beth, a zombie 
comedy written and to be directed by her live-in boyfriend, Jeff Baena 
(co-writer of I Heart Huckabees). She sums it up with a wry smile: "It's a 
really fucked-up movie."

Plaza is quick to admit that she doesn't get every part she wants. "People 
don't totally trust me yet," she laments. Safety Not Guaranteed was the rare 
film she was offered outright. "I still have to go after things that I want," 
she says, and sometimes indefatigability isn't enough – she had to pass on one 
of the leads in Whit Stillman's Damsels In Distress when she couldn't fit the 
movie shoot into her TV schedule.

"I want to be considered a well-rounded actor, not a weirdo," she says. That 
said, "You can't control what people think. And I can't not have some parts of 
what I'm doing be me, because it's all I have to use. I'm not, like, Daniel Day 
Lewis." She grins. "Yet. I will get there!" Despite the self-protective tinge 
of ironic self-awareness in her voice, I have no doubt she means it.

• Safety Not Guaranteed is released in cinemas nationwide on 26 December.
 