
In the afternoon on New Year's Eve, three dozen passengers from the MV 
Akademik Shokalskiy walked town the gangplank and stepped on to one of the ice 
floes that had trapped the ship since Christmas Day.

They walked, carefully, along a pathway marked by small flags until they 
reached a relatively flat area of the ice covered in fresh snow. They formed a 
chain at one side, linked arms and proceeded to stomp, in formation, across the 
snow, compressing the powder under their feet. This is how you make a helipad in
Antarctica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica>.

Minutes before, we had been told that the Australian icebreaker, the Aurora 
Australis, had failed to get through. This was the second icebreaker that 
hadn't made it – the Chinese ship, the Xue Long, got some of the way through 
the ice on Friday last week before turning back. The only option left is to 
evacuate by helicopter.

Ben Maddison, a historian and author on board the Shokalskiy with the 
Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE), had led the passengers on to the ice 
near the ship.

"I wanted people to participate in their own rescue, to create the conditions 
for the helicopter to land, a moment of activity so we're not so passive in the 
face of events," he said.

With arms linked, the 30 or so people sang songs – including a festive Auld 
Lang Syne – as they tramped down the soft snow for their rescue helicopter to 
land.

Whenever anyone's feet fell a little too deeply through the uncertain surface, 
the whole line stopped to help them out, and then carried on across the field.

"It was like a choir – we were a big Antarctic choir in the middle of a 
rainstorm," said Maddison.
 Passengers and scientists stomp an area of ice next to the Akademik 
Shokalskiy for a makeshift helicopter landing pad in readiness for evacuation 
from the trapped ship in Antarctica Photograph: Laurence Topham for th 
The Shokalskiy was heading east around Commonwealth Bay, to the Mertz glacier, 
after a brief visit to the huts built a century ago by the scientist and 
Antarctic explorer, Douglas Mawson.

Just before Christmas Day, strong south-easterly winds began pushing the sea 
ice towards the Antarctic coastline, quickly forming a dense mass around the 
ship and pinning us in place.

When the captain issued the call for help, on Christmas morning, the ship was 
only two nautical miles from open water. Seven days later, after blizzards and 
more strong winds, the sea is 20 nautical miles away. This barrier of ice, now 
up to 5 metres deep in parts, has proved impossible to penetrate so far.

When we first got trapped, we were just over two weeks into our month-long 
expedition, from Bluff in New Zealand to East Antarctica, following in the 
spirit of Mawson, leader of the original AAE of 1911, repeating his wildlife, 
ocean and weather observations to build a scientific picture of how this part 
of the world had changed in 100 years.

The AAE was set up as a mix of adventure and science, of researchers alongside 
paying members of the public with an interest in climate and zoology, who 
wanted to venture where few others do.

Mary Regan, a Sydney-based consultant, holds a deep interest in the heroic age 
of Antarctic exploration – the time of Scott, Shackleton and Roald Amundsen. 
She also wanted to help measure climate change.

The moment she first saw the domed ice cap of Antarctica, during a visit to 
the Hodgeman Islands last week, she said it took her breath away.

"I thought, I'm really here. It was so majestic, so grand. There was that 
beauty of how we were there in this beautiful but tough, cruel environment. It 
grabbed me. I had tears in my eyes."

The ship's misfortune has not dampened her enthusiasm. Everyone is on board 
through some sort of love for Antarctica and not, she said, to tick off boxes. 
They wanted to experience the continent. Changes of plan, unexpected 
situations, these were all part of the adventure, she said.
 Passenger Nicole De Losa waves to a helicopter sent from the Chinese 
icebreaker Xue Long to assess ice conditions. Photograph: Andrew 
Peacock/AFP/Getty Images 
Sean Borkovic, who has a recent masters in environmental management in Sydney, 
said he had always wanted to sail the Southern Ocean.

He recalled the Shokalskiy's first approach to the frozen continent, almost 
two weeks ago, after several days of rough seas. We had finally made it to calm 
waters and, on a clear, sunny day, we approached the Antarctic landmass through 
a corridor of enormous, pure-white icebergs.

"The sunshine was a surprise," said Borkovic. "But the stark nature was 
everything and more than I imagined."

Maddison has visited the frozen continent 10 times but each time it has 
surprised him. "I feel like I've only been touching the surface – I want to 
come back again and touch it in a deeper way."

During an excursion two weeks ago we all got into Zodiacs – tough inflatable 
rubber dinghies – and passed close to a decaying iceberg. We were with Maddison 
on the lookout for leopard seals.

The morning had started off grey and cold but the sun came out. Maddison took 
his boat and passengers far from the hum of ship's engines, far from the other 
Zodiacs and well beyond the range of everyone's radios.

"The ice floes were separated by big pools of water that were so still that 
they were like mirrors," he said. "We switched off the engines and sat there, 
in complete silence, in between these glistening mirrors."

For 12-year-old Robbie Turney, who has been begging his father, AAE expedition 
leader, Chris Turney, to visit Antarctica for years, it has been the trip of a 
lifetime.

"I've always heard stories of Antarctica in winter, I was expecting 80mph 
winds, struggling to stand," he said. "It was different, it was warmer. If 
you're walking or building you can do it in shorts and sleeves. It's beautiful 
and white. It's better than I was expecting."

Last week, whenever allowed to venture on to the lumpy, sludgy ice floes 
around us, Turney has taken charge of constructing snow slides and snow men.

There have been trips on to the ice – blizzards permitting – for people to 
contemplate the stillness, watch penguins and investigate this desolate 
landscape that appeared out of nowhere.

"It's this week of being beset in the ice that people will remember and people 
will be asked about," said Maddison.

"A lot of people can't remember what we did before this and this is what 
they'll be asked about."

As we have watched the weather and tracked the progress of the Chinese and 
Australian icebreakers, everyone has kept their spirits high and fingers 
crossed. It would be untrue to say no one has felt deflated, or worried.

But each turn of events has been met with, as AAE co-leader Greg Mortimer put 
it, an adventurous spirit. And we have held on to the fervent hope that our 
ship would somehow be freed, to sail back to New Zealand under our own steam.

Mortimer has told us that that was unlikely to happen. Instead, we needed to 
pack our bags and be ready to be evacuated by helicopter to the Aurora 
Australis, via the Xue Long, when the weather cleared.

From there we would sail to Australia, via the Australian Antarctic base, 
Casey. We would be several weeks late home but what a story we would have to 
tell.

Perhaps it was the isolation as much as the personalities, but this was a 
group of people who had grown strong bonds. Every meal this past month had been 
spent together. Films, games and countless trips on land and ice were shared in 
the same small groups.

In the past week, stuck in the ice, the AAE members each took turns leading 
lessons for others in everything from salsa dancing to yoga.
 Steve Lambert entertains his fellow passengers with a rendition of Danny Boy. 
Photograph: Laurence Topham/Guardian 
On New Years' Eve, as the clock counted down to midnight, a hastily arranged 
choir belted out a song, written by AAE member and Australian Green party 
senator-elect Janet Rice. The song recounted the story of the Shokalskiy and 
the icebreakers. "Bloody great shame we're still stuck here," was the refrain.

"You often feel very close to people on an Antarctic vessel, and that's as 
much to do with the place you're in and things you're doing, as the bonds you 
actually have," said Maddison. "Because you're remote and isolated, you huddle 
together more."

With departure almost imminent, Maddison said he was emotional about leaving 
the Shokalskiy and, in particular, the spot where the ship had been stranded. 
The past few days, he said, had satisfied an enormous craving he had held for 
years.

"I've been through this body of water many times and always wanted to stop in 
it," he said. "And I have, accidentally. I've always wanted the time to 
contemplate and notice it in a way I don't have while in a ship."

This had been Regan's first trip to the continent but, like Maddison, her 
experience is not yet complete. "It's met my expectations but not satisfied 
them. I caught myself saying the other day, "Next time I come to Antarctica … "

Borkovic said he had been humbled by what he had seen in the past few weeks. 
"There's a quality to it that I expected but couldn't appreciate until I was 
here," he said. "It is such an extreme environment, the last untouched 
wilderness. I'll remember this forever."
 