
The federal government is planning to allow new stock market operators to 
compete against the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX).


Australian Securities Exchange chief quits over Tabcorp investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/21/australian-securities-exchange-chief-quits-over-tabcorp-investigation>
On Wednesday the treasurer, Scott Morrison, announced the government’s 
response to recommendations by the Council of Financial Regulators (CFR) to 
open up the ASX to competition and develop conditions for competitors to the 
share ownership clearing house.

CFR will now develop those conditions, as well as regulatory expectations on 
the ASX’s conduct.

“[It] will mean that should a competitor to the ASX emerge, there will be 
arrangements in place for safe and effective competition, allowing for a 
transition to competition over a period of around 18 months,” Morrison told 
reporters in Sydney.

The government’s response said it would “give considerable weight to the 
regulators’ views” and it was unlikely it would licence a competitor to the ASX 
unless it met those minimum conditions. It said it would take at least 18 
months for competitors to emerge and for a licence to be approved.

The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission will also be given the 
power to arbitrate disputes about access to ASX stock clearing and settlement 
services.

Morrison welcomed the ASX’s plans to develop distributed ledger technology 
(block chain) for the Australian share market. But the government response 
noted it could have significant implications for the role of central clearing, 
and reduce the likelihood the ASX would face competition.

Regulatory expectations set for the ASX “should seek to ensure that 
technological developments do not preclude effective competition in post-trade 
services”, it said.

Ownership restrictions on the ASX will also be relaxed by the government, as 
recommended by the Murray financial system inquiry, to allow the ASX to raise 
capital more easily.

The government will legislate that the current ASX ownership limit of 15% can 
be exceeded with the treasurer’s approval if it is in the national interest.

“As treasurer I want to help create an environment where our financial 
services sector can be both internationally competitive and play a central role 
in aiding the positive transition of our economy,” Morrison said.

Do you pay more tax than Australia's biggest private companies?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/ng-interactive/2016/mar/22/do-you-pay-more-tax-than-australias-biggest-private-companies>
Deregulation and increased competition for the ASX, a listed company itself, 
would mirror developments in Europe and the US where competition and mergers 
among exchanges have become the norm in recent years.


The London Stock Exchange, for example, is planning a £20bn ($37.71m) merger 
with its German rival, Deutsche Börse, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/04/london-stock-exchange-backs-deutsche-borse-deal-as-profits-rise>
while the world’s biggest market, the New York Stock Exchange, merged with its 
rival Euronext in 2007 before being bought by Intercontinental Exchange.
 