
Australian consumers could be worse off thanks to the rising power of large 
corporations, the head of the competition watchdog has warned.

Rod Sims, the chairman of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
(ACCC) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-competition-and-consumer-commission>
, said in a speech on Thursday that the revenue of the largest 100 companies on 
Australia’s stock exchange had increased from just 27% of gross domestic 
product in 1993 to 47% in 2015.

And speaking to ABC, Sims said the ACCC had to make sure the benefits flowed 
through to consumers.

Economics 101: house prices are surging because of low supply | Stephen 
Koukoulas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/economics-101-house-prices-are-surging-because-of-low-supply>
“What we’ve really got to make sure is there’s adequate competition to see any 
benefits from scale flow through to the general economy,” he said.

“Conventional economic wisdom says monopolies will charge more and give less, 
it says that highly concentrated markets with high entry barriers are going to 
see consumers worse off.”


The rise of corporations in Australia over the past two decades has been so 
great that it has outstripped the growth of large companies in the US, Sims 
said, where their revenue had increased from 33% of GDP to 46% in the past 23 
years.


But Sims told the RBB Economics conference in Sydney 
<http://www.accc.gov.au/speech/keynote-address-rbb-economics-conference-0#_ftn5>
 that despite the significant growth in revenue for Australia’s biggest 
companies since 1993, concerns about increasing market concentration could also 
be “taken too far”.

“Many markets in Australia remain with low levels of concentration,” he said.

“Over the last 20 or more years, although market concentration has increased 
in the US and Australia, world poverty has reduced and we have seen living 
standards increase considerably in developed countries.

“Further, while in many countries inequality has increased, and this is an 
important concern, given its effect on the social fabric and wider policy 
debate, virtually all groups have seen their living standards improve,” he said.

Sims said from a competition perspective, what we need to understand is 
whether smaller rivals or new entrants can readily contest the position of 
larger, more established corporations.

He said one way to assess the degree to which concentrated markets were 
contestable was to observe how often the identity of large firms changed.

And the regularity with which the identity of large firms changed, as a 
consequence of entry or expansion, provided a good indicator of the degree to 
which concentrated markets were contestable.

“Of the ASX top-100 companies in 1990, only 29 companies remained in the top 
100 as at October 2015,” he said.

“Sixty-one had been acquired or merged, five had disappeared due to corporate 
collapses and five had slipped from the top 100.

“However, the identity of the six largest listed companies has not changed 
substantially in recent times. For example, in 2005 the top six listed 
companies by market capitalisation, in order, were BHP, Telstra and four banks: 
Commonwealth, NAB, ANZ and Westpac.

“Today the top six companies in order are four banks: Commonwealth, Westpac, 
ANZ and NAB, followed by BHP Billiton and Telstra,” he said.

But the top six companies had not grown as strongly as the rest of the top 
100, he said.


“Since 1993, the top six’s revenue as a proportion of GDP has doubled from 7% 
to 16%. For the rest of the top 100 this percentage has nearly quadrupled from 
8% to 31%,” he said.

All change at Reserve Bank, but Australia's economy is still heading for the 
rocks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/glenn-stevens-all-change-at-reserve-bank-but-australian-economy-stays-headed-for-rocks>
Sims said he often heard concerns about the number of mergers being cleared by 
the ACCC, and the increasing concentration in Australia’s economy.

He said it may be worth considering how US courts deal with potential mergers.

He said in the US, where once markets are defined and a merger is likely to 
result in a significant increase in market concentration, there exists a 
“rebuttable presumption” that the merger should not proceed – unless companies 
can produce evidence to the contrary.

He said conventional wisdom in economics and business was that market 
concentration gives companies power.

“[But] under rebuttable presumption, the merger parties must show why 
conventional wisdom does not apply to the merger and produce evidence to 
support their propositions,” he said.

“There will be times when a merger to high concentration is acceptable, due 
perhaps to low entry barriers, but logic says it will not be the norm. Why 
shouldn’t those arguing the unconventional have the burden of producing 
evidence to support their position?

“I am not necessarily advocating for this, simply raising a question we should 
all ponder,” he said.
 