
It's a pity most city dwellers don't get an opportunity to meet their meat – 
although from what I gather most country folk don't bother, either. After 
someone kills a chicken for the first time I witness a new perspective; a 
change in the way he or she values meat.

My pig was one of two sows handed to me in one of those free-to-a-good-home 
scenarios. All that was required was a long drive to pick them up and to find a 
place to house them for a month while they were finished off to be butchered. I 
negotiated with a friend for a paddock to house the girls until the day the 
mobile butcher arrived to perform his craft. I almost missed out: only a few 
days before hearing of the free pigs, I'd ordered a half-pig for curing 
purposes. Being a man of limited financial means I hurriedly cancelled my porky 
order.
 The sows, housed in a friend's paddock. Photograph: Rohan Anderson 
The free pigs were my first venture in large animals as a source of meat. 
Before my adventures in practiculture, I bought meat at the supermarket. But 
once I committed myself to only eating meat that I acquired with my own two 
hands, pork was usually out of the question. Hunting wild rabbits, duck, quail 
and trout has kept me and the family well fed for a few happy years now.

Apart from the annual leg curing and the odd stick of chorizo, pork just 
hasn't been on our menu for years. When the day of butchering came I was amazed 
how much meat the butcher and I processed. The possibilities seemed endless, 
but a new problem had presented itself: what to do with all this pork?

Most of my cooking is based around the concept of using more veg than meat, 
and a fair chunk of that meat tends to be cured. It makes sense to me that I 
grow all my vegetables year-round and add a little meaty goodness from 
home-cured jamon or some flavour-filled chorizo. Of course, I get great 
freshness from my backyard produce, reduce my food miles and can be sure that 
the produce is chemical-free. But it's still all about that moment when the 
food hits your mouth, the mastication process takes hold, and we take pleasure 
in the flavours. That's the real benefit of homegrown.

The joy of eating this food is increased tenfold when you take care of it 
yourself. When you grow the plants of vegetable and fruit, and when you raise 
the animals that provide the meat, you're required to put in some level of 
effort. When you pick food up at the supermarket you just don't seem to get the 
same buzz. I wonder if it's part of the reason so many people feel rather 
unfulfilled and miserable?

The first bit of porky tucker I had from our pig was a pan-fried tenderloin 
doused in wine and butter and cooked over a campfire – what a way to test the 
quality of the meat. I sat by the fire with the river gently drifting past and 
the tucker dimly lit by the moonlight. I was alone enjoying the fruits of my 
labour. Part of me wished I had someone to share it with – but more selfishly I 
was quite pleased that I could feast on the beast by myself, enjoying each 
mouthful.

To celebrate the hint of spring weather, I slow-roasted a slab of pork a few 
days later; nothing added to it – just some water in the roasting pot and a 
gentle heat. Again the idea was to enjoy the flavour of the pork. Hours passed 
as I salivated over the smell wafting in from the kitchen. Later we ate pork in 
bread for dinner. That's right: just pork and bread. Heavenly.

The roast was so large it sat in the refrigerator for days, slowly being 
sliced cold, sometimes fried with eggs for breakfast or warmed-up for a hearty 
man-wich. With spring produce popping up I combined the two.
 Broad beans, the symbol of early spring. Photograph: Rohan Anderson 
I had broad beans out of the garden and figured they'd marry well with some 
twice-cooked roast pork. Added to the mix were some of last summer's roasted 
cherry tomatoes, goat's cheese and fresh parsley atop a hot cooked flatbread.
 Flat bread with broad beans and twice-cooked pork. Photograph: Rohan Anderson 
Twice-cooked pork is a delight, the flavour seems to change when the roast 
pork gets pan-tossed in some olive oil: the pork fat melts and adds flavour 
through the dish. Naughty, but what better way to celebrate the girl than by 
enjoying her fatty flavour? The broad beans, the symbol of early spring, made a 
fresh addition to the salad. Soon I'll have kilos of these delightful beans and 
now that I also have plenty of pork I reckon the two will be married several 
times, well into summer.
 