
Wednesday 1st September

Dear Diary,

Woken early by an employee of Parcel Force. He was a Chinese bloke and asked 
if I was "Mr Occupier!" I said I was Mr Adrian Albert Mole. He was holding a 
squarish, heavy-looking parcel. I hoped it was the wooden Japanese neck-pillow 
I had ordered from Innovations many months ago.

After a chilly doorstep wrangle (the wind was blowing through the fly of my 
pyjamas, directly on to my prostate), I managed to persuade him to hand the 
package over and went inside. When I opened it at the kitchen table I was 
shocked to find Tony Blair's face staring up at me with the words,Tony Blair A 
Journey. Inside was a House of Commons acknowledgments slip from Pandora:

Aidy darling,

Had a brief disastrous affair with a bookshop manager – he left his wife and 
turned up at my apartment with his ghastly suitcases and a hyperactive 
boy-child called Plato. He has promised me free books for life. I know you are 
obsessed with TB so enjoy this advance copy.

After a struggle to control my jealous rage I started to read.

As I ploughed through the acknowledgments I could not help but reflect that, 
had I had 26 people to help me with my own books I might have had at least one 
published by now.

My own semi-autobiographical novel, Lo! The Flat Hills of My Homeland has been 
with Hutchinson for two and a half years.

At 11am my mother came in from next door to "borrow" yet more teabags (she 
already owes me 17). On seeing Mr Blair's cover photograph she began to 
sniffle: "He was so full of promise," she said, "And look at him now, he's a 
broken bulrush in the River Nile of life."

I went to the lavatory and was in there for some time. When I returned my 
mother was engrossed in the book and my father had let himself into the house 
and was rummaging through my fridge (God! I should never have installed those 
wheelchair ramps which allow him easy access to my house).

I went into my bedroom to get dressed and came back to find my father eating 
the cold custard from last night's dinner. My mother looked up fromA Journey 
and said: "He writes that he came very near to having a drinking problem."

My father said: "A pisshead yeah? What was he on?"

My mother said: "A gin and tonic and two glasses of wine over dinner."

My father sneered. "A gin and tonic and two glasses of wine? He's a 
bleedin' amateur." He put the empty custard jug back in the fridge and lit a 
cigarette.

He said: "Now, if he was crawling in the gutter in Downing Street, screaming 
at the moon and trying to fight a policeman on the door of Number 10, then yes, 
I'd agree he did have a drink problem."

He tapped cigarette ash into the ashtray that had been welded on to the arm of 
his wheelchair.

Thursday 2nd September

Dear Diary,

I read A Journey all night and into the early hours. At 5.10am I had a 
revelation. Mr Blair surrounded himself with Alpha Males: Alastair Campbell, 
Gordon Brown, John Prescott, Margaret Beckett, Philip Gould, Jonathan Powell 
and Peter Mandelson, yet he was not an Alpha Male himself. He was a receptacle 
and a conduit of their wishes and opinions. Mr Blair had as much self-belief as 
a chameleon.

I remembered that when he returned to London after a long period in the United 
States he had an American accent, much like that of his fellow Christian and 
friend, Sir Cliff Richard.

I am not a trained psychologist but I am wise beyond my 40 years and think 
that I have discovered why Mr Blair was so keen to become a war leader and to 
swagger alongside George Bush. He thought it would give him another pair of 
testicles and would promote him to Alpha Maleness.

At 1.30pm I took A Journey round to my parents' house and said: "I've finished 
it."

"What?" said my mother, "You've read all 718 pages? It's impossible."

I reminded her that I was a speed reader and had read War and Peace in two 
days.

"What's your method?" she said suspiciously.

"I skip over the adverbs and adjectives," I said.

I left them fighting over who was to read A Journey first and went to my desk 
to write a stern letter to Hutchinson, demanding that my own book,Lo! The Flat 
Hills of My Homeland, be published tout suite:

Dear Hutchinson,

My friend and confidante Dr Pandora Braithwaite BA, MA, D phil, advanced me a 
copy ofTony Blair A Journey (incidentally I notice with sorrow that Dr 
Braithwaite's name does not appear in the index, though she has spoken to me at 
length many times about the long and intimate conversations she had with Mr 
Blair into the early hours). I congratulate you on your sales of the above 
book, which brings me to the subject ofLo! The Flat Hills of My Homeland. Apart 
from an acknowledgment slip some time in 2007 which said: 'Your manuscript 
arrived at our office today. However, it may be sometime before we can get back 
to you', I have heard nothing from you and warn you that unless you promise me 
a publication date, I will take the manuscript back and offer it to Penguin.

Yours,

Adrian A Mole

PS Mr Blair uses too many emotive adjectives and he could do with taking a red 
pen to his adverbs also.
 