
Ed Balls is planning to outmanoeuvre George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> over the future of 
Britain's public finances by embracing fiscal rules that would be tougher than 
those proposed by the chancellor in his autumn statement.

The shadow chancellor is examining plans to challenge the "totally 
discredited" forward looking assessment of the deficit reduction plans that 
allowed Osborne to miss his target last year while claiming he was meeting his 
"fiscal mandate".

Labour's indication came after Balls was criticised by frontbenchers and 
backbenchers on his own side for one of his poorest performances in the 
Commons, in which he struggled to be heard over shouting from the Tories.

Balls dismissed the criticisms as he said he was battling against a wall of 
noise. He said: "It was very, very, very loud. Every now and again that is how 
the Commons is. You've got more than 300 Tory MPs shouting very, very loudly. I 
am not going to allow the Tories to drown me out and if that means I am going 
to shout louder then I am going to shout louder."

Balls singled out Matt Hancock, the business minister, who served as Osborne's 
chief of staff before the last election. "We have decided to name Matt Hancock 
'Lola' – the chancellor's real poodle. When you are standing there it is so 
loud you can't actually hear anything."

The Tories turned on Balls in the chamber after the chancellor announced in 
his autumn statement that he is to tighten the rules for tackling the budget 
deficit to ensure that Britain starts to run a surplus towards the end of the 
next parliament. The chancellor will seek to give his Labour opponent less room 
for manoeuvre – or leave Balls vulnerable to charges of fiscal irresponsibility 
– by putting the new charter to a parliamentary vote in 12 months' time, just 
six months before the election.

Outlining the changes, the chancellor told MPs: "We will bring forward next 
year an updated charter for budget responsibility and ask parliament to support 
it. I can say today that government must ensure that debt continues to fall as 
a percentage of GDP, including using surpluses in good years for this purpose. 
In other words this time we will fix the roof when the sun is shining.

"We will look to see whether the five-year time horizon of the fiscal mandate 
could be shorter and even more binding now that the public finances are closer 
to balance. And we will see how fiscal credibility could be further enhanced by 
a stronger parliamentary commitment to the path of consolidation already agreed 
for 2016-17 and 2017-18. The answers will be written into an updated charter 
for budget responsibility which will be presented to parliament a year from now 
and voted upon."

Treasury sources indicated that Osborne is prepared to cut the assessment 
period for the fiscal mandate – the elimination of the annual structural budget 
deficit – from five years to two or three. A Treasury source said: "As part of 
this review – on the fiscal mandate – we are looking at whether the five years 
should be shortened to, say, two or three years to make it a much more binding 
target when you are already close to balance."

Under the original fiscal mandate, outlined by Osborne in his emergency budget 
of June 2010, the assessment was made on a rolling forward-looking five-year 
basis. This meant that Osborne did not technically fail the fiscal mandate when 
he announced inlast year's budget 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/economy/2012/03/tax-rate-today-britain-billion> 
that he would not achieve his plan of eliminating the structural budget deficit 
by 2015. This is because the current budget only has to be in balance five 
years from the moment the chancellor makes an assessment.

It is understood that Balls regards the forward looking assessment as a trick 
that has allowed Osborne to announce he would miss his original target of 
eliminating the structural deficit by claiming that he had achieved success.

The second main element of Osborne's new fiscal rules will say that any future 
budget surplus will have to be used to help pay down debt. In a supplementary 
target to the fiscal mandate in 2010, Osborne announced that debt should be 
falling as a proportion of GDP by 2015-16. He has announced that he would 
finally meet his debt target by 2016-17 when it is forecast by the Office for
Budget <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility to fall to 79.9% 
of GDP from 80% the previous year.

But Balls made clear that he regarded Osborne's plans for new fiscal rules as 
a trap that he would seek to pre-empt. He said that he has already outlined his 
own fiscal rules – placing the current budget to surplus and to see debt 
falling.

And he hinted that he is prepared to go further than Osborne as he criticised 
the way in which the chancellor has assessed his fiscal mandate on a rolling 
forward looking five years basis. He said: "Clearly George Osborne and Danny 
Alexander have got a problem because they set very clear fiscal rules in 2010 
and they have completely missed them. The five-year rolling rule is totally 
discredited because every year the five years gets further away.

"We have said very clearly we will have two fiscal rules. One: to get the 
current budget back into surplus and secondly to have the national debt 
falling. We will do that through our manifesto. We have had fiscal 
responsibility charters in the past so we have no aversion to that."

The shadow chancellor added that he would be more open to Osborne's new 
charter if he accepts Labour's call for the tax and spending proposals of 
opposition parties to be audited by the Office for Budget Responsibility.

In his response to the autumn statement, Balls accused Osborne of presiding 
over a complete economic failure after the chancellor acknowledged that he 
would be borrowing £79bn in 2015 – the year he was due to balance the books. 
The shadow chancellor told MPs: "He used to say that he would balance the books 
in 2015. Now he wants us to congratulate him [the chancellor] for saying he 
will do it in 2019. With this government it is clearly not just the badgers 
that move the goalposts."
 