
Implausible as it may appear, George Osborne seems to be courting the vote of 
Toby Esterhase, John le Carré's spook in his novel Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy. 
The archetypal floating voter (Esterhase's loyalties tended to swing more often 
than an economic forecast from the Office forBudget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility) he is exactly the sort 
of chap to who might benefit most from the autumn statement the chancellor 
delivered on Thursday.

Swingeing Whitehall budget cuts are inked in for the next two years, but they 
will not apply to the security and intelligence agencies, where Esterhase 
heroically clung to employment. Nor will they fall on Her Majesty's Revenue & 
Customs, which once provided cover for the spook as he posed as a taxman.

Osborne had good news for shop owners too, who are set to receive a discount 
of up to "£1,000 against business rates bills for retail premises with a 
rateable value of up to £50,000 in the next two tax years" - a cracking result 
for any real-life Esterhases, as the fictional version had the initiative to 
save himself from ruin by setting up a second-rate London art gallery flogging 
works of dubious provenance. There will be lower costs on the gallery's 
delivery van too, with the cancellation of fuel duties next year, and less 
expensive heating costs for Esterhase's showroom as the chancellor told us 
again about the government rolling back green levies so that folk might 
occasionally be able to flick on the boiler this winter - the current cold war. 
Esterhase (as played by David Dencik in the 2011 film, right), remember, once 
headed up a division called the lamplighters.

When the nicknames were being dished out in Tinker Tailor, they skipped rich 
man – which had been destined for Toby, right – and focused on the poor man. 
That was partly the message the chancellor was attempting to flog regarding his 
own policies, although as Osborne will be wrestling to eliminate the deficit 
long after he predicted it should have vanished, he may also want to study some 
of the wisdom Esterhase despatched in the direction of his mentor, George 
Smiley.

"You're on a damn long road, George," he said. "What happens to you if you 
never reach the end?"
 