
Plan A had no place for the occasion. Along with Gordon Brown's glossy budget 
books with smiling children on the cover, the autumnal budgetary set-piece was 
an early victim of the coalition's somberly suited government in the national 
interest. In place of spin, George Osborne offered blood, sweat and an 
old-style plain red book. Inthe autumn statement of 2010 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmhansrd/cm101129/debtext/101129-0001.htm#1011298000002>
, the new chancellor simply stood up, read out Office for Budget Responsibility 
forecasts, and sat down again. The strategic course had already been plotted in 
the spending review, and there was no merit in fiddling with it – that would 
only be to divert from the plan.

But during three years of failure – with less growth and more borrowing at 
every pass – an itch to tinker with presentation and detail set in. And now 
that there is, at last, real evidence of a real recovery building, Mr Osborne 
is determined to seize any occasion that the parliamentary calendar provides to 
crow. The chancellor looked to be enjoying himself on Thursday, as he mixed 
justified claims (about buoyant employment, for example) with more dubious 
boasts about national income, which remains substantially smaller than anybody 
– himself included – had expected by this stage. What a thrill to be able to 
come to the Commons and paint a picture somewhat brighter than forecast, and 
not – as had become his habit – explaining why things have got worse.

With investment and exports depressed, there are still plenty of nits to pick 
at. For Labour, the most obvious is the fact that plan A has not come to 
fruition. Despite the recovery and the revisions, years of stagnation have 
taken their toll. Annual borrowing is still running at £111bn, compared with 
the £60bn that Mr Osbornehad originally pencilled in for this year 
<http://www.direct.gov.uk/prod_consum_dg/groups/dg_digitalassets/@dg/@en/documents/digitalasset/dg_188581.pdf>
. But in a raucous Commons, Ed Balls came across as too wound up to hit home.

Accustomed to so much power so early in life, as Mr Brown's right-hand man, 
the shadow chancellor has interpreted his title a little too literally, and 
provided a running commentary on what he would do at any given moment, instead 
of concentrating on where he needs to be on election day. His own plan B, 
featuring temporary VAT cuts, would have proved a helpful spur amid the 
stagnation of 2011-12; but it was never going to provide him with much to say 
after recovery came. With Labour's thinking about the sort of recovery it wants 
still so sketchy, Mr Balls struggled to take the wind out of Mr Osborne's sails 
as he might have hoped. Measured by the noise on the government backbenches, it 
was the chancellor's day.

The substance of his statement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/chancellor-george-osbornes-autumn-statement-2013-speech>
, however, hardly suggests that Mr Osborne is yet writing the rules of the 
game. It revealed a nervous chancellor, grabbing, twisting and modifying ideas 
from his opponents. Weeks after agreeing to cap payday lending charges to see 
off a parliamentary defeat, he moved on to territory marked out by Ed 
Miliband's conference speech – curbing business rates to benefit smaller 
companies, and answering Labour's supposedly reckless energy bill freeze with 
an avowedly unrelated £50 discount of his own, which is put forward as an 
entirely responsible giveaway. It was all strangely reminiscent of how 
chancellor Brown was spooked by a younger Mr Osborne intocutting inheritance tax
 
<http://www.politics.co.uk/news/2007/10/09/govt-accused-of-cynicism-as-it-cuts-inheritan>
, and pretending, without convincing anybody, that this was what he had always 
wanted to do. There were other Brownian moments, too. A legislated spending cap 
on social security is designed to create trouble for a Labour party that Mr 
Osborne wishes to paint as the friend of the scrounger; it is the mirror image 
of Mr Brown's child poverty bill, a wheeze that tried (and ultimately failed) 
to shame the Tories into backing family benefits. Both are, in their way, an 
abuse of parliament. A new fiscal compact, supposedly locking all parties into 
austerity through the next parliament, is further game-playing. Alistair 
Darling, too, once legislated for deficit reduction targets – a silly statute 
that the coalition repealed.

Such legislative tricks purport to be an answer to a fundamental lack of 
public trust in the stewardship of the economy. They are, however, doomed. 
First, because the Treasury still cannot be trusted with the figures. The big 
tax rises on Thursday all came through anti-avoidance measures, which – while 
welcome – can hardly be relied on. Mr Osborne's deal on Swiss banks has raised 
nothing like what was intended. Meanwhile a potentially substantial expansion 
of university places was "funded" through sale of the student loan book, which 
is a bit like trying to get rich by selling cash. More fundamentally, faith in 
the economy's governance will not be restored while the recovery is not being 
felt in most homes. The return of wage growth was pushed back by another year 
in the smallprint of Thursday's figures. These reveal that the average worker 
is now in for15 lost years <http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/press/>. 
Recovery or not, Mr Osborne will not really regain his swagger until he can do 
something about that.
 