
An afternoon of men in suits reeling off numbers to 650 adults mooing like a 
cattle auction: few formats have been better designed to confuse the public 
about the state of their economy. Yet one important lesson can be gleaned from 
the autumn statement. AsGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> sparred with Ed Balls, 
voters got their clearest view yet of how the next general election will be 
fought. And the amazing, depressing news is that both in its most important 
battle and its key dividing lines, the 2015 election looks like being little 
more than a rerun of the one we had in 2010.

The presiding question in May 2015 will be the same as it was five years ago – 
how much austerity does Britain need? The answers from the Tories and Labour 
will be identical to May 2010, too.

David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> will argue 
that Britain needs another historic round of spending cuts, this time to hack 
back the state to its smallest size since the 1930s. Ed Miliband will admit 
that Whitehall and town hall budgets need to be chopped – but will argue that 
he would wield the knife more precisely and compassionately. That, you will 
remember, is the argument voiced by Gordon Brown as he was whisked offstage.

As if the echoes were not already loud enough, Osborne is even planning a bill 
to bind the next government to his promises on the deficit. Precisely such a 
law was gifted to him by his predecessorAlistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling> – and the new boy 
promptly ripped it up.

An old German economist remarked that history repeats itself: first as 
tragedy, then as farce. He would have seen the absurdity in a chancellor 
admitting that his sums are so badly out that Britain will borrow more than 
double this year than the £37bn he originally promised – and claiming that as a 
triumph. We can all spot the nonsense in a Treasury presenting its projections 
on tablets of stone – only for a cabinet minister, Vince Cable, to point out 
within a few hours that they are impossible.

He’s not the only sceptic: the Office for Budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility noted that Osborne’s 
planned cuts in day-to-day departmental spending “would pose a significant 
challenge if they were confirmed as firm policy”. Such arched eyebrows would be 
admired by Humphrey Appleby.

Sure enough, the austerity plans look like they’ve dropped out of la-la land. 
Crunching the official figures, the Resolution Foundation thinktank believes 
the coalition plans to take another £55bn out of the public finances. If you 
believe Wednesday’s performance, then this will not be achieved by a single 
major tax increase (the same pretence has been adopted by all three major 
parties, just as it was in May 2010, shortly before VAT was jacked up). But it 
will mean another 1,000,000 jobs lost in the public sector by the end of the 
next parliament.

By that time, according to the OBR, the British state will be smaller than it 
was before the introduction of the welfare state. In 2009, the government spent 
£188bn on everything bar health, education and foreign aid. By 2019, that will 
have shrunk to £86bn. At the last election, the rationale for making these cuts 
was that otherwise Britain would end up like Greece. This time, there will be 
no real justification at all.

The chancellor was full of jokes at Labour’s expense yesterday: gags about 
Wallace and Gromit, Emily Thornberry, the arid Red Planet. But his fiscal plans 
were aimed at another party’s voters altogether: no need to back Ukip; the 
Tories will give you Farageland.

Plenty here for Labour to go at, you might think. Not going by Balls’ 
response. He was caught between wanting topoint out the coalition’s failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/ed-balls-labour-flaws-george-osborne-giveaways>
 to hit its own borrowing targets, while being scared stiff of doubting the 
need for more austerity. The same confusion is etched in opposition policy: the 
two Eds will both allow themselves much more leeway to invest in roads and 
schools – while still making £8bn of departmental cuts next year alone and 
accepting the coalition’s cap on benefits.

Looking into the Eds’ eyes, wavering voters do not spy the cutting zeal that 
reassures them of fiscal probity; but nor do they offer a genuine alternative 
to those fed up of Osborne’s botch job.

The result is a chancellor and a government in supreme confidence. On 
Wednesday he brought out all manner of gimmicks: cuts in stamp duty, 
unlikely-looking taxes on Amazon and Starbucks, fines on rotten banks to pay 
for all manner of good causes. Think of the previous few days, in which the 
coalition has made the news: one day more money for the NHS, the next a tunnel 
under Stonehenge; even the transformation of Bicester into a garden city.

All these billion-pound distractions are meant to drown out an economy that 
sounds like a stuck record, forever playing a refrain from 2010. In a sense, we 
were doomed to repeat the last election as soon as Osborne gave up on his 
deficit reduction drive in 2012-13 and Labour stuck with austerity-lite. Nor 
have we cleared up the chronic illnesses that beset the UK economy.

As the stamp duty cut shows, this remains a country whose erogenous zone is 
firmly in its property market, where a devaluation of the pound does nothing to 
eat away at a giant current account deficit and where the workforce is so badly 
paid that record employment doesn’t yield enough taxes.

There’s one more lesson the political classes should take from 2010: no party 
won that election – not Labour, not the Lib Dems, and certainly not the Tories.
 