
Finally the cap is lifted. It's not been taken off entirely, mind. George 
Osborne still wants to show his hand has a firm grip on the rattling lid of 
council spending. But the commitment to raising councils' borrowing caps by 
£300m at least gives local authorities some wiggle room when it comes to new 
development.

Like much in coalition politics, the decision to raise the cap in this week's 
autumn statement is part of a double deal. The first deal is between the 
coalition partners. The Liberal Democrats, whose rank and file have long been 
supportive of a total removal of the borrowing cap, had to accept an increase 
in the discounts available to right-to-buy purchasers in return.

Secondly, though there is little formal detail so far, it is expected that the 
ability to borrow more will have to be brokered through local enterprise 
partnerships or the Greater London Authority. Councils may also have to meet 
tough criteria to achieve the additional borrowing capacity: demonstrating 
acute housing need, for example, or committing to estate improvement and 
development targets.

Speaking to Inside Housing 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/osborne-to-free-councils-to-build/6529808.article>
, a senior Liberal Democrat described the deal as a "trade off", which seems a 
fair summation. But how much difference will this compromise actually make?

In campaigning for the cap to be lifted the Local Government Association 
estimated that the measure would mean 60,000 additional new homes could be 
built over the next five years. The raised cap still has a lower limit than the 
LGA planned for in these calculations, so let's take an optimistic punt and 
state that this policy will lead to 40,000 extra new homes in the next five 
years.

Of course it's true that any mechanism that can help us build more social and 
affordable housing will be welcomed. But in its campaigning, the LGA also 
spelled out the desperate situation that councils find themselves in: the nine 
local authorities that, until today, were unable to take on any loans at all 
have a combined 40,000 households on the housing waiting list.

Compare this number of homes to the desperate figures of housing need – both 
sides of the House of Commons have now accepted that we need to build around 
200,000 homes every year to barely keep pace with demand – and this week's 
announcement is a drop in the ocean.

In the meantime the right-to-buy has become a more attractive proposition with 
healthier discounts meaning the policy is now open to a wider range of low- and 
middle-income households. We know that, despite government promises, onlyone 
home is being built for every seven sold 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/house-gap-getting-bigger-only-2874686> 
under the right-to-buy. How quickly could this apparent concession to the need 
for new social housing be wiped out by the "trade-off" that ushered it into 
Osborne's autumn oration?

We also heard more about the onward march of the government's Help to Buy 
scheme, with two new lenders – Virgin and Aldermore, so called "challengers" in 
the banking sector – announced as partners this week. The policy is scorned by 
financial experts who point to its potential for inflating the housing bubble 
and offering false hope to new homeowners who may face extreme personal 
difficulties if (when) interest rates rise fast. It was a bizarre announcement 
from a chancellor who opened his speech stating that his government would "spot 
the debt bubbles before they threaten financial stability". We may need an even 
faster rate of housebuilding to offset the market distortion encouraged by Help 
to Buy.

Ahead of the autumn statement, local government information unit chief 
executive Jonathan Carr-West, described the situation for councils during 
austerity as"a case of no good deed going unpunished" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/local-government-network/2013/dec/04/george-osborne-autumn-statement-chancellor-economic-plans>
. He must surely feel the same now over councils' role in tackling the housing 
crisis.

• Want to have your say? Email housingnetwork@theguardian.com

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the housing 
network <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> for more news, 
analysis and comment direct to you.
 