
Two men came to the Commons chamber on Thursday to have a fight that neither 
of them really wanted to have. They were meant to be arguing about the economic 
recovery – the one that's finally turned up in Britain a few years later and 
rather shabbier than originally billed. ExceptGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> didn't want to trumpet an 
upturn, for fear of looking boastful and out of touch. And Ed Balls certainly 
wasn't going to talk up a rebound, lest that be taken as admission that his 
previous warnings about suicidal austerity were wrong.

Meanwhile, any voter who bothered to check in on proceedings in Westminster – 
rather than bracing for impending gales and rail hell – would have been 
forgiven for inquiring whether this recovery planned to spread anywhere outside 
a handful of estate agents in central London.

All this made the debates over the autumn statement both frustrating and 
fascinating. The conventional thing to say about mid-term budgetary statements, 
or "fiscal events" as wonks call them (yes, really) is that they chalk out the 
parties' battle lines for the next election.

But what politicians served up yesterdaywas a fake debate about a false 
recovery. One in which the typical family is still earning less than before the 
crash – and will continue to do so until 2018. In which London and the 
south-east have sped out of a slump, even while much of the rest of the country 
still feels like it's in recession.

A Westminster discussion worth hearing would have acknowledged that Britain is 
recovering – then asked why that recovery is serving so few people, and what 
that tells us about Britain's economy. Instead frontbenchers served up the 
usual stagefight, the kind of contrived display that Nigel Farage doubtless 
hopes we get a lot more of before next May's European elections, as they're so 
effective at driving voters away from the main parties.

In a day without any big winners, the shadow chancellor was the clearest 
loser. Standing up straight after the chancellor had just delivered his first 
upgrades to growth since moving into Number 11, Balls delivered the same attack 
lines he has been using since 2010. "Flatlining", "slowest recovery for over 
100 years", "tax cut for millionaires": all were present and technically 
correct, just rather shopworn after three years of constant service. Responding 
to a budget statement is always tough for a shadow chancellor, who sees the 
numbers and policies at pretty much the same time as the rest of the country. 
And as the coalition MPs rose in one collective jeer, and Balls' face went as 
puce as a Saturday footballer, one was reminded of just why, of all metaphors 
for the Commons, "bearpit" is such a durable cliche.

But Balls has always had the dangerous tendency for a politician of wanting to 
win an argument, even if it means losing an election. As the man who rightly 
warned of the dangers of cutting public spending too fast, too soon in his 
Bloomberg speech of August 2010, he still wants to prove his point; even though 
events have moved on, and it's well past time for the argument to do so, too. 
However clapped out, economies do not stall forever – especially given huge 
injections of cheap mortgage and Bank of England cash. The danger here forLabour
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> is that, just as they let 
Cameron and Osborne define the crisis (as being all Gordon Brown's fault), so 
they will also allow No 10 to frame the rebound.

Osborne certainly had a good stab at that task on Thursday. This was a 
"responsible recovery", he began. The Tories have overdone economics optimism 
before, such as when Cameron declared the UK "out of the danger zone". But 
there was a purpose to Osborne's caution. He wanted to ram home the message 
that when it came to cutting the deficit we were not "off the hook". For all 
the giveaways – free school meals, further relief for the British film industry 
(or, as it should really be known, the Richard Curtis tax break), there were 
takeaways, with even more public spending cuts. And he ended with words crying 
out for a poster: "Britain's moving again … let's keep going."

As slogans go, this one feels quite Buy One Get One Free. It warns that the 
patient's recovery would be endangered by the other side. But it also enables 
the chancellor to keep making the case for austerity even as the urgent 
economic danger recedes. Three years ago, the coalition's basic rationale for 
cuts was that without them Britain would go the way of Greece. But even with 
the euro crisis past its worst Osborne laid out plans to extend austerity all 
the way to 2019. By then, public spending as a proportion of the economy will 
be back to the levels of early 2000s. These are remarkable cuts, and they are 
being made because the Conservative believe in them.

Cameron made the ideological argument for a "leaner, more efficient state" at 
the Lord Mayor's banquet last month; Osborne wants to give that policy a 
pragmatic sheen. His ruse for doing so is the plan to enshrine the principle in 
law, to be voted on next autumn. This is an obvious trap for Labour – either 
assent to shrink-the-stateism, or be branded profligates – but it should also 
be a conundrum for the LibDems: do they really want to give Tory politicking 
coalition cover? But the great open goal left by Osborne that Labour really 
should be aiming at is just how lopsided this recovery looks.

As the Office for Budget <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> 
Responsibility pointed out, our economy is growing sooner than expected, but 
not by more than forecast – there may well be a corresponding slowdown. The 
upturn is driven by households dipping into their savings, cheap credit, and 
what has all the makings of a propery bubble. According to the original 
forecasts, Britain should have seen business investment rise 35% by now; 
instead it's gone up only 1%. Go back to the initial promises made by the 
chancellor and the "responsible recovery" still looks like a dismal failure.

As shown by his autumn gamble on energy prices, Ed Miliband can think about a 
broader economic agenda than just tax and spend – and Labour has fresh things 
to say on when and how the state should intervene in markets. And when they say 
them, they work: a good chunk of Osborne's performance was spent trying to 
shoot Labour foxes.

It's just a shame there's not more. Over the past couple of years, I have been 
in meetings with party frontbenchers as they toyed with the idea of setting 
some benchmarks on what a real recovery would look like: rising wages, 
businesses investing more, banks lending to the real economy and so on. 
Everyone agreed it was a good idea, but it never got off the starting blocks. 
Yet now the recovery is here and Labour is still stuck on what to say about it.
 