
Three Indian judges today ruled that the disputed religious site in Ayodhya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya>, claimed by both Muslims and 
Hindus, should be shared by both communities.

In one of the longest awaited and most controversial judgments in India's 
history, the Lucknow bench of the Allahabad high court decided against the 
claim by the Muslim community that they should be allowed to rebuild a 16th 
century mosque demolished by a mob of Hindu extremists in 1992.

The site of the mosque would be split between two Hindu groups and one Muslim 
group, the judges said.

The 2,000-page ruling ordered that status quo at the religious compound in 
Ayodhya at the centre of the dispute — currently under state control — would be 
maintained for three months.

Lawyers representing the Muslim claimants said they were "partly disappointed" 
and that they would appeal the decision at the supreme court.

Chaotic scenes accompanied the release of the judgment after lawyers for Hindu 
groups left the court before it was published to hold an impromptu press 
conference claiming victory.

The destruction of the mosque — known as the Babri Masjid — 18 years ago 
sparked some of India's worst religious rioting since independence, causing 
2,000 deaths. The reaction to today's decision is being seen as a crucial test 
of India's commitment to secularism and rule of law.

There are widespread fears that – despite repeated appeals for calm by 
politicians from all sides and representatives of all faith communities 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/30/ayodhya-verdict-india-security-braced>
 – the ruling will spark violence.

The government's cabinet committee on security was meeting today in New Delhi 
to review the situation in the country following the court verdict.

Many schools and offices remained shut today as a huge security operation 
involving hundreds of thousands of troops and paramilitaries across the country 
got underway. Police arrested more than 10,000 people to prevent them from 
inciting violence, while another 100,000 had to sign affidavits saying they 
would not cause trouble after the verdict, officials said.

Helicopters hovered over holy sites in the state as people entering temples 
were checked with metal detectors. The government also extended its ban on bulk 
texting to stop people from sending mass messages that could incite violence.

More than 40,000 police fanned out across the city of Mumbai, which erupted in 
anti-Muslim riots and retaliatory bombings after the mosque's demolition in 
1992, but has played host to scattered peace marches in recent days.

In Hyderabad, capital of the southern Andhra Pradesh state, authorities 
deployed more than 20,000 additional police. Some 460 arrests to stop possible 
violence were made, said police chief Abdul K Khan.

Orders were posted banning the gathering of more than five people in the city, 
and liquor shops were closed and religious processions and meetings barred, 
said Khan.

In the southeastern state of Pondicherry, police issued a one-week ban on 
rallies, public gatherings and the use of firecrackers.

With only three days before the Commonwealth Games opening in Delhi, today's 
decision poses another security threat to the thousands of athletes and 
dignitaries already inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>. More, 
including Prince Charles, are due to arrive before the opening ceremony this 
weekend. Ayodha is around 350 miles east of the capital.

The legal dispute over the site of the Babri Masjid has been running for 60 
years. Representatives of the Hindu community in India have argued that they 
should be allowed to build a huge temple to the god Ram where the mosque once 
stood.

Sonia Gandhi, the president of the centre-left Congress party, which current 
heads a coalition government, asked Indians to accept the judgment.

"I request you keep faith in the Indian judiciary and maintain peace, mutual 
respect and brotherhood at any cost. Emotional unity is the greatest strength 
of India," Gandhi said.

"There should be no attempt whatsoever made by any section of the people to 
provoke any other section or to indulge in any expression of emotion that would 
hurt the feelings of other people," the prime minister, Manmohan Singh, said in 
an advertisement published in Indian newspapers.

Hindus first protested that the Ayodhya mosque, built in 1528 by the Mughal 
emperor Babur, had been erected at the birthplace of Rama more than 150 years 
ago. The conflict was aggravated in 1949 when idols of Rama appeared in the 
mosque. Hindu extremist groups and the BJP then exploited the issue to build 
mass popular support in the 1980s.

The passions roused by the issue have threatened India's multi-ethnic, secular 
democracy, many say. Some analysts, however, argue that India has changed 
enormously since the early 1990s, with economic aspirations more dominant than 
ever before and religious identities less strong.

"The whole mood has changed," said Mahesh Rangarajan, a political analyst at 
Delhi University.

The Indian home minister, P Chidambaram, said India had moved on. "Especially 
people who were born after 1992 … They have a very different world view," he 
said.
 