 India's ruling Hindu nationalist party faced embarrassment last night as a 
small but determined band of Hindu extremists said it would go ahead with a 
symbolic ceremony at a disputed site in Ayodhya, a move which could plunge 
India into further bloody communal rioting.
The World Hindu Council or Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) said it would defy 
India's supreme court and carry out a puja (prayer ceremony) close to the 
disputed area where Hindu zealots destroyed a mosque in 1992.

"If I can't offer prayers, I am ready to kill myself," Hindu leader Mahant 
Paramhans said last night. "I'm willing to be shot or beaten to death."

Thousands of Hindu activists were last night crossing fields in an attempt to 
dodge police barricades erected to stop them reachingAyodhya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya>.

Riot police armed with rubber bullets and tear gas sealed off all approaches 
to the disputed plot. The VHP has demanded control of the 67-acre area and set 
a deadline of today to begin building a new temple.

Hindu activists revere Ayodhya as the birthplace of Lord Ram - one of 
Hinduism's most important gods - and claim that the Babri Masjid mosque, 
demolished 10 years ago, was built on the ruins of an earlier 11th century 
Hindu temple.

The dispute comes at a time of smouldering tension between India's Hindu and 
Muslim communities, after riots in Gujarat earlier this month in which more 
than 1,000 people died. The violence was the worst inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> since 1992, when 3,000 people, mostly 
Muslims, were killed after the mosque at Ayodhya was destroyed.

The unresolved standoff threatens India's precarious coalition government. The 
Hindu nationalist prime minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, supports the 
construction of a temple at Ayodhya, but wants the courts to settle the issue 
first. He has come under fire from his government's secular partners, who 
oppose his party's religious agenda, and from his own Hindu revivalist allies, 
who accuse him of treachery.

"Our prime minister is not a Hindu any more. He has become a Muslim," one VHP 
activist, Naryan Das, said.

The government had "insulted and humiliated" Hindu worshippers and had behaved 
in a "Hitler-like" manner towards its own supporters, Mr Paramhans, president 
of the pro-temple Ram Birthplace Trust, added yesterday.

Earlier this week, Mr Vajpayee's Bharitya Janata party (BJP) argued that Hindu 
activists should be allowed to conduct a ceremony at the site, but the supreme 
court disagreed. The government now wants to solve the dispute by allowing the 
VHP to build a temple on ground close to the ruined mosque.

But India's Muslim leaders fear that once construction work starts, the VHP 
will merely shift the Hindu temple's pillars to where the mosque once stood.

"I can't express how much pain I felt when the mosque was destroyed. I used to 
go there for prayers as a young man. It was always a serene and calm place," 
said Mohammed Hashim Ansari, a retired tailor, 81.

"The mosque is now under the control of terrorists and its terrorist regime in 
India."
 