
The dispute over the 16th-century Babri mosque, in Ayodhya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya>, goes back decades. In December 
1992, Hindu militants razed the mosque, which is on a disputed religious site 
in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh, triggering clashes with Muslims that left 
2,000 people dead and plunged the country into political crisis.

In a Guardian article dated 3 December, Derek Brown describes mounting 
political tension as Hindu holy men decide whether to press ahead with 
construction of a temple on the site of the mosque, which they believe to be 
also the birthplace of the deity Lord Ram. The Indian government is bracing 
itself for confrontation with Hindu zealots, Brown writes, as it deploys 
paramilitary forces to protect the 460-year-old Babri Masjid mosque of the 
Moghul emperor, Babar. "What began as an arcane religious squabble has in 
recent years become the most intractable dispute inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>," he says.
 The Guardian, December 3 1992. Click image to read the archive article 
Three days later, the state government falls as "a baying mob of Hindu bigots" 
tears down the mosque, where they want to build a temple. "They used primitive 
tools and their bare hands to tear the mosque to pieces," writes Brown. "First 
the three domes went, then the spartan interior and the perimeter walls. The 
Hindu idols, installed in the late 1940s at the start of the arcane, 
obscurantist dispute, also disappeared ... In a few frenzied hours, the mob 
brought down the government of India's most populous state, and provoked deep 
communal tension throughout the country."
 The Guardian, December 7 1992. Click image to read the archive article 
On 8 December, Brown describes how riots have erupted the length and breadth 
of "a huge and angry country". Even Bombay, the great western metropolis 
considered the most modern of Indian cities, is caught up in the violence, 
which leaves more than 200 people dead.
 The Guardian, December 8 1992. Click image to read the archive article 
Elsewhere in that day's paper, Brown analyses the events leading up the 
confrontation. To the despair of educated Indians "ingrained with a notion of 
their country as steeped in the non-violence of Gandhi", he says, Ayodhya had 
been an explosion waiting to happen after Rajiv Gandhi, the then prime 
minister, ordered that a makeshift temple built on the site just after 
independence in 1947 should be reopened, as a sop to Hindu extremists. The 
temple went on to be become a rightwing and nationalist cause for the 
fast-growing Bharatiya Janata party, Brown writes.
 The Guardian, December 8 1992. Click image to read the archive article  