
Some savers, disillusioned with low rates, will be thinking about giving 
peer-to-peer lending a go after the chancellor announced tax changes which 
could boost the returns.

Peer-to-peer websites, which cut out the banks by putting people with money to 
lend in touch with those wanting to borrow, have been one of the financial 
success stories of the past few years as savers have looked to beat paltry 
interest rates on offer from banks and building societies.

It is more risky than putting your cash into a traditional savings account 
because peer-to-peer isn’t covered by the official Financial Services 
Compensation Scheme, though most of the websites have alternative safeguards.

But many people have been prepared to live with that because of the higher 
returns – up to 15%.

And this week the industry received a major boost when George Osborne unveiled 
a package of measures designed to help it grow. Crucially, the chancellor 
announced a new bad debt relief which will allow individual investors to offset 
any losses.

For the uninitiated, peer-to-peer firms match borrowers (individuals or 
companies) with individual investors or lenders. Best-known are Zopa and 
RateSetter, which, between them, account for getting on for half of the market, 
though they work in slightly different ways.

Lenders who sign up to RateSetter can choose the best interest rate available 
based on supply and demand. However, most choose the market rate because it is 
simple and quick; it is currently 2.6% for a month, 3.5% for a year, 3.8% for 
three years and 5.9% for five.

Zopa’s rates are 4% for up to three years and 5.1% for five years.

However, unlike RateSetter, Zopa splits a lender’s money into chunks to lend 
to different borrowers, so lowering the risk. “Both take a fee from their 
borrowers and use some of this to build a safety net so that if borrowers are 
late paying, or don’t repay, this can be absorbed by the safety net,” says 
Andrew Hagger at financial website MoneyComms. To date, no lender has lost a 
penny of their capital on either.

The rates are undeniably good when compared to those offered by easy-access 
savings accounts and cash Isas. However, while the money to be made on 
RateSetter and Zopa dwarfs normal savings accounts, you can get an even better 
return if you are willing to lend to businesses.

The market leaders in this area are Funding Circle and ThinCats. Funding 
Circle has a minimum investment of £20 and its headline rate on Thursday was 
7.4%. This is an estimate of the annual return after fees and bad debts that 
investors could earn from lending money to businesses seeking loans – the 
figure is updated daily.

You can bump this up to a double-digit return by lending to more risky 
businesses. Funding Circle awards them a risk rating of A, B, C or C-. If you 
are happy lending your money to the highest-risk (C-) you could, at the time of 
writing, get a gross rate of 13.2% before fees and bad debts.

For investors who want to spread the risk, Funding Circle operates the 100 
Club, where an investment is split between 100 different borrowers. “By 
diversifying, even if a couple of borrowers get into difficulties, it shouldn’t 
have a major impact on net return,” says Hagger.

Rival ThinCats boasts a bigger average return of 9%. You have to be a member 
to view live auctions, and the minimum lending amount is £1,000. Live auctions, 
at the time of writing, included target rates of between 7% and 12%.

Both Funding Circle and ThinCats are upfront about the risks.

On Wednesday, Osborne said the new bad debt relief measure would take effect 
in April 2016, though individuals will be able to make a claim for relief via 
the self-assessment system from April 2015.

Zopa boss Giles Andrews says: “Thousands of consumers will keep more of their 
returns as they will now be able to offset any losses against their 
peer-to-peer interest when calculating tax due on that interest.”

James Meekings, co-founder of Funding Circle, reckons the average investor 
“could earn up to 25% more overnight per year as a result of this change”.

“This could potentially be significantly higher, depending on an individual’s 
investment strategy. It will have a hugely positive impact on the industry,” he 
said.

Zopa, RateSetter, Funding Circle and ThinCats are the “big four”, but there 
are new platforms popping up, each with a slightly different business model.

It is probably best to stick to lenders who are members of the Peer-to-Peer 
Finance Association <http://p2pfa.info/>.

This means they adhere to certain rules. Membership currently comprises Zopa, 
RateSetter, Funding Circle, ThinCats, LendInvest, Madiston LendLoanInvest, 
MarketInvoice, Lending Works and Landbay. Some of these platforms specialise in 
certain industries.
 