
BAE Systems <https://www.theguardian.com/business/baesystems> is preparing to 
close its Portsmouth shipyard in an overhaul of its naval manufacturing 
operations that will put more than 1,000 jobs at risk on England's south coast 
and in Scotland.

The government and Britain's largest defence contractor are preparing to 
announce a restructuring of BAE's yards in Portsmouth as well as at Scotstoun 
and Govan in Glasgow, with statements due to be made later this week. .

It is understood that there will be a commitment to the future of shipbuilding 
on the river Clyde – a politically sensitive issue with the 2014Scottish 
independence <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> 
referendum looming – but there will still be job losses at the two Scottish 
sites, which employ 3,200 people.

However, ship construction is widely expected to cease at Portsmouth naval 
base, where 1,200 employees have worked on building hull sections for the HMS 
Queen Elizabeth and HMS Prince of Wales aircraft carriers.

The cuts come after BAE Systems has experienced the biggest peak in UK 
shipbuilding since the second world war, led by the £5.4bn aircraft carrier 
programme that that saw BAE share its allocation of the work across Portsmouth, 
Govan and Scotstoun. The next BAE project for the Royal Navy, the Type 26 
combat ship, is not big enough to sustain all three sites.

Discussions about the restructuring have been taking place for more than a 
year between theMinistry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> (MoD), BAE Systems and 
trade unions.

BAE declined to be drawn on the potential job losses. "We continue to work 
closely with the MoD to explore all possible options to determine how best to 
sustain the capability to deliver complex warships in the UK in the future. 
This work is ongoing and we are committed to keeping our employees and trade 
unions informed as it progresses," the company said.

Hugh Scullion, general secretary of the Confederation of Shipbuilding and 
Engineering Unions, said: "We have secured talks with senior BAE systems 
executives early next week to examine the business case of the forthcoming 
announcement. The shipbuilding workforce throughout the UK are working flat out 
to deliver the aircraft carriers for the defence of the UK and they need to 
know what lies in store for them, their families and their communities."

The first of the carriers, Queen Elizabeth, is due to begin sea trials towards 
the end of the decade. A decision will not be taken until 2015 about whether 
the second carrier, Prince of Wales, will ever be operational; it could be sold 
or mothballed. The carriers were built by a consortium that included BAE.

The MoD said how BAE "rationalise their business" is a matter for the company. 
"Negotiations between the MoD and the Aircraft Carrier Alliance regarding the 
rebaselining of the Queen Elizabeth carrier programme are at an advanced 
stage," it said. "No final decisions [on the programme] have been taken."

If shipbuilding is wound down at Portsmouth, the MoD will have to bear costs 
that could run into hundreds of millions of pounds under a 2009 agreement 
guaranteeing BAE a minimum of £230m a year in shipbuilding and support work 
over 15 years. The agreement can be cancelled, but the MoD would be liable for 
closure costs and compensation to BAE for its lost investment.

An additional 2,900 BAE staff are employed in the Portsmouth area on tasks 
that include maintaining, servicing and upgrading the Royal Navy ships at the 
naval base. Their jobs are not expected to be affected by the announcement.

The future of the last major shipbuidling sites on the Clyde, a former 
powerhouse of the global shipping industry, is set to become a talking point of 
next year's referendum, with any threatened closure of the Scotstoun or Govan 
sites expected to benefit the independence campaign.

Scotland's finance secretary, John Swinney, said: "We have been in dialogue 
for some time with BAE Systems on the issues surrounding the future of the 
Clyde shipyards. We are awaiting the outcome of BAE's discussions with the MoD 
and are very alert to the situation concerning both yards. We are seeking 
urgent clarity on the future for both Govan and Scotstoun."
 