
British taxpayers are paying millions to fund a police watchdog in Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> that has failed to investigate 
torture claims in the case of a man who has been sentenced to death.

The ombudsman receives the funds as part of a £2.1m package to improve the 
criminal justice system in the Gulf state, which is a key ally of the UK. 
Tobias Ellwood, the junior Foreign Office minister, told MPs last month that 
“we encourage all those with concerns [in Bahrain] about their treatment in 
detention to report these directly to the ombudsman”.


But despite a formal complaint from the family of Mohammed Ramadan, a 
32-year-old airport guard, the ombudsman has failed to investigate.

Ramadan’s wife, Zaynab Ebrahim, has called on UK ministers to use their 
influence to halt his execution and demand a retrial. She said: “His hands were 
cuffed from behind and they beat him severely with the use of wires and punches 
and kicking in a random and sustained manner to coerce his confession.

“[The jailers] also detained him in a very cold room and they refused to let 
him sit, and whenever he tried to sit he was beaten and humiliated. When he 
told them he cannot stand for long due to a back problem, they increased the 
pressure on him [to stand].”

Ebrahim said the prosecution was “revenge against him for his peaceful 
political and social activities”.

Ramadan says he has been kept in solitary confinement and beaten around the 
genitals, where he previously had surgery. The former security guard was 
arrested – allegedly without a warrant – in February 2014. He was later 
convicted of taking part in a bombing that killed a policeman.

Ramadan did not confess under torture, but the court accepted the confession 
of another defendant, Husain Moosa, who was also sentenced to death. It is 
claimed that he was beaten until he admitted to the involvement of others. 
Ramadan’s death sentence was upheld last November by Bahrain’s top appeals 
court.

The claims of torture appear to have been ignored by the Bahraini authorities.

Last month Human Rights Watch (HRW) said credible allegations of torture and 
mistreatment of detainees in Bahrain undermined claims that its criminal 
justice system was improving. HRW said the new institutions were just “sham 
reforms” and questioned how the Bahraini government and the UK could claim they 
were “effectively protecting detainees from abuse during interrogation”.

Labour’s justice spokesman, Andy Slaughter, whose campaigns forced the 
government into a U-turn over the UK funding of Saudi prison reforms, said: 
“Once again we see the British government giving aid and comfort to a regime 
with an appalling human rights record. The Bahraini authorities stand accused 
of abuse of legal process, including forced confessions and use of torture in 
the case of Mohammed Ramadan and many others.” Bahrain is granting the UK a 
naval base – its first east of the Suez canal since 1971.

Last week the European parliament passed a resolution calling on the Bahraini 
ruler, Sheikh Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, to grant a royal pardon for Ramadan.

Bahraini officials said they had no record of a complaint to the ombudsman and 
that any claims “of ill-treatment and torture to extract a confession … [are] 
now being falsely claimed by the defendant, his family and legal 
representative”.

Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei, director of advocacy at the Bahrain Institute for Rights 
and Democracy <http://birdbh.org/about/>, which works with victims of human 
rights abuses, said the Gulf state had been caught out using “flawed 
institutions, paid for by the British taxpayer, to try to block a European 
parliament resolution condemning torture and which calls for the death sentence 
of a torture victim to be commuted. Britain has praised the ombudsman often in 
the past, and it will be a test of its human rights values if it continues to 
do so following the ombudsman’s defence of Mohammed Ramadan’s unjust sentence.”


Bahrain has been unwavering in its denial of Ramadan’s allegations. In August 
2014, when five UN human rights experts raised the issue of Ramadan’s alleged 
ill-treatment, they were told by Bahrain that the claims contained “not a shred 
of truth”. Bahrain has so far refused to allow the UN special rapporteur on 
torture to visit the country.

Bahrain torture report undermines UK's reform claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/23/human-rights-watch-report-says-bahrain-is-torturing-detainees>
Since the Bahraini government’s crackdown on Arab spring protests in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/22/bahraini-activists-jailed-life>, 
rights groups have expressed concern over security services in the country 
using violence and torture. There is also a sectarian divide with the 
al-Khalifa Sunni royal family ruling a majority Shia country.

A spokesman for the UK Foreign Office said: “The UK opposes the death penalty 
in all circumstances. We are concerned by any death sentences and will continue 
to express our opposition publicly and privately. Our support to Bahrain’s 
reform programme is the most constructive way to achieve change.”

An adviser to the Bahraini government, who did not want to be named, confirmed 
the ombudsman’s office had investigated complaints related to the case on at 
least two occasions but said “records available indicate that the complaints 
were unrelated to any accusations of torture or abuse of any nature”.

She added: “The special investigation unit set up to investigate allegations 
of torture or any misconduct committed by the security forces has to date 
received no formal complaints related to this particular case”.

Nasser Al Qaseer, a Shia Bahraini MP, said of the European parliament 
resolution: “This is an interference in an independent judicial body’s decision 
and a blatant meddling in the domestic affairs of a sovereign and independent 
country.”
 