
Tommy Bowe is not accustomed to this losing business. Ireland's grand-slam 
right wing came down to earth with a bit of a bump as he went back to work with 
his Welsh region and joined the long line running without reward into a solid 
wall ofGloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> defenders.

If there was one tiny shred of comfort for one of the star turns of the Six 
Nations it was that he came through without damage, which was more than could 
be said for an almost equally long list of candidates for the Lions tour. Mike 
Tindall, Gavin Henson, James Simpson-Daniel and Ian Gough all went off injured. 
Iain Balshaw, who may no longer be in the frame for this forthcoming summer 
tour, but who is a former Lion, managed to injure himself in the act of scoring 
the game's only try.

It came after Mike Phillips, strangely placed on the bench behind the New 
Zealander Jamie Nutbrown, came on, picked up the scraps after yet another 
scintillating run by Shane Williams – a dance that, like them all, came to 
nothing – paused and threw a pass to Balshaw. Off went the wing, down the 
length of the field at full pace and then straight off down the tunnel with a 
limp after ­touching down.

The exit by the scorer apart, no more than Gloucester deserved, an ­attacking 
reward at the end of an outstanding defensive operation. Williams and Bowe had 
more ball in this semi-final than either had seen in seven weeks of 
­international rugby, but however many yards Williams made, Gloucester poured 
back to stop everything. Balshaw's try came when the game was already in the 
bag. Ryan Lamb, out of favour of late and in talks, rumour has it, with other 
clubs scored all the other points.

He kicked a penalty right at the start of the first half to give his side a 
slender lead that they defended resolutely until the interval. He then kicked a 
second penalty just after play had resumed, increasing the margin and 
increasing the pressure on theOspreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> to score a try. Even before this 
obligation, the Welsh team had kicked a penalty from hand towards the corner.

Now they opted to scrummage, rather then go for three points. Perhaps they 
were persuaded to go for the full seven points because James Hook had missed 
with two penalties in the first half. It meant in the end that they scored not 
a single point. Between the pair of ­penalties and the Balshaw try came the 
all-important play. Lamb banged the ball up into the air and Olly ­Morgan, a 
­prominent part of the defensive ­operation from start to finish, pursued the 
kick, leapt high and reclaimed it. From the ruck the full-back went across 
field before Lamb landed a precise drop goal.

Now the Ospreys had to score twice. They had plentiful supply of ball on which 
to build momentum. They had line-breakers in many positions, with James Hook 
nearly as successful as Williams at evading tacklers. But every time they 
compiled their forward yards the operation came to an abrupt halt with a 
forward pass here, a knock-on there. Marty Holah was clear at one stage with 
only five yards to go, but Olly Barkley ran back and tackled him. Hook then 
failed to release after the next tackle and yet another chance had gone.

The Gloucester scrum was struggling, their line-out was all a bit scrambled 
and they did nothing but hoof the ball high when they did secure it. But giving 
possession away simply made them more determined to tackle. The back row, with 
Gareth Delve high on the tackle-count, was outstanding – as might be expected. 
Akapusi Qera came on and continued the good work, singled out by Gloucester's 
coach, Dean Ryan for the four hits he made in just a few minutes.

But there were others, all the way across the field, in a team that seems to 
have discovered solidarity at just the right time, as the season draws towards 
its finals. The Ospreys coach, Sean Holley, refused to blame their selection 
process for the defeat, preferring to count the errors his team had made. They 
too have to look ahead to other competitions and extract something other than 
gloom from defeat. But this was a zero game for a side packed with 
international players who last week lost to Ireland and finished only fourth in 
the Six Nations.

There was a vibrancy to the Ospreys game and, by extension, the Wales game not 
so long ago. That energy has been sorely sapped in the past eight days. Losing 
pushes the recovery process into the depths of the following week. ­Winning 
makes bruises vanish, as Bowe will probably not be telling his Welsh team-mates.
 