
So the proprietor of the Huffington Post has decided to ban anonymous 
commenting from the site, starting in mid-September.Speaking to reporters 
<http://gigaom.com/2013/08/21/huffington-post-to-end-anonymous-comments/> after 
a conference in Boston, Arianna Huffington said: "Trolls are just getting more 
and more aggressive and uglier and I just came from London where there are rape 
and death threats. I feel that freedom of expression is given to people who 
stand up for what they say and [are] not hiding behind anonymity. We need to 
evolve a platform to meet the needs of the grown-up internet."

Quite so. I can see heads nodding in agreement. After all, much anonymous 
online commenting seems to be stupid, nasty, vicious and ignorant. And that's 
just the stuff that isn't tangential to the topic of the article being 
commented on. If people have to take responsibility for what they say in 
public, then they will surely behave better.

That seems like common sense. Whether it is supported by evidence is, however, 
uncertain because at the moment there isn't much research, and what there is 
seems to be mostly anecdotal. The most striking study I've come across is the
experiment conducted by the (South) Korea Communications Commission 
<http://english.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2011/12/30/2011123001526.html> 
from July 2007. From that month onwards, anyone wanting to comment on any of 
the 146 Korean websites with more than 100,000 members was required by law to 
submit resident registration or credit card details.

The hypothesis behind the requirement was that people would behave better 
online if they were easily identifiable. But it didn't turn out that way. At 
any rate, the commission announced recently that it was withdrawing the 
registration requirement because it had been ineffective in preventing people 
from posting abusive messages or spreading false rumours. When the regulation 
was introduced in 2007, malicious comments accounted for 13.9% of all messages 
posted on internet threads. But a year later, bad behaviour had reduced by less 
than 1%.

Without knowing the details of the Korean experiment, the metrics used to 
measure bad behaviour, etc, it's difficult to know how seriously to take this 
result. Personally, I'm sceptical, if only because much of the pathological 
behaviour that we've observed online – from violent threats, grotesque abuse, 
"lynch" mobs and bullying to gossip, slander and character assassination – 
corresponds pretty closely to what psychologists and historians have learned 
over the centuries about human behaviour offline. Put simply: if people believe 
that they will not be held accountable for their behaviour, then they tend to 
behave badly.

This is no consolation to those who, like Huffington, want to run websites 
that seek to encourage user engagement without having to spend large sums of 
money paying moderators to keep order and enforce civility. But obliging 
commenters to use their real names will have costs as well as benefits. Chief 
among the former will be a significant reduction in the volume of commenting, 
at least in the short term, which in turn will adversely affect the site's 
advertising revenues. The hit might be worth taking, however, if in the longer 
term the quality of the discussion on the site visibly improves.

For site owners who fear that real-name commenting represents a risk too far, 
there is a halfway house: pseudonymity‚ ie a system in which commenters are 
allowed to choose their own user names, but have to associate them with a valid 
email address (which in the last analysis could be used as an identifier). Last 
year,Disqus <http://www.disqus.com/>, a company that provides an online 
discussion and commenting service for websites, published some usefulresearch 
on the behaviour of different types of site user 
<http://disqus.com/research/pseudonyms/>.

The purpose of the research was to address the criticism that there is no 
substantive difference between pseudonymous and anonymous commenters. Disqus 
begged to differ, arguing that whereas real names are for authentication 
(establishing who you are), pseudonyms are for expression: they imply "a choice 
of identity" and therefore have a communicative function. The company looked 
through its database of 60 million users and 500m comments to see how 
commenting practice differed between users who were completely anonymous, those 
who used pseudonyms and those who had registered via Facebook (and therefore 
were obliged to use their real names).

The metrics used in the Disqus study are crude but the results are 
nevertheless intriguing. Pseudonymous users produced significantly more 
"quality" comments (assessed by numbers of times a comment was "liked" and 
replied to) than either anonymous or real-name users. And they weremuch more 
prolific commenters: 61% of the 500m comments came from pseudonymous users, 
compared with 35% from anonymous users and a mere 4% from the 
Facebook-registered crowd.

And the moral of the story? Think twice, Arianna Huffington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington>, before insisting on real 
names.
 