
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> is to impose a 
series of tests on large UK banks to establish whether they are able to 
withstand a dramatic slowdown in China, a contraction in the eurozone, the 
worst deflation since the 1930s or a fall in UK interest rates to zero.

The Co-operative bank – which failed last year’s tests – is no longer included 
in the annual assessments of the industry’s financial strength as it is too 
small, leaving six banks and the Nationwide building society to be tested.

The banks are Barclays, HSBC, Santander UK, Standard Chartered and the two 
bailed-out banks, Lloyds Banking Group andRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>.

Bank of England stress tests: what are the banks being tested on?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/16/bank-of-england-stress-tests> 
The Bank will give more weight to international scenarios, devised after talks 
with the International Monetary Fund, than it did in the 2014 tests, which had 
a domestic emphasis. Last year’s tests were designed to meet those imposed by 
the EuropeanBanking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Authority, 
which is not conducting tests this year.

The City is expecting this year’s tests to focus on the strength of HSBC and 
Standard Chartered <https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered>, 
although a scenario for the UK is included, under which inflation is negative 
for seven consecutive quarters – the largest fall in prices for 80 years – and 
the bank rate cut to zero from the 0.5% level at which it has been stuck since 
the banking crisis.

Banks are being asked to test their ability to withstand shocks over a 
five-year period to the end of 2019 and be expected to maintain a minimum 
amount of capital and meet a leverage ratio – a tougher measure of financial 
strength – while ensuring lending to the real economy grows 10% over the 
five-year period.
 . Photograph: Bank of England 
Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney>, governor of 
the Bank, said last year’s results showed the UK banking system was stronger 
than it had been before the 2008 crisis. “This year’s test will have a 
different focus and is equally important. By assessing the resilience of the UK 
banking system against a major shock, we will improve further our ability to 
identify vulnerabilities and we will ensure that banks have plans in place to 
address a wider range of problems,” Carney said.

The severity of the test’s imagined downturn in China – with growth falling to 
about 1.6% growth – is likened to the scale of the fall in house prices in the 
UK used last year, when house prices were assumed to collapse by 35%. Chinese 
economic growth is about 7%.
 . Photograph: Bank of England 
Under such scenarios, the eurozone GDP troughs at -2.1% in the first quarter 
of 2016, while the UK economy would contract by 2.3% in 2015 before recovering. 
Oil prices would fall to $38 a barrel and other commodity prices would also be 
weak. A tougher test is being imposed on the investment banking arms of banks 
to assess their ability to cope with a seizure in the financial markets and the 
event of their biggest clients – be they rival banks or major companies – 
defaulting.

The Bank said the Co-op had been left out because it had no plans to increase 
the size of its balance sheet, which has been scaled back from the height of 
its problems in 2013, when a £1.5bn capital shortfall was uncovered and hedge 
funds stepped in to bail it out. “It’s significantly smaller than the other 
banks included in the 2015 stress test. So the resilience of Co-operative Bank 
is unlikely, on its own, to have a material impact on the resiliences of the 
financial system,” the Bank said.

The test for world GDP is more severe than the risks estimated by the IMF, 
which said in October that there was a one in 20 chance of global growth below 
2.5% in 2015. The Bank is asking banks to factor in world GDP falling to 0.9% 
in 2015 – after contracting for a period of the year – and 0.7% in 2016. Even 
so, the contraction in economic activity across the world’s biggest economies 
is less than that experienced amid the recent global financial crisis although 
such cumulative falls have not taken place since the second world war.
 . Photograph: Bank of England 
There is no assumption in the tests that Greece will pull out of the eurozone. 
“As a forward-looking regulator our job is never complete,” said Carney. “Our 
focus is clear. To promote the good of the people of the United Kingdom, we are 
committed to ensuring that our major banks are resilient, that they can weather 
shocks without calling on taxpayer support, and that they can continue to lend 
even in adverse conditions.”

Threadneedle Street has pointed out that these estimates are not forecasts but 
scenarios intended to put banks under pressure.

The banks being tested account for 70% of the stock of lending to UK 
businesses and about 75% of the stock of UK mortgage lending.

Banks will need to have a capital ratio of 4.5% and meet a leverage ratio of 
3% to pass the test. The Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) could require 
banks to strengthen their capital position by raising new funds or selling off 
businesses.

But, even if banks meet the hurdle rates, the PRA could still demand action if 
it is concerned. It could impose new capital requirements across the sector.
 