
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> signalled that it 
would not impose draconian measures to cool the housing market unless house 
prices rise by more than 20% over the next three years.

Governor Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> 
announced the first limits on the mortgage market in 30 years – restricting the 
amount that homeowners can borrow relative to their income and tightening the 
affordability tests would-be homeowners face when applying for a mortgage – but 
he acknowledged there would be no immediate impact on fast-rising property 
values.

Presenting the Bank's half-yearly assessment of risks to the financial system, 
Carney said that UK households start from a "vulnerable position" with debt at 
140% of disposal income. "This is the limits of our tolerance and that's why 
there is a cap in place. We will evaluate [and] if we need to recalibrate, we 
will," he said.

The Bank calculates that its new measures will only start to have an effect if 
house prices rise more than 20% between now and the first quarter of 2017.

Lenders and house builders were relieved that Threadneedle Street had not 
taken more drastic steps. The mortgage industry had been braced for tougher 
action from the Bank after the chancellor used his Mansion House speech earlier 
this month to give Carney new powers to prevent a fourth bubble in the housing 
market since the early 1970s.

Carney said the Bank was aware of the risks of reckless lending but said a 
"graduated and proportionate" response was called for.

"These actions should not restrain current market housing activity … these 
actions will have minimal impact in the future if the housing market evolves in 
line with the Bank's central view," he said.

The governor said they would only bite "if there is sustained momentum in the 
housing market over the coming years and that's accompanied by further sharp 
increases in high loan to income lending".

While lenders agreed that the new measures would not immediately affect the 
market, the policy nevertheless breaks new ground as a result of regulatory 
changes introduced by the coalition government after the 2008 banking crisis.

Under the measures announced on Thursday, The Bank of England's financial 
policy committee – set up to monitor risks after the crash of 2008 – is 
restricting banks' and building societies' ability to lend out more than 15% of 
their mortgages to customers needing to borrowing four and half times their 
income.

It acknowledges the move will have no immediate impact as no lender is 
currently at that ceiling. The same limit will be imposed on mortgages covered 
by the government's help to buy scheme, designed to encourage lending.

The Bank is tightening the interest rate being imposed on new borrowers 
through a mortgage market review which tests customers' ability to repay their 
loans. This is similar to the current "stress" of a 7% interest rate imposed by 
most lenders.

Economists at Capital Economics said it was a "missed opportunity" to make 
homes more affordable.

House prices <https://www.theguardian.com/money/houseprices> in London have 
breached their 2007 peak and the Bank expects house price inflation to remain 
at similar levels for the next 12 months.

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the Treasury select committee, 
was supportive of the Bank's step by step approach but said the FPC was largely 
unknown to the public. "Further use of tools such as these could, in the long 
run, have a big effect on millions of people."

In its half-yearly financial stability report 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/fsr/2014/fsr35.aspx>, the 
FPC said: "This action is designed specifically as insurance against the risk 
that there is greater momentum in the housing market than currently anticipated 
and that, as a result, lenders face growing demand for loans at very high loan 
to values," the Bank said.

"The FPC does not believe that household indebtedness poses an imminent threat 
to stability. But it has agreed that it is prudent to insure against the risk 
of a marked loosening in underwriting standards and a further significant rise 
in the number of highly indebted households."

Share prices of Britain's leading housebuilders Persimmon and Barratt 
Developments were among the biggest risers in the FTSE 100, gaining almost 5% 
on relief that there was no immediate clampdown. The Bank underscored lack of 
supply, with 110,000 new homes built in 2013 – below the 180,000 average of 
2000 to 2007.

Lucian Cook, head of residential research at Savills UK, said: "The measures 
announced today are not nearly as draconian as they might have been had the FPC 
applied absolute loan to value or loan to income caps at an individual mortgage 
level."

Bailed out banks Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland have already 
taken steps to limit some lending to four times a customers' income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/21/lloyds-mortgage-cap-london-property-fears>
. Lloyd Cochrane, head of mortages at RBS said he expected no significant 
impact on its lending.

Carney rebuffed suggestions the Bank was not taking swift action to tackle 
potential risks, saying: "This is action. We're acting early. We can do it in a 
way that doesn't slow the economy."
 