
Bank lending to UK businesses will go up this year for the first time in four 
years as economic growth picks up, according to an influential forecasting 
group, in a boost to government attempts to kickstart a flatlining economy.

The prediction comes after the Treasury and Bank of England extended the £80bn 
Funding for Lending scheme in an attempt to boost support for small businesses, 
which are still struggling to borrow.

Lending is expected to grow by 3% to £440bn this year, and by 8.5% to £447bn 
in 2014, according to a report published on Monday by independent forecaster 
the Ernst & Young ITEM Club. The news is a further boost to George Osborne 
after the chancellor escaped the ignominy of a triple-dip recession last week 
with the publication of official figures that showed GDP growth of 0.3% in the 
first quarter of 2013.

The flow of money towards British business in the ITEM report would be a 
dramatic reversal of last year's crackdown on credit, which saw lending to 
corporates shrink 5%, hitting the lowest level since 2006.

"You might be forgiven for thinking we were still in the midst of the banking 
crisis," said Andy Baldwin, head of financial services in Europe at Ernst & 
Young. "But behind the scenes banking fundamentals have quietly been improving 
and banks are now in a better position to be able to provide funds to the wider 
economy." Nonetheless the optimism of the ITEM forecast is at variance with 
some of the Bank of England's own soundings,which show that small firms are 
still faced with a tough lending environment 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/agsum13apr.aspx>
.

The main drivers of banks' return to lending would be better access to 
wholesale funding and a decrease in bad loans, Baldwin said, rather than any 
marked impact from Funding for Lending, which was launched by the Bank of 
England last year but has failed to have a marked impact on business lending.

A fall in money lost to bad loans is also helping to rebuild confidence. 
Write-offs are forecast to fall to £9.3bn, just 0.56% of all borrowing this 
year, after peaking in 2013 at £11.6bn.

However, even minor changes to the UK interest base rate could push many 
companies into bankruptcy, the report's authors warn. The Bank of England has 
held rates at a record low of 0.5% for four years, helping businesses and home 
owners stay solvent.

Banks have been more lenient than in previous recessions, allowing weaker 
loans to continue rather than foreclosing. Many companies being kept afloat are 
simply able to service their debts and are unable to invest or expand.

"It wouldn't take a significant shift in interest rates to increase the 
repayment burden of families and businesses across the UK, at great social cost 
and with a detrimental knock on effect on lending," said Baldwin.

ITEM is the only non-governmental forecaster to use the Treasury's model of 
the UK economy. It also consults a network of company executives, from a range 
of corporate life including FTSE companies and small-sized firms. According to 
ITEM, economic growth will be modest, with the UK economy growing 0.9% in 2014.

The Bank of England, which administers the Funding for Lending scheme, will be 
extending it for a year until January 2015, and it will offer lower interest 
rates to lenders who can prove they are extending credit to small businesses.

The senior economic adviser to the ITEM Club, Carl Astorri, said the upbeat 
outlook reflected the fact that company executives are coming to terms with an 
uncertain business environment, where the implosion of the eurozone and the 
Chinese economy is a constant but so far unrealised threat.

"Things like the eurozone collapse, the Chinese hard landing or sequestration 
in the US have been prevalent when we speak to top chief executives and chief 
financial officers. But increasingly they are less fearful and are becoming 
used to operating in an environment where those risks exist."

The ITEM Club's optimism comes despite a more cautious assessment of the 
business lending environment from the Bank of England. In its agents' report 
for April, which gauges the economic environment around the UK, the bank says 
firms are "relatively positive" about their likely use of bank borrowing over 
the next 12 months.

In a survey of 370 firms, the bank said large companies had seen an 
improvement in availability of credit but small firms, classified as businesses 
with a turnover below £1m, had seen a deterioration in the availability and 
cost of loans. Medium-sized companies said access to borrowing was easier, but 
more expensive.
 