
The 2013 film Her was about a man who buys an artificially intelligent 
operating system for his computer “that listens to you, understands you and 
knows you”. So how would you feel about having that sort of relationship with 
your bank?

A new bank being launched on Tuesday 3 May appears to be trying to tap into 
this vaguely sci-fi-ish concept. Called simply B, the bank is built around an 
app designed specifically for tablets and smartphones, and is offering a 
current account and a savings account (other products are promised). But the 
monthly fee that kicks in after 12 months could turn many people off.

Claiming to take inspiration from lifestyle and health apps rather than “the 
more sterile fare on offer from the traditional banking sector”, B looks like 
the sort of thing that would be launched by a tech company or startup, but it 
is actually the brainchild of Clydesdale and Yorkshire banks, founded in 1838 
and 1859 respectively.

The B current account pays 0.5% on balances up to £2,000, and nothing above 
that, and offers a 12.5% EAR overdraft rate, plus a two-day grace period on 
planned and unplanned borrowing. The savings account pays 1% on all balances.

However, it’s the intuitive app and range of interactive tools designed to 
help users take control of their money that makes B stand out from the crowd, 
or so say those behind the initiative. Along with functions that let users set 
up savings pots, tag and track spending or automatically sweep cash between 
current and savings accounts, it also learns as it is used, says Helen Page, 
the banking group’s propositions and marketing director.

B will tell you whether you’re good to go when you see that must-have jacket 
or pair of trainers
Helen Page, B 
By analysing users’ spending, B can spot where they might have extra cash left 
in any month, or let them know their finances might be a little tight. “B will 
tell you whether you’re good to go when you see that must-have jacket or pair 
of trainers,” says Page. “This feels very different – B gets to know you. The 
more you use it, the more it finds out about you. Nothing like this exists 
right now.”

The big downside is the fee. The current account is free for the first 12 
months, but then you must pay £2 a month – ie, £24 a year. Page says the group 
consulted with potential customers over this charge, adding: “If you feel after 
12 months that you’re not getting value, then you can move off it.”

Some people may feel that if they are going to pay a monthly fee, they might 
as well sign up for something like Santander’s £5-a-month 123 current account, 
which gives cashback on bills and an interest rate of 3%. Others will feel 
their existing bank’s app and website are quite whizzy enough for their needs.

B is aimed at attracting “a newer, more affluent segment of customers”, and is 
also part of a plan to give the banks more of a presence outside their 
heartland regions. Customers will have the back-up of the Clydesdale and 
Yorkshire banks’ branch network, plus a dedicated UK call centre. .
 