
By the end of this month, thousands of students will have embarked on one of 
the most long-lasting relationships of their lives. Human partners may come and 
go but - if the rest of us are anything to go by - customers' relationships 
with their banks will remain solid. The banks may lose a few along the way - 12 
per cent of students switch while still at college, says the Royal Bank of 
Scotland - but they can be confident that most of the remainder will be with 
them for life.

Not that there's anything wrong with a lifelong relationship with your bank; 
just don't let it get out of control. By all means, let it have your current 
account, but if you let it take over other areas of your life, you'll pay a 
heavy price.

A young family that bought its mortgage, life assurance, personal loan, credit 
card and house insurance from Barclays would spend an unnecessary £1,137 a 
year, says Which? magazine. An older family with savings, travel insurance and 
house insurance could do itself out of £1,110 a year by buying exclusively from 
NatWest, it adds.

'Buying extra financial products from your bank is misguided loyalty that can 
cost you dear,' concludes the report.

The banks know how profitable those extra products are, which is why they're 
so keen on capturing your current account in the first place. The profitability 
of cross-selling - or 'relationship banking', as the banks prefer to call it - 
accounts for the £90 million a year they spend on junk mail designed to break 
down a customer's resistance.

And it works: 63 per cent of customers have an in-house credit card; just over 
half take out their bank's personal loans and more than a third choose a bank 
mortgage, according to Datamonitor research.

Even if we don't give in to the expensive convenience of buying the extras, 
why do we seem so happy to put up with the poor value of some current accounts? 
Part of the answer may lie in the fact that an estimated 70 per cent of current 
account-holders don't pay bank charges. Until something goes wrong, they have 
no particular incentive to switch.

A current account is 'not something people generally get worked up about', 
says Alastair Whitmore of pollster Mori Financial Services.

 'It needs something dra matic or innovative to get people to move.' 

Feeling disgruntled isn't enough, says Datamonitor. Although 11 per cent of 
customers considered changing, only 1 per cent eventually did so.

But Datamonitor's figures reveal that we may not be as loyal - or as apathetic 
- as we seem. While few switch completely, around 25 per cent of customers have 
more than one current account.

So what do you do if you want to make a clean break with your bank? If you are 
among the number who have considered moving but haven't yet, help is at hand. 
In response to research showing that people were put off switching accounts 
because of the hassle of moving direct debits, the Association for Payment 
Clearing Services (Apacs) and the Bankers' Automated Clearing System (Bacs) are 
to pilot a scheme aimed at making switching much easier.

Now, if you want to transfer, you will have to write to every organisation 
which you pay by direct debit to request a new mandate, which you then fill in 
and return with your new bank's details.

You also have to inform your employer of the change, as well as cancelling 
standing orders at your old bank and then reinstating them at your new one.

The first part of the trial, in which all banks are involved, will concentrate 
on making sure they can all provide a complete and detailed list of a 
customer's direct debits, standing orders and direct credits within 10 days of 
receiving a request, either from the customer's new bank or direct from the 
client. The aim of this is merely to standardise the timetable for what already 
happens when someone switches.

In the second part of the experiment, the customer will no longer have to tell 
each direct debit originator individually.

Instead, the new bank will pass the list to Bacs, which will inform them 
automatically.

Only a handful of banks will be participating in this part of the pilot at 
first. Their names have not yet been revealed, although an announcement is 
expected in the next few weeks, says Richard Tyson-Davies of Apacs.

It's a step in the right direction, but until all banks are involved - which 
is not expected to be until mid-2001 - 'you won't see an immediate benefit'.
 