
Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> gave strong 
backing to the European Central Bank’s radical stimulus but warned it could 
disrupt the financial markets.

The governor of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> told the last day 
of the Davos meeting of the World Economic Forum that he could receive daily 
risk positions of the banks to monitor any stresses in the system as he 
admitted persistently low interest rate environments could cause investors to 
take risks.

The move by the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> to buy €60bn of 
government bonds and corporate debt announced on Thursday dominated much of the 
discussing during the four-day meeting in the alpine ski resort and comes after 
central banks in the US and the UK have also taken similar steps to stimulate 
economies.

“In an environment of low interest rates and quantative easing there can be 
excessive risk-taking,” he said. Investors could make the false assumption that 
the Bank of England was already to step in causing them to buy riskier assets 
than they might otherwise have done.

Carney admitted that savers could lose out from low interest rates but said 
that stimulus was necessary to avoid long-term unemployment. “Monetary policy 
always has distribution effects,” he said. “One of the biggest distributional 
issues is the risk that people who are unemployed for a long time become 
detached from the labour market and lose their skills, in the UK we have 
created 600,000 jobs in the last year and wages are starting to pick up. We are 
winning that race against unemployment.”

He is also facing questions about the low rate of inflation in the UK, which 
has fallen below the 2% target rate set by the government, sliding to 0.5% in 
December.

Carney said prices would start to rise in the next two years to bring the 
inflation rate back to target.

“We have a very low inflation environment right now, largely due to oil 
prices,” he said.

“We have the responsibility, we have the means and the will to do it and 
return inflation back to target within the two year horizon so people can rely 
on that.”
 