
The defining moment of Melbourne City’s 1-0 win over Brisbane Roar on Monday 
arrived in the sixth minute of play. Lisa De Vanna, the Matildas captain, 
delivered a sharp cross into the penalty area, which Larissa Crummer, the 
league’s leading goalscorer, couldn’t quite reach. But where Crummer failed, 
Kim Little, City’s Scottish international, slammed the ball home. Depth and 
dominance: the story of City’s inauguralW-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/w-league> season.

 The win means City are the 2015-16 premiers, and completed a record-equalling 
10-game winning streak. What should have been cause for celebration at the 
final whistle, however, felt like mere formality. The City players casually 
congratulated one another, without any of the usual hoopla.

Melbourne City crowned W-League premiers after victory in Brisbane
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/28/melbourne-city-crowned-w-league-premiers-after-victory-in-brisbane>
 Even before the season began, this was the result many expected from City. 
The cashed-up club ventured aggressively into the market, signing the highly 
respected coach Joe Montemurro as well as young talent, established players, 
Matildas and high-profile foreigners.

 Indeed Monday’s result showcased the best of City’s smart recruitment. De 
Vanna was her usual, dangerous self; Jess Fishlock, Avi Luik and Little were 
impish through the middle; Beattie Goad was lively off the bench. Brisbane put 
in a spirited performance, but after Little’s early goal City maintained 
possession for large periods and generally controlled the match. Both Little 
and Crummer had late chances which they usually would have finished.

 From their very first match of the season – a whopping 6-0 victory over 
Sydney FC – City made their intentions clear. Crummer, recently named in 
Guardian Australia’s list of top breakout stars of 2015, scored two goals, and 
has led the pack since. City beat four sides by four or more goals. As if to 
prove a point, twice they thumped last season’s premiers Perth Glory 4-0.

 The most telling match of City’s season was in November against Canberra 
United. City went 3-1 up in the first half and were seemingly cruising to 
victory when De Vanna was sent off with more than half an hour left to play. 
Three minutes later, Canberra striker Michelle Heyman scored to make it 3-2.

 In a normal season, in a normal team, this might have been a turning point. 
Instead, City simply reshuffled to accommodate the numerical disadvantage, 
continued to attack, and scored a fourth late in the match. To win 4-2 against 
Canberra – the former glamour club of the W-League – is a significant result. 
To do so with 10 women was a powerful illustration of City’s dominance.

 The records speak for themselves. In the 10-game winning streak, City scored 
32 goals and conceded just three. The +29 goal difference is equal to Glory’s 
record, set last season. Watching on, the Matildas coach Alen Stajcic said, 
“They [City] are probably the best W-League side in history.”

 Yet the discussion has raged all season about whether City represent a 
positive or negative step for the W-League. In October,Canberra United’s CEO 
Heather Reid asked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/23/friday-focus-w-league-shaken-up-by-the-arrival-of-melbourne-city>
 if “their influence on player recruitment could skew the market”. In early 
December, Matilda Elise Kellond-Knight, now plying her trade in Germany, said 
City’s dominance “was to the detriment of the other teams”.

 De Vanna, who crossed from Victory to City before the current season started, 
responded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/23/2015-newsmaker-lisa-de-vanna-ive-done-a-lot-of-changing-and-soul-searching>
: “We complain that we want more money, better facilities and to be treated 
like a professional, but we complain when a team does that. For me, they [City] 
have done the right thing, they’ve looked after us. It’s time for other clubs 
to step up and do what City does if things are to change and grow.”

 It does seem disingenuous to criticise City for their ambition, and their 
superior treatment of their players. Most of the W-League sides are now run 
privately by the A-League clubs, and the W-League still has a salary cap. 
City’s riches are only a part of the story – the greater story is in the other 
clubs’ lack of investment and imagination. As Stajcic told Guardian Australia: 
“It just shows what a little bit of investment can do – they [City] haven’t 
even gone over the top.”

 In November, research by Roy Morgan found that women’s football is now more 
popular than netball among girls. The “Matildas effect” was seen to be one of 
the biggest influences on this growth. There is no better time for A-League 
clubs, and Football Federation Australia for that matter, to invest in women’s 
football.

 A regular season that lacked mystery, suspense or intrigue has drawn to a 
close, and City will enter the finals series as firm favourites. Whatever 
happens, it is hoped that this season will be a pivot. The W-League faces a 
choice between the neglect and blinkered mediocrity of the past, and the hope 
and opportunity of the future.

 “They’ve set a new benchmark for other teams to follow,” said Stajcic. “As 
soon as someone raises a benchmark I’m not sure you can criticise it. What are 
we going to do: lower the bar for other teams to catch up? I think we should be 
raising the bar.

 “I’ve seen the game grow in leaps and bounds. More than investment it needs 
to be at the forefront of everyone’s mindset. That goes to A-League clubs, 
federations, right down to grassroots clubs. Are the girls going to be at the 
forefront of our minds when we talk about football? Or is it just going to be 
an afterthought?”
 