
The US president, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, has signalled he will use a 
critical two-day visit to Athens this week to step up calls for the country to 
be given “meaningful debt relief”.

Related: Barack Obama must fulfil his pledge to close Guantánamo Bay now | 
Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/barack-obama-must-fulfil-his-pledge-to-close-guantanamo-bay-now>

Weighing in on the potentially explosive issue of how best to revive the 
European Union’s most financially strained member state, the outgoing president 
said debt forgiveness would play a pivotal role in giving people hope. “I am a 
strong believer that to make reforms sustainable, people need hope,” he told 
the Greek newspaperKathimerini before the trip, which will be his final state 
visit before leaving office. “The International Monetary Fund has said that 
debt relief is crucial to put Greece’s economy on a sustainable path and set 
the stage for a return to prosperity.”

Obama, who has blamed the excoriating effects of austerity on Europe’s slowing 
growth, said while Athens needed to implement reforms, a nominal write-down 
would help reignite an economy that has lost over 25% of its output since the 
nation’s financial woes first surfaced seven years ago. At around €330bn 
(£284bn), or 180% of gross domestic product, Greece’s staggering debt is by far 
the biggest in the EU.

“That is why I will continue to urge Greece’s creditors to take the steps 
needed to ensure the country is well placed to return to robust economic 
growth, including by providing meaningful debt relief,” he said in the 
interview. “Getting that done would not only fuel the Greek economic recovery, 
it would show thatEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> can 
make its economy work for everyone.”

Obama is the fourth US leader to visit Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>. Amid heightened fears of terrorism 
following a hand-grenade attack on the French embassy last week, and planned 
protests by anti-capitalists, security in Athens is expected to be immense. One 
neighbourhood with leftist affiliations in the heart of the capital has 
pronounced Obama “person non grata” while communists, anarchists, students and 
womens’ group have all pledged to take to the streets.

But the Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, a once fiery anti-austerity 
communist himself, has set much store on the visit.

Although the timing of the trip essentially renders Obama a “lame duck” 
president, the leftist-led government is relying on his backing – and appeal – 
to persuade Germany, Europe’s powerhouse and the biggest provider of rescue 
funds to date, of the import of moving ahead with debt relief. After Athens, 
the US president flies straight to Berlin where he will dine with chancellor
Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> on Wednesday.

Greece, the recipient of three bailouts since 2010, has undergone brutal 
belt-tightening with successive rounds of budget cuts, tax rises and pension 
reforms in exchange for over €300bn in emergency funding. The depression-era 
downturn triggered by the policies has caused unprecedented levels of poverty 
and unemployment.

Tsipras, whose popularity has plummeted as a result of enforcing measures he 
once promised to eradicate, has now made debt relief a priority. In recent 
months he has ratcheted up the rhetoric, calling for an agreement to be reached 
by the end of the year.

Athens, which is currently undergoing a second review of its economy, has been 
told debate on the issue can open once the inspection is concluded.

With the government also seeing debt forgiveness as vital to ending economic 
uncertainty and attracting much-needed investment, Tsipras is keen to get a 
deal by the time eurozone finance ministers meet for the last time this year on 
5 December.

Although few believe that will be possible, a strong message of support from 
Obama could facilitate talks in the coming weeks. The US president admitted he 
had played a seminal role in preventing Greece from being ejected from the 
single currency at the height of the euro debt crisis. “I have strongly 
supported efforts to keep Greece in the eurozone because I share the view of 
the vast majority of Greeks that this outcome is in Greece’s best interest,” he 
told the conservative daily. “I believe that European integration is one of the 
greatest political and economic achievements of modern times, with benefits for 
EU members, the United States and the entire world.”

Debt relief <https://www.theguardian.com/world/debt-relief> is also regarded 
as crucial to including Greece in the European Central Bank’s quantitative 
easing program, itself essential to lowering borrowing costs and improving the 
cash-starved economy’s liquidity. If the debt load is viewed as unsustainable, 
it will be impossible for Athens to re-enter capital markets when its current 
rescue programme expires in 2018, the country’s central banker, Yannis 
Stournaras, has also said.

“Obama’s visit comes at a crucial time. On a symbolic level he can show there 
is support for the idea of debt relief and remove the moral hazard element from 
the discussion,” said Nick Malkoutsis at Macropolis, an economic analysis 
website. “If debt servicing costs are reduced, it would allow primary surplus 
targets [set by lenders] to come down which would lead to less pressure on the 
economy.”

But as has always been the case in Europe’s seemingly never-ending debt 
crisis, it is Germany that calls the shots. Berlin’s hardline finance minister, 
Wolfgang Schauble, has repeatedly ruled out debt relief until after next year’s 
general elections at the earliest.

Yet Greece has won an unlikely ally in the form of the International Monetary 
Fund, which has refused to sign up to the country’s third bailout – agreed 
after months of tortuous negotiations 18 months ago – until the debt question 
is resolved.

“Debt relief for Tsipras would be a huge win in the Greek political calculus,” 
said Alec Mally, an economist and former US diplomat based in Athens. “Even if 
America can’t deliver it per se it can help support Greece in the IMF and press 
the point in discussion with European leaders and that is clearly what Obama is 
trying to do.”
 