
It hasn’t been an easy few weeks, to say the least, for what we used to know 
as the good old days and no doubt there are plenty of us who desperately want 
to believe football has wised up and everything is different now. It just isn’t 
easy to be entirely sure when, in the last few days, a letter from the 
solicitors of one club has been brought to my attention that makes it 
absolutely clear there are still holes in the system, still people winging it 
and still the overwhelming sense that the modern‑day sport likes to operate by 
its own rules.

The letter is from Brabners, the law firm where Maurice Watkins, the chairman 
of Barnsley, is a senior partner and it contains a candid admission that the 
club employed a full-time physiotherapist to work in their academy without 
bothering to make the standard Criminal Records Bureau (CRB) checks – now known 
as the Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) – that would ordinarily be 
mandatory for anyone working in junior football.

Ian Farmery was given the job without any of the routine checks that would 
apply if someone wanted to help out at a scout camp, or take a cleaning job at 
the local school, or any other kind of work that involved children. Farmery 
started at Oakwell in August 2011 and it wasn’t until after he left, in 
December 2014, that the people running the club found out he was given a 
40-week suspended prison sentence for drug-dealing only a few months into the 
job. He had not been checked once, even though it is meant to be statutory for 
a new employee and the Football League recommends it is repeated every three 
years. “Contrary to club policies, a CRB (DBS) check was not undertaken prior 
to his employment,” the legal letter, sent to one of the academy boy’s parents 
in June this year, confirms. “A CRB [DBS] check was not undertaken in respect 
of Mr Farmery prior to his resignation.” No explanation is offered.

Farmery subsequently moved abroad and, to be absolutely clear, there is 
nothing whatsoever to suggest he did not do his job professionally, or that he 
or anyone at Barnsley is implicated in the latest update from the National 
Police Chiefs’ Council that 98 clubs at professional and amateur level have 
been identified, along with 83 suspects, from the 639 referrals to Operation 
Hydrant since Andy Woodward, and then Steve Walters, waived their anonymity to 
tell their stories in the Guardian.

Yet there is a broader story here and it does make me wonder how many other 
clubs, at all levels of football, might be taking the odd risk here and there, 
abandoning protocol and generally not taking the guidelines as seriously as 
they should, if Barnsley can usher someone into their academy without thinking 
it necessary to go through the usual checks.

Watkins spent 28 years as a director at Manchester United before the man 
described on the Brabners website as “one of the best known sports lawyers in 
the world” joined Barnsley’s board in May 2013. He has the sort of background, 
one imagines, where everything would be meticulously in place. Barnsley say 
that is now the case but I have also spoken to Kevin Philliskirk, previously 
the club’s head of education, in the last few days about his own time at 
Oakwell. Philliskirk, a former policeman, felt it was a “club that tried to cut 
corners”. He left in June this year and his recollection is that throughout his 
three years at Barnsley the club “did not have a proper DBS process in place”.

At which point, you might be thinking the same as me and asking yourself how 
many other clubs might be guilty of similar lapses. Is it merely a one-off? Or 
are Barnsley just the unlucky ones, having been caught out, when there are many 
others operating with the same kind of blurred priorities?

All we can really be certain about is that the Football League is aware about 
what has happened and Barnsley have opened themselves to the possibility 
of sanctions when, for instance, Farmery’s membership with the Health and Care 
Professions Council appeared to lapse in May 2012, meaning the club might have 
breached elite player performance plan regulations. At the very least, the 
authorities should be asking for an explanation and, if there are sanctions, 
the league ought to explain what they are.

Either way, it leaves a hole in the argument that so many people in high 
positions have been projecting recently that football, in 2016, is about as 
safe as it can possibly be. Greg Clarke, the chairman of the Football 
Association, spoke recently about clubs “sleepwalking” throughout the 1980s and 
1990s.

Well, it turns out there are some in the modern game who have been guilty of 
taking a nap, too. And, without wishing to be alarmist, if Barnsley have been 
as lax as it sounds they might be lucky in one respect not to have encountered 
more problems than one bloke who, according to a report in theDoncaster Free 
Press in December 2011, was caught dealing mephedrone – also known as meow meow 
– a class-B drug.

In a statement, Barnsley have assured me the club have “completed a review, 
independently assessed, with the Football Association to ensure rigorous 
safeguarding procedures are in place, and fully in compliance with all FA 
recommendations”. What happened was “contrary to Barnsley FC policies” and the 
club say they have worked closely with the league “who are satisfied with our 
safeguarding procedures and policies”. Barnsley are “committed to a thorough 
safeguarding policy to protect children and young persons and all individuals 
who come into contact with the club”.

What all this corporate-speak lacks, perhaps, is any hint of regret, an 
acceptance that they messed up, or an explanation about how they could possibly 
let these things slide. There is no clarification either about what 
specifically has changed, although that is not entirely a surprise when if 
there is one thing, journalistically, that has become clear recently it is how 
difficult it can be to get straight answers out of football clubs when they 
have their backs pressed against a wall.

A colleague on another newspaper tells me he totted up 21 different approaches 
to Crewe Alexandra, a club with much more serious issues than Barnsley, before 
getting a response recently, and it has certainly been difficult to keep track 
of the number of occasions the relevant people at Gresty Road have swerved even 
the most mundane requests for information about the “independent review” they 
have apparently put in place.

The FA, to put it into context, has already announced that Clive Sheldon, a QC 
with considerable experience in child-protection matters, will be leading its 
own inquiry and that the aim is for full disclosure, give or take whatever 
legalities might crop up, with the overriding objective being “to ensure that 
any possible failings by the FA and clubs are brought to light”.

That still leaves the question about whether it can truly be independent when 
the FA is paying to investigate something that might eventually come back to 
its own door. Yet there is at least a sense the FA recognises this is not the 
time to look the other way and hope everything works out in the end. There is a 
promise of transparency, which is what we all want, whereas two weeks have 
passed since Crewe announced a “thorough investigation” and we are still 
waiting to hear anything about the terms of reference, who is in charge of the 
process and whether it is someone suitably qualified or, to put it one way, one 
of the chairman’s old mates from the Rotary Club cribbage team.

Not for the first time, the thought occurs that Crewe seem desperately in need 
of more PR expertise, for their own sake. The lack of knowhow feels startling 
and, in the meantime, whoever is orchestrating the investigation has not even 
made the first contact with the former players whose shattered lives have 
driven this story from the beginning.

From what I can gather, it would come as a shock to many of those players if 
that changed any time soon. That is how much faith they have in the club where 
their lives were shaped, and who can really blame them?

Last week, one of those players dug out a number for one of the club’s former 
employees to leave a message, after all these years, saying he would really 
appreciate the chance to speak about everything. There was no call back, and a 
few days later the same player tried again. An automated message told him his 
number had been blocked.
 