
Barratt has become the latest housebuilder to report rising sales as the 
government extended efforts to tackle the UK housing crisis.

Sales rose 20.7% to £2.5bn between July and November, prompting the company to 
make a record dividend payment of more than £200m to shareholders. It is 
holding its annual meeting in London on Wednesday afternoon.

Barratt said it was seeing high levels of demand across all regions. Last 
week, York-based housebuilder Persimmon said the third quarter had been an 
“extremely busy time” for the company, when it reported a 12% increase in sales 
to £780m. Another builder,Bellway, posted a 44% jump in full-year profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/oct/13/bellway-figures-and-interest-rate-hopes-boost-housebuilders>
 to £354m last month, better than expected.

Bellway figures and interest rate hopes boost housebuilders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/oct/13/bellway-figures-and-interest-rate-hopes-boost-housebuilders>
Davy analyst Colin Sheridan said Barratt’s figures showed “further evidence of 
a very strong autumn selling season in the UK”.

The industry has been the beneficiary of the government’s help-to-buy scheme, 
which has been extended until 2020 and is aimed at helping first-time buyers 
into the market. Barratt said it was supporting the government on its starter 
homes scheme, which has set out to provide 200,000 homes for first-time buyers 
over the next five years.

David Thomas, the company’s chief executive, said: “Against the backdrop of a 
significant structural shortage of new homes in Britain, we have made a strong 
start to the year.”

However, the company has scaled back new developments and hirings. It launched 
49 developments – down from 80 at this stage last year – and now operates from 
380 sites, compared with 395 last year. Barratt said there were still shortages 
of skilled labour in some trades and locations. It hired 327 new graduates, 
trainees and apprentices this year and is recruiting another 250 for the next 
financial year.

Barratt’s shares slipped 1.6% to 566.32p in early trading on Wednesday. 
Analyst Charlie Campbell at Liberum said last week after the Persimmon update: 
“Valuations for the three largest UK housebuilders (Barratt, Persimmon and 
Taylor Wimpey) are too stretched to accommodate any bad news on future gross 
margins.

“It is our view that house price inflation in future is likely to moderate as 
affordability is stretched and that the FPC [the bank of England’s financial 
policy committee] can keep a lid on house price inflation through its role as 
overseer of UK mortgage lending standards.”
 