
BBC director general Tony Hall has stood by the corporation’s controversial 
coverage of a police raid on Sir Cliff Richard’s home afterthe singer launched 
legal action against the BBC and South Yorkshire police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/10/sir-cliff-richard-allegedly-to-sue-bbc-and-south-yorkshire-police-for-1m>
.

Hall said he was sorry for the distress that had been caused to Richard but 
said theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> was right to report a 
matter which was of public interest.

Police raided Richard’s Berkshire home in August 2014 over historical sex 
abuse allegations. The BBC broadcast images from BBC cameras with a helicopter 
hovering over his property.

Cliff Richard takes legal action against BBC and South Yorkshire police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/10/sir-cliff-richard-allegedly-to-sue-bbc-and-south-yorkshire-police-for-1m>
The singer was told by police last month that there would be no charges and 
the investigation had been dropped.

Hall said: “Sir Cliff is a fabulous entertainer who has done great things for 
the BBC over many years. We said sorry for the distress he has been caused over 
the last couple of years.

“If the police are investigating a matter which is of public interest and 
concern then we should report that, not just us but all our colleagues in the 
broadcast media and newspapers as well.”

It was revealed at the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/10/sir-cliff-richard-allegedly-to-sue-bbc-and-south-yorkshire-police-for-1m>
 that Richard was launching a £1m legal action against the BBC and the South 
Yorkshire force.


He said: “My life was effectively turned upside down, and my reputation, 
worldwide, was unnecessarily damaged.”

Richard added: “In the absence of satisfactory answers, a court will determine 
whether or not their behaviour was justified and proportionate. I would not 
want the same to happen to others whether in the public eye or not.”

Hall confirmed: “Yes we have received a letter and will respond to that in due 
course.”

He said he had appeared before MPs on the parliamentary home affairs committee 
who had concluded the BBC had done nothing wrong in its decision to run the 
story.

“It reviewed our decisions and said we see nothing wrong in the BBC’s decision 
to run the story and I think that’s right,” he added.

An independent police review in February 2015 sharply criticised the agreement 
in 2014 between the force and the BBC, when the broadcaster agreed to a 
one-month delay reporting on the allegations of historical sex abuse in return 
for advance notification of the raid.

The parliamentary home affairs committee had already condemned the force’s 
handling of the case as “utterly inept”, but said the BBC was “within its 
rights to run the story”.

Chris Evans ‘gave his best’


Hall declined to comment further on reports that Radio 2 breakfast DJ Chris 
Evans may face questioning by police over historic sex allegations.

Evans continues to present his show on Radio 2 but stepped down after just one 
series of BBC2’s Top Gear, which he took over from Jeremy Clarkson, saying he 
had given it his best shot but it wasn’t good enough.

“Chris has closed a chapter on Top Gear,” Hall said.

“He decided to resign, he said he gave the programme his best and I completely 
agree he absolutely did. It’s no easy task relaunching a programme as important 
as Top Gear and I’m really grateful to him as is the whole of the BBC for all 
the work and energy he put into that.”

Hall said neither he nor the BBC had any contact from the police about Evans 
and so had nothing to say on the matter.

About Top Gear, which will return with Evans’ former co-presenter Matt LeBlanc 
as the fact of the new show, Hall said: “I think it is interesting when you 
look at the team he left behind, I think you can see a team that is going to 
take the programme to great heights.

“I am very hopeful for the team he left behind, and I am grateful to Chris for 
all the work he has done. I think he does a brilliant job on Radio 2 in the 
morning.”
 