
The salary bill for the BBC’s top executives and staff grew last year with the 
corporation managing to get rid of just 54 staff despite ramping up its 
cost-cutting plans.


The amount paid to the BBC’s executive board, which includes director general 
Tony Hall and BBC Worldwide chief Tim Davie, grew slightly from £3.6m to £3.7m, 
even as the corporationseeks hundreds of millions in cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/10/bbc-cuts-nao-delivering-quality-first>
 over the next charter period.


The executive wage bill rise was mainly due to a £224,000 bonus payout for 
Davie, despite the commercial arm of theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> reporting a fall in headline profits 
from £139m to £134m.

BBC boss expected to address issue of bullying in annual report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/tom-hiddleston-night-manager-evidence-bbc-creative-best-report>
Stripping out the impact of the sell-off of almost half of BBC America, to 
Walking Dead and Breaking Bad maker and broadcaster AMC,BBC Worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide> said profits rose 4% which in 
turn justified Davie’s bonus payout.

The BBC’s annual report shows that full time equivalent staff numbers fell by 
just 54, from 18,974 to 18,920, in the year to the end of March.

The BBC said that during the year it cut 278 posts as part of its Delivering 
Quality First cost savings plans, but that “due to the timing of the changes 
this is not fully reflected in the average numbers”.

The report shows that total employee remuneration rose from £1.16bn to £1.2bn 
last year.


When BBC Worldwide and other commercial businesses are included total staff 
numbers fell slightly to 20,916, while the overall salary bill rose marginally 
to £1.3bn.


The BBC said it had kept its promise to cut senior management headcount with 
numbers dropping from 401 to 356 last year.


The corporation paid out a total of £26m in severance pay last year to 448 
staff, with £4.8m of that going to 40 senior managers.

Dip in stars’ pay


The BBC also made a small reduction in the amount paid to top stars such as 
Gary Lineker, Graham Norton, Chris Evans and the now departed Jeremy Clarkson.

The bill for the BBC’s best-paid stars – those earning from £500,000 to £5m a 
year – fell 25% from £8.9m to £6.6m as their number dropped from nine to seven. 
The BBC does not name its top paid talent for commercial reasons.

The overall wage bill for talent fell from £208m to £200m year on year as the 
number of staff on the BBC’s pay roster fell from 50,332 to 49,755.


The BBC said that its cuts strategy resulted in the delivery of £157m in 
savings last year.

The annual report shows that operating costs fell from £4.9bn to £4.77bn in 
the year to the end of March.

News channel ‘will stay’


Elsewhere, Hall guaranteed the future of the BBC News channel as a standalone 
operation when he said the importance of the corporation’s role in covering the 
momentous events of the last few weeks and months had never been greater.

There has been speculation that the news channel could be axed, or merged with 
the BBC World News channel, as part of cost savings.

Hall said: “Yes, the News channel will stay. We all know the importance of 
being able to go over to your TV and see what is unfolding.”

Hall said he had no fear about the change at the top of the Conservative 
government with Theresa May replacing David Cameron, and he downplayed any 
impact it might have with on-going negotiations about the BBC’s future ahead of 
the renewal of its royal charter at the end of this year.

“The whole government, including John Whittingdale, was behind the white 
paper,” said Hall. “I have no reason to think that Theresa May won’t think it’s 
right.”

In a robust assessment of the BBC’s performance over the last 12 months, Hall 
paraphrased the classic front page headline of the Sun – one of the 
corporation’s fiercest critics – when he said: “It was the programming what 
helped to win it.

“Not for one minute am I being complacent but I do believe we have been on top 
creative form.”

Drama a ‘priority’


Hall said he has made BBC drama a “priority”, citing hit programmes including 
The Night Manager, War and Peace and Doctor Foster.


“Great drama is our lifeblood and the audience love it,” he said. “And this 
year we have gone from strength to strength.”

However, statistics from the annual report show that the amount of drama aired 
on the flagship BBC1 fell by 11%, from 643 to 576 hours last year.


And the proportion of repeats in peak time grew from 4.8% to 5.7%. On BBC2 the 
proportion of repeats in peak time rose from 25.8% to 27.4%.

Decline in bullying and harassment


Hall also revealed the BBC had 41 formal cases relating to bullying, 
harassment and sexual harassment last year. This is a slight decline on the 47 
cases the previous year.


The corporation said that there were 11 disciplinary cases, five bullying and 
harassment and six sexual harassment.


There BBC recorded 31 cases of whistleblowing, well up on the 20 in the 
2014/15 year.


The corporation said that its confidential independent helpline provider, Care 
First, found that the “majority ... of the calls they receive concern the use 
of inappropriate language. Very often the individual had not been aware that 
they had caused the offence.”


The BBC has committed to tackling failings in the reporting of incidents at 
the BBC in the wake of the Dame Janet Smith report into how the corporation’s 
culture allowed Jimmy Savile and Stuart Hall to sexually abuse nearly 100 
people without detection for decades.


“An open BBC also means a transparent BBC,” said Hall. “One that is able to 
expose itself to scrutiny and accept responsibility for failure as well as 
success.


“We are absolutely committed to learning the lessons of [the Dame Janet Smith] 
review. I think the detail in this report show that we have made significant 
progress since 2012. We will continue to learn lessons, improve processes, and 
strengthen protections.”
 