
The BBC has been told to do more to help the 2 million people who are colour 
blind in the UK after theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Trust 
upheld a series of complaints about confusing general election graphics.

Kathryn Albany-Ward, founder of Colour Blind Awareness, described some of the 
corporation’s election coverage as a “fiasco” and accused the BBC of trying to 
“brush off” her complaints.

She raised a number of concerns about the BBC’s graphics around last year’s 
general election, including the use of least nine different shades of orange 
and white text on a yellow background which was “unreadable”.

Fireman Sam Qur'an row gets alarm bells ringing at BBC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2016/jul/27/fireman-sam-quran-row-bbc-complaints>
The BBC Trust upheld six out of seven complaints brought by the not-for-profit 
community interest group, and said BBC management had “failed to meet best 
practice standards and … had not considered the needs of a significant majority 
of its audience at an important time”.

“We have been making the BBC aware for some time that a lot of their broadcast 
and online information is difficult for colour blind people to understand – 
with virtually no success,” said Albany-Ward.

“When the impending 2015 election graphics fiasco came to our attention and we 
were being given the brush-off, we decided enough was enough. The BBC can’t 
stand by and knowingly discriminate against nearly 5% of the population at any 
time, but in the run-up to a general election we found their attitude to be 
totally unacceptable.

“We decided to make an example and despite constantly being ignored all the 
way through the very lengthy BBC complaints procedure we have finally been 
vindicated by the BBC Trust complaints and appeals board which upheld six out 
of seven of the points we made.”

Colour Blind Awareness commended presenter Jeremy Vine, the figurehead of the 
BBC’s election graphics, but said a number of difficulties were caused by the 
on-screen colour palette.
 Jeremy Vine fronts BBC coverage of the 2014 European elections Photograph: BBC
It said colour blind people had difficulties distinguishing between the 
Conservatives’ blue and Ukip’s purple, between Labour’s red and the Lib Dems’ 
orange, and between Lib Dem orange and SNP yellow.

The BBC, in response, said it used official party colours and was “constrained 
in that regard”.

The corporation said it used a number of systems to double check the graphics 
were colour blind friendly, including software packages called Snook and 
Vischeck. It also ran a training session on the issue for online designers.

In its findings the trust “asked the BBC to review the totality of its 
guidance for people with colour vision deficiencies, across broadcast and 
online”.

It “concluded that the BBC had failed to meet best-practice standards and in 
so doing it had not considered the needs of a significant minority of its 
audience at an important time”.

A BBC spokesman said: “The BBC leads the industry in making accessible 
programmes and we strive to produce graphics that are clear and informative for 
all viewers.

“During last year’s election coverage we used text labelling and journalist 
explanations, both online and on television, to convey graphical findings in 
other ways.

“Whilst we are restricted to using official political party colours we have 
already made many changes to our graphics, partly in response to our 
conversations with Colour Blind Awareness, including the use of party logos and 
adjusting some colours and how we contrast them on graphics.”

Colour Blind Awareness was set up by Albany-Ward in 2009 as a non-profit 
organisation because of colour blindness in her family. One in 12 men and one 
in 200 women in the UK are colour blind, around 4.5% of the population.

Albany-Ward added: “Unfortunately, many BBC graphics are still inaccessible 
and we are looking forward to finding out how and when the BBC intend to 
implement the changes recommended by the trust. We hope that in their new role 
[media regulator] Ofcom will be monitoring the situation closely.

“We also hope the new culture secretary, Karen Bradley, will be willing to 
meet with us discuss how colour blind people can also be afforded proper access 
to sport and to digital information.”
 