
The BBC has made “significant progress” in addressing issues raised by the 
review into the corporation’s culture during theJimmy Savile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/jimmy-savile> and Stuart Hall years, the 
BBC director general has said.

Dame Janet Smith published her review into the culture and practices of the BBC
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> in February, looking at the period 
when presenters Savile and Hall were employed and examining the corporation’s 
connection to the child sexual abuse by Savile.

There were 40 grievances relating to bullying and harassment dealt with in the 
year to the end of March 2016, with four upheld and eight ongoing, the BBC said 
at the unveiling of its annual report on Tuesday.

BBC chief stands by Cliff Richard coverage after singer launches lawsuit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/bbc-cliff-richard-legal-action-tony-hall-police-raid>
There was one further case complaint made of sexual harassment. 

Tony Hall said on Tuesday: “We have made significant progress since 2012. Our 
child protection, complaints, whistleblowing and investigation processes are 
all sound – and we are doing even more to make sure all our staff are aware of 
them.”

He added: “Lessons will continue to be learned, processes improved and 
protections strengthened. That is the only way we truly can ensure we rebuild 
the trust and faith of those who we failed.”

One area of focus has seen the BBC making dedicated whistleblowing channels 
available to employees.

Last year, 31 cases were treated as whistleblowing, up from 20 cases in 
2014/2015. Fifteen of those cases were upheld and four are ongoing. However, a 
staff survey showed that only 55% of respondents knew of the BBC whistleblowing 
policy.

While 72% said they knew where to go to find information and support in case 
of bullying or harassment, just 47% felt they would be confident of any action 
having a fair outcome.

However Bectu general secretary Gerry Morrissey said that a note of caution 
had to be sounded over the figures.

“We recognise that the BBC has done a lot but staff surveys show that for some 
there is still a lack of confidence in the processes,” he said.

“We should not assume that these are the number of people who feel they’ve got 
claims. There are a number of people on fixed term contracts now and if they 
are they may feel in less of a position to complain than someone on staff.”

The BBC said it would not release any information about the disciplinary 
outcome for any cases involving bullying and harassment.

New deputy director general Anne Bulford said: “These are, at heart, 
confidential processes, and what we haven’t done is publish a lot of data about 
what happens to complaints that are upheld ... What we have done is put out 
very full data about the numbers of complaints that we have received and the 
sources of them.

“We’re not aware of anyone else doing that and this is a very big step 
forward.”

An NSPCC spokesman said: “It is positive that the BBC is now taking the issue 
of child protection seriously; we would expect nothing less from a British 
flagship organisation that represents the UK around the globe.

“There have been some very difficult moments in the organisation’s past when 
it comes to child abuse and, whilst whistleblowing is important, it’s only one 
piece of the jigsaw.


“We need to ensure that the momentum continues and the NSPCC is working with 
them to help achieve this.”

The BBC’s final response to Smith’s review will be published later in the year.

 