
Tony Ageh <https://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-ageh>, one of the architects 
of the BBC iPlayer, is to leave the corporation after 14 years to join the New 
York Public Library as chief digital officer.


Until the US institution approached him earlier this year, he says had no 
intention of leaving the BBC. Ageh, most recently controller of the BBC 
archive, has been one of itsmost dogged technology advocates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/nov/01/tony-ageh-interview-bbc-archive>
, routinely pushing the TV-centric corporation to embrace the internet as the 
best way to deliver its obligation to inform, educate and entertain.

Awarded an OBE in 2015 for services to digital media, Ageh has proven himself 
adept at navigating notorious BBC bureaucracy. In 2003, a year after joining, 
he worked with engineer Ben Lavender to push the iPlayer project through no 
fewer than 84 internal meetings before it was approved. iPlayer has so far been 
used to watch 10bnBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> programmes online.

“Everything I told the BBC to do they didn’t understand or do. There’s no 
shortage of ideas at the BBC but it’s about whether that idea survives the 
BBC’s power testing of ideas. I am good at making ideas survive that process, 
which means they survive the outside world,” said Ageh.

BBC controller for internet services for five years and controller of archive 
development for seven years, Ageh said that privacy and security of users’ data 
should be a priority for the BBC. “No one should ever be able to discern your 
interests or views from the media you consume,” he added.

“I believe in universal and equal access for all of British culture. It should 
not be the case that anyone gets better service because of their wealth, sex or 
religion. We should bring the best of our culture to as many people as 
possible.”

On 11 April, Ageh joins the New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> Public Library as chief digital 
officer, a role that will involve developing a digital strategy for the city 
institution, its network of more than 80 district outposts and interactive 
programmes online for its collection.

Ageh says NYPL’s ambitious plans for education could have more impact than the 
BBC. “I feel I could have more impact on those kids in Walthamstow from NY than 
I could from W12. They are already ahead of the BBC in their thinking – the 
same Reithian, public service values.”

Both organisations, said Ageh, have an obligation to make sure that its assets 
are both protected and preserved accessible for future generations, as well as 
encouraging citizens to explore and reimagine material for their own creative 
ideas. “The library is the one memory institution that lets you take the 
artists’ work home,” he said. “That means you can come back with your own 
ideas.”


Roly Keating, former director of BBC Archive and now chief executive of the 
British Library, said: “Tony has always had a rare and special ability to see 
the moral and social potential of media and the internet, and to turn his 
insights into inspiring visions.”

Ageh said a priority will be search, discovery and distribution of the 
library’s collection of 53m items, adding that some of the most exciting 
projects would come about by experimenting with releasing data sets and APIs 
for the library’s collections.

“I would never have left the BBC but the opportunity is greater than I could 
have imagined,” he said. “I was good for the BBC because I was so unlike them, 
and didn’t want to be like them. But I told them that they have to shape this 
challenge, the internet, before it shapes you. People do well that run towards 
the problem, not away from it.

“I ain’t afraid of no ghosts <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MYjFKsJjCP0>.”
 