
Judging by the wild goose chase detailed on the Antarctic Circle website 
<http://www.antarctic-circle.org/advert.htm>, the $100 reward won't be an easy 
bounty. The money is yours if you can find evidence to prove that Ernest 
Shackleton, on the verge of a trip to Antarctica in 1912, really did take out a 
newspaper advert as follows: "Men wanted for hazardous journey. Low wages, 
bitter cold, long hours of complete darkness. Safe return doubtful. Honour and 
recognition in event of success."

Whether it appeared in print or not, you can't fault it for accuracy. The 
carnage of Antarctic discovery is all over the maps: Cape Disappointment, 
Exasperation Inlet, Deception Island, Terror Gulf. Then there are the stories, 
more or less known: Scott's expedition disaster after being beaten to the south 
pole, Captain Oates walking out of the tent to his certain death, claiming he 
"may be some time", and Apsley Cherry-Garrard's conclusion that "an Antarctic 
expedition is the worst way to have the best time of your life".

All that historical wreckage makes friends raise a nervous eyebrow when you 
announce a trip to the Antarctic – but since the 1950s, tourism to this great 
wilderness has been growing steadily. It's now more a case of, "I may be a 
fortnight, depending on flights." That said, it doesn't do to get complacent. 
As recently as 2007 the Gap Adventure-owned Explorer, a tourist vessel carrying 
154 passengers, went down in the Antarctic – a story told in gleeful detail by 
Damien, a marine archaeologist and historian on the trip I am taking. It turns 
out he was on the Explorer, and has been in various other scrapes, including 
getting stranded in South Georgia during the Falklands war. "You either want to 
stick by me," he says, "or run away. I'm not sure which."

Damien is part of the Quark Expeditions team welcoming the 90 or so passengers 
on board our ship, docked in Ushuaia, capital of Tierra del Fuego, Argentina. 
Pointing out the lack of disco ball in the dining area, expedition leader Lynn 
explains with no apology that this boat was designed for science, not luxury.
 The Ioffe. Photograph: Pascal Wyse 
The Akademik Ioffe, built by Scandinavians for the Russian Academy of Science 
in 1988, is an oceanographic acoustic research vessel. It has reassuring 
sounding specifications such as an ice-strengthened hull and side thrusters. 
There is a small bar, a tiny sauna and a presentation room for lectures, but 
it's still a converted science vessel with relatively basic – and mostly shared 
– facilities. The Quark fleet has a range of boat styles, and the Ioffe and its 
sister ship the Sergey Vavilov are the most ascetic. What the company aims for 
in all expeditions, though, is stable and quiet vessels – sound being an 
important consideration when tracking wildlife. Keeping numbers to around 100 
is also a priority: it adds to the flexibility and customisation in the face of 
a very unpredictable Antarctic. Ours is a historic trip, in a way, as this is 
the Ioffe's last season for Quark. (Damien, keen to sprinkle some 
conspiratorial spice, points out that the Ioffe was probably used as a spy 
ship.)

All this science, combined with the strident barking of Captain Poskonny and 
his Russian crew, does something to lessen our panic. Again, the nicknames say 
it all. At sea, between the latitudes of 65 and 40 degrees are the Roaring 
Forties, Furious Fifties and Screaming Sixties. This is what we will be passing 
through, via the Drake Passage, on our journey to the Antarctic peninsula and 
South Shetland Islands. "Below 40, there is no law," says a 19th-century 
sailing proverb. "Below 60 there is no God." This seems a good point to hear a 
talk from Timur, the ship's doctor, on "wellbeing" at sea.

It takes about two and a half days to sail to the Antarctic peninsula from 
South America. Add on the 16 hours' flying to get to Ushuaia from the UK, and 
it's clear that a fortnight is more or less the minimum. Quark runs trips to 
more extreme places, such as the south pole, and longer expeditions. As a quick 
burst, though, the peninsula offers good accessibility and a rich display of 
wildlife. Within that, the variables depend on when you travel: early in the 
Antarctic summer (November) is great for ice and snow, and penguins. High 
summer (December/January) is good for chicks, and the end (February/March) is 
good for marine mammals.

There's plenty to do during the voyage: lifeboat drill, "Drake proofing" your 
cabin – making everything secure for the infamously rough Drake Passage – and 
attending lectures by the Antarctic specialists. We're a diverse bunch: a group 
of IT workers who have been planning this for years, including one who has 
changed her name to Pinguino; two honeymooning couples; a man travelling the 
world after spending a near-death five weeks in a diabetic coma; a "girls on 
tour" family trip of grandmother, mother and granddaughter. Anyone who wants to 
do this, says an American pastry chef on her second expedition, has to have a 
screw loose. "But, you know, in a good way."

The magic gateway to our destination is the Convergence, where the cold waters 
of the Antarctic meet the warmer waters of the subantarctic. This mix provides 
a rich nutrient soup for sea creatures, and a dramatic layer of mist. Beyond 
this, the world changes. Albatrosses and petrels have been flying with us for 
some time now, but they are joined by their cousins: blue and Antarctic petrel, 
and wandering albatross. The wildlife list is duly started on the ship's 
noticeboard – a tally that will eventually hit 39 and include whales and 
dolphins. Signs of the frozen world arrive – little blocks of sea ice at first, 
rather than the other forms we learn about, such as bergy bits (small 
icebergs), pancake (circular pieces of ice) or pack (a larger area of ice). 
Then the unbelievable truths you hear so much about: the exquisitely sculpted 
ice, so compacted it glows blue. "It's just not a human place," says Lynn, as 
if it is her first sighting. She's been more than 140 times.

In the bar that evening, a great bear of a man is uneasy at the prospect of 
not being allowed to take a pee while ashore. Not even in a bottle. "Reaching 
the age I have," he says to Lynn, "I am fortunate enough to have developed 
certain issues in the realm of the prostate." Lynn acknowledges the plumbing 
issues, but rules absolutely not. You will be returned to the ship to pee. 
Snaking in to the lounge area is a queue of passengers waiting their turn with 
a vacuum cleaner. We must meticulously clean out every fold, pocket and Velcro 
attachment of any bag, hat or object we intend to take off the ship. No tiny 
seeds or alien food or vegetation must come across with us. There will be no 
eating, no leaving anything behind but footprints. And even those must be 
sensitive: a penguin can get stuck in a deep boot hole. The sun doesn't set 
that night; we have definitely arrived.
 Gentoo penguins. Photograph: Pascal Wyse 
The great explorers were well entertained by penguins – but at times rather 
rude about them. "Remarkably stupid," said Victorian explorer Sir James Clark 
Ross, while in Scott's Last Expedition Vol 1 it is noted: "From the moment of 
landing on their feet their whole attitude expressed devouring curiosity and a 
pig-headed disregard for their own safety. They waddle forward, poking their 
heads to and fro in their usually absurd way, in spite of a string of howling 
dogs straining to get at them. 'Hulloa!' they seem to say. 'Here's a game – 
what do all you ridiculous things want?'."

The penguins are right: we are the ridiculous ones, with our big, yellow Quark 
parkas and long lenses. Climbing ashore at Cuverville Island, we stand 
transfixed by gentoo penguins. The males are making an arduous journey – each 
with a stone in his beak – from the rocky edges of the water, up a steep hill 
and back to the chattering colony at the top. They potter around, duetting like 
cautious dancers as they pass one another on their single-lane pathways in the 
deep snow. If one falls, he'll just belly-ski for a while. The cuteness is cut 
with wafts of fishiness from the large red patch of guano (droppings) that 
delineates their rookery.

It can be difficult, surrounded by three-course meals and the snap of cameras, 
to savour a sense of the wilderness. A chance comes when a group of us camp out 
on the ice at Danco Island (an optional paid extra). It's an opportunity for me 
to indulge a passion for recording sounds. I point the microphones up the hill 
from our camp towards a busy rookery and drift off wearing the headphones – 
only to be startled awake by a penguin announcing his arrival six inches from 
my bivvy bag. Looking around the camp, I see that almost every sleeper has a 
curious penguin standing guard. With a view for miles across the island and the 
water, it is as close as I get to what Herbert Ponting, Scott's official 
cinematographer, called the "great white silence".
 Photograph: Pascal Wyse 
In four days of shore excursions, each cove, bay or island offers a unique 
recipe of weather, wildlife and terrain – punctuated by the bony remains of old 
sealing and whaling industries, and even a working post office at Port Lockroy. 
We approach by walking, ice-climbing, kayaking or just cruising around the ice 
floes in inflatable Zodiacs. You have to be prepared for last-minute 
alterations, though: getting ashore depends on the shifting patterns of ice and 
bergs, which thwart many of our climbing and skiing opportunities. But the 
excursions make for a really memorable physical experience. Wielding crampons 
and an ice axe, sinking up to your waist in snow as you take turns to lead and 
"plug" stepping holes, while the penguins slide by … It beats peering through 
binoculars from the deck. Quark calls this an expedition, but that's really to 
encourage a mindset, says Lynn. "It's not that people need to be in any way 
physically fit; it's about attitude and approach – being interested in doing 
more than just cruising and looking."

All too soon we have to leave the peninsula. The lectures continue, with a 
wave of facts: the Antarctic harnesses 33,100,000 billion tonnes of ice. That 
ice has an average depth of 2km, and true glacial ice takes 1,000 years to 
form. Temperatures can fall as low as −89C. It's the driest, windiest place on 
earth, with yearly precipitation only slightly higher than in the Sahara. 
Krill, an invertebrate food source that swarms in the seas of the Antarctic, is 
the most abundant species on the planet.

As we round Cape Horn, Damien stands on the bridge and reads Sara Vial's 
memorial poem:

I, the albatross that awaits you at the end of the world. 

I, the forgotten soul of the sailors lost that crossed Cape Horn from all the 
seas of the world.

But die they did not in the fierce waves, for today towards eternity in my 
wings they soar in the last crevice of the Antarctic winds.

And Milton, the climbing and skiing guide, is heard – perhaps for the 100th 
time – to say: "You'll never, never know if you never, never go."

• The 12-night Antarctica Explorer itinerary from Exodus (0845 863 9601, 
exodus.co.uk <http://www.exodus.co.uk/holidays/psx/overview?>) costs from 
£5,400pp, including international flights. The next trip is on 13 November
 