
We are on our way to Rumdoodle. Not the mythical mountain of W E Bowman’s 1956 
humorous book <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ascent_of_Rum_Doodle>, but the 
dramatic nunatak in Antarctica, close to the Australian base at Mawson, that is 
named after it <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rumdoodle_Peak>. We set out with a 
cast of characters who uncannily resemble the fictional Rum Doodle team: we 
have scientists, photographers and characters with names such as Cookie and 
Fossil, the latter busy setting up an Ebox, a temporary shelter, to allow me to 
paint en plein air out on the sea-ice.

In Bowman’s book, the scientist whose name is Wish is obsessed with measuring 
the boiling point of snow and experiments on the ascent at every possible 
opportunity. The scientists with me have a similar obsession with measuring the 
lift in the earth’s crust; it seems that ice shelves cause the Earth’s crust to 
displace, and therefore one might detect the depletion of the ice by measuring 
the shift in the bedrock using GPS. I learn a lot about their project in the 
Katabatic Bar where the icy clink of glasses allows more bedrock to move.

Rumdoodle is high up on the icy plateau; an incredible, serene landscape that 
reveals what Antarctica can be. I look across the glittering blue ice littered 
with rocks that seem to float, their radiant heat having created a moat around 
the base. In the distance is Fang, the sharp incisor of a peak that identifies 
the David Ranges, and I am lost to the world as I paint the day away. I ponder 
the horizon, an iridescent blue-green stretching out to infinity as the sun 
lowers. The mountains fade from a distinct and sharp dark tone back into a 
misty vagueness. I change canvases and focus on a large rock sitting proud on 
its icy plinth. Has Sisyphus been freed of his obligation to push it back up 
the mountain?

Behind me the photographer lays down in the snow as the beautiful white Snow 
Petrels 
<http://www.antarctica.gov.au/about-antarctica/wildlife/animals/flying-birds/snow-petrel>
 flirt overhead investigating the alien species below. The day is bliss! 
Cookie, the station leader takes us to a frozen lake on whose edge the Snow 
Petrels bathe in the snow. It’s a beautiful moment watching nature enjoy itself 
in a white world made of ice.

But nature always has an antidote. In this case it is the Skua 
<http://www.antarctica.gov.au/about-antarctica/wildlife/animals/flying-birds/south-polar-skua>
. The ever-present lurking danger, ready to transform these beautiful dove-like 
creatures into Angel Wings. They strike dramatically, descending on the birds 
and, using their sharp beaks, penetrate their prey’s skull in mid-flight. The 
Snow Petrel drops from the sky and quickly all is devoured except for the 
wings, which are left, frozen, protruding out of the snow.
 What is left of a snow petrel after a Skua has finished with it. Photograph: 
Justin Chambers 
We head back down in the Hag, past Hendo, the mountain that dominates the 
station, imitating the top half of Australia with Cape York creating the peak. 
We follow the same strict route home using GPS waypoints, identified by canes 
stuck in the snow. Coming down from the sublime, one encounters the void not 
more than thirty metres off the track. We stop and are shown how to identify a 
crevasse, then a poke and a hack with an ice axe and one is able to stare down 
into crystalline blue that seems to go on forever.

Looking out to sea we can view the icebergs that glitter and litter the coast. 
A few nights earlier I painted from the Henderson Hut as the summer sun, the 
one that never sets, lights up the bergs that sparkle like jewels off the 
coast. About 17 kilometres out to sea a number of them form a semi-circle of 
shelter where the Emperor Penguin colony of Auster 
<http://www.abc.net.au/science/antarctica/ingrid/diaries/980717.htm> can be 
found. Each year the penguins congregate and form a rolling line, which 
gradually moves around the sea-ice while eggs are laid, then hatched and the 
young are reared. The older penguins are curious, willing to investigate and 
approach me while I draw them.

Back at Mawson I begin to paint the station in my ‘Ebox’, a three-metre sea 
container that has been staked into the ice a few hundred metres off shore. It 
is comfortable and pleasant with the door open and the unobstructed view of the 
multi-coloured boxes that make up the station, bookended by the two wind 
turbines with the tip of Mount Henderson peeking over the plateau.

After an hour the wind strengthens and I congratulate myself on having kept 
one door closed. I place my easel behind it and continue to work, as the wind 
grows stronger. I begin to think it might be hazardous to attempt to walk the 
several hundred metres back to base on the slippery ice. But I am also 
wondering just how secure this box is. Should I stay or should I go?
 Container returning to base. Photograph: Richard Youd 
I am pleased to see a colleague’s vehicle pull up. With some difficulty the 
heavy door is closed and I am returned to base, where a sturdier studio, with 
the wonderful moniker, Wombat RSL is waiting. Later the winds rise from the 70 
knots I encountered to the blizzard strength of 98 knots. As I make the 
30-metre trek from the studio to the main shed, my goggles are ripped from my 
face. The snow sandblasts my exposed skin and the wind penetrates my eyeballs 
as I struggle to walk the short distance to safety.

The next morning, with the winds now subsided, we discover the portable studio 
missing from the ice. It’s found several kilometres away on an island, its 
doors ripped off and the floor punctured. When Antarctica rejects you she lets 
you know it.
 