
I had a conversation with a politically radical, highly educated middle-class 
woman the other day in which I was faintly taken aback to discover that 
although I had grown up in aworking-class background 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/26/barbara-ellen-your-class-stays-with-you>
, with no money, no cultural capital, no university degree and non-existent 
parental expectations, she considered me to have had the more privileged 
upbringing.

The reason was simple. I am male and she is female, ergo the privilege is 
objective and inescapable. Her identity as a woman is deeply entangled in wider 
power relationships that, for her, are as straightforwardly factual as that of 
socioeconomic class.

Identity is crucial with regards to how you perceive the world and how you are 
perceived – and thus, this woman would say, more powerful than simple 
economics, as it is power played out inside the head.

So, if having a label stuck on you (or sticking a label on yourself) has a 
fundamental effect on your consciousness, what does it mean to see your 
identity as – or be defined as – a parent?

Does parenthood make you more sexist – or just more confused? | Tim Lott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/29/parenthood-sexist-men-women-gender-roles>
People who go from being non-parents to parents undergo a seismic identity 
shift. Not only have they seen their selves merged into another self in the 
creation of their children – and hopefully into an enduring relationship – but 
they have also seen their sense of self revised by the appearance of offspring 
in the taking on of a new role/identity – that of parent.

The arrival of parenthood is bound up with identity at the deepest level. 
Personal freedom gives way to responsibility. Self-love gives way to other 
love. Traditionally, for men particularly, the archaic but still active idea of 
the heroic, ego-driven, priapic swashbuckler gives way to the mundane domestic 
breadwinner and part-time skivvy. For many women, it’s similar – the career and 
self are put on hold. Only for them, the skivvying often becomes full time.

Becoming a parent tends to be invisible in the sort of sociological terms in 
which the middle-class woman was inclined to frame things (though such matters 
are acknowledged in feminism through the idea of the personal being political). 
But I can think of no greater identity issue we go through as human beings. Of 
course, you can choose to be a parent, whereas you can’t choose your race or 
sexual orientation or gender (um, I think).

Whatever it represents in terms of formal, institutional and economic power, 
it means a great deal in terms of private power. A parent of any race or gender 
may find their sense of self disappear under a tsunami of childrearing tasks. 
Any privileged position that either parent previously held – perhaps via 
sexuality, money, glamour or power – is transformed.

Identities don’t only confine and define marginal groups. They operate at all 
levels for all people at all times. Thejourney of the self 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jan/13/our-memories-tell-our-story>
 is lifelong, and a mixture of objective and subjective factors in proportions 
that cannot be estimated. I may be white and I may be male and I may (now) be 
middle class, but I am absolutely not the person I used to be, and I am not the 
person I will be five years from now.

Identity is never fixed. And in a way the woman was right – identity is more 
important than class. Because how you think about yourself – and how you are 
allowed to think about yourself – can be more important than your economic 
status and position in society.

Being a parent is the most radical and important identity I have worn – yet 
embodying the paradox that it has also been the most disempowering. This, 
perhaps, is the problem with a feminist analysis based on power relations and 
social identities. It puts simple power at the heart of everything – whereas 
people, with all their complexity, are that heart. But then, perhaps as an old, 
privileged white man, I would say that.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 