
1. The Readers’ Travel Tips competition (the “Competition”) is open to 
residents of the UK aged 18 and over.

2. The Competition is not open to:
a. employees or agencies of Guardian News & Media Limited (“GNM”, the 
“Promoter” or “us”) or its group companies;
b. employees or agencies of Hotels.com or its group companies;
c. freelance contributors to GNM; or
d. anyone else connected with the Competition including family members of any 
of the persons referred to in paragraphs a. – c., above.

3. Entrants into the Competition shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions.

4. To enter the Competition you must go to theguardian.com/witness and sign in 
with your existing Guardian account or create a new account, or download the 
free GuardianWitness app via the App Store or Google play on your smartphone. 
Once you are on GuardianWitness, look under ‘current assignments’ for readers’ 
tips competition, click on the headline, then click on ‘Add your contribution’ 
to enter your tip. No purchase necessary.

5. Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Competition entry to us.

6. GNM accepts no responsibility for entries which are lost, delayed, 
misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical 
or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM.

7. The Competition opens at 10am on Wednesdays and closes at the same time the 
following Wednesday. Entries received outside this time period will not be 
considered. GNM reserves the right in its absolute discretion to extend the 
closing date where the entries received are of insufficient quality.

8. You own the copyright to your Competition entry as its author.

9. By submitting an entry to the Competition, you give GNM:
a. Permission for your Competition entry to be published on GNM websites 
including but not limited to witness.theguardian.com and theguardian.com (“GNM 
Websites”) and on any social media account controlled by GNM, including but not 
limited to Facebook and Twitter accounts (“GNM Social Media Accounts”) , and 
you grant GNM a non-exclusive, royalty-free, worldwide licence to use and 
publish your Competition entry in electronic format (including on GNM Websites 
and GNM Social Media Accounts) and hard copy (including in GNM publications) 
for purposes connected with the Competition, and to adapt the entry to enable 
such publication (including to crop or otherwise edit it for such purposes), 
and you hereby irrevocably waive, for the benefit of GNM, all moral rights in 
the entry to which you are entitled; and
b. The right to use your name and county of residence for the sole purpose of 
identifying you as the author of your entry and/or as a winner of the 
Competition.

10. Your Competition entry must be your own work, must not be copied, must not 
contain any third-party materials and/or content that you do not have 
permission to use, must not promote any goods or services or include any trade 
marks (other than those belonging to the Promoter), and must not be obscene, 
defamatory, distasteful, offensive, or in breach of any applicable law or 
regulation, or in breach of any confidentiality obligations owed by you to 
third parties. If we have reason to believe your Competition entry is in breach 
of this paragraph 10 then we may not consider it and may disqualify it.

11. We may disqualify your Competition entry for the following reasons: your 
entry does not comply with these Terms and Conditions; you are not eligible to 
enter the Competition; or you cannot be contacted. In the event of 
disqualification, we may select a new winner in accordance with the selection 
processes outlined below.

Picking the winner
12. A judge who is independent of GNM will select one (1) winning entry from 
all valid entries received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. Full 
details of the judging process and the name of the judge are available on 
request to jessica.edwards@theguardian.com.

13. When choosing the winner, the judges will consider the most original and 
creative entries.

14. The judge will select the winning entry within four (4) days of the 
closing date. The judges’ decision will be final and no correspondence will be 
entered into.

The Prize
15. The winner will receive one (1) Hotels.com voucher worth £200.

16. The winner will be notified by phone or e-mail within seven (7) days of 
the closing date and be given details of how to claim the prize. The winner 
will receive the prize within 30 days of claiming the prize. If a winner does 
not respond to GNM within fourteen (14) days of being notified of their win, 
the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select 
another winner in accordance with the process described above (and that winner 
will have to respond to notification of their win within fourteen (14) days of 
being notified or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a winner rejects 
their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, the winner’s 
prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner.

17. The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable, and is not redeemable for 
cash or other prize.

18. Hotels.com is responsible for supplying the prize accordingly GNM reserves 
the right to substitute the prize with another prize of similar value in the 
event the original prize offered is not available.
Some other rules

19. The name and country of the winner and details of their winning entry can 
be obtained fourteen (14) days after the closing date by sending a stamped 
address envelope to the following address: The Guardian Marketing Department, 
King’s Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU.

20. The winner may be required to take part in promotional activity related to 
the Competition and the winner shall participate in such activity on the 
Promoter’s reasonable request. The winner consents to the use by the Promoter 
and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the 
Competition for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and 
name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and 
films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and 
its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material 
without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the 
Competition, all entrants consent to the same.

21. The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you 
supply to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at 
http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Competition, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Competition entry, and for the 
purpose outlined in paragraph 19 above.

22. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the 
Competition or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any 
injury or damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or 
resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with 
the Competition. Nothing in these terms and conditions shall exclude the 
liability of GNM under law fraud, fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or 
personal injury resulting from its negligence.

23. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Competition with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Competition is final and no 
correspondence will be entered into.

24. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
relating to this Competition where the failure is caused by something outside 
its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure.

25. The Competition and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Competition submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
English courts.

26. Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London 
N1 9GU.
 