
I made a strawberry pizza the other night, on a whim, and it was surprisingly 
good. It wasn't a puddingy, jammy-sweet pseudo-pizza, but a thin-crusted, 
charred-edged, savoury one. Besides strawbs, it had cherry tomatoes (their 
flavour profile is on the same spectrum as the strawberry's, a little more 
towards the savoury/umami end of it, so the two go well together), sweated-down 
onions (which matched the berries' sweetness), salty olives and creamy 
mozzarella, which provided a perfect counterpoint. It was all very harmonious – 
and gorgeous to look at.

This culinary coup proves that there's always something new you can do with 
strawberries. While I'm more than happy to enjoy these summer treats in classic 
ways – doused in cream, mingled with meringue, snuggled up with shortbread – 
it's gratifying to find a new way to dress an old favourite.

Despite our long, cold winter and sunless spring, British strawberries seem to 
be thriving this year. Stickler that I am for the homegrown and the locally 
sourced, I'd like to see us all raising our own strawberries, or buying them at 
farmers' markets and PYO farms. For me, these places are pillars of our local 
food communities. Support them and you are fostering a better relationship with 
food for yourself and your family. PYOs, particularly, play a great role in 
keeping us close to the source of what we eat. Where else, apart from your 
garden, can children see so clearly how food gets from plot to plate?

I do concede, however, that British supermarket strawberries are getting 
better. A great deal of investment goes into developing varieties these days, 
with the result that the dull but high-yielding Elsanta no longer dominates as 
it did a few years back. Sonata is a better berry, for a start, and the 
varieties that come along a little later in the season, from late June onwards, 
tend be juicier and sweeter still – look out for Jubilee, Sweet Eve, Red Glory, 
Honeoye and Ava.

Not that sweetness is all. For a straightforward strawberry pud, yes, the most 
honeyed, luscious berries are what you need. But for other applications, 
particularly savoury ones, a little acidity is very desirable. A just-ripe, 
unsugared strawberry has a variety of "notes", some green and sharp, some 
aromatic, some nutty and sweet. These berries share flavour compounds with 
apples, pears and pineapple – let your palate search for them next time you eat 
strawberries – all of which can work very well in non-sweet dishes.

So try strawberries in salads, with avocado, fennel, cucumber, celery or red 
onion. They love basil, mint and black pepper as seasonings and are great with 
toasted nuts, especially almonds. Pair them with salty hams and cheeses, or 
other piquant flavours such as olives or capers. Squeeze out their juice (just 
crush and rub through a sieve) and use it in dressings and sauces – a lemony, 
minty, strawberry dressing is lovely, for instance, with seared steak.

And let's not forget afters: there's loads you can do with strawberries, 
should you tire of pavlova or Eton mess. Lately, as a post-dinner treat, I've 
been dipping them in honey and then rolling them in chopped dark chocolate, 
which creates some delicious, slightly winey flavours in the mouth. They make a 
great breakfast smoothie combined with freshly squeezed orange juice, and 
a fabulous elevenses or teatime sandwich with soft white bread and peanut 
butter. I also love mixing them with rhubarb, as in this week's pud recipe, as 
well as in fools, tarts and a straightforward compote made by mixing lightly 
cooked rhubarb with sliced raw strawberries.

Strawberries don't ripen further once picked, so buy them as ripe as you can 
(another compelling case for the PYO). And they deteriorate fast – within 24 
hours if they're really ripe. It's OK to keep them in the fridge for a day or 
two to prolong their life, but bring them up to room temperature before eating, 
or you'll miss out on their aromatic, fragrant charm.

Strawberry and avocado salad

Gentle, rich and velvety, avocado enhances strawberries almost in the same way 
cream does. Meanwhile, basil, salty cheese and a lemony dressing balance their 
sweetness in this beautiful salad. Serves two.

1 small avocado
100g strawberries
About 6 large basil leaves
A little parmesan, or hard, matured goat's cheese, very finely shaved

For the dressing
2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
A squeeze of lemon juice
1 tsp runny honey
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Whisk together all the dressing ingredients, and taste – it should be a little 
sweet and a little salty and have a hint of acidity from the lemon juice, so 
adjust as necessary.

Peel and de-stone the avocado, and slice the flesh lengthways into slices 
about 1cm thick at the outer edge. Arrange on a plate and spoon over a little 
dressing. Hull the strawberries and slice them thickly. Arrange over the 
avocados and spoon over a little more dressing.

Tear the basil into small pieces and scatter over the salad. Use a potato 
peeler to shave a few very fine, translucent curls of parmesan over the salad, 
add a trickle more dressing and a grind of black pepper, and serve.

Strawberry and rhubarb crisp
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's strawberry and rhubarb crisp: 'I love mixing 
strawberries with rhubarb.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
A crisp is a simple alternative to pie or crumble. Serves four.

300g rhubarb, cut into 5-10mm slices
300g strawberries, hulled and halved or quartered
100g caster sugar
Finely grated zest of 1 lemon

For the topping
100g coarse, fairly fresh white breadcrumbs
25g caster sugar
50g butter, melted

Mix the rhubarb, strawberries, sugar and lemon zest in a bowl, then set aside 
to macerate for 30 minutes.

Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6. In a bowl, combine the topping 
ingredients and set aside.

Arrange the fruit in a fairly shallow 25cm x 18cm oven dish. Scatter the 
buttery breadcrumbs on top and bake for 20 minutes, until the fruit is bubbling 
and the topping golden brown and crisp. Leave to rest for 10 minutes, and serve 
hot with whipped cream or vanilla ice-cream.

Pasta with raw tomatoes and strawberries

As my pizza proved, the combination of strawberries with tomatoes can be a 
real winner. They feel like natural partners to me, sharing both a colour and 
some flavour characteristics. To make strawberries sing in a savoury dish, you 
need something salty and piquant alongside, hence the olives and parmesan. 
Serves four.

500g cherry tomatoes (or any flavoursome tomatoes)
200g strawberries, hulled
1 clove garlic, peeled and finely chopped
75g black olives, such as kalamata, pitted and roughly chopped
½ small red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped (or a pinch of dried chilli 
flakes)
About 10 large basil leaves, shredded
100ml extra-virgin olive oil
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
350g pasta shapes, such as small penne or orrechiette 

To serve 
Parmesan or hard goat's cheese

Cut the tomatoes into small pieces – quarters for small cherries, 
similar-sized pieces for larger ones – and put in a large bowl. Cut the 
strawberries into similar-sized pieces and add to the bowl with the garlic, 
olives and chilli, half the basil and the oil. Add a little salt and pepper, 
and mix gently. Set aside somewhere fairly cool, but not the fridge, for an 
hour.

Bring a large pan of water to a boil, salt well and add the pasta. Cook for 
the time suggested on the packet, then drain. Combine with the tomato and 
strawberry mixture. Season to taste, then serve, scattered with the remaining 
basil and a few shavings of cheese.

Strawberry and clotted cream sandwich

One of my favourite summer puds. I'd much rather eat this in strawberry season 
than a traditional cream tea with strawberry jam.

Just take two slices of very fresh crusty white bread and spread one with 
unsalted butter. Thickly slice about 50g strawberries, lay them on the buttered 
slice and sprinkle liberally with sugar. Spread the second slice of bread 
generously with thick West Country clotted cream, place cream-side down on top 
of the strawbs and, pressing lightly to hold everything together, cut into two 
with a very sharp knife. Eat straight away.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ,
 