
I have fond memories of liquorice. Not real liquorice, the woody root of 
Glycyrrhiza glabra (how do you pronounce that?) that's prized both medicinally 
and as a flavouring. No, when I think of liquorice, I think of good 
old-fashioned, lip-blackening, paid-for-with-your-own-pocket-money sweets: 
bootlaces and allsorts and the plump coin of aPontefract cake 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pontefract_cake>.

Liquorice is a love-it-or-hate-it thing. As a child, if you loved it, then you 
lucked out: you got to eat the rejects of all the kids who didn't. The flavour 
doesn't try too hard to please: although sweet, it's also dark, almost burnt, 
intense, a bit edgy. That spicy savour comes at least partly from liquorice 
root, but it's almost invariably complemented by another flavour: aniseed. And 
it's anise's curious, complex, sweet-tangy character that defines many 
liquorice confections. Even if you never could standBlack Jacks 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Jack_(confectionery)>, don't dismiss 
aniseedy flavours. Just try them outside the realm of the sweet shop.

True aniseeds, which grow on a pretty, white-flowered plant, get their 
extraordinary flavour from anethole, a very sweet compound that has a cool, 
menthol sharpness. It is found in other plants, too, some of which just happen 
to be among my favourite flavourings: notably fennel, sweet cicely and star 
anise, which is amazingly versatile in both sweet and savoury recipes.

Star anise has a pungent and penetrating quality – too much really is too much 
– but used judiciously, it has a wonderful seasoning effect. Infuse the pods in 
marinades, or throw them into meaty stews or fruit compotes, where they'll 
leave a rosy flush of sweet, aromatic warmth. If you're cooking long and slow, 
drop in a whole pod; for a more immediate and intense effect – in a dressing or 
marinade, say – crack open a few points from a star anise and release the shiny 
seeds inside. Crush these and the intense essential oils of aniseed are 
immediately in play.

Star anise is also the defining component of Chinese five-spice, a delicious 
and distinctive seasoning. Just a pinch will turn a dressing for a duck salad 
or a thrown-together stir-fry into something rich and somehow authentically 
oriental.

True anise, meanwhile, is a tiny brown seed that can be used much like its 
sister spice caraway: toast it gently, crush to a powder and add to cakes and 
biscuits. It's also great with fruit, notably apples. And the leaves and seed 
pods of sweet cicely are natural sweeteners; they can't replace sugar 
altogether, but throw a few chopped pods into the filling, and you can 
certainly reduce the sugar content of a fruit crumble or pie.

Sometimes it's fun to get an anise hit with those succulent black sweets, too. 
I don't see the sweet shop as a reliable source of great food, but liquorice 
can be a nifty ingredient from time to time.Lisa Allen 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lisa_Allen>, chef at Northcote Manor, cooked a 
fabulous dish of venison with damsons and a liquorice glaze on my Three Good 
Things show <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/hughs-3-good-things/4od#3475739>
 last year, the glaze being simply melted-down Pontefract cakes. This week's 
recipe for liquorice ice cream follows that lead, and is definitely worth 
digging into your piggy bank for.

Pigeon with star anise, cabbage and noodles 

The sweet pungency of star anise is wonderful with red meats. This dish is 
best if you marinate the meat for at least 12 hours. Serves two.

4 pigeon breasts
½ small cabbage (about 250g), trimmed and shredded
2 nests quick-cook egg noodles

For the marinade
1 medium-hot red chilli, deseeded and thinly sliced 
4 star anise, roughly bashed (or just the seeds from inside, crushed)
1 thumb-sized piece fresh ginger, peeled and finely chopped 
150ml apple juice
4 tbsp soy sauce
2 small or 1 large shallot, thinly sliced 
2 garlic cloves, peeled and thinly sliced

Put the pigeon and all the marinade ingredients in a bowl and refrigerate for 
12-24 hours.

When you're ready to cook, put a large pan of water on to boil. Lift the 
breasts from their marinade, brush clean and wipe dry with kitchen paper 
(reserve the marinade).

Drop the cabbage and noodles into the boiling water, cook for two to three 
minutes, until the noodles are done, and drain.

Meanwhile, put a frying pan over a medium-high heat, add a little sunflower 
oil and, when the oil is hot, sear the breasts for a minute on each side if you 
like them quite pink inside, or two minutes a side for medium. Transfer to a 
warmed dish to rest while you finish off.

Over a medium heat, tip the marinade into the pigeon pan, bring to a simmer, 
and cook for three to five minutes, until the shallots are tender. Add the 
cabbage and noodles and toss in the sauce to reheat.

Lift the cabbagey noodles on to warmed plates, cut the pigeon breasts into 
thick slices, arrange on top of the noodles, and serve at once.

Apple and anise cake 
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's apple and anise cake: 'Anise's aromatic edge 
enhances the fruit beautifully.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
Anise has an intense natural sweetness, while its aromatic edge enhances fruit 
beautifully. The seeds aren't as widely available as some spices, but you can 
get them online (trysteenbergs.co.uk <http://www.steenbergs.co.uk>). Caraway 
seeds also work well here. Serves 10-12.

Butter, for greasing
2 tsp anise seeds
100g sultanas
juice of 1 lemon
100g ground almonds 
175g self-raising flour 
1 tsp baking powder
Pinch of salt
200g soft, unsalted butter
200g soft dark brown sugar
3 large eggs
500g eating apples, peeled, cored, quartered and thickly sliced
25g demerara sugar

Heat the oven to 170C/335F/gas mark 3. Butter and base-line a 20cm round 
springform tin. Lightly toast the anise seeds, bash them up in a pestle and 
mortar, then transfer to a small pan with the sultanas and lemon juice. Heat 
until steaming, then set aside to plump up.

In a bowl, combine the almonds, flour, baking powder and salt. In a mixer (or 
by hand), beat the butter and sugar until really light and fluffy: this will 
take several minutes in a mixer. Beat in the eggs one at a time, adding a 
spoonful of the flour mix with each, and amalgamating each egg thoroughly 
before adding the next. Fold in first the remaining flour mix, then the 
sultanas, anise and any pan juices, and finally the apples. Transfer to the tin 
and scatter the demerara over the top.

Bake for an hour and a quarter, or until a skewer comes out clean. Leave to 
cool in the tin for 15 minutes, then turn out on to a rack and allow to cool 
completely.

Orange and liquorice ice-cream

The subtle liquorice flavour here blends beautifully with the warm tones of 
orange. Enjoy it as it is, or with fruit puddings such as baked apples. I like 
Taveners Pontefract cakes, which are still made in Pontefract. Serves four.

100g plain liquorice sweets such as sticks or Pontefract cakes, chopped small
200ml whole milk
300ml double cream
Finely grated zest of 1 orange
½ vanilla pod, split along its length
4 large egg yolks
50g caster sugar

Put the liquorice in a pan with 200ml water, bring to a boil, turn the heat 
low and simmer very gently, stirring often, for 15 minutes, until the liquorice 
has mostly melted and you have a dark syrup (don't worry if it doesn't dissolve 
completely). Turn off the heat but leave in the pan.

Put the milk, cream and orange zest in another pan. Scrape out the vanilla 
seeds and add to the pot, along with the scraped half-pod. Bring to just below 
boiling, then set aside to infuse.

Whisk the egg yolks and sugar in a large bowl. Whisk in the hot cream, then 
return to the pan and cook over a gentle heat, stirring all the time, until the 
custard is just below boiling and has thickened. Pour on to the melted 
liquorice, stir for a minute or so, then pour through a sieve into a jug. Cut 
out a piece of clingfilm or baking parchment to sit on the surface of the 
custard, to stop a skin forming, leave to cool, then chill.

Churn in an ice-cream machine until soft-set, transfer to a freezer container 
and freeze solid. (Don't worry if it's a bit grainy when frozen: this is 
because of the gelatine in the liquorice.) Alternatively, pour into a plastic 
container and freeze for an hour, until the sides start to get solid. Mash with 
a fork, mixing the frozen sides into the liquid centre, then freeze for another 
hour. Repeat at hourly intervals until soft-set, then leave to freeze solid. 
Before serving, let it soften slightly.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 