 Iraqis arrested by coalition forces have disappeared into a 'black hole' with 
no records of where they are being held, Tony Blair's personal envoy on human 
rights has warned.
Ann Clwyd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-clwyd> said if the scandal 
of the missing prisoners had been taken more seriously from the start by the 
US, it could have helped prevent the abuse of detainees in their jails.

In an interview with The Observer, the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP said she was 'very unhappy' at 
the rising numbers still detained - and called on the Iraqi government to 
publish a report on claims that inmates were tortured by Iraqi jailers.

Clwyd, appointed after decades of campaigning against Saddam Hussein's regime, 
reports directly to the Prime Minister and has until now rarely discussed her 
work.

She has spoken out amid growing criticism of Britain's failure to stop abuses 
inIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, arguing that suggestions Blair 
was unwilling to confront the US administration on such issues were wrong: 'I 
know, in conversations he has with the people of influence in the US, he 
doesn't pull his punches. He pushes them, sometimes with direct results.'

Clwyd's own files include two alarming cases highlighting the issue of the 
missing - and the scale of effort required to trace them.

The first involves an elderly woman arrested shortly after the war in the 
middle of the night by US soldiers. With her family unable to find her, 
relatives in Britain sought Clwyd's help.

'I spent days and weeks trying to trace where this woman was,' said Clwyd.

'Eventually it meant a visit to Washington, going into the White House and 
talking to people like [national security adviser] Steve Hadley, [former deputy 
defence secretary] Paul Wolfowitz and [former US envoy to Iraq] Paul Bremer.' 
Still, she drew a blank.

Finally Wolfowitz ordered an investigation in Iraq: the woman was traced to a 
US-run prison near Baghdad airport and freed. She had, according to Clwyd who 
interviewed her afterwards, been abused in custody: as a Muslim, the shame was 
such that she would not be identified. 'She was obviously very unsure of 
herself, emotional, confused: she was frightened. She wanted to put it all 
behind her.'

The second case involves an elderly man who disappeared in 2004, and was 
reportedly sighted in a US prison. His son, a British resident, contacted 
Clwyd. She raised the case in Washington last autumn but so far there has been 
no trace of him.

Clwyd admitted she did not know how many other similar cases there could be 
among those arrested on suspicion of being an insurgent or a security threat.

'Mistakes were being made,' she said. 'People were being scooped up - 
[although] that was all at a time when they were still looking for some of the 
most wanted.'

The 'tremendous effort' required to trace the missing worries her. 'You did 
feel that people were disappearing into black holes and it's very difficult.'

Clwyd appears to suspect incompetence, not malice, in the disappearances. 
Detainees' names were noted by US officials 'sometimes in Arabic, sometimes 
not, sometimes in bad Arabic', making matching them with the missing difficult.

None the less, she argued, the Americans should have taken the cases more 
seriously: 'If they had followed it up harder at the time I think it might have 
avoided some of the allegations - and proof - of abuse that took place.'
 