
Cardiff Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> became the 
first club through to the semi-fnals of this competition last night when, in 
Pool B, they beat their fourth English side in a month - but only after a 
mighty struggle and aBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> fight-back 
which got them to within three points as the game went into injury-time.

The Blues had already beaten Gloucester, Leicester and Sale in October but the 
Guinness Premiership's current leaders were harder to swallow and scored two 
second-half tries - one a penalty try awarded when Jason Spice came close to 
taking Alex Crockett's head off with a high tackle. The wing Andrew Higgins 
also got on the end of a move started by Jonny Fa'amatuainu but the kicking of 
Ben Blair and a rumbling try from Cardiff's 19st Tongan prop Taufa'ao Filise 
ultimately booked them a place at the Ricoh stadium in March.

After hearing that the Ospreys intend using five of their Welsh squad members 
against London Irish tomorrow, Dai Young was more sensitive to the national 
cause, starting just two of his seven, Tom Shanklin and Robin Sowden-Taylor. 
Cardiff needed only to avoid defeat to go through but their coach's selection 
will have gained him brownie points in high places as well as bringing early 
rewards last night.

Shanklin seemed to be at the heart of everything early on, trying little chips 
and cheeky offloads before he created Cardiff's first try with an old-fashioned 
bit of muscle, bumping the Bath midfield cover aside before putting Ma'ama 
Molitika under the posts after only five minutes. The kick was simple enough 
for Blair, who also landed two penalties before half-time. Bath had only a Jack 
Cuthbert penalty, a lot of sweat, tons of possession and a hatful of missed 
chances to show for their considerable first-half efforts. Shaun Berne and Dan 
Browne were guilty of sloppy handling when the hard work had been done by the
Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> forwards, Danny Grewcock among 
them for the first time this season after picking up a pre-season injury.

Joe Maddock managed to wobble over one penalty, when Shanklin was yellow 
carded for slowing the ball down, but missed from in front of the posts when 
Bath were awarded their penalty try. Blair banged over two and, with Bath heads 
starting to drop, Cardiff bundled Taufa'ao Filise over in the corner.

Cardiff Blues Blair; Mustoe, J Robinson, Shanklin, James; N Robinson, Spice; 
Yapp (Powell, 32), G Williams, Filise, Jones, Tito (Morgan, 63), Molitika, 
Sowden-Taylor, Lewis (M Williams, 63).

Tries Molitika, Filise. Con Blair. Pens Blair 4. Sin bin Shanklin 52

Bath Cuthbert (Cheeseman, 44); Maddock, Crockett, Hape, Higgins; Berne, 
Bemand; Flatman (Catt, 59), Dixon, Bell (Jarvis, 53), Short, Grewcock (Hooper, 
h-t), Beattie (Fa'amatuainu, 47), Scaysbrook, Browne.

Tries Maddock, Higgins Con Berne. Pens Cuthbert, Maddock. Sin bin Hooper.

Referee N Owens (Pontyberem).
 