
Simon on Caz


What were you hoping for?
To meet someone new and try a new restaurant.


First impressions?
Pretty, and easy to talk to.

What did you talk about?
Architecture, family and friends, worst jobs, music, films and previous dating 
experiences.

Any awkward moments?
She accidentally kicked my knee under the table. But she was very apologetic.

Good table manners?
Yes. She liked broccoli a lot.

Best thing about Caz?
Her eyes and smile. And her passion for art.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Yes.

Describe her in three words
Pretty, kind, good listener.

What do you think she made of you?
Slightly nervous? I hope I made a good impression with my ironed shirt and 
jeans.

Did you go on somewhere?
No. It was a school night, and late.

And... did you kiss?
A peck on the cheek when she arrived.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
It was humid and we both suffer from hay fever, so I’d have liked some more 
air in the venue.

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
We’ve decided to stay friends.

Caz on Simon


What were you hoping for?
A nice evening, good company.


First impressions?
A nice guy.

What did you talk about?
Ultimate Frisbee, photography, architecture, Lindy hop, cheesy nightclubs, 
rush hour crushes…

Any awkward moments?
It may have looked as if I was winking at him, but I had issues with a contact 
lens.

Blind date: I was hoping to find ‘the one’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/18/blind-date-aidan-padraig> 
Good table manners?
Horrendous – he ate like a pig. Only joking. Simon had lovely table manners.

Best thing about Simon?
Very easy to get on with.

Would you introduce him to your friends?
Some of them, yes.

Describe him in three words
Active, sociable, chatty.

What do you think he made of you?
Amazing, intelligent, witty, sophisticated… just kidding.

Did you go on somewhere?
No, it was getting late.

And... did you kiss?
Nope, no juicy gossip.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
My right contact lens.

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
As friends. We exchanged numbers.

• Simon and Caz ate at the Savannah <http://www.thesavannah.co.uk>, London NW1.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>. For a free three-day trial of Soulmates, 
go tosoulmates.theguardian.com <https://soulmates.theguardian.com/>
 