
Lucy on Charlie 

What were you hoping for?
An enjoyable evening in a new place with an interesting person.

First impressions?
Easy to get along with.

What did you talk about?
Music, art, food and our strange childhood fears.

Any awkward moments?
She was late and it looked as if I’d been stood up. The lovely restaurant 
staff were visibly relieved when she arrived.

Good table manners?
I couldn’t fault them: she navigated chopsticks and a dessert-on-a-stick with 
ease.

Best thing about Charlie?
She’s a great conversationalist.

Would you introduce her to your friends?
Sure.

Describe Charlie in three words.
Warm, friendly, genuine.

What do you think she made of you?
Hopefully that I was decent company.

Did you go on somewhere?
No, but we spent hours happily chatting in the restaurant.

And… did you kiss?
Nope.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I would have ordered more of the delicious aubergine dish.

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
It’s not on the cards; it was a very nice evening, but there was no spark.

Charlie on Lucy 

What were you hoping for?
I was so nervous, I was just hoping I’d end up with someone I got along with.

First impressions?
She had really friendly eyes.

What did you talk about?
Phobias, children, and how giraffes feel about long necks.

Any awkward moments?
Towards the end, when we’d run out of things to say.

Good table manners?
Oh gosh, yeah. She let me have the last piece of aubergine.

Best thing about Lucy?
She didn’t judge me at all for bringing up the topic of giraffes and their 
necks.

Would you introduce her to your friends?
Totally. They’d love a good debate about Brexit with her.

Describe Lucy in three words.
Approachable, kind and interesting.

What do you think she made of you?
I hate the fact I made an awful first impression by being late.

Blind date: ‘Awkward moments? She asked if I played Pokémon Go’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/30/blind-date-lucy-vik> 
Did you go on somewhere?
If we’d gone on anywhere else we’d have missed the tube.

And… did you kiss?
We did not.

Marks out of 10?
A solid 8.

Would you meet again?
We both agreed there wasn’t that spark.

Lucy and Charlie ate at Yumi Izakaya in Shaftesbury Avenue, London W1D 6EX. 
Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. For a free three-day 
trial of Soulmates, go tosoulmates.theguardian.com 
<http://soulmates.theguardian.com>.
 