
Phil on Rebecca

What were you hoping for? 
Someone who was my type, whom I could have a decent conversation with.


First impressions? 
Very pretty, nice eyes.

What did you talk about? 
My degree in furniture design, my French origins, her Dutch origins, travel 
and cycling.

Any awkward moments? 
My plethora of food knowledge did not match up to hers, which I think she 
found a little tedious.

Good table manners? 
Yes, perfect.

Best thing about Rebecca?
Her eyes, lips, and love of cycling.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Yes, but she might be a bit too much for some people.

Describe Rebecca in three words. 
Bubbly, pretty, outdoorsy.

What do you think she made of you? 
I’m not sure she fancied me much. She kept saying the food was nice and the 
wine was nice. I kept expecting her to say the company was good, too, to no 
avail!

Did you go on somewhere? 
No.

And... did you kiss? 
Quick peck, nothing else.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? 
Her need to know the most about everything.

Marks out of 10? 
8.

Would you meet again? 
Possibly, but solely as cycling buddies.

Rebecca on Phil

What were you hoping for?
The father of my firstborn.


First impressions?
Tall, good shirt, nice glasses, and sweet that he said I looked beautiful, 
despite my clearly bedraggled cycling hair.

What did you talk about?
Decking, cycling, life modelling, and squash.

Any awkward moments?
When he told me about the date he had the next day.

Good table manners? 
Excellent.

Best thing about Phil?
His willingness to share food.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
Probably not.

Blind date: ‘I went for the cheek and she went for the lips…’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/06/blind-date-rosie-rodney> 
Describe him in three words. 
Knows his decking.

What do you think he made of you? 
I think he thinks I’m posh, and probably a bit ridiculous.

Did you go on somewhere? 
No, it was my friend’s birthday so I had to skip away.

Did you kiss? 
Nope, just a lovely hug.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? 
I should have ordered his pudding.

Marks out of 10?
6.1.

Would you meet again? 
I don’t think so, I’m afraid. 

Phil and Rebecca ate at Osteria <http://osterialondon.co.uk/> in The Barbican 
Centre, London EC2. Fancy a blind date? Emailblind.date@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>. For a free three-day trial of Soulmates, 
go tosoulmates.theguardian.com 
<https://soulmates.theguardian.com/subscribe/blinddate>
 