
Charlotte on Alastair

What were you hoping for?
A nice evening out with good food and company.


First impressions?
Friendly, great smile and chatty.

What did you talk about?
Jobs, university, our families and our political views.

Any awkward moments?
Surprisingly, no: we talked and talked the whole time.

Good table manners?
Very good. Apart from his wine-pouring skills.

Best thing about Alastair?
He made me laugh and was interesting to listen to.

Would you introduce him to your friends?
Yes, most definitely. I think he would get along with a few of them very well.

Describe him in three words
Engaging, fun, interesting.

What do you think he made of you?
Probably a crazy-haired chatterbox.

Did you go on somewhere?
No, but we ordered another bottle of wine and didn’t leave the restaurant 
until midnight.

And... did you kiss?
Maybe...

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
That the night didn’t end so quickly, because we could have carried on talking.

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
We plan to meet again and exchanged numbers.


Alastair on Charlotte

What were you hoping for?
To be swept off my feet.


First impressions?
Blue hair!

What did you talk about?
Family, tattoos, Harry Potter, the Coliseum, social pressures, women’s 
football, tax and baked beans.

Any awkward moments?
I’m going out on a limb and saying not a single one.

Good table manners?
Faultless.

Best thing about Charlotte?
Her smile, and really good conversation.

Would you introduce her to your friends?
Sure.

Describe her in three words
Happy, charming, grounded.

Blind date: I was hoping to find ‘the one’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/18/blind-date-aidan-padraig> 
What do you think she made of you?
God, he talks a lot of nonsense. Beyond that? Floppy hair and smiley.

Did you go on anywhere?
No time! We stayed in the restaurant so late, we just scraped on to our last 
trains.

And... did you kiss?
Yep.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
Maybe a smidge less wine?

Marks out of 10?
8.7.

Would you meet again?
On Tuesday.

• Charlotte and Alastair ate at Stuzzico <http://www.stuzzico.co.uk/>, London 
W2.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com <>. For a free three-day 
trial of Soulmates, go tosoulmates.theguardian.com <>
 