
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is to pay for 10 people to 
be implanted with a “bionic eye”, a pioneering technology that can restore some 
sight to those who have been blind for years.

Only a handful of people have undergone surgery in trials so far to equip them 
to use Argus II, which employs a camera mounted in a pair of glasses and a tiny 
computer to relay signals directly to the nerves controlling sight. The 
decision to fund the first 10 NHS patients to be given the bionic eye could 
pave the way for the life-changing technology to enter the mainstream.
Bionic eye graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/archive-zip/giv-3902WOwKhMgmJWos/>
Those who will get the equipment can currently see nothing more than the 
difference between daylight and darkness. The system allows the brain to decode 
flashes of light, so that they can learn to see movement.

One of three patients to have had the implant into the retina in trials at 
Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> Royal Eye hospital is 
Keith Hayman, 68, from Lancashire, who has five grandchildren. He was diagnosed 
with retinitis pigmentosa in his 20s. The disease causes cells in the retina 
gradually to stop working and eventually die. Hayman, who was originally a 
butcher, was registered blind in 1981, and forced to give up all work.

“Having spent half my life in darkness, I can now tell when my grandchildren 
run towards me and make out lights twinkling on Christmas trees,” he said. “I 
would be talking to a friend, who might have walked off and I couldn’t tell and 
kept talking to myself. This doesn’t happen anymore, because I can tell when 
they have gone.” They may seem like little things, he said, but “they make all 
the difference to me”.

The way I see it: living with partial blindness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/14/the-way-i-see-it-living-with-partial-blindness-rp>
The NHS will fund the first 10 patients during 2017 to have surgery at 
Manchester and at Moorfields Eye hospital in London. All will be carefully 
followed, to gather data on their progress and assess how much the bionic eye 
improves their daily lives. If the results are good, more patients are likely 
to receive the treatment in the future.

“This highly innovative NHS-funded procedure shows real promise and could 
change lives,” said Dr Jonathan Fielden, director of specialised commissioning 
at NHS England. “The NHS has given the world medical innovations ranging from 
modern cataract surgery to new vaccines and hip replacements. Now once again 
the NHS is at the forefront of harnessing ground-breaking science for the 
benefit of patients in this country.”

Professor Paulo Stanga, who first performed the surgery at the Manchester 
hospital in 2009, said they were very grateful to NHS England. “I personally 
believe this is a landmark decision,” he said. “It will significantly benefit 
patients who are completely blind – not only patients with retinitis pigmentosa 
and their families, but hopefully other patients in the future with other 
conditions, such as age-related macular degeneration.”

At the moment, there is no proven benefit from gene and stem cell therapies, 
said Stanga, even though he believes they will one day help. So the bionic eye 
is the only treatment that can give back a degree of vision to those who are 
completely blind..

There are an estimated 16,000 people with RP in the UK with varying degrees of 
deterioration in their vision. About a tenth can no longer see to count the 
fingers on a hand. Between 160 and 320 are thought to be eligible for a bionic 
eye operation. The numbers with age-related macular degeneration, however, are 
far higher – it is the commonest cause of blindness or severe vision loss. The 
‘bionic eye’ treatment, including surgery, follow-up, equipment and 
rehabilitation, costs £150,000.

Some patients will do better than others, said Stanga. “Patients need to learn 
to interpret the newly acquired visual function,” he said. “They are going to 
be experiencing a pattern of light and darkness. The more they use the device, 
the more they learn to interpret it.

“They are not going to be able to discern faces but if they can see somebody 
is standing in front of them and in what direction the person is moving, that 
is great benefit for them. One of the main complaints people have is the 
feeling of isolation that they suffer. Some of our patients tell us they go to 
the pub and no longer feel that they may be talking to themselves.”
 