
Joe on Astrid

What were you hoping for?
A nice evening and someone interesting.

First impressions? 
She was dressed very smartly and we arrived at the same time. Punctuality is 
an underrated personality trait.

What did you talk about? 
An eclectic mix of books, alcohol tolerance and the Yorkshire moors.

Any awkward moments? 
I made a rookie error by wearing a white shirt, which I spilled food on. She 
mocked me, but I got the stain out in the end.

Good table manners? 
Far better than mine.

Best thing about Astrid? 
She has very different life experiences.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
I’m not quite sure what she’d make of my friends.

Describe her in three words
Quirky, funny, punctual.

What do you think she made of you? 
Maybe that I ask too many questions.

Did you go on somewhere? 
No.

And... did you kiss? 
No.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? 
I would not have spilled food on myself.

Marks out of 10? 
7.5.

Would you meet again? 
She lives in Windsor and I’m in east London, so logistically it’s a bit of a 
nonstarter.

Astrid on Joe 

What were you hoping for?
Good food and good company.

First impressions?
He doesn’t look like a serial killer.

What did you talk about?
Whether to taste the wine and pretend to be an expert, board games, patterned 
clothing.

Any awkward moments?
I had to ask him his name twice. It is a difficult one.

Blind date: ‘I didn’t expect a kiss on each cheek – I’m a hand-shaker’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/29/blind-date-emily-tom> 
Good table manners?
Yes (we’ll overlook him spilling food down his shirt).

Best thing about Joe?
He is easy to talk to.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
I think they’d get on.

Describe him in three words
Easygoing, intelligent, chatty.

What do you think he made of you?
A technophobe, but useful in a pub quiz.

Did you go on somewhere?
No, I had to get a train home.

And… did you kiss?
No.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I would have picked a different dessert.

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
We didn’t swap numbers.

• Astrid and Joe ate at Silk in the Courthouse Hotel 
<http://www.courthouse-hotel.com/restaurantsandbars-en.html>, London W1.

Fancy a blind date? Email blinddate@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blinddate@theguardian.com>.
For a free three-day trial, go to Guardian soulmates 
<https://soulmates.theguardian.com/subscribe/blinddate>.
 