
Andrew on Katie


What were you hoping for?
Fun with a nice girl. I figured Glastonbury would be a pretty magical setting 
for a blind date, so why not?

What were your first impressions?
Straight away, I could tell she had a good sense of humour. Strong dress 
sense. And she was cute.

What did you do on your date?
We had an adventure around Glastonbury. I only expected to spend an hour or so 
watching a band with her – 10 hours later, we were still partying. We did a 
Craig Charles DJ set, Foals, Underworld, the Shangri-La field. Then we ended up 
in a place called the Common.

What did you talk about?
Everything. Melbourne – she’s from Australia – and our jobs and friends. 
Skin-grafting on penises, She-Pees. She talked about She-Pees a lot.

Any awkward moments?
Nah, not at all. She was really sweet.

How did you rate her taste in music?
All right! We liked the same stuff. She loves grime and, when I got hammered, 
I started rapping at her but she seemed to think it was funny.

What did you think of her dance moves?
Solid dance moves.

Best thing about her?
She had good chat and she was up for a party.

Which food stall would you take her to?
She’s a pescatarian, so no meat. We ended up at a falafel place.

Would you share a tent with her?
Yeah!

Describe her in three words.
Adventurous, genuine, kind.

What do you think she made of you?
Great rapper.

Did you kiss?
Yes. There was a lot of snogging.

If you could change one thing about the date, what would it be?
That we were closer in age.

Marks out of 10?
Nine.

Would you meet again?
Not to hook up but definitely to party.

Katie on Andrew


What were you hoping for?
An experience and to get a different perspective of Glastonbury through 
someone else’s eyes.

What were your first impressions?
Nice guy, easy on the eye, my type.

What did you do on your date?
Roamed around Glastonbury, saw some amazing gigs and partied.

What did you talk about?
Life. Work, family, friends, holidays, a really tragic accident that he 
witnessed and was pretty gory.

Any awkward moments?
It was easy right from the start, the conversation flowed.

How did you rate his taste in music?
I’d say it was right on par with mine.

What did you think of his dance moves?
He’s got good rhythm. Good movement in the hips.

Best thing about him?
He’s a gentleman. It was nice to hang out with someone looking out for you – 
holding on to me while we traipsed through the mud, making sure I didn’t fall 
over. There was a lot of teamwork.

Which food stall would you take him to?
A veggie one. He loves halloumi.

Would you share a tent with him?
I wouldn’t say no.

Describe him in three words.
Bubbly, chilled, crazy cat.

What do you think he made of you?
I hope he thought I was a nice person and that he had a good time.

Did you kiss?
Yes. He’s an excellent kisser.

If you could change one thing about date what would it be?
Nothing.

Marks out of 10?
A full 10.

Would you meet again?
We’ll see, back in London. I’d like to.

Blind Date appears every Saturday in Guardian Weekend magazine. Fancy a blind 
date? Emailblind.date@theguardian.com <mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>. For 
a free three-day trial of Soulmates, go tosoulmates.theguardian.com 
<http://soulmates.theguardian.com>
 