
Tom on Emily

What were you hoping for?
Some nice food and good chat. And pudding.

First impressions? 
Friendly and relaxed. She put me at ease very quickly.

What did you talk about? 
Which supermarket makes the best hummus, boozing at weddings, the importance 
of lamps.

Any awkward moments? 
I think my hello and goodbye were both quite bad. Also, in the panic of the 
hello I forgot Emily’s name.

Good table manners? 
Yes, we shared food on all three courses.

Best thing about Emily?
Her sense of humour and honesty.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Yes, I think they would get on.

Describe Emily in three words 
Fun, interesting, inquisitive.

What do you think she made of you? 
Probably a bit nervous, hopefully a good companion for dinner.

Did you go on somewhere? 
The number 52 bus (we live just down the road from one another).

And… did you kiss? 
On the cheek.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? 
I wouldn’t have accidentally shaved a patch out of my beard that morning.

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
Yes, I’d like to. We have swapped numbers.

Emily on Tom

What were you hoping for?
A good chat and a tasty meal.

First impressions?
Friendly and genuine.

What did you talk about?
Lancaster University, where we both went. Cycling, cheese.

Any awkward moments?
I didn’t expect a kiss on each cheek – I’m a hand-shaker.

Good table manners?
Yes. He offered to have a silent first course as I was so hungry!

Best thing about Tom?
Genuine, and made me laugh.

Would you introduce him to your friends?
Yes. I think he’d be able to take their slight madness.

Describe Tom in three words
Friendly, interesting, laid-back.

Blind date: ‘She told me she usually went for younger men and wasn’t into 
beards’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/08/blind-date-she-told-me-she-usually-went-for-younger-men-and-wasnt-into-beards>
What do you think he made of you?
Potentially overly talkative and obsessed with food.

Did you go on somewhere?
The bus, does that count?

And… did you kiss?
A peck on the cheek and a hug.

If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be?
I’d have had less paint on my hands (I’d been at a team-building event that 
day).

Marks out of 10?
7.5.

Would you meet again?
Yes.

• Tom and Emily ate at The Ivy Kensington Brasserie 
<http://theivykensingtonbrasserie.com>, London W8.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>. For a free three-day trial, go to 
soulmates.theguardian.com/subscribe/blinddate 
<http://soulmates.theguardian.com/subscribe/blinddate>
 