
Jon on Karen

What were you hoping for?
Nice conversation and a couple of belly laughs.

First impressions?
Very pretty smile. Good fashion sense.

What did you talk about?
Favourite films, favourite books and favourite member of Busted (Charlie, 
obviously). Pleasant, but superficial.

Any awkward moments?
“I like Katie Hopkins <https://www.theguardian.com/media/katie-hopkins> – she 
tells it like it is.”

Good table manners?
Flawless.

Best thing about Karen?
I appreciated her laughing at jokes that I’m well aware weren’t exactly 
zingers.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Probably not; I’m not sure what they’d talk about.

Describe her in three words
Interested, pleasant, easy-going.

What do you think she made of you?
Intense and awkward, maybe? She was also probably taken aback when I started 
going on about hatingTom Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston>.

Did you go on somewhere?
It was 11 by the time we finished dessert, so there wasn’t really time.

And... did you kiss?
She has read only one of the Harry Potter books, which weirds me out a little, 
so no.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I’d have had the fish to start.

Marks out of 10?
6.

Would you meet again?
“I like Katie Hopkins – she tells it like it is.”

Karen on Jon

What were you hoping for?
To meet my future husband. Or a plate worth Instagramming.

First impressions?
Bearded and bespectacled.

What did you talk about?
Avocados, how to get verified on Twitter and Hiddleswift.

Any awkward moments?
When I arrived, the restaurant didn’t tell me he was already there, so I 
waited by the bar.

Good table manners?
Yes.

Best thing about Jon? 
His stories about being a film extra and celebrity encounters.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
I don’t see why not, especially if they needed tech advice.

Describe him in three words 
Scholarly, eloquent, ambitious.

What do you think he made of you?
Probably that I’m indecisive, scatty and Instagram-obsessed.

Did you go on somewhere? 
Just the tube home.

And... did you kiss?
A noncommittal, “See you.”

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? 
I wish I’d ordered the dover sole instead of the veal risotto.

Marks out of 10?
A very respectable 7.

Would you meet again?
He’s a bit young for me and there was no spark.

• Karen and Jon ate at Savini at Criterion <http://www.saviniatcriterion.co.uk>
, London W1.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com

For a free three-day trial, go to soulmates.theguardian.com 
<http://soulmates.theguardian.com>
 