
David on Marco


What were you hoping for?
A chilled evening, interesting food and nice company.

First impressions?
Very Italian-looking, smelled nice, sharply dressed.

What did you talk about?
Travelling, London life, food.

Any awkward moments?
I fell off my bike on the way, so I was a little shaky, but a G&T sorted me 
out. I also had an embarrassing incident in the toilet where I slightly wet 
myself.

Good table manners?
Didn’t notice, so I am guessing impeccable.

Best thing about Marco?
Interesting and interested in equal measure.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
If he wanted to meet them.

Describe him in three words.
Sophisticated, smiley, chatty.

What do you think he made of you?
Young-looking for my age and slightly strange.

Did you go on somewhere?
No, it was pretty late and I was on my bike.

And… did you kiss?
Nope – didn’t get that vibe.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I wish I’d taken off my cycle leggings from under my trousers. I was a little 
hot.

Marks out of 10?
9. Can’t fault the guy, but I’m not sure we clicked.

Would you meet again?
We come from slightly different worlds, but Marco says he wants to buy a bike, 
and a cycle round Richmond Park would be nice.

Marco on David 


What were you hoping for?
Great food and vino and a good connection.

First impressions?
Good-looking, smiley and easy-going.

What did you talk about?
The Guardian, the Economist, online dating and life goals.

Any awkward moments?
I was late and out of breath; luckily he was still there.

Good table manners?
Excellent. He let me have the last caramelised aubergine.

Best thing about David?
His life attitude and his eyes.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
With pride.

Describe him in three words.
Positive, smart, nomadic.

What do you think he made of you?
Hopefully a nice guy.

Did you go on somewhere?
Four hours was enough for a first date.

And… did you kiss?
Nope – a big hug instead.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
It would have been a Friday.

Marks out of 10?
A nice 8.

Would you meet again?
Maybe. We certainly had a lot to talk about.

• Marco and David ate at Kurobuta <http://www.kurobuta-london.com/> Marble 
Arch, London W2.

Fancy a blind date? Email blinddate@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blinddate@theguardian.com>.

For a free three-day trial, go to Guardian soulmates 
<https://soulmates.theguardian.com/subscribe/blinddate>.
 