
Lucy on Vik


What were you hoping for? 
A dreamboat. A young Paul Newman with a kind heart and good sense of humour.

First impressions? 
A winning smile and lovely long eyelashes (that I am jealous of).

What did you talk about? 
Families, music, cooking and signature dishes.

Any awkward moments?


I got stuck at the ticket barriers at Bond Street. I couldn’t find my Oyster 
card.

Good table manners? 


Excellent. We shared dishes, but I think I ate most of the food. Poor Vik must 
have been starving.

Best thing about Vik? 
He was easy to talk to and had interesting travel tales.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
Yes, I’m sure he’d get on with most people.

Describe him in three words? 
Interesting, dashing, chatty.

What do you think he made of you? 
I think he thought I was really hot (as in sweaty and gross: it was 33C).

Did you go on somewhere? 
Just to the tube together.

And... did you kiss? 
Two kisses on the cheek – very continental.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? 
I would have made it 10 degrees cooler.

​Marks out of 10? 
9.

Would you meet again? 
As a mate. He was keen for me to teach him some moves from my street dance 
class.

Vik on Lucy


What were you hoping for? 
Potentially a spark.

First impressions? 
Pretty chirpy.

What did you talk about? 
London life, tattoos, festivals.

Any awkward moments? 
When she asked if I played Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go>, which I do. She didn’t get 
the hype.

Good table manners? 
Very much so. She was pretty good with chopsticks, too.

Best thing about Lucy? 
Her bird tattoo.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Probably not. I think we just have different interests.

Describe her in three words? 
Lively, chatty and petite.

What do you think she made of you? 
Hopefully a happy chappy.

Did you go on somewhere? 
I offered to go for a drink, but her commute is a bit excessive so we called 
it a night.

And... did you kiss? 
If you count a peck on the cheek, then yes.

If you could change one thing what would it be? 
Probably to eat on a rooftop. It was the hottest day of the year.

Marks out of 10? 
6.

Would you meet again? 
I took down her number.

• Lucy and Vik ate at Oliver Maki <http://www.olivermaki.co.uk/>, London W1. 
Fancy a blind date? Emailblind.date@theguardian.com <>. For a free three-day 
trial of Soulmates, go to soulmates.theguardian.com
 