
It is a shame for Saracens that the victory which kept them in with a chance 
of making the semi-finals was overshadowed by an ugly second-half incident 
involving the Northampton and England hookerDylan Hartley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dylan-hartley>. A swinging arm which 
appeared to strike the throat of the scrum-half Moses Rauluni led Saracens' 
director of rugby, Eddie Jones, to urge the citing commissioner to scrutinise 
the video tape. His call is bad news for England with the autumn internationals 
only two weeks away.

Hartley is one of three hookers in England's senior squad alongside Bath's Lee 
Mears and Leicester's George Chuter, but with Mears suffering a rib injury on 
Friday night the last thing the England manager, Martin Johnson, needed was a 
question mark over another hooker. "I thought the play was dangerous and I hope 
the citing commissioner has a bit of a look at it," said Jones, the former 
Australia head coach. "He took the head of the player away from the ball and it 
was a serious misdemeanour."

Hartley has long been earmarked as a future England hooker but disciplinary 
problems, including a six-month ban for gouging in 2007, mean the 22-year-old 
has yet to win his first cap. Those issues appeared to be behind him, and only 
last weekend he was praised for being the model of restraint against an 
aggressive Montpellier side. Yesterday, though, is likely to do him few favours.

"I would be concerned for his Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> coach that he tends to 
have a record off the ball," Jones added.

"Discipline is exacerbated by pressure of the game. He seems like a good kid, 
he can play a bit but you don't want to see players doing that sort of thing. 
If he is doing it in a club game then you would worry about him in a Test 
match."

Unsurprisingly, Jones' opposite number, Jim Mallinder, said he felt the 
referee, Martin Fox, had been right to simply penalise Hartley. "I had a quick 
look at it and didn't think it was that bad actually," Mallinder said. "He is 
an aggressive player but he is controlling himself. He needs some international 
rugby to test himself against the best."

Hartley may not have received a yellow card but another sin-binning in the 
first half led to the most lively passage of play, even if it had little 
bearing on the result. With a quarter of the game gone, Noah Cato, the England 
under-20 wing who had earlier evaded two tacklers, bumped off Lee Dickson and 
carried Ben Foden over the line to open the scoring, was sin-binned for taking 
out Dickson in the air.

While he was off the teams scored 10 points apiece, Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> starting first when Rauluni foxed 
the covering defence from a ruck and Gordon Ross, who went on to score 23 of 
Saracens' points, slotting the conversion. Barely a minute later, Foden, 
excelling in his first start at full-back for Northampton, swapped passes with 
Chris Ashton to score, only for Saints to give away a penalty from the restart 
which Ross knocked over.

With Cato still to return, Northampton capitalised again down his flank. 
Stephen Myler's cross-field kick looked poor, but the player left kicking 
himself, or at least stamping his feet in frustration, was Andy Saull. The 
flanker rushed up on No8 Roger Wilson as he snatched at Myler's kick, only for 
Wilson to pirouette out of the attempted tackle and stroll the 10m to the line.

Ross succeeded with a second drop-goal attempt in the last action before half 
time to put Saracens 21-16 up but thereafter, the only noteworthy incident came 
from Hartley's introduction to the fray.

Saracens ticked the scoreboard over with four penalties from Ross to one from 
Myler to take the win. And so, while it may not take headlines, the result is 
significant: the Scarlets, Northampton and Saracens can still reach the 
semi-finals, with the first two to face each other in the final pool match this 
weekend.

Saracens Goode; Leonelli, Powell, Farrell (capt), Cato; Ross, Rauluni; Lloyd, 
Cairns, Visagie (Mercey, 55), Borthwick, Chesney (Ryder, 72), Barrell, Saull, 
Skirving (Seymour, 49).

Tries Cato, Rauluni. Cons Ross. Pens Ross 6. Drop-goal Ross. 

Sin-bin Cato 20

Northampton Saints Foden; Ashton, Mayor (Ansbro, 72), Mordt (Spencer, 68), 
Diggin; Myler, Dickson (Dickens, 76); Tonga'uiha, Shields (Hartley, 65), 
Stewart (Murray, 56), Lord (capt), Day (Fernandez Lobbe 76), Lawes, Lewitt 
(Gray, 65), Wilson.

Tries Foden, Wilson. Pens Myler 3.

Referee M Fox (Leics). Attendance 6,984.
 