
The European commission is to spend tens of millions more pounds on promoting 
the ideal of the EU citizen under plans drawn up by officials in Brussels in 
the wake of the Brexit vote.

Officials for the European parliament claim there is now a “clear need” for a 
significant increase in spending on theEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> for Citizens programme, which 
aims to foster the notion of an EU citizenry through remembrance events, town 
twinning and involvement in European parliamentary elections. The programme had 
its budget cut from €215m to €185.5m after a request from Britain in 2013.

“Considering the current political climate, in which an increasing number of 
citizens question the foundations of the EU, decisive action is indispensable,” 
an assessment of the programme by officials in the European parliament reports.

“It is for this reason that the reduction in funding for the EFC programme is 
a serious handicap to successful implementation: to reiterate, the budget for 
the current EFC programme is €185.5m (down from €215m under the previous 
programme), which amounts to merely 0.0171% of the EU multiannual financial 
framework.”

The aim of EFC is said to be that of developing “a better understanding” of 
the EU across all its member states, to fund remembrance events for key moments 
in European history and foster the ideal of European citizenship. The 
assessment document says that funding “which promotes and enables citizens to 
engage in European matters is of vital importance, especially in times when 
Euroscepticism is on the rise”.

It adds: “A reduction was requested by the United Kingdom government, as is 
apparent from a report of the UK House of Commons’ European scrutiny committee 
regarding the EFC programme 2014-2020, and backed in the council.

“The latter report states that ‘in his letter of 31 October 2013, the minister 
for culture, communications and creative industries (Ed Vaizey) informed us 
that the government had succeeded in securing a reduction in the budget of the 
programme (down from €229m in the commission’s original proposal to €185m)’...

“The reduced funding has undoubtedly entailed serious consequences for the 
functioning of the EFC programme as a whole.”

In 2015, from 2,800 applications for cash, 408 projects were selected for 
grants: 252 town twinning citizens meetings, 33 remembrance projects, 32 
networks of twinned towns and 27 civil society projects.

Hungary had the greatest number of successful applications for cash (17%) 
followed by Slovakia (13%) and Italy and Germany (11%).

Earlier this month it emerged that Federica Mogherini, the EU’s foreign policy 
chief, was preparing a timetable setting out steps to create EU military 
structures “to act autonomously” from Nato. Mogherini reportedly said: “We have 
the political space today to do things that were not really do-able in previous 
years.”

The military plan would see countries such as France, Germany, Italy, Spain 
and Poland formingpermanent military structures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/is-there-a-secret-plan-to-create-an-eu-army>
 to act on behalf of the EU and for the deployment of the EU’s battle groups 
and 18 national battalions.

However, the British defence secretary Michael Fallon said he would veto any 
“common military force” as long as the UK was a member state of the EU. The 
European Council president Donald Tusk said Theresa May had told him during 
their meeting at Downing Street last week that she would be ready to trigger 
Article 50 to begin Brexit by February 2017.
 