
At the Almeida Theatre in Islington, north London, last week, I had the rare 
opportunity to see a play that focused on a society that is rarely portrayed in 
high culture and is, in fact, more likely to be a subject of ridicule in 
lowbrow, sneering, reality TV shows.Boy, a new play by Leo Butler 
<http://www.almeida.co.uk/whats-on/boy/5-apr-2016-28-may-2016>, follows Liam, a 
17-year-old Neet (not in education, employment or training) for 24 hours as he 
wanders the capital, trying to find friends, connect with a family who have 
given up on him and with community services that communicate so differently 
from the way Liam does, it seems like they are speaking another language.

The performance is excellent: innovatively staged on a travelator with scenes 
in a jobcentre, doctor’s surgery and on public transport, where among the 
hubbub of conversation you hear snippets of other people’s lives. In the 
jobcentre, while Liam asks if he can “get skills” and is told they can’t “put 
him in the system” until he turns 18, a woman at another desk has been 
sanctioned for missing an appointment because her child is sick, and a couple 
are distraught at the fact that one of them has had her personal independence 
payment (PIP) cut after being declared fit for work.

Liam slips through the cracks and is shunned by former school friends who are 
“keeping themselves busy with workshops”; the only person who spends 
considerable time speaking to him is an opportunistic drug dealer.

As a portrait of modern society, it is startlingly astute – a scene with two 
schoolgirls arguing at a bus stop is uncanny in its depiction of south London 
slang, and speech mannerisms, and all the more notable because this is so 
rarely done accurately and with empathy.

Art has a duty to entertain, but also to inform and comment on modern society. 
Black, and working-class, life is too often overlooked in theatre, film and TV, 
and so excluded from our shared cultural history. At arecent event on the lack 
of diversity in British television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/23/lenny-henry-bbc-diversity>, a 
woman in the audience told the room that as a child in the 1980s, whenever a 
black person appeared on TV, she and her siblings squealed with surprise to see 
someone who looked like them on screen. The tragedy, she said, is that even now 
her young daughter does the same.

People enjoy and gain validation from seeing their experiences and lived 
realities reflected back in art

Analysis by Goldsmiths University and the London School of Economics of the 
2014 Labour Force Survey, published last week, shows that the creative 
industries are overwhelmingly white, with only 7% of the workforce from a black 
or minority ethnic group, compared with 13% of the general population, and a 
disproportionate number of people from privileged backgrounds. In London, where 
many of the creative industries are clustered, 40% of the population are BME, 
so to be representative many creative professions would be far less white than 
they currently are. A“class ceiling”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/27/class-ceiling-working-class-actors-study>
still exists in the arts, and little appears to be changing.

Why does it matter? Because our cultural gatekeepers tell us stories about 
ourselves. People enjoy and gain validation from seeing their experiences and 
lived realities reflected back in art. When films, books, plays and television 
programmes don’t come close to portraying your community or including 
characters that resemble you, even remotely, in terms of class, economic 
position, race and outlook, the message is that your stories and, in turn, your 
lives don’t matter.

Politicians and playwrights voice concern that theatre-goers are almost 
exclusively middle-class and middle-aged, hence the introduction of cheaper 
tickets for younger people and of outreach programmes: but if the only lives 
depicted mirror those of the more affluent, the cycle will persist. Cuts to the 
arts of £236m since 2010 diminish access to creative jobs for people from 
under-represented backgrounds, and low pay forces out young people who do not 
have independent wealth.

We need more plays like Boy, that sensitively observe social issues in modern 
Britain. Increasing diversity in the arts is key to that, and key to ending the 
silencing of the most excluded and powerless in society.
 