
What is it? Finally, a sensible explanation for everything that’s wrong with 
the world.

Why you’ll love it: The year is 2016, and partisan politics are tearing the 
world apart. Our leaders would rather shoot themselves in the foot than give an 
inch of ground to their opponents. Supporters refuse to even talk to those they 
disagree with. We are more polarised than ever, and the middle ground has all 
but disappeared. What could have possibly caused such a destructive series of 
events?

Space bugs. No, hear me out. Space bugs that look like ants, and fell out of a 
meteor, and crawl into your ears and eat half your brain and turn you into an 
impotent idealist with an unexplained love for You Might Think by the Cars. The 
answer is space bugs. We should have seen this coming.

This, in a nutshell, is the premise of Amazon’s BrainDead. It’s a 
Washington-set thriller about the machinations of political gridlock, but it is 
also an absurdly playful sci-fi comedy about ants that make your head explode. 
And, while I know I’m in danger of saying this every week, I think it might be 
my favourite television series of the year.

BrainDead is by Robert and Michelle King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/21/news-junkies-good-wife-writing-team-is-one-of-the-sharpest-in-tv>
, who also createdThe Good Wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-good-wife>. But where that show 
tended to play a little too close to soap for my liking, this is a giddy 
satirical genre piece from start to finish. It is mainly played for laughs – 
witness the opening scene of episode four, in which two flirty neighbours are 
infected with space bugs and turn into furious all-caps internet commenters, or 
the “previously on” recaps that are all delivered as jaunty little ditties – 
but it is underpinned by a serious question. Something must have got us to this 
point, but what?

It is a difficult mix of tones to get right, but the Kings were helped 
enormously by casting Mary Elizabeth Winstead in the lead. The bulk of her 
co-stars – from Johnny Ray Gill’s amateur scientist to Tony Shalhoub’s 
Republican senator – get to play it beautifully broad, so it falls to Winstead 
to ground the show in something approximating realism. She is a veteran of 
scary-silly work such as 10 Cloverfield Lane and Abraham Lincoln: Vampire 
Hunter and it is hard to think of anyone who could play the role better.

Despite its lightness of touch, BrainDead is propelled by daring plot twists. 
Giving anything more away would spoil your enjoyment of the show, but with 
every new episode – and every new scene that stretches the limits of your 
disbelief – you will fall in love with the show. There is one more episode left 
in the series, and I have no idea where it will go. At this stage, anything 
could happen.

I don’t know if there will be a second series. Part of me thinks there won’t. 
This feels like a one-off, a specifically 2016 way of showing everyone how dumb 
they are being. But if this really is it, then BrainDead might go down as one 
of the greatest one-and-done series in television history. Honestly, that’s how 
good it is.

Where: Amazon Prime. 
Length: Ten hour-long episodes, with the finale available next week. 
Stand-out episode: Episode six, which begins with a song that includes the 
line “This isn’t supposed to happen to the main character”, and only gets 
weirder from there.
If you liked BrainDead, watch: The Good Wife (Netflix), Spin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/08/subtitles-politics-and-spin-the-latest-from-channel-4s-walter-presents-foreign-drama-strand>
 (Walter Presents).
 