
A sourdough loaf is very different from what mostly passes as bread these 
days. In fact, it is the antithesis of the industrial factory loaf – that soft, 
structureless, flavour-lite bread that is produced in such huge quantities in 
this country.Sustain <http://www.sustainweb.org/>, whose Real Bread Maker Week 
<http://www.sustainweb.org/news/apr13_real_bread_maker_week/> starts today, 
reckons that well in excess of 90% of our bread is mass-produced either by the 
big brands or supermarkets. Sourdough, by contrast, is bread with immense 
character, with presence – bread with a point. And that's why I think you might 
want to have a go at making it yourself.

Of course, you can buy great sourdough, but if you've done so, you'll know it 
isn't cheap. A magnificent 2kg Poilâne loaf, for instance, will set you back 
about £10, while even smaller, less prestigious examples cost considerably more 
than standard bread. I'm not knocking that: the price reflects the quality of 
the ingredients and time that goes into making the loaf, something you'll 
appreciate if you make it yourself. But making sourdough at home is not 
expensive at all and, while it demands patience, it requires little actual 
effort. It might be a good 10 days from beginning your sourdough starter to the 
point when you can enjoy the first mouthful of a finished loaf, but there's 
very little work to be done in that time.

This starter, with which the whole process begins, is just a flour-and-water 
batter. Well, perhaps not "just". Because it will also contain, invisibly but 
crucially, the spores of wild, airborne yeasts – the ones that happen to be 
native to your own kitchen. These will begin to feed and multiply and, as they 
do so, all sorts of interesting things are produced: bubbles of gas, 
flavoursome alcohol and the acids that give sourdough its characteristic, 
slightly tangy taste. Within a week or so, the starter is ready to be used in a 
loaf – you take some of it, mix it with fresh flour and turn it into bread. The 
remaining starter, provided you "feed" it regularly, can then be kept 
indefinitely, ready to give you a loaf whenever you feel like it.

And you will feel like it. Because it isn't just sourdough's superb flavour 
that will reward your patience; its texture will, too. This bread has an 
elastic, ever-so-slightly-rubbery-but-in-a-really-good-way crumb and a proper, 
crisp, crunchy, robust crust. Freshly baked and smeared with cold, creamy 
butter, it's exceptional. Torn up, dabbed in good olive oil, and sprinkled with 
a few flakes of salt, it's a delight. It also has longevity. Over the days 
subsequent to baking, you'll find it makes the best toast ever, it's brilliant 
for bruschetta and, as it gracefully comes to the end of its life, it produces 
the very finest breadcrumbs and croutons.

If you make it, and like it, it pays to get into the rhythm of baking 
it regularly enough to make it your mainstay loaf. Sourdough-production – the 
nurturing of the starter, the mixing of the dough, the long, slow rise and the 
final, glorious bake – is one of those kitchen routines that's somehow 
life-affirming and transformative. And why wouldn't it be? You are, after all, 
growing your own bread.

Sourdough starter
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's sourdough starter recipe: 'Make it with 
wholegrain flour and keep it warm in your kitchen, and you should see signs of 
life within 24 hours.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
The time it takes a starter to begin fermenting can be a few hours or a few 
days. But make it with wholegrain flour and keep it warm in your kitchen, and 
you should see signs of life within 24 hours.

About 100g strong bread flour (at least 50% wholegrain, such as wholemeal, 
spelt or wholegrain rye)
Up to 1kg bread flour (or a mixture of flours), to 'feed' the starter

In a large bowl, mix the flour with enough lukewarm water to make a batter the 
consistency of thick paint. Beat it well, then cover with a lid or clingfilm 
and leave somewhere fairly warm. A warm kitchen is fine, as is a coolish airing 
cupboard. Check it every few hours, until you can see fermentation has begun. 
This is signalled by the appearance of bubbles and a smell of, well, 
fermentation (it can smell quite unpleasant and acrid at this stage, but don't 
worry, it will mellow).

Your starter now needs regular feeding. Begin by whisking in 100g or so of 
fresh flour and enough water to retain that thick batter consistency – you can 
now switch to using cool water and to keeping the starter at normal room 
temperature. Leave it again, then, 24 hours or so later, scoop out and discard 
half the starter and stir in another 100g of flour and some more water. 
Repeat this discard-and-feed routine every day, maintaining the sloppy 
consistency and keeping your starter at room temperature, and after seven to 10 
days you should have something that smells good: sweet, fruity, yeasty, almost 
boozy. Don't be tempted to bake a loaf until it's been on the go for at least 
a week.

If you're going to bake bread every day or two, maintain your starter in this 
way, keeping it at room temperature, feeding it daily, and taking some of it 
out whenever you need to. However, if you want to keep it for longer between 
bakings, add enough flour to turn it into a stiff dough, then it won't need 
another feed for four or so days. You'll just need to add more water when you 
come to make the "sponge" (see below). Alternatively, lull your starter into 
dormancy by cooling it down – it will keep for a week in the fridge without 
needing to be fed. You'll then need to bring it back to room temperature and 
probably give it a fresh feed to get it bubbling and active again. Combine 
these two approaches – keep your starter as a stiff dough in the fridge – and 
you can leave it for two weeks before it will need your attention again. If you 
know you won't be baking for a while, you can even freeze the starter; it will 
reactivate on thawing.

Sourdough loaf

For the sponge
About 150ml active starter (see recipe above)
250g strong flour (white, wholemeal or a mixture of the two)

For the loaf
300g strong bread flour (white, wholemeal or a mixture), plus more for dusting
1 tbsp rapeseed or olive oil 
10g fine sea salt

The night before you want to bake your loaf, create a sponge: in a large bowl, 
combine 150ml of active starter with 250g flour and 275ml warm water. Mix, 
cover with clingfilm and leave overnight. In the morning it should be clearly 
fermenting: thick, sticky and bubbly.

To make the dough, add the 300g of flour to the sponge, along with the oil and 
salt, and incorporate. You should now have a fairly sticky dough. If it seems 
tight and firm, add a dash more warm water; if it's unmanageably loose, add 
more flour, but do leave it fairly wet – you'll get better bread that way.

Turn out the dough on to a lightly floured surface and knead until smooth and 
silky – about 10 minutes – then put in a lightly oiled bowl and turn it to coat 
with the oil. Cover with clingfilm and leave to rise. Sourdough rises 
slowly and sedately, so it'll take a few hours in a warm kitchen, and a few 
more in a cool larder. One good option is to knead it in the morning, then 
simply leave it all day – perhaps while you're at work – in a cool, 
draught-free place until it has more or less doubled in size and feels springy 
if you push your finger gently into it; alternatively, knead it in the evening 
and leave to rise overnight.

Deflate the risen dough by punching it down with your knuckles on a lightly 
floured surface. You now need to prove the dough (give it a second rising). 
First form it into a neat round, tucking the edges of the dough underneath 
itself so you have a smooth, round top and a rougher base.

If you have a proper proving basket, dust it liberally with flour. 
Alternatively, rig up a proving basket by lining a wide, shallow bowl with a 
clean, floured cloth. Place your round of dough smooth side down in the basket 
or bowl, cover with oiled clingfilm or a clean plastic bag, and leave to rise, 
in a warm place this time, for an hour and a half to three hours, until roughly 
doubled in size again. It's now ready to bake.

Heat the oven to its highest setting (250C/500F/gas mark 10 is ideal). 
If possible, have ready a clean spray bottle full of water – you'll be using 
this to create a steamy atmosphere in the oven, which helps the bread rise and 
develop a good crust. (You can achieve the same effect with a roasting tin of 
boiling water placed on the bottom of the oven just before you put the loaf in.)

Five minutes before you want to put the loaf in, place a baking sheet in the 
oven to heat up. Take the hot baking sheet from the oven, dust it with flour 
and carefully tip the risen dough out of the basket/bowl on to it; it will now 
be the right way up. If you like, slash the top of the loaf a few times with a 
sharp serrated knife (or snip it with a pair of scissors) to give a pattern. 
Put the loaf in the oven, give it a few squirts from the spray bottle and leave 
to bake for 15 minutes. Lower the heat to 200C/390F/gas mark 6, give the oven 
another spray, and bake for a further 25-30 minutes, until the now well-browned 
loaf vibrates and sounds hollow when you tap its base.

Leave to cool for at least 20 minutes – it's OK to slice it warm, but not 
piping hot.

• For the latest news from River Cottage HQ, go to rivercottage.net 
<http://www.rivercottage.net>.
 