
I mourned AA Gill <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill> by chain-reading 
his work, bingeing on interviews, restaurant reviews, travelogues: all 
fearless, curious, unbothered by the bourgeois notion of giving offence, a 
clear-headed vision with unique literary elan.In one interview 
<http://www.foodrepublic.com/2015/05/07/all-aa-gill-wants-to-do-is-sell-papers/>
, these lines struck me: “Everything is so overflavoured now,” he said, 
“dominated by the East and by Latin America and these enormous, big flavours. 
This style of cooking is fantastic, and I love it. But actually, I was just 
thinking, when was the last time I ate a blanquette de veau that was just 
white, and just soft, and wasn’t shouting at me?”

Now, I swoon at a cacophony of tastes as much as the next palate on a journey 
to jaded, but Gill’s words resonate as I take possession of a series ofBreddos 
<http://breddostacos.com>’ signature tacos. They are unspeakably delicious, but 
I feel bludgeoned, bewildered, bloated with flavours. Normally when reviewing, 
I’m a hideous plate-sniffer, trying to identify individual components, parse 
technique, understand context; I’m a whole lot of fun on the job, me. Here, I 
can’t see the food (it’s dark), I can’t hear others’ observations (it’s loud) 
and everything arrives at once in a great, untrammelled blurt of 
hot-sour-sweet-crisp-gooey-chewy shoutiness. It’s a mic drop moment.
 Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Guardian 
Anyway, some background. The duo behind Breddos, Nud Dudhia and Chris Whitney, 
were food-obsessed friends who jacked in their jobs to start selling beef 
shortrib tacos from a shack at east London’sNetil Market 
<http://netilmarket.tumblr.com>. A labour of love (Ginger Pig 
<https://www.thegingerpig.co.uk> beef, marinated and seared and slow-cooked) 
they would make as many as they could with limited means, sell out and repair 
to the pub. Selling out earlier and earlier made them realise they had a hit on 
their hands. An extended menu and street food fame followed, and now they’re 
out into the real world of Clerkenwell at the edge of the City. Their new 
restaurant is a cutie: lightboxes, hand-painted wall menus, booths; during an 
early-days visit, it’s populated by a swearathon of industry insiders, chefs 
dick-swinging so noisily that it puts me off my frilly fried egg taco with 
macadamia nut mole, hoja santa (a lightly anise-scented Mexican leaf) and 
homemade queso fresco. Which is bloody annoying, because it’s way sexier than 
they are.

So I have to go back during daylight hours. Worth it: the kitchen elevates 
street food to an art. They make each taco in-house, soaking, cooking, liming, 
washing (or nixtamalising) the corn and grinding it on a mill made from 
volcanic stone. I know. No commercially bought taco will taste like these. 
They’re the perfect vehicle for the dazzling toppings, each core ingredient 
(pig’s head cochinita pibil, say; or crisp-fried masa chicken; or a loose pile 
of their own fragrant chorizo verde; or smoky roast sweet potato) with a 
backing choir of electrifying salsas and seasonings: honey and pasilla chile 
glaze, habanera sauce, shrimp chiltomate, x’ni pek, pea mole. (No, you look 
them up: I haven’t the word count.) The cumulative effect is blinding.

Related: The Laughing Heart, London E2: ‘The only good news from 2016?’ – 
restaurant review | Marina O’Loughlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/30/the-laughing-heart-hackney-london-e2-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>

This isn’t Mexican food. Or Tex-Mex food. Or even the kind of ingredients-led 
Mexican food I ate recently in Arizona. (Brief shout out to all the Trump 
voters I spoke to who, when I hastily changed the subject to favourite food, 
answered “Mexican”.) It’s a mad, chaotic fusion where, if the flavour is big 
enough, it’s in; so there’s kung pao chicken, Szechuan black vinegar, pineapple 
nam jim. The subtlest thing we eat is Yucatan-style sea bass “tikin xic”. With 
its skin charred and its flesh glazed with half salsa rojo and half salsa 
verde, both ringing with chilli, it’s to subtlety what Trump is to interior 
decoration.

What seems to drive the Breddos boys is a kind of ferocious creativity. Menus 
change frequently: you might find crunchy nut sweetbread tacos, or the 
shortribs could come with masa onion rings and pickled jalapeño instead of 
lemon onions. Tlayudas (Mexican “pizza”) feature curry leaf and cumin instead 
of avo and salsa. The wood oven might be disgorging arbol chile crab instead of 
the Old Spot pork “al pastor” that came our way, spit-grilled and served with 
roast pineapple.

Whatever you find, it won’t be a soothing experience, a blanquette de veau for 
the soul. They need to do some work on running an actual restaurant in terms of 
timings and flow, rather than a street food shack with fine mezcals. But it’ll 
have your tastebuds howling “Chihuahua” like the drunk at the fiesta.

• Breddos <http://breddostacos.com> 82 Goswell Road, London EC1, 020-3535 
8301. Open Mon-Sat, noon-late. About £10 a head, plus drinks and service.

Food 8/10 
Atmosphere 6/10 
Value for money 9/10
 