
An apprentice bricklayer has been convicted of trying to join Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> in Syria after training for battle at 
a paintballing centre alongside three other men linked to the terror group.

Humza Ali, 20, posed for “promotional” photos alongside Mohammed Ali Ahmed, 
Gabriel Rasmus and Abdelatif Gaini at a paintballing centre in Solihull months 
before border staff in Turkey sent him back to Britain.

The pictures – released by police after reporting restrictions were lifted – 
show three of the four Birmingham men making the single-fingered Isis salute as 
other paintballers walk and sit nearby.

A three-week trial at Birmingham crown court heard that Ali wanted to “fight 
until I die” in Syria and was covertly recorded telling a fifth Isis 
sympathiser that his mother had confiscated his passport.

Ahmed, who is seen smiling on the “bonding session” pictures, was jailed 
earlier this week for his part in handing £3,000 to Brussels “man in the hat” 
bombing suspect Mohamed Abrini.

The trial also heard that pictures recovered from Ali’s phone showed him with 
would-be jihadist Rasmus, posing beside a tank at Delta Force paintballing in 
Cut Throat Lane, Hockley Heath, in June 2014.

Gaini, who is thought to be in Syria, is seen crouching near a military 
vehicle in one of the pictures. Ali – a student at Birmingham’s South and City 
College, who lived with his parents – told his trial he had no intention of 
travelling to Syria when he made his way by sea and air routes to Istanbul via 
Ireland in January 2015.

But jurors convicted Ali, who will be sentenced in January, of attempting to 
travel for terrorist purposes and disseminating numerous video messages to 
other men showing beheadings and atrocities carried out by Isis.

Ali, of Ward End, Birmingham, was also found guilty of sending malicious 
communications after directing abusive anti-democracy messages at a local 
councillor.

During Ali’s trial, prosecutor Anne Whyte QC said the paintballing photos were 
proof that Ali was preparing for terrorist acts.

She told jurors: “If you step back you will understand that for an 
inexperienced but committed young man like Humza Ali, who intends to leave his 
western urban life for war in the Middle East, the opportunities for handling 
anything remotely resembling a type of firearm are extremely limited.

“Membership, for example, of a gun club might draw unwanted attention, but the 
occasional paintballing session with friends is ideal, however bizarre that may 
seem, and at least enables the participant to handle a type of weapon and to 
take broad aim.

“Should you be in any doubt about the serious intent behind this activity in 
June 2014, you will be able to consider evidence which we say demonstrates that 
this was in fact a sort of training exercise, and of itself an act of 
preparation.

“During it, the participants posed for photographs in quasi-combat gear, 
holding their paint-filled weapons, including Ali.

“They were able to use the occasion to take a sort of promotional photo 
sealing their common sense of identity.

“It was a bonding act of preparation between men of like mind and like intent. 
They were doing what passed, in their limited circumstances, for training.

“Three including Ali have been thwarted in their plans to get to Syria.”

Ahmed paid for the paintballing exercise, added Whyte, who told jurors that he 
had already pleaded guilty to an offence under the Terrorism Act.

Ahmed, 27, of Small Heath, Birmingham, was jailed for eight years on Monday at 
London’s Kingston crown court.

Contempt of Court Act restrictions in the case of Ahmed had prevented 
reporting of his presence at the paintballing centre and references to the fact 
that 41-year-old Gaini travelled to Syria.

Rasmus, 29, of Lozells, Birmingham, was jailed for four years at the Old 
Bailey last month after being arrested in April last year at Dover while en 
route to Syria to engage in terrorism.
 