
Given the sad timing of their deaths in December, a documentary exploring the 
relationship betweenCarrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> and her mother Debbie 
Reynolds <https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds> was inevitable, but 
Bright Lights (Sky Atlantic) has long been in the works. Filming began back in 
April 2014, and it is transparently a work of great patience. The only thing 
rushed aboutit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/06/bright-lights-carrie-fisher-debbie-reynolds-documentary>
is the air date, which has been moved forward a few months.

Unflinchingly honest (although I flinched a few times) and unbearably poignant,
Bright Lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/06/remarkable-tenderness-film-examines-bond-between-debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher>
 doesn’t just trump future documentaries about Fisher and Reynolds; it 
precludes the need for them. It is as comprehensive a portrait of mother and 
daughter as you are ever likely to see.

Apparently the film was Fisher’s idea – she wanted to document her mother’s 
relentless determination to perform. At the start, Reynolds, in her 80s and in 
frail health, is about to do a show at a casino complex. “She loves doing it 
when she’s doing it,” says Fisher. “But afterwards she’s laying on the floor. 
But in a good, dignified, movie-star way.”

Fisher and Reynolds lived next door to each other, in what Fisher called “the 
compound”. Debbie’s house was tidy and old-fashioned; Carrie’s was exuberantly 
weird, full of creepy portraits and scavenged oddities. She had a player piano 
in her bathroom and bloody palm prints on her shower curtain. As parent and 
child, they had their share of mutually inflicted trauma, but as neighbours 
they had reached a peaceful accommodation. They were, essentially, best 
friends. “To a great degree,” says Fisher, “sometimes more than I would ever 
want to, I know what my mother feels and wants.” They made a formidable double 
act, with Fisher’s scissoring wit fended off by Reynolds’ straight-man 
impression of indulgent bewilderment. Their relationship was deeply 
affectionate, but Fisher’s blunt honesty was always to the fore. “Everything in 
me demands that my mother be as she always was,” she says early on. “Even if 
that way is irritating. She just can’t change – that’s the rule.”

As Hollywood royalty, their lives were comprehensively filmed and 
photographed, enabling the documentary to zip back and forth across decades: 
mother and daughter singing together on stage when Carrie was still a teenager, 
and again just last year. It could revisit Debbie’s divorce fromEddie Fisher 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0279472/bio>, or glimpse at the earliest 
incarnation of Princess Leia, then skip forward to Fisher signing posters at a 
sci-fi convention (“lap dances”, she called them). Some of the human frailty on 
display is raw – in particular home video of a younger Fisher exhibiting manic 
behaviour on the Great Wall of China, or visiting her dying father back in 1995 
– but it is never gratuitous.

It is probable that Brights Lights was always intended as a sort of 
valediction – it revolves around Reynolds’ approaching retirement, and the 
final auction of her impressive collection of Hollywood memorabilia. And if 
that is all it ends up being – a testament to showbiz grit – it will have 
succeeded. But it is really about two people looking after one another. “If my 
mother’s unhappy, it lives on my grid,” says Fisher. You don’t have to care 
about Hollywood, or Star Wars, or be a particular fan of Fisher or Reynolds, 
for Bright Lights to break your heart.

I would not be surprised if the initial proposal for Our Dancing Town (BBC2) 
was a single sheet of A4 with the words: “LikeGareth Malone’s Choir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/24/gareth-malone-choir-great-british-christmas-interview>
, but with dancing.” It’s none the worse for the striking resemblance, except 
in the sense that you can see everything coming a mile down the road.

Choreographer Steve Elias heads to Yorkshire to get the locals hoofing – he 
wants to put on a huge, flashmob-style parade through the streets of Barnsley. 
There is some predictable – if perfectly understandable – scepticism from 
former coal miners about the idea of restoring the town’s dented civic pride 
through the medium of dance. But there are also some closet hoofers out there. 
Joan, 72, missed out on her chance to be a Bluebell Girl, but she can still 
tap. Twenty-year-old Mick used to win dancing competitions, but now he works 
in his parents’ chippy.

Elias, who is built like a prop and comes from south Wales, has an exuberance 
that seems capable of awakening Billy-Elliot-style stirrings in almost anyone 
(apart from ex-miners – they’ll march, but not dance, and they don’t need no 
trial run). The people of Barnsley are, if anything, too cooperative for this 
sort of show – a little more resistance might have made it more dramatic – but 
the final dance sequence, featuring cops, kids, old people, baton twirlers, 
northern soul devotees, glass blowers and a brass band, still brings a lump to 
the throat. It’s a formula because it works.
 