
Aside from visiting a former pupil in a young offender institution, Dame Sally 
Coates had never been in a prison before when she was asked by the justice 
secretary, Michael Gove, to undertake a review of prison education. “All I knew 
about prison education was that the boy I visited wasn’t getting any,” she says.

“If he’d got his GCSEs perhaps he could have gone on to do something with his 
life. Because he failed, because he was in custody, he kind of went over the 
cliff. I knew that when he came out he wouldn’t go back to education. I was 
really furious about it. When I saw the secretary of state, I said to him: 
‘Somebody should look into education in prisons because it’s really awful’. 
A couple of weeks later I had a call from his office asking me to do it. I 
didn’t know a lot about prisons at that time, but I do know a lot about 
education.”

Coates’s review, to be published this month, will recommend the creation of a 
graduate scheme along the lines of theTeach First 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jan/14/why-is-teach-first-scheme-so-controversial>
 programme, whereby graduates spend two years working as prison officers before 
going off to pursue other careers. They will link up with Cambridge university 
to do two years of an MSc alongside their prison work. The graduate officers 
will get 10 weeks intensive training, including basic teacher training – so 
instead of just being turnkeys they will be educational helpers on the wings. 
“This will put education at the heart of the prison not just in the education 
block,” Coates says.

Michael Gove unveils review of prison education in England and Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/08/michael-gove-prison-education-review-england-and-wales>
As a headteacher, Coates recruited some of the first Teach First graduates. 
“After two years 50% of them left to go and work as bankers etc, but the other 
50% loved the work so much they stayed on and some are heads now. That’s what 
I’m hoping will happen with our prison graduates.”

Coates wants to go to universities in September and recruit graduates for the 
scheme, provisionally named “Unlock-ed”. “We’ll tell them: ‘Learn great 
leadership skills, work with some of the most disadvantaged people in the 
country, give something back and then go off and pursue your career.’ We’ll get 
people who wouldn’t normally see the prison service as a career, just like with 
Teach First, and hopefully some of them will get the bug and want to go on to 
be prison governors or work in other areas of the prison service.”

Coates’s report will also recommend that prison learning should be modular 
rather than linear and that prisoners are able to take their driving theory 
tests while in prison. She wants more incentives for prisoners to learn, by 
paying prisoners doing courses the same wages as they would receive in 
a workshop, instead of less than half.

Prisoners will have an initial educational assessment when they enter prison 
and will then be provided with a personal learning plan. “It’s about getting 
qualifications that lead to work wherever possible. Basic numeracy and literacy 
if they need it, and then it will be in the governor’s gift to allow them to 
study up to level three four and five if they have the ability. But mainly it’s 
about being able to go on and get a qualification to get a job.”

If you shut a person up without helping them change, it's likely somebody 
worse will come out

At present long-term prisoners and lifers are not allowed to study for a 
degree until they are six years from a release date. Coates says that will 
end: “We’re recommending that if someone can get a degree and qualify in prison 
there is no reason they can’t become teachers in prison, not just a peer 
mentor, but a real teacher.”

Coates is best known for turning around 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/education/schools/punctuality-respect-constant-exams-how-dame-sally-coates-turned-burlington-danes-around-10054870.html>
 the failing Burlington Danes academy in west London. Controversially, she 
introduced “rank ordering” of pupils, showing where each stood in relation to 
each other, and rigorous testing up to six times a year. She was heavy on 
discipline and punctuality, with detentions given for being even a few seconds 
late. “It compels students to ensure that they are on time,” says Coates. Five 
years after she took over as head, in 2013, the school was declared“outstanding 
in every category”. <http://burlingtondanes.org/ofsted-and-performance-data-3>

During the course of her prison review, Coates and her team of 12 visited 30 
institutions. She spoke to governors and prison officers, and went to education 
departments to speak to prisoners and teachers. When I ask what she thought was 
missing from prison education she has to think hard: “Any kind of pace. In a 
school or a college there’s a pace, an energy, an outcome. There’s enthusiasm. 
But in the prison classrooms, it didn’t seem to matter.”

The most demoralising class she went into she says was a maths class. “There 
were about eight men in the room with a teacher. Some were stretched across 
their desks dozing, some were leaning over their chairs, they just looked so 
bored and lacking in energy. They had exercise books with very little in them. 
One man complained that he wanted to be a painter and knew that he needed to 
know how to use a tape measure to measure walls. He’d asked if he could have 
one in the class but he’d been told they weren’t allowed because of some 
incident some years earlier. The whole education block in that prison was just 
depressing.”

Prison education still at the back of the class, as Gove takes new course
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/04/michael-gove-prison-education-justice-secretary-jail>
Coates sees prison education as vital to rehabilitation. “I totally believe 
there are consequences if you behave badly. But people are in prison as 
punishment not for punishment. If you just shut a person up for however many 
years without trying to help them to change for the better, then you’re likely 
to get somebody worse coming out. If you’re the victim, it’s hard to accept 
people in prison benefiting in some way. We’ve put in the report that 
reoffending costs society somewhere between £9bn and £11bn a year, with court 
costs, police lawyers etc. So it’s worth investing in rehabilitation so there 
are fewer victims and reduced financial costs to society.”

And, Coates says, for many prisoners, rehabilitation means more education.

But how will she implement the integration of the graduates on the scheme? 
“The reason we are putting them on the wing rather than in the classroom is 
because that’s where prisoners are most of the time. They will still lock up 
and unlock, but we also hope they’ll do extra.

“They can have reading groups on the wing, they can really bring education to 
the heart of the prison. They’ll come out after two years with almost a 
master’s qualification and we hope some will stay. And those who go on to 
industry, well they’ll have a great understanding of prisons and prisoners, and 
hopefully will employ ex-offenders and encourage others to do the same. They’ll 
have more empathy.”

Coates is very positive about Gove’s plan to give prison governors more 
autonomy and introduce prison league tables, which will include assessment of 
education provision. “Once we introduced accountability and league tables and 
transparency of results in schools everything changed,” she says. “Every 
teacher that teaches an exam class is held accountable for the results, and we 
should be more like that in prisons. So as the head is held accountable, so the 
governor should be held accountable.”
 