
If Monday was a time to recall fond memories, Friday was about settling old 
scores. John Aloisi, 10 years ago the hero in the Socceroos’ World Cup 
qualifier against Uruguay, saw his side Brisbane Roar draw 1-1 against his 
former clubMelbourne City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-city>
. Not the result he wanted, but a respectable comeback against the club that 
sacked him in December 2013.

Ante Covic: 'You need to be a little bit nuts to be a goalkeeper' | Paul 
Connolly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/20/ante-covic-you-need-to-be-a-little-bit-nuts-to-be-a-goalkeeper>
This build-up was all about Aloisi. A decade since that penalty ended a 
32-year curse on Australian football and turned him into a household name, 
naturally Aloisi was wheeled out to reflect on the historic moment.


Friday night’s fixture, however, brought more recent history into sharper 
focus: namely Aloisi’s 17 game winless streak as coach of Melbourne Heart. The 
horror run in his first season as a head coach – he lost 24 of his 39 games at 
Heart – threatened to ruin his reputation irreparably. When he was sacked, 
Heart’s then-chairman Peter Sidwell said, “we’ve all got blood on our hands”.

Much has changed since then. City have famously had a change of owners, while 
Aloisi has had a mini-renaissance after a period away from theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>. His brother Ross has joined 
him as assistant coach in Brisbane, and Aloisi looks rejuvenated and 
comfortable in his role.

Brisbane Roar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brisbane-roar>, who went 
into the match equal top of the table with Melbourne Victory, were firm 
favourites but it was a evenly-matched first half. Brisbane’s front three, 
Jamie Maclaren, Dimitri Petratos and Brandon Borello, looked dangerous, but 
lacked finesse and decisiveness in front of goal.

Matt McKay had the first chance in the second minute, flashing a low shot just 
wide. On the half-hour mark Petratos and Maclaren unsuccessfully peppered 
City’s goal four times in the space of five minutes, with the latter butchering 
a point blank header which he really should have buried in the back of the net.

Aaron Mooy, meanwhile, stalked the midfield looking like an undernourished 
street-urchin searching for pockets to pick. In both first and second half, 
Brisbane goalkeeper Jamie Young invited attention.

Midway through the first half, under no pressure whatsoever, as Young prepared 
to throw the ball out from his penalty area, he slipped, collapsed 
embarrassingly in a heap and released the ball to City’s Uruguayan striker 
Bruno Fornaroli. The ball ended up with Mooy, who was lurking on the edge of 
the penalty area, but he turned his shot just wide of the far post.

Just minutes after half-time, again under no pressure, Young was left 
red-faced as he made a mess of what should have been a regulation restart. 
Brisbane’s beanpole centre-back Daniel Bowles turned his back on Young, whose 
short goal-kick bounced off Bowles’ heels to the Artful Dodger Mooy.

After a quick on-two with Fornaroli, Mooy’s shot was stopped by Young, but his 
save could only be parried as far as Harry Novillo, who poked the ball into the 
net to make it 1-0 to City. His double-sweatband celebration was a tribute to 
his countrymen in France after the terrorist attacks on Paris last week.

Brisbane had the better of the play in the second half, and Henrique equalised 
on 70 minutes. Thomas Broich’s beautiful floated pass found the Brazilian, 
whose first touch was good and finish was better. The hero in last week’s 1-0 
win over Perth Glory, Henrique was again the super-sub at Suncorp Stadium.


While City coach John van ‘t Schip said it was a “fair result”, Aloisi said he 
was “disappointed we didn’t get the three [points].” Aloisi labelled City’s 
approach “anti-football” – pointing out that referee Chris Beath gave City 
players five yellow cards “for pretty cynical fouls”.

“I was surprised they played like that to be honest,” said Aloisi. “There’s 
one thing about defensive mindset, and there’s one thing about just fouling. 
That’s the difference. I didn’t have the money that they’ve got to play a 
certain type of football. I didn’t have that money.”


While Aloisi may not have been impressed with his former club’s performance, 
his show of emotion on the sideline after Henrique’s goal showed that it was an 
important goal not just for the point on the ladder, but also for his own 
pride. Losing to Melbourne City at home, after being the better side on the 
night, would have been a painful end to an otherwise happy week.
 