
After missing a hatful of chances, Jamie Maclaren was the eventual hero as 
Brisbane Roar came back from a goal down to defeatWellington Phoenix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wellington-phoenix> 2-1 on Saturday 
afternoon. In oppressive, late-afternoon Far North Queensland humidity it was a 
gutsy, important performance by the Roar.

From Perth to Dunedin, Geelong to Townsville, since 1977 the national league 
has bravely battled the tyranny of distance. How many other football leagues in 
the world can claim, completely unselfconsciously, aLong Distance Derby Cup 
<http://www.perthglory.com.au/article/glory-and-phoenix-battle-for-long-distance-derby-cup/9zcv2031lyq71fbcoyigk9e5f>
?

Marcelo Carrusca on the spot to give Adelaide late win over Sydney FC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/11/marcelo-carrusca-on-the-spot-to-give-adelaide-late-win-over-sydney-fc>
In the almost-four decades of national league football, however, the 
northern-most meeting point has been Townsville, and even there, the North 
Queensland Fury experiment only lasted for two mostly regrettable seasons. This
A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> encounter in Cairns — 
the 113th national league venue — is a new frontier, one for the 
stadium-spotters, stats nerds and most importantly, for the thriving, 
multicultural football community that has developed in the splendid isolation 
of Queensland’s tropical north.

Brisbane Roar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brisbane-roar> believe 
they are spreading football to regional areas of Queensland, and hope to make 
this a more regular event. Indeed their members voted to play in Cairns over 
much closer locations, and the players made themselves available to the locals, 
which is a vote of confidence for football in the Far North.

That Suncorp Stadium, their regular home ground, is being re-turfed after the 
recent Taylor Swift concert was also a significant factor. Without first-class 
real estate football is the perennial wanderer. The Roar remain at the mercy of 
Suncorp, and the biggest piece of football infrastructure up here in Cairns is 
Endeavour Park, which, apart from a touch-up here and there, hasn’t changed in 
25 years.

Perhaps the only disappointment was that the match was played – in front of a 
5,162 crowd – at Cazaly’s Stadium, a totally unsuitable AFL ground named after 
a Victorian footy player and the current home of AFL Cairns. The atmosphere was 
flat, but it wasn’t for a lack of trying – where else can you get pre-game 
entertainment featuring Ned Zelic swaggering out of a chopper dressed in 
T-shirt, shorts and shades, as if he was just popping into a Saturday afternoon 
barbecue at a mate’s place?

Brisbane, who prepared for the Cairns humidity for the past fortnight by 
watering their training pitch, started the brightest. Half-chances fell to Jack 
Hingert and Maclaren, while Henrique — granted a rare start in place of Brandon 
Borello — was his usual busy self. His low cross into the box on 35 minutes 
deserved better than Dimitri Petratos’ air-swing and Thomas Broich’s feeble 
shot.

It was Phoenix striker Roy Krishna who opened the scoring on the stroke of 
half-time, burying the visitors first real chance of the game. Collecting the 
ball on the edge of the box, he bamboozled both Hingert and Petratos, and drove 
a low shot into the net to give Phoenix a shock lead. Perhaps Krishna, who grew 
up in Fiji, was the best acclimatised to the tropical conditions?

The heat, of course, was the biggest talking point of the match. In the Cairns 
summer it is brutally hot by 8am, so a 4:15pm kick-off reduced the players to a 
sacrificial offering at the alter of the Fox Sports programming department. 
Wellington, who last week played in mild Auckland weather on a scabby blue 
pitch painted green, must have felt like they were stepping straight into a 
furnace.

Word is that head of the A-League Damien De Bohun was up in Cairns this time 
last year to arrange this fixture, but the logic of Cazaly’s Stadium at 4:15pm 
remains a mystery. All week, local football people shook their head in 
bemusement at the scheduling and the location. Why not play it at 7:30pm, when 
the heat is less oppressive? Why not play at Barlow Park, the home of state 
league side Far North Queensland Heat and the ground where the NRL hosts games?

Certainly Phoenix coach Ernie Merrick wasn’t happy with the scheduling. Midweek
 he questioned the timing of the match 
<http://theworldgame.sbs.com.au/article/2015/12/09/merrick-questions-afternoon-kick-cairns>
, and post-game admitted that his players “deteriorated due to the weather 
conditions”.

“We weren’t allowed a drinks break in the second half because it was a 
nano-degree below 28 [degrees],” he said. “Kick-off time is obviously decided 
by someone who has never played football in his life. If it’d been a couple of 
hours later I think we could have produced a better performance.”

In any event the match was entertaining, end-to-end and probably of a higher 
quality than most expected. In the first half the Phoenix sat back to conserve 
energy, happy to play on the counter attack, while the fresh legs of Jeffrey 
Sarpong just after half-time instantly made an impact, with the Ghanaian 
providing a defence-splitting pass to Roly Bonevacia on 49 minutes. Only Jade 
North’s lung-busting run and superb slide tackle prevented the Phoenix going 
further ahead.


For all the Roar’s possession, there was a frustrating lack of finesse up 
front for most of the match. On several occasions Maclaren found himself in 
good positions, but simply couldn’t find the back of the net. On 68 minutes he 
missed perhaps the best chance of the game, failing to connect properly to a 
precise Broich cross.

In the 71st minute, however, Maclaren made up for his earlier errors by 
turning provider. His searching pass into the penalty box found Jean Carlos 
Solorzano, who in turn found Steven Lustica with a sharp cross. Lustica, who 
came off the bench on 66 minutes, provided the clinical finish that had been 
previously lacking, and post-match Roar coach John Aloisi said he “deserved” to 
score.

“Stevey has been unlucky that he hasn’t been starting, because early on in the 
season he was playing,” said Aloisi. “We’ve got a strong squad so I have to 
make decisions, tough decisions, but he never drops his head. That’s a credit 
to him and that shows the rest of the players that you don’t drop your head, 
because you never know when your opportunity is going to come again.”

Indeed not giving up became a theme of the night. Moments after Lustica’s 
equaliser he tried to return the favour with a delightful back-heel for 
Maclaren, but again the Brisbane striker failed to finish the job. With just 
minutes left to play, however, Maclaren finally broke through the Phoenix 
defence and slid his shot underneath goalkeeper Glen Moss. Maclaren’s winner 
was his sixth goal of the season, and probably his hardest earned.

“Macca was lucky, a bit fortunate to finish the way he did,” said Aloisi. “But 
he deserved it because he kept on going and made sure that he got into 
goal-scoring positions all the time.”
 