
I am fortunate enough to live in one of the Lancashire “hovels”, Haslingden, 
part of Rossendale. Thirty-five years ago, when I emigrated here from 
Yorkshire, the mills actually worked, there was a railway line and people had 
jobs (London must stop sucking cash from the rest of Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/23/london-stop-sucking-up-cash-britain>
, 24 December). I was made welcome and became part of the community. Since 
then: the railway line closed, followed by the mill, then the hospital, then 
the public hall, then the swimming pool. Finally, about two years ago, 
Rawtenstall town centre died, closed and was demolished.

We have lost much of our industry and now it would appear most of our 
remaining history, culture and bus transport links are going. The nationally 
acclaimed Helmshore Textile Museum is scheduled to close, as are all five 
libraries in Rossendale, along with other remaining historical and cultural 
places throughout Lancashire.

The Tory MP criticises the Labour Rossendale and Lancashire councils. In turn, 
the Labour powers criticise the Tory government. Who cares? Our community, like 
many others “north of the M25”, is obscenely neglected, starved of funds and 
dying. One example of the London-versus-the-rest hypocrisy: for Rossendale, we 
need £30m to provide a desperately needed railway line reconnection between us 
and Manchester. You must be joking to expect such extravagance in austerity 
Britain. However, for London, finding funds for HS2, Crossrails 1 and 2, tube 
and station improvements and anotherLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> airport runway costing tens of billions 
of pounds, there is no problem. Apparently, it’s vital to stimulate the economy.

Gripe over. We know our place up here. I’ll shuffle back into my little 
northern hovel and reflect on why people cannot be bothered to vote.
Vernon Hudson
Haslingden, Lancashire

• What an excellent piece by Simon Jenkins on the unfair distribution of arts 
and infrastructure spending between London and the regions. Public funding for 
culture is immensely valuable – that’s why we want it shared fairly. When I was 
Labour shadow arts minister I discovered that London gets 14 times as much arts 
money per person as the rest of the country and in Lincolnshire the budget last 
year was 25p per head. But when I spoke about this in parliament the only 
response I got was a complaint from a leading London gallery director with 
a publicly funded new building project.
Helen Goodman MP
Labour, Bishop Auckland (Co Durham)

• London does not “suck cash from the rest of Britain”. The rulers use London 
to suck cash into Britain which they claim, falsely I believe, benefits 
Britain; but it undoubtedly hurts Londoners. London is being sold off to 
oligarchs and oiligarchs and other unlovely specimens of the global super-rich, 
which brings foreign cash into London while driving London property prices out 
of reach of Londoners. Those property buyers who choose to live in London 
divert facilities into serving their wishes. The rulers claim that keeping 
London as the world financial capital is a vital British interest, but it 
imposes another lot of grotesquely overpaid overlords on Londoners.

The influx of capital hasn’t done working Londoners any good. London has lost 
a greater proportion of its industry than almost anywhere. This is symbolised 
by its buses: the old Routemaster was built in Willesden, the new “Boris bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/20/flat-batteries-london-buses-add-to-boris-johnsons-problems>
” with its mean little windows and cramped upper deck is built in Northern 
Ireland.

And Jenkins wants to move all remaining middle-level public-sector jobs out of 
London, another step towards leaving the capital entirely to the rich and those 
who serve them.

The only original feature of Jenkins’ malice towards London is his desire to 
destroy its world-class universities. I assume this is due to his resentment 
that any British university should presume to challenge the monopoly of his own 
public school and Oxford clique.
John Wilson
London

• Simon Jenkins highlighted the problem of a metropolitan mafia and 
celebrities with vanity projects that drain scarce resources from the regions 
and underfunded art forms such as jazz and folk. London has two opera houses 
cheek by jowl soaking up over £40m pounds of public subsidy. But Mr Jenkins 
failed to expose the primary culprit presiding over this disgraceful state of 
affairs, in terms of arts funding:Arts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>. It is high time it 
was replaced with an organisation that will at last be driven by a policy for 
the arts that dispenses resources in an equitable way and is based outside 
London.
Chris Hodgkins
London

• In his list of things that should leave London, Simon Jenkins misses the 
greatest prize. It is well known that the Houses of Parliament are so 
dilapidated that they need a massive refurbishment. Whether funds are provided 
for this or not, parliament will need another home for maybe three to five 
years. Surely this is the moment to make the “northern powerhouse” a reality by 
moving the lot (preferably permanently) to Leeds or Manchester, or even 
Newcastle?
Roderick Thirkell-White
London

• Some years ago, while at a dinner party, I was lamenting the fact that 
Bristol had failed to get a grant for a new concert hall. A guest from London 
remarked: “There’d be no point – no one there would appreciate it.” Not 
just greedy, arrogant with it.
Anthony Burton
Stroud, Gloucestershire

• David Cameron boasted while in York of spending “hundreds of millions of 
pounds on flood defences in Yorkshire during this parliament”. Meanwhile, 
Transport for London will spend £563m onone tube station (Bank). This shows 
where the government’s priorities lie.
Mark Knight
York

• Simon Jenkins describes the disparity between the profligate funding of 
culture in London at the expense of the rest of the country. His evidence 
includes the latest proposals by Lancashire county council to dispose of its 10 
museums. The chancellor is fond of talking up the prospect of a northern 
powerhouse. However, his disastrous and ineffectual austerity policies appear 
to be about to wipe out the heritage of an earlier one. Faced with savage cuts 
to their local government settlement, Lancashire councillors debate among 
themselves whether culture or social care should be their priority. In truth, 
this is a false choice given that they should be enabled to fund both as London 
does and, as Keynesian economics would advocate. Along with the 10 museums, the 
council is also proposing to remove 40 of the county’s 74 libraries, terminate 
their arts services and sell off the buildings. The millions previously 
invested by Lancashire ratepayers and taxpayers as well as agencies such as 
Arts Council England and Heritage Lottery Fund will be simply written off at a 
stroke.

Heritage and culture generates economic benefits through tourism and also 
helps us to describe and make sense of our identity. To create an economic 
climate in which whole chunks of our regional identities are simply dumped into 
a skip marked “austerity” is both morally and economically wasteful. If the 
cultural investment multiplier works for London, then why not the regions?

There is a Christmas card on my mantelpiece. It depicts a ragged Edwardian 
labourer sitting with his tearful granddaughter in a wretched room, a sparse 
Christmas meal before him. The superimposed caption says: “I’m sorry love. It’s 
because we’re northern. That’s all there is to it.” Indeed.
Richard Hooper
Retired head of cultural services, Lancashire

• Simon Jenkins’ article on the problem with London was spot on. For decades 
the capital has been sucking resources away from the rest of the country. Many 
years ago I attended a conference on economic development in the south-west and 
was told that “London could not be stopped”, to which the obvious response 
seemed to be that something had to be done to stop it! But nothing has been 
done and the regions (the south-west as well as those mentioned by Simon) are 
starved of investment.

Here, in the small market town of Chudleigh, about 10 miles from the centre of 
Exeter, we have been seeking funding for various projects for more than five 
years. The town centre needs a revamp, we need a new community hall and the 
sports centre needs to expand, all to cope with the rapidly growing population. 
These relatively modest aspirations could probably all be achieved with an 
investment of no more than £3m – small change compared with, for example, 
Joanna Lumley’s ridiculousgarden bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/14/work-on-london-garden-bridge-to-begin-despite-30m-shortfall-private-money>
. We are constantly being praised, including by a parliamentary committee, for 
the work undertaken locally, mostly by volunteers, to determine the needs of 
the town, but are then told there is no money available. Clearly there is money 
available, but it is being spent in the wrong place and on the wrong things. So 
it is time for a more equitable distribution of funding. Thank you, Simon, for 
highlighting the issue.
Graham Wall
Vice-chairman, Chudleigh Town Centre Enhancement Advisory Committee

• Bravo, Simon Jenkins, for a wholly positive, fact-based exposé of the use of 
sharp elbows by the London mafia at the expense of the rest of the country. But 
the rest of the country is not just the divide between our cities north and 
south, but includes the urban-rural divide. Here in Ludlow we struggle on to 
provide arts and community activities, minus even the modest Arts Council help 
of the past, at the Assembly Rooms. We operate with a dozen paid staff and more 
than 100 volunteers and by hook or by crook manage to deliver live events, 
films, talks, live streaming and the central venue for community activities 
ranging from zumba to the Civic Society. It is 30 miles to the nearest 
commercial cinemas and larger arts venues, and public transport is poor.

We may live in beautiful surroundings, but the benefits of this provision – 
physical and mental wellbeing, overcoming social isolation, providing respite 
for carers, and creating a cohesive community – are the same wherever you live.

We currently survive on masses of goodwill plus approximately £2pa 
public-sector funding per head. We anticipate this cash will be withdrawn over 
the next two to three years. Currently we are seeking funding to upgrade our 
facilities and become “sustainable”. Pro bono appearances by Lord Puttnam, Alan 
Johnson MP and Lord Hennessy in 2015 have enhanced our programme and reputation 
– and for this type of support we are indebted.

Of course our capital should be pre-eminent – though in Ireland the National 
Opera House is not in Dublin – but not to the extent that it snuffs out 
activity and access elsewhere. Thank you, Simon, for this timely salvo.
Helen Hughes
CEO (volunteer), Ludlow Assembly Rooms

• Why do the Arts Council and our culture secretary, Ed Vaizey, choose to 
spend their (presumably limited) time and effort pleading for an Italian 
painting of an Italian man to be saved and for someone to spend £30m on a 
foreign painting (British buyer sought for £30m Pontormo portrait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/23/uk-buyer-sought-30m-pontormo-painting-young-man-red-cap>
, 24 December), rather than on our endangered British heritage? Lancashire and 
other councils across the country are closing museums and galleries, cutting 
conservation of rare British objects and paintings, disbanding local 
collections and neglecting or selling off important buildings because they have 
no money. Vaizey and the Arts Council have their priorities askew when they 
prefer to plead for a Pontormo that will be well cared for somewhere else 
instead of doing what they should be doing: worrying about the many unique 
British objects, paintings and places that are at risk thanks to “austerity”.
Claire Nash
Skipton, North Yorkshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 