
In every addiction, a part of us is addicted to the process. Laying out the 
cigarette papers to build the joint; heating the spoon and flicking the 
syringe; dealing with our emails before our DMs; cueing up Netflix for when the 
kids go to sleep; methodically polishing the keys to our own prisons.

Britain seems to be going through the preliminaries associated with one of its 
most cherished addictions: bombing. Bombing Syria has probablyonly been 
postponed by Russia’s intervention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/07/russian-jets-pound-syrian-provinces-in-fresh-wave-of-attacks-says-watchdog>
. It was, of course, amusing to see the western press suddenly preoccupied 
about whether bombs were hitting their intended targets. Perhaps Putin should 
have avoided such rigorous international scrutinyby bombing only hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/04/afghan-hospital-bombing-msf-labels-us-airstrike-a-war-as-it-withdraws-staff>
.

The recent immolation of a Médecins Sans Frontières hospital in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/03/msf-hospital-us-condemned-over-horrific-bombing-in-afghanistan>
 presented us with the internal contradiction of our media’s presentation of 
bombing: that we have technology so precise our weapons can hear their victims 
begging for a trial, and that we sometimes blow up stuff “accidentally”. It has 
been suggested thatnon-white people caught up in our foreign wars are 
“unpersons reported” 
<https://twitter.com/benphillips76/status/650671915661664256>. More accurately, 
they are treated as subpersons. A handful of Afghans dying could make the front 
pages, but only if they were strangled one by one by Beyoncé as the half-time 
entertainment at the Super Bowl.

Historically, Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> has existed as a 
place where outsiders come to fight, a bit like Wetherspoon’s. No one likes 
Assad: he has the surprised appearance of a man who has just swallowed his own 
chin, and a bizarre, faint, fluffy moustache, as if he pulled on a cashmere 
turtleneck just after eating a toffee apple. He has created a hell for his own 
people that British teenagers seem eager to go to and fight in, just to give 
you some idea of how shit Leeds is.

But if their desire to go to Syria is deluded, how is our government’s any 
less so? A government that doesn’t believe it should have any responsibility 
for regulating our banks or even delivering our post thinks it needs to be a 
key player in, of all things, the Syrian civil war. Somehow, the plight of this 
strategically significant state has touched their hearts. Britain is so 
concerned about refugees that it will do anything – except take in refugees – 
to try to kill its way to a peaceful solution.

Why is war more palatable than more refugees? Why is the destruction of lives 
you can’t see easier to live with than someone on your bus making a phone call 
in a language you don’t understand? The idea that war is for Queen and country 
has always struck me as bizarre. It must be hard for the British royal family 
to see who we choose to fight against – I can imagine they were as baffled when 
we went after the Nazis as they are now that we disapprove of the ritualistic 
murder of journalists.

So, which of a variety of awful groups is Britain going to side with? We have 
all the options of a 39-year-old woman whose Tinder app has given her only one 
match: Broadmoor.

Of course, there are no guarantees that airstrikes in support of rebel groups 
will work. It’s simply uncharted territory for Cameron, with only the fact that 
he did exactly the same thing recently in Libya and caused an unmitigated 
disaster that turned the country in to a kind of jihadi Mad Max to provide any 
kind of guide. Perhaps we believe the myth that bombing helps because we think 
bombing beat the Nazis. That was a win, wasn’t it? I mean, it’s not as if we 
now live in a Europe controlled by the Germans or a country where the poor are 
restricted from breeding and disabled people are dying as a result of forced 
labour.

We cling to our dependency with the weary rationale of any addict. The 
addiction is simple; giving up is complicated. It’s a tricky old situation when 
you get down to it. Our key allies are the people funding the jihad that we are 
supposedly trying to stop. We want to stand against Islamic Statewhile having a 
cosy relationship with other Islamic tyrannies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/uk-saudi-arabia-relationship-under-growing-strain>
. The tiresome thing about social democratic allies is that they don’t usually 
need to gun down their own people in any significant numbers, and we don’t make 
our money exporting ballot papers. Bombing is simple. It’s what we’ve prepared 
for. As the old saying goes, when all you’ve got is a hammer, every problem 
starts to look like a foreigner you can beat to death with a hammer.

Yes, recovery is difficult, but that’s because it’s a return to reality, in 
all its beautiful complexity. The ability to act unilaterally and the ability 
to create solutions for difficult situations with multiple actors are mutually 
exclusive. The very idea of unilateral action is probably a post-imperial 
hangover. If we wanted to get well as a society, we would end up like anyone in 
recovery: sitting around a table talking, having awkward conversations and 
making compromises. Instead, a few months from now, we’ll be dealing with the 
kind of horror that is unleashed when British MPs are told they can vote with 
their consciences.
 