
The king or queen of comedy award is the jewel in the crown of the British 
comedy awards <http://www.britishcomedyawards.com/>. It marks the point when – 
after a night of mild debauchery, endless toe-curling speeches from corporate 
sponsors and, if history is any indication, consistent technical difficulties – 
one figure will rise above the rabble and be given just recognition out for 
their singular, bravely anti-authoritarian, dedication to communicating truth 
through comedy.

That's the theory, at least. In reality, the king or queen of comedy award is 
voted for by the public, so it'll probably go to whoever's been on the telly 
the most or has the nicest hair. And, now that the nominations for this year's 
award have been revealed, we know that it'll go to eitherJack Whitehall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jack-whitehall>, Sarah Millican, 
David Mitchell, Alan Carr, Graham Norton or Lee Mack.

There's an argument here that many of these nominees are personalities rather 
than comedians. Technically speaking, in terms of public recognition, this is a 
list of four chatshow hosts and the two blokes from Would I Lie to You. They're 
all undoubtedly funny and charismatic – and to some extent they all write 
material and perform live – but that doesn't matter. This is basically a 
popularity contest based on a public vote. If Ant and Dec had been nominated, 
or Keith Lemon, or Arg from TOWIE, it would have been all over by now.
 Graham Norton, Lee Mack and Alan Carr: all nominees for the king or queen of 
comedy award. Photographs: Rex/Getty Images 
On the plus side, though, this is the only category that the nominees have any 
say in. The others are all voted for by the comedy awards jury – a gang of 
industry writers, performers and producers with an impressive spectrum of 
tastes and output – over whom the nominees shouldn't have that much influence. 
But it's different with public awards. Thanks to Facebook and Twitter, we get 
to see how much the nominees want this. With every link to the voting site, or 
friendly tweeted reminder that they've even been nominated, we get a look at 
the cold hard ambition behind their eyes. If you've got time, you could even 
compile a kind of Neediness Index. I'm sure the results would be revealing.

But that's the nature of public votes. Look at the People's Choice awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jan/12/peoples-choice-awards-voter-gop>
. Its winners always vary wildly from the winners of the Oscars. This year, for 
example, the Oscars gave its best actor award to Daniel Day-Lewis. The People's 
Choice awards, meanwhile, gave theirs to Zac Efron. The criteria is different 
between public votes and jury-led votes. One wants emotion and range and a 
quantifiable physical transformation. The other just wants something pretty to 
look at.

And that's why the nominees for king or queen of comedy shouldn't be too 
worried if they don't win next month. It might be presented as the most 
important award of the night, but it's just a popularity contest. Surely it's 
much better to win something that's been voted on by a tight-knit group of 
industry peers who acknowledge and champion the pursuit of comedy as the purest 
form of art. So let the king or queen of comedy be given to whoever has the 
best haircut. We all know that the real artists are found in the best comedy 
entertainment personality category, anyway.
 