
A British couple have won a legal fight to be reunited with their children 
after being arrested on suspicion of trying to travel to Syria to join Islamic 
State.

The couple, from the north-east of England, were arrested at the Eurotunnel 
terminal at Folkestone on 10 July 2015 on suspicion of preparing terrorist acts 
and child cruelty or neglect. Their teenage son and two younger children were 
in the back of the car and later told police they did not know where they had 
been going.

The parents always insisted they were going on a surprise weekend away in the 
German Alps, where they planned to hike and “taste the local pastries”. No 
evidence was ever found that they had made any direct communication with anyone 
living in Syria or in Isis-controlled territories.

When told that police thought the family were heading to Syria, the teenager 
reportedly said: “Oh my days, I never thought that my dad would really go to 
Syria or Morocco or somewhere like that.”

The three children were placed in foster care for four months but were 
returned to their parents in November 2015.

A high court judge has now ruled 
<http://www.bailii.org/cgi-bin/format.cgi?doc=/ew/cases/EWHC/Fam/2016/3088.html&query=(%22islamic)+AND+(state%22)>
 they can stay together as a family, along with their new baby sibling.

Mr Justice Cobb said he was not convinced the family had been going for a 
weekend away in Germany, but he believed the attitudes of the parents had 
“genuinely changed” after they took part in an extensive deradicalisation 
programme.

Suspicions about the family were raised four months before their arrest at 
Folkestone, when the father posted a picture on Facebook of a man with whom he 
had been in an altercation, calling him an “apostate”.

He was arrested on suspicion of publishing threatening written material 
intending to stir up religious hatred.

The family home was searched and a number of electronic devices were seized. 
Analysis of videos, documents and social media communications aroused concern 
that the parents supported forms of Islamic extremism, terrorism and jihadi 
activity, and that they had associations with proscribed terrorist 
organisations with connections in Syria and Iraq.

Among the material found was a picture of a woman and children being hanged 
over a bridge, a video of a captured Jordanian pilot being executed, and The 
Book of Jihad by Abi Zakaryya.

The father was a member of a WhatsApp group that included various suspected 
terrorists and criminals, and on which he praised the actions of a leading 
al-Qaida figure who was allegedly responsible for several terrorist attacks, 
dispatching suicide bombers, and the beheading of hostages.

The father was interviewed by police but he offered no comment. The police 
formed the view that the father was associated or connected with al-Muhajiroun, 
a proscribed organisation.

The father denied this and told police he had been researching the attitudes 
of those who espoused radical or extreme Islamic views. He was never charged 
with any terror offence.

The mother had retweeted messages from a well-known Islamic extremist preacher 
as well as pictures of men in orange boiler suits being prepared for death, 
under the banner: “This is the recompense for every spy helping to kill 
innocent Muslims #Isis #IS”.

In his fact-finding ruling 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Fam/2016/3087.html>, Cobb said the 
parents’ claim that they had been going for a weekend away was “wholly 
unconvincing”, partly because of their behaviour en route and also because of 
how much they had packed.

Shortly before reaching the Eurotunnel terminal, the parents pulled into a 
supermarket car park off the motorway to change out of their traditional Muslim 
clothing. The mother removed her abaya and niqab, and the father changed his 
T-shirt and shaved off his long beard.

The mother had not been without a scarf or hijab since she was 16; she said 
she had never known the father without a beard. The father had been to Germany 
at least four times in the previous 15 years, and on no previous occasion had 
he shaved his beard, the judge said.

In the back of the car was “a substantial quantity of clothes for all 
seasons”, despite the alleged holiday taking place in mid-summer, plus 17 pairs 
of male boxer shorts, more than 40 pairs of socks, approximately 30 pairs of 
knickers, 17 baby-grows, a black balaclava, 112 sanitary towels, multiple 
razors, refills and shavers, sun creams and deodorants as well as several sim 
cards.

The parents were carrying £3,000 in cash, £2,000 of which the father had 
raised in the weeks before the trip by selling items on eBay, many of which he 
didn’t appear to own and none of which he ever sent to the purchasers.

Before leaving their home they gave away their family pet.

Concluding his judgment, Cobb acknowledged “a risk that the parents have 
simply complied superficially” with the deradicalisation programme and that 
“once the proceedings are over and the glare of social work interest has faded, 
they will revert to their previous views and behaviours”.

But he said: “There is now good evidence that the parents reject their 
previous ideological beliefs, which they now acknowledge to have been extreme 
and unorthodox; there is no evidence that they have in any sense indoctrinated 
[the two older children, who] have a much more resilient attitude to extreme 
ideology than previously.”

The children will continue to be monitored by social workers. 
 