
The British aristocrat accused of trafficking £4.7m worth of cocaine into Kenya
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> has been confronted in court with 
the 100kg haul of class A drugs.

Jack Marrian, the grandson of the sixth Earl Cawdor, appeared visibly 
distressed as 90 packages of the drug were displayed at his trial in Nairobi.

Marrian, 31, was arrested in July after Kenyan police seized the huge shipment 
of cocaine inside a container of Brazilian sugar at Mombasa port.

The sugar trader, who attended a prestigious Kenyan school with the British 
cyclist Chris Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/chris-froome-wins-third-tour-de-france>
, has maintained his innocence.

The sugar and cocaine were packed at Port of Santos in Brazil then shipped to 
Kenya via Valencia, Spain.

Spanish police and the US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), which tipped 
off Kenyan authorities, believe the drugs were destined for the European market 
but they were not off-loaded in Spain as planned.

Marrian and his clearing agent, Roy Mwanthi, were arrested and charged after 
their names were seen on shipping documents.

On the second day of the trial, Marrian rocked back and forth and held his 
head in his hands as the 100kg shipment was opened by Nairobi’s top narcotics 
police officer, Hamisi Massa.

Wearing surgical gloves and using a carpet cutter knife, Massa cut open a 
series of the packages removing an outer layer of shrink-wrap to reveal a strip 
of coloured nylon and a Lacoste clothing brand sticker, complete with crocodile 
logo.

After the third brick was opened Mwanthi asked to leave the room because the 
fumes were making him feel “a bit funny” while Marrian was handed a dust mask.

Marrian’s defence lawyer, Andrew Wandabwa, attempted to pick holes in the 
prosecution’s allegation that Marrian was the owner of the cocaine, as well as 
the sugar.


While cross-examining Massa, the defence lawyer drew the court’s attention to 
the presence of a duplicate seal found inside the shipping container along with 
the cocaine.

Wandabwa said this was “the hallmark” of a style of smuggling known as 
“rip-on, rip-off”, whereby cartels place their illicit cargo inside a legal 
consignment shipped by an unwitting owner.

“Would you agree the smoking gun, as far as the owner of the drugs is 
concerned, is that unused seal?” Wandabwa asked.

“Probably, yes,” Massa replied. “People could be using the transactions of 
others to transact illegal business without the knowledge of the owner.”

Marrian, whose full name is Jack Alexander Wolf Marrian, was born into the 
famous line of Scottish nobility known as the Clan Campbell of Cawdor. His 
mother, Lady Emma Campbell of Cawdor, runs an upmarket interior design firm on 
the outskirts of Nairobi.

Campbell told the Guardian in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/07/briton-family-baffled-arrest-100kg-cocaine-haul-kenya-jack-marrian-drug-shipping-containers>
 that the family were “baffled” by his arrest and that his innocence was 
“palpable and obvious”.
 