
Larry Elliott (Brexit may be the best answer to a dying eurozone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/20/brexit-best-answer-to-dying-eurozone-eu-undemocratic-elite>
, 19 May) paints a grim picture of the European future in making a case for 
Brexit. But he fails to explain how the UK leaving the EU will help us, or the 
wider continent. The UK, by virtue of geography and its economic and political 
structures, is fully impacted by whatever happens in Europe.

Brexit may be the best answer to a dying eurozone | Larry Elliott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/20/brexit-best-answer-to-dying-eurozone-eu-undemocratic-elite>
Elliott is right, the EU faces an existential crisis made worse by a 
dysfunctional economic and monetary union. But the crisis is about far more 
than the euro. The union, like the rest of the world, is grappling with the 
consequences of post-cold-war economic globalisation. The power and destructive 
potential of multinational corporations, the weakening of democracy, grotesque 
levels of inequality within and between nations, potentially catastrophic 
climate change, mass migration food insecurity, water shortages, and wars over 
natural resources indicate a deeply conflicted 21st century. John Gray in his 
bookStraw Dogs <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/straw-dogs.html> described 
globalisation as “the chaotic drift of new technologies”.

None of these challenges will be helped by a resurgence in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> of the twin spectres of 
nostalgia and nationalism, or a return to the patchwork of 48 rivalrous nation 
states set up by the treaty of Versailles. The UK must play a full role in 
shaping Europe’s response to contemporary threats.

Yanis Varoufakis (Why we must save the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/yanis-varoufakis-why-we-must-save-the-eu>
, The long read, 5 April) argued that Europeans face a choice: either we commit 
to democratic renewal based on compromise and solidarity between neighbours, or 
we face the return of authoritarianism and mass repression.

We should vote to remain on 23 June, and then vote for a UK government that 
will reverse the ruinous neoliberal agenda promoted by successive British 
governments and spread like a virus throughout Europe. Governments need to 
reconnect with grassroots movements to secure a better future.
Dr Simon Sweeney
University of York

• Larry Elliott is right about the eurozone: without fiscal union and 
democratic legitimacy, it has become a deflationary disaster zone akin to the 
inter-war gold standard. All the more surprising, then, that he appears to 
endorse Angela Merkel’s dictum that “If the euro fails, Europe fails”. If, as 
he implies, a federal fiscal union complete with powers to tax, spend and 
borrow is unattainable, it does not follow that we are stuck with the current 
stasis. The alternative is to break up the eurozone, preferably by arranging 
for Germany and its “hard currency” satellites to leave, regroup around a 
reincarnated D-mark and let it appreciate against the euro. No doubt this would 
involve a huge loss of face for Europe’s political elite. But the accompanying 
crisis would also provide an opportunity to give the EU a new lease of life as 
a transnational counterweight to the unbridled power of global capital.
David Purdy
Stirling

• Larry Elliott overeggs the pudding in saying that Tony Benn’s dystopian 
vision of the EU “proved entirely accurate”. Within a decade Jacques Delors was 
the EU president, the social chapter of workers’ rights later became, and still 
is, enshrined by treaty; and many of Benn’s erstwhile supporters on the left 
became Europhiles. The point is that paradigms and policies in the EU change 
from “right” to “left” and vice versa. But solutions to the neoliberal 
dominance of the EU and eurozone have to come first from progressive 
alternatives at national level. When more convincing and popular alternatives 
lead to a few such national governments in the main EU states, then the 
personnel and policies of the EU as a whole can change. Brexit would simply 
make that wider shift more difficult, strengthen quasi-fascist and xenophobic 
parties across Europe and swap the undemocratic, pro-market elites dominating 
the EU with the UK’s own local version; probably sans even the social chapter.
Bryn Jones
Bath

• Larry Elliott is surely right in his gloomy assessment of the state of the 
EU. But it must be wrong for us to leave Europe to sort out its troubles 
without us. Europe’s fate will be ours too. Our departure might well lead to 
further collapse of the union and, who knows, perhaps the return of 
increasingly fractious nation states that will all too easily fall into war 
with each other again. The first half of the last century is a reminder of what 
can happen; the second half an indication of how countries united in a common 
purpose, however imperfect its realisation, can live peacefully together. God 
knows, European institutions need root-and-branch reform but, however hard this 
may be to achieve, Britain must play an active and leading role in bringing it 
about – from the inside.
Richard Griffiths
Syderstone, Norfolk

• The subheading on Larry Elliott’s column is “Staying in the EU means 
hitching ourselves to an undemocratic project run by and for a remote elite”. 
That’s probably why we feel completely at home.
Bill Linton
London

• I agree with Larry Elliott’s conviction that Europe isn’t working. 
Unfortunately I have yet to read any alternative political or economic plan 
that could deliver a viable alternative. While Brexit may be the equivalent of 
deserting a sinking ship, we’d still end up in the water without a paddle. If 
we’re serious about Brexit, we should have begun by designing its successor. 
The referendum encourages us to jump, as we scream “save me”.
Martin London
Henllan, Denbighshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 