
David Tennant has said the second series of Broadchurch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch> was inevitably going to 
be criticised by some, claiming: “I think we’re a victim of our success to be 
honest.”

The Scottish actor refused to be drawn on the whodunnit drama’s remaining 
episodes, saying he was a “vault of secrets”.

“I don’t tell anyone anything,” he said.

Tennant’s comments come as he was picking up the gong for best actor for his 
role in the RSC’s Richard II at the What’s On Stage awards in central London, 
where Miss Saigon’s blockbuster return to the West End swept the board.

After collecting his award, Tennant said: “It’s lovely getting a prize for 
doing something you would do for free frankly. And I feel very blessed in many 
ways.”

Asked about the less positive reaction to the second series of ITV’s 
Broadchurch, the former Doctor Who star said: “I think we’re a victim of our 
success to be honest. The first series was such an extraordinary thing. This 
country, we never allow lightening to strike twice in this country … we just 
don’t let that happen.

“So, inevitably there was going to be a certain amount of ‘it’s not as good as 
the first time’. I think it is. I think it’s a wonderful series that I’m very 
proud to be part of.”

 Tennant, who last week took part in BBC Radio 4’s Just a Minute, refused to 
sum up in one word what he thought viewers would make of the series two finale.

“Not a single adjective, nothing,” he said.

Tennant, who stars alongside Olivia Colman in the drama, hailed his co-star 
and remained tight-lipped about how he felt about a third series or a spin-off 
for their characters.

“There’s nothing finer than working with Olivia. I’d like to do that everyday 
of my life, but I think the story will lead that.

“I think what’s been wonderful about the second series of Broadchurch is that 
it’s not been the same type of show as the first series and therefore the story 
has to determine whether there’s more to tell,” he said.

The long-running hit Silent Witness triumphed in a head-to-head clash of the 
crime dramas last month as it edged ahead of Broadchurch.

On 19 January, the BBC1 forensic pathology programme pulled in an average 
audience of 5.9 million viewers, compared with the ITV show’s 5.7 million, 
which included viewers of its catch-up +1 channel.

At the What’s On awards, Tom Hiddleston, who played the title role in 
Coriolanus, lost out to Tennant as best actor, but collected the award for best 
play revival which the Donmar Warehouse production won.

Mark Gatiss, who has both written and starred in Doctor Who, was named best 
supporting actor for his performance in Coriolanus.

Billie Piper was named best female actor for her performance in the National 
Theatre’s Great Britain.

Miss Saigon won nine awards at the event, including best actress in a musical 
for Eva Noblezada, best choreography, best set design and best West End show. 
It also won the best actor in a musical and best supporting actress and actor 
categories.

The revival of the hit musical, which tells the story of a bar girl who falls 
in love with a US soldier during the Vietnam war, has been a huge hit and taken 
millions of pounds at the box office.

The event which was hosted by Mel Giedroyc and Steve Furst at the Prince of 
WalesTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>. Awards are voted for 
by the theatre-going public.


 