
The older brother of JonBenét Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/jonbenet-ramsey-the-brutal-child-that-still-haunts-america>
 is suing the US television network CBS and others for $750m (£610m), saying 
his reputation was ruined after a television series concluded he killed his 
six-year-old sister two decades ago.

In the lawsuit filed on Wednesday, Burke Ramsey, 29, claims the network, its 
production company and the experts interviewed in the series on the unsolved 
murder conspired to defame him for publicity and profit. The series, called The 
Case of JonBenét Ramsey, aired in September ahead of the 20th anniversary of 
JonBenét’s death.

The beauty pageant star was found dead in the basement of her family’s home in 
Boulder, Colorado, the day after Christmas in 1996. A prosecutor cleared her 
parents and brother in 2008 based on DNA evidence. But the district attorney 
currently overseeing the case has said it was premature to exonerate the 
Ramseys and ordered additional tests using new DNA testing technology that 
authorities hope will further the investigation.

Police have collected and studied thousands of pieces of evidence and say the 
case remains open.

CBS <https://www.theguardian.com/media/cbs> spokesman Dustin Smith declined to 
comment on the lawsuit, which is the second Ramsey has filed over the 
television series. In October, Ramsey sued a forensic pathologist featured on 
the show who said he bludgeoned his sister to death. The pathologist is also 
named in the latest lawsuit, which was filed in Michigan, where Ramsey lives.

The new lawsuit says CBS and its featured experts set out to conduct a “sham 
reinvestigation” of the murder with “the preconceived storyline” that Ramsey 
killed his sister and conspired with his parents to cover it up.

“The accusation that Burke Ramsey killed his sister was based on a compilation 
of lies, half-truths, manufactured information, and the intentional omission 
and avoidance of truthful information about the murder of JonBenét Ramsey,” the 
lawsuit says.
 