
Brand campaign and marketing

Guardian News & Media has a strong desire to increase its audience in order to 
spread its unique blend of liberal journalism as well as to maximise commercial 
opportunities.

But we are not prepared to do this at any cost and the Guardian has avoided 
using the cult of celebrity to maximise our online audience.

In fact, GNM has made it clear that it does not want to be all things to all 
people but concentrate on attracting a progressive audience who feel in tune 
with our core values.

To aid this process, the marketing department, for the first time in more than 
25 years, developed a brand campaign aimed at demonstrating the Guardian's 
values and unique form of open journalism. 

The Whole Picture campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/advertising/the-whole-picture> launched on 29 
February with a two-minute TV spot,The Three Little Pigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2012/feb/29/open-journalism-three-little-pigs-advert>
. The film ran on Channel 4-owned stations for four weeks, as well as playing 
nationally in cinemas. It was also hosted on YouTube, Facebook and 
at theguardian.com/open.

The response to the campaign has been extraordinary. The film kick started 
global debates about the future of news reporting, about open vs closed, about 
citizen journalism, about the digital future and about the role of great 
advertising. 

We were thrilled that the debates weren't confined to the media village; 
rather they involved a range of schools, universities, Facebook groups as well 
as other news organisations. We were equally pleased that this wasn't just a UK 
conversation: the spread of online views from all around the world shows that 
there is universal interest. It has become by far the most viewed film we have 
ever made, with more than two million views online alone. 

Marketing footprint

The consumer marketing department has been working with Envido, a carbon 
solutions company and PHD, our media buyers, to measure the carbon output of 
our bought media. This is the first step towards being aware of the CO2 impact 
of our marketing and how our decisions affect GNM's overall carbon footprint.
 
A retrospective report of media buying in 2010 showed less than 1% of the 
Guardian's operational footprint could be attributed to media buying. However, 
what is crucial is understanding how we make better decisions and not simply 
report a number.

In 2012 we are again running this analysis, but we want to understand better 
where the high-risk emission areas are in each form of advertising TV, radio, 
billboards etc). We continue to work with PHD to take forward learnings, 
without affecting campaign reach or impact.

We are also planning to engage our creative agencies in this project. This 
means we will be measuring the carbon footprint of our Whole Picture campaign.
 
At the same time, many media owners are already taking substantial steps to 
reduce their carbon output. This knowledge will be used by GNM and PHD in the 
briefing process to make responsible and informed decisions.
 