
Before the coffee revolution, my daily cup of Joe didn’t rate that highly on a 
list of life concerns. Oh how things have changed. Now I can’t imagine turning 
up for work on a morning without a cup of the good stuff suctioned to my hand, 
even though I know I look like an infantalised adult holding a child’s sippy 
cup.

Over the years I’ve followed coffee’s evolution into the complicated, 
many-faceted beast that it is today and have happily adopted its new forms. 
However, there’s a new movement in coffee that’s making me regret getting so 
involved. It might be time we broke up.

As I consider the break-up, I do dream of simpler coffee times, when there 
wasn’t the choice between an ethically sourced single or triple-origin 
drip-filtered brew, served in a half cup, or a soy frappaccino.

Back then, if there was an occasion for coffee, I would reach for a jar of 
powdered mixture that was reserved for special occasions, like dinner parties. 
Many a delightful eve was concluded with hands embracing a pottery mug of 
boiling instant Moccona. At the time, Moccona was to coffee what the Vienetta 
from the supermarket freezer was to desserts. It implied that you’d gone the 
extra mile to spoil your guests. A dollar or two extra, mainly.

The same effect could also be achieved by simply adding a fresh bar of Cussons 
Imperial Leather soap in the bathroom. For those of us who weren’t very 
sophisticated, these were instant signifiers of class. Ironically, it just 
showed we didn’t have much of it.

When I started making my first coffee at a bar in the ’90s, I had no idea you 
weren’t supposed to heat the milk to eye-wincing levels. Fortunately, I was 
also never required to make a drink that featured a natty pattern on the top 
that recreates Picasso’s Guernica. I would have failed dismally. It was all 
pretty simple back then. No soy, almond or rice milks to add either.

As the years roll on I have become a tiresome coffee snob. However, the latest 
coffee trend might change all that.

Instead of using milk to round out the brown, apparently it’s time we all add 
butter to the coffee, because full fats give us an energy boost and speed up 
the metabolism. Allegedly, the thick sludge created by mixing a few tablespoons 
of grass-fed butter with coffee is delicious. This style of coffee is called 
Paleo coffee or Bulletproof, and it’s already landed at a cafe near you. In 
fact, it’s practically passé.

People. Stop. Think about this. Just because people had yak butter in their 
coffee or tea while trekking in the freezing mountains of Tibet doesn’t make 
this a good idea for those of us deskbound, doing not much more than lifting the
penske file <http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=penske+file> at 
work each day. Romans drank gladiator blood, will that revolting trend be next?

If butter in coffee is where we’re headed, I’d rather go back to having some 
of that powdered stuff, scraped off the floor, after the real coffee was 
manufactured and shipped out.Coffee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/coffee> that gets its lovely 
red/brown hue from food colouring made of a particular species of crushed up 
bug.

So I’ll see you at work tomorrow, not in line at the local cafe but in the 
communal work kitchen, brewing a delicious hot beverage from a jar of Nescafe 
Blend 43. I will also be sure to check that the used-by date isn’t 1983. Join 
me for a cuppa?
 