
At the age of 25 Shivi Hotwani still lives at home with his parents in 
north-west London. After years of saving he recently got a foothold on the 
property ladder. But his £160,000 two-bed flat is not in the capital, where he 
works as a conference manager, and he doesn’t get to live in it.

“I wanted to buy a flat in London as I have lived here my whole life but, even 
with my parents help, I just can’t afford to,” he says.

Instead, he bought his first property with a buy-to-let mortgage in Nottingham.

Hotwani is is one of a growing breed of amateur investors who have driven the 
huge boom in the buy-to-let sector in recent times for reasons that are not 
always conventional.

In the 10 years from 2005 the number of outstanding buy-to-let mortgages as a 
percentage of the whole mortgage market has almost doubled from 7.7% to 15% now.

Osborne drops tax bombshell that will wipe out bulk of buy-to-let profits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/11/buy-to-let-budget-tax-profits-mortgage>
Among this army, the proportion of part-time or “amateur” landlords – those 
who supplement their day job with rental income – has reached its highest-ever 
level according to recent figures from the National Landlord Association. It 
says that part-time landlords make up more than 70% of the sector.

“In recent times a number of portfolio landlords have become locked out of the 
market as lenders have restricted the number of properties they will lend on,” 
says Brian Murphy of Mortgage Advice Bureau. “In addition, for those new 
landlord borrowers, or those termed ‘amateur landlords’, who have perhaps two 
or three properties in the sector, is at its best since the onset of the 
financial crisis, with lower interest rates, higher loan-to values and ever 
more lenders providing choice.”

And – despite an unexpected crackdown from the chancellor in last month’s 
budget that means some landlords will, from next April,start losing a major tax 
break on their rental income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/osborne-buy-to-let-tax-relief-limit-budget>
 – the number of landlords looks likely to grow further.

By 2025 more than half of people under 40 will be living in properties owned 
by private landlords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/22/pwc-report-generation-rent-to-grow-over-next-decade>
, according to a report from economists at the accountancy firm PwC last week.

In 10 years, PwC predicts that 7.2m households will be in rented 
accommodation, compared with 5.4m today and just 2.3m in 2001. And while 
mortgage rules surrounding residential mortgages were tightened materially last 
year, meaning that borrowers can now be subject to an in-depth two-hour 
interview about their finances before they can get a home loan, the same cannot 
be said of buy-to-let.

The relative ease of getting a loan has inspired many to give property 
investment a go. We spoke to some of the newer investors and asked them about 
their motivations.

To get on the housing ladder 

In a move Shivi Hotwani never expected to make in his ​20s, he became a 
landlord and says the reason is because he couldn’t afford to buy anywhere to 
live in himself.

He had a decent deposit and looked at lots of new-builds in “up and coming 
areas” but found that, within such developments, most of the stock had been 
sold to overseas investors and what was left “wasn’t great”.

Instead he turned to Nottingham, where he had visited friends who were at 
university there in the past.

I'd like to buy to live, but I feel no one is helping me achieve that – so I’m 
doing what I need to get on the ladder
Shiv Hotwani 
“I wanted to get somewhere with a big student population so that tenants would 
be easy to find,” he says. “I don’t make a lot of money but I knew that when I 
set out. I want it as a long-term investment.”

It is not easy to get a buy-to let mortgage if you don’t already own a 
residential property – only a handful of lenders will consider one on this 
basis. Hotwani went to brokers London & Country and got a 75% LTV two-year-fix 
through the Clydesdale.

“I would still like to buy to live in London but I feel like no one is helping 
me to achieve that aim, so I’m doing what I need to do to get on the property 
ladder,” he says.

To help children on to the housing ladder

Rod Smith, 67, is a retired GP from Reading, Berkshire. Last year he invested 
in a flat in Highbury, north London, with his son to give him both an 
investment and a place to live.

“He works in the City in insurance but it is impossible for him to afford to 
buy,” he says.

This year he bought a three-bed semi-detached in Reading with his daughter.

“I wanted to get her started,” he explains. “I have owned buy-to-lets in the 
past and have always found that, as an investment, it has worked well.”

Dr Smith funded his latest property investment using the money from a 
remortgage on his own home. Because of his age, most lenders would not advance 
him the money but the Ipswich building society decided he was a low-risk 
borrower and agreed.


To beat the interest rate on savings

Katie Vincent, a social media manager, bought her first property to live in, 
in a small rural village in County Durham in 2006 with her husband Paul.
 Katie Vincent: beating the savings rate 
Eight years later they wanted a bigger place but switched their attentions to 
buy-to-let because of a lack of suitable properties on the market.

“After a lengthy search and a few false starts we realised our ideal home just 
wasn’t out there,” says Vincent. “With the money sitting in the bank earning 
next to nothing, we decided to use the money towards a buy-to-let property so 
that we wouldn’t be tempted to dip in to the cash.”

The couple have just completed on a sizeable two-bedroom terrace in Stanley, 
Co Durham, and believe it will be easy to rent out as the numbers of people 
locked out of the property market grows.

“Having previously seen these houses on the market for around £30,000 more 
than they are now, we felt it was a good time to buy,” she says. “If the 
struggle for first-time buyers continues, rental properties like ours will be 
in higher demand.”

Matthews describes the process of getting a buy-to-let mortgage as “effortless 
and pain free”, a sentiment that reflects the experience of many borrowers in 
the market.

To supplement a pension

Some commentators expect the buy-to-let market to be fuelled further over the 
months ahead thanks to the pension freedoms that were introduced in April. 
These allow anyone over 55 to access their full pension pot for the first time 
if they want to.

Numerous surveys of over-55s have suggested that many have an interest in 
investing some of this pension money in property, althoughthe Bank of England 
said recently that most pensioners would find it difficult to obtain a 
buy-to-let mortgage. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/01/buy-to-let-boom-jeopardise-financial-stability-bank-england-house-prices>

Small business owner Stephen Slade, who is in his mid-50s, recently accessed 
some of his pension money to invest in his third property in Middlesex.

“Most people won’t retire with a decent private pension these days,” says 
Slade, who is a client of Devonshire Wealth Management.

“We got into buy-to-let a few years ago to supplement our income when we come 
to retire.”

Slade says he will only ever invest in Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs) as 
he believes these provide better returns.

“The pension freedoms mean that we may now consider taking more out of our 
retirement fund and using it for buy-to-let,” he says.
 