
What are Britain’s negotiations with the EU all about?


In 2013, David Cameron promised an in-out referendum on Britain’s EU membership
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/23/david-camerons-europe-speech-points>
 before the end of 2017 if the Conservatives won the general election. He is 
expected to lead the campaign to stay in the EU if he can secure a 
renegotiation of the UK’s relationship with the EU that he is happy with.

Since the party’s election victory in May, talks between the UK and the rest 
of the EU have been gathering pace and have now reached acrucial moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/31/camerons-hopes-of-early-eu-referendum-dashed-after-talks-with-tusk-break-up>
. Both sides hope to strike a deal on 18-19 February at a summit of EU leaders.

Cameron has said he wants the UK to remain in a “reformed EU”. Speaking this 
month on the BBC’s Andrew Marr show, he said a British exit was not “the right 
answer”, but promised that in the event of a vote to leave he would do 
“everything necessary to make it work”.

What does Cameron want?

He is seeking changes in four areas: limiting in-work benefits for EU citizens 
working in Britain, stronger protection for countries outside the eurozone, a 
target to cut EU red tape, and more power for national parliaments to stop 
unwanted EU laws.

What is the main sticking point?

The most controversial part of the talks is Cameron’s wish to restrict other 
EU citizens working in Britain from claiming in-work benefits for four years. 
For the rest of the EU, this amounts to discrimination that flouts the basic 
principle of freedom of movement. To bridge the differences, theEuropean 
commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> has proposed 
an emergency brake to stop migration flows if and when welfare systems and 
public services are under serious strain.

Downing Street has claimed a “significant breakthrough” in the talks because 
the commission has accepted that current numbers of EU workers in the UK mean 
the emergency brake could be triggered. But Eurosceptics are rubbishing the 
emergency brake, because officials in Brussels rather than the British 
government would decide when to use it.

EU renegotiation talks reach 'crucial' climax - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/01/eu-renegotiation-talks-cameron-tusk-climax-politics-live>
So everything else is agreed?

The benefits issue has grabbed the headlines, but the UK’s ideas for 
protecting the rights of non-eurozone countries are also proving contentious. 
This agenda has been shaped by George Osborne, with the aim of protecting the 
City of London. He wants to reset the balance of power between the 19 countries 
sharing the euro and the minority outside the single currency.

In practice, this means official recognition that the EU has more than one 
currency and a get-out clause on economic policy, confusingly also known as an 
emergency brake. Countries outside the eurozone could use the economic 
emergency brake to stop unwanted economic laws, triggering further discussions 
among EU leaders. But this would require treaty change and several eurozone 
countries, including France and Germany, are loath to introduce this mechanism 
when the currency union may need to act fast in a debt crisis. France is 
insisting that it will not give the British veto powers over the eurozone.


The rest is easy?

The determination of the Conservative party to rewrite the EU’s “ever closer 
union” motto perplexes other European governments. To allay Eurosceptic fears, 
EU leaders in 2014drafted a declaration 
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_Data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/143478.pdf>
 that “ever closer union” allows for different paths of integration …respecting 
the wish of those who do not want to deepen any further”. France and Germany 
are reluctant to go beyond this, but some face-saving formula is expected.

Agreement is also possible on Cameron’s plan to give national parliaments 
power to block EU legislation, as few governments see it as a game-changer.


Wasn’t there something about so-called red tape?

The final area of negotiations concerns competitiveness and is the least 
contentious. The European commission has already published plans aimed at 
simplifying EU regulation, which go some way to meeting Cameron’s demands. All 
EU countries are ready to sign up to “competitiveness and better regulation”, 
the most widely used EU buzz words, although governments have very different 
ideas about what this means in practice. In the short term, these differences 
can be papered over and are unlikely to stand in the way of a deal.

What happens now?

More talking. Senior officials are meeting on Monday to discuss possible 
compromises on the British demands. Donald Tusk, president of the European 
Council, is expected to send a draft agreement to all 28 EU member states on 
Tuesday. The rest of the EU will have a chance to give its response on Friday 
at talks between senior officials, paving the way for EU leaders to meet in 
Brussels next week.

What if there is no deal next week?

Cameron is trying to sound relaxed about failure to reach a deal next week: 
his aim, he said recently, is to hold the referendum before the end of 2017. 
The prospect of a second EU leaders’ summit in February to nail down a deal has 
already been mooted. But senior EU officials are wary about the British talks 
dominating the EU’s agenda while the union struggles to cope with the refugee 
crisis.

So when is the referendum?

A deal between the UK and the rest of the EU in February would fire the 
starting gun on the formal referendum campaign. At least 16 weeks is needed to 
prepare for polling day and the government has pencilled in 23 June. Any delay 
in reaching agreement would mean holding the referendum in September. This is 
seen as more risky for the pro-EU cause, as it is likely to coincide with a 
peak in refugee arrivals, potentially strengthening the leave vote.
 