
The coalition’s bitter rift over the economy deepened on Sunday when David 
Cameron accused theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> of being “all over the 
place” on the economy and Nick Clegg countered by saying the Tories were trying 
to kid the electorate on the scale of their plans to cut the deficit.

Writing to Tory backbenchers, the prime minister claimed the choice for the 
electorate in the wake of the autumn statement was between competence and 
chaos. Cameron wrote: “The Liberal Democrats are all over the place, unable to 
decide whether they want to stick to the plan or veer off it. And they – like 
Ukip – would be prepared to prop up a failingLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government.”

In sparring that underlines the extent to which the two coalition parties are 
diverging as the election draws near, the deputy prime minister accused the 
Tories of making unfunded tax cuts.

“It is impossible to balance the books, remorselessly shrink the state, 
deliver unfunded tax cuts and protect the public services that people treasure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/07/nick-clegg-tories-services-cuts-nhs-education>
 – such as supporting the police, the NHS, schools and colleges,” he said on 
BBC1’s Andrew Marr Show.

He said the Tories were “kidding themselves, or kidding the public, if they 
think they can do that. It just does not add up”.

The two coalition parties agreed they needed to “get rid of the last bit of 
the so-called structural deficit in 2017 and 2018, but thereafter there are 
some big differences”, Clegg said.

He and the Tories are now publicly at odds over spending plans after 2017-18 
and whether tax rises are needed to clear the deficit, as the Lib Dems believe.

Clegg said he supported the plan set out in Wednesday’s autumn statement to 
get rid of the non-cyclical current deficit by 2017-18 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2012/dec/05/reality-check-george-osborne-debt-deficit>
, but said state spending thereafter should rise in line with GDP. The autumn 
statement, by contrast, was based on projections that total government 
expenditure will be flat in real terms in the two years after 2017-18, and so 
not rise in line with overall economic growth. The Lib Dems also want capital 
spending to rise in the next parliament.

On Sunday night Danny Alexander waded into the row to accuse the Tories of 
pandering to Ukip in a pre-election panic.

The chief secretary to the Treasury claimed the Tories would “inflict 
unnecessary pain” on the country because they were ideologically committed to 
shrinking the state and had a policy of “austerity forever”.

In an article for the Daily Telegraph, he wrote: “It is sad to see the 
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> move away 
from the sensible, balanced approach of the coalition, to a more doctrinaire 
policy that would inflict unnecessary pain on the people of Britain.

“Who’d have thought that of the two parties that formed the coalition, it 
would be the Tories who would be blown off course?

“A mix of unfunded tax promises, harsh spending plans and pandering to Ukip 
may be born of pre-election panic, but it is not economically credible.”

The Conservatives have been forced to counter analyses by the Treasury’s 
watchdog, the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), and by the Institute of 
Fiscal Studies thinktank suggesting that by2019-20 spending will fall to its 
lowest level as a percentage of GDP for 80 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/autumn-statement-2014-george-osborne-spending-cuts>
. Ministers have also been accused of misleading the public by claiming more 
than half the cuts programme has been implemented.

The Conservatives moved on Sunday to undo any political damage about the scale 
of its cuts, denying they had any target to achieve a large budget surplus by 
2019-20 and insisting public spending would only fall to the level of the 
Labour government in 2002.

The former Labour cabinet minister Lord Mandelson will warn on Monday night 
that the government may be going too far in its cuts programme, saying it will 
cost the Tories centre-ground support.

Mandelson, often a critic of Labour’s deficit stance, will say: “The public do 
not want an axe taken to public services and state spending. They know the 
public finances need rebalancing and put on a sound footing, but the Tories are 
pursuing this too eagerly, with too much zeal and ideological relish. This is 
not where mainstream voters are.”

He is due to make his remarks on Monday, at the launch of a new Labour 
pamphlet on policies for the 21st century, in which he will argue that 
mainstream voters want policies that “are aspirational and not motivated by 
envy or resentment of those who are better off”.

On the BBC’s Sunday Politics programme, David Gauke, the Treasury financial 
secretary, insisted the cuts required were achievable once efficiency savings 
and welfare cuts were included. He added the Conservative party was “not 
committed to the £23bn surplus” in 2019-20.

In the autumn statement last week the chancellor, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, announced the OBR 
economic predictions that suggested Britain would have a surplus of £4bn in 
2018-19, increasing to £23bn the following year.

Gauke said his party was not bound by the OBR prediction. He said: “We’ve made 
very clear we are committed to a surplus. At the moment the OBR predicts that 
we will have a surplus of £23bn, but we’re not making a commitment to the 
British people, ‘that’s what the number will be in 2019’.”
 