
Too many elderly and vulnerable people are not receiving an "appropriate" 
level of care from nurses inNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
hospitals, David Cameron has admitted.

The prime minister was responding to a question in the Commons from Ann Clwyd, 
who said this week that her husband had been treated with arrogance and 
indifference by nurses in the final days before his death in October. He had, 
she said,died with the dignity of "a battery hen" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/dec/04/ann-clwyd-husband-died-hen>.

In an emotional exchange, Clywd said she remained firmly committed to an NHS 
that is free at the point of use, but that there were increasing complaints 
about nursing in some parts of the system.

"A universal healthcare system free at the point of delivery is what the 
overwhelming majority of the British people want and is something I remain 
firmly committed too," she said. "However, there are increasing complaints 
about nurses who fail to show care and compassion to their patients. What 
exactly will you do about that?"

Responding, Cameron said that he too, was "a massive fan of our NHS, an 
enormous fan of that fact it is free at the point of use, that you don't 
produce a credit card when you go to hospital and my own family has had 
extraordinary care from our NHS".

But, he added, "we don't do our NHS or indeed our nurses any favours if we 
don't point out there are some very real problems in parts of our health and 
care systems".

"As a constituency MP, I see quite a few letters from people, particularly 
elderly people and their relatives, who are not getting the sort of care that 
is appropriate in hospitals," he added.

Cameron said there was "no silver bullet, no magic wand" but he listed some 
"simple steps" that hospitals should take, such as asking every hospital to ask 
patients and staff whether they would be happy for their friends and family to 
be treated in the hospital. That "can make a real difference", he said.

The prime minister also suggested that nurses ask elderly patients once an 
hour whether they have had water and food, and are comfortable.

But he rejected the need to compel hospitals to make changes. "We shouldn't 
have to dictate these things but I think a proper conversation with our nurses 
who are angels by the vast degree can get this sorted out for all our 
relatives," he said.

Clwyd, the Labour MP for Cynon Valley since 1984 
<http://www.parliament.uk/biographies/commons/ann-clwyd/25755> and Tony Blair's 
former human rights envoy to Iraq, told the Guardian this week that she feared 
there was a "normalisation of cruelty" among NHS nurses. She had chosen to 
speak out after her husband's death, she said, because this had become 
"commonplace".

Clwyd was on the royal commission on the NHS and served on the Welsh hospital 
board. But she said she found it impossible to make her voice heard.

"It's uncomfortable speaking out and I don't like it but if I couldn't get 
anyone to listen to me, how do other people manage it?" she asked. "I want 
people to know that they can't leave things to the professionals in the NHS. 
You have to keep asking questions."

Clwyd said she "will always regret that I did not ask more questions" but that 
whenever she tried, she was ignored or brushed off.
 