
“Housing is the first of the social services,” said the manifesto. “It is also 
one of the keys to increased productivity. Work, family life, health and 
education are all undermined by crowded houses.” The incoming government 
pledged to build 300,000 council homes a year and to make that target “second 
only to national defence”.

This was the Conservatives in 1951 – and they kept their word, with housing 
minister Harold Macmillan forcing civil servants to scrawl the figures on to a 
blackboard daily. They achieved the target in December 1953, their second year 
of office. The postwar Labour government had only ever managed 220,000 a year.

It’s an episode from Conservative history that Theresa May would do well to 
revisit. As she begins to piece together an economic strategy, one of her first 
acts should be to clean up themess left by David Cameron and George Osborne on 
housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/05/rob-poor-give-rich-housing-policy-2016>
.

Cameron’s pledge was a pale, post-Thatcherite reflection of Macmillan’s: one 
million new homes over a five-year period 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-31683974>, built largely by the private 
sector. It is failing badly. The last time the housebuilders exceeded 200,000 
homes a year was in the four years prior to the Lehman Brothers crash.

W​e need nothing short of a wholesale review of housing policy​ after Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jul/18/brexit-aftermath-housing-policy-review-house-of-lords-gavin-barwell>
At the heart of the problem is a dearth of council-house construction. For the 
past five years, councils in the UK have built only 2,000-3,000 homes a year. 
In 2012, council-house building became “self financing”.Councils took on an 
extra £13bn of debt 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/councils-use-new-found-freedom-to-borrow-13bn/6521195.article>
, creating the capacity to build half a million homes over 30 years. That would 
have been only 16,000 homes a year but would have been a significant change of 
pace from the low thousands now.

What kiboshed the whole thing? Councils’ plans to borrow and spend were based 
on the assumption that economic recovery would boost inflation, that housing 
benefits and rents could rise above inflation, and that they would borrow 
against the projected upside. But inflation dropped like a stone.

Next, to save money on the welfare bill, the government stopped pegging 
council rent increases to RPI inflation and switched to the lower CPI. On top 
of that, the government has ordered social landlords to cut rents by 1% a year 
from 2015.

When council finance experts punched all this into their spreadsheets, gloom 
descended: instead of accumulating a cash pile of £1.5bn from their own housing 
operations, they are looking at cash losses for the next 11 years. Far from 
financing new building, any cash generated from council rents has to go to 
servicing the debt they took on in 2012.

If May is serious about social justice, she should start by scrapping the 
Cameron government’s housing policy. If you look at the stats for housebuilding 
– and indeed house prices – since Macmillan’s day, it’s clear that the single 
most important determinant is policy. You can switch supply on and off if you 
want to – but Cameron’s addiction to market solutions meant he never wanted to.

Millennials will spend £53,000 on rent before age of 30, thinktank says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/16/millennials-will-spend-53000-on-rent-before-age-of-30-thinktank-says>
The first key to unlocking the housing problem is overall government spending. 
With everybody now talking about stimulus – fiscal and monetary – there should 
be cash for council house building, and to reduce pressure on the welfare bill. 
If the Treasury were to refinance the councils’ existing debt, remove the cap 
on council borrowing and scrap the four-year rent freeze, councils could start 
building again.

But the bigger change has to come in the government’s attitude to the mix of 
commercial and social housing in private-sector developments. Market forces are 
skewing new building projects towards high-priced homes that are out of the 
reach of most families. Even to afford one of Cameron’s pledged “starter homes” 
you have to be earning £55,000 a year.

A Tory government really committed to social justice would do as Winston 
Churchill did to Macmillan – prising him out of his desired role as defence 
secretary and ordering him to transform the built landscape of Britain. It 
would create a national plan – call it a framework if you really don’t like the 
word – for councils and housing associations to build. And massively.

At the same time, it would understand the lessons of another Conservative-led 
administration: the National Government of 1931-35. Under Stanley Baldwin’s 
effective leadership, a policy of cheap credit and loose planning rules 
effectively covered British suburbia with semi-detached private homes that were 
well within the reach of the lower middle class and some workers.

But such is the scale of Britain’s housing need that, for May, it is not a 
choice between the Baldwin approach and the Macmillan approach. She needs to do 
both.

There are, currently, 27.7m households in Britain, projected to be 30m by 
2025. That means we need Cameron’s promised million homes,and another million 
in the five years after 2020 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/property/11653052/Britain-to-be-one-million-homes-short-of-housing-its-people-by-2025.html>
, just to stand still.

Housebuilding, done right, has a multiplier effect on economic growth. If you 
train the people to do it, source the raw materials locally, do it to 
high-quality environmental and energy standards – and make it beautiful – you 
can use housebuilding to counteract the forces of stagnation and depression.

It’s a testament to the incoherence of Cameron/Osborne that, despite a massive 
monetary stimulus into the housing market, and very generous handouts of 
government land to private builders, they produced a glut of luxury apartments 
and a shortage of homes for working people.

Cameron’s ministers, in their perpetual backroom tussle over welfare cuts, 
took away from councils the very thing they’d tried to give: the power to build 
homes by the tens of thousands. It’s time for a fresh start.
 