
The Archbishop has Catholic tastes. In an interview in this week's New 
Statesman 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/religion/2008/12/williams-archbishop-lambeth>, 
Rowan Williams reveals that his all-time favourite films are Andrei Rublev and 
The Muppet Christmas Carol. The first is a stark, black-and-white portrait of 
an icon painter who suffers a crisis of faith in famine-plagued medieval 
Russia. The second stars Kermit the Frog as Bob Cratchit and Gonzo as Charles 
Dickens.

Full credit to the Primate of All England. It's a neat (perhaps too neat) way 
of showing the general public that he is a serious man with a fun and frivolous 
side. (Come to think of it, "the Primate of All England" could almost be a 
Muppet character itself. I picture it as a posh, tea-drinking baboon in a top 
hat.) Yes, the Primate is saying, he likes Tarkovskian doom and gloom (and, as 
a Russian speaker, he can probably watchAndrei Rublev 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WT3Q0eucDQM> without subtitles). But he also 
appreciates theodd spot of song-and-dance 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KBthi_An5qQ>, the occasional jiggle of stuffed 
toys. He might even make the case that these two films are really not so very 
different after all. Both, after all, concern a long, dark night of the soul, 
although only one features a talking vegetable that shouts: "Help! Help! I'm 
being stolen!"

Still, let's not muddy the waters here. For the purposes of this exercise, we 
shall keep Tarkovsky in the arthouse and the muppets in the multiplex. Put them 
together and they form a chalk-and-cheese double bill.

And this is surely something we can all relate to. Scan your DVD collection 
and there are bound to be some odd bedfellows lying cheek-by-jowl. Bergman next 
to Mamma Mia!; Robert Bresson beside Luc Besson; John Wayne cosying up to Jean 
Cocteau. The Primate has set the bar pretty high with his Rublev-Muppet 
extravaganza, but this is hardly an insurmountable task. What are the most 
dissimilar favourite movies in your collection? And what's the most outlandish 
(and yet still honest) double bill of classics that you can come up with?
 