
How should the European Union respond to the narrow decision by voters in the 
UK to leave? European leaders are now focusing, rightly, on how to prevent 
other countries from leaving the EU or the euro.The most important country to 
be kept in the club is Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/jul/26/italy-economy-banks-loans-crisis-europe>
, which faces a referendum in October that could pave the way for the anti-euro 
Five Star Movement to take power.

Europe’s fear of contagion is justified, because the Brexit referendum’s 
outcome has transformed the politics of EU fragmentation. Before, advocates of 
leaving the EU or euro could be ridiculed as fantasists or denounced as 
fascists (or ultra-leftists). This is no longer possible.

Brexit has turned leave (whether the EU or the euro) into a realistic option 
in every European country. Once Britain gives the union formal notice (by 
invoking article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon), that option will enter the 
mainstream of political debate everywhere.Research 
<http://www.ecfr.eu/publications/summary/the_world_according_to_europes_insurgent_parties7055>
 by the European Council on Foreign Relations has found 34 anti-EU referendum 
demands in 18 other countries. Even if each of these challenges has only a 5% 
chance of success, the probability of at least one succeeding is 83%.

Can the genie of disintegration be put back in its bottle? The EU’s breakup 
may well prove unstoppable once Britain leaves; but Britain has not yet invoked 
article 50. The bottle could still be sealed before the genie escapes.

Forget Brexit, Quitaly is Europe's next worry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/jul/26/italy-economy-banks-loans-crisis-europe>
Unfortunately, Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is using 
the wrong threats and incentives to achieve this. France is demanding that 
Britain accelerate its exit. Germany is playing the “good cop” by offering 
access to the single market, but only in exchange for immigration rules that 
Britain will not accept. These are exactly the wrong sticks and carrots.

Instead of rushing Brexit, Europe’s leaders should be trying to avert it, by 
persuading British voters to change their minds. The aim should not be to 
negotiate the terms of departure, but to negotiate the terms on which most 
British voters would want to remain.

An EU strategy to avoid Brexit, far from ignoring British voters, would show 
genuine respect for democracy 
<http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/features/its-not-over-until-its-over>. The 
essence of democratic politics is responding to public dissatisfaction with 
policies and ideas – and then trying to change the judgment of voters. That is 
how numerous referendum outcomes – in France, Ireland, Denmark, the 
Netherlands, Italy, and Greece – have been reversed, even when deeply emotional 
issues, such as abortion and divorce, were involved.

If European leaders tried the same approach with Britain, they might be 
surprised by the favourable response. Many leave voters are already having 
second thoughts, and prime minister Theresa May’s uncompromising negotiating 
position will paradoxically accelerate this process, because voters now face a 
much more extreme version of Brexit than they were promised by the leave 
campaign.

May has stated unequivocally that immigration control is her over-riding 
priority and that Norway or Switzerland can no longer be models for Britain’s 
relationship with the EU. Her new “Brexit ministry” has defined Britain’s main 
objective as tariff-free access to Europe and free-trade agreements with the 
rest of the world. That means abandoning the interests of Britain’s financial 
and business services, because services are unaffected by tariffs and are 
excluded from most free-trade deals.

As a result, the new government will soon be politically vulnerable. In fact, 
most British voters already disagree with its negotiating priorities. 
Post-referendum polls show voters giving priority to single-market access over 
immigration restrictions by atwo-to-one 
<http://whatukthinks.org/eu/questions/should-the-british-government-prioritise-maintaining-access-to-the-single-market-or-restricting-the-freedom-of-movement-when-negotiating-the-uks-withdrawal-from-the-eu/>
 margin ormore 
<http://whatukthinks.org/eu/questions/is-full-access-to-the-single-market-or-freedom-of-movement-of-people-across-europe-more-important-to-you/>
.

Making matters worse for May, her slender parliamentary majority depends on 
disgruntled remain rivals. As the British economy sinks into recession, trade 
deals prove illusory, and legal and constitutional obstacles proliferate, May 
will find it hard to maintain the parliamentary discipline needed to deliver 
Brexit.

A strategy to avert Brexit therefore has a good chance of success. The EU 
could advance this strategy by calling May’s bluff on “Brexit means Brexit”. 
May should be told that only two outcomes are possible: either Britain loses 
all single-market access and interacts with Europe solely under World Trade 
Organisation rules, or it remains an EU member, after negotiating reforms that 
could persuade voters to reconsider Brexit in a general election or a second 
referendum.

This binary approach, provided EU leaders showed genuine flexibility in their 
reform negotiations, could transform public attitudes in Britain and across 
Europe. Imagine if the EU offered constructive immigration reforms – for 
example, restoring national control over welfare payments to non-citizens and 
allowing for an “emergency brake” on sudden population movements – to all 
members. Such reforms would demonstrate the EU’s respect for democracy in 
Britain – and could turn the tide of anti-EU populism across northern Europe.

The EU has a long history of adapting in response to political pressures in 
important member states. So why is this strategy not being considered to 
counter the existential threat of Brexit?

The answer has nothing to do with supposed respect for democracy. The Brexit 
vote is no more irreversible than any other election or referendum, provided 
the EU is willing to adopt some modest reforms.

The real obstacle to a strategy of persuading Britain to remain in the EU is 
the EU bureaucracy. The European commission, once the EU’s source of visionary 
creativity, has become a fanatical defender of existing rules and regulations, 
however irrational and destructive, on the grounds that any concessions will 
beget more demands. Concessions to British voters on immigration would inspire 
the southern countries to demand fiscal and banking reforms, eastern countries 
would seek budget changes, and non-euro countries would demand an end to their 
second-class status.

• Anatole Kaletsky is chief economist and co-chairman of Gavekal Dragonomics

 * Copyright: Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 2016  