
Car manufacturing is a proud pillar of the western world's industrial history, 
but the hollowing out of Detroit as a city and an economic force is just the 
most shocking example of a decline that has afflicted automotive superpowers 
such as the US, the UK, France andnow Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/10/toyota-cease-manufacturing-cars-australia>
, where Toyota will close all of its factories by 2017. But in recent years 
some of those countries have at least stopped the rot. And government 
intervention has been key in rebuffing the global pressures – cheaper labour 
elsewhere, deteriorating consumer confidence, excess factory capacity – that 
have seen car plants shut all over the world since the credit crunch exposed an 
over-expanded and over-leveraged industry.

The US was the most successful, and most ambitious, example of intervention 
with the managed bankruptcies ofGeneral Motors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/generalmotors> and Chrysler which were 
supported financially by the government. "Despite being seen as a free market, 
the US had an industrial policy to rescue those car manufacturers and get them 
to shift to new low-carbon vehicles," said David Bailey, professor of 
industrial strategy at Aston University business school. Without government 
intervention, the US car industry would not have survived on its current scale, 
he said.

In an unsentimental, Thatcherite view of the world, two of Detroit's biggest 
companies would have been allowed to go to the wall – they weren't fleet-footed 
enough for a global car market that had seen the likes of Toyota enter GM and 
Chrysler's backyard. But the Bush and Obama administrations took the view that 
the collapse of two-thirds of theDetroit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/detroit> triumvirate – Ford came through 
relatively unscathed – would have ramifications that stretched far beyond Motor 
City, with hundreds of thousands of jobs at risk in the supply chain.

State support has also played a crucial role in the UK and Bailey credits the 
UK's "more intelligent industrial policy" since the financial crisis in keeping 
car manufacturing in the country. He estimates that a state-sponsored programme 
to diversify the manufacturing base, into medical technology and car parts, 
helped to save 10-12,000 jobs in the West Midlands following the closure of MG 
Rover. By contrast, the Australian government, he says, has tended to fall back 
on the natural resources boom, rather than use a limited period of state 
support to adjust to changes in the world economy.

In the UK, government support was key in the saving of the Vauxhall plant at 
Ellesmere Port on the Wirral in 2012, when business secretary Vince Cable and 
the Unite trade union thrashed out a deal with GM that kept the 50-year old 
plant open. This flexibility on the part of unions, underpinned by support from 
a government that understands the importance of car manufacturing albeit 
without the financial firepower to back it with a radical financial 
intervention, has persuaded Japanese manufacturers such as Nissan and Honda to 
stay in the UK. A spokesman for the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders 
said the British industry had learned from poor industrial relations that 
characterised the 1970s, citing better links between carmakers and unions, as 
well as the government, as one of the reasons why British car manufacturing is 
thriving.

The UK's heritage brands also help. As a hub for making luxury vehicles 
including the Mini, Bentley, Jaguar and Land Rover, Britain has also benefited 
from China and the emerging world's appetite for luxury cars. Indian-owned
Jaguar Land Rover <https://www.theguardian.com/business/jaguar-land-rover> 
flirted with a bailout during the credit crunch but has added thousands of 
British jobs since as demand for vehicles like the Evoque took off globally.

"We can do everything here and we have got a proven pedigree in developing 
what markets want all over the world," said the SMMT spokesman, citing the fact 
that 50% of vehicles produced in the UK are exported outside Europe. The SMMT 
expects that the UK will soon overtake France as Europe's third largest car 
market, behind Germany and Spain.

In France, state support has been forthcoming too, but has until recently 
served to prop up factories that need trimming back. European car manufacturing 
remains predicated on a pre-2008 world and the French establishment's reluctant 
acceptance of the closure of Peugeot's Aulnay plant outside Paris was a sign 
that governments can no longer support the status quo. Carmakers have to get 
leaner without cutting back on investment in new, greener models. German car 
makers still dominate in the luxury market because they are underpinned by 
decades of government support for manufacturing as a broad sector covering 
products from white goods to factory machinery to cars, while a state-level 
banking system has helped maintain a thriving culture of small-to-medium sized 
suppliers, ormittelstand. Maintaining a car industry is a marathon, not a 
sprint. Something a sporting nation like Australia would appreciate.
 