
For a coach who has just watched his side beat Toulouse, Dai Young is 
especially cautious about Cardiff Blues' chances of beatingGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> in the EDF Cup final this 
Saturday.

Young said: "I certainly don't think we have seen the best of Gloucester in 
the two games we have played against them this season. I felt they were a 
better team than the performances they produced against us. I have told the 
players we may have beaten them twice. We can take a lot of confidence out of 
that but we have to be realistic and understand they will bring more to the 
party on Saturday."

Cardiff have already beaten Gloucester twice this season in the pool stages of 
the Heineken Cup and, with the 9-6 win over Toulouse still fresh in their 
minds, there is little doubt they enter the EDF final as favourites. "I accept 
that," Young said, "but it doesn't change my focus or the emphasis of what we 
do for this game. Whether we're favourites or underdogs is irrelevant in my 
preparation."

Cardiff beat Gloucester 37-24 at home, and then 16-12 away, even though they 
had been reduced to 14 men when wing Tom James was sent off. That typified the 
grit and determination in Cardiff's play this season, in which they have won 11 
cup games out of 11. Mindful that that statistic will mean little if the season 
unravels now, Young is keen to play down his side's achievements so far.

"I was thrilled at the weekend, and I'm thrilled to be in this final but I've 
still got to bang that drum," he explained. "I've still got to shake that stick 
about a little bit because we've got to keep on improving. When we played 
Gloucester at home we had a purple patch of 10 minutes just before half-time 
where we converted two opportunities; they had three or four and didn't convert 
them.

"We are going to have to be better and focused on our job. One thing we won't 
be is overconfident. We know this is a big challenge and we have to get back up 
there again. We must sustain the levels of commitment and attitude to make sure 
we nail these big games."

After the EDF final Cardiff face Ulster in the Magners League then have the 
Heineken Cup semi-final against Leicester. This makes the next three weeks some 
of the most important in the region's playing history. Young added: "It's 
exciting isn't it? Because we've put in a lot of hard work not only this season 
but in the seasons previous, so it'll be great for the players to achieve 
something and to get the rewards for all their hard work."
 