
Cardiff's second EDF victory over English opposition was all the more 
creditable for coming amid rumbles of discontent over the release of players 
for Wales's autumn internationals.

The Blues had been far from happy about seven of their players receiving text 
messages from the Wales management just before training last Friday morning 
telling them to report to a training camp today. Later on Friday theWelsh Rugby 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/southafricarugbyteam> won a ruling in 
the High Court forcing the regions to release their Wales players earlier than 
intended so that they could prepare for the match with the world champions,
South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/southafricarugbyteam>, on 
Saturday week. But the Blues coach, David Young, believed the texting tactics 
were out of order.

"I'm 100% behind Wales, but I'm annoyed that the focus for a big cup game was 
taken away from our training on Friday," he moaned. "I'm hugely frustrated the 
players were texted by the Welsh management just as they were going out for our 
training. I don't think that helped us."

But for all the perceived pre-match distractions, the Blues, leading Wales's 
challenge in both theHeineken <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heinekencup> 
and EDF Energy Cups, were more than good for their win against aLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> side who had previously 
lost only once this season in all competitions and were unbeaten on the road.

The Blues shaded a poor first half and then racked up the pressure on a 
stuttering Tigers team to score both the match's two tries, through Jamie 
Robinson and Jason Spice, at the beginning and the end of the second half.

Robinson, who could have had a hat-trick had the ball bounced more in his 
favour, was put over after a searing midfield break from a scrum by the centre 
Jamie Roberts, and Spice crossed after the Blues pounced on a foolhardy 
cross-kick from Toby Flood in his own 22.

It was the Blues' second major English scalp in seven days after beating 
Gloucester 37-24 in a rousing Heineken Cup clash in the Millennium Stadium next 
door.

"We enjoyed the victory over Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> and took a lot of 
self-confidence and belief out of it," said Young. "But we knew we had to back 
that up. We have been capable of one-off big performances in the past but have 
struggled to put in back-to-back performances.

"To get two results against two of the real England giants, not only of the 
English game but Europe as well, is something we needed to do. I thought we 
made a real statement."

Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>, who fielded 
Flood at inside-centre to make way for the South African Derick Hougaard, were 
never in front and did not have an answer to strong-running incursions from the 
likes of Andy Powell at No8 and Roberts, nor to the silkier skills of Leigh 
Halfpenny - three players required by Wales this week.

"We had our moments and we got some momentum going, but we made too many 
mistakes," reflected the Tigers' captain, Martin Corry. "They took their 
chances and we didn't take ours."

Leicester's chances of reaching their third consecutive EDF final have now 
diminished whereas Cardiff are still on course to reach their first. Victory 
over Bath, the Guinness Premiership leaders, at the Arms Park on Friday night 
will ensure that they qualify for the last four.

Cardiff Blues Blair; Halfpenny, J Robinson, Roberts, Mustoe; N Robinson, 
Spice; Yapp, G Williams (Thomas, 70), Filise, D Jones (Morgan, 70), Tito 
(capt), Molitika, Sowden-Taylor (M Williams, 70), A Powell.

Tries J Robinson, Spice. Cons Blair 2. Pens Blair 3.

Leicester Murphy (Varndell, 57); Rabeni, Hipkiss, Flood, Smith (Erinle, 79); 
Hougaard, Ellis (Dupuy, 60); Stankovich (Cole, 54), Chuter (Davies, 70), White, 
Blaze, Wentzel (Kay, 70), Corry (capt), Croft, Crane.

Pens Hougaard 3.

Referee D Pearson (England). Attendance 9,815.
 