
Even in these days of long-haul foreign holidays, Mongolia is off-limits for 
most travellers. Its capital, Ulan Bator, has steadfastly resisted the 
attractions of McDonald's and even now its most famous native is Genghis Khan, 
who was born the best part of 850 years ago. So it's a bit of a culture shock 
to find one of the world's leading authorities on Mongolian society tucked away 
among the imposing stained glass windows of King's College, Cambridge.

Caroline Humphrey admits to being torn between her two lives, as Cambridge 
academic and field researcher out on the Mongolian steppes. But whatever her 
private feelings may be - and her feet look decidedly twitchy - she's likely to 
be in Cambridge for the next few years as she's just been appointed the first 
Sigrid Rausing professor of collaborative anthropology.

There's a neat symmetry to the appointment. Rausing herself is an 
anthropologist, and her area of interest - post-Soviet society - coincided with 
Humphrey's and she had been supporting her work ad hoc for some years. So, in a 
sense, the endowment is merely the formalisation of an ongoing process, though 
Humphrey sees it as much more. "I have always believed that anthropology should 
not just be about a researcher going into a community and then returning home 
to write up the findings," she says. "There should be a sense in which the 
people you are studying are involved in the research, and I hope to set up 
exchange programmes between researchers here and abroad."

Boost for anthropology

The new chair is also an important thumbs-up for old-school anthropology. In 
the early 80s, many anthropologists thought themselves into an intellectual 
cul-de-sac through a bout of navel gazing that prevented them from reaching 
conclusions about anything. "It was a necessary process, I suppose," says 
Humphrey, "but understandably the funding councils got irritated" - and at the 
same time the discipline came under attack from scientists who regarded human 
beings as purely biological animals whose development was primarily dictated by 
the evolution of their genes.

Just as bad, fashions changed. Whereas anthropologists had tended to study 
remote tribes, now they are just as likely to study communities in the western 
world. All of which has placed Humphrey slightly outside the mainstream - 
though she defends her ground. "There was a sense that anthropologists had been 
everywhere of interest," she says, "and what was now important was to 
understand the process of globalisation and homogenisation.

"But that doesn't account for differences. There may be an Americanisation of 
language and some technologies may be the same, but we don't all use them in 
the same way. I've recently completed a study of Russian chatrooms and it's 
clear both that their users are much more concerned with the development of 
their virtual identities than we are in the UK, and that they are much more 
likely to meet person to person offline."

Her passion for her work is evident in the nervous intensity of her voice, but 
Humphrey's interest in anthropology largely stemmed from hedging her bets. She 
grew up in Edinburgh, where her father was a scientist and her mother both an 
architect and a card-carrying member of the Communist party. "She wasn't that 
hardline," Humphrey laughs, "but it meant I grew up with a love of Russian 
poetry and music - particularly Prokofiev. My ambition was to be a writer, but 
I took the view that - given cold war travel restrictions - I was much more 
likely to be able to visit the country as an anthropologist."

So an anthropologist she became, and after getting her first degree from 
Cambridge in 1966, she won a place on a postgraduate Foreign Office exchange to 
study at Moscow University. "It was a strange time," she says. "Before we left 
we all roared with laughter when we were briefed on how we would be spied on by 
the KGB, but it turned out to be a reality. I was questioned about what I knew 
of a British spy by a man who let himself into my room. We all had our rooms 
bugged. Several of the male students were drugged at parties and then filmed in 
compromising positions and one friend was arrested on suspicion of spying."

Whilst in Moscow she studied the Buryat - a tribal community on the borders of 
Siberia and Mongolia - and was astonished to be given permission to travel to 
study them on a collective farm. "The scale of the enterprise was just 
staggering," she says. "There I was, in the middle of nowhere, living among 
3,000 people on a farm the size of Yorkshire." As the first westerner to visit 
the farm in the Soviet era and with cold war paranoia at its height, the 
immediate prospects for meaningful research were not promising.

But Humphrey got lucky. "I looked much younger than I was," she says, "and the 
Buryat seemed to assume that the Soviet minder assigned to keep tabs on me was 
the principal researcher and that I was her junior. And my minder rarely 
bothered to accompany me on interviews, so I could ask the questions I wanted 
to."

Her research resulted in a PhD on magical drawings in the religion of the 
Buryat and a book about life on the collective farm - which she updated in 
1998. "It was fascinating to return to the area after the end of the Soviet 
regime," she says. "You would have expected the old farm to have been 
privatised, but everything had remained much the same. Even the statue of Karl 
Marx was still there. The only change was the Buryat had become poorer."

Learning Mongolian

What Humphrey learned from her initial field research, though, was that she 
wanted to cast her net wider. "The Buryat explained to me that they had lived 
under Soviet rule for too long and had become Russified," she explains. "They 
suggested that if I was really interested in their culture and shamanism I 
should study in Mongolia itself." So it was back to the UK and Leeds for a 
crash course in Mongolian.

She rolls her eyes at the memory. "The language is a nightmare," she smiles. 
"Even now, more than 30 years on, I still consider myself a beginner."

Beginner or not, Humphrey headed off to Mongolia and has been going back 
regularly ever since - though not for such extended periods since her marriage 
in 1984 to Martin Rees, who later became the Astronomer Royal. Even so, she has 
managed to extend her expertise to areas of Nepal and India and, despite her 
claims that anthropology is largely interpretative and qualitative, one of her 
most significant contributions to her discipline has been to supervise a huge 
five-year scientific study on the effects of pastoral herders, in 15 regions of 
East Asia, on the desertification of the environment.

You get the feeling that she's at her happiest when she's holed up with some 
nomadic tribe that can only be reached after a five-day off-road Jeep and raft 
trip. But it's certainly not a job for the faint-hearted. She's been kidnapped 
- "I don't really want to talk about it, but it was very frightening and I was 
lucky to find a hole in the wall to escape", been laid low by various 
unpleasant parasites, and has got by on a diet that would turn the average 
western stomach. "I've got used to yak's milk," she says, "but I've never been 
able to stomach sheep's tails."

The way of life of the people she studies may be under threat, and it's hard 
not to see Humphrey herself as something of an endangered species. "When I 
first began my academic life, you had a sense that ordinary people were 
interested in the world around them," she says. "Now the only contact most 
people have with the remoter parts of the world is through travel writing, 
which merely reflects the things that interest us rather than the things of 
importance to the people who live there." So, given that Cambridge is one of 
the last strongholds of the academic, arcane and obscure, maybe King's College 
wasn't such a strange place to meet her after all.

Curriculum vitae

Name: Caroline Humphrey
Age: 62 
Job: Sigrid Rausing professor of collaborative anthroplogy, Cambridge 
University
Publications: Karl Marx Collective: Economy, Society and Religion in a 
Siberian Collective Farm
Likes: Walking, playing the piano
Dislikes:  Paperwork 
Married: to Sir Martin Rees
 