
Amazon

Mr Robot

With the world’s financial system thrown into crisis, what remains to be 
achieved for Rami Malek’s sallow and sunken-eyed computer genius Elliot 
Alderson? For a start, he needs to conquer the demons that led him to create 
his titular alter ego. Which is easier said than done when the FBI is on your 
trail and your fellow hackers want to raise the stakes still further. The 
welcome return ofMr Robot <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot> 
is sure to be further enlivened by a spot for rapper Joey Bada$$ as Elliot’s 
friend Leon.
Available from Wednesday

The Girlfriend Experience

The 2009 film of the same name didn’t really cut the mustard. But the transfer 
of Steven Soderbergh’s brainchild to the small screen has resulted in a 
striking and, eventually, thrilling and unpredictable drama. Riley Keough stars 
as Christine Reade, a law student who turns to prostitution, discovers the 
extent of both her own greed and that of her clients, and unearths a scandal 
along the way. Not perhaps the most original of dramatic setups but the show 
itself is icily gripping.
Available now

Netflix

Stranger Things

This smalltown supernatural thriller stars Winona Ryder as a woman whose son 
goes missing. As she becomes convinced she can communicate with him via ouija 
board, the townsfolk begin to doubt her sanity. But, before long, all manner of 
furies are unleashed. In the meantime, the town’s children are taking matters 
into their own hands. And just to up the quirk quotient still further, a kid 
with telekinetic powers turns up. An oddball treat.
Available from Friday

Spotless

There are shades of Brotherhood and Breaking Bad about Netflix’s latest 
import. A long-lost brother with questionable social skills and a nasty 
surprise in his Transit disturbs our antihero Jean’s domesticity, and suddenly 
his specialist skills as a scene-of-crime cleaner are in demand. With the fine 
English supporting cast’s eccentricities seen through the eyes of two French 
leads, this is blackly comic stuff, with a Tarantino-esque taste for smart 
dialogue and ludicrous setups.
Available now

BBC3

Clean Eating’s Dirty Secrets

Is clean eating a fad, a health revolution or even, just possibly, neither? 
Vlogger and body-positive internet phenomenon Grace Victory takes a trip into 
the self-satisfied world of smoothie bowls and sweet potato brownies and 
investigates some outlandish claims (sometimes made by people who seem barely 
qualified to do so). Should food purity be a priority? Or can we continue to 
enjoy the odd bacon sarnie?
Available from Monday

Podcast

Invisibilia

This hugely popular podcast offers tangential takes on mental health and 
wellbeing issues. Recent episodes include the story of a drug addict who used 
the thin line between sanity and derangement to get a home, and the question of 
whether we should even attempt to solve certain dilemmas or simply let them 
take their course.
Available now
 