
TV: Walter Presents

Channel 4 announces itself as a major player in the crowded subtitled drama 
field with this new streaming service. The Walter of its title is erstwhile TV 
exec Walter Iuzzolino, who has hand-picked these foreign-language series, from 
Danish vampire thriller Heartless to Kabul Kitchen, a French comedy-drama based 
on the real-life tale of a journalist who ran a restaurant for expats during 
during the early 00s US war in Afghanistan. Further titles will be added later 
in the year, with a select few – such as Deutschland 83 also receiving a 
broadcast on Channel 4 or More4.

All4 <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/walter-presents>

TV: Dickensian 

This grand-scale BBC serial chucks all of Dickens’s characters into a single 
Victorian London and lets them get on with it, an idea so brilliantly simple 
it’s remarkable that it hasn’t been tried before. The characters here – Miss 
Havisham, Scrooge, Fagin – are intimately familiar, but seeing them interact 
with each other outside of their respective novels brings a freshness to the 
source material that proves immensely enjoyable.

BBC iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer>

TV: Mozart In The Jungle

The first run of this drama about the travails of a symphony orchestra flew 
under the radar when it was released at the end of the year. That’s a bit of a 
surprise, given that Mozart In The Jungle actually makes for highly bingeable 
fare, boasting a strong cast – Gael García Bernal, Lola Kirke, Malcolm McDowell 
– and a zippy, soapy sense of pacing. Perhaps this second series, which 
promises romantic turmoil between Kirke and Bernal’s characters as well as 
money troubles for the orchestra, might be the one that sees the show graduate 
from minor to major player.

Amazon Prime Video

Audio: Serial 

Not up to speed with series two of Sarah Koenig’s popular podcast? Time to get 
caught up: it may well be the only thing anyone’s talking about when you get 
back to work after the festive break. This time the focus is on Bowe Bergdahl, 
the army deserter kept prisoner by the Taliban for nearly five years. Just why 
did he walk away?

serialpodcast.org <http://serialpodcast.org>

TV: Matt Berry Does… Happy New You

When BBC execs talk about the corporation’s bold “digital future”, they’re 
probably not referring to Matt Berry’s extremely daft iPlayer shorts. Not that 
that matters a jot: as inessential as they may be, they’re also very funny. 
This final instalment in the occasional series celebrates festive excess, with 
Berry narrating, in that sonorous but silly voice of his, over stock footage of 
chubby-looking animals. As an extra treat, Bob Mortimer pops by to lend his 
vocal talents to proceedings.

BBC iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02mwdx3>
 