
BBC3

Refugee Diaries 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/585bbdf9e4b06265ff0d5b04>

With thousands of refugees dying each year while fleeing humanitarian crises 
across the globe, those who manage the treacherous journey to Europe are, in 
many ways, the lucky ones. That is, of course, a glib assessment – the 
challenges facing asylum seekers only continue once they’ve arrived. This 
timely new three-parter follows Thaer (pictured, above) from Syria: episode one 
sees him attempt to survive on just £35 a week in the UK, while subsequent 
instalments see him trying to gain refugee status and revise for the university 
entrance exams that could help him restart his education – all the while 
receiving news of the chaos back home.

Available from Monday 

Uncle <http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbcthree>

Lifting its premise almost entirely from About A Boy didn’t prevent this fine 
sitcom from becoming a success in its own right. Nick Helm plays Andy, a 
layabout, stoner, bachelor and failed musician who forms an (initially 
reluctant) bond with his gawky swot of a nephew, Errol. The two learn a lot 
from each other, yadda yadda, you know how it goes, but that isn’t too 
important. What is, is that it’s hilarious – walking the fine and tricky line 
between sweet and fist-chewingly crude, with Helm’s musical interludes 
providing frequent, welcome whips of surrealism. Good to have it back.

Available from Sunday

Netflix

One Day At A Time

A reboot of a 70s US series, this new Netflix offering charts the lives of a 
Cuban-American family helmed by war veteran Penelope and old-school abuela 
Lydia. Soapy and sentimental – complete with a recurring gag about Toni 
Braxton’s Un-Break My Heart – it’s not going to win any awards for sitcom 
originality. However, it’s both lighthearted and a reminder of the importance 
of US Latino culture in the age of Trump.

Available from Friday

Podcast

UnStyled <https://soundcloud.com/user-228288341>

Refinery29’s latest podcast does something you might not expect a New 
York-based “lifestyle” publisher to do: offering honest advice and anecdotes on 
personal style, rather than merely focusing on current trends. The site’s 
co-founder Christene Barberich sits down to speak with the likes of Danielle 
Brooks, AKA Taystee from Orange Is The New Black (pictured, left), and Leandra 
Medine, founder of pithy fashion site Man Repeller. Brooks’s episode is 
particularly illuminating, with plenty of insight into her life as an African 
American actor as well as how she’s learned to embrace her natural body shape.

Available now, with new episodes added weekly 

Someone Knows Something <http://www.cbc.ca/radio/sks> 

The second season of this underrated Canadian cold-case podcast tells the 
murky tale of the 1998 disappearance of Sheryl Sheppard. Reminiscent of the 
first run of Serial, film-maker and journalist David Ridgen delves into the 
mystery, hoping to join dots missed or discounted in the original 
investigation. As he speaks to long-lost friends and acquaintances, he builds a 
picture of a young woman mixing with a variety of unsavoury characters. Grisly 
and gripping.

Available now, with new episodes added weekly
 