
The chair of the UK’s leading charity that aims to minimise gambling 
addiction, who also lobbied on behalf of Britain’s bookmakers, has announced 
his retirement.

Neil Goulden issued a statement saying he will retire from his role as a 
trustee and chair of the ResponsibleGambling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gambling> Trust (RGT), which is the 
country’s most influential voice on gambling-related harm.

However the RGT has been taken to task for being too close to the industry. 
Critics say the way the RGT is funded – through donations from the gambling 
industry – already raises questions about the independence of its research 
programme.

Earlier this month, the Guardian revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/06/documents-reveal-gambling-charity-chair-conflict-of-interest>
 that Goulden had warned the industry of the threat posed by “a vociferous 
anti-gambling lobby”.

In a paper drawn up in January 2013, Goulden, who chaired both the Responsible 
Gambling Trust (RGT) and the Association of British Bookmakers (ABB), 
identified “a large degree of righteous paternalism” that would see the public 
mood “swinging away from smoking, heavy drinking, gambling, non-contributors 
and tax avoiders”.

The paper came as the non-profit organisation that Goulden oversaw launched 
the largest ever study of high-speed, high-stakes betting machines, which are 
thought to be particularly addictive. In the paper, he said that once the 
public’s ire had been focussed on casinos, it had now moved onto bookmakers and 
their lucrative fixed odds betting terminals (FOBTs) in shops.

“Industry unity is essential as a rising tide lifts all ships,” Goulden wrote, 
warning “a negative perception will spread like a virulent virus”.

When questioned Goulden defended the dual arangement, saying that the trust 
“benefited from my industry knowledge and contacts”. “At no time did my two 
roles come into conflict,” he told the Guardian in an email.

A few months earlier the RGT, which describes itself as the leading charity in 
the UK committed to minimising gambling-related harm, had announced it had 
begun research into betting machines. This culminated in studies that showed it 
was possible to identify patterns of play that distinguish problem gamblers 
from non-problem players.

The RGT had commissioned a team of researchers to plough through 6.7bn 
individual bets at FOBTs, one of the most controversial aspects of UK gambling 
that provide bookmakers with substantial profits from their shops.

Last year FOBTs, which are disproportionately found in poorer parts of 
Britain, generated £1.7bn of revenues for bookmakers. Campaigners label the 
machines the “crack cocaine of gambling” because they allow stakes of £100 to 
be laid every 20 seconds on casino games.

Politicians of every party have been alarmed by the rise of the machines. Last 
April the government forced bookmakers to put checks in place so that punters 
who wanted to bet more than £50 at a time would need to set up gambling 
accounts.

This year for the first time, the government’s review into gambling bets and 
winnings in Britain will specifically consider whether there should be 
reductions in stakes.

Goulden has also been one of the public faces of British bookmaking; he became 
chair of the industry lobbyist ABB in 2012 – and stepped down in 2014. He had 
previously been on the board at Ladbrokes and was chairman of bookmaker and 
bingo group Gala Coral.

When questioned about the paper, Goulden told the Guardian: “I had no 
involvement in setting the research questions (the minister and RGSB and the 
[Gambling Commission] did that), nor did I have any involvement in the choice 
of researcher, the commissioning of the research, the presentation or the 
interpretation of the findings.”

He said that in the paper he had been merely urging “the industry to take 
consumer product protection more seriously or face more bad press and a loss of 
government and consumer confidence”.
 