
For Ronald Koeman it was the return to Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> he probably expected but 
that did not make it any easier to bear. After hearing some less than -kind 
words from the home ranks the Dutchman had to watch on as his new side were 
deservedly beaten by his old one. The Everton manager could not hide his anger 
afterwards and may well now be wondering if he made the right decision swapping 
the south coast for Merseyside after all.

The goal that decided this contest came early – after 41 seconds, in fact – 
and the truth isEverton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> never 
really recovered. As against Swansea City last week their approach play was 
sluggish and limited for large periods but the difference this time was that 
they could not muster an equaliser. The visitors had only one shot on target 
and it came as little surprise to see many of their supporters heading for the 
exits long before the final whistle had blown.

Southampton 1-0 Everton: Premier League – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/27/southampton-v-everton-premier-league-live>
In contrast Southampton’s fans were buoyant until the end, albeit after they 
had got some ill-feeling off their chests. “We fucking hate you, Ronald Koeman” 
was among the chants delivered by the majority of those located in the Northam 
Stand on seeing the man in question’s emergence from the tunnel before 
kick-off; his decision to leave Southampton in the summer is clearly not 
forgotten or forgiven in these parts.

Some would deem that ungrateful given the 53-year-old led the club to 
sixth- and seventh-place finishes, their best in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, in his two seasons at the 
club but from the recipient came no disgust.

“Everyone is free to give the reaction they want,” Koeman said. “I know how 
the players of Southampton react to me and I know the staff of Southampton 
appreciate what we did together. The rest is football. That’s life.”

The abuse looked set to continue only for Charlie Austin to change the mood 
completely and before the majority in attendance were comfortable in 
their seats. Southampton started with a bang and, after Everton had failed to 
clear Cédric’s right-wing cross, the striker secured his ninth goal of the 
season with a close‑range header. Cue jubilation in the Northam Stand and 
elsewhere.

A key figure in the goal was the 19‑year‑old winger Josh Sims, who was handed 
a surprise debut by Claude Puel having impressed for Southampton’s under-23 
side, and the teenager repaid his manager’s faith with a display that brimmed 
with menace.

It was Sims’s long‑range shot that caused Everton’s defence initially to panic 
in the buildup to the goal and from the same player came the assist, a clever 
and quick scooped pass to Austin after Cédric’s delivery had bounced off 
Séamus Coleman.

From there Sims continued to torment those in blue from an advanced 
right-sided position and he almost produced the moment of the match midway 
through the second half after driving past Leighton Baines and Ashley Williams 
only to mess up at the crucial stage by playing a poor square pass that was 
easily cut out by Idrissa Gueye.

Alexis Sánchez double helps Arsenal fend off tenacious Bournemouth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/arsenal-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
Nevertheless it was a hugely encouraging debut from the latest member of 
Southampton’s much-vaunted academy and Sims was rightly awarded a standing 
ovation from the home spectators after being replaced by another youth product, 
Sam McQueen, on 84 minutes.

“For a first game in the Premier League it was very good,” Puel said. “It was 
not a risk to start him as I have seen very good things from him in training 
sessions and with the under-23s.”

Others in red and white also impressed, no one more so than Virgil van Dijk, 
who continues to look one of the most complete defenders in the country. Puel 
suggested the only disappointment for Southampton was that they did not get the 
second goal that their display of great togetherness and intent deserved.

James Ward-Prowse failed with a couple of presentable chances late on while a 
powerful header from Austin on 58 minutes was kept out only by Maarten 
Stekelenburg’s impressive low save.

The hosts’ first league win since mid‑October moves them up to 10th, three 
places and two points off Everton, who showed more urgency in the second half 
but generally posed little threat, with Gareth Barry’s late volley the one time 
Fraser Forster was called into action.

It is now one win in eight games for a side who began the season with grand 
ambitions. “I’m not worried about results, I’m worried about what I see on the 
pitch,” said Koeman, who later claimed he “wasn’t aware” of Sims during his 
time at Southampton.

“We are starting games badly and have difficulties being organised 
defensively. We have to do more.”
 