
On 31 August, supporters of the prisoner Charles Bronson will deliver a 10,000 
signature petition 
<http://www.thepetitionsite.com/4/free-charlie-bronson---enough-is-enough-its-time-to-free-him>
 to 10 Downing Streetcalling for his release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/aug/09/charles-bronson-conviction-review>
. Bronson, now in his 40th year of imprisonment, more than 30 of which have 
been spent in solitary confinement, is one of the UK's longest-serving 
prisoners. He has spent more years inside than most convicted murderers or sex 
attackers ever will – yet he has never killed or sexually molested anyone.

That he has been a problem for the prison system since his conviction in 1974, 
when he was sentenced to seven years for the £26 armed robbery of a post office 
when he was just 21, is beyond dispute. By his own admission, he was a handful 
as a youngster. Prisons do not like people they can't control and Bronson's 
response to much of what he saw as the system's petty and demeaning treatment 
of prisoners was violence.

Declared "insane" by a prison doctor in HMP Parkhurst in 1978, Bronson was 
sent to Broadmoor special hospital for treatment. Forcibly drugged and 
allegedly beaten, he rebelled by taking to the roof and causing hundreds of 
thousands of pounds worth of damage before being talked down by his family. 
Five years of special hospital "treatment" later, he was declared sane and sent 
back to prison.

Since then, whenever he has felt aggrieved, he has taken hostages: a prison 
governor, a librarian, and two Iraqis who had hijacked a plane to seek refuge 
in the UK, only to find themselves subject to Bronson on a day when he was in a 
hostage-taking mood. (Myths abound about Bronson's feats of strength – that he 
is a champion dwarf-thrower or that he can bend cell doors with his bare hands. 
What is true is that he forced one of his Iraqi captives to tickle his feet, 
explaining later: "I hadn't had them tickled for a while.")

His last hostage victim was prison art teacher Phil Danielson. In Hull prison 
special unit in 1999, Danielson was tied to a leash and led around the unit, 
"like a dog". Bronson was cleared of threatening to kill him, but Danielson was 
so traumatised by what happened that he has never worked since.

For that offence Bronson received a life sentence, eligible for parole after 
three years. Ever since then he has been isolated in one of the most secure 
cells in the country, next door to a man who has killed three fellow prisoners. 
He has been given no opportunity to demonstrate a positive change of attitude 
or behaviour.

But the time that Bronson has spent in prison is disproportionate to his 
crimes. He is now being punished simply for being Charles Bronson.
 