
During my time at Essex <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/essex> county fire and 
rescue service, barely a shift went by without receiving a call from an elderly 
person who had fallen in their home, or from their concerned neighbour or carer.

The calls were always the same: a frightened voice, racked with humility and 
embarrassment, apologising profusely for “wasting” our time. “I telephoned 
because I know you can get in my house. I can’t get up, you see. I’m so sorry 
to trouble you.”

I would mobilise a crew and inform the ambulance service, which wouldn’t be 
far behind. We’re the “fire and rescue” service, you see, and that’s what we 
do. It was all part of the service, along with rescuing donkeys from swimming 
pools, righting overturned horse boxes and getting dogs out of lakes. These 
days the service is so much more than pointing wet stuff at burning stuff.

So news that Tendring district council in Essex is planning to introduce a 
“falling fee” for elderly residents 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/12/18/pensioners-charged-falling-fee-tendring-district-council_n_8837776.html>
 struck a blow to all that I knew about decency, humanity and my years in the 
service.

I only did four years and thought perhaps attitudes were changing, so I 
contacted a former colleague to ask his opinion. He responded with expletives, 
with anecdotes of broken hips and shattered wrists and ribs smashed on the 
sides of bathtubs, and how dealing with them needed the professional care that 
comes of regular first-aid training and having a paramedic on hand.

How council services are affected by spending cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/how-council-services-are-affected-by-spending-cuts>
Paul Honeywood, a Conservative councillor for Tendring, defended the measure 
saying the council needs the £26 annual charge in order to continue offering a 
“lifting service”. “Having consulted users, we have discovered 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/12058296/Pensioners-to-be-charged-26-lifting-fee-for-falling-over-at-home.html>
 there is a demand – and the idea is now going through the budget process with 
a final decision to be made in February,” he said.

Ironically, Mr Honeywood is also an officer with the Citizens Advice Bureau , 
which offers assistance to people who feel that they are being unfairly 
discriminated against on the grounds of age under theEquality Act 2010 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents>. If I were an elderly 
resident of the area, I might feel that being charged £26 for the inconvenience 
of growing old would count as discrimination, and might complain to Mr 
Honeywood at both of his offices. Politics, local and national, feel so 
desperate and deluded as to be beyond satire.

The falling charge will apply from April, if approval goes through. But this 
has wider implications. If passed, it will almost certainly prompt other 
cash-strapped local councils to follow suit. Yet old people will have 
contributed to healthcare services all their lives, through income tax, council 
tax (part of which is diverted to their local fire service) and taxes on goods 
and services. And many of them will have served their countries in the second 
world war, fighting for Mr Honeywood and others to have the freedom to decide 
to fine them for growing old.

In Essex, older residents already pay £21 a month if they want a Careline “big 
red button” alarm system in their homes – the falling fee is extra. The 
sinister undertone in this discussion is one of fear, and the same old nasty 
politics. Instil fear in people who are not as young as they were, not quite as 
sprightly, who may be living alone, and may already be fearful not just of 
taking a tumble on the stairs but of what the future holds.

For public officials to capitalise on this fear of infirmity is both sinister 
and cruel. My grandmother, who is in her early 80s, has had the odd fall. But 
if Southend council thought to offer a £26-a-year service to pop her back on 
her feet, I’m sure she would politely tell them where to stick it.

Elderly people, save your pennies and buy a £10 mobile phone. Stick it in your 
pocket, and if you should find yourself needing to be picked up and nobody else 
can get into your home, 999 is – and will always be – free to call.

In the meantime, this Essex council wants a “consultation”. Let’s give it to 
them. As Martin Luther King once said: “Our lives begin to end the day we 
become silent about things that matter … What are you doing for others?”
 