
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> will resist attempts by 
rival clubs to secure Michy Batshuayi on loan next month as the Belgium forward 
prepares to make his first Premier League start for the leaders in the visit of 
Bournemouth to Stamford Bridge on Boxing Day.

Batshuayi, a £33.2m summer signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/chelsea-announce-signing-michy-batshuayi>
 from Marseille, is poised to deputise for the suspended Diego Costa following 
the striker’s fifth caution of the season, after 11 cardless appearances, at 
Crystal Palace on Saturday. Antonio Conte could still opt to utilise Eden 
Hazard in a central role, flanked by Pedro Rodríguez and Willian but the chance 
to offer Batshuayi his first league start is expected to sway his decision.

The forward, prolific in Ligue 1 last season and a scorer at Watford in 
August, has made only 13 appearances for the London club to date this campaign, 
with his three starts all in the EFL Cup. He scored a doublein a 3-2 win 
against Bristol Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/chelsea-bristol-rovers-efl-cup-match-report>
 in the second round. Yet those are his most recent goals and, with the player 
reduced to a bit-part role, West Ham United have indicated a desire to take the 
23-year-old on a six‑month loan in January.

That inquiry will be knocked back with Conte convinced Batshuayi will benefit 
more from working with the Chelsea squad at Cobham and conscious that the 
Belgian is his only senior alternative to Costa up front. The Brazil-born Spain 
international has been prolific this term, his winner at Palace made him the 
Premier League’s top scorer with 13 goals, and has improved his on-field 
discipline markedly leaving Batshuayi having to stay on the sidelines.

Yet Costa was substituted at Selhurst Park complaining of tightness in his 
hamstring and, while that should not prevent him from featuring against Stoke 
City on New Year’s Eve, it was a reminder that niggling injuries may play a 
part in the remainder of the season. “This game was the third game in seven 
days, and Diego played all the games, with great intensity, passion and drive,” 
said Conte after the 1-0 win. “The injury is nothing important. Now he has more 
days to rest compared to his team-mates.”

The striker has taken advantage of the squad being granted three days off this 
week to return to Brazil. Hazard is still undergoing treatment on the knee 
injury sustained from a kick he received against West Bromwich Albion earlier 
this month.

While there has been frustration at limited opportunities, Batshuayi’s 
commitment in training has never wavered, and his attitude has impressed 
Conte’s coaching staff despite being restricted to occasional cameos from the 
bench and appearances for the club’s Under-23s, for whom he has scored twice. 
Chelsea consider him a key player for the future who has the pedigree to make 
his mark this season if required.

Batshuayi is not the only Chelsea player to have interested West Ham of late. 
The leaders’ back-up goalkeeper, Asmir Begovic, has been targeted and there 
could be a loan offer submitted for the young the midfielder Ruben 
Loftus-Cheek. Conte intends to hold talks to the technical director, Michael 
Emenalo, and the player before determining whether he should seek to gain 
first-team experience away from Stamford Bridge over the second half of the 
season.
 