
“Yeah, yeah, I’m back, yeah,” says Michaela Coel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/07/michaela-coel-crush-black-mirror-comedy>
’s character Tracey. Back for a second series ofChewing Gum 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/chewing-gum> (E4), back on the estate. She 
is clutching a Bible in one hand, and, if she didn’t have a bin bag of 
belongings in it, the other would probably be in her knickers. Tracey is 
holding on to her optimism, too. She has already been to see her best friend, 
Candice, and her nan, who, she says to camera, were really happy to see 
her. “Welcome back,” said Candice, looking neither happy nor welcoming. 
“Fucking hell, what you done to your hair?” said Nan.

When other comedy characters address the camera, it can be a bit cheesy, and a 
bit been-done-before. But there is something so utterly, convincingly real 
about Tracey, and the way she speaks – even faster and quieter when she is 
confiding in the camera, as if she really has something to tell – that I think 
I lean in towards the TV to make sure I don’t miss anything. There are 
flashbacks to an attempt (another one) at becoming not-a-virgin at the homeless 
shelter with Connor, who again remained flabby, but most of the episode takes 
place inside Deepak’s Delectables mini market and off-licence, where Tracey now 
seems to reside as well as work, and which Deepak has unwisely left in her care 
while he holidays in America.

Connor comes into the shop, to fix Deepak’s shelves he tells Tracey, but 
really he is there to see her and clear up a few things about what went 
wrong between them. She is thrown – scrabbling about for makeup and for things 
to do, and for an invented new boyfriend (she has seen Connor with his real new 
woman on social media). But she gets it all wrong – the makeup and the made-up 
boyfriend. She picks a celebrity one by mistake, which makes the lie a lot more 
complicated, although it does allow for a nice cameo appearance at the end. 
Yes, of course I know whoStormzy <https://www.theguardian.com/music/stormzy> 
is, I’ve seen him out and about, driving his Rolex.

There is nothing all that new in the source of the comedy: a bit of 
love trouble, some bedroom issues, misunderstandings, jealousies, lies leading 
to bigger lies leading to trouble. You could find all of that in an episode of
Miranda <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/miranda>, say. What sets 
Chewing Gum apart, of course, is Coel, her creation and her performance. 
Hilariously filthy, there is nowhere she – and it – won’t go: down there, in 
here (well, if it were not for Connor’s issues), on that. But, at the same 
time, it is also human, tender, maybe even wise. And it is certainly true – a 
big slice of modern working-class urban life shoved rudely, and gloriously, 
right in your face.

In answer to the question Transgender Kids: Who Knows Best? 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b088kxbw> (BBC2), the kids say: “We do”, even 
though some are still pretty much toddling and don’t really know much about 
anything at all. We were born into the wrong bodies, and we want them – those 
bodies – changed, they say. And, increasingly, their parents are agreeing with 
and supporting them, because this is the 21st century, and a “gender 
affirmative” approach is more than fashionable, it’s the norm. Especially in 
Canada, where this documentary, from the This World strand, was made (I suspect 
it may be different in Yemen, say, or Mongolia).

Not everyone agrees, though. Dr Kenneth Zucker, a world expert in childhood 
gender dysphoria, doesn’t think the kids do always know best. He thinks there 
might be a range of psychological issues that can lead to a child’s desire to 
change gender. Zucker is not an advocate of the gender-affirmative approach.

What does he know, say the transgender activists. He is living in the past, 
that’s why he was fired from his post at the Centre for Addiction and Mental 
Health in Toronto, where he ran a gender identity clinic … And so on. 
Ding-dong, ding-dong.

One thing that is clear from this balanced, thoughtful, thought-provoking film 
is that it is not only about identity; it’s political, too.

I am going to come down very firmly somewhere in the middle. I am totally for 
laws that defend the rights of transgender people, I applaud Canada for leading 
the way in this. But if my son, who is not quite three, and who has been known 
to wear a dress from time to time, tells me he is a she, we are not going 
straight to the clinic. Not without first having a jolly good chat about it, 
anyway.
 