
'Now bring us some figgy pudding!" goes the carol, but not everyone is 
enamoured of boozy, spicy, fruity Christmas pud; or, indeed, of oozy, 
super-sweet mince pies. Even those who love them will not want to indulge more 
than a couple of times over the holiday period, so whether it's to offer as an 
alternative on the big day, or to cater for a Boxing Day or New Year crowd, 
you'll need something else by way of a sweet treat. And it had better be good. 
It isChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, after all.

Well, I can pretty much guarantee that if you bring them a chocolate pudding – 
especially a rich, dark and sophisticated one – they won't be disappointed. 
This is not just because chocolate is so widely loved, and a pretty safe bet. 
It's also a fantastic ingredient to shuffle into the Christmas culinary chaos 
because it has so much deep, pleasing flavour. Foil-wrapped chocolate coins and 
melting tree decorations aside, real, cocoa-rich chocolate is complex, deep and 
slightly bitter: just the kind of thing you need in a punch-packing pudding in 
the high season of hearty.

You don't always need actual chocolate to make a great chocolate pud. Cocoa 
powder, formed from roasted cocoa beans after the cocoa butter has been 
extracted, is intensely chocolatey but not at all sweet. In sponges or cakes, 
where you want the finish to be light and fluffy, but still delicately moist, 
cocoa is ideal; it acts like a super-chocolatey flour. (Melted chocolate 
doesn't always work so well in sponges, giving a heavy and rather unyielding 
finish.)

When it comes to rich, creamy mixtures, however – brownies, mousses, dense, 
almondy cakes and ice-creams – a good dark chocolate is what you want. It will 
melt and meld deliciously with all those other indulgent ingredients. For 
cooking, I generally use chocolate with 70-75% cocoa solids. It's easy to buy 
bars with a much higher cocoa solid content, but such intense stuff can be too 
strong and bitter (though I have used 85% very successfully in brownies, where 
it cuts through all the butter and sugar). Bear in mind, though, that the 
figure for cocoa solid content can be a bit of a red herring: it's not in 
itself a guarantee of quality, and I've eaten chocolate with very high cocoa 
solids that was still bland and waxy. As with any ingredient, properly good 
chocolate is about the calibre of the raw materials: the cocoa beans and how 
they were produced, roasted and processed.

My friend Claire Burnet, who runs the Dorset-based artisan chocolate company 
Chococo <http://www.chococo.co.uk>, knows all the tricks of the trade. "Cheap 
chocolate often has some of the cocoa butter removed and replaced with cheaper 
vegetable fats, including palm oil," she tells me, "whereas top producers 
actually put extra cocoa butter back in."

Cocoa is packed with a huge range of aromatic compounds, and in good dark 
chocolate those flavours are there in abundance. Taste your chocolate before 
you cook with it – it should release waves of flavour on your tongue: nutty, 
toasty, vanilla, fruity, coffee-ish. For a dish such as today's clementine one, 
the chocolate has to stand out in its unadulterated form, so it's got to be 
good. But even in a pudding or mousse, any extra money you spend on top-notch 
choc will be paid back in sumptuous flavour.

Clementines with marrons glacés and chocolate

You could put a box of marrons glacés (candied chestnuts), a bowl 
of clementines and a couple of bars of dark chocolate on the table after dinner 
and let your guests tuck in. You won't get many complaints. But if you take the 
10 minutes or so needed to put those ingredients together into this extravagant 
fruit salad, you'll get a round of applause. Quantities are per person.

2-3 squares dark chocolate, 70-75% cocoa solids
2 clementines (or tangerines), chilled
1 large marron glacé

Break up the chocolate into small pieces, and put it into a heatproof bowl set 
over a pan of just simmering water – ensure the bowl is not touching the water 
– and leave to melt, stirring once or twice.

Meanwhile, peel the clementines. With a small, sharp knife, remove as much of 
the white pith and membrane as possible. Use a large, sharp knife to slice the 
clementines into 5mm-thick discs. Reserve the small end bits.

Arrange the slices evenly over each plate. Crumble the marrons glacés on top, 
then trickle the molten chocolate over the cool fruit, where it will quickly 
set into gorgeous whirls and ribbons. Squeeze the juice from the reserved end 
bits over the top and it's ready to go. Delicious with a glass of chilled 
champagne.

Chocolate, brandy and star anise ice-cream

This lovely, grown-up ice-cream comes from Gelf Alderson, chef and senior 
tutor at the River Cottage HQ cookery school. Makes about 800ml.

3-5 whole star anise 
200ml whole milk
300ml double cream
Finely grated zest of 1 large orange (optional)
1 vanilla pod, split
4 large egg yolks
100g caster sugar
200g dark chocolate (70-75% cocoa solids), finely chopped
75ml cider brandy or calvados 

Bash the star anise in a pestle and mortar – you want to reduce them to chunky 
bits, not a powder. Tip into a pan with the milk, cream and orange zest, if 
using. Scrape the seeds out of the vanilla pod and put seeds and pod into the 
pan. Bring to just below boiling point, then set aside to infuse for 15 minutes.

Beat together the egg yolks and sugar until well combined. Strain the hot 
cream through a fine sieve over the eggs and sugar, whisking all  the time. 
Pour the mixture into a clean saucepan and cook gently, stirring all the time, 
for a few minutes, or until the custard has thickened. Don't let it boil or it 
will split.

Remove the thickened custard from the heat and add the finely chopped 
chocolate. Stir gently until the chocolate has melted. Stir in the cider 
brandy, strain through a sieve into a clean bowl, then set aside, with a piece 
of clingfilm or baking parchment on the surface to stop a skin forming, until 
cool.

Churn the custard in an ice-cream maker until soft-set, then transfer to the 
freezer to freeze solid. Alternatively, pour the mixture into a plastic 
Tupperware-type container and freeze for about an hour, or until the sides 
start to get solid. When this happens, mash up the mixture with a fork, mixing 
the frozen sides into the liquid centre. Put it back in the freezer for another 
hour, and repeat at hourly intervals until soft-set, then let the ice-cream set 
solid. Transfer to the fridge 30 minutes before serving, to soften a little.

The Grenada Chocolate Company <http://www.grenadachocolate.com>'s bars are an 
excellent choice, and ethically produced (they are even exported to Europe via 
sailing ship). Claire also recommendsMarou <http://marouchocolate.com>, a 
Vietnamese single origin brand.

Hot chocolate toffee banana pudding
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's hot chocolate toffee banana pudding: 'A great 
crowd-pleaser.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
Made with ingredients most of us have knocking about at Christmas, this 
glorious fusion of banoffee, sticky toffee and chocolate sponge is easy to put 
together and a great crowd-pleaser. Serves six to eight.

100g softened butter, plus extra for greasing
3 medium-ripe, medium-sized bananas
100g self-raising flour
50g ground almonds
30g cocoa powder 
100g caster sugar
2 large eggs
75ml milk

For the toffee sauce
100g soft dark brown sugar
40g butter
200ml double cream

Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Lightly butter an oven dish that's 17cm 
x 27cm and at least 5cm deep. Put the ingredients for the sauce in a small 
saucepan and heat gently, stirring often, until the butter has melted and you 
have a smooth brown toffee sauce. Set aside.

Peel the bananas and halve each one across the middle, then cut each in half 
again lengthwise, so you have four pieces from each banana. Arrange in the 
buttered dish, and pour over the sauce.

Mix the flour, almonds and cocoa powder, and set aside. Beat together the 
butter and sugar for several minutes until very pale, light and fluffy. Beat in 
the eggs one at a time, adding a spoonful of the cocoa mixture with each, then 
fold in the rest of the cocoa mixture. Add the milk to form a batter with a 
soft dropping consistency. Dollop this over the bananas and toffee, and 
carefully spread it out: it should just barely cover the sauce, so don't worry 
if some is still visible at the edges. Bake for 30-35 minutes, until the sponge 
is firm on top and the sauce bubbling up around the edges. Poke a skewer into 
the middle of the sponge, to check it's cooked through. Leave to settle for a 
few minutes, and serve piping hot with cold double cream. Serve it with the 
sponge uppermost, or flip the portions as they come out of the dish, so the 
bananas and toffee take top spot.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.

• This article was edited on 13 January 2014. The original recipe for 
clementines with marrons glacés and chocolate mistakenly said to cut the fruit 
into 5cm-thick slices. This has been corrected.
 