
ST. PHILIP’S, SALFORD. - Canon Peter Green writes: - “If, among many 
economies, ‘Christmas as usual’ is to be the rule, as far at least as it 
affects the children in this poor parish, we shall need the help of kind 
friends as in past years.”


BOOTH HALL MILITARY HOSPITAL. - Rev. W. Holden, chaplain, says that just now 
there are 380 patients, and that more are expected before Christmas. To bring 
them a touch of homeliness and comfort the staff would be grateful to receive 
gifts of game, turkeys, fowls, fruit, chocolates, cigars, tobacco, and 
literature, especially Christmas numbers of magazines, and donations for making 
aChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> present to each 
soldier. These should be addressed to Dr. Sprott, Booth Hall Military Hospital, 
Charlestown Road, Blackley.


SALVATION ARMY. - Commissioner Adelaide Cox, writing for the Women Social 
Workers, pleads for some Christmas cheer for their 2,000 sorrowful and desolate 
protégés: for the aged, afflicted poor, many of whom, she says, live in one 
room with no fire and little food: and for the neglected little ones, “poorly 
clad and often ill-used, who live in Slumland and are looking for Father 
Christmas.” Money, garments, toys, coal, or food will be most gladly received, 
and should be addressed to the Officer in Charge of the Oakhill Home, Cheetham 
Hill, or of either of the Slum Posts - 29, Alexandra Place, Rochdale Road, and 
144, Greengate, Salford.


For the neglected little ones 'poorly clad and ill-used, who live in Slumland 
and are looking for Father Christmas.'
Salvation Army 
CHRISTMAS HAMPERS FOR CRIPPLED CHILDREN. - The Crippled Children’s Help 
Society, who intend that “each of the afflicted little ones confined in the 
homes of the Manchester and Salford poor shall receive on Christmas morning a 
hamper of good things,’’ confidently appeal for contributions in aid; 500 
hampers, they say, were provided last year. For the other children on the 
Society’s register, who are less severely disabled - about 700 of them - a 
smaller gift will be provided. Donations should be sent to the hon. 
secretaries, Miss M. Kirlew and Mr. Fred Hargreaves, 55, Cross Street, 
Manchester, or to Mr. F. G. Smith, 28, Shudehill,Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>.


BOYS’ AND GIRLS’ REFUGES, STRANGEWAYS. - Mr. Thomas Ackroyd writes that in 
addition to the ordinary needs of the 400 boys and girls in the homes - needs 
that are always great, - he hopes to provide, as in other years, a Christmas 
treat and a little gift for every child. The Refuges, he says, have recently 
taken in a number of motherless children of men who have joined the army, in 
which are serving also 230 Old Boys. He therefore makes an urgent appeal for 
special help this year, and invites gifts of money or of dolls, toys, mufflers, 
and garments.


BOATMEN’S BETHEL, CASTLEFIELD, DEANSGATE. - Mr. George Partington, the hon. 
superintendent, writes that the committee desire to provide, as in past years, 
meals and comforts for the old people and the poor children of a district in 
which much poverty and distress prevail. He earnestly appeals to our readers to 
send clothing, boots, bedding, provisions and toys to the secretary, Mr. S. B. 
Bell, 116, Cornbrook Street, Old Trafford, and donations to himself at 94, 
Grosvenor Road, Urmston, or to the treasurer, Mr. Samuel Bardsley, at the 
Manchester and County Bank, 55, King Street.

HOLLAND STREET RAGGED SCHOOL, ANCOATS. - The secretaries feel sure that their 
appeal for the poor children and old people at Christmas and the New Year will 
not suffer from the many war claims of the time, and that the help of our 
readers will enable the Committee to brighten the many saddened homes of the 
district. Donations and gifts of clothing and toys will be most gratefully 
received by the treasurer, Mr. Thomas Morris, 102, Birch Lane, Longsight, or by 
the secretaries, Mr. Robert Salthouse, 226, Ridgway Street, Manchester, and Mr. 
C. Patten, 46, Iron Street, Miles Platting.


GROSVENOR STREET BAPTIST CHURCH. C.-ON-M. - Mr. Edward Turner, of 5, Pembroke 
Grove, Plymouth Grove, appeals for support for the fund which provides old 
folks with a treat on January 8. Donations may be sent to him as treasurer, or 
to the pastor, Rev. A. E. Robinson, 94, Shakespeare Street.

Queen Mary's book for war charity, 1915
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/from-the-archive-blog/2015/dec/08/first-world-war-charity-book-1915>
ST. CATHARINE’S, HEYWOOD STREET, CHEETHAM. - The Rector, Dr. George S. Cockin, 
hopes once again to feed the hungry slum children of the parish on Christmas 
Day. Last year, he says, 570 sat down to a free breakfast, and later most of 
them attended a tea party. He invites the kind aid of our readers.


ST. MARKS, CITY ROAD, HULME. - The Rev. A. H. Swann, the rector, pleads the 
cause of the poor children of his parish. He is confident that our readers will 
renew the help that will enable him to give the little ones another Christmas 
treat. Contributions in money, toys, or clothes may be sent to him or to Mr. 
Noble, 21, City Road, Hulme.


TATTON STREET MISSION, LOWER MOSS LANE. - The Committee of the Sunday school 
intend to provide treats for both the old and the young among the poor of the 
district, particularly among those who do not benefit from the war and those 
who have lost relatives at the front. The old folks will be entertained on New 
Year’s Eve and the children during Christmas week. Gifts of money or toys will 
be gratefully acknowledged by the secretary, Mr. Arthur Collinge, 377, Chester 
Road, Old Trafford.


JOHN STREET RAGGED SCHOOL PENDLETON. - The workers of the Mission appeal for 
assistance for the poor children of their crowded district. Subscriptions will 
be most gratefully received by Mr. F. H. Sugden, 100, King Street, Manchester; 
Mr. W. Ogden, at the school; or Mr. J. T. Ireland, Ladybarn, Lightoaks Road, 
Pendleton.


GRAVEL LANE RAGGED SCHOOL. - The secretary makes his annual appeal for 
contributions in aid of Christmas treats to the poor children of the Greengate 
district of Salford. Subscriptions will be gratefully acknowledged by Mr. G. 
Nelson, 108, Devonshire Street, Higher Broughton, or by the secretary, Mr. T. 
Moscrop, 9 Durnford Street, Middleton.

 