
Whatever else George Osborne’s performance was in the spending review on 
Thursday, it amounted to an act of worship to a mysterious deity, one with a 
name, a price tag, and multiple mentions in both the chancellor’s speech and 
the accompanyingTreasury documents 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/spending-review-and-autumn-statement-2015-documents/spending-review-and-autumn-statement-2015>
.

The god is efficiency. The NHS is supposed to be generating savings of £22bn 
based on it; the Department for Transport’s operating budget is being cut by 
37% and will be all the better for it. In the name of efficiency a score or 
more of the arm’s length bodies run by the Department for Business, Innovation 
and Skills are to be sacrificed (though detail on which they are is still 
lacking).

 The Home Office is supposed to be losing £80m in running costs by 2020. The 
Cabinet Office, already small, lops £30m off.

Central government and the spending review: 'doing a lot more with a lot less'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/25/central-government-spending-review-whitehall-cuts>
Justice takes a huge hit, its administration budget falling from £516m to 
£278m over less than five years. But it is not going to cease running prisons – 
the jail population is still running at record levels. And justice secretary 
Michael Gove has won approval for ambitious plans to restructure the prison 
estate, which presumably someone in the ministry will oversee. Similarly, the 
tasks facing the Home Office don’t look as if they will get lighter, now that 
police numbers are to be sustained.

The Osborne plan contains the huge efficiency assumption that far fewer civil 
servants can do just about the same size of job.

The spending plan assumes, though it doesn’t spell out, that Whitehall will go 
on losing staff. A straight read across from the cuts in administration budgets 
implies at least one in five mainstream civil service jobs disappearing, with 
much higher impact in HM Revenue & Customs and the Department for Work and 
Pensions.

Yet the chancellor had virtually nothing to say about how all this efficiency 
was to be achieved. That old favourite, shared services, received only cursory 
mention.

Perhaps Osborne thought it was too obvious to be worth saying: it’s the 
internet, stupid. The government’s mantra has been all about digital 
government. Speaking recently at theInstitute for Government 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/events/how-do-we-make-sure-government-actually-works-working-people-matt-hancock-outlines-new-agenda>
, Cabinet Office minister Matt Hancock could speak of little else. But here, 
too, detail is lacking. While it is feasible to move transactional public 
services online, an awful lot of what the public sector does is not like 
vehicle licensing.

The benighted officials at DCLG will run even harder round their hamster 
wheels, trying to keep up.​ But they will fail

Giving out grants to schools cannot be automated: someone has to calculate 
need and someone also has to remember, let’s say, whether a local MP has been 
lobbying the education secretary. Supervising HS2 cannot be left to a computer.

The spending review will deplete departments and agencies both of staff and of 
their accumulated knowledge. If Osborne had stood up and said that government 
was simply ceasing to do things, that would have been one thing. But these are 
plans to run pretty much the same level of services – across health, local 
services, transport, education, justice – at a severely reduced cost.

In addition, Osborne announced a flock of new schemes and mini projects, all 
of which will take administration. For all his rhetoric around devolving power 
to councils, we got no hint that the centre would actually withdraw.

That means the benighted officials at the Department for Communities and Local 
Government will run even harder round their hamster wheels, trying to keep up. 
But they will fail.

One conclusion from the spending plans has to be that government – central, 
local and the bits in between – will become less accountable, for the simple 
reason that there will be fewer people able to run the numbers, supervise 
projects and apply a red risk rating.

Spending statements demonstrate the Treasury’s command of the financial 
totals. But this one also shows that with the cuts come declining levels of 
control over what is bought.

In future we will know even less about the value of our services for the 
reduced amount of money being spent.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 