
Nick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> has backed George 
Osborne's timetable for balancing the UK's books and pledged to keep his party 
focused on reducing debt to a "sensible" level, which his aides warned could 
take another two decades.

In a key speech on the economy, the Lib Dem deputy prime minister signalled he 
was firmly signed up to the Conservative chancellor's plans to eliminate the 
UK's structural deficit in 2017-18, rather than Labour's proposal to run a 
budget surplus a year later by the end of the parliament.

"In the autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/05/autumn-statement-key-points-george-osborne-live>
 we set out a plan to get debt falling as a proportion of GDP by 2016-17 and to 
get the current structural deficit in balance a year later," Clegg said at 
Mansion House in the City of London. "That is the right timescale and the one 
to which the Liberal Democrats remain absolutely committed. If I am in 
government again, this is the plan I want us to stick to."

Clegg's focus on reducing debt and his alignment with Osborne, rather than the 
shadow chancellor, Ed Balls, over the pace of deficit reduction could be 
crucial in the event of another hung parliament. However, the Liberal Democrat 
leader made it clear the party would balance the books in a different way to 
the Tories through a combination of tax rises and lower spending, rather than 
focusing on £12bn of extra welfare cuts like Osborne. He said the Lib Dems 
would not target welfare cuts at the working poor, like theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, and want the wealthy to 
pay more through a new mansion tax.

Senior sources said the Lib Dems believe about 80% of savings should come from 
spending cuts and 20% from tax rises, although an exact figure has not yet been 
agreed.

Clegg said: "The Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> will continue to rely 
on a mix of tax and spending measures to fill the black hole in our finances, 
just as we have in this coalition government. The Conservatives have decided to 
break with the approach they have signed up to in government with us in order 
to pursue spending cuts alone, but I believe, as do most mainstream economists, 
that a mix of tax and spending measures is the most economically and socially 
responsible way to proceed."

Addressing businessmen and women at a dinner, Clegg made it clear reducing 
Britain's debt is a major priority for the Lib Dems, arguing a lack of 
continued spending restraint would saddle future generations with an 
"unbearable" burden.

He pointed out Britain will still owe £1.5tn – almost 80% of gross domestic 
product (GDP), or its overall output – in 2017-18 under current forecasts, 
which would need to be brought down to "sensible levels" in the future.

Senior Lib Dem sources pointed to an EU paper that recommends debt should be 
no more than 60% of GDP and said this could take another 10 or 20 years to 
achieve.

However, they insisted this did not mean austerity would have to continue for 
that long, as debt could be brought down as a proportion of the country's 
overall output (GDP) without the need for big cuts if the economy carries on 
growing. They also argued public services would not necessarily have to shrink.

Clegg said: "The Liberal Democrats will plot a course which safeguards 
investment, which protects future generations from future shocks and which 
ensures that, instead of spending more and more of our money on servicing the 
interest payments set by international bond traders, we spend it on the support 
and services the British people need."

It comes just weeks after the Lib Dem business secretary, Vince Cable, issued 
a warning about the government cutting too hard and attacked Osborne's 
"ideological" plans to slash more from the welfare budget.

Last month Cable said: "It is one thing to respond to a record deficit after a 
long period of rising public spending, as we have since 2010. It is quite 
another to continue cutting hard from a position where the debt burden is 
falling and when spending has been under pressure for half a decade."

The Institute for Fiscal Studies <> has also warned it will probably only be 
possible to achieve a budget surplus in the annual accounts in 2018 by imposing 
an extra 30% of cuts on unprotected areas of spending, excluding schools and 
health.

On Monday night Clegg's aides insisted the entire Lib Dem front bench, 
including Cable, is signed up to his timetable for reducing the deficit and 
continuing to cut the debt.

The deputy prime minister was also dismissive of Labour's attitude to the 
public finances, accusing the party of acting recklessly by setting a deadline 
of 2020 to balance the books – a year longer than the Conservatives and Lib 
Dems think is achievable.

Clegg said: "Ed Balls has now confirmed that Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> think they can put all this off 
until the end of the next parliament. Borrowing more, piling on more debt, 
diminishing the confidence of our creditors. But it's reckless and it threatens 
the stability that's been achieved. Ed Miliband keeps promising a recovery for 
all. But there will be no recovery at all if you won't see through the 
difficult decisions and get the job done."
 