
Six weeks from now, in Cancun, Mexico, the world's nations will gather under 
the auspices of the United Nations (the UNFCCC) to again discuss how to 
alleviate climate change. They'll try to pick up the broken pieces from last 
December in Copenhagen, where we witnessed tortured dances by government 
leaders trying to avoid the realities of our time, and the profound conundrums 
we face as a society. They accomplished nothing, and may reprise that 
performance in Cancun.

Take the case of President Obama. He generally signals a serious desire to 
address climate issues, but, like the leaders of all the developed industrial 
nations, has been caught in a terrible dilemma. He tries to argue for lower 
emissions limits, both globally and in the US. But he is simultaneously 
desperate to revive rapid economic growth and stimulate a sluggish industrial 
economy hampered by rising costs of energy, rapidly diminishing resources and 
venal bankers.

So, while Obama talked climate change in Copenhagen, he pushed for accelerated 
growth and consumption, emphasising such climate-deadly industries as private 
automobile production, new road construction, nuclear power generation, and 
continued coal extraction (including horrendous "mountain top removal") while 
extolling an entirely theoretical "clean coal". He was also for expanding 
manufacture of heavy industrial equipment, and for more export-oriented 
industrial agriculture, as well as "new housing starts", increased oil drilling 
in deepwater zones – such as BP's – and for deadly tar sands development, all 
in hopes of growth, profit and jobs.

Watching his performance from a distance, we really don't know if he 
understands the contradictions in this pattern, how one goal cancels the other, 
or if he has simply made a "safer" political choice. If so, it's safer only in 
the very short run, as the entire economic system, and possibly 
industrial-consumer society itself, face intrinsic systemic problems, which may 
not be solvable. Trying to save an old economic model that is near collapse, he 
may sacrifice the opportunity to mitigate climate change and save the world.

Does Obama know this? If so, wouldn't it be "safer" politically to tell the 
truth about it? Some enlightened political leadership would be really helpful 
right now. But for the moment, the main point is this: in a choice between 
addressing the stresses of the planet and addressing the stresses of corporate 
capitalism, President Obama chooses the latter, while undermining the former.

Let's be fair. Obama is not alone. The leaders of nearly all governments of 
the world – and their opposition leaders – exhibited similar internal conflict 
and timidity in Copenhagen. Even those with true desire to cut carbon felt that 
their priority was to also stimulate economic growth for their own industries, 
at all costs. Without growth, big businesses die, and so do national economies, 
and jobs. The whole system is threatened. That's really all anyone talks about 
now.

Whether it's the political left or right, Obama, or Cameron, or Sarkozy, or 
Putin, or Wen, or Harper or Miliband or Gingrich or Palin, or any political 
candidate for any office, they're all talking about the necessity to stimulate 
growth. The media does, too, whether it's the Guardian or the Murdoch press, 
the Financial Times or the New York Times. They all agree on the one thing: 
growth, growth, growth. That's the lifeblood of the system. Everyone is hunting 
the magic elixir to revive rapid growth. How to build and sell more cars? How 
to increase industrial production, from computers to heavy equipment to 
industrial agriculture? How to increase exports?

But there's a missing link in the discussion, ignored by nearly everyone in 
the mainstream debate: nature. They speak about our economy as if it were a 
separate entity, its own ever-expanding universe, unconnected to any realities 
outside itself, not embodied within a larger system from which, actually, it 
emerged and can't escape. Nature cannot be left out of the discussion. It may 
be the most important detail of the entire conversation. Leaving it out of 
consideration is, well, suicidal. Here's the point: never-ending growth on a 
small planet with finite resources is a profound impossibility. It's an 
absurdity. A fantasy. It's time to wake up.

The missing link

Look around you. The clothes you are wearing, the chair you are sitting in, 
the implements on the stove, the stove, the floor and walls of your room, its 
carpet, the lights and the switches, the electrical lines in the walls, your 
mobile phone, the road outside, the car you drive and all its tyres, wires, 
metals, glass, fabrics, batteries; airplanes, skyscrapers, tanks, missiles, 
computers ... were all once minerals and metals dug up from the earth, then 
shipped around the world, transformed, assembled, shipped again to a store near 
you, and sold. Or else they were living beings: trees, plants, animals, fibres, 
corals that had their own independent existence. Even "synthetics" began as 
natural elements. Is your shirt made of polyester? Polyester is plastic. 
Plastic is oil.Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> used to be 
dinosaurs, trees, plants. All of it is nature. The entire material economy 
began as part of the earth, buried in the ground, or it grew from it, or it was 
alive before we transformed it. But it's disappearing fast.

The whole situation is something new for capitalism, a shock. For two 
centuries it's been like a closely guarded secret that the entire economic 
system we live in, and assumed was forever, is actually part of another larger 
system, but with only so many resources and dump sites. But the secret is out. 
We are eating up the materials that sustain us, and the feast is almost over.

During the great heydays of capitalism – the last two centuries of spectacular 
development and growth – we lived in what the great ecological economist Herman 
Daly called a "full world" of resources. We thought they were unlimited, some 
kind of permanent gift to the human race from God, so we could display our 
stewardship, or something. But it's not a "full world" any more. Somebody 
should tell our leaders.

In addition to those climate impacts, we now face rapidly diminishing supplies 
of cheap oil and other fossil fuels. They call it "peak oil". This is 
catastrophic for our system. Cheap fossil fuels were the primary engine that 
grew our society over the last two centuries. That's soon over, and there is no 
combination of sustainable alternative replacements capable of maintaining 
industrial society at nearly its present level.

Perhaps ultimately even more important is the global scarcity of fresh water. 
The World Bank already predicts the next world war will be over water. Healthy 
topsoils are also seriously diminished, as are agricultural lands, converted to 
other uses, and global food supplies, which are ever more expensive. So are 
forests and their hundreds of crucial byproducts, as well as biodiversity of 
every kind, life in the oceans, coral reefs, and key minerals, including coltan 
(for your mobile phone), lithium, phosphorous, lead, zinc, tin, copper, gold, 
and hundreds of others. Following two centuries of voracious exploitation of 
every mineral, metal and biological resource, we will soon be facing what Daly 
calls an "empty world".

Watch for the big announcement: THE PARTY IS OVER. Without ever-expanding 
resources, ever-expanding production and consumption, our economic growth model 
becomes a relic, instantly obsolete. But so far, no one in leadership roles 
(with one or two exceptions, as we will see) is admitting to that. If they know 
it, they're too scared to say so.

Deal killers

No individual or group of countries was to blame for the failures of 
Copenhagen last year. A lot of people accused China of dragging its feet, 
seeking advantage. Others blamed the G77 poorest countries for demanding 
partial compensation for prior resource thefts from colonial days, and for 
having suffered most of the pollution fallout from the over-consuming rich. 
Many blamed the richest countries for hanging on to their deadly indulgences 
and ill-gotten favours. I shared that view. Yet the true deal-killer was 
ultimately the commitment of nearly all countries to exponential growth 
everywhere, while simultaneously faking their commitment to emissions cuts. 
That was the impossible burden of Copenhagen, and the real dead end, and we 
just might see it all replayed in Cancun next month.

Nowhere among the assembled nations (with the lonely exceptions of Bolivia and 
Ecuador) has there been national emphasis on "conservation" – that is, 
advocating less production and less consumption of energy and materials, less 
global export shipping, "powering down". Less globalisation and more 
localisation. More emphasis on regional self-sufficiency, especially in food 
and energy production and the need for a democratic post-capitalist model, free 
of a growth imperative, that could live within the carrying capacity of the 
planet and its atmosphere, while seeking greater equity. Such moves would 
require economic transformations that few corporate powers, bankers, heads of 
state can accept.

So, we are left with a profound dilemma: do we serve the short-term interests 
of profits and growth? Or do we face reality and serve long-term planetary 
survival? How to solve one problem without exacerbating the other? So far, the 
decisions have favoured the corporate side, as usual. But circumstances may 
change that.

The rights of nature

Six months after Copenhagen, in April 2010, President Evo Morales of Bolivia 
convened a meeting in Cochabamba, Bolivia, gathering some 30,000 of the 
protesters whose viewpoints had been ignored at the UN climate summit. Morales 
found significant support from other South American countries, many of whom are 
part of the G77, in attempting to redefine strategies to deal with climate 
change. One of those countries, Ecuador, had for several years been arguing in 
favour of such concepts as "the inherent rights of nature", which was recently 
added to Ecuador's national constitution amid great fanfare. It also promoted 
an idea by which poor countries would leave their oil resources in the ground, 
in exchange for compensation from rich countries. The rich countries declined; 
they would rather have the oil.

Meanwhile, Morales, the only head of state from an indigenous heritage, made 
his position clear, first in Copenhagen, and then in Cochabamba: "We have a 
stark choice between capitalism and survival," he said. "The countries of the 
world have failed in their obligations … Either capitalism lives or Mother 
Earth lives."

Morales proposed three ideas: 1) nature should be granted rights that protect 
ecosystems from annihilation, under a Universal Declaration of Mother Earth 
Rights, with enforcement powers; 2) poor countries should receive compensation 
for crises they face but had little part in creating, as per the G77 position; 
and 3) there should be a continuing "world referendum on climate change", open 
to all people. Further meetings are ongoing.

Morales also denounced systemic dependency on economic growth and 
overconsumption as being inherently harmful to the earth, and he advocated for 
the economic practices of indigenous peoples. He pointed out that more than 50% 
of surviving global biodiversity, including forests, is found on indigenous 
lands. This is not accidental, he argued, but consistent with most indigenous 
peoples' worldviews over millennia, accepting non-hierarchical, 
non-exploitative relationships with nature.

Morales's comments received little coverage in mainstream media, except for 
one lengthy interview on Amy Goodman's Democracy Now, on the Pacifica Network 
in the US. During the discussion, Goodman asked about lithium mining activities 
in Bolivia. (Lithium is a crucial ingredient for modern batteries, and Bolivia 
has the world's largest reserves.) Those mines, run by Japanese multinational 
corporations, were subject to protests by indigenous groups during the 
Cochabamba summit. Morales admitted that he himself is not entirely free from 
the same conundrums that face other leaders. Bolivia, among the poorest, most 
exploited nations, desperately needs export cash, Morales said, though he 
bemoans that need. He committed to studying long-term effects from these mines, 
and how "to regenerate healthy lands". He also said Bolivia will now demand at 
least 60% ownership in all such mining operations.

The interview offered few hints as to how Bolivia might balance industrial 
extraction with protections for nature. Does Morales have new economic 
structures in mind? How would he provide jobs? Would Bolivia become a mixed 
economy, accepting corporate participation when desirable, but within a 
state-controlled framework, like China? Or does he really advocate an eventual 
return to indigenous economic models? If so, does that imply no modern economic 
development on any meaningful scale? Beginning to answer such questions was the 
stated mandate of the Cochabamba process. We'll see how it proceeds and if it 
can influence Cancun, or other meetings.

But the conclusion is clear. From here on, no one gets off easy. Everyone's in 
the same boat, caught in the same systemic conflict. The conundrums apply as 
much to Morales as to Cameron and Obama. Growth is over, and they need a real, 
clear vision of a way forward. That's true for all of us. Surely it's time to 
agree that the first step is to start drawing curtains on an obsolete, 
out-of-date system that could kill us all, and to shape a new one. Which brings 
us to the good news.

Steady state

Already there are many hundreds of groups, from every continent, at work 
defining the ingredients of an alternative economic system, one that can live 
within the carrying capacity of the planet. I don't have room to describe their 
work here, and it varies depending on political orientation. But, a few points.

The universal quest is to define systems that that can deliver economic 
sufficiency and equity, permanently, while remaining within the carrying 
capacities of the planet. Most accept that systemic economic growth will soon 
be over, though growth is encouraged in specific timely activities – for 
example, certain renewable energy forms, local agriculture practice, 
sustainable building and the arts. Other ingredients of a new economy that some 
groups advocate include:

• Adoption of an international "oil depletion protocol" for an orderly, 
equitable decline of fossil-fuel use and a transition to less total energy use; 
a commonly used term for this is "powering down" – that is, aiming at minimum 
energy for sufficiency and equity.

• Universal emphasis on conservation and efficiency in all activities.

• Introduction of "steady state" (no-growth) economic models. Extensive 
research on global, regional and local carrying capacities.

• Emphasis on localisation not globalisation (thus reducing negative impacts 
of global transport). Local production for local consumption, especially in 
crucial areas such as food, housing and energy. Restrictions on the conversion 
of food-growing lands. Emphasis on the revitalisation of sustainable local 
agriculture systems. On national levels, revival of the "import substitution" 
model; an emphasis on local production for essential needs, rather than trade. 
Greater regulation and less movement of capital across borders.

• Less long-distance shipping, not more.

• Development of local participatory democracies. Various kinds have been 
proposed. Many favour the concept of "subsidiarity". Political power moves to 
the lowest practical level. (Climate change requires international agreement; 
economic and political rule-making should be local.)

• Ban privatisation of the "natural commons" – water, forests, genetic 
structures, medicinal plants, and so on – as well as such public commons as 
education, health, security, and (some say) media.

• Legal confirmation for the inherent rights of nature, with a coda and 
enforcement standards. Universal application of the UN Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Return of indigenous lands expropriated for 
mining and oil development.

• End legal "personhood" for corporations; introduction of "site here to sell 
here" policies; establishment of local boards of directors including 
significant labour and environmental representation, among other local 
stakeholders. Encouragement of community-owned and worker-owned enterprises.

• Introduction of new standards of economic measurement. Elimination of GDP as 
a measurement of societal success, substituting alternative measurements for 
human wellbeing and the wellbeing of the natural world. These include such 
community values as health, education and happiness, rather than wealth 
accumulation, and full protections for global biodiversity.

• Advocating for standards of "sufficiency" rather than wealth accumulation.

• Development of a formal process for the transfer of green technology, and 
some degree of surplus wealth, from wealthy countries to poor ones, given a 
planetary framework of reduced economic possibilities. Return of traditional 
agricultural lands, expropriated during colonial days and during more recent 
neoliberal globalisation.

That is the tiniest sample of what thousands of people are now discussing in 
various forums, including Cochabamba, World Social Forums and many others. For 
more information, I suggest internet searches of some of the following: Post 
Carbon Institute, Transition Towns movement, Center for the Advancement of the 
Steady State Economy, NewEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> Institute, Global Footprint 
Network, Ecosocialist International Network, New Economy Working Group, ETC 
Group, The Story of Stuff, 350.org, left or green biocentrism, Dark Mountain 
Project, Indigenous Environmental Network, Tebtebba foundation, Food and Water 
Watch, Navdanya, Third World Network, International Center for Technology 
Assessment, Global Alliance for Rights of Nature, Rainforest Action Network, 
Institute for Policy Studies, International Forum on Globalization. These will 
doubtless lead to dozens of others.

• Jerry Mander is the founder of the San Francisco-based International Forum 
on Globalization. His books include Four Arguments for the Elimination of 
Television, In the Absence of the Sacred, and The Case Against the Global 
Economy (with Edward Goldsmith) and Alternatives to Globalization (with John 
Cavanagh)
 