
It was not possible to see Panorama’s Trump: The Kremlin Candidate? 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b08bls3s> (BBC1) in advance, but adequately 
placed to offer insight into the decline of the western world instead wasCoach 
Trip: Road to Marbs 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/coach-trip-road-to-marbs> (E4), in which 14 
contestants go on holiday together on a bus, then each day have to decide who 
is the least popular couple and vote those people off, right in front of their 
sad, disappointed faces.

I had not realised that Coach Trip was still on. When it started back in 2005, 
it was a late-afternoon treat that featured people who might actually choose to 
go on a coach trip abroad. It quickly became a student viewing staple, largely 
because of its host and compere, Brendan Sheerin, who embodied end-of-the-pier 
camp and gentle bawdiness, but also because it pioneered a kind of television 
that revelled in forcing uptight Brits to be rude to each other’s faces, rather 
than behind each other’s backs. It’s a formula that has since been put to 
excellent use onCome Dine With Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/come-dine-with-me> and Four in a Bed 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/four-in-a-bed>. It was mean, but not too 
mean. It was designed to create awkwardness, but it never ascended toBig Brother
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/big-brother> levels of cruel.

But here it is, 12 years later, on the second series of its “reboot” (the 
first, in 2016,took the Road to Ibiza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/26/coach-trip-road-to-ibiza-review-wish-you-werent-here>
), and now there’s a hashtag emblazoned on the roof of the coach. Gone are the 
retired couples in fleeces and walking boots, replaced with a homogenous army 
of magazine-attractive, sculpted young people and a series of activities that 
appear to mostly involve getting them to wear as little clothing as possible.

This Coach Trip takes place around sunny Spain, with plenty of opportunities 
for those lingering bikinis-and-boxers shots. The contestants arrive in pairs; 
there’s one couple, the rest are friends, then two individuals turn up. They’re 
all in their 20s. Some are seasoned travellers, and some are new to the joys of 
sitting on a bus for 15 hours when there’s only one loo, the air conditioning 
has broken and someone has packed an egg mayo and tuna sandwich. They all love 
a laugh. Kieran and Sam talk as if David Brent alone taught them how to be men. 
Calvin and Conrad describe themselves collectively as “the king of banter”. 
Their banter is so great that it has merged them into one regal entity., their 
coat of arms surely bearing the legend, “We’re only having a laugh.” Dhillan 
and Adam are best friends who take offence easily, which bodes well for the 
end-of-episode vote. Most of the others merge into a series of nice faces.

Apart from, that is, the two lone travellers, who are quickly sandwiched 
together in an attempt at adding a littleTake Me Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/take-me-out>/First Dates romance. 
There’s Olivia, who appeared on series five of Made In Chelsea (she has moved 
on “to bigger and better things”, she says), and another Adam, an Aussie and 
self-declared “ladies man” who immediately decides he’s supposed to fancy 
Olivia and treats her as a challenge to be tackled. “What would annoy you about 
her?” he is asked. “If she said no,” he blurts, less lucky lothario, more 
potential recipient of a restraining order. Adam is as charmless as this 
reboot, but he does provide one of the more memorable lines of the episode, 
when Olivia pulls him up on calling her “chick”. “Oh right, yeah,” he 
apologises, smoothly explaining that she didn’t understand him. “We call birds 
‘chicks’.”

Where old Coach Trip contestants might have visited a museum or learned about 
the local geography, this lot “get to know each other” – the currency by which 
they make enough friends to avoid being booted off – by pole-dancing and going 
on a waterslide. Then comes the vote, which remains a masterclass in British 
passive-aggressive avoidance. “Nothing personal,” one couple will say. “We just 
got to know the others better.” “It’s fine. We’ve all got to do it,” their 
victims will reply, through tight white teeth. As the excuses get increasingly 
preposterous – one vote is based on where they are seated on the bus – the 
resentment is more and more palpable. In the interests of not rocking the bus 
for the following day’s exile, however, everyone is forced to push it down, and 
grimace gamely.

Brendan is taking it all in his stride, but there’s something of the 
cut-and-shut about this incarnation of Coach Trip, something not right in the 
sandwiching together of old-style TV and its more youth-focused offspring. It’s 
like The Only Way is Antiques Roadshow, or Songs of Praise: Grime Edition. 
These people wouldn’t go anywhere near a coach holiday. They just want to be on 
TV. And that’s fine, but it strips the premise of its bumbling appeal, and 
makes it exactly the same as any other reality show. It’s a shame that not even 
Brendan’s variety-show cheer can save it.
 