
Lee Hall's article on his new production of Close the Coalhouse Door (Still a 
rich seam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/26/close-the-coalhouse-door-revival>
, G2, 27 March) took me off down memory lane. In the late 1960s I was living in 
Peterlee, County Durham, and was a member of Peterlee Players, the town's 
amateur theatre group. We all went to see the original production of the piece 
in Newcastle and were entranced by it.

Around August 1969 the London production had just closed, but as far as we 
knew the play hadn't yet been "released" for amateur production. With tongue 
rather in cheek, I wrote to the agent Margaret Ramsay explaining that we were a 
group living in a "town built for miners", that 1969 marked the centenary of 
the Durham Miners' Association (DMA), and that we'd love to do Coalhouse Door. 
We almost begged for a licence.

To our absolute delight we received permission to go ahead. Rehearsals started 
and we had a call from a professional theatre designer asking if he could help. 
He gave us a superb set. I contacted the headquarters of the DMA, and they 
mounted a display of mining history in the foyer and decorated the auditorium 
with some of the magnificent banners belonging to the union lodges in each 
colliery. And so at the beginning of October the curtain went up on the first 
amateur production of the play, which played to packed houses for a week.

Alex Glasgow and Sid Chaplin came to the first night, and Alan Plater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater> apologised for not being able to 
make it. I still treasure Sid's comment after the show: "If Alan had been here 
I'm sure he would have been proud that the people from whom the play came in 
the first place had taken it back and done it credit."

We had a memorable week, and I still occasionally get out my old script and 
read it again – and enjoy it. Best wishes to Lee Hall for his production. We 
live in deepest Cheshire now but are determined to get up "home" to see it.
John Alan Simpson
Cheadle Hulme, Cheshire

• London is home to a significant proportion of England's huge variety of 
cultural institutions, so it's perhaps not surprising that a substantial amount 
of the Arts Council's first tranche of proposed investment in refurbishment of 
arts buildings should be allocated to the capital (Noises off as arts bodies 
hear good and bad news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/mar/29/big-hitters-arts-council-funding>
, 30 March). However, more than half of the £114m will go to 18 organisations 
across seven other English regions – like Square Chapel in Halifax, York 
Museums Trust, and Theatre Royal in Plymouth. And there is more to come for 
smaller organisations, with a small-scale capital fund to be launched later 
this year. Plus 75% of our Grants for The Arts investment this financial year 
has been outside London.

The Lottery funding we use for such projects cannot be applied to the running 
costs of organisations in our national portfolio, but our grant-in-aid 
investment there is equally geographically diverse – 446 of our 696 portfolio 
organisations are based across eight English regions other than London. An 
almost 30% reduction in our budget from government for the arts meant reducing 
funding to the majority – including Max Stafford-Clark's Out of Joint, who will 
still receive a little over £1.8m from us over four years.

Sadly, there were other organisations we had to take the difficult decision to 
no longer fund at all. But the Arts Council has never funded all the art that 
takes place in this country and, given an equivalent cut in local authority 
funding, it was sadly inevitable that some organisations would not be able to 
manage.

The Arts Council is using its increasing income from the lottery in new ways 
to help support decreasing levels of money from government. We're looking at 
the long term, helping arts and cultural organisations all over England, and of 
all shapes and sizes, become more sustainable, have fit-for-purpose buildings, 
and generate other sources of income, so they can continue to deliver great 
work that audiences flock to see.
Alan Davey
Chief executive, Arts Council England <http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/>
 