
A serious approach to water stewardship is written into the Coca-Cola 
corporate water strategy, which aims to reduce, recycle and replenish the water 
the company uses to make its beverages. By 2020, Coca-Cola is aiming to return 
as much water to nature and to communities as it uses in its drinks.

Coca-Cola's strategy utilises the comprehensive water risk assessments that 
the company uses to help it understand the water challenges it faces around the 
world.

The strategy takes in water management at the company's 900 bottling plants 
and extends to watershed protection, sustainable communities, and raising 
awareness – with the aim of inspiring other people and companies to act.

Goals are tied into business growth – as the company's business expands so too 
does its investment in water stewardship.

The judges "highly commended" Coca-Cola in this category.

"We were impressed with the scale of Coca-Cola's ambition" – The Guardian 
judges

Water is the most important ingredient in Coca-Cola's beverages and is also 
used for various processes in the manufacturing cycle.

The company's target to reduce its water use ratio is managed through a 
system-wide water resource sustainability corporate standard. This requires 
each of its bottling plants to assess the sustainability of water resources 
used to make its beverages, and those used by the surrounding community.

By 2013 all plants will need to have a source water protection plan in place. 
The plans address critical water challenges at a watershed level, from 
hydrological vulnerabilities to local government management.

To meet its goal of replenishing all the water it uses, Coca-Cola invests in 
community water partnership projects and since 2005, the company has been 
involved in more than 300 of these.

Benefits from water stewardship include watershed protection and conservation; 
expanding community drinking water and sanitation access; and improving water 
for productive use.

The company freely admits that calculating water benefits is in its infancy 
and hopes that the methodology it is helping to advance will support the 
ongoing development of this emerging discipline in water conservation.

Advancing the science of water conservation requires multiple, strategic 
partnerships at every step of the way. Coca-Cola has also joined forces with 
NGOs and organizations such as the Water Footprint Network, the Nature 
Conservancy, World Wildlife Fund and the Global Environment and Technology 
Foundation.

The company is also seeking to raise global awareness of the importance of 
water stewardship and to encourage other businesses in its industry to take 
action. It has been instrumental in setting up the CEO water mandate, a 
public-private partnership to help companies develop, implement and disclose 
water sustainability policies and practices, as well as the beverage industry 
environmental roundtable and the global water challenge.

At an operational level it is transforming best practice and raising 
expectations of business responsibility in the treatment of wastewater, 
introducing the very first wastewater treatment systems in some locations.

With 70% of wastewater in developing countries going untreated, this is 
clearly a very important step in the company's water stewardship commitment.

Coca-Cola's comprehensive strategy made such an impression on the judges that 
they thought it likely to become an industry standard.

Highly commending the company's approach, they said: "We were impressed with 
the scale of Coca-Cola's ambitions and how it actively champions water 
stewardship. We look forward to seeing this ambition turned into results."

Lorna Thorpe is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 