
There’s something about the way that the Community Shop is lauded as an answer 
to food poverty that makes me somewhat hesitant and uncomfortable, in a way 
that I can’t quite put my finger on.

Could supermarkets for poor people tackle the UK’s chronic food poverty? | 
Patrick Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/11/community-shop-supermarkets-low-income-customers-food-poverty>
The Demos thinktank pushes for food banks to become more like community shops; 
instead of handing out food parcels, they should provide long-term support for 
people in chronic food poverty. As a former user of The Storehouse food bank, 
run by the Vineyard church, in Southend on Sea, I can’t help but feel that this 
is a misrepresentation of the work that food banks do. Many food banks offer 
long-term support. The Trussell Trust offers a voucher scheme, where a referral 
grants the recipient three vouchers, each to be exchanged for three days supply 
of emergency food. A client can be re-referred by their doctor, social worker 
or other health or social care professional if they still need help after those 
first three vouchers.

I recently visited my local Trussell Trust food bank, and found alongside 
volunteers offering food parcels, kind words and cups of tea, were external 
organisations providing support: drug and alcohol abuse leaflets; information 
about debt advice; and a benefits workshop. I’m in talks with Trussell Trust 
about offering basic cooking courses. The Storehouse had “stay and play” 
sessions for those of us trailing young children behind us, overseen by family 
support workers. with cups of tea and kind words for the strung-out and 
haggard, those of us with deadened eyes and distress plastered across our faces 
So, in my experience, food banks do offer support to help tackle the reasons 
people end up at their doors in the first place.

Perhaps what I find deeply unsettling about the Community Shop approach is the 
sad suspicion that the major retail giants are donating their “surplus food” to 
write it off in a tax loophole. Or, perhaps it’s the well researched and 
unshakeable knowledge that many of the retail behemoths employ people on 
zero-hours contracts. Or perhaps it’s a memory, from late 2012, of the mum in 
the green and black fleece of the Asda uniform, queuing at the food bank after 
her shift, because she didn’t earn enough to pay her bills. Or the Tesco 
cleaner, a few places behind? Perhaps supermarkets need to get their houses in 
order, and pay their staff fairly, so those staff don’t need “community 
initiatives” to help them feed the families they go out to work to support.

But this criticism is aimed at the Big Four. As a concept, trying to tackle 
food waste and the retail giants’ abuses at all stages of the supplier chain, 
is a good one. But local supermarkets specifically targeted at the working poor 
or anyone on means-tested benefits are not an answer to food poverty: if you 
are in the queue at the food bank because you can’t afford to buy simple basic 
groceries for yourself and your family, it doesn’t matter where those groceries 
are that you can’t afford to buy.

I like and support any idea that reduces food waste for its green credentials 
and society-focused behaviour. Let’s not fool ourselves that boxes of broken 
biscuits, or mushroom and pecorino tarts at £2.20 a slice, hold any of the 
answers to feeding the poorest and hungriest in Britain today.

There is more we can do. One of the things I feel I cannot shout loudly enough 
about is backing any campaign you see for the living wage. What use is a 19p 
box of M&S biscuits, if you have to bypass the Community Shop and go to the 
food bank, because 19p is too much of a stretch?
 