
A fifth of bowel cancer patients who received an emergency diagnosis in one 
year in England had characteristic symptoms the year before, suggesting their 
disease could have been caught earlier, researchers say.

With the majority of patients having seen a doctor in the 12 months before 
their diagnosis, whether emergency or non-emergency, the authors of the new 
study say multiple factors could be behind the finding.


“The sample [of patients] we have analysed come from more than 200 GP 
practices, so this suggests that it is not a problem of specific doctors, it 
suggests that it is a system-wide problem,” said Cristina Renzi, lead 
researcher ofthe study 
<https://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-us/cancer-news/press-release/2016-09-28-1-in-5-emergency-bowel-cancer-patients-had-symptoms-before-diagnosis>
 from University College London and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine.


“Emergency presentations are associated with worse patient-reported outcomes 
and disruptions to hospital services,” she added. “Cancer survival after an 
emergency colorectal cancer diagnosis is also substantially lower.”

With the study also showing that more than half of bowel cancer patients who 
receive an emergency diagnosis had no record of relevant symptoms up to a month 
beforehand, Renzi believes more needs to be done to supportGPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps>, while patients should be encouraged 
to discuss all symptoms of concern with their doctor.

Writing in the British Journal of Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer>, the researchers, from four 
British universities, described how they analysed GP records and cancer 
registration data from more than 1,600 patients over the age of 25 who had been 
diagnosed with either colon or rectal cancer between 2005 and 2006.

While Renzi admits that the situation might have changed since the data was 
collected, the proportion of emergency diagnoses made for rectal cancers, she 
said, has remained fairly constant over the last decade, while those for colon 
cancers has dropped slightly.

Of the 1,029 colon cancer patients, 35% were diagnosed in an emergency 
situation, such as A&E or an emergency GP referral, compared to 15% of the 577 
with rectal cancer. Emergency diagnoses were more common among women, those 
aged 80 or over and, for rectal cancer, those with a low socio-economic status.

When researchers examined up to five years of medical history for the 
colorectal cancer patients, whether diagnosed in an emergency situation or not, 
they discovered that more than 95% had seen a doctor in the previous 12 months. 
“In both cases it seems that they have been to their doctor multiple times and 
increasingly so the year before diagnosis,” said Renzi.


Those diagnosed in non-emergency situations were more likely to have symptoms 
typical of bowel cancer, including “red flag” symptoms such as rectal bleeding, 
anaemia or a change in bowel habits. But, the authors report, 18% of colon 
cancer patients and 23% of rectal cancer patients diagnosed in emergency 
situations also showed at least one red flag symptom in the 12 months before 
their diagnosis.

That, the authors said, suggests that around 20% of colorectal cancer patients 
could have been diagnosed earlier. That they were not, says Renzi, could be 
down to a number of factors.

“It might be that the doctor has referred them to have a diagnostic test and 
maybe the cancer progressed more rapidly; it might be that the patient had to 
come back and they didn’t,” said Renzi. “For now, we haven’t been able to 
really understand what went wrong after they were seen with the typical red 
flag symptoms.”

With many of those given an emergency diagnosis showing no red flag symptoms 
or other relevant signs, such as weight loss, Renzi said it was important that 
patients talk to their GP about all symptoms they are experiencing, while 
doctors need access to specialists and diagnostic facilities.

“The GPs need more support to deal with patients who present with non-specific 
symptoms in order to be able to diagnose cancer earlier, even in those cases,” 
she said.
 