
This week, Sydney’s Daily Telegraph published a cover portraying the 
African-born Grand Mufti Ibrahim Abu Mohammed as a monkey: a predictable 
manifestation of the Islamophobia unleashed since the atrocities in Paris.

But there’s a complementary phenomenon that’s less obvious – a wave of 
conservative Islamophilia. Yes, Islamophilia.

We accept that Russian bombs can provoke a terror backlash. Ours can too | 
Mehdi Hasan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/17/russian-bombs-terror-vladimir-putin-syria-david-cameron>
We often forget that, in his classic text Orientalism, Edward Said writes as 
much about western desire for the Islamic world as disdain for it. The two 
responses depend on each other, he says, with the category “Orient” generated 
as a projection of Orientalist hopes and fears.

If the Islamophobe essentialises Muslims into a set of racialised 
characteristics –
violence, fanaticism, asceticism, etc – the Islamophiliac performs the same 
operation, and then expresses a strange yearning for these supposed “Islamic” 
traits. There’s an obvious analogy with antisemitism, where “philosemitism” 
often accompaniesout-and-out anti-Jewish bigotry 
<http://mondoweiss.net/2015/03/confirms-christian-semitic>.

Islam, argued Grayson Clary 
<http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/fear-of-a-muslim-planet/> in a fascinating 
March 2015 essay in the New Inquiry, “often figures in conservative dreamscapes 
as an object of esteem, envy, even sexual longing”. But the form of that esteem 
changes over time, according to the vagaries of international politics.

In an earlier phase of the “war on terror”, some American social conservatives 
openly expressed their admiration of the sexual mores they identified with 
Islam. In 2004, Pat Buchanan, Reagan’s former communication adviser and now a 
widely published paleoconservative commentator,explained that on questions of 
sexual morality <http://www.antiwar.com/scheuer/?articleid=2599> “conservative 
Americans have more in common with devout Muslims than with liberal Democrats”.

This, Buchanan suggested, was the basis of an alliance against common foes.

“If conservatives reject the ‘equality’ preached by Gloria Steinem, Betty 
Friedan,NARAL <http://www.naral.org/> and the National Organization for Women, 
why seek to impose it on the Islamic world?” He wrote. “Why not stand beside 
Islam, and against Hollywood and Hillary?”

In 2007, conservative provocateur Dinesh D’Souza wrote an entire book 
extending that argument. In The Enemy at Home: The Cultural Left and Its 
Responsibility for 9/11, he contended that liberalism had provoked Osama bin 
Laden by offending his moral and cultural sensibilities.

“[T]he cultural left,” he argued, “has fostered a decadent American culture 
that angers and repulses traditional societies, especially those in the Islamic 
world that are being overwhelmed with this culture … This campaign has provoked 
a violent reaction from Muslims who believe that their most cherished beliefs 
and institutions are under assault.”

Like Buchanan, D’Souza pushed for a rapprochement with “Islam”, on the basis 
of a joint struggle against the left on issues such as homosexuality, 
promiscuity, pornography, atheism and the like.

“Conservatives,” he wrote, “must strive to convince traditional Muslims that 
there are two Americas, and that one of these has a lot in common with them.”

Not surprisingly, the D’Souza thesis did not catch on. Aside from anything 
else, the American right’s attitude toIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> isn’t merely a matter of culture. 
It’s also (and more importantly) a mediated expression of the geopolitics of 
the Middle East, in which the label “Islam” identifies those forces opposed to 
America’s strategic interests.

When, in the late seventies, the US backed the resistance to the Soviet regime 
in Afghanistan, Carter’s National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinskitold the 
mujahedin <http://edition.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/0109/29/cp.00.html>, “your fight 
will prevail and you’ll have your homes and your mosques back again, because 
your cause is right and God is on your side”.

But, in the context of Iraq and Afghanistan, D’Souza’s form of Islamophilia is 
probably untenable as a significant political current.

Nonetheless, there are other versions on offer. In his article, Clary 
discusses the French novelist and provocateur Michel Houellebecq. Houllebecq’s 
often denounced, with good reason, as an Islamophobe – famously, he called 
Islam “the most stupid religion”.

But he’s also an Islamophile, as his most recent novel Submission (Soumission) 
reveals. The novel depicts the Muslim Brotherhood, under the leadership of a 
certain Mohammed Ben Abbes, taking control of France and imposing sharia law.

On the surface, the narrative might sound like something Pauline Hanson might 
dream up – a boilerplate Islamophobic fantasy. Yet, as Adam Gopnik points outin 
his review for the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/01/26/next-thing>, Houllebecq presents 
Brotherhood rule in an unexpectedly rosy light:

The portrait of the Islamic regime is quite fond; [Houllebecq] likes the 
fundamentalists’ suavity and sureness. Ben Abbes’s reform of the educational 
system is wholesome, and his ambitions to rebuild France are almost a form of 
neo-Gaullism. (He succeeds in integrating Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, and Turkey 
into the European Union, creating a power bloc greater than the American one.) 
The reform of education, the reinforcement of the family, even the 
re-domestication of women are all held up for admiration.

The book’s real scorn is not for Islam but for liberal modernity, which 
gratefully submits to Islam (hence the novel’s title).

“Houellebecq despises contemporary consumer society,” Gopnik says, “and though 
he is not an enthusiast, merely a fatalist, about its possible Islamic 
replacement, he thinks that this is the apocalypse we’ve been asking for. What 
he truly hates is Enlightenment ideas and practices, and here his satire 
intersects with a fast-moving current of French reactionary thought ...”

He cannot help a sneaking envy for Isis’s willingness, unlike the “pussified” 
US, to massacre civilians.

In an earlier decade, the reactionary anti-liberalism of a French intellectual 
would generally be expressed through Catholicism. Today, however, the Catholic 
church – an institution in palpable decline – simply doesn’t present a 
sufficiently viable platform from which to rail against the culture of the 
modern age.

For a French reactionary, Islam represents on the one hand a symptom of 
contemporary decline – a religion associated with immigration, globalisation, 
the breakdown of national culture and so on. But it also possesses an 
anti-modern dynamism and confidence that the traditional church lacks – and 
because of that, it exerts a strange fascination for the right, simultaneously 
an object of loathing and envy.

You can see the same tension playing out in less articulate forms in the 
English-speaking world, particularly in the wake of the Paris atrocities. After 
those murders, Republican presidential contender Ted Cruzissued a press release 
<https://www.tedcruz.org/news/cruz-america-must-stand-with-our-allies-against-the-scourge-of-radical-islamic-terrorism/>
. “America must stand with our allies against the scourge of radical Islamic 
terrorism,” he thundered.

And then came this:

We must immediately recognize that our enemy is not ‘violent extremism’. It is 
the radical Islamism that has declared jihad against the west. It will not be 
appeased by outreach or declarations of tolerance. It will not be deterred by 
targeted airstrikes with zero tolerance for civilian casualties, when the 
terrorists have such utter disregard for innocent life.

The kicker comes in that final line, which might be paraphrased like this: 
America should be more like Isis.

Cruz is not D’Souza, or even Houellebecq. He’s not going to argue, as D’Souza 
did, that conservatives should support conservative Muslims against the 
blasphemies of Dutch cartoonists. On the contrary, Cruz takes every opportunity 
to ridicule and insult Muslims. But his Islamophilia is the love that dare not 
speak its name and he cannot help a sneaking envy for Isis’s willingness, 
unlike the “pussified” US, to massacre civilians.

“It’s said,” writes Grayson Clary, “that ‘Africa’ is Europe’s name for its own 
worst impulses; ‘Islam’ might be the name traditionalists give their own 
unfinished ambitions.”

You can feel the same unspoken desire in so many of the conservative 
think-pieces that have appeared after the Paris murders. It’s not that the 
writers approve of Isis. Obviously, they don’t. They see it as a threat – but 
they’re also fascinated by its apparent success in overcoming the decadence of 
modernity.

Thus, they begin by asserting the Islamists’ hatred for liberalism and its 
manifestations, but quickly move on to bemoaning the developed world’s 
multiculturalism and political correctness and moral relativism and general 
spinelessness:

Why don’t westerners believe in anything any more? 

Why won’t they stand up for their values and their traditions? 

Why do they spurn traditional mores and sexual standards and religion? 

Why aren’t they prepared to fight, to sacrifice themselves for their nation 
and their cause?

The conclusion generally hovers unasked in the air: why aren’t they less 
modern and more, well … Islamic?

Oceans of ink have flowed into articles pondering why young people sign up for 
murderous Islamist groups. Actually, the attraction the jihadis exert over 
radicalised youths probably isn’t that different from the sentiment oozing from 
the conservative press: a profound disaffection with liberal modernity.

Christian refugees are fine, Muslims aren't. In a post-racist world, of course 
that's not racist | Yassir Morsi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/15/christian-refugees-are-fine-muslims-arent-in-a-post-racist-world-of-course-thats-not-racist>
The hideous cycle of terror and war will not be ended by western nations 
retreating into anti-modern authoritarianism, something that seems increasingly 
on the cards. That’s why we need less pontificating about freedom as an 
abstraction and much more discussion of the specific freedoms under assault in 
the here and now.

In particular, progressives cannot content themselves with propping up a 
liberalism that lacks a base of its own. We need rather to radicalise liberty, 
filling the seemingly lifeless shells of democracy, justice and freedom with a 
deeper, more meaningful content.

To put it another way, to defeat the craving for reaction, we must hold 
modernity to the promises it makes but so often fails to deliver.
 