
Labor’s 11th-hour “hire Australian” amendment to the Australian Building and 
Construction Commission bill could impose onerous requirements to advertise 
jobs even when an Australian is hired, experts have warned.

Employment law expert Andrew Stewart has told Guardian Australia the 
provision, which is intended to force employers to advertise for locals before 
hiring visa-holders, appears to impose the requirement across the board 
regardless of who is hired.

The Master Builders Association chief executive, Wilhelm Harnisch, has 
confirmed it is a “live issue” that is being raised with the government and the 
ABCC, the new regulator that took over from Fair Work Building and Construction 
this week.

The amendment moved by Labor requires a clause in the building code that “no 
person is to be employed to undertake building work” unless:

 * the position is first advertised in Australia; 
 * the ad was targeted to reach a “significant proportion” of qualified 
citizens and residents 
 * any skills or experience requirements are set out in the ad; and 
 * “the employer demonstrates that no Australian citizen or Australian 
permanent resident is suitable for the job”. 
The government first opposed the amendment in the Senate, but accepted it in 
the lower house aspart of a deal to win crossbench support for the ABCC bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/coalition-agrees-to-new-procurement-rules-and-jobs-test-to-help-pass-abcc-bill>
.

Year ends with Senate roulette and deals spun as grand bargains and cunning 
plans | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/year-ends-with-senate-roulette-and-deals-spun-as-grand-bargains-and-cunning-plans>
Stewart, a labour law professor at Adelaide University, said the amendment was 
“meant to say nobody who isn’t an Australian citizen or permanent resident can 
be employed” unless the conditions were met.

“But that’s not what it says – it says no person is to be hired without the 
conditions being met. On the face of it, it means no matter how minor, every 
job must be nationally advertised.”

Stewart said that was a “significant” imposition because of the project-based 
nature of building work and the fact employers generally hired from a pool of 
workers known to them without extensive advertising. “There is no way any 
contractor will comply with that requirement as written,” he said.

Stewart said the government could try and insert a better drafted term into 
the code, but that “risks the argument the code is invalid because it is 
inconsistent with the legislation”.

He said it was more likely the government would put the provision into the 
code then ask ABCC to ignore the unintended consequences rather than blacklist 
employers due to a failure to meet the technical requirement.

That would give companies that didn’t comply with other sections of the code 
an argument “that they’re being singled out or treated arbitrarily because 
other code breaches are let go”, Stewart said.

Commenting on the requirement as it was intended to operate, Harnisch said: 
“The construction industry and contractors as normal practice hire Australians 
first, with high-level skills.”

He said use of skilled temporary 457 visa-holders was “ not the first resort” 
of employers.

Asked about the two-year phase-in period for the building code negotiated by 
Derryn Hinch, Stewart said it had “saved the government from a mess of its own 
making”, theproposed retrospective application of the code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/michaelia-cash-criticised-over-industrial-relations-bill-with-retrospective-powers>
.

But Stewart said the phase-in would create problems for builders without 
enterprise agreements, or whose agreements were up for renegotiation in the 
next two years, if they came under industrial pressure from the union to sign a 
non-code-compliant deal.

He said the application of the new code could arbitrarily punish some builders.

“If an employer rolls over after the new code takes effect, they’re in the 
firing line; whereas those who rolled over right away, if they did exactly what 
the government said they shouldn’t do, they get protection until November 2018 
.”

A spokeswoman for the ABCC said: “The new code is yet to be published and 
registered. It is subject to amendments made this week.”

The ABCC refused to comment on the effect of the amendment, adding only that 
it would “review and analyse the registered version of the code”, despite the 
fact the text of the offending provision is already contained in legislation.

Guardian Australia has contacted the employment minister, Michaelia Cash, for 
comment.
 