
The cost of flatsharing in some of the UK’s most expensive towns and cities 
has soared by nearly 30% in the past three years, with tenants in five cities 
now paying more than £500 a month to rent a room in a shared house.

Flatshares are still a cheaper option for most renters than finding a place on 
their own. But, as the number of people who cannot afford to buy homes grows, 
prices are being pushed upwards.


Figures from flatsharing website EasyRoommate <http://uk.easyroommate.com/> 
show that since 2012, the biggest leap in room rents has been in Oxford. There, 
a combination of demand from students and some of the least affordable house 
prices in the UK has been driving up costs. EasyRoommate said the cost of rooms 
in the city listed on its site had increased by 29% since 2012, to an average 
of £571 a month.

Other towns in the south-east of England have also recorded steep rises. In 
Reading, costs have increased by 23% to an average of £514 a month. In 
Cambridge, prices are up by 21% at £552.

Why Generation Rent doesn’t care about your precious green belt | Joel Golby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/05/generation-rent-concrete-over-green-belt-renting>
Separate figures from housing charity Shelter showed that in the past year, 
one in five working adults aged 20-34 have moved back in with their parents. A 
further 15% have never moved out.

The charity said more than half of what it dubbed “clipped wing kids” had 
moved back because of the high cost of housing. A third said they wanted to 
save for a deposit for a place of their own, while a fifth said simply that 
renting was too expensive.

London remains the most expensive place to rent in a flatshare, with the 
average cost of a room advertised on EasyRoommate heading rapidly towards 
£700-a-month.

The average amount asked of flatsharers in the capital has increased by nearly 
14% since 2012, to £692 a month, or £8,300 a year. For that price, the website 
is currently listing 18 rooms available to rent, including a double room in 
Archway, north London, in a flat with three other people, and a room in 
Willesden, in north-west London, billed as a twin, which has bunkbeds and a 
kitchenette.


The other generation rent: meet the people flatsharing in their 40s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/25/flatsharing-40s-housing-crisis-lack-homes-renting-london>
The average rent for a room is also more than £500 a month in Brighton and 
Hove.

The website said a survey of tenants showed that only in Milton Keynes, High 
Wycombe and Maidstone was the cost of renting less than the amount flatsharers 
said they could afford to pay. In London, it said people were stretching to 
find £94 a month more than they had the budget for.

EasyRoommate’s chief executive, Karim Goudiaby, said: “Our research reinforces 
the urgent need to replenish the housing supply in Britain with affordable 
accommodation.

“There is a pressing need to tackle the housing crisis to mitigate inflation 
with rented room prices and to ensure Britain’s renters can find a room that 
best suits them and their budget.”

Campbell Robb, chief executive of Shelter, said: “When getting even a toe on 
the housing ladder is completely out of reach and private rents are sky-high, 
it’s no wonder so many working young adults are having to move back into their 
childhood bedroom.”


The charity said that current government schemes such as Help to Buy and 
Starter Homes, which will see new properties built to be sold at 20% below 
market rate, did not help people on ordinary incomes.

The fight against exorbitant rents: from the archive, 20 August 1960
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/20/exorbitant-rents-landlords-renting-property>
“With plans to sell off many of the few genuinely affordable homes we have 
left, expensive and unstable private renting or living with mum and dad are the 
only option,” said Robb.

Dan Wilson Craw, policy manager at the campaign group Generation Rent, said 
the housing crisis was “much more than a London problem”.

He said: “Rents are rising anywhere the economy is growing and that makes life 
harder for people who are already struggling or not enjoying a wage increase.

“For some, moving back in with parents while they accumulate a deposit 
rent-free is the only way they’ll get a home of their own – but not even that 
works if the only jobs are at the other end of the country.”

For those for whom flatsharing is not driven by a desire to cut costs, 
EasyRoommate said its most expensive listing was a double room in a two-bed 
flat in central London – a short hop from Oxford Circus. The room is listed at 
£3,200 a month, or £38,400 a year, although that does not include bills.

At the other end of the scale is a room in Belfast, also with one flatmate, 
advertised for just £165 a month. Rents for a room in the city average £278.20 
a month, the website said.

 