 The Indian deputy prime minister, Lal Krishna Advani, was cleared yesterday of 
inciting the 1992 demolition by Hindu zealots of the 16th-century Mughal mosque 
in Ayodhya.
But the special court in Uttar Pradesh state told seven other prominent Hindus 
that they would be tried on similar charges.

They include a fellow member of the Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) government, 
the human resources development minister, Murli Manohar Joshi, who has since 
tendered his resignation.

They will be charged on October 10 with offences likely to include incitement 
and unlawful assembly.

The charges relate to the ransacking of the mosque in Uttar Pradesh, which was 
attacked by tens of thousands of Hindu activists with spades, crowbars and 
their bare hands.

The attack led to nationwide riots in which 2,000 people died, and a decade of 
tension between Hindus and Muslims.

Last year further rioting claimed 1,000 - mainly Muslim - lives in the western 
state of Gujarat after Muslims set alight a railway carriage carrying 60 Hindu 
pilgrims and activists fromAyodhya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya>.

Yesterday's verdict seems to be a political reprieve for Mr Advani, who is 
regarded as a successor to the prime minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee.

If the court had convicted him he would have had little option but to resign 
from the government. But to cheers from Hindu activists, the judge simply 
declared "Advani is discharged", giving no reason.

Mr Joshi's offer to resign awaits the decision of Mr Vajpayee when he returns 
toIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> from a foreign tour at the 
end of the month.

The BJP has made it clear that it does not want him to step down, because the 
case, it says, is "politically motivated and doesn't involve moral turpitude or 
allegations of corruption".

Though relieved Mr Advani appeared to be uncomfortable with the ruling. 

"I can't analyse why this distinction between me and my colleagues," he said. 

"Earlier, the case was one of conspiracy, so one could understand such 
distinctions being made. But now the charges related essentially to making 
inciting speeches provoking the demolition.

"To the best of my knowledge, no speeches were made that day. Not by me, not 
by Mr Joshi, nor anybody else."

Mr Advani is credited with having brought the BJP to power by taking up the 
radical Hindu demand for the construction of a temple dedicated to the Hindu 
god Ram in place of the Babri Mosque in Ayodhya.

Hindus believe that the mosque, named after the Mughal emperor Babar, stood at 
the very site where Ram was born.

Though opinion polls show that he still lags far behind Mr Vajpayee in 
popularity, his leadership of the Ayodhya movement did much to give him 
national prominence as a hardline Hindu leader.

But in recent times, even while maintaining that he is "proud of whatever I've 
done", he has been seeking to develop a less hard-edged political profile, more 
acceptable to the majority of Indians.

This inevitably made him a target of radical Hindu leaders, especially from 
the VHP (the Vishwa Hindu Parishad or World Hindu Council), which is at the 
forefront of the Ram temple movement.

The VHP leader, Praveen Togadia, reacting to the judge's orders, said 
yesterday: "What's happening in India. This is a matter of great surprise. One 
minister has been let off, while another is being charged."

The VHP has already threatened that if its demand for a special session of 
parliament to legislate on the construction of a Ram temple is not accepted by 
October 15, it will summon its activists to Ayodhya for another huge show of 
strength.

But the court's unexpected decision has put the BJP in a quandary. With state 
assembly elections due in crucial north Indian states in November, it was 
hoping to gain some political advantage from the Ayodhya case.

If all the leaders had been put on trial, the party would have sought a 
sympathy vote. If all had been discharged, it could have claimed proof that the 
case was fabricated.

But now that Mr Advani has been let off while other senior leaders are to be 
charged, the political fall-out from the case appears to be that much more 
complicated.

Those facing trial include the BJP leaders of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh 
states, and three leaders of the VHP.
 