
Bridget Syms 
Age 46
Lives in South Buckinghamshire
Occupation Self-employed ceramics restorer
Earns £14,500
Mortgage £30,000
Debts £700 on credit card, £2,500 car loan
Investments £4,000 in shares, £500 in instant access acount, £100 a month ISA 
savings
Pension Personal pension
Aims To reduce debts and build up short term and long term savings.

Bridget's experience as a dental technician in the airforce, combined with her 
knowledge of antiques and art, stood her in good stead when she set up as a 
ceramics restorer 12 years ago. The job was intended to be one she could do 
from home while her children were young, but she has continued with it, 
although her son and daughter are now in their twenties - her son is in his 
final year at university.

She is not short of work. Much of her business comes from the antiques trade, 
but she also takes private commissions, restoring all manner of damaged 
ceramics such as figurines, jardinières, plates and jugs.

But Bridget would like to feel more secure. 'I can live quite well on my 
earnings until something happens which ruins my well-laid plans, such as the 
car breaking down, the washing machine needing mending or my son needing a new 
suit,' she says.

She is worried about getting further into debt. 'The more debt you have, the 
easier it becomes to think another hundred pounds doesn't matter.'

Although Bridget has £500 in a Tesco instant access account for emergencies, 
she is not sure when she should use that money and when she should take out 
credit. At present she is paying off her credit card bill at around £200 a 
month and hopes to clear it in about three months, unless something else crops 
up. Her car loan should also be cleared in just under a year.

Her endowment mortgage has been one of her greatest financial worries. She has 
a low-start policy with Eagle Star which, in the worst-case scenario, could pay 
off only 50 per cent of her outstanding mortgage in 14 years' time. Indeed, she 
has managed to get £4,000 in compensation for having been mis-sold the policy.

She has invested this money in a small portfolio of shares. She is planning to 
leave these untouched until her endowment matures in the hope that they will 
help to make up the shortfall. As an extra protection, she is also saving £100 
a month in a Legal & General index tracker Isa.

Her mortgage is with Bristol & West and she is paying a variable mortgage 
rate. As she was self-employed when she took it out, it had to be on a 
non-status basis.

Although she has thought about remortgaging, she feels it is unlikely another 
lender would consider her for a new loan on her low earnings.

Bridget's main aim is to build up a larger cash cushion both for now and for 
retirement. Although she really enjoys her work, she realises she won't always 
be able to cope with the volume of jobs she handles now.

 Adviser 1: Gillian Cardy

Bridget should try to build up a greater cash reserve so that she avoids 
making emergency purchases on credit cards or other expensive forms of 
borrowing. To this end she may like to consider putting her Legal & General Isa 
on hold for a few months and save the money into a mini-cash Isa instead.

Meanwhile, she may do well to adjust her finances to make the most of the cash 
she has available. Transferring her credit card balance to a cheaper card would 
be of benefit.

She has chosen to invest her compensation from her mis-sold endowment into 
even higher-risk investments. She may find it useful to work out how much the 
shares need to increase in value each year on average to cover the shortfall.

It would have been preferable to put the shares into an Isa, which would have 
been more tax-efficient. However, transferring them now will not be 
particularly cost-effective. She should be careful about the possible impact of 
capital gains tax on the sale of the shares in future.

She could consider putting some of her mortgage on to a repayment basis to 
deal with the problem of the endowment shortfall in a lower-risk way.

She should not assume a remortgage would be difficult. A review of her pension 
planning options may also be advisable.

Gillian Cardy works for financial adviser Professional Partnerships.

 Adviser 2: Andrew Jones 

Bridget is doing the right thing by paying off her loans as soon as possible, 
although it would have been better to repay these before investing her 
endowment compensation, especially in the light of recent stock-market falls.

She is wrong to think lenders would consider her income too low for a 
re-mortgage. However, this option may not be cost-effective, so she should see 
if Bristol & West will offer an improved deal based on her established earnings 
record.

Her pension contributions are low, and she could consider increasing these 
when funds allow. Or she could put additional savings into an Isa in the same 
way as her pension plan, and use the capital accumulated to supplement her 
pension.

She should also consider her state pension. Her Nat-ional Insurance record may 
be incomplete and she should apply for a pension forecast from the DSS. It can 
often be worthwhile making up any shortfall with voluntary contributions.

Then there is ill-health provision. Bridget should take out an income 
replacement policy. A policy paying £800 per month and ceasing at age 60 would 
cost around £85 per month.

Or she could buy a lump-sum critical illness policy. A lump sum of £50,000 
would cost about £33.50 a month. It would repay her mortgage and leave some 
money to live on.

Andrew Jones works for accountant Blick Rothenberg 

• Advice is for guidance only. Do you want to appear in Wealthcheck? Write, 
including daytime and evening telephone numbers, a brief list of circumstances 
and any investments, to: Wealthcheck, The Observer, 119 Farringdon Road, London 
EC1R 3ER, or e-mail:cash@observer.co.uk <mailto:cash@observer.co.uk>. You must 
be prepared to be interviewed and photographed.
 