
The lowest 10-year mortgage rate on record is set to be launched on Friday, 
and more cuts could be on the cards as lenders take advantage of falling money 
markets to offer cheap deals.

Coventry Building Society is to offer a rate of just 2.39% for borrowers 
willing to fix their loan for a decade. The mortgage, which beats the previous 
best-buy rate of 2.84% from Leeds Building Society, has a fee of £999 and is 
available only to borrowers with a minimum 50% deposit.

Before the referendum, George Osborne warned that a Brexit vote would lead to 
higher mortgage rates, but there were already signs thatfixed-rate loans could 
fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/20/brexit-vote-mortgage-rates-drop-investors-government-bonds>
as yields on safe government bonds started to drop.

Darin Landon, distribution director at Coventry, said: “The recent fall in 
swap rates means we have an opportunity to offer market-leading rates to 
borrowers looking for long-term security in these uncertain times.

“Today’s market is particularly fast moving, however, so I’d encourage 
borrowers to act quickly.”

Andrew Montlake of mortgage broker Coreco described the rate as extraordinary. 
“I never thought I’d see a 10-year fixed rate that low – it’s not so long ago 
that we were wondering if five-year rates would fall that far.”

Montlake said the mortgage should appeal to someone who was remortgaging or 
downsizing from a large property. He added that the rate suggested banks and 
building societies were still actively interested in lending, and that he would 
not rule out even lower rates in the weeks ahead. “In this market anything is 
possible,” he said.

Coventry has launched a separate deal for borrowers with a smaller deposit, 
offering loans of up to 65% of a property’s value at a rate of 2.49%.

Both deals have early redemption charges for borrowers who want to pay off 
their loan before the end of the 10-year term. These are equal to 5% of the 
repayment until 30 September 2018, 3% until 30 September 2021, then 1% for the 
rest of the mortgage term.
 