
If you were a teenage romantic in the 80s, you might have been the kind of 
little dreamer who boughtLoving magazine. Filled with swooning love stories, it 
must have seemed an unlikely place to hear the latest record by an anarcho-punk 
outfit from Essex. And yet that's exactly what happened when a flexi-disc with 
a song titled "Our Wedding 
<http://www.southern.com/southern/label/CRC/09410.html>" by an artist called 
Joy De Vivre – purported byLoving to capture the happiness of your big day for 
"true romantics" – was given away to readers. Famously, the mag was forced to 
issue an apology when it emerged this was actually a subversive piece of 
feminist agit-prop from an album calledPenis Envy by a band called Crass 
<http://www.myspace.com/crasscrass>. This lent new meaning to the lines: "All I 
am I give to you, you'll honour me, I'll obey you" and caused theNews of the 
World to describe them as a "band of hate".

As usual, the tabloids couldn't have been more wrong. Crass were many things – 
angry, subversive and loud – but they were not a band of hate. They formed in 
1977, a compelling mix of anarcho-punk, avant-garde art and – despite singer 
Steve Ignorant's protestation that he hated hippies – vegetarian free-thinkers 
who worked and lived out of a commune called Dial House in Essex, writing their 
own literature and putting out their own records.

Jon Savage, author of punk chronicle England's Dreaming 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Englands-Dreaming-Jon-Savage/dp/0571227201>, 
interviewed Crass in 1979 at Dial House. He told me last week: "A lot of bands 
pontificated about changing the world but Crass were the only band who really 
impressed me by actually walking the walk. Punk was very male at that point in 
time, and they had two women onstage, talking about gender issues. But they 
weren't dogmatic, they wanted a conversation, not to shout you down."

It may be the Pistols and the Clash who dominate the annals of punk, but any 
young band referencing them these days would likely be met with a massive yawn. 
Younger generations who've come to consider the gobbing fans and safety pins of 
punk a bit passé have, in Crass, at least one largely unmined source of anarchy 
that doesn't seem played out.

The point at which their name came back into currency arrived with a Jeffrey 
Lewis record,12 Crass Songs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/sep/28/popandrock.shopping4>, three 
years ago. This harbinger of the US east coast "anti-folk" scene added wry new 
meaning to lines such as "I am a symbol of endless, hopeless, fruitless, 
aimless games" by delivering them with his acoustic guitar. Explaining why he 
covered their music, Lewis said: "I wouldn't say that I necessarily agree with 
100% of what Crass says, nor do I think that they would want me to, which is 
part of what's great about them."

While the likes of newer band Flats appear to have much in common with Crass 
musically, co-founder Penny Rimbaud has himself collaborated with new-wave punk 
band Japanther, who are influenced by Crass's use of situationist techniques in 
their live performances: shadow puppets have featured at gigs, as well as 
synchronised swimmers. Rimbaud also appears on the new Charlatans album,Who We 
Touch.

"Penis Envy came out when I was about 12," explains Charlatans singer Tim 
Burgess. "It changed everything – it meant so much more. I became a feminist 
and vegetarian overnight." According to Burgess, the opportunity to have 
Rimbaud "inspire, aggravate and annoy" on the band's new record was 
irresistible.

At some point, probably around the time Noel Gallagher visited 10 Downing 
Street, anti-authoritarianism seemed to stop looking cool in this country. The 
late 90s were a time of political optimism in the UK, of champagne supernovas 
and champagne socialism, and the vegetarian stew-eating way of life that Crass 
represented looked, if anything, embarrassing.

Times change. Crass split in 1984 – following a dismal gig in support of the 
striking miners – and the sort of internal politics that scar so many bands 
means that any hopes of reunion won't be realised. But recently they reissued 
their 1978 debutThe Feeding of the 5000, and among younger groups, Crass's name 
is increasingly being dropped. As the country finds itself preparing to deal 
with the bloody mess left by George Osborne's fallen axe, the ability to 
inspire, aggravate and annoy seems more relevant than ever.
 