
One of the country's largest community based credit unions faces closure or 
takeover after a financial crisis that has prevented savers from withdrawing 
their cash for eight months.

The Camberwell Credit Union in south London, which has more than 2,500 
members, was effectively frozen last August following an investigation that 
discovered mismanagement and a lack of controls to protect its assets.

Efforts to revive the business, which offers savings and loans to low income 
groups, have so far failed to satisfy the regulator, the Financial Services 
Authority.

But if plans for a takeover by a neighbouring credit union, which failed at 
the first try in December, or a full recovery of outstanding loans are not 
achieved, savers face the prospect of losing up to 15% of their capital.

The problems are a blow to the government, which wants credit unions to be a 
central plank of its plans to protect low income groups from loan sharks and 
finance companies that offer crippling interest rates. Chancellor Gordon Brown 
believes credit unions could do more than offer savings and loans and are well 
placed to promote a range of banking services to local community groups in hard 
pressed areas of the country.

The FSA is consulting with credit unions, banks and other interested parties 
about regulations due to take effect next year that will strengthen regulations 
and offer credit union members greater protection.

At the moment credit unions can count on 300,000 members and £180m of assets. 
They are run largely by volunteers and rely on the active involvement of 
members to maintain probity.

They must purchase insurance to protect members from fraud and embezzlement. 
However, shortfalls arising from mismanagement or incompetence are not covered.

The new regulations will protect credit union members for the first time. They 
will get the first £2,000 of their money back in full and 90% of the next 
£31,000, bettering the current arrangement for bank customers, who can recover 
90% of the first £18,000. FSA chairman Howard Davies said last December: "We 
aim to develop a practical and proportionate regulatory system for credit 
unions which should meet the needs of the credit union movement and its members.

"We are confident these proposals will improve consumer confidence in the 
financial soundness of credit unions, and that this will help to provide the 
positive environment credit unions need in order to grow and to pursue their 
social objectives."

The rules are likely to come too late for the Camberwell members when they 
come into force in summer 2002.

Peter Bussey, a director of the Camberwell credit union, said it was in a 
position to repay savers 63% of their cash at the moment and expected to 
recover 85%-90% when all loans had been recalled.

A credit union running normally would expect to have 70% of its assets out on 
loan and only 30% in the bank. Despite already exceeding these levels, 
negotiations designed to reopen the business, between the union and the FSA 
have stalled.
 