
Big changes are happening fast in the criminal justice system. Under the 
justice secretary, Chris Grayling's, "transforming rehabilitation" agenda the 
planned transfer of responsibility for the supervision of low- and medium-risk 
offenders fromprobation trusts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jan/09/probation-service-private-firms-grayling>
 to contracted-out providers – many of them private firms such asG4S and Serco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/15/serco-g4s-bid-contracts-chris-grayling>
 – is progressing at some speed.

Clive Martin, director of the networking and advocacy charity Clinks 
<http://www.clinks.org/>, is concerned about the sheer volume of change. "Over 
the next 12 to 18 months there will be new supervision arrangements for over 
300,000 people," he says. "All the providers of current supervision services 
will change and there is no one who will be left in the same role. From 1 
April, community rehabilitation companies (CRC) will hold contracts for the 
transition period of a year and during that year the contracts will be handed 
over to the new providers.

Clink supports, represents and campaigns for voluntary and community groups 
and social enterprises that work with offenders and their families, and it has 
around 600 members. Martin, 60, has worked in criminal justice for some 25 
years, first as a prison education manager and then heading up Clinks. So, if 
anyone can explain the mind-bogglingly convoluted process in which more than 
1,600 voluntary organisations can compete for contracts, he can.

There are to be three tiers of service provider, he says. Tier 1 is the prime 
providers, private-sector organisations and large charities that will compete to
run the 21 CRCs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/oct/23/sarah-billiald-probation-service-offenders-role>
. Tier 2 will be medium-sized charities and social enterprises that have the 
capacity and resources to work under contracting arrangements and tier 3 will 
be the smaller, local groups. Tier 1 providers should commission services from 
tier 2 and 3 organisations. Yet, if the example of the government'sWork 
Programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2011/jun/22/bid-candy-charities-carved-out-of-work-programme>
 is anything to go by, Martin fears that smaller charities could end up being 
used as "bid candy" by the prime providers in order to secure contracts.

"The sector is pleased the government has recognised this may be an issue, 
given the huge sums of public money involved," says Martin, "but it's difficult 
to see what monitoring of contracts is going to be in place."

Along with the statutory provision of 12 months' post-prison supervision for 
all short-sentence prisoners, which Martin warmly welcomes, the introduction of 
payment by results for the CRCs and of 70 resettlement prisons, make Grayling's 
reforms the most radical in recent criminal justice history. According to the 
justice secretary they will bring about a reduction in the "stubbornly high" 
reoffending figures, running at about 70% over two years.

Yet, in December, a joint report by HM Inspectors of Prisons and Probation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/dec/17/offender-management-programme-prison-rehabilitation>
 concluded that more than nine years after its creation, efforts by the 
National Offender Management Service (Noms) to stop prisoners reoffending are 
"not working". And that it was doubtful that the prison service would be able 
to meet its expectations under the new reforms.

For Martin, rehabilitation is about giving people hope that they can change 
and the tools with which to do so.

"We are constantly fed the story of failure and of risk – what's really 
inspiring is the story of people changing for the better and turning their 
lives around, of which we hear less and less. But that is the story that really 
makes communities safer."

Does he think the government's new approach will crack it? "The way people 
change is through other people," he says. "Unfortunately the stuff we welcomed 
early on relating to mentoring is in danger of being replaced by the concept of 
supervision – which is about holding someone to account, rather than helping 
them chart a course so they are able to rehabilitate themselves."

Does he feel the system has lost faith in the possibility of rehabilitation? 
"I think the system has become all stick and no carrot," he says. "In my 
experience working in prison education, I met very few people who didn't want 
to change. But in public discourse and the way the issues are presented to the 
public by policymakers, there seems to be a sense that we have given up on 
hope. We talk about 'the market' and 'programmes', but we don't talk about 
people. For whatever reason, empathy has been pushed to the sidelines. We don't 
feel empathetic towards groups of people – even fairly obvious groups such as 
unemployed young people, who we tend to blame for their situation.

"If you look at what most people in prison were before they were labelled 
'offender', they were people who had terrible upbringings, people who were 
abused, people with mental health problems – they're the sort of people we 
would normally tend to have some sympathy with, but we don't. We see them as a 
drain, a burden, rather than a part of us. We forget that there but for the 
grace of God go so many of us ."

In October, Grayling announced that new prisoners would have to wear uniforms 
and have restricted access to privileges such as television. Prisoners were 
also banned for the first time from receiving Christmas presents from family 
and friends. This suggests a deep-rooted antipathy towards offenders on the 
part of the general public.

"It has always struck me that the generalised prejudice against offenders is 
one of the last unchallenged prejudices in our society," says Martin, but he 
adds hopefully: "I really don't feel the public are as punitive as they are 
presented to be. What people want to know is that something effective is 
happening – that someone isn't just being sent to prison to be humiliated or to 
rot."

Curriculum vitae

Age 60

Status Single; twin son and daughter

Lives York

Education: KwaZulu/Natal Teknikon (now Durban University of Technology); 
London University

Career 1998 to present: CEO Clinks; 1989-1997: community education manager, 
Humberside Education Authority; 1983-1989: senior lecturer, adult and community 
education, Richmond Upon Thames College.

Publications Bridge into the Community (with Bryans and Walker); The VCS and 
Prisons – A study.

Interests Open water swimming, cycling, hill walking, chocolate.
 