
A £1bn competition to build carriages for the Crossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail> project is expected to relaunch this 
week, with the future of Britain's last active train manufacturing plant in the 
balance.

The long-term prospects for the 173-year-old Bombardier plant and about 1,600 
jobs are in doubt, with the Crossrail contract seen as key to the factory's 
survival.

The process has been suspended after the scrapping of a private finance 
initiative that would have underpinned the order. Instead, it will be publicly 
funded in a move that is expected to level the playing field between the four 
bidders: Canada-owned Bombardier; Germany's Siemens; Japan's Hitachi and 
Spain's CAF.

A PFI, with its reliance on debt funding from the markets, was thought to 
favour the chances of Siemens, which has superior financial firepower to 
Bombardier. The full Crossrail line is expected to open in 2018.

However, Bombardier will contest the contract for 600 carriages without its UK 
boss. Paul Roberts , Bombardier Transportation's chief UK representative, is 
stepping down after less than two years in the post to take up a senior role at 
IMI, the FTSE-listed engineering business.

A Bombardier spokesman said: "Paul Roberts is leaving Bombardier in order to 
take up an opportunity outside the company. The process to appoint a successor 
has begun. He will remain working with Bombardier over the next few months to 
ensure an orderly handover."

Instead of the original timetable, which would have seen the shortlist of four 
reduced to two before choosing a winner, Crossrail is expected to go straight 
to the selection of a preferred bidder next year. The 73-mile rail route links 
Heathrow airport to Canary Wharf in London Docklands and Shenfield in Essex via 
25 miles of tunnels under central London.

The revised tender for the Crossrail carriage deal is scheduled for 
publication this week, as at least six bidders prepare to lodge their interest 
in the contract for operating services on the £14.8bn project.

Submissions are expected from FirstGroup, Go-Ahead and National Express, which 
are seasoned UK rail operators, as well as the Hong Kong-based MTR, France's 
RATP and Arriva, owned by Germany's state-backed Deutsche Bahn.

If Go-Ahead expresses interest, it is expected to team with Keolis, owned by 
the French national rail operator, SNCF.

Crossrail's operations director, Howard Smith, said: "It is encouraging to see 
keen competition for the job of operating Crossrail for us." Crossrail is a 
joint venture between the Department for Transport and the London mayor's 
transport authority,Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for 
London.
 