
Crystal Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> will 
resist any renewed interest from Tottenham in their Ivory Coast-born winger 
Wilfried Zaha and remain confident they will eventually agree a contract to 
extend his stay at Selhurst Park.

Zaha, Palace’s most impressive player over a difficult season to date, will 
feature for Sam Allardyce’s side against Arsenal on Sunday and Swansea City on 
Tuesday beforejoining his new Ivory Coast team-mates at an Africa Cup of 
Nations training camp in Abu Dhabi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/wilfried-zaha-ivory-coast-squad-africa-cup-of-nations>
. That tournament begins on 14 January, meaning the 24-year-old could be absent 
for the majority of the mid-season transfer window, potentially missing up to 
four Premier League games as well as his club’s initial involvement in the 
FA Cup.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
His absence may not deter Spurs from offering a deal potentially worth £30m 
for a player they coveted in the summer, when Palace dismissed a derisory offer 
of £12m for the youth-team graduate. The Palace chairman, Steve Parish, made 
clear then that he would not countenance the player’s sale, and that stance has 
not shifted. Allardyce, while disappointed that he is to lose Zaha to 
tournament football at a critical early stage of his tenure, also recognises 
the impact he can have over the remainder of season.

Palace will now endeavour to reach an agreement with the forward’s 
representative over a longer-term deal. Zaha’s contract runs until 2020 but, at 
around £40,000 a week, he is not among the bigger earners at Selhurst Park. The 
intention to extend on improved terms was first mooted at the end of last 
season, with talks held in September and an offer lodged which would lead to 
the winger’s wage rising to parity with that of the captain, Scott Dann, on 
around £65,000 a week.

Yet the player’s advisers have seen Christian Benteke, Yohan Cabaye and Andros 
Townsend signed on higher terms over the past two summers and are arguing that, 
as one of Palace’s key performers, he should be earning a similar amount. Talks 
are likely to continue aimed at reaching a compromise, with Palace intent upon 
retaining the player.

The relationship between Parish and Zaha remains strong, with the chairman 
understood to have spoken at length with the winger regarding his frustration 
at a lack of recent opportunities with England. The player’s two caps were 
awarded by Roy Hodgson in friendlies during 2012 and 2013 and while he has 
represented the under‑21s since, he has now decided to pledge his future to 
Ivory Coast.

That decision was made in consultation with the Palace hierarchy and 
effectively with the club’s blessing. It was confirmed despite Gareth 
Southgate’s late intervention to try to convince the player to remain eligible 
for England. It is understood the England manager did not offer any assurances 
over future selection in those discussions, with Zaha duly deciding to pursue 
his switch back to the country of his birth.

The winger may still be uncapped by Ivory Coast but the coach, Michel 
Dussuyer, has already made clear his intention to use him as a replacement for 
the injured Gervinho in the tournament in Gabon.

Allardyce, meanwhile, has revealed that he turned down the chance of a 
lucrative move to China before taking over at Palace.

Chinese Super League clubs are investing huge sums in order to attract big 
names from Europe to Asia,with Carlos Tevez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/carlos-tevez-shanghai-shenhua-chinese-super-league>
 and Oscar among the most recent names to make the switch. Cristiano Ronaldo’s 
agent, Jorge Mendes, also claimed on Thursday that his client had been offered 
$100m a year to join an un-named Chinese club.

Now it appears Southgate’s predecessor as England manager was also targeted. 
“Did I have an offer? Yes.

“I didn’t go. I could have gone but I preferred to stay here,” Allardyce said. 
“It’s difficult for a player or a club to turn that down, it’s just the way of 
the world and changing forces in the football world. China has decided it wants 
to be a force and has decided the way to do it is to buy the best players and 
pay over the odds. Time will tell if it’s the right thing to do.”
 