
Unions have claimed victory in the bitter and long-running industrial dispute 
with Carlton and United Breweries, saying that workers – who were dubbed the 
CUB 55 – will return to work.

The dispute began when contracted maintenance workers at the Carlton and 
United Breweries Abbotsford plant in Melbourne were told they would be rehired 
by a new contractor.

Boycott CUB beers! Here are some other beers we can highly recommend | First 
Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/boycott-cub-beers-here-are-some-other-beers-we-can-highly-recommend>
The move, the unions alleged, stripped workers’ conditions and cut their pay 
to just 50 cents above the award. They said the change constituted an effective 
sacking of 55 maintenance workers.

The treatment of the workers prompted a national campaign against the company, 
which involved a boycott of its beers, the picketing of the Abbotsford brewery, 
andthousands-strong rallies across the country. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/carlton-and-united-breweries-workers-protest-against-breakdown-of-pay-talks>

Australian Unions tweeted on Wednesday morning claiming victory in the 
dispute, saying: “#CUB55 just won all their demands and will return to work! No 
matter how strong a multinational corp, we can fight them. And win.”

A statement from the Australian Council of Trade Unions said the sacked 
workers had been offered their jobs back, with fair pay and conditions.

The ACTU secretary, Dave Oliver, described Carlton’s decision as a “historic 
win” for the union movement.

“These 55 workers have been out on the street for nearly 180 days standing up 
for the rights of all workers, they will walk back into work on Monday morning 
with their jobs secure at their full pay and conditions,” Oliver said.

“We are glad to finally be able to end the boycott on CUB products, which are 
once again proudly union-made at Abbottsford.”

“We hope that the unqualified success of this campaign is a clear indication 
to all employers that sham contracting and abuse of the labour hire system will 
not be tolerated.”

One of the 55 workers, Alan Dinon, told Guardian Australia it was a “very 
sweet day and one to savour”.

To be on a picket for six months and be proven right is just fantastic
Alan Dinon, one of the CUB 55 
Dinon and other workers were at the Electrical Trades Union’s Melbourne office 
celebrating on Wednesday.

“[We’re] just euphoric, it’s been a real act of faith, you know, we believed 
what we offered to the business was real and tangible, and to be on a picket 
for six months and be proven right is just fantastic,” Dinon said.

“I knew it would happen, we just had to stay solid, and we did.”

Dinon, 67, is retiring, but had campaigned to secure a job for one of his 
apprentices, who would now be able to take his place.


He said the CUB 55 were keenly aware that their fight had broader implications 
for workers’ rights in Australia.

“In fact, that was probably one of the reasons we carried on the picket,” he 
said.

“If one of the biggest companies in Australia could do it and do it in such a 
way, what would stop a smaller business doing it?”

'I love CUB beer but I won’t be having one tonight': minister lashes brewer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/19/i-love-cub-beer-but-i-wont-be-having-one-tonight-minister-lashes-brewer>
CUB has previously denied any allegation that it sacked 55 workers. It said 
the former contractor gave six months’ notice before the contract was ended and 
then paid redundancies to workers.


The company claimed the new roles would have been paid $70,000 and $120,000, 
above award rates.

A joint statement from CUB, the Electrical Trades and Australian Manufacturing 
Workers unions said they had agreed to productivity and efficiency improvements 
at the brewery.

“CUB and the unions have mapped out a better approach based on mutual respect, 
productivity, and a shared passion to make the best beers with the best skilled 
workers,” the statement said.

“The ETU and the AMWU have called for an immediate end of the ongoing boycott 
and are encouraging their supporters to return to drinking the full range of 
CUB beers and ciders.

“All parties are pleased to resolve this dispute and to refocus their 
attention on working together to brew the best beers in Victoria.”
 