
The cucumber has a bit of a hard time these days. Not blessed with good looks 
or a particularly enticing form, it struggles to shake off the 1970s aura of 
"something green to put in a salad that isn't lettuce". Indeed, if it's not 
prepared thoughtfully, cucumber can be the most forgettable of vegetables (or 
fruits, technically). But cukes have great potential. Apart from the fact that 
they're prolific, inexpensive, crunchy, refreshing and almost quintessentially 
summery, let's reconsider their flavour. Subtle, yes, but also distinctive, 
sophisticated and quite pervasive. It's amazing how a few strips of cucumber 
peel inveigle their gently pleasing scent past the oranges, strawberries and 
even the mint to create that delicious top note in a glass of well-made Pimm's.

The cucumber sandwich is another perfect example of how well cucumbers will 
reward you if you fix them right. The unseasoned, fridge-cold, soggy-bread 
version is nothing short of nasty, but when the cucumber is thinly sliced, 
lightly salted, laid on good, thickly buttered white bread and served up 
without delay, it is a genuine treat.

Other cooking cultures seem to make a much better fist of using cucumbers than 
we do, however. There's the delectable Thai relish ajad, for instance, made by 
soaking sliced cucumber in a salty-sweet vinegar syrup with lots of shallot, 
chilli and coriander. Indeed, lightly pickled cucumber salads can be found in 
many cuisines, from Japan to Denmark; you'll find my version below. Vinegar has 
a wonderful effect on cucumber, softening it nicely and enhancing its flavour.

In the heat of the Indian subcontinent, cooling, minty yoghurt and cucumber 
raitas make a superb side order to hotly spiced dishes, while around the Med 
cukes add refreshing crunch to salads, including the classic Greek one. This is 
a dish that can be delicious if made with good ingredients, and eaten fresh and 
cool (but not chilled). It also serves to highlight the happy marriage between 
cucumbers and olives, a favourite combo of mine. The delicate green flavours of 
the former and the pungent salty savour of the latter just seem to bring out 
the best in each other. Capers and cukes are a similarly good match.

A thinly sliced cucumber and strawberry salad is another rather brilliant 
idea, especially if you dress the fruit with a delicate vinaigrette, trickle 
with a whisper of honey and strew with shredded basil or mint.

Seasoning and temperature are everything with cucumbers. Biting into 
super-chilled cucumber flesh makes your teeth hurt, quite apart from the fact 
that it's much harder to detect flavour in something that's freezing cold. 
Generally speaking, cool room temperature is best to fully appreciate that 
aromatic taste.

And don't forget the salt. Most vegetables need a dusting of salt and pepper 
to be as good as they can be, and cucumbers respond particularly winningly. 
Salting was originally a means of reducing the cucumber's bitterness, but 
modern varieties have already had the astringency bred out of them. However, 
a delicate sprinkle of flaky salt still gives them a vital lift.

When you're buying cucumbers, choose examples that are really firm from end to 
end, with no soft patches. As soon as their cells start to break down, they're 
on the way out. Store them in the fridge, ideally in the salad compartment, 
which should be less cold than the higher shelves. Should your cuke find itself 
pressed against the inner wall of the fridge, there's a chance of it freezing 
on one side, in which case it's game over: the frozen part will dissolve into a 
mushy bruise as it defrosts.

When it comes to using your cuke, wash it well. There is no need to peel it if 
you don't want to; at least there isn't with the thin-skinned European 
varieties you find in British shops. I do remove the skin sometimes (a very 
easy job with a potato peeler), but that's generally for aesthetic reasons, or 
if I'm looking for a smooth texture in a dish. The skin contains plenty of 
flavour, and much of the fruit's vitamins and antioxidants, so leave it on for 
maximum goodness.

Cucumber sorbet

Cucumbers, like their relatives melons, are technically fruits. Sweetened, and 
given definition with mint and lemon juice, they make a lovely, refreshing 
sorbet. The optional touch of Pimm's in this makes the ice a little more 
grown-up. Cucumber shares some of its flavour compounds with borage (also 
a traditional part of a Pimm's); if you have any of this easy-to-grow perennial 
in your garden, the delicate blue flowers make a lovely edible garnish. Serves 
six.

2 large cucumbers (around 750g in total)
25g bunch of mint, leaves picked and roughly torn
Juice of 2 medium lemons
125g icing sugar
50ml Pimm's (optional)
Strawberries and/or borage flowers, to serve (optional)

Peel the cucumbers, cut them in half lengthways and scoop out the seeds. 
Roughly chop the flesh and put in a food processor with the mint, lemon juice 
and icing sugar. Process to a wet puree (it will be slightly coarse), then add 
the Pimm's, if using.

Transfer to a jug and refrigerate until chilled. Churn the mix in an ice-cream 
machine until soft set, then transfer to the freezer. Alternatively, pour the 
mixture into a plastic, Tupperware-type container and freeze for about an hour, 
until the sides start to get solid. When this happens, mash up the mixture with 
a fork, mixing the frozen sides into the liquid centre, and return to the 
freezer for another hour. Repeat this at hourly intervals, until the sorbet is 
soft-set, then let it freeze solid.

Transfer the sorbet to the fridge about 30 minutes before serving, to soften a 
little. Serve in glasses, straight up, or decorated with a few strawberries and 
borage flowers.

Chilled cucumber and almond soup

One instance where chilling cukes is a good idea. Loosely based on the Spanish 
ajo blanco, this is rich and garlicky, but refreshing. Serves four.

150g blanched almonds
50g slightly stale, robust white bread, such as sourdough, crusts removed
2 medium-large cucumbers (about 700g in total)
1 large garlic clove, peeled and halved
100ml extra-virgin olive oil, plus extra to serve
1-2 tbsp sherry vinegar or balsamic vinegar
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
A few toasted, flaked almonds (optional)

Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Put the blanched almonds on a baking 
tray and toast them in the oven for five to eight minutes, checking them 
frequently, until they've turned a light golden-brown. Spread out on a cold 
plate, leave to cool completely, then tip into the bowl of a food processor.

Tear the bread into chunks and soak in cold water for a couple of minutes. 
Squeeze out the excess water and put the bread in the food processor bowl with 
the almonds.

Slice off a 10cm length of one cucumber and set aside. Peel, deseed and 
roughly chop the rest, and add to the food processor bowl.

Add the garlic, olive oil, a tablespoon of vinegar, a good quarter-teaspoon of 
salt and a little pepper, and blend to a thick soup. Add a touch of cold water 
to thin it a little, if you like, but keep it pretty thick. Transfer to a bowl 
or jug, and refrigerate until thoroughly chilled.

When chilled, taste and add more salt or vinegar as needed. Finely chop the 
reserved cucumber. Serve the soup in bowls, garnished with the chopped cuke, a 
swirl of olive oil and a few flaked almonds, if desired.

Marinated cucumber with mint 
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's marinated cucumber with mint. Photograph: Colin 
Campbell for the Guardian 
This delicately sweet-sour dish – my version of the ever-successful lightly 
vinegared cuke idea – is somewhere between a salad and a relish. It's very good 
alongside barbecued meat or fish. Serves three to four.

1 medium-large cucumber (350-400g)
1 tsp cider vinegar
1 tbsp olive or rapeseed oil
2 tbsp finely chopped mint
Pinch of sugar
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Peel the cucumber (or leave the skin on, if you prefer), halve it lengthways 
and scoop out the seeds. Slice into thick half-moons. Put in a dish with the 
vinegar, oil, mint and a pinch each of sugar, salt and pepper. Toss together 
thoroughly, then set aside in a cool place (but not the fridge) for 15-30 
minutes. Toss again before serving.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 