
Jeremy Hunt's former special adviser Adam Smith has told the Leveson inquiry 
the amount of his contact withNews Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> lobbyist Frédéric Michel 
could not have come as a surprise to anyone else in the government department.

Smith, who sent 257 text messages to Michel during the course of News Corp's 
BSkyB bid in 2010 and 2011, said senior figures in the Department for Culture, 
Media and Sport, including Hunt, were all "generally aware" of his activities.

The former special adviser, who resigned last month after the degree of his 
contact with Michel was revealed at theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>, said in his witness 
statement: "Even if other members of the department did not know, precisely, 
the amount of contact I was receiving from Mr Michel, I do not believe that it 
could have been a surprise to anybody that Mr Michel was contacting me on a 
very regular basis.

"As I had not received any specific instructions as to how I should deal with 
the contact I received, I approached the matter the same way that I did other 
projects with which I had been involved. My style and approach was well known."

Smith said he felt "bombarded" by information sent by Michel. "Yes he sent me 
quite a substantial amount of correspondence that was going on between News 
Corporation and [media regulator]Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom>
 and the OFT [Office of Fair Trading]," he told counsel to the inquiry, Robert 
Jay QC on Friday.

In his written statement, Smith said: "At no time did any individual express 
concern about the level of my involvement or provide any guidance about the way 
in which I should be responding to the contact I was receiving from Mr Michel."

He added: "The fact that other members of the department appear to have had 
contact with Mr Michel also leads me to question whether all the references to 
'JH' which appear in Mr Michel's emails do in fact refer to me."

On Thursday, when Michel gave appeared at the inquiry, it emerged that there 
was evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/may/24/news-corp-jeremy-hunt-bskyb> 
of 191 telephone calls, 158 emails and 799 text messages between the News Corp 
lobbyist and the DCMS, of which 90% were with Smith. Between 28 November 2010 
and 11 July 2011 Smith sent 257 text messages to Michel.

Asked by Jay if he had mentioned Michel's names in his discussions with Hunt, 
Smith said: "I believe so … I mean, I would have mentioned it … I suppose I 
would say they generally knew I was in touch. On some certain issues they 
certainly knew."

In his statement, Smith said: "I believe that Mr Hunt [and others] were all 
generally aware of my activities from a combination of … the discussions at our 
meetings and more informal contact."

Smith added he "received no specific instructions as to whether or not there 
were any limits to the types of information which I could provide".

Smith was asked about an email, which Michel sent to James Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesmurdoch>, the News Corp deputy chief 
operating officer and his boss at the time, on 15 November 2010 which said Hunt 
was "very frustrated" he was unable to meet with Murdoch in person because of 
the judicial process.

Jay said: "We know from the core records that you spoke to Mr Michel that day 
twice, once for one minute and the second time for six minutes. Did you 
communication Mr Hunt's frustration and the fact of the permanent secretary's 
involvement to Mr Michel?"

Smith replied: "I certainly don't remember doing so. I may well have phoned Mr 
Michel to say that unfortunately Mr Hunt could no longer meet Mr Murdoch, but I 
don't think I would … have put it like that and I don't remember putting it 
like that."

He was also asked about the second paragraph in Michel's email, which said 
that Hunt and Murdoch could "have a chat" on a mobile phone "which is fine". "I 
don't remember saying so, no," said Smith.

Jay asked: "Was the position simply this, that Mr Hunt was concerned about the 
way the bid might be going in the hands of Dr [Vince] Cable and that you knew 
he was frustrated because he wanted to speak to Dr Cable and involve him at a 
policy level on the merits of the bid more widely? Is that your understanding?"

Smith replied: "Not really, because I think the frustration if there was any … 
was more about Mr Hunt wanting to talk to Mr Murdoch about the bid and the 
broadband and local TV and all sorts of other issues. I'm not sure that that 
frustration relates to Mr Cable but I don't know myself."

He also spoke of his regret over a text message he sent to Michel in which he 
said he was "causing a lot of chaos and moaning from people ... on your behalf".

Smith said the text was an attempt to get Michel off his back rather than 
evidence the two were working together and had become inappropriately close.

The text, sent on 2 June last year, said: "Over the last few days I have been 
causing a lot of chaos and moaning from people here on your behalf. I shall 
have an update later today."

Smith told the Leveson inquiry: "This is the one that I do regret the most. By 
this stage I was probably coming towards the end of my tether as it were and I 
sent him a text to get him off my back.

"But certainly I don't think anybody in the department would have said that's 
what I had been doing and I certainly wasn't doing anything on their [News 
Corp's] behalf but in hindsight I shouldn't have sent it. It was an attempt to 
mollify him."

Jay suggested it indicated a "degree of collusion there between you, that 
you've become so close that you were almost working together. Do you agree 
that's a reasonable inference or not?"

Smith replied: "I can see how people would think that but I sent it to mollify 
him and get him off my back, not to do as you are suggesting."

Michel relayed Smith's text in an email to James Murdoch, later the same day, 
in which he said: "JH just called. He said over the last few days he had been 
causing a lot of chaos and moaning from people at DCMS on our behalf. I should 
have an update later today."

Asked whether he and Michel had become inappropriately close, Smith said: "I 
think the tone of some of the language I may have used in some of the texts in 
hindsight was a bit too flippant and loose certainly but I don't think the 
substance of what we've been through was inappropriate."

Earlier, Jay pressed Smith on what his "personal opinion" was on the wider 
implications of News Corp's £8bn bid to take full control of BSkyB.

Smith said: "My personal view was that if the consultation didn't throw up any 
new issue that we hadn't thought of, that the undertakings in lieu were 
therefore likely to have worked."

Jay said that was a "sort of studied legal response" and pressed Smith further.

Smith replied: "As I said yesterday, I actually wasn't that fussed about it, 
so I'm sorry if my personal view was a bit legalistic and processy, but that's 
what it was."

Jay suggested Smith was "parrying" him because he did not want to tell the 
inquiry his true opinion.

Asked by Lord Justice Leveson whether he "didn't feel quite as strongly" as 
Hunt, who strongly supported the deal – as revealed in a memo by the culture 
secretary to David Cameron which Smith helped draft – the former special 
adviser replied: "Yes."

He added: "Nor did I feel as strongly against it as a lot of the other 
opinions that were expressed. I was not that fussed, as I said yesterday."

In another message to Michel on 17 February last year, about a discussion on 
BBC Radio 4's The Media Show about the bid, Smith said: "Interesting. More 
evidence that we need to be strong and confident when we go to public 
consultation."

Jay said: "You're almost communicating there a public relations message, and 
coming close to putting yourself in the same boat as News Corp by using the 
pronoun 'we'?"

Smith replied: "'We' would have been 'we' the collective. I wouldn't have put 
'I' because I wouldn't have been saying anything publicly."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 