
As I walked around Keswick this week, I saw once again the amazing volunteers 
harrying the streets, the battle-field adrenalin of those sweeping out their 
homes, the bewilderment of the national TV crews and the determination of 
everyone to get back to normal as soon as possible. As the representative of 
Keswick in Parliament, I could only ever feel pride in the people of this 
community.

One shop owner summed up the Keswickian and the Cumbrian spirit best for me as 
he showed me the extent of the flooding in his shop. As I looked at the 
thousands of pounds of unusable stock, he gave me an eye witness account of his 
experience as the flood water rose. A woman in her eighties appeared from the 
front door of her terraced house. She stepped over the flood barrier attached 
to her front door, swinging half a bin liner of dry clothes over her shoulder 
in the process. In one hand, she had a bottle of milk. She put the milk bottle 
in her coat pocket and studiously locked her front door before wading off up 
the street. I asked him where she was going. “To look after her friend,” he 
told me. His face broke into a smile. “This is a wonderful town, “ he said, “We 
look after each other. We always look after each other.”

The people and the communities of Cumbria have a granite-like resilience and 
this character has been hewn from our physical and social environment over 
centuries. Recently, the local authorities have been struggling to provide 
services as a result of devastating cuts to their budgets by central 
government, of poor or non-existent public transport, of poor housing and urban 
poverty similar to that found anywhere in London, Liverpool or Manchester and 
compounded by geographical isolation and a widely dispersed population: half a 
million people spread over 7,000 square kilometres.

The county is strategically unique within the UK, being home to the country’s 
largest concentration of civil and military nuclear industries. With new (and 
hard won) new nuclear power investments alongside potential new renewable 
investments, Cumbria may soon provide 15% or more of the UK’s electricity 
needs, becoming one of the fastest growing local economies anywhere in the UK 
in the process.

In addition to this, the Lake District’s location on the north west coast of 
England, coupled with its mountainous geography, makes it the wettest part of 
England. But when rain in the Lake District leads international news bulletins, 
you know you have a problem.

Even with our vast promise, Cumbria has had it hard in recent years. So many 
national policy prescriptions simply do not fit the lives of the people who 
inhabit this spectacular county. Cut social care in Birmingham and maybe, just 
maybe, good neighbours or a band of volunteers can help out those individuals 
affected. Cut it in Keswick and if your children are fortunate enough to be 
able to afford to live in the town, then they might be able to make the trek 
upon disintegrating roads, past swollen rivers and instant fjords to help you 
out. Should you need help, don’t hold your breath waiting for an ambulance.

For many, if not most Cumbrians, there exists a tolerance, if not acceptance 
of sketchy service provision and a lack of parity with metropolitan areas. 
Gross inequalities in government spending aren’t accepted, but the fact that 
outcomes may sometimes differ is understood.

But inadequate government spending on flood defences in the wettest part of 
the country isn’t understood, isn’t justifiable and isn’t acceptable.

As a former shadow environment minister, I warned the government when it made 
cuts to flood defence schemes, that these cuts represented a false economy: 
that the country and those affected communities would end up paying more than 
any cuts would save in the long run. The Environment Agency (EA) warned them 
too, and specialist flood groups, flood victim support groups and many others.

All of the warnings fell upon deaf ears. No government can predict, or be 
blamed for the weather, but the government knew that the likelihood of the 
devastation that flooding can cause would be increased by cuts to flood defence 
spending. In this knowledge, it went ahead and cut anyway. Whether or not this 
would have prevented some of the chaos seen this weekend is impossible to know 
and in any event, now irrelevant.

The department for environment, food and rural affairs (Defra) is the weakest 
department in Whitehall. Bossed and bullied, I cannot recall a time when it won 
a serious policy battle or found itself with a Secretary of State prepared to 
fight the Treasury for the cash to protect its capability. The EA, DEFRA’s more 
sprightly sibling has also now found itself boxed in and so ends up on national 
television both explaining and taking the blame for policy decisions it 
actively lobbied against.

On a cross party-basis, Cumbria’s MPs, councillors and local authority leaders 
should now speak for the county with one voice. Climate change doesn’t care 
about the colour of anyone’s party rosette, and there can be no place for 
sweetheart deals designed to shut down political discomfort.

What is now needed is a government backed “Commission for Cumbrian 
Infrastructure and Resilience”’. This Commission – and I have asked David 
Cameron to establish such – should have the power to plan and resource 
improvements to the county’s infrastructure, improving resilience in the face 
of what will be extreme future weather events and taking into account the 
special requirements of the county.

This is a job for government and having already witnessed the consequences of 
its indifference, this government must not turn its back on the very real needs 
of Cumbria again.
 