
Some think of jam-making as a cold-weather activity, one for the autumn and 
winter. But preserving is all about avoiding wastage and grabbing a glut: 
whenever there's plenty of something about, my preserving pan comes out.

You might think June's a bit early for a glut – but it depends what's on the 
go in the garden, or what's to be had for a keen price at the grocer's. There 
are some gorgeous ingredients for preserve-making available already. Mid-season 
gooseberries are fat, flavourful and juicy: combine ripe with slightly 
under-ripe berries for the best jams. I also love gooseberries in a smooth but 
tart curd (see recipe below), while a cooked, sieved puree makes a great base 
for a spicy fruit ketchup.

Strawberries are plentiful now, too, and I've been freezing them into 
vanilla-scented parfaits as one way to avoid wastage. I also won't get through 
the summer without making at least one batch of strawberry "fridge jam". This 
low-sugar, fast-cooked preserve has a fresher, fruitier flavour and softer set 
than standard jams; as well as dolloping it on to toast, I use it as a kind of 
fruity sauce. To make it, combine 1.5kg of lightly crushed strawberries with 
the juice of one lemon and 1kg jam sugar with pectin. After leaving this to sit 
for an hour, bring it to a rolling boil and keep it there for just five minutes 
before potting in sterilised jars. After opening, it will keep for about three 
weeks in the fridge.

Maincrop (ie, outdoor) rhubarb is well into its stride now and should be 
producing armfuls of sturdy stems – more than a weekly crumble and the odd fool 
can take care of. Its penetrating flavour makes it a winner in sugar- and 
vinegar-heavy preserves such as chutneys, where it won't be overwhelmed. It 
makes a delicious jam as well, particularly when combined with ginger.

Gluts aren't only about fruit and veg: herbs, too, are often abundant around 
now, already in their summer flush and in need of a vigorous cutting back to 
keep them tender and fresh-flavoured for the rest of the season. A herb-scented 
cordial is one lovely way to capture their aromatic flavours. And consider 
herb-scented sorbets: lemon verbena is one of my favourites, though the classic 
combo of lemon and mint also works beautifully.

Jams, jellies, chutneys, syrups, curds and the like always call for large 
quantities of the main ingredient. They're the perfect illustration of the neat 
sensibleness of cooking seasonally. If the supermarket seems too expensive, 
keep an eye out at the sort of place that has, shall we say, minimal overheads 
– I'm thinking roadside stalls and allotments – and you'll find the true 
overflow crops, perhaps for just pennies.

To ensure success, follow some basic preserving etiquette. First, measure and 
weigh your ingredients carefully and follow recipes closely – there's some 
science involved in preserving, and all instructions are there for a reason. 
Second, remember that cleanliness is paramount. Don't use very damaged or 
slightly mouldy produce, and always sterilise jars or bottles. This is very 
simple: just wash the jars or bottles and lids in very hot, soapy water, rinse 
them in equally hot, clean water, then put them in the oven at 120C/250F/gas 
mark ¼ for 20-30 minutes. This dries them and heats them up (hot preserves 
should go into hot jars), but also knocks on the head any lingering bacteria. 
Another sterilising method is to run the jars through a hot dishwasher cycle, 
then use them straight away, while still hot from the machine.

I know many keen cooks who, out of some curious sense that it's not their bag, 
have never given preserving a go. I also know that when they do, they are often 
instantly hooked.

Gooseberry curd

This is a little more subtle and complex than a pure lemon curd, with the 
floral flavour of the gooseberries dancing on the tastebuds. There's nothing 
better on a scone or hot breakfast pancakes. Makes about five small (250-300ml) 
jars.

500g gooseberries
100ml lemon juice
125g unsalted butter
450g granulated sugar
200ml strained beaten egg (around 4-5 large eggs)

Sterilise some jars as above. Put the gooseberries in a pan with the lemon 
juice. Bring slowly to a simmer, stirring often, until the fruit starts to 
release its juice, then simmer gently for five to 10 minutes until the fruit 
has collapsed. Rub this mixture through a fine sieve to get a thin, smooth 
gooseberry puree.

Put the puree, butter and sugar into a large basin over a pan of simmering 
water. Stir until the butter has melted and the mixture is smooth. Take off the 
heat and let it cool for a minute – you don't want it to be too hot when you 
pour in the eggs, or they will scramble. It should be cool enough that you can 
comfortably put your finger into it.

Pour in the strained beaten egg, whisking all the while. Return the pan to the 
heat and stir the mixture over the simmering water until thick and creamy and 
registering at least 82C on a sugar thermometer. This requires patience – it 
will take a good 10 minutes, probably more – but the curd is much less likely 
to get too hot and scramble than if you cooked it directly in a pan. If the 
curd does start to scramble, take it off the heat and whisk vigorously until 
smooth.

As soon as it has thickened, pour the curd into the hot jars and seal. Leave 
to cool before labelling. Use the curd within four weeks; once opened, keep in 
the fridge and use within a week.

Lemon and mint cordial

A lovely, zingy cordial for summer drinks. Try it with soda or fizzy water and 
lots of ice. Makes 1.5 litres.
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's lemon and mint cordial: 'A lovely zingy summer 
cordial.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
A couple of large bunches of mint – about 75g in total
Finely grated zest of 5 lemons, plus their juice (about 150ml in total), 
strained to remove pips and fibres
750g granulated sugar

Tear up the mint, stalks and all, and put into a large bowl with the lemon 
zest. Pour over a litre of boiling water and leave to infuse overnight, or at 
least for several hours. Sterilise some bottles with swing-top lids or screw 
tops (see introduction).

Line a sieve with a piece of muslin or clean, thin tea towel and place over a 
saucepan. Pour the minty, lemony liquid through the sieve, then gather up the 
corners of the cloth and twist them, so you squeeze every last drop of flavour 
out of the mint and lemon zest. Add the strained lemon juice and the sugar, 
heat gently, stirring to dissolve the sugar, then bring to a simmer and cook 
for two minutes.

Use a funnel to pour the hot liquid into the hot, sterilised bottles. Seal the 
bottles and leave to cool before labelling. The cordial will keep for about six 
weeks in the fridge. If you want to keep it for longer, leave it to cool in the 
pan, pour into plastic bottles and freeze.

Rhubarb, apricot and ginger chutney

With its acidity and deep flavour, rhubarb makes a fantastic chutney – it's 
delicious with nutty cheddar in a sandwich. Makes five or six medium 
(300-400ml) jars, though you can double the quantities (in which case it will 
take longer to cook).

1kg rhubarb, cut into 3-4cm pieces
500g onions, peeled and chopped
4 cloves garlic, peeled and chopped
500g dried apricots, very roughly chopped – quarters or sixths is fine
350g golden granulated sugar
300ml cider vinegar
Finely grated zest of 2 large oranges
Juice of the oranges (about 200ml)
50g root ginger, peeled and finely grated
1 tsp dried chilli flakes
1 tsp ground coriander
½ tsp salt
½ tsp finely ground black pepper

Put all the ingredients in a preserving pan. Bring to a simmer and cook gently 
for an hour and a quarter to an hour and a half, stirring often, particularly 
towards the end, when the thickened mixture might otherwise catch and burn.

The chutney is ready when it is rich and thick, exhibiting a geyser-like 
plopping, rather than a liquid simmering. Pull a wooden spatula through it – if 
you can see the base of the pan briefly, before the chutney comes together 
again, it's ready.

While the chutney is cooking, sterilise some jars and vinegar-proof lids. Put 
them in the oven towards the end of the chutney cooking time, so they are 
clean, dry and hot when you come to pot the chutney.

Pot into the hot jars, filling them right to the top and ensuring there are no 
air pockets. Seal at once and leave to cool before labelling. Leave for at 
least a month before opening, then keep in the fridge. Store unopened jars in a 
cool, dark place for up to two years.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 