
Home care services for the elderly in deprived areas will have to be scrapped 
except for those in the most desperate need as a result of George Osborne’s 
funding cuts, the Tory-controlledLocal Government Association 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/> says today.

The warning comes as official figures show that wealthier, mostly 
Conservative-run parts of the country, where demand for care services is often 
lower, will be able to raise their social care budgets by three times as much 
as the poorest regions by using new powers to increase council tax, announced 
by the chancellor last week.

The LGA says this will create a “postcode lottery” for social care, in a 
funding system that completely fails to address the long-term needs of the 
elderly and those in need of help at home.

Responding to calls for action to ease a nationwide funding crisis in social 
care, Osborne said in his autumn statement that local authorities will be 
allowed toraise council tax by up to 2% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/20/osborne-plans-to-allow-2-council-tax-rises-to-plug-social-care-holes>
 as long as the extra money is spent on social care. The rise in the number of 
elderly people – as well as a desire to keep them in their homes rather than 
looking after them incrowded hospitals – has placed local authority budgets 
under huge pressure.

But the LGA, representing more than 370 local authorities in England and 
Wales, says that, while the new power to raise extra funds is welcome, towards 
devolution and greater flexibility, it will benefit richer regions most, as 
higher property values mean they can raise far more by increasing council tax. 
By contrast, poorer areas, where council tax accounts for a much smaller 
proportion of their total incomes, will be able to raise far less and will, as 
a result, be less able to offset the latest round of central government funding 
reductions.

The LGA calculates that Osborne’s latest cuts will mean a further 24% 
reduction in councils’ core funding by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/25/local-government-councils-funding-gap-critical-budget-cuts-social-care-spending-review>
, on top of cuts of more than 40% in the last parliament.

David Simmonds, the Tory vice-chair of the LGA and deputy council leader in 
the London borough of Hillingdon, said people in areas where property prices 
were lowest– and where council tax makes up a lower proportion of a council’s 
income – would be able to provide only an “absolute minimum” level of service 
from now on.

Many of those councils would also refuse to impose council tax rises because 
local people would not be able to afford them, further worsening their plight. 
By contrast, better-off areas, where property values are higher and the council 
is in a better position to increase council tax, would be able to serve their 
elderly populations much better.

“If you are in one of those areas with a very low council tax base, what you 
are likely to be saying is that, unless you are someone who physically cannot 
get out of bed, have a wash and feed yourself, or make a drink without someone 
coming round to your house, you are not going to get any help at all. In those 
wealthier areas, including mine, we are going to be saying we will provide a 
burglar alarm, a heater during the winter if the heating goes off, because we 
are in a stronger position to do that. That is the postcode lottery issue.”

Investigations by the Observer, based on detailed analysis of all councils’ 
finances, show massive disparities in the ability to use council tax to offset 
central government cuts. While Knowsley in Merseyside will be able to raise its 
income by only 4.7% if it were to increase council tax by the maximum by 
2019-20, its far wealthier near-neighbour, Cheshire East, willbe able to 
benefit to the tune of 11.6%.

The London borough of Newham will be able to raise its funding by only 4.1% 
compared with 11.3% for Kingston-upon-Thames, 12.4% for Buckinghamshire and 13% 
for Wokingham in Surrey.

The LGA’s finance spokeswoman, Sharon Taylor, leader of Labour-controlled 
Stevenage borough council, said increases to theBetter Care Fund 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/part-rel/transformation-fund/bcf-plan/> – 
which aims to transform funding of health and social care – were welcome but 
would not come soon enough.

“Councils will not see the money until 2017. We have got a crisis now in 
social care funding. Our services are at breaking point and they are at 
breaking point now,” she said.

A Department for Communities and Local Government spokesman said: “The social 
care precept is part of a wider £3.5bn investment package to ensure councils 
can support older and vulnerable people in their area.

“In particular, the increased and improved Better Care Fund will offer support 
to councils with greater demands for their social care services, on top of the 
funds they raise through the precept.

“This is a short-sighted analysis from the LGA as we will be setting out 
proposals on changes to the local government finance system which will take 
into account the main sources of revenue currently available to councils, 
including council tax.

“Councils will have almost £200bn to spend over this parliament, a cash terms 
increase and a reduction of just 1.7% in real terms each year.”

Meanwhile, the independent thinktank Social Market Foundation said Osborne’s 
decision to scrap cuts to tax credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2015/nov/25/spending-review-george-osborne-autumn-statement->
 not only masked serious cuts down the line for those moving on to the new 
system of universal credit (UC) – but could also reduce the job incentives that 
UC was designed to bolster.

The foundation said: “To protect existing tax credit claimants from losing 
out, the government is implementing a system of ‘transitional protection’, 
whereby an additional amount is paid to UC claimants to make up the shortfall. 
However, transitional protection ceases to apply if the family undergoes a 
change of circumstances, such as a partner moving in or out of the household. 
Changes in circumstances can also include moving home.

“Suppose a family was receiving transitional protection as a result of being 
moved from tax credits to UC. One partner is offered a better-paid job, but one 
that would require the family moving home. The family faces a dilemma. Do they 
move to take up the job offer, increasing their income but losing their 
transitional protection payments? Or do they refuse the job offer in order to 
continue the receipt of their transitional protection?

“This example just illustrates precisely the kind of situation that universal 
credit was designed to avoid: a barrier to taking up better-paid work. The 
problem will be exacerbated in April 2016 when the cuts to UC create 
considerable differences in the generosity of tax credits as compared with 
universal credit.”
 