
The Cypriot president is expected in a snow-bound Brussels later on Sunday for 
a showdown with European governments and the International Monetary Fund that 
is likely to determine whether the island, teetering on the brink of 
insolvency, becomes the first country to be kicked out of Europe's single 
currency.

Nicos Anastasiades is to see Christine Lagarde of the IMF and Mario Draghi, 
head of the European Central Bank, as well as the presidents of the European 
commission and European council, Jose Manuel Barroso and Herman Van Rompuy, who 
have cancelled an EU-Japan summit to return to Brussels because of theCyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> emergency.

Anastasiades is expected to unveil new proposals to hit wealthy Cyprus banking 
clients with heavy levies on their deposits in order to come up with about 
one-third of the €17bn bailout the country needs.

A week ago he insisted on minimising the levy to less than 10% to prevent 
foreign investors, mainly Russians and British, pulling their money out of 
Cyprus. Now he is being forced to double that levy to 20%, according to reports 
from Nicosia late on Saturday, while sparing all savers with less than €100,000.

With the stakes never so high for Cyprus, the European Central Bank is 
threatening to pull the plug on short-term funds propping up the Cypriot 
financial sector on Monday unless a last-minute deal is struck that satisfies 
the island's increasingly hawkish eurozone creditors, led by Germany.

The eurozone's biggest economy is determined that the island deflates a 
bloated financial sector that exceeds the size of the Cypriot economy by a 
factor of eight.

"It is well-known that I won't allow myself to be blackmailed, by no one or 
nothing," said the German finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble. "I'm aware of my 
responsibility for the stability of the euro. If we take the wrong decisions, 
we'll be doing the euro a great misservice," he told a German Sunday newspaper.

Anastasiades's meetings in Brussels will be followed by an emergency meeting 
of eurozone finance ministers in the eurogroup on Sunday evening. It will also 
be attended by Lagarde, the European commissioner Olli Rehn and top officials 
from the European Central Bank – which will be the crucial venue for striking a 
deal.

In talks on Saturday in Nicosia with the "troika" of EU, ECB and IMF 
officials, according to Reuters, Anastasiades conceded a much bigger 
confiscation of wealthy depositors' cash. Anyone with more than €100,000 in 
Bank of Cyprus, the country's biggest bank, would lose 20%, while similar 
deposits in other banks would be hit by a 4% levy.

The proposed deal would still need to pass the Cypriot parliament, which last 
Tuesday unanimously rejected an agreement to tax savers. The parliament is 
expected to convene quickly if the Cypriots and the eurogroup reach agreement 
on Sunday evening.

"There are only hard choices left," said Rehn.

"We are undertaking great efforts. I hope we have a solution soon," 
Anastasiades tweeted.

Schäuble said Cyprus could not avoid very tough times. "But that is not 
because of European stubbornness, but because of a business model that no 
longer functions," he said.

The eurozone's terms for an agreement could not be changed, he added, also 
insisting that depositors with savings under €100,000 had to be spared.

A senior policymaker at the ECB also served Cyprus notice that it would be 
given little leeway in the crucial talks by predicting that the island's 
financial woes would not tip its eurozone peers into economic crisis.

Ewald Nowotny, the head of Austria's central bank, echoed the view of his 
German counterparts in an interview this weekend, warning that the Cypriot 
economic model – with its reliance on offshore banking and Russian money – was 
unsustainable.

"This system is certainly no longer able to continue," said Nowotny.

Speaking in an interview with the Austrian newspaper Österreich, Nowotny 
indicated that failure to agree a deal by Monday's deadline – when the ECB has 
threatened to cut off financial assistance to Cyprus – would not trigger a 
systemic crisis across the eurozone.

"We see clear signs of improvement in Spain, Portugal and Ireland. I see no 
massive economic problems in Italy as well, so I do not believe that it will 
come to contagion," he said, reiterating that Cyprus accounts for only 0.2% of 
eurozone GDP. Nowotny also ruled out the prospect of the Cypriot depositors' 
haircut being implemented on Austrian savers. "Austrian savers' money is 
absolutely safe," he said.

The original rescue deal for Cyprus collapsed last week when legislators 
rejected proposals that included a levy of 6.75% on all deposits below 
€100,000. Observers have warned that the haircut has damaged public trust in 
the euro project, because deposits under €100,000 are protected across the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

Cypriot banks hold €68bn in deposits, including €38bn in accounts of more than 
€100,000. With so much of the Cypriot banking system predicated on deposits 
rather than wholesale debt funding, officials at the IMF, the ECB and the EU 
have told the Cypriot government that depositors must carry some of the pain of 
a bailout, or risk their savings being wiped out altogether.
 