
The two-day, bone-rattling journey to Band-i-Amir may be littered with 
landmines and the odd village of Taliban sympathisers, but if the Afghan 
government gets its way a collection of five sapphire-blue lakes will one day 
become one of Central Asia's hottest international tourist destinations.

A first significant step was taken yesterday when Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> declared that one of its most 
astonishing natural features will become the country's first national park - 36 
years after a previous attempt to do so was interrupted by political strife and 
decades of war.

Few people would deny that the crystal-clear lakes in the country's 
mountainous centre, which are ringed with pink cliffs, deserve their new 
designation, which still needs to be ratified by parliament.

Nancy Hatch Dupree, in her classic 1970 guide to Afghanistan, wrote that a 
full description of such a place would "rob the uninitiated of the wonder and 
amazement it produces on all who gaze upon it".

According to local lore the huge natural dams of slow-growing mineral deposits 
that hold the lakes in place were thrown into position by Hazrat Ali, the 
prophet Muhammad's son-in-law, during the reign of the infidel king Barbar.

Today the mineral-rich water bubbles through the cracks of the Dam of the 
Slaves, the Groom's Dam, the Mint Dam and the Dam of Cheese and surrounding 
wetlands. But it is the Dam of Awe, or Band-i-Haibat, that attracts most 
visitors and where the government hopes tourist facilities including 
guesthouses and shops can be established. About two miles long and 1,500 feet 
wide, the waters are supposed to have healing properties for anyone who braves 
temperatures that remain icy all year round in an area just under 3,000 metres 
above sea level.

For those who prefer not to swim, weirdly incongruous pink, blue and yellow 
swan-shaped pedaloes can be hired for less than a dollar for an hour of 
floating about on the placid waters.

The central highlands, dominated by the Hazara ethnic group, which has no 
truck with the Pashtun-dominated Taliban insurgency, is relatively safe and 
boasts other tourist magnets including the valley of Bamiyan, famous for the 
giant Buddhas destroyed by the Taliban in late 2001.

Speaking at an event marking the signing of the decree turning the area into a 
national park yesterday, Frank Ricciardone, deputy US ambassador, was bullish 
in his predictions for the area's future. "You will draw visitors not only from 
all across Afghanistan, but all across the region and the world."

But although the province's international military base, run by New Zealand, 
is spending $1.5m on an eco-tourism project there are major obstacles to 
overcome before the area takes off as an international tourist destination.

According to a 2005 survey by the Asian Development Bank, almost 40,000 
domestic tourists visited Band-i-Amir and Bamiyan, as did between 3,000 and 
4,000 international visitors, mostly drawn from foreigners working in Kabul. 
Local officials say numbers dropped off sharply as security nationwide 
deteriorated.

While the shortest road from Kabul to Bamiyan and Band-i-Amir has been too 
dangerous for foreigners to travel for years, last summer a vehicle carrying an 
international aid worker on a previously safe long route was hit by a roadside 
bomb.When the Guardian attempted the journey by motorbike last October, police 
had to come to the rescue after a breakdown in one of the few Pashtun areas, 
close to the attack. The yard of the police station where the Guardian sought 
refuge boasted craters from a recent rocket attack.

Increasingly, foreigners rely on the dirt airstrip at Bamiyan, although 
flights are infrequent and technically reserved for those on official 
humanitarian business.

Last summer Sandy Gall, the TV journalist who covered the bloodshed in 
Afghanistan in the 1980s, horrified Foreign Office bureaucrats by leading a 
party of largely female Britons on a sponsored walk near the lakes to raise 
money for his Afghan charity. A shortage of seats on the plane forced a number 
of middle-aged woman to return to Kabul by minibus.

Amir Folabi, head of eco-tourism in Bamiyan for the Aga Khan Foundation, said 
the eco-tourism initiative was not intended to cater for a sudden increase in 
foreign tourists but to lay the ground work for sustainable tourism in the 
future.
 