
In his perceptive analysis of gay men's attitudes to camp (What Alan Carr 
taught me about gay men's prejudice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/20/alan-carr-gay-men-homophobia-camp-prejudice>
, 21 April), Owen Jones suggests that an aversion to it is a form of 
self-loathing. But for many of us struggling to come out in the 1970s and 80s, 
it was camp itself which represented self-hatred. Comedians such as John Inman 
and Larry Grayson personified everything that I did not want to be. They were 
almost a third sex: grotesque pantomimic creatures, willingly collusive in the 
mocking laughter of the TV audience. My generation of activists wanted to show 
people that we weren't all hairdressers or ballet dancers, just ordinary blokes 
who worked in factories and offices and drove trains and buses.

Times have thankfully changed, and many of these high-camp relics can now seem 
almost endearing, but they did huge damage to many young gay people trying to 
find an image of themselves they could respect. That these young people 
nevertheless succeeded in doing so, openly and proudly, laid the foundation for 
the more tolerant society that this gay generation takes for granted. I truly 
admireAlan Carr <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-carr> for being 
himself and not caring what people think when he dresses up as a fairy, but 
please forgive me if I still flinch a little. That's not prejudice, lack of 
humour or self-loathing; it's actually self-love.
Alan Clark
London

• I dislike Alan Carr, not because I suffer from internalised homophobia but 
because I think he's about as funny and relevant as The Black and White 
Minstrel Show. He plays to a tired, lazy stereotype that historically portrayed 
gay people as, literally, different and inhuman and made it so much harder for 
them to be treated with respect and as equals by their straight peers. This is 
why I had to wait until I was 44 to see the first gay weddings. Owen Jones 
won't remember any of this. After all, he only had to wait until he was 29.
Matthew Handy
Harrogate
 