
Andrei Tarkovsky's Stalker (1980) came second, behind Blade Runner, in a 
recent BFI poll of its members' top movies. In outline, it's one of the 
simplest films ever made: a guide, or Stalker, takes two people, Writer and 
Professor, into a forbidden area called the Zone, at the heart of which is the 
Room, where your deepest wish will come true. It is this simplicity that gives 
the film its fathomless resonance. If Tarkovsky's previous film, Solaris, 
seemed like a Soviet 2001, was Stalker Tarkovsky's take on The Wizard of Oz?

The starkness of its conception did not prevent the production traumas that 
seem integral to the creation myths of other favourites: the likes of 
Apocalypse Now and Fitzcarraldo. Plans to shoot in Tajikistan had to be 
abandoned because of an earthquake. Having relocated to an abandoned 
hydroelectric power station in Estonia, Tarkovsky was dissatisfied with the 
cinematography and decided to shoot a pared-down version of the script all over 
again - in the same place. The price paid for this pursuit of an ideal is 
incalculable. Sound recordist Vladimir Sharun believes the deaths from cancer 
of Tarkovsky (in 1986), his wife Larissa and Anatoly Solonitsyn (who plays the 
Writer) were all due to contamination from a chemical plant upstream from the 
set.

The film itself has become synonymous both with cinema's claims to high art 
and a test of the viewer's ability to appreciate it as such. Anyone sharing 
Cate Blanchett's enthusiasm for it - "every single frame of the film is burned 
into my retina" - attests not just to the director's lofty purity of purpose, 
but to their own capacity to survive at the challenging peaks of human 
achievement. So a certain amount of blowback is inevitable. David Thomson 
included Stalker in his pantheon of 1,000 memorable movies, but was dubious 
about the notion of the Room. Perhaps it's "an infinite, if dank enclosure in 
which an uncertain number of strangers are watching the works of Tarkovsky. 
Equally, it may be that as malfunction of one kind or another covers the world, 
we may have a hard time distinguishing the Room, the Zone, and the local 
multiplex."

Sometimes wry scepticism is a more appropriate tribute than po-faced 
reverence, especially given that Tarkovsky leaves ample room for doubt. Any 
claim made for the Zone ("the quietest place in the world," says the Stalker) 
is countered by the suggestion that it's a bit disappointing ("smells like a 
bog," says Professor). In an interview Tarkovsky even raised the possibility 
that the Zone did not exist and was merely the Stalker's invention.

Though it's easily forgotten, there's often a touch of comedy - even slapstick 
- in Tarkovsky-land. Deep in the Zone, on the threshold of the Room, the three 
guys are pondering the mysteries of existence when a phone rings. The professor 
answers: "Hello? No, this is not the clinic!" Was this the inspiration for 
those Orange-sponsored "Don't let a phone ruin your movie" scenarios?

I've seen Stalker more times than any film except The Great Escape. I've seen 
it when the projectionist got the reels in the wrong order (I was the only 
person who noticed), I've seen it on my own in Paris and dubbed into Italian in 
Rome, I've seen it on acid (remember that sequence when the solid ground begins 
to ripple?) and I've seen it on telly - and it's never quite as I remember. 
Like the Zone, it's always changing. Like the Stalker, I feel quite at home in 
it, but whenever I see the film I try to imagine what it might be like, 
watching it for the first time when it seems so weird.

Consider the first 15 minutes. After a credit sequence showing an oldish guy 
drinking in a gloomy bar, we peer through an interior set of doors into a room. 
Inside already, the camera takes us deeper indoors. It's as if Tarkovsky has 
started off where Antonioni left off in the penultimate inside-out shot of The 
Passenger and taken it a stage further: inside-in. It's slower than Antonioni, 
and without the colour. It has a kind of sub-monochrome in which the spectrum 
has been so compressed that it might turn out to be a source of energy, like 
oil and almost as dark - but with a gold sheen, too. The camera pans across the 
people in bed and then tracks back. Not a long take by Tarkovsky's standards, 
but still, one takes the point. "If the regular length of a shot is increased, 
one becomes bored, but if you keep on making it longer, it piques your 
interest, and if you make it even longer a new quality emerges, a special 
intensity of attention."

The rumble of heavy transport - accompanied by an anthem to Homo Sovieticus - 
causes a glass to rattle across a table. The man wakes up and gets out of bed. 
Unusually, he sleeps without his trousers but with his sweater. Another weird 
thing is that, although trying not to wake his wife, he puts on his trousers 
and his boots before clomping quietly into the kitchen. His wife was awake, it 
turns out, or has been roused by his movements.

It would be interesting to compile a list of the first words spoken in films 
and run the results through a computer. In this instance they are spoken by the 
wife: "Why did you take my watch?" The film's only just started, she has just 
woken up and, from a husbandly point of view, she is nagging. No wonder he 
wants out! But of course we're also getting the big theme introduced: time. In 
effect, Tarkovsky is saying to the audience: "Forget about other ideas of time. 
Stop looking at your watches, give yourself over to Tarkovsky-time, and the 
helter-skelter mayhem of The Bourne Ultimatum will seem more tedious than 
L'Avventura."

The wife expands on this notion of time - she has lost her best years, grown 
old - and you're reminded again of Antonioni, because the plain truth is, she's 
no Monica Vitti. Then she lays a whole guilt trip on him, but the usual terms - 
you only think of yourself - are reversed. She says: "Even if you don't think 
of yourself ..." Whoa, some kind of Dostoevskian twist here.

She begs him to stay, but he's got to do what a holy fool's got to do. 
Tarkovsky's films have always invited allegorical interpretation, and certain 
viewers might be tempted to view the Stalker's impending trip in the light of 
recent history. Is the Zone an idealised image of the UK with its generous 
welfare system, a land of milk and honey with many opportunities for those 
willing to pick fruit for six quid an hour? Or, more radically, is the Stalker 
an asylum-seeker? It turns out, yes, that's exactly what he is! But he's 
seeking asylum from the world. Ridiculous, of course, to see a work through the 
prism of events that occur after it was completed, but the idea that Stalker 
imaginatively anticipated the Zone of Exclusion around Chernobyl has become a 
critical commonplace.

She says he'll end up in prison. He replies that "everywhere's a prison". One 
assumes this is intended metaphorically, but the film is constantly making us 
wonder about its connection to the state that funded it. (Worth pausing here to 
consider if Tarkovsky could ever have raised the dough to make this film in the 
unrepressive west.) Now, this was the 1970s, not the 1930s or the 1950s, when 
the Soviet Union was a vast prison camp. By the time of Stalker, communism had 
become, in historian Tony Judt's words, "a way of life to be endured".

Still, while the film may not be about the gulag, it is haunted by memories of 
the camps, from the overlap of vocabulary ("Zona", "the meat grinder") to the 
Stalker's Zek-style shaved head. The turnaround, as the film-maker Chris Marker 
has pointed out, is that here freedom is found within the wire.

After the Stalker leaves, his wife has one of those sexualised fits of which 
Tarkovsky seems to have been fond, writhing away in a climax of abandonment. 
He, on the other hand, like many men before and since, has gone to the pub. 
He's not there to meet his mates - this is not Distant Voices, Still Lives - 
but the people he's taking into the Zone. From the bar they can hear a train, 
can hear that lonesome whistle blow. So there are hints, here, of a heist movie 
- the Stalker being lured back into the Zone for one last job - and of a sci-fi 
western (ie "eastern"). They leave the bar, begin their journey into the 
cinematic unknown. In a way that might prove significant, the Stalker tramps 
through a puddle like a man with more important things on his mind than 
worrying about wet feet.

Since there are people out there who have not yet had Stalker burned into 
their retinas, and given the film's zero-gravity suspense - is anything going 
to happen? - I propose to leave it there, before the blissful shift into 
colour, before we glimpse the wonders of the Zone, ages before the miracle of 
the film's closing sequence. But three further observations won't spoil 
anyone's enjoyment.

One: despite their scepticism, Writer and Professor sufficiently buy into the 
Stalker's soggy faith that they end up wading, shoulder-deep, through 
radioactive-looking water without even removing their overcoats. Two: near the 
end, the Writer puts a crown of thorns on his head. Biblical? I dunno. 
Everything just is. Or isn't, but may be. Three: at a certain point the 
audacious claim is made that the reason we were put on earth was to create 
works of art. By the same token, it's not enough to say that Stalker is a great 
film - it is the reason cinema was invented.

Stalker is at the BFI Southbank, London (020-7928 3232) on 10 February. Geoff 
Dyer's new novel, Jeff in Venice, Death in Varanasi, will be published by 
Canongate in April
 