
Every bank and building society depositor will immediately receive 100% 
protection on the first £35,000 of savings as part of the government's plan to 
beef up its financial compensation scheme following the Northern Rock fiasco, 
Alistair Darling will announce today.

In a speech that will coincide with the start of the Conservative party 
conference in Blackpool, he will seek to defuse opposition attempts to exploit 
the first run on a UK bank in almost 150 years by bringing in interim measures 
until legislation is passed for a new £100,000 guarantee.

The chancellor will say: "The Financial Services Authority has increased the 
limits of the financial services compensation scheme so that it covers from 
today in full the first £35,000 of people's deposits in any institution at 
100%."

Amid speculation that the prime minister may call a snap election, Mr Darling 
will say that the government has moved quickly to address issues raised by the 
Northern Rock affair. "In a global financial market no country or company can 
insulate itself entirely from international risk. So if a problem does happen, 
we need to be able to deal with it quickly to maintain stability and 
confidence. Savers need to be sure that they can get their money out if they 
need to. That is why in the current market circumstances we are providing a 
guarantee for Northern Rock's depositors. But for the future, we now need to 
put in place a better regime."

Mr Darling's reforms could run into opposition in the City of London. 
Britain's insurers warned the government last night not to increase the safety 
net to £100,000, where it could become unaffordable and damaging to other forms 
of investment.

"The public is now highly likely to perceive that one part of the financial 
services market will not be allowed to fail. That perception will distort 
savers' decisions about where to put their money, drawing them towards cash 
deposits and away from investment products," the Association of British 
Insurers said in a letter to Mr Darling.

Under the current rules of the financial services compensation scheme 
established in 1997, savers get 100% of the first £2,000 held in an account if 
their bank or building society fails, but only 90% of the next £33,000.

The FSCS is more generous than the minimum required by European Union 
directives but its inadequacy was seen as the main reason for the three days of 
queues outside Northern Rock branches last month even after the Bank of England 
said it would offer an unlimited line of credit to the Newcastle-based bank.

Labour's first serious financial crisis in more than a decade in power forced 
Mr Darling into an emergency announcement safeguarding Northern Rock savers and 
has left the bank dependent on a £8bn line of credit from the Bank of England 
to fund its day-to-day activities.

The Treasury said yesterday that it had received inquiries from firms 
interested in buying Northern Rock but denied weekend reports that they had 
included two US hedge funds, Cerberus and JC Flowers.

Speaking alongside Alan Greenspan after a meeting of the Business Council for 
Britain, Mr Darling will stress that today's move will be followed by an urgent 
overhaul of the entire compensation system.

The chancellor will tell parliament next week that he intends to put joint 
Treasury and Financial Services Authority proposals out to consultation within 
the next four to six weeks, and that legislation is expected in the next year.

Treasury sources said the reforms would also include measures to enable savers 
to get their money back more quickly if a bank or building society collapses.
 