
Oscar Isaac, Catherine Keener and David Schwimmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/02/david-schwimmer-interview-feed-the-beast-amc-tv>
 are starring in the next big blockbuster, but you won’t need to buy a movie 
ticket to see it. The actors, along with Arrested Development’s David Cross and 
the comedian Amy Sedaris, are all starring in a new podcast calledHomecoming 
<https://gimletmedia.com/show/homecoming/>, which is Gimlet Media’s first foray 
into scripted dramas, a modern take on the old-time radio dramas.

Scripted dramas are experiencing a second act in the world of podcasts, with 
creators embracing a format that’s now attracting bigger-name talent. The new 
life of audio dramas started with the strange fictional world of Welcome to 
Night Vale, which launched back in 2012. (In 2014 the Guardiancalled it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/14/night-vale-podcast> “an 
unsettling radio drama masquerading as a local community news programme”.) As 
the genre became more popular, Welcome to Night Vale’s production company 
started releasing more dramas, including Alice Isn’t Dead, Within the Wires and 
The Orbiting Human Circus.

Welcome To Night Vale, the podcast that's like a local news Twin Peaks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/14/night-vale-podcast> 
They’re not the only ones to mine the drama genre, though. Shows such as the 
supernatural investigation of The Black Tapes, the tech-thriller LifeAfter, the 
blockbuster mysteries Limetown and Archive 81, and Secrets, Crimes, and 
Audiotape – an umbrella series of comedic and dramatic stories told over 
several episodes, which launched with a story told by real-life husband and 
wife Jenna and Bodhi Elfman – are all creating intricate worlds and captivating 
drama. Audio dramas aren’t just for adults, either: there’s a whole group of 
shows, such as Eleanor Amplified and The Unexplainable Disappearance of Mars 
Patel, aimed squarely at a younger demographic.


The six-episode series Homecoming, which comes from the experimental 
storyteller Eli Horowitz, as well as Micah Bloomberg (Creative Control) and the 
sound designer Mark Phillips (Serial), is Gimlet’s first effort in the genre. 
“Scripted fiction is a large category in other media formats – TV, film, books 
– and we think it could become one in digital audio as well,” says Matt Lieber, 
co-founder of Gimlet Media. “Our colleagues at The Truth and Night Vale have 
already proved there’s an appetite, and we wanted to give it a shot with 
top-caliber writers, actors and sound designers. So we did.” As the show is 
only one episode in and the storyline is non-linear, the exact plot is still a 
bit of a mystery. According to Schwimmer: “They’re in a research facility 
sponsored by the government and the military trying to study PTSD.” Isaac plays 
Walter Cruz, a soldier who has returned home from some unnamed war zone and is 
struggling with post-traumatic stress.

Keener plays Heidi Bergman, a caseworker of sorts in something called the 
Homecoming Initiative, a reintegration project and psychological experiment 
that is still awaiting full congressional approval. (Homecoming also marks a 
reunion for Isaac and Keener, who starred in the HBO seriesShow Me a Hero 
<http://www.amazon.com/dp/B016APPSLY/?tag=slatmaga-20>.) 

Homecoming’s story is complex, with time jumps, non-linear story arcs and 
multiple settings, but that works well for audio dramas, which allow producers 
and creators with big ideas to put together ambitious projects on a shoestring 
budget. “Audio is really great in that it gives you a lot of freedom to create 
environments and soundscapes and really authentic-feeling worlds in a way that 
could [cost] millions of dollars in a movie, but if you have a talented sound 
designer they can do it pretty effectively,” says Horowitz.

For Horowitz, who helped push the boundaries of storytelling at McSweeney’s 
publishing house, and created an app that released what he called “weird 
digital novels”, the scripted drama podcast was simply the next frontier in 
storytelling. “I think it’s an exciting moment in podcasting where there’s the 
energy and the audience, but there’s also a lot of room to experiment about 
what this form even is and what it could be,” he says.

The so-called golden age of radio ran from the 1920s through the 1940s 
(basically until the advent of television) and was driven by the popularity of 
radio dramas. Early soap operas, comedy shows such as Fibber McGee & Molly and 
the work of Jack Benny, and adventure serials such as Captain Midnight (which 
you can still listen to thanks toonline archives 
<https://archive.org/details/Captain_Midnight>) ran side by side with radio 
presentations of Shakespeare and Sherlock Holmes, and comic-strip adaptations 
such as Little Orphan Annie and Dick Tracy. Orson Welles’s radio program, The 
Mercury Theatre on the Air, famously caused a scare with its retelling of The 
War of the Worlds, said to have sparked panic among many listeners who didn’t 
know the alien invasion was simply a story. Podcasts, of course, have great 
potential to reach listeners: Marc Maron’s WTF gets between5 and 6 million 
downloads 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/2015/04/13/serial-podcast-undisclosed/25501075/>
 a month, while Serial has reached well over 80 million people since it debuted 
in 2014, and people are still listening. That reach has made the format popular 
with producers as well as A-list talent.

For in-demand actors, scripted podcasts are a way to have fun playing a new or 
different character with little impact on their schedules. “I’ve done a lot of 
radio drama before and I just find it really fun and not a huge commitment for 
an actor in terms of time,” says Schwimmer, who has worked withLA Theater Works 
<http://www.latw.org/> to record live radio dramas. “I worked on this for one 
day and we had eight hours to do all my stuff.” Similarly, according to 
Horowitz, while Isaac was in the middle of shooting a little movie called Star 
Wars he was able to carve out six hours from his schedule for a part in 
Homecoming. Horowitz was entirely grateful for whatever time the stars would 
give the project: “They had no reason to be there other than wanting to be 
there. It certainly wasn’t for fame or fortune.”

No longer 'on a break': is the David Schwimmer renaissance finally here?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/31/david-schwimmer-schwimmnaissance-feed-the-beast>
Schwimmer was excited to play a character that he might be a longshot for on 
television. “I like playing this kind of character who can offer a little comic 
relief because of his incompetence or frustration, but also playing a guy whose 
motives are not necessarily altruistic,” said Schwimmer. “I don’t get the 
opportunity to play characters who are reprehensible or suspect very often. I 
think I would make an excellent sociopath!”


While he doesn’t get to play a sociopath in Homecoming, Schwimmer does play a 
corporate true believer on a seemingly suspicious mission. To prepare for the 
part, he called upon his experience playing something else entirely – a 
giraffe. According to Schwimmer, doing voiceover work as Melman the giraffe in 
the Madagascar franchise helped prepare him for audio stories. “There’s not a 
lot of difference between a podcast and voiceover, except there is a lot less 
time and money in radio dramas,” says Schwimmer. “An actor has to rely on his 
or her imagination almost exclusively. The fun was imagining I was in an 
airport, imagining I’m stepping on a little girl’s backpack on the walkway, or 
pretending that I’m looking for my gate or in a cab in Dubai.”

For Horowitz the process was a little more challenging. Before Homecoming he 
had never written a script (he wrote this one in TextEdit) and had never 
directed, admitting to Googling “how do you direct?” before his first day on 
set. “The first day of taping was Oscar Isaac and Catherine Keener at 8.30 in 
the morning and I had no idea what I was doing,” says Horowitz, laughing. “It 
was only possible because I was surrounded by people who actually did know what 
they were doing.”

The result is a compelling drama that is earning a lot of buzz and is already 
preparing for its second season. “I’m looking forward to picking up these 
characters again and bang them into each other into a different way,” says 
Horowitz. “I’m really excited how it turned out and I’m excited about what we 
do next and what everyone else does next. I think this is a field where 
everyone can constantly inspire and challenge each other so I think that will 
be fun.”

Homecoming is available now on iTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/homecoming/id1170934381?mt=2>
 