
Guardian News & Media (GNM) makes substantial use of freelance contributions 
to deliver its media products. On any given day, about 50% of all articles are 
contributed by freelances, and close to all photographic, illustrative and 
audiovisual material is supplied by freelances and agencies. GNM agrees about 
50,000 commissions a year and about 400 freelances and agencies are on 
fixed-term contracts.

The majority of freelance relationships are governed by our Freelance Charter. 
This document, which originally appeared in 1999 following formal negotiations 
with the National Union of Journalists, set down on paper for the first time in 
newspaper publishing a framework for managing freelance contributions based on 
a best practice approach.

Designed to balance the rights of individual freelances with the needs of GNM 
as an international, multi-platform media concern, the charter initiative 
stemmed mainly from the longstanding desire of GNM to achieve the highest 
possible ethical standards in its dealings with contributors, for example by 
standardising GNM commissioning practice, settling the thorny issue of 
copyright ownership, and improving payment times to contributors.

To emphasise GNM's openness in its freelance relations, the charter is a 
public documentavailable on our website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-news-media-freelance-charter>. It 
sets out in a detailed but understandable way the terms and conditions under 
which GNM engages freelances, including the commissioning process, minimum 
fees, payment terms, rejected work, expenses policy, ethical considerations, 
etc.

Importantly, the charter also outlines our standard copyright terms. In the 
majority of cases, freelances retain the copyright in their contribution and 
grant GNM a clearly-defined licence that enables it to undertake its publishing 
and commercial activities.

With the exception of attributable revenues from syndication where 
contributors receive a 50% share, contributors are paid inclusive fees for 
their work that buy out all rights. The value of these individual rights is 
made available on request to the National Union of Journalists on a 
confidential basis.

The charter is kept under constant review to ensure it is up-to-date with 
current business practice, most recently our Digital First strategy, and there 
is a separate page detailing amendments and revisions to the charter.

In accordance with our best practice approach, GNM has invested in a bespoke 
Oracle system, RCS, to support its content procurement. Linked to our 
production, distribution and finance systems and used by 450 staff across 
editorial and commercial procurement, the RCS system ensures that all 
contributors receive the correct contractual documentation, that they are paid 
in a timely manner in accordance with published minimum rates, and that the 
copyright terms they have agreed with GNM are adhered to, especially in the 
realm of commercial exploitation, such as syndication.
 