
The term “manchild” conjures up a vivid image: a lazy, self-centred bloke who 
relies on women to wash his socks, listen to his problems, remind him to go to 
the doctor and make sure he maintains his relationships.

It’s a generalisation, to be sure, but one that resonates with many women for 
important reasons.

A 'wife bonus' is just an allowance for a dependent spouse by another name | 
Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/01/wife-bonus-allowance-dependent-spouse-feminism>
The manchild was front and centre in my mind while reading Jess Zimmerman’s 
Where’s My Cut? <http://the-toast.net/2015/07/13/emotional-labor/view-all/>, a 
brilliant and accessible exploration of women’s “emotional labour 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emotional_labor>” in interpersonal relationships:


[Women] should get paid for all the work they typically do for free – all the 
affirmation, forbearance, consultation, pacifying, guidance, tutorial, and 
weathering abuse that we spend energy on every single day.

Zimmerman’s conception of emotional labour is a subset of what feminists call 
“women’s work”, which also includes things like housework, reproductive and 
caring labour.

These are services that have historically been rendered by women on an unpaid 
basis. Now they’re being recognised, albeit using different terminology, by 
decidedly non-radical institutions like Australian bank ANZ, which recently
released a discussion paper 
<http://www.businessspectator.com.au/news/2015/7/29/australian-news/gender-pay-gap-alarming-study>
 on the gender pay gap stating:

Unfortunately, Australian women are more likely to retire in poverty than men. 
This is largely because they are paid less for the same work and they often 
revert to part-time jobs to assume child rearing or family responsibilities at 
some point in their lives.

The manchild is the imagined beneficiary of all this so-called women’s work: 
freed from the burdens of looking after himself and his children, and able to 
go out and earn a higher income, he also wins the luxury of acting like a child.

The extent to which this is reflected in individual lives varies enormously, 
but the outcomes don’t lie: women earn less because we spend a lot of time 
taking care of people, especially men, and men make more because they don’t.

This arrangement has historically been beneficial to men, and a range of 
beliefs about women’s innate caring capacities have emerged to prove it’s 
natural; women are said to be better listeners, nurturers.

After all, if we like looking after the manchild so much, why do we need to be 
paid?

Femininity itself is supplied as a justification for why women enjoy emotional 
labour, and that supposed enjoyment, that affective satisfaction, is why the 
work is unpaid. After all, if we like looking after the manchild so much, why 
do we need to be paid?

Both Zimmerman and the ANZ bank are here expressing an interest in doing away 
with the manchild. Zimmerman’s wry suggestion is that women should charge men 
directly for unequal interactions, transforming the manchild into a consumer 
and emotional labour into a product for purchase:

Imagine a menu of emotional labor: Acknowledge your thirsty posturing, $50. 
Pretend to find you fascinating, $100. Soothe your ego so you don’t get angry, 
$150.

What women would do with this increase in money and free time is left 
unanswered, and Zimmerman says this suggestion is at least partially tongue in 
cheek.

It’s useful to contrast this with ANZ’s approach to the issue. Their premise 
here involves an acknowledgement, in economic terms, of the material 
disadvantages that accrue to women from performing forms of labour that have 
never before been considered valuable.

This is as close as banks will ever get to saying “yes, the manchild is real”.

Force men to take paternity leave. It will make the world a better place | 
Gabrielle Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/10/want-better-dads-happier-mums-and-healthier-kids-make-men-take-paternity-leave>
But the difference is stark: where Zimmerman desires freedom from the manchild 
as an end in itself, what ANZ clearly wants is for women to be relieved of 
unpaid emotional, reproductive and caring duties specifically so they can 
commit themselves to the paid workforce.

Rather than equalising the emotional load, the bank seeks to ensure women 
spend more time taking care of business and less time taking care of men, 
family and community.

This represents a sneaky move to hijack feminist arguments in service of the 
aims of capital, which does not inherently care about women, men or anyone else.

Zimmerman’s droll suggestion that men should pay for emotional labour sparked 
fury among many men and some women, despite the unlikelihood of it ever 
happening. But corporate efforts to wring as much work out of everyone as 
possible using the language of feminism are an unwelcome extension of the 
demands that have been placed on men for centuries.

Looking at it this way, we can see how gender justice and economic justice are 
inextricably linked. Taking all forms of labour seriously, whether they’re 
currently paid or unpaid, and compensating them adequately will benefit 
everybody – even the manchildren.
 