
Constant death threats are being received by village health workers (VHTs) 
trying to promotefamily planning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2010/feb/22/male-attitudes-family-planning/>
 in Katine sub-county, north-eastern Uganda. In a region where most men are 
firmly against their wives bearing fewer children, arguments against quantity 
of children in favour of quality of lifeare fiercely rejected and women have 
little legal redress locally orspecialist medical support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2009/oct/28/uganda-contraceptive-use/>.

One woman determined not to give in to male pressure is Sarah Akello, 24. She 
has just borne her fourth child, a girl, at Tiriri health centre, and hopes 
this could be her last. She says her decision is based on the risks involved in 
bearing children. She feels four children are enough, although most women of 
her age are seen as too young to give up having children.

Not long before the birth Akello's husband, Sam Engulu, also 24, who 
accompanied her to the health centre, had opposed herdecision. He said he did 
not see why his wife should stop at four children. He argued it should be 10 
and justified his position biblically - only God had the right to stop his wife 
giving birth.

Such conflicting views over family planning cut right across the Katine 
community, where the issue of numbers versus quality of life acts as a serious 
brake on development.

According to the National Population Policy (2008), all couples and 
individuals have the basic right to decide freely and responsibly the number 
and the spacing of their children, and to have access to information and 
education to make an informed choice - plus the means to do so. But that raises 
another problem for Akello.

Local authorities slow to act

The African Medical Research Foundation (Amref) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/amref/>, implementer of the Katine project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/> funded by 
Guardian readers and Barclays Bank, has trained 272 village health team (VHT) 
members to help improve health standards. One of their roles is to educate 
residents on the consequences of big and unplanned families, but the opposition 
of Engulu and most of the adult male population means the battle could be long 
drawn out.

Despite the negative impact this brings to development programmes, little is 
being done by local authorities to change opinion, and an attempt to bring 
village local council leaders into the campaign has so far had little impact. 
The reason for such apathy is that no byelaws have been passed by the 
sub-county authorities to compel men to accept family planning.

The situation has now got so heated that VHTs told the Guardian earlier this 
month that several had received death threats each time they visited families 
to talk about family planning. Helen Alago, a VHT member for Abata village in 
Merok parish, said she and three colleagues had been warned to stop promoting 
family planning - they would be killed if women in their village stop producing.

"Men in our village promised to kill us," said Alago. "They said: 'We shall 
destroy you and burn your homes if women in [Abata] village stop producing.' So 
you fear visiting some families because none of us is really willing to die." 
Each village has a VHT team of four members who usually move around together 
during their family planning visits to families, but a threat like this leaves 
them vulnerable.

Outrage due to lack of services

The sub-county's VHT coordinator, Simon Echolu, said the threats are 
definitely there and could severely affect any plans to promote manageable 
families. But he added that outrage in the community was partly due to the 
scarcity of family planning services in Katine.

"At one time, VHTs mobilised local residents for services such as vasectomy 
and tube ligation (tying up a woman's fallopian tubes), but the specialists 
Amref promised from Marries tops clinic to conduct operations did not come. 
Residents nowsee no reason [in it]; they think we are just wasting their time."

There is some progress but it's slow. Echolu says in places such as Ojom 
parish couples are slowly getting the message although they have to travel to 
Soroti regional referral hospital for vasectomies, tube ligation and other 
services. Travelling 28km from Katine to Soroti town is not the best incentive 
in a community that gives family planning such a low priority. Meanwhile, Amref 
has raised acceptance rates on family planning from 1% to 4% since the start of 
the Katine project

Nationally, Uganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> has policies and 
guidelines guaranteeing access to reproductive health services and commodities 
and granting all Ugandans their sexual and reproductive health rights. However, 
disinterest among political leaders and policy-makers allows men to continue 
their opposition to women's free expression of their rights over reproduction - 
and seriously hamper the country's long-term development.
 