
Hardly a day passes without an African newspaper, radio or TV report focusing 
on a fresh case of defilement, a sex crime against juveniles that seems to 
thrive on widespread poverty. In parts ofUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>, it's on the rise.

Ugandan law defines defilement as the act of having sex with a girl under 18, 
while rape is having sex with a woman without her consent, usually by force. 
Often defilement involves relatives, married men or professional people in the 
community. Worse still, some men rape or defile their own daughters. Rape and 
defilement can lead to infertility, trauma, contraction of HIV/Aids, terminal 
illness or even death.

In fact, defilement is a capital offence in cases where the victim has been 
infected with HIV/Aids virus or is very young and has been defiled by a 
relative ─ categorised as aggravated defilement. Those defiling children aged 
14-18 get prison sentences if convicted.

Peter Georges of the St Nicholas Uganda Children's Fund, writing about child 
poverty in Uganda <http://www.ugandachildrensfund.org/poverty.html/>, says 
defilement of school-age girls is common. "Rape is always a danger as girls 
travel to and from school through risky neighbourhoods at dawn and dusk. 
Defilement is not always involuntary.

"Because of extreme poverty, many girls are tempted by the promise of a little 
money to buy food or clothing. The most at risk are girls in the upper primary 
classes (P/5-P/7). Some are well into their teens by the time they reach sixth 
or seventh grade because their academic progress was delayed due to lack of 
school fees."

Georges argues that the cost of secondary school is prohibitive for most 
families and these girls see no hope for their future. This then makes them 
vulnerable to the advances of unscrupulous men. The St Nicholas children Fund 
is an non-government organisation providing orphans and vulnerable children 
with education, nutrition and healthcare.

Cases are common in Uganda. For example, a couple of months ago in Katine 
sub-county, in the north-eastern part of the country, communities were shocked 
after news emerged that a local teacher had defiled one of his pupils. The 
event caused a lot of anger, with many residents threatening to tear up the 
teacher ─ as if the child affected had been their own. Interestingly, weeks 
later the same residents were advising the girl's parents to forgive the 
teacher.

One-night affair

The issue came to light after 17-year-old Judith (not her real name) told her 
parents she had had a one-night affair with her teacher in a cassava plantation 
near her school. The revelation followed the parents' decision to flog her 
after they discovered she had slept out away from home. Judith's parents then 
took her to the local police to make statements and this led to the arrest of 
the teacher.

Police have since refused to give details of the case, saying they needed 
permission from the Soroti regional office. However, Katine sub-county chairman 
Jorem Eboku confirmed the incident, saying he had asked police to investigate 
and have the accused prosecuted. In fact, the police released the accused after 
the girl's parents opted to settle the matter out of court. The girl's 
headteacher said that, despite being released, the teacher was no longer 
employed at the school.

In Uganda, most parents choose to negotiate with those suspected of defilement 
because of material gain. The negotiations are usually illegal, but the high 
rates of illiteracy linked with poverty in rural communities like Katine make 
residents ignore legal proceedings.

According to the police spokesperson for the eastern region, Hassan Nyene, 
statistics indicate a general hike in crime rates in the area, with 5,515 of 
cases recorded from January to June 2010. Of this, 2,564 are under 
investigation, 1,745 appeared in court, and 1,721 suspects have been charged, 
while 388 convictions have been secured. 1,422 suspects are awaiting trial. In 
the same period, 535 suspected defilement cases were registered (205 went to 
court, 209 cases are pending, while only seven convictions have been secured). 
In cases taken to court, 154 suspects were adults and 51 juveniles.

Soroti district, which includes Katine, with 23.5%, follows Kumi district on 
Soroti's southern border on 28.7%, Bukedea district 15.7%, Katakwi 12.3%, 
Kaberemaido 11.2% and Amuria 7.7%.

"The incidents of defilement are high because stakeholders are not helping 
police to sensitise the community on the dangers of the crime," said Nyene. In 
some instances, he says, parents don't report cases of defilement to police as 
they opt to settle out-of-court - in other cases, "even if they report, most of 
them withdraw the cases."

He adds that in a poverty-stricken community such as Katine, justice often 
takes second place when families have the chance to receive considerable sums 
of money from suspects willing to pay to avoid imprisonment or worse.

The withdrawal of Judith's case means the police are unlikely to pursue it 
further as there are no witnesses, says Nyene. He adds that there are no 
initiatives to help rehabilitate defilement victims, most of whom end up in 
early marriages that drop them further into poverty. "As police, we only talk 
to parents of the infected victims and take [the victims] to Taso, an 
organisation helping to treat HIV/Aids patients."

'Some take the message, others don't'

Many schools support the Ugandan government's Presidential Initiative on Aids 
Strategy for Communication to Youth (Piascy), a programme designed to educate 
young people against early sex. "This is helping in sensitising pupils," said a 
teacher at one of the participating schools in Katine.

"We are telling these young people that early sex is not good. Some take the 
message but others don't. You find a girl in primary five going out a man older 
then her father."

The African Medical Research Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/amref/>, which is implementing the Katine 
community development project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/>, funded by 
Guardian readers and Barclays Bank, is also helping to spread the message 
through its education programme and use of role models.

Sadly, defilement is one of the most common crimes in Uganda, according to the 
non-government organisation (NGO), Save the Children Uganda. The police's 2007 
Crime Report says 12,230 defilement cases were reported in 2007 against 15,385 
in 2006. This implies that "over 25 children are defiled every day in this 
country which further translates into two children every hour," says the NGO.

The charity says the statistics are alarmingly high, given that most 
defilement cases are never reported. Worse still, of cases reported, it says 
few use the courts for redress, partly because the prosecution often fails to 
verify the age of the defiled child.

"Many children in Uganda are victims of defilement, child prostitution and 
early marriages due to lack of proof of age," it says. They have no birth 
certificates. Further, parents of the defiled victims accept bribes and connive 
with alleged offenders to alter the child's age to pervert the course of 
justice.

The NGO argues on its website <http://savethechildren.ug/> that "the 
government urgently needs to put in place an effective birth registration 
programme to combat child sexual abuse."
 