
Mortgage lending leapt by 30% in the 12 months to February to hit £17.6bn, 
according to the latest figures from banks and building societies.

Despite a 5% fall from January’s figure, the Council of Mortgage Lenders 
reported strong year-on-year growth, after low mortgage rates and demand for 
homes fuelled lending.

The £17.6bn total compared with £13.6bn in the same month of the previous year 
and was the highest lent in a February since 2008, when the downturn was 
starting to take hold.

The CML’s figures are for gross lending during the month and do not take into 
account repayments. Recent months have shown strong levels of remortgaging 
activity, as borrowers have taken advantage of fixed-rate mortgages at record 
lows.

The CML’s economist, Mohammad Jamei, said the annual rate of growth was in 
line with the figures for the closing months of 2015. “The recovery is being 
underpinned by market fundamentals in the UK, as wages grow and unemployment 
falls, helped by government schemes and competitive mortgage deals,” he said.

The change to stamp duty rates on second homes, which comes into effect on 1 
April, led to a 40% rise in buy-to-let loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/10/buy-to-let-mortgage-lending-rockets-ahead-of-stamp-duty-rise>
 for house purchase in January, and it is likely that this boost continued into 
February.


However, Jamei said he did not think the figures pointed to a significant 
acceleration in lending. “While there may be a slight current boost to lending 
as some transactions seek to complete before the 1 April tax changes in the 
buy-to-let-sector, this is likely to be followed by a slight fall in activity,” 
he said.

Buy-to-let mortgage lending rockets ahead of stamp duty rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/10/buy-to-let-mortgage-lending-rockets-ahead-of-stamp-duty-rise>
“Affordability pressures continue to weigh on activity, as does the low number 
of properties coming on the market, though this has been improving very 
recently.”

Wednesday’s budget has confirmed that all property investors will face an 
extra stamp duty bill if they buy homes after 1 April. The rates on additional 
homes will be three percentage points above the standard stamp duty rates, 
which will add £6,000 to the upfront cost of investing in a £200,000 property.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said lending was 
likely to have been boosted by both remortgaging and purchases. “Housing market 
activity is seemingly getting some boost at the moment from increased activity 
from buy-to-let and second home purchases ahead of April’s rise in stamp duty,” 
he said.

“This could exert limited upward pressure on house prices in the near term. 
Post April, a likely waning of buy-to-let interest may modestly dilute housing 
market activity and ease upward pressure on prices.”

The main house price indices show the cost of buying a home has risen more 
quickly than earnings over the past year, and Jeremy Duncombe, director of 
Legal and General Mortgage Club, which works with advisers and lenders, said 
buyers were being forced to take out larger loans to cope with increasing house 
prices.

“These high prices combined with a lack of affordable housing puts owning a 
property out of reach for many first time buyers. Initiatives that can aid the 
delivery of the 250,000 extra homes needed annually should be thoroughly 
explored by the government, with all options considered.” he said.

“As the chancellor himself conceded in his budget, more needs to be done to 
speed up the realisation of these new properties if the housing market and the 
wider economy is to return to full health.”
 