
The US supreme court – already sent to issue momentous opinions in cases 
involvingabortion rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/16/us-supreme-court-make-abortion-deciding-factor-2016-presidential-election>
 andpublic sector unions 
<http://theweek.com/articles/598791/might-end-organized-labor> in the middle of 
a presidential election campaign – just added another the hottest of hot-button 
issues to its docket on Monday: immigration.

And though the court will nominally decide whether President Obama’s major 
executive action on immigration 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/2016/01/immigration-policy-review-and-decision-this-term/#more-237381>
 – which limited the deportation of undocumented immigrants to those with 
felony convictions and without dependents with the right to remain – was legal, 
the decision is a potential time bomb for the Republican Party,whose elites 
remain concerned 
<http://www.governing.com/blogs/politics/gov-future-gop-hispanic-voters-looks-grim.html>
 about their shrinking demographic base.

The root of the political fight which the court must now consider was a 
November 2014 announcement by President Obama of an executive action on 
immigration, called Deferred Action to Parents of Americans and Lawful 
Permanent Residents (Dapa). The policy was a response to a dilemma created by 
congressional policy: immigration statutes have made large numbers of people 
potentially subject to deportation, but the legislature has provided the 
executive branch with the resources to actually deport only a fraction.

The gap between the requirements of the law and the resources provided to the 
executive branch to enforce it has always meant that the president has to make 
choices about which undocumented immigrants to deport and why.

President Obama first asked Congress to establish some priorities through 
legislation. Since 2010, however, the Republican Party has controlled at least 
one house of Congress, presiding over a base which is increasingly, virulently 
opposed to any changes to immigration policy other than in the enforcement of 
it.

For instance, the current leader in the polls for the Republican presidential 
nomination is a reality TV star and real estate developer with no political 
experience who has been leading the national polls for months owing largely to 
his strident anti-immigration. (Lawyers for the recently captured Mexican drug 
Kingpin El Chaporecently cited a virulently anti-Mexican immigrant Trump speech 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/el-chapo-donald-trump_us_569bbabee4b0b4eb759eaf70>
 as evidence that he couldn’t receive a fair trail in the United States.)

Not surprisingly, this party’s congressional leaders were unwilling and unable 
to pass any law on either immigration policy or the enforcement of it – leaving 
it up to the White House to exercise its constitutional discretion.

Obama did so by attempting to codify what was already informal practice: the 
administration had already exercised discretion by essentially focusing its 
deportation efforts on convicted felons and undocumented immigrants without 
citizen children. Dapa simply stated outright that undocumented immigrants who 
had not committed a felony or significant misdemeanor and who have at least one 
child with American citizenship or a green card would be able to apply for a 
renewable deferral status that would allow them work permits and exempt them 
from deportation.

Since such people were already highly unlikely to be deported, clarifying 
their status provided them some security and reduced the possibility of 
employers using the threat of possible deportation can illegally exploit them.

If Congress didn’t like the administration’s priorities, it was free to set 
its own – but it hasn’t and won’t. The executive branch had to decide; Dapa was 
Obama’s decision. And despite all the cries of executive overreach,his actions 
were hardly unprecedented 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/120328/obama-immigration-executive-action-why-it-will-be-legal>
.

But Republicans still had an option other than congressional action: reaching 
out to their allies in the federal judiciary, via a lawsuit, to do their dirty 
work. An ultra-conservative district court judge ruled the executive action 
unconstitutional, and hisdecision was upheld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/11/the-fate-of-immigration-policy-and-politics-rests-with-the-supreme-court>
 on a party-line vote by a panel from the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals.

But the most important thing about the US supreme court’s decision on Monday 
to hear the case (unless you are an undocumented immigrant) is the timing: the
US supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> had just a 
few days remaining during which it could have accepted a case and issued a 
ruling before the typical end of its term in June. Had it waited, the issue 
would have remained in limbo for another year. But the court needed to decide 
this issue in a timely manner, and it will.

As for how the court will decide, it’s hard to say. The argument that Obama’s 
executive order is unconstitutional is almost transparently illogical: Congress 
left immigration enforcement to the discretion of the executive branch by 
giving it inadequate resources to enforce the policy set by Congress, forcing 
it to exercise its discretion. The president doesn’t violate the US 
constitution by exercising that discretion just because he exercised it 
differently than various members of Congress would have preferred or would have 
themselves legislated, if they were so inclined.

The fact that the argument that the executive action is unpersuasive, however, 
doesn’t necessarily mean that opponents of the president’s actions can’t find 
five votes at the US supreme court. For example, the argument that Section 4 of 
the Voting Rights Act violates the US constitution was actively embarrassing, 
but that didn’t stop the US supreme court from joining the Republican Party’s 
ongoing campaign of voter suppression 
<http://prospect.org/article/supreme-courts-war-great-society>. 

But however the court ultimately rules, both parties face a situation in which 
their policy and political interests clash. An anti-immigration decision issued 
by a Republican-dominated US supreme court and supported by Republican 
officials and candidates in the heat of a presidential campaign would be a 
political godsend for a Democratic candidate running against a Republican 
candidate (who will either be Trump or someone forced by Trump to run far to 
the right on immigration), as it would likely drive even more Latino voters to 
the welcoming arms of the Democratic party.

The potential end of the power of the Republican party, though, doesn’t mean 
that Democrats should welcome an opinion that would be terrible on both policy 
and legal grounds. Republican party elites tend to be more pro-immigration that 
the party base – which, at this point, isn’t saying much – in part because of 
the demographic necessity of eventually appealing to the growing base of Latino 
voters. One suspects that many of them are actually hoping that the US supreme 
court will stay its hand, uphold Obama’s order and allow the Republican 
leadership in Congress to do what it most wants to do: duck the immigration 
issue while blaming everything on the White House and the traitors on the 
Supreme Court.

Meanwhile, the lives of millions of people living and working in America today 
hang in the balance. Cementing the Republican party’s decline into obsolescence 
won’t help any of those people if the Republicans win in 2016.
 