
Diana Mosley, widow of Britain's pre-war fascist party leader Sir Oswald Mosley
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/oswald-mosley> and one of the notorious 
Mitford sisters, has died in her Paris apartment at the age of 93.

Lady Mosley, who spent much of the second world war in prison in Britain, died 
peacefully on Monday in the city where she had lived for over half a century, 
according to a death notice published today in the Times.

Despite unabating criticism of her fascist sympathies, she never apologised 
for her fascination with Adolf Hitler, who attended her secret wedding to Sir 
Oswald, held at Joseph Goebbels' Berlin home in 1936.

"They'll go on persecuting me until I say Hitler was ghastly," she said in a 
recent interview. "Well, what's the point in saying that? We all know that he 
was a monster, that he was very cruel and did terrible things. But that doesn't 
alter the fact that he was obviously an interesting figure.

"It was fascinating for me, at 24, to sit and talk with him, to ask him 
questions and get answers, even if they weren't true ones. No torture on earth 
would get me to say anything different."

Although she was on close terms with the most respectable members of the 
British establishment - from Winston Churchill and Evelyn Waugh (who said her 
beauty "ran through the room like a peal of bells") to Sir John Betjeman - she 
admitted having a peculiar affinity with Hitler.

The affection was mutual. Hitler described Diana and her sister Unity as 
"angels". She claimed, however, that Hitler never mentioned his anti-semitism 
to her during many hours of conversation.

Sir Oswald was arrested, but MI5 documents from 1940 released in November last 
year showed that the security services regarded Diana as the greater threat.

One read: "Diana Mosley, wife of Sir Oswald Mosley, is reported on the best 
authority, that of her family and intimate circle, to be a public danger at the 
present time.

"Is said to be far cleverer and more dangerous than her husband and will stick 
at nothing to achieve her ambitions. She is wildly ambitious."

When details of the memo were relayed to her last year, she responded: "Oh, 
it's too wonderful really."

It was not long before Diana Mosley joined her husband behind bars, in 
Holloway, where they spent three years before being released due to Sir 
Oswald's health in 1943.

Mosley was not alone in her admiration for Hitler; her sister Unity was 
described as "more Nazi than the Nazis" and shot herself in the head when war 
broke out, causing severe brain damage. She died in 1948.

Her other sisters included the communist-thinking Jessica, novelist Nancy, and 
Deborah, the Duchess of Devonshire.

The Mosleys moved to France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> in the 
1950s, where they were well known for their entertaining. Sir Oswald died in 
1980 and as a widow, Diana Mosley remained in Paris to continue her husband's 
work.

An avid reader, the mother-of-four listed gardening, swimming and her 
extensive family as her main interests in life. Most of Diana's five sisters 
achieved equal notoriety. The eldest, Nancy, based her most famous works, The 
Pursuit of Love and Love in a Cold Climate, on her own unconventional childhood.

Jessica became a communist and moved to America, while Pamela adopted a quiet 
rural lifestyle. Deborah, the only surviving sister, made the Chatsworth estate 
a commercial success. Their only brother, Tom, was killed in the second world 
war.
 