
A few years ago Newsweek magazine ran a short and memorably dyspeptic item 
asking why, exactly, was Demi Moore still a movie star of any note, and why, 
given the presence in her recent oeuvre of such world-beating duffers as GI 
Jane, The Scarlet Letter, and Striptease, did she even have a viable career at 
all? And that was it for Miss Demi. It was like she read it and retired the 
next morning. Nothing more was heard of her - no more boob-jobs, no more 
star-fits, no more "gimme Moore" - until she returned to the screen last 
summer, surgically reupholstered, for the Charlie's Angels sequel.

Casting a baleful gaze over the recent output of the aforementioned's former 
husband,Bruce Willis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brucewillis>, I find it 
incumbent upon me to ask whether the same process of Tinseltown defenestration 
could not also be profitably performed on him. He earned $22m for Hart's War, a 
box-office stiff, while for The Kid, a leg-lifting dog of a movie, he trousered 
$20m. I don't know what he banked for Bandits, The Story Of Us, Mercury Rising 
or The Jackal, but somebody should be asking for that money back.

His recent career has included neo-imperialist tosh like Tears Of The Sun and 
a flurry of sequels, remakes and career do-overs. We've had The (half-assed) 
Whole Ten Yards, a brief cameo in Charlie's Angels 2, and a completely 
uncalled-for remake of Sam Shepard's True West. And then there is the prospect 
ofDie Hard <https://www.theguardian.com/film/die-hard> 4: Die Hardest, with all 
the autumnal - nay, Viagra - echoes of impotence and detumescence for which its 
title labours to compensate.

But never count Willis out: his career may have the soul of an ad campaign, 
but it also has the hide of a rhino. Show that boy the money. The first Die 
Hard marked the onset of 1980s movie-star salary-inflation and Willis - a proud 
Republican - has a business head to match the Governator's. He knows when to 
double-down on the upfront salary to make a killing on the back end (Sixth 
Sense, Unbreakable), how to boost his profile by association with coming 
players (Tarantino, M Night Shyamalan again), and when to strike with another 
boneheaded moneyspinner like Armageddon. He's overdue for another reinvention 
any day now...

And every night I pray he loses his golden touch. Every night. 

 Career high  The Last Boy Scout. Stupid, violent, loud, empty - and perfect. 

 Career low  In a crowded field, The Story Of Us and Color Of Night certainly 
stand out.

 Need to know  Offered the casino boss role in Ocean's Eleven that went to 
Andy Garcia. He'd have been infinitely creepier.

 The last word  "I'm staggered by the question of what it's like to be a 
multimillionaire. I always have to remind myself that I am one." Bruce, look at 
the Learjet under your ass. That'll do it.
 