
Buoyed by the possibility of a crisp, fresh start to the year, most of us woke 
up to 2015 with a level of optimism. However, now that a couple of weeks have 
passed and reality has set in, most of us desk jockeys (including myself) are 
back to our regular work schedules and dealing with a rapidly dawning reality 
that nothing else much has changed with the new year other than the click-over 
of a number.

It is at this point that the “new year, new start” rhetoric shows itself to be 
bollocks.

Let’s be honest, most of us don’t return to work feeling all that refreshed, 
what with the manic Christmas shopping, overeating and drinking and multiple 
family obligations. It’s occasionally fun, but not particularly restful. 
Unless, of course, the whole thing was somehow avoided by disappearing into a 
Wi-Fi free zone in a jungle somewhere.

So, if you’re feeling a little flat or dismayed that this fresh year has 
started and failed to bring the promised joy and rejuvenation, here are a few 
survival tips for getting through these first few weeks, sanity intact.

Don’t, whatever you do, read the diet articles on any news websites for at 
least a month. The new year is just an arbitrary date, and starting a new 
fitness and diet regime can happen at any time. Welcome to the guilty end of 
the festive season, and it’s compounded by news outlets posting clickbait 
designed to feed our insecurities. Most fad diets are stupid and the key to 
weight loss is probably just eat a lot less and do more exercise.Ketosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/dec/07/ketogenic-diet-high-fat-epilepsy-weight-loss>
 andputting butter in your coffee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/17/call-it-paleo-coffee-or-bulletproof-or-full-fat-thick-sludge>
 don’t have to be a thing – and not right now, this week.

As a fun challenge, work on a few versions of your “what I did over Christmas 
and new year story” for retelling in the office. Within a week, the sad tale of 
not getting one proper sleep-in, and fighting with the folks over a Christmas 
lunch of a slightly slimy budget ham while seated on a fold up chair at the 
kids table, can magically evolve into a delightful day consisting of a 12 
course degustation meal of exquisite meats, matched with sparkling conversation.

Don’t read any list that uses phrases like “the hottest travel destinations of 
2015”. The photos of each magical place are heartbreakingly enticing and only 
serve to remind us that most of us aren’t going anywhere. At least not until 
Easter. Also,Adelaide’s on that list 
<http://www.pedestrian.tv/news/travel/theres-only-one-aussie-city-worth-visiting-says-th/e20ec450-1386-4331-a47f-25ff57c2698c.htm>
 this year.

And finally, block anyone on Facebook or Twitter posting inspirational quotes. 
This time of year is the absolute worst for a barrage of online emotional 
blackmail designed only to make you feel worse about your life choices. The 
yearly changeover sees usually sane people quite happily posting things like 
“do what makes you happy, be with those who make you smile, and laugh as much 
as breathe”. Quotes such as this only make sense when read through a haze of 
cocktail fumes on a tropical island holiday. They have absolutely no relevance 
when you’re back at work, sharing a cubicle with a chronic mouth breather who 
enjoys tinned tuna every day for lunch. Do not post and do not read.

And finally if you’re going to give anything up, leave it until February. No 
one else will be talking about juice cleanses by then.
 