
Having completed our rolling assurance process for each section of the 
Guardian News and Media (GNM) sustainability report 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/series/sustainability-report-2012>, 
this summary allows us to step back and provide an overview of the year 
alongsidethe in-depth comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/assurance> made in each section of 
the report.

Editorial success and growing readership have continued alongside 
unsustainable losses, giving GNM plenty of significant challenges to overcome. 
The digital-first strategy and the concept of 'open journalism' provide the 
framework that GNM has developed to continue the editorial achievements and 
secure financial stability. Both concepts align well with sustainability, and 
progress has been made in many areas: Stakeholder inclusiveness is being built 
into the editorial and commercial approaches through mechanisms such as 
incorporating readers' views and opinions into articles and developing targeted 
advertising approaches to website users; GNM has measured its digital footprint 
and despite a small increase in carbon footprint emissions operational impacts 
are generally reducing; Volunteering remains impressive; the majority of 
readers consider GNM to be living its values; revenues from 
sustainability-related activities have grown.

As GNM completes its first year of the digital-first strategy there are some 
key areas for focus to build on the successes to date. We recommend that the 
board approach to incorporating sustainability in the digital-first strategy is 
clarified. The carbon positive strategy should build on the leading role GNM 
has taken in calculating its digital footprint, both by acting to reduce that 
footprint and using its influence to raise the bar amongst other media and ICT 
companies that have yet to grasp the nettle. With the clarity on "progressives" 
as GNM's key audience, it will be important to understand further how 
sustainability can strengthen their connection with GNM, supporting both 
editorial content and commercial revenues in a way that aligns with the 
company's values.

Finally, as the transformation programme leads to further staff changes, GNM 
will need to work hard to make these changes in a way that aligns with its 
values, ensuring that new staff can enhance the diversity of the organization 
and support its values in the years ahead. The publication of the recent staff 
survey results and the planned six monthly staff surveys will provide important 
feedback on staff engagement levels throughout the changes.
 