
The former prime minister of Qatar, one of the world’s wealthiest men, could 
be drawn into a series of high-profile investigations into the awarding of the 
2022 World Cup and the controversial billion-pound bailout ofBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> bank if he were stripped of his 
diplomatic immunity, a court has heard.


Lawyers for Fawaz al-Attiya, a British citizen and former official spokesman 
of the emirate, claimed that Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber al-Thani, had 
taken up a position as a diplomat in London after leaving office to shield 
himself from claims that he was responsible for their client’s kidnap and 
torture.


Attiya claims that Qatari agents acting on behalf of Thani, who is commonly 
known as HBJ, ordered his false imprisonment in Doha for 15 months beginning in 
2009 and subjected him to conditions amounting to torture.


The claims are rejected by HBJ, whose lawyers say the “extremely serious 
allegations are, without exception, a combination of distortion, exaggeration 
and wholesale fabrication”.


At the high court, Thomas de la Mare QC, acting for Attiya, said that HBJ had 
invested billions in Barclays bank, a transaction for which the bank was now 
being investigated by the Serious Fraud Office, and that he was “intimately 
involved” in Qatar’s successful bid for the football World Cup in 2022.


“The [Barclays] investments were subject to a high profile SFO investigation 
against Barclays bank which one would anticipate the defendant [HBJ] would be a 
highly significant witness if called,” said de la Mare. “Immunity was operating 
in a context … arising with Barclays and indeed the World Cup.”


HBJ, who has a personal fortune of £8bn, stood down as Qatar’s prime minister 
and foreign minister in June 2013. He has appeared on the UK’s Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office (FCO) diplomatic list as a “minister-counsellor” serving in 
the London embassy and has remained on the diplomatic list.


Monica Carss-Frisk QC, who is acting for HBJ, said the FCO had confirmed that 
his appointment – which focused on economic relations – began on 6 November 
2013. As a minister-counsellor, he would have legal immunity under the Vienna 
convention of 1961.


In court, de la Mare claimed that HBJ had in fact never taken up his position 
in the embassy. The lawyer described the appointment as a sham. “[HBJ] had 
never been to the Foreign Office, never gone to the London embassy or attended 
the ambassador’s reception and ate the Ferrero Rocher chocolates on offer.”


Instead, he argued, that HBJ spent his time pursuing personal business deals – 
breaching the terms of the Vienna convention which forbids engaging in 
commercial activity for personal profit. Court papers claim that HBJ held 
“beneficiary” ownership of key London hotels and had purchased an oil company 
in London for £1bn while a diplomat.


“There is no doubt that he was engaged in substantial commercial activity in 
the UK and when not here he was engaged in it elsewhere. He bought a stake in 
Deutsche Bank and bought Spanish department store El Corte Ingles,” said de la 
Mare.


He added that HBJ’s Instagram account showed he spent much of his time when 
not doing deals on holidays in exotic locations such as Marrakech, Mumbai and 
the Maldives. The judge, Justice Blake, drew laughs in court by asking whether 
Instagram was a “social media account”.


However, Carss-Frisk said such claims were irrelevant as Qatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> had freely appointed the billionaire 
as a diplomat and that this had been confirmed by the FCO, which had been made 
aware of claims of business activity. “The Qatari ambassador and foreign 
minister and the foreign office all say he was appointed as a diplomat,” she 
said.


She added it was wrong to suggest HBJ could not claim diplomatic immunity 
under the Vienna convention and argued that the court should speak with one 
voice with the government “on such a matter of international relations”.


She told the judge that if the court decided to remove HBJ’s immunity there 
might be “many, many cases of spurious allegations by reference to Instagram 
over whether diplomats are exercising their diplomatic functions or not. It 
makes the whole thing unworkable”.


Blake said that the issue he had to consider was whether the Foreign Office 
officials had taken an “ultra vires” step in claiming HBJ had “enjoyed the 
privileges and immunities of a member of the diplomatic staff of a mission”.


The judge reserved judgement and will make a ruling at a later date. 

 