
Australia’s disability discrimination commissioner has criticised the ABC for 
its decision to stop transcribing some of its news and current affairs programs.

Alastair McEwin warned the decision would affect thousands of people with 
disability, and would prevent the ABC from being accessible to all Australians.

He told Guardian Australia the decision was bad from a human rights 
perspective, and ran contrary to the web content accessibility guidelines that 
require all media, including audio and video, to be accessible through 
transcripts.

He said the ABC had not contacted him before the decision but he would take it 
up with the broadcaster.

The Weekly Beast: A Current Affair tries to turn back Four Corners' exposé of 
life on Nauru
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/21/a-current-affair-tries-to-turn-back-four-corners-expose-of-life-on-nauru>
The ABC has come under fire since it was revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/05/abc-source-dries-up-as-transcripts-of-news-and-current-affairs-shows-curtailed?CMP=soc_568>
 two months ago that its management had changed the ABC’s transcription set-up, 
and would dramatically wind back transcriptions of key news and current affairs 
programs.

Programs affected include AM, The World Today, PM, 7.30, Lateline, and 
Insiders.

The head of ABC’s current affairs, Bruce Belsham, explained to staff at the 
time that the decision reflected changing audience needs.

“As audience needs have changed with the shift to mobile consumption, and 
towards key ABC digital properties such as abc.net.au/news and apps, the need 
for this focus on transcripts has reduced, and the need for digital staff to 
create bespoke versions of stories and program items in text, video and audio 
formats is increasing,” Belsham said in a note to staff.

 During Senate estimates this week, Michael Millett, ABC’s director of 
corporate affairs, said the ABC would save $210,000 a year from the changes.

The Labor senator Kim Carr asked Millett if he felt the changes were worth it, 
given the deterioration in the quality of its transcriptions since the decision.

Carr said a transcript of an Insiders interview with the shadow treasurer, 
Chris Bowen, on 9 October was “grossly inaccurate”.

“It does concern me that for such a small amount of money such an important 
service upon which many people rely – and certainly in this building but I put 
it to you across the country, given the significance of the ABC’s news 
gathering service – that we could end up in a situation like this,” said Carr.

McEwin has now told Guardian Australia the significant reduction in ABC 
transcripts would severely affect people with disability.


“People who are deaf or hard of hearing … the vast majority of them rely on 
the written transcripts to be able to follow what’s being said in audio 
formats, such as radio chat shows,” he said.

“And people who are blind, whilst they can hear the radio, many of them also 
like to download the transcript and read it at their own pace through their own 
software, such as screen reader software.”

He said Michelle Guthrie, the head of the ABC, had said she would like the ABC 
to be accessible to all Australians by 2020, but these cuts were a “backward 
step.”

Attacking the ABC is a win-win for conservatives. The latest furore is no 
surprise | Lee Zachariah
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/21/attacking-the-abc-is-a-win-win-for-conservatives-the-latest-furore-is-no-surprise>
An ABC spokesman told Guardian Australia, in response to McEwin’s criticism, 
that the ABC still provided more transcription services in this area than any 
other broadcaster.

“The ABC’s transcription services have undergone change as a result of both 
budget cuts and the recognition of ABC audiences’ growing reliance on catch-up 
services,” a spokesman said.

“As more content has become available online or as podcasts, the ABC 
determined that there was less demand for its transcription services.

“The ABC still offers transcriptions services, including the key political 
interview on programs such as AM, The World Today, PM, Correspondent’s Report 
and Insiders, and full transcripts for 730 and Lateline.”
 