
Up to 800 Phones 4u staff are to keep their jobs after Dixons Carphone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dixons-carphone> received the all-clear 
to offer jobs to workers who had been operating mobile phone concessions in its 
PC World and Currys outlets.

A further 4,200 jobs remain at risk after Phones 4u fell into administration 
on Monday. Administrators at PricewaterhouseCoopers have said there is enough 
cash to pay staff for another day and they could begin to lay off workers and 
permanently shut down parts of the business from Thursday if buyers for all or 
part of the business are not found.

The three administrators are talking with potential buyers for some of the 
group's 550 stores, including mobile operators EE and Vodafone, whichhave been 
accused of forcing the demise of Phones 4u 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/15/phones-4u-founder-john-caudwell-retailer-collapse>
 by withdrawing their business from the chain.

The concessions in a further 160 PC World and Currys stores ceased trading and 
reverted to the newly merged Dixons Carphone group when Phones 4u collapsed. 
The retailer said it wanted to take on all its staff and reopen as soon as 
possible.

The concessions are likely to be rebranded under the Carphone name over time 
but PwC made clear the agreement with Dixons Carphone did not include the sale 
of stock or the Phones 4u brand name.

It is understood the retailer has about 300,000 handsets in stock, which the 
administrators will either sell or return to manufacturers. Phones 4u's demise 
has also leftcustomers unsure about their rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/live/2014/sep/16/phones-4u-collapse-consumers-live-q-a>
. The retailer's insurance arm also fell into administration on Wednesday with 
the same team from PwC taking on the job. A spokesman said all policies were 
safe and claims would continue to be handled but there would be a short delay 
in processing them because of shop closures.

Dan Schwarzmann, joint administrator and PwC partner, said: "We would like to 
reassure all policyholders with an active Phones 4u Care or Premierplan mobile 
phone insurance policy that your policy remains in force in accordance with its 
terms and conditions." Phones 4u Care customers can call a dedicated hotline, 
0333-222 6730, for further information.

Administrators said they were continuing to engage with a number of parties – 
likely to include coffee shops, e-cigarette sellers and nail bars, which 
operate from similar-sized outlets – about the future of Phones 4u's stores. EE 
andVodafone <https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> are also 
looking at buying up to several dozen of Phones 4u's standalone stores. The 
closure of all Phones 4U's outlets earlier this week is the biggest one-day 
shut-down of a chain since Woolworths collapsed in 2008 according to high 
street analysts Local Data Company.

Vodafone and EE were accused on Monday of playing a central role in Phones 
4u's downfall. The company's private equity owner, BC Partners, said Vodafone 
had behaved in a way "designed to inflict the maximum damage" on Phones 4u 
while it described EE's decision to withdraw its business from Phones 4u last 
week as surprising.

Phones 4u sells mobile-phone contracts and handsets to consumers on behalf of 
operators but its business model has been irreparably damaged by networks 
deciding to open own-branded outlets instead.

In an outspoken attack on Monday, Phones 4u's founder, John Caudwell, blamed 
the company's demise on its owners and former partners.

"It's astonishingly ruthless. Vodafone have had millions upon millions from 
Phones 4u over 25 years. It's dreadful for British business.

Sources close to one of the mobile operators said that they had made clear for 
some time that they were reviewing their relationship with Phones 4U and 
discussions had broken down after the retailer refused to offer improved terms 
on a historic agreement.

Meanwhile a group of Phones4U bondholders said they would look into launching 
a rescue plan for the company. A spokeswoman for the bondholders said: "We have 
proposed a restructure of the business that means the capital structure will no 
longer be an impediment to achieving the commercial outcome which allows the 
company to continue as a going concern."
 