
The devastating impact of cigarette smoke on the body’s DNA has been laid bare 
by the first comprehensive study into the damage tobacco inflicts on human 
cells.

People who smoke a pack of cigarettes each day for a year develop on average 
150 extra mutations in every lung cell, and nearly 100 more mutations than 
usual in each cell of the voice box, researchers found. More still build up in 
the mouth, bladder, liver and other organs.

What is a mutation? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=c8b78875-5e71-4146-a2da-8081cf14d976>
While chemicals in tobacco smoke have long been known to raise the risk of at 
least 17 forms of cancer, the precise molecular mechanisms through which they 
mutate DNA and give rise to tumours in different tissues have never been clear.


“This is about running down the root cause of cancers,” said David Phillips, a 
professor of environmental carcinogenesis at King’s College London and a 
co-author on the study. “By identifying the root causes, we gain the sort of 
knowledge we need to think more seriously about cancer prevention.”

More than 70 of the 7,000 chemicals found in tobacco smoke are known to cause 
cancer. Some damage DNA directly, but others ramp up mutations in more subtle 
ways, often by disrupting the way cells function. The more mutations a cell 
acquires, the more likely it is to turn cancerous.


The reason why some people can smoke for years without getting cancer, while 
others develop the disease, is down to the way mutations arise. When a person 
smokes, the chemicals they inhale create mutations at random points in the 
genome. Many of these changes will be harmless, but others not so benign. The 
more smoke a person is exposed to, the greater the chance that the accumulating 
mutations will hit specific spots in the DNA that turn cells cancerous.


Do lung cancer scans deter smokers from giving up?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/shortcuts/2015/sep/08/smoking-lung-cancer-scans-screening>
“You can really think of it as playing Russian roulette,” said Ludmil 
Alexandrov, a theoretical biologist at Los Alamos National Lab in New Mexico 
and the first author of the study. “You can miss the right genes. But if you 
smoke you still play the game. It’s a very strong message for people not to 
start smoking. If you smoke even a little bit you’ll erode the genetic material 
of most of the cells in your body.”Smoking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/smoking> is the most preventable cause of 
cancer in the world and accounts for more than 1 in 4 UK cancer deaths.


With researchers at the Wellcome Trust’s Sanger Institute near Cambridge and 
others, Alexandrov analysed the DNA of more than 5,000 cancers. The team then 
turned to pattern recognition software to tease apart the various mutational 
signatures found in tumours from smokers versus non-smokers. To find the 
signatures - the patterns of mutations present in cancer cells - researchers 
performed the genetic equivalent of recording the chatter at a party and then 
extracting individual conversations from the hubbub.


The scientists spotted more than 20 mutational signatures in 13 types of 
cancer linked to tobacco smoking. But only five of these were more common in 
smokers’ tumours. One pattern of mutations, dubbed signature four, was found to 
be a major driver for lung cancer. It is thought to be caused by benzopyrene, a 
chemical found in tobacco smoke.


More intriguing was how tobacco caused mutations in tissues that are not 
directly exposed to smoke, such as the bladder, kidneys and pancreas. The study 
found that chemicals from tobacco smoke found their way to different organs and 
tissues and then sped up the molecular clocks in the cells. This ramped up the 
natural rate at which mutations built up in the tissues.


“We knew there was direct damage from smoking in the lungs. What we didn’t 
expect was to see smoking speed up the molecular clocks inside cells,” said 
Alexandrov, whose study appears in the journalScience 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.aag0299>. “In bladder 
cancer, the only thing that causes the extra mutations in smokers is the 
speeding up of the clock, and that will be very dependent on the intensity of 
smoking. For every pack of cigarettes you smoke per year, you accumulate 18 
mutations in all of your bladder cells,” he added.

Scientists hope that by understanding how the individual ingredients of 
tobacco smoke raise the risk of various cancers, they can develop new ways to 
prevent the disease. The same techniques used in the latest study will now be 
used to tease apart how alcohol, obesity and other factors also increase a 
person’s cancer risk.

“There is a message here for people who are occasional or social smokers who 
think it doesn’t do anything,” said Alexandrov. “If you smoke four to five 
packs of cigarettes in your lifetime it doesn’t sound that much, but you still 
get several mutations in every cell in your lungs and these are permanent, they 
do not go away. There are a lot of things that do revert back when you stop 
smoking, and this shouldn’t discourage people from giving up, but the specific 
mutations in the lung cells are like scars. If you stop smoking, they’ll still 
be there.”
 