
Toby Young, journalist and campaigner for 'free schools': The problem with 
western parents,Amy Chua says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/12/tiger-mother-chinese-parenting>, 
is that we assume our children are fragile, delicate creatures. We think 
they'll be permanently damaged if we push them too hard or express our 
disappointment if they're under-achieving. Chinese mothers, by contrast, will 
chastise and ridicule their children, confident that they're strong enough to 
take it. "Chinese parents demand perfect grades because they believe that their 
child can get them," she writes. "If their child doesn't get them, the Chinese 
parent assumes it's because the child didn't work hard enough. That's why the 
solution to substandard performance is always to excoriate, punish and shame 
the child."

A lot of this is exaggerated, of course, and I'm sure many Chinese mothers 
will resent being stereotyped in this way. But I like Chua's lack of 
ambivalence about her own values. She knows her own achievements are based on 
back-breaking labour – she's a professor of law at Yale – and wants her 
daughters to be as successful as her. She doesn't have any truck with the 
trendy notion that children should be allowed to flower in their own way. Her 
daughters aren't allowed on sleepovers, they've never watched TV or played 
computer games and they've never appeared in school plays. And, yes, they 
always get As. Apart from in drama and PE, which don't count.

She claims that Chinese children make for more robust adults, having been 
galvanised in the hot-house of the Chinese parenting academy. The problem with 
constantly boosting our children's self-esteem, telling them they're budding 
little geniuses when they manage to add 2 + 2, is that we're setting them up 
for a fall. We send them out into the world with an inflated idea of their own 
abilities and the moment they come face to face with a tough competitor – one 
of Ms Chua's daughters, for instance – they collapse like a house of cards. 
Bye-bye, self-esteem. Hello, depression.

This sounds like a good reason to be a bit tougher on our children, but is it? 
You're the psychologist, you tell me.

Oliver James, psychologist and author: Chua is right that the great majority 
of exceptional achievement in many domains is the product of hothousing, not in 
our genes. Whether it be the Williams sisters, Michael Jackson (who, along with 
his brothers, was whipped by his father if he did not come straight home from 
school and practise singing and dancing until bedtime for every day of his 
childhood) or Tiger Woods, such stars' parents hijacked them as vehicles for 
their own ambitions by coercing them to focus on a particular skill to the 
exclusion of any other gratifications from a very young age. While the vast 
majority of prodigies do not go on to be exceptional adults, it's true 
hothousing is the main cause of exceptional skills in most fields. For 
instance, studies of musicians show that from childhood onwards, compared with 
"mere" orchestral players, soloists practised for more hours, under more 
pressure to do so, from earlier ages.

The evidence also shows that indiscriminately positive praise for children, as 
opposed to praise for specific efforts, leads to bloated, unreal self-esteem 
and is one of the reasons for the epidemic of narcissism now afflicting the USA.

However, there is also very robust evidence that offspring of perfectionist, 
over-controlling parents whose love is conditional on performance do worse than 
ones whose parents love them for "who they are".

It's not just that such children are at much greater risk of depression, 
anxiety, eating disorders and substance abuse. Overall, paradoxically, they 
actually do worse academically.

Presumably we agree that we both want mentally healthy offspring who have the 
skills to do well in fields they enjoy. How do you propose to achieve that with 
your children by bullying and abusing them? Would you like to have been 
Jackson's or Woods's father?

Toby: You appear to be confusing Amy Chua with Michael Jackson's dad. I don't 
get the impression that she's a "perfectionist, over-controlling" parent "whose 
love is conditional" on her children's "performance". Just a typical Chinese 
mum. Indeed, you point out that children of such parents tend not to do well 
academically, whereas Amy's children are straight-A students so, by your own 
account she can't be guilty of Jacksonian overbearance. Similarly, Chinese 
children on average do better academically than their British and American 
counterparts, so it can't be that the Chinese method of parenting is 
counter-productive in the way you highlight.

More generally, is there any evidence that Chinese children are at a "greater 
risk of depression, anxiety, eating disorders and substance abuse" than western 
children? A lot of our ideas about parenting are informed by a general desire 
to minimise the risk of mental disorders – we want our children to be happy – 
but most of us haven't bothered to make a thorough, evidence-based assessment 
of different parenting philosophies. You appear to be saying that a tougher, 
more proscriptive approach to parenting, like the one Chua is recommending, 
will produce children more prone to unhappiness. But is this based on a robust 
body of evidence? Can you refer me to the relevant peer-reviewed research?

Oliver: Healthy success in children results from self-motivation (see 
selfdeterminationtheory.org <http://www.psych.rochester.edu/SDT/> for 
scientific papers). Children who are coerced by parents end up "introjecting" 
their values – mechanically adopting them without understanding, out of fear 
and obedience, making them like hypnotised subjects who feel they have no 
volition.

By contrast, if parents are loving, supportive and encouraging, the child 
"identifies" with parental values makes them their own, metabolises and owns 
them. These are the children who do best in every way, are cheerful and do well 
in the subjects that interest them, rather than grade-chasing zombies.

Lack of creativity is a major problem as a result of Asian schooling. During 
visits to seven nations in 2004, in each one I played a simple game with a 
group of 15-year-olds. They had to picture what it would be like to have the 
average wage, then double it, then how they would feel six months later. Then 
it was doubled again and so on.

The Chinese children never got past the first stage: "But why would you pay me 
twice as much for doing the same?", "That would never happen" and so on. They 
were simply incapable of picturing an abstract situation and of entering into a 
game. I am sure this was because their creativity had been systematically 
destroyed and in its place, a survival pragmatism installed.

On the other hand, the Chinese suffer very low rates of depression. One reason 
is that their parents do not actually act as Chua claims. Yes, the child is 
excoriated for failing the family and its clan, if it does badly. But the 
parents and grandparents still show a great deal of love and warmth to the 
child, even if it has failed or done wrong. That it is a shame rather than 
guilt culture seems to reduce against self-attacking depressive thoughts.

In the end, just imagine what a crazy world it would be if everyone followed 
Chua's advice: a skills arms race, in which you would have to be unbelievably 
motivated and ruthless to get anywhere. Only psychopaths would succeed!
 