
There are opportunities you never welcome – the letter offering you the chance 
to go on a speed-awareness course, an illustrated guide to lovemaking from 
one’s partner or, as I now have, the chance to join a club exclusively for 
people who’ve experienced close bereavement.

Widowed & Young (Way) <https://www.widowedandyoung.org.uk/> is a support group 
with more than 1,800 members. It embraces everyone whether married or not with 
or without kids and whatever sexual orientation – as long as you’re 50 or under 
when bereaved. They know full well you’d rather be anywhere else: “We’re sorry 
you’re eligible to join us, but we’re glad you found us.” Surprisingly, so am I 
as it turns out.

I’d heard about Way but resisted my cousin Holly’s advocacy with some 
vehemence: “No chance. I’m not a clubby sort of bloke and I’m not going to 
start now. In the 30 years I’ve been a member of the Triumph car club, I’ve yet 
to go to a meeting. Anyway, where am I supposed to find the time and 
inclination to hang around people where the only things we’ve in common are 
tears and trauma?”

This last point is a biggie for me – I need to be lifted out of my slough of 
despond, not to join others wallowing in it. It’s why I wonder how online 
dating sites just for widows and widowers work – over dinner do you talk about 
funerals, memorials and bereavement benefits?

Holly doesn’t let me off the hook – her best friend’s husband died and his 
widow is a Way cheerleader. She also, as family feel entitled to, goes for the 
jugular. “For Christ’s sake what have you got to lose, Adam? You might just 
discover there are people who are going just as crackers as you feel you are 
and are not mad at all but simply grieving. Anyway, you old fooker …” Holly is 
younger than me and has a north-east accent, “… in how many clubs do you still 
qualify as young?”

I smile; she has a point – not so much about the age thing, although it is 
true, but I’ve been looking for an explanation for my strange behaviour. In the 
weeks since Helen’s death, I have developed an hour-long nightly bedroom 
ritual. I find myself picking up objects that were Helen’s – her diary, her 
hairbrush with blond hairs still attached, her makeup and even her dressing 
gown – and then spend ages being extra careful to place them exactly as she had 
last touched them. I know it has something to do with maintaining a close 
connection but it also smacks of bereavement-induced OCD.

It always happens at 1am adding further to my exhaustion and sense of the 
macabre, but as long as I jump into my empty bed by 2am I’m asleep in minutes. 
But if I miss the 2am slot I can lie awake for hours.

So I have bowed to Holly’s will and joined Way. It’s a revelation. It makes me 
realise that I am not alone. There are people there who have so many of the 
same sort of issues and it’s the one group who when they say that they 
understand, really do. I tinker at the edges for now but enough to take comfort 
in their stories and knowledge.

I’m humbled by the trauma of some of those whose loved ones have gone more 
brutally than I experienced with Helen, albeit we all ended up at a graveside. 
And I remind myself that I need sleep to be in the best shape for our children, 
Millie and Matt – they are the true reminders of Helen, not a hairbrush or comb.

So I go on a spree of clearing out our bedroom to bin/loft/charity. There’s a 
very bad moment finding Helen’s reading glasses. These were so much a feature 
of her appearance that knowing there’s no longer a face to place them on is an 
unexpected and painful emotional ambush. Team Way will be nodding at this. But 
this scorched earth clearance strategy works and I’m stronger – another small 
notch on this dreadful journey. Check out Way if you have been bereaved and 
qualify. It has asister organisation for people in their 50s and 60s, Way Up 
<http://www.way-up.co.uk/>.

“I don’t want to belong to any club that will accept people like me as a 
member” – Groucho Marks was wrong. Way to go, Way.

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 