What was the title of Apsley Cherry-Garrard's 1922 book about an expedition he 
made with Captain Scott?  The Heart of Whiteness  The Worst Journey in the World
 Blizzard Be Damned  Towards Terra Nova Which character begins Mary Shelley's 
Frankenstein with an account of a voyage to the Arctic?  Victor Frankenstein  
Captain Walton  Henry Clerval  Chay Blyth In his poem Antarctica, the 
Northern-Irish poet Derek Mahon details the last moments of Captain Oates. How 
many times is the quotation, "just going outside and may be some time" repeated?
 Twice  Four times  Five times  Seven times Edgar Allan Poe's only completed 
novel tells the story of a doomed voyage to the south pole. What is its title?  
The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket  The City in the Sea  A Descent 
into the Maelström  Southward Ho! What throws the hero of Ian McEwan's novel 
Solar into a panic in the Arctic?  A polar bear attack on his bivouac  A 
chapstick down his trousers  A frostbitten nose  Getting caught in a blizzard 
How do the creatures known as the Elder Things survive in the Antarctic in HP 
Lovecraft's At the Mountains of Madness?  On six-foot penguins  On polar bears  
Stealing from explorers  By eating the beings they created, the Shoggoths Beryl 
Bainbridge's 1995 novel The Birthday Boys is about Scott's expedition to the 
Antarctic. From whose point of view is the story told?  Robert Scott and Edward 
Wilson's  Taff Evans's  Lawrence Oates and Henry Bowers'  All five Which polar 
explorer's daughter, known as the snow baby, has written a book about the women 
behind the polar heroes?  Sarah Shackleton  Kari Herbert  Selina Scott  IC White
In Samuel Taylor Coleridge's Rime of the Ancient Mariner, how is the ice 
described as the mariner reaches the Arctic?  "Tracks of shining white"  "White 
as leprosy"  "Green, and blue and white"  "Green as emerald" In Jules Verne's 
The Adventures of Captain Hatteras (1866), what is discovered in the Arctic and 
named after Hatteras?  A mountain range  An active volcano  A Fjord  A cavern  
You got…  You're practically Robert Falcon Scott! Without the dying.  Not bad, 
and it's hard going. But you weren't quite ready for the expedition. Regroup, 
and set out again.  You've frozen. We're sending a team of emergency librarians 
to rescue you from dangerous ignorance  Challenge your friends Submit answers  