
Spoiler alert: this is a detailed look at the 50th-anniversary special episode 
ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>, The Day of 
the Doctor. Don't read on if you haven't seen it.

'We've got enough warriors, and any old idiot can be a hero. Do what you've 
always done. Be a Doctor.'

As three Doctors stand in that mysterious barn in the desert, Tennant's 10 and 
Smith's 11 reassure Hurt's "war Doctor", on the verge of committing xenocide, 
that he really is worthy of the name and the numbering that comes with it. "You 
were the Doctor on the day it wasn't possible to get it right."

You do wonder if Steven Moffat wasn't channelling something of his own 
insecurities with that line. The waves of hype and anticipation over the Doctor 
Who 50th anniversary special have been silly. We all went over the top to the 
point where there was, surely, no way everyone – even anyone – was going to be 
happy. We in fandom couldn't really cope. I can't even think what it must have 
been like for the poor man who had to write the thing.

As fandom goes, I'm actually pretty vanilla, but last month has been solidly 
Who-based, be it pub quizzes, fan theorising or Brian Cox scientific specials. 
We journalists started reporting this anniversary a whole 18 months ago. Things 
finally reached a peak on BBC3 on Saturday night, when the UK's other biggest 
cultural export One Direction put in a video link so awkward it will be 
repeated on BBC3's "awkward moment" compilation shows for time immemorial.

The point is, this unprecedented ancillary activity has all been based around 
what essentially is just a single episode of a long-running drama. It's been 
too easy to lose sight of that and I'm not sure any of us behaved too well.

Steven Moffat did. He was the showrunner on the day it really mattered, and on 
that day when it was impossible to get it right, he only went and got it right. 
The Day of the Doctor's greatest strength? It was, simply, a rollicking good 
Doctor Who story. Not a fanfest we'd hoped for, nor the snub fans had feared. 
Just an all-time great example of why this show is still so beloved after 50 
years.

Even if you took away all the anniversary stuff, there's a perfectly pitched 
and paced two-part Zygon invasion story in there – a relief after all the 
"movie poster" nonsense of the most recent series. Despite the bells and 
whistles, this was a showstopper just seemed happy just to be the show.

But what bells and whistles they were! As much as the grand opening stunt made 
me feel nauseous (I watched it in 3D), most of the time director Nick Hurran 
showed quite a lot of better-paid Hollywood directors that subtlety works if 
you're going to wander into the third dimension. Such grand vistas of invading 
Dalek fleets. Such feelings to go with them.

'Great men are forged in fire. It is the privilege of lesser men to light the 
flame'

So to the anniversary-ness of it all. Doing a multi-Doctor story was a 
necessary but dangerous move. Can you imagine how bad this might have been if 
Tennant and Smith had not got on? But Moffat's keen instinct that meeting 
yourself would be a nightmare, coupled with the actors' infectious chemistry, 
made it entirely plausible. Still, a beautifully done stunt is a stunt all the 
same. The real fangasm moment was to finally, if tentatively, go into 
mythology's forbidden country, the events of the Time War. The modern Doctor 
has been a haunted war survivor, and the implication of his genocide against 
two races has hung heavy. In the light of what we know now, it's hung awkwardly 
too.

You can see how this story was clearly written with Christopher Eccleston's 
Doctor in mind. I can't decide whether I would have preferred him to have 
appeared and have Nine wrestling with the genocide question, but in any event, 
Hurt was superb. So much was made about this guy being the dark one who can do 
everything in a look, but when he realised had a get-out, and he opened and 
softened and became Doctor once more, my heart leapt. As Moffat told me when I 
talked to him yesterday, he simply couldn't square the fact that this 
incredible hero would ever be capable of killing two-and-a-half billion 
children, and the war scenes depicting the gravity of that choice – a sort of 
Les Mis meets Black Hawk Down in space – were shockingly powerful. I wonder 
what Russell T Davies must think about Moffat retconning his big idea, but I'm 
a bit more reassured about my hero now I know he didn't really do it. Moffat 
had described this special as "end of part one". The show now has a macguffin: 
Gallifrey. Now we enter Doctor Who II: The Voyage Home. Or Battlestar 
Doctorica. God knows how this impacts on the events of The End of Time, mind.

'The Moment is coming'

If you can't have Rose Tyler, then a sentient nuclear warhead is a pretty good 
place to start compensating. We would all have loved to have seen Billie Piper 
and David Tennant interact again, but it would have just been wrong. Rose's 
story ended and ended well – trying to extend it would have been stupid. This 
way Billie, a true and unending legend of Doctor Who, gets to return, and her 
wise rendition of the Bad Wolf avatar made a passable stab at the stealing of 
the show. Billie's flirty-ghoul performance brought some welcome camp to the 
weighty proceedings, with her final grin as the Doctor(s) make the right choice 
melting you with emotions.

Also bringing the camp was Joanna Page as Queen Elizabeth I, taking a direct 
lead from Miranda Richardson's reading of the her in Blackadder II (a 
compliment). Jemma Redgrave fleshed out UNIT boss Kate Stewart, a formidable 
and powerful woman driven almost to the point of genocide by daddy issues. Her 
father, the late, great brigadier, was given to blowing everything up when the 
monsters got too much. But if we're talking about the Doctor's female friends, 
the revelation of The Day of the Doctor was Clara. Jenna Coleman's character 
was an underwritten enigma of a letdown first time out. Here, freed from a 
mystery and given a pivotal role in the story, she feels like a companion worth 
travelling with.

Fear factor

Hurrah for the return of the Zygons, a beautifully revived vision of tactile 
latex, and Doctor Who's most popular one-time villain. The impact they made in 
1975's Terror of the Zygons should not be understated. Moffat has declared his 
intention to bring them back again. He'd be silly not to after spending all 
that money on the outfits.

Mysteries and questions
 Who's this? It's only the next Doctor … Photograph: Universal News And Sport 
(Scotland) 
I had two big theories about what was going to happen and neither quite did. 
Adding in Hurt's non-Doctor, and based upon what Moffat has said recently, that 
the fake "hand regeneration" in The Stolen Earth bumps Smith's Doctor up to the 
Thirteenth – and according to established mythology, the last. So I was 
convinced they would address the question of renewing his life-cycles. Still, 
all of that still stands, so I'm assuming the answer must lie at Trenzalore …

I was also convinced they would feature all the living older Doctors in 
one-line cameos, thus addressing the question of how Peter Capaldi can have 
appeared twice in the Whoniverse already – the Doctor always takes faces that 
have already existed. That didn't happen. And that beautiful and suggestive 
moment from Tom Baker at the end is probably all the more powerful for leaving 
a question mark. The road to hell lies in trying to figure out where that fits 
in with canon. That sort of analysis sucks the romance from the room. I think 
the best way to think about that is not to think about it at all and just drink 
it in. Sometimes, magic just happens.

Time-space debris

• Clara is now a teacher, and at Coal Hill School in Shoreditch, the same 
place that Ian Chesterton and Barbara Wright were teaching Susan Foreman all 
those years ago. That opening sequence was no accident. Better still, Ian 
Chesterton is now chairman of the board of governers.
 Osgood … the ultimate fangirl. Photograph: BBC 
• Some of us wondered about Osgood and her Fourth Doctor scarf. We wondered if 
the Doctor had given it to the Brigadier, who passed it on to Kate, and Osgood 
ended up with it. So I asked Moffat. He reckons that she probably just saw it 
on the pictures of the Doctor in the black archive and sorted one out for 
herself. "She's a Doctor Who fangirl," Moffat told me, "We wanted to make sure 
we had one of those."

• Was that horse the same horse as Arthur, from The Girl in the Fireplace?

• How many former companions did you spot on the UNIT noticeboard?

• Kate's line about Americans rewriting history was a dig at the TV movie's 
assertion that the Doctor was half-human on his mother's side. Something we all 
now accept as him telling lies for giggles.

• Roundels!

• I particularly loved how the bickering Doctors played out all the fan 
criticism, regarding the Doctors getting younger and Ten being quite the 
stud-muffin.

• Ten and Queen Elizabeth have previous, of course, and Moffat admitted 
yesterday that he carried on that story because he found Davies's one-line gag 
so funny.

Next time!

It feels like Boxing Day for Doctor Who fans now. But how better to get over 
Boxing Day than to have another Christmas to look forward to! Yes, the Doctor 
is back in just four weeks. And knowing what will fall, that will be a silent 
night indeed …
 