
SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don't read ahead if you haven't seen episode 12 – Nightmare in Silver

Catch up with Dan Martin's episode 11 blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2013/may/04/doctor-who-hide-series-33-episode-11>

"Technically upgraded warriors. We couldn't win. Sometimes we fought to a draw 
but then they'd upgrade themselves, fix the weaknesses and destroy us. It's 
hard to fight an enemy that uses your armies as spare parts."

As has been widely publicised, there was just one brief for Neil Gaiman's 
return to Doctor Who: make the Cybermen scary again. About time. Of all the 
revived enemies since the show returned in 2005, they're the ones whose return 
has fallen most flat. They've been portrayed as clunky, easily defeated and 
almost bumbling. Their featured stories have been less than classics, and in 
the season-two finale, whichwas a classic, they were seen off good and proper 
by the Daleks, which only served to emasculate them more. In fact, they haven't 
had the same creeping menace to them since the 60s. On those terms, Nightmare 
in Silveris a triumph: the metal monsters prove an imposing presence, upgraded 
into quickfire warriors. We will get to that further below.

But it's almost impossible to look at Nightmare in Silver without considering 
Gaiman's 2011 episode,The Doctor's Wife 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/may/14/doctor-who-doctors-wife-gaiman>
, correctly hailed as one of the greatest ever. In this month's interview with 
Doctor Who Magazine, Gaiman sounded almost apologetic about his new offering, 
as if convinced the comparison was going to stifle people's enjoyment of the 
episode. It's true that Nightmare in Silver doesn't tower over all around it 
like The Doctor's Wife, but in a run that has delivered a steady stream of good 
episodes without any truly great ones, Nightmare in Silver certainly emerges 
near the top table.

As the Doctor and Clara take the children in her care, Angie and Artie, to 
Webley's World Of Wonders, the greatest theme park in the universe, they are 
surprised to find an abandoned wreck under military command. But an old evil 
lurks …

Sensibly, Gaiman doesn't try to replicate the romance of The Doctor's Wife, 
but it is shot through with a surrealist whimsy that is classic Gaiman. 
Wonderfully, the final battle takes place in a place called Natty Longshoe's 
Comical Castle (a castle with a drawbridge and a moat, but comical). All this 
makes for a slightly thematically confused tale, set against the cyber-terror. 
But the guest cast – Jason Watkins, Tamzin Outhwaite and an immeasurably 
charming Warwick Davies – are all terrific, playing the dafter material 
straight.

"Now if you don't mind, I have to finish my chess game and you have to die 
painfully and very far from home."

The Doctor is sidelined from the action once again, spending most of the story 
trying to win back his memories from the Cyberiad in a chess match. But what a 
performance from Matt Smith! Three years into a tenure, the worry can be that 
an actor will start to repeat himself, but Smith still keeps finding new places 
to go with it. He has never looked more demented as he plays out the battle 
between the two forces inside his own brain; a physical feat as much as the 
delivery of the tongue-twisty dialogue. If Smith really is bowing out soon, 
he's saving his best for last.

"I hate the future, it's rubbish! There's no phone service."

The inclusion of Angie and Artie will surely have outraged certain fans who 
don't like it when extended families tag along. But it does mix up the dynamic, 
and shows Clara in her role as a nanny, which fleshes out her character While 
plenty has worked about the new companion, the interminable mystery of who she 
has really has meant at times there's been a disconnect. The point is that we 
don't know who she is, but we still need to know her. The children come off 
just abit annoying, Angie feels too generically moody, Artie too much of an 
eager scamp from Just William ("Clara, I think outer space is actually very 
interesting!"). But if you're going to celebrate the acclaimed 
stylised-storybook writerNeil Gaiman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman> writing for Doctor Who, you 
probably shouldn't complain when he turns in something stylised and storybook.

As for Clara herself, she maybe takes to leading the military with a little 
too much ease; this is the same woman who only a few weeks ago was making a 
terrible hash of negotiating with an Ice Warrior. Also note that Clara goes 
home after each adventure. After an episode that riffs further on the 
flirtatious nature of their relationship, the arrangement looks more like a 
series of dates than a pair of flatmates. And what will River make of her next 
week?

Fear factor

Gaiman has said that a lot of the redesign of the Cybermen was down to the 
theory of "the uncanny valley 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/gamesblog/2007/aug/08/artistsclimbt>". 
Coined by robotics professor Masahiro Mori in 1970, the hypothesis goes that a 
replica which looks and acts almost – but not quite – like a human stirs a deep 
sense of unease. That bears out in the design. The heads are more in tune with 
a human face than those Cybus models. Moving the action thousands of years into 
the future allows Gaiman to create his own backstory, ignoring the Cybus 
Industries stuff from the Russell T Davies era while not doing away with it, 
allowing us to assume that these probably are descendants of the original 
versions from the planet Mondas. Either way, their tech has come on in leaps 
and bounds, upgrading people with living tech through their faces, and the 
Cybermats having evolved into insect Cybermites. That sequence where the lone 
Cyberman shoots forward was truly a heart-in-mouth moment, beautifully executed 
by director Stephen Woolfenden. If anything, this new army istoo powerful.

Mysteries and questions


Just one week to go until we learn the secret of "the impossible girl, a 
mystery wrapped in an enigma squeezed into a skirt that's just a little bit too 
tight". A lot of you below the line have been pointing to the recurrence of 
mothers and daughters in the series so far. @Johnny555 even suggested that she 
could be the offspring of the Doctor and River, Oswald meaning "god's power" 
and Clara meaning "bright". I wouldn't be so sure. Showrunner Steven Moffat 
loves to throw in red herrings; last year we spent hours spotting references to 
Christmas, eggs and flickering lights – and look where that got us. I would bet 
on the resolution being something more straightforward, that Clara simply gets 
scattered across time because she gets scattered across time …

Time-space debris


• Angie thinks the gang have landed on a moonbase, a clear nod to 1967 
cyber-story The Moonbase.

• The Timelords invented chess.

• "Do you think I'm pretty?" "No, you're too shouty and bossy, and your nose 
is all funny."

• Nice to see a cameo from all of the Doctors, if only in picture form. With 
the Big 50th coming up, is that really all we're going to see of them?

• There was a lovely story this week about how fan David Dovery bought 14,000 
novelisations and donated them to primary schools 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2013-05-03/fan-buys-14000-doctor-who-books-to-donate-to-schools>
.

Next week


Everything has been headed to Trenzalore for some time, and now we're going to 
get some answers. River and the Paternoster Gang return for the finale, The 
Name of the Doctor …
 