
SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don't read ahead if you haven't seen episode 13 – The Name of the Doctor.

Catch up with Dan Martin's episode 12 blog. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/11/doctor-who-episode-blog-nightmare-in-silver>

"The Doctor does not discuss his secrets with anyone, my dear. If you are 
still entertaining the idea that you are the exception to this rule, ask 
yourself one question: what is his name?"

There's a timey wimey element to the blog this week. Such is the secrecy 
surrounding the Doctor's greatest secret that the final scene was left off 
preview copies. So I'm writing this on Thursday, still unaware of the final 
revelations, but as you read this I'll be down there below the line, not really 
concentrating on Eurovision while I try to make sense of whatever has just 
happened. I may ecstatic or spluttering with rage. But here on Thursday, I 
could not be happier. This was not just the best episode of the season, but 
possibly the best finale we've seen.

Remarkably, it felt small scale. No explosions and precious few new sets built 
or locations visited. Here was a finale based on ideas, and the ideas were 
gigantic. The Doctor visits Trenzalore – a place first mentioned by Dorium 
Moldovar way back in The Wedding Of River Song. It turns out to be the one 
place a time traveller must never go. The Tomb of the Doctor! What a 
wonderfully fangasmic line. This suicide mission begins as a consequence of his 
greatest quality: the Doctor will do anything for his friends. But to save 
Vastra, Jenny and Strax, our hero acts recklessly. The gravity of the course of 
action is illustrated by a single tear down his cheek when a suburban 
babysitting session goes wrong. Matt Smith, again,is electrifying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/17/has-doctor-who-lost-its-way>
, as a small and thoughtful story about death changes everything.

The Name of the Doctor takes the ideas of 2008's Turn Left – what would a 
world without the Doctor look like? – and blasts them toward a terrible 
conclusion. When the vengeful Great Intelligence jumps into the Doctor's grave, 
infecting the open wound in time, his every victory is reversed. That's 50 TV 
years of saved lives and civilisations. As Vastra says, there are going to be 
consequences.

As long-running shows continue, the tendency is to move towards darkness. 
There have been a lot of plot points about the Doctor as a weapon in recent 
years, and omens of a darkening Timelord. But while the episode itself was 
painted in hues of black, in the 50th year it's quite rightly time to celebrate 
our hero. No wonder Clara felt that she had to jump …

"I blew into this world on a leaf. I don't think I'll ever land. My name is 
Clara Oswald. I'm the impossible girl. I was born to save the Doctor."

And so the mystery of Clara is finally resolved. Your demented theories as to 
her true nature have been fantastic, but I always thought it would be something 
much more simple than her being Susan or Romana or The Rani. She chases the 
Great Intelligence into the grave, fracturing herself through time and space, 
in endless copies and versions: sometimes Clara the governess, sometimes Oswin, 
usually souffle girl. The Clara we meet now is the real one, with different 
facets of her saving the Doctor in different eras. The pre-credits sequence, 
with all the Doctors, actually made me fall over.

The solution is both straightforward and mindbending. But that doesn't quite 
get over any of the question marks about what Clara is like as a person. I 
still don't feel I know her. Now this is all over with and we know Jenna is 
back for the 50th, hopefully that can change.

"This planet is the property of the Sontaran Empire! Surrender your women and 
intellectuals!"

And how great to see the Doctor's friends all together. Just a fortnight ago I 
wondered whether the Paternoster Gang were becoming a one-note gag. It felt 
like there might be only so far to go with a lesbian Silurian detective, her 
chambermaid ninja wife and a dim Sontaran butler. All that has flipped. Faced 
with real storylines, they do convincing human tragedy (some feat when two of 
them are not human). When Vastra thinks she's lost Jenny, you feel her lizard 
pain and cry along.

Meanwhile, yes! My beloved River is back. And gone is the preening camp of 
before. Shewas starting to get annoying, but her smartarsery is in check. We 
see it briefly, in the delicious moment during the psychic conference call as 
she "disgracefully" turns the tea into champagne, and the prickly moment 
between her and Clara is superb. But beyond that it's all poetry and pathos: a 
woman hopelessly in love, whose love can only ever be hopeless. This, remember, 
is River post-Library. "When one's in love with a lonely God," she once said to 
Mommy Amy, "one does one's best to hide the damage." By this point, she's given 
up trying to hide it. For the first time, their respective timelines are in 
tandem with ours, and so the Doctor breaks down too. I dread the day that Alex 
Kingston decides not to return to Doctor Who, or Steven Moffat runs out of 
things to do with her. That doesn't look likely: everything is set up for this 
avatar version of a Professor Song to return.

Fear factor

Topping off all of this, there's a fantastic new villain in the Whispermen, 
effectively blank-faced and handy with a couplet. Their slow approach gives 
another chill addition to this gothic tale, even though it's not exactly clear 
what they actually do orhow they're going to stop your heart. But no matter – 
as henchmen to Richard E Grant's camp Great Intelligence they get to join the 
top table of New Who monsters.

Mysteries and questions

Again, here on Thursday I don't know the final twists. But it seems unlikely 
Steven Moffat isreally going to reveal the Doctor's name. For a moment, I 
almost thought it was "Please", since that was his last word before the 
Whispermen retreated. I'm still wondering whether it might be "Love", and that 
will be where the word came from. Or perhaps "Geoff". Rather, I suspect this 
promised great secret that will "change the course of Doctor Who forever" might 
be the thing we discussed above: that faced with his final destiny, this 
sexless man finally realises that he loves his "wife". For philandering 
adventurers like the Doctor, that can be a big thing to admit.

Time-space debris

• A fun game is to try to work out which stories the old Doctor footage came 
from. The Seventh Doctor is clearly the inexplicable Dragonfire cliffhanger, 
while the Second Doctor is the footage from his colour return in The Five 
Doctors. How many others did you get?

• The Great Intelligence doesn't half hold a grudge; there are villains who 
have been defeated a hell of a lot more.

• The Valeyard is indeed a name the Doctor will be known as. This was the name 
of the Gallifreyan prosecutor played by Michael Jayston 1984's epic and awful 
themed season The Trial Of A Timelord. The Valeyard was the Doctor's final 
incarnation, gone evil, and turned on himself.

• "What were you expecting, a body? Bodies are boring, I've had loads of them."

• The Doctor had one day expected to retire and take up watercolours or 
beekeeping or something. Maybe Matt Smith could team up with Alex Kingston for 
a remake of The Good Life?

• Neil Gaiman revealed in an interview this week 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2013-05-15/neil-gaiman-on-re-writing-doctor-who-clara-was-originally-going-to-stay-as-a-victorian-governess>
 that the original plan for Clara was for her to have been a Victorian 
governess the whole way along. Plans for the impossible plot came along when 
he'd already written his first draft.

• Coo! Gallifrey!

Next time!

It's all about the Big 50th from here, and we've got a long wait. But before 
the November fiesta, a huge thank you to you all for making this the liveliest 
Who community on the web.

When we started this three years ago, the intention was to create a forum for 
people who wouldn't normally go on Doctor Who forums. But the fans came anyway, 
and the mix of old and new has made for explosive conversations. I read them 
all, as do Matt Smith and Steven Moffat, because they've told me they do.

If any regulars are planning to attend the official Celebration event at ExCel 
in London in November, do hit me up on Twitter. An informal, inaugural meeting 
of the Guardian Blog Society could be just what the Doctor ordered …
 