
SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don't read ahead if you haven't seen episode 10 – Journey To The Centre of the 
Tardis

Catch up with Dan Martin's episode 9 blog. 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/tv-and-radio/2013/apr/20/doctor-who-hide-series-33-episode-9>

"Don't touch a thing, the Tardis will get huffy if you mess"

First of all, that ending. Plenty of fans will have heads banging keyboards 
right now: the day was saved when a Big Friendly Button somehow rewrote time. I 
can't think of another story in Doctor Who history that makes fun of fandom so 
audaciously; things could only get more knowing if Diana Rigg's character in 
next week's episode turns out to be a ghost named Deus Ex Machina.

But wasn't it hilarious? Fans are always desperate for a glimpse of what lies 
beyond the Tardis's control room, so an episode set in her innards will always 
make us squeal.

In that sense, it's a sequel of sorts to The Doctor's Wife. Standing anything 
next to that tall poppy is a bit unfair, but even without Neil Gaiman and 
Suranne to power it, Journey holds its own. There's a little sub-genre 
developing here. Fans might remember with heavy heart The Invasion of Time from 
1975, which realised the Tardis's vast expanses as a series of drab hospital 
corridors. Designer Michael Pickwoad did an admirable job of creating infinity 
with two weeks and a TV budget. It put me in mind of The Mind Robber.

And the ship's personality is developing nicely. From her wily ways back in 
the days of The Edge of Destruction through to last week, where she was 
described as "like a cat," she is probably the most consistent character in 
Doctor Who.

The fanboy left happy. Did you?

"Don't get into a spaceship with a madman: didn't anyone teach you that?"

Journey is kind of unusual for not having a villain. However it has zombies 
and a threat in the unknown depths of the Tardis. The closest thing to an 
antagonist is Gregor Van Baalen, the unscrupulous scavenger.

With another small cast, it's a credit to the writing and acting that their 
arc makes the story feel whole. The revelation of the Van Baalens – that Tricky 
is not an android but the third brother – gives the story an emotional wallop 
behind the fangasmic nature of the premise. As has often been the case this 
year, the characters are not hugely developed, but Gregor's manipulation of his 
kid brother has real notes of human tragedy. The guest stars sell it. And after 
the Big Friendly Button does its work there's a hint in the direction of their 
redemption.

To be fair, the Doctor saw them coming: Clara was in real danger, but his 
tricking of them into thinking that the Tardis was going to explode was too 
easy.

"I think I'm more scared of you than anything else on that Tardis right now"

Clara is a funny one this week. For half of the running time she's playing 
your generic damsel in distress and is understandably useless in that situation 
– well wouldn't you be? But not long later, she's dealing with the facts of her 
own mystery remarkably calmly. Probably sheis just remarkable. There's been a 
lot of talk here and elsewhere that Clara hasn't yet become her own character. 
I would say that's unfair. Jenna-Lousie Coleman, who plays her, remains 
fantastic, and it's still early days.

Fear factor

For the third week running, the grounds on which this did best were the creepy 
ones. Director Mat King does a masterful job of giving the panicky, 
malfunctioning Tardis a real sense of menace. You're right there with Clara, 
however daft her predicaments get. And those ossified zombie monsters are 
horrific, even before we realise what they actually are. Job done.

Mysteries and questions

Frustratingly this episode advances the arc before striding right back to 
square one. Clara reads the Doctor's name in the Tardis library (what luck, 
it's on the first page she opens)and finds out about her multiple deaths, 
before the day-saving ways of the Big Friendly Button erase her memory. Still, 
we're approaching endgame and everything we look at has to be significant.

@HTPBDET came up with a great theory about a forgetful Doctor being the victim 
of companions being removed from his own past, but that was nixed by someone 
else pointing out how the comics are already doing a similar story.

On the subject of the 50th anniversary, @Branfish wondered if the existence of 
a Harvey as well as an Oswald on the asylum planet might be linked to another 
assassination that occurred in November 50 years ago. Me, I'm just wondering 
why, if nobody else survived the Timewar and the Doctor doesn't want anyone 
knowing his name, why is it mentioned in a book only he can have written?

Time-space debris

• The dialogue-echoes as Bran strips the Tardis console, date all the way back 
to Susan's speech from the very first episode, An Unearthly Child. How many 
other fragments of conversation did you spot?

• That first sequence in the Tardis is there to show off that this is the 
first set they've had that's completely 360 degrees – a shot they could never 
have done before.

• Second mention in as many weeks for the Eye of Harmony, a piece of Timelord 
engineering that manipulates black holes to fuel time travel. And this time we 
see the thing; with Gallifrey gone, it resides within the Tardis itself.

• A crack in time and an exploding Tardis both featured in Smith's debut 
series. Coincidence?

• Your suggestions as to the Doctor's real name, please …

Next week

It's the return of our favourite Victorian lesbian Siluran; and Madam Vastra 
and her Paternoster Gang lead their own investigation in Mark Gatiss's story 
The Crimson Horror.
 