
SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. Don't 
read ahead if you haven't seen episode 11 – The Crimson Horror

Catch up with Dan Martin's episode 10 blog. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/apr/27/doctor-who-journey-centre-tardis>

"Way past that now, yucky red parasite from the time of the dinosaurs pitches 
up in Victorian Yorkshire, didn't see that one coming."

There may have been trouble at mill, but it was great fun. Mark Gatiss's 
second episode of this series mashed up period drama, comedy farce, Sherlock 
Holmes and gothic horror. Some early reviewers have complained that it was 
inconsistent, but this episode was as demented and creepy as the show should 
always be.

This is natural territory for Gatiss of course, and his dialogue fizzed with 
period and regional detail ("Ooh hellfire, that's put me right off me mash"). 
Typically for him, there was also a quiet political thrust within the period 
setting, an unpleasant veneer to Victorian values (Mrs Gillyflower's rally also 
had something ofthe temperance movement 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2010/jan/12/temperance-movements-working-class-liberalism>
 about it) and a dark truth behind those idealised mill communities. "I wanted 
the adventure to feel very distinctive and it really does," the writer told 
Radio Times, "a lurid, Victorian penny-dreadful with Vastra, Jenny and Strax 
and 'orrible murder. It's very me!"

But The Crimson Horror played with form as well as genre; its always nice to 
see an episode that plays with look and feel, and the sepia flashback footage 
to the Doctor and Clara's arrival at Sweetville was beautifully done.

"The bright day is done, child, and you are for the dark."

The story also saw a first, as Diana Rigg and her daughter Rachael Stirling 
appeared on screen together, as nefarious hag Mrs Gillyflower and her put-upon 
daughter Ada.

The casting came at the suggestion of Gatiss, who, as Steven Moffat explained, 
"is not content with just writing an episode, he has to cast it as well".

Both looked like they were having a whale of a time – Rigg was superbly 
beastly to Stirling's blinded, blighted Ada, and increasingly deranged as she 
revealed the true nature of her relationship with "Mr Sweet". With the villain 
defeated, their relationship swerved. In another first, Rigg was able play in 
her native Doncaster accent, which only highlighted the mistake in allowing 
Matt and Jenna to goof it up in cod-Yorkshire accents for portions of the 
episode. Smith last did it in The Rebel Flesh, and I didn't like it then either.

"If this weak and fleshy boy is to represent us, I strongly advise the issuing 
of scissor grenades, limbo vapour and triple-blast brain splitters."

It was a welcome return for the "Paternoster Gang", lesbian Silurian Madame 
Vastra and her scissor-kicking chambermaid wife Jenny, and Strax, Sontaran 
butler offering comic relief. It was nice to see Caitrin Stewart as Jenny take 
centre stage, doing most of the actual work between the trio.

Their schtick might be starting to get a little familiar, but the gags were 
still funny and the ingenuity of their set-up still has mileage. They enrich 
the Eleventh Doctor's extended family with some style – I can't be the only 
person calling for a spin-off.

You should likely expect the trio to be back for the finale, along with River, 
a prospect that excites me greatly. But it's the final twist that really throws 
the curveball, with Clara's nanny charges, Angie and Artie, discovering her 
secret (although not herbig secret) and insisting on coming along for the ride. 
A Tardis crew bolstered by teenagers – there will doubtless be some fans who 
are less than happy about that.

Fear Factor 

This was, by and large, a funny one. But horror aficionado Gatiss slipped in 
plenty of nods to classic horror. The Doctor's creaking routine riffing on 
Frankenstein's monster being a particular highlight. How many references did 
you spot?

Mysteries and questions

The standalone nature of these "movie poster" stories this season often makes 
for a frustrating lack of progress for the soft mystery. Maybe that's to blame 
for the intense speculativediscussion on everything but what's happening in the 
episodes <http://www.thedoctorwhoforum.com/>

Once again, this was another adventure where the Doctor's ulterior motive for 
visiting the Victorian age was to throw some light on the Clara question. He 
didn't get far, merely confusing the hell out of Jenny. Could this be the 
moment she finally twigs?

But Moffat said this year's finale, on the Fields Of Trenzalore, plays out a 
longer game. He toldDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> Magazine: "There's often 
an element of throwing in some lovely names, and then figuring it out later, 
but I've always had a sort of plan for the Doctor and Trenzalore. Things will 
be resolved. Things I've left hanging in plain sight – and sometimes not in 
plain sight – will be tied up." Some closure before the 50th, then.

But … we've always assumed the fabled "Fall of the Eleventh" at Trenzalore 
<http://www.doctorwho.tv/whats-new/article/steven-moffat-teases-trenzalore-and-the-name-of-the-doctor/>
 would be his regeneration. Except we know he's not regenerating yet … so?

Time-space debris 

• "Only the best for Sweetville, I just hope my teeth don't let me down."

• Strax gets a bit peculiar if he eats sherbert fancies. With all the talk of 
Mr Sweet, and bright red people, I was almost wondering if there might be some 
link back to The Happiness Patrol. It was certainly a bizarre enough story to 
have done that.

• Why was the urchin boy Thomas Thomas using Sat Nav in 1893?

Can you believe there are only two more episodes to go?

Next week

Expectations are high for this Neil Gaiman story, The Doctor's Wife. For his 
next trick, he promises to make the Cybermen scary again with Nightmare in 
Silver.

• This article was amended on 06/05/2013. The headline was changed to 
correctly state the episode title as The Crimson Horror, rather than Journey to 
the Centre of the Tardis. It was further amended on 07/05/2013 to correct the 
spelling of Rachael Stirling's name.
 