
My phone beeps with a text message on a frantic day in clinic. It’s from a 
surgeon who wants me to call him.

“I’m in a quandary,” he says outright.

A patient has been under his care for days. She arrived at a large public 
hospital suffering from a life-threatening condition which required surgery. He 
has performed an emergency operation and the patient’s condition remains stable 
but serious, at risk of deteriorating again and of requiring repeat surgery.

Getup maps $57bn in Abbott-era health cuts hospital by hospital
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/getup-maps-57bn-in-abbott-era-health-cuts-hospital-by-hospital>
The woman needs close hospital monitoring, the kind of monitoring that would 
be routine for any postoperative patient after a major procedure. Except there 
is a problem. This woman has no fixed address, no connections she will admit 
to, barely speaks English and most importantly, has no Medicare rights.

Now, an executive had accosted him in the corridor and asked what business he 
had treating this patient.

“Why are you giving her antibiotics? Shouldn’t you be deporting her instead?”

The surgeon was taken aback, replying that the patient needed ongoing care. 
Clearly displeased, she threatened to report him to the CEO.

Taking a deep breath, I realise that the surgeon is indignant enough for us 
both and would appreciate my practical help. Such patients are fairly rare for 
any doctor to encounter let alone a highly specialised surgeon.

“It doesn’t sound like there is an ethical dilemma if the patient has pus 
oozing out of her wound,” I say.

“I agree, the patient stays put and I will fight back the executive. I guess I 
am disappointed.”

He puts his reaction mildly but his dismay is apparent. Due to the language 
barrier and the patient’s condition, it’s not immediately clear if she is an 
overseas visitor, someone who has overstayed her visa, or a refugee, entitled 
by law to compassionate treatment in Victorian public hospitals. Of course, 
doctors don’t handle deportation but he is more perturbed by her tacit 
assumption that anyone without Medicare rights must be a refugee and refugees 
must be deported. 

These details take time to establish and in any case, the hospital can later 
bill patients, although admittedly, most default. The surgeon is simply 
uncomfortable ejecting a patient who needs to be treated. Briefly, we discuss 
how he might express his disappointment to the hospital – and conclude quickly 
that it won’t matter because the person who accosted him was a part of the 
executive, and that too, a nurse.

Unsettled by his musings, I promise to do what I can. That night, I reach out 
to the physicians who have helped me look after my refugee patients. They are 
uniformly helpful and only mildly appalled, perhaps more inured than the rest 
of us to seeing such dramas play out, although even they say this level of 
executive interference is unprecedented. I can’t help feeling that I am 
enlisting the help of some secret society to assist a colleague undertake his 
duty of care.

“Where are the advocates in your hospital?” I can’t help asking.

“I wish I knew.”

No matter how we vote at the polls, inside the hospital, our vote goes to the 
patient every single time.

The surgeon hangs on to the patient but not without stress, and eventually, I 
stop needling his discomfort by asking for updates. But I can’t help laughing 
when he tells me that his hospital is sending him to a developing country to 
upskill local surgeons.

“We can help these people, just not in our hospitals,” he observes wryly. I 
can’t help thinking of the self-congratulatory images that fill our screens 
whenever a hospital undertakes such “mercy missions”.

And I keep wondering what the executive nurse was thinking when she confronted 
the surgeon. Doctors are (and should be) questioned about length of stay and 
resource utilisation. In this day of greater recognition of theharm that 
medicine can inflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/27/when-is-saving-a-life-too-much-medicine-this-is-a-lifelong-test-for-doctors>
, it is a legitimate question to ask every doctor, “Does your patient need this 
drug or this intervention?”

But doctors as an arm of Border Protection? Really? If a surgeon can be 
invoked to eschew his duty of care to a patient on the whim of an executive, 
which patient is next? The pregnant, unmarried mother? The gay man with 
syphilis? The morbidly obese woman with a heart attack? The depressed, suicidal 
adolescent?

To judge is human and medicine abounds with judgement. We judge patients from 
the time we set eyes on them. And yet, every day, we strive to recognise it and 
curb our tendency to pronounce on how our patients live and the decisions they 
make. We try to put aside our biases and treat the person at the bedside.

Dutton risked safety of asylum seeker sent to PNG for abortion, court finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/06/dutton-risked-safety-of-asylum-seeker-sent-to-png-for-abortion-court-finds>
This is why we treat smokers who have lung cancer, alcoholics with liver 
failure, the delirious pensioner and the abusive heroin addict. We suspend our 
judgement because in some corner of our heart, we know that but for some 
invisible grace, one of these patients could be us or someone we love.

And yes, we falter, but at least we are driven by the notion that amid all the 
froth and bubble of healthcare, the patient’s good is sacrosanct and no matter 
how we vote at the polls, inside the hospital, our vote goes to the patient 
every single time. Take away a doctor’s (or nurses’s) ability to separate 
politics from patients and you undermine the integrity of a healthcare system. 
It demoralises the individual and diminishes us a society. This is certainly 
not thehealthcare system the world admires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/15/the-world-regards-australias-healthcare-system-as-one-of-the-best-its-time-we-realised-why>
.

While hospitals might grumble at the seemingly unnecessary, unremunerated 
expense of treating the occasional patient without Medicare rights, a smart 
executive realises that the doctors who advocate for such patients are in 
general doctors who care about their patients as people. When paediatricians in 
Brisbane refused to release a badly burnt baby back into detention on Nauru and 
doctors and nurses in Melbourne protested about the harm done to children in 
detention, they were not seeking glory but doing what’s right. Everyone know 
that going out on a limb for a vulnerable patient is no one’s recipe for career 
advancement.

I keep thinking that the nurse who asked a doctor to deport his patient was 
just having a very bad day. Perhaps she was well-intentioned but loose-lipped? 
Or maybe she couldn’t resist an opportunity to put a surgeon in his place. 
Anything else would be too depressing to contemplate.
 