
‘No damsels in distress, no pretty castles, no such thing as Robin Hood!’

Last week, they put the Doctor into the “most dangerous place in the universe” 
– the innards of a Dalek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/30/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-two-into-the-dalek-peter-capaldi>
. This week, the Doctor meets fellow fictional hero Robin Hood. Let battle 
commence – with a spoon!

Things got incredibly meta in Robot of Sherwood, which was the fun, knockabout 
episode three in a series that’s going all out to sell itself on darkness. Here 
was a “celebrity historical” where the “celebrity” isn’t necessarily real. But 
in a universe where we have established that Santa Claus definitelyis real (his 
name is Geoff and can we meet him soon in a Christmas special, please?), how 
could Robin Hood not be?

Robin, played by Tom Riley, was more Errol Flynn than Russell Crowe. He’s 
handsome and hot, but he is also the type you might end up wanting to slap as 
soon as he has rescued you. His Merry Men are even more garish, as they 
probably should be. But if there’s a problem here, it’s that the legend of 
Robin Hood has simply too much mythology to introduce and work through in 45 
minutes. The Marian thing didn’t work for me at all. And with so much to get 
through, the Doctor himself becomes something of a bit player. His main role 
this week seemed to be bickering with Robin about who is real, while Clara 
continued to prove herself as the alpha-female he never knew he wanted in his 
life.

But there was plenty to love about Robot of Sherwood too, even beyond that 
wonderful punning headline. It was brimming with the Mark Gatiss-ey 
“Gatissness” we have come to expect – English mythology with just a whiff of 
subversion. Once again, the writing for Clara is exceptional and Jenna Coleman 
flies with it. And once again, this Doctor is still difficult to pin down and 
that’s probably the point and that’s probably a good thing. Still, it’s 
unsettling, no?

It’s an unfortunately truncated blog this week. You may have read that the 
episode was edited at the last minute to remove a beheading scene, out of 
respect for murdered US journalists James Foley and Steven Sotloff 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-29068551>. The scene in question, in which the 
Sheriff is revealed to be a robot when his head is severed, was a fairly 
crucial plot point in the original version. But the last-minute nature of the 
change meant that the new edit was not ready for previews in time to meet our 
production deadlines. It also meant that I only got to do my “fan watch” a few 
days ago, and not my “work watch” with a notepad. I’ll be in the comments after 
broadcast on Saturday night to discuss further.

Fear factor

It’s difficult to comment at this stage, with the big fright scene apparently 
deleted.

Mysteries and questions

@FredDibnah last week picked up on the fact that both Half Face Man and 
Gretchen found themselves at Missy’s tea party in heaven after sacrificing 
themselves. Which, if this is the point, would exonerate the Doctor from having 
done the pushing himself two weeks ago. So we can safely assume that there’s an 
ongoing theme of redemption this year, which would make sense of the Doctor’s 
heavy weather over his own morality.


No Michelle Gomez this week, but the Sherriff’s ship was on its way to find 
this Promised Land as well, so what could be going on here?

Time-space debris

• “I don’t need a sword. Because I am the Doctor. And this is my spoon.”


• Yes, this Doctor really does love a chalkboard.


• Was this the first mention of Clara hailing from Blackpool – the homeland of 
Coleman herself?

Next week!

It’s Clara and Danny’s first date, but the Doctor needs her for a “thing”. 
What could possibly go wrong? Spoiler warning: this one is very, very, very, 
very good.
 