
We’ll start with the Mysteries segment this week, because …

It’s probable that, like the rest of you, I have fallen off my chair – and not 
just because of X Factor’s Fright Night. The preview edit of this episode made 
available to reviewers had crucial scenes withheld – but not so withheld that 
we didn’t have an idea what was going on, as Missy told the Doctor who she 
really was. This was after the heavily teased clip in which she purrs “you know 
who I am”, and all the heavy weather made of the #WhoIsMissy hashtag. So, it’s 
surely going to be something big. I’ll have to go back on my assertions that 
Missy was definitely a new character and put it out – actually, no, she’s 
probably the Master after all, isn’t she? The name gave it away from the 
beginning.

Before Capaldi was announced, there was more heat than ever about casting a 
female actor as the Doctor. A couple of years back, Moffat even took the 
unusual step of appeasing such demands by rewriting the show’s mythology and 
establishing (in 2011’s The Doctor’s Wife) that Timelords/ladies can indeed 
switch gender. But if a female Doctor isn’t imminent, wouldn’t a female Master 
be a fun place to start mixing things up?

Missy, the Gatekeeper of the Nethersphere, has been watching over the dead in 
her holding pen for some time, apparently to harvest a new army of Cybermen, 
and clearly has some kind of deep-rooted link to the Doctor, as well as access 
to Gallifreyan technology. It all sounds rather Master-y, doesn’t it? And her 
colour scheme fits. The preening, coquettish Michelle Gomez owns the screen 
completely, and, if itis the case, she’s already the second best Master (after 
Roger Delgado).
 Fans get up close and personal with a frankly uninterested Cyberman. 
Photograph: Jack Barnes/BBC 
Except that … back at the BFI launch, Steven Moffat was asked – and by a child 
– if he had any plans to bring the Master back, and he said no chance, because 
the character was done with and, according to Moffat, had pretty much been done 
with since the days of Delgado. Yet, we all know rule one: Moffat lies.

We’re here to get your boyfriend back from the dead. So back up and give me 
some attitude

Meanwhile, this is awkward. After all this horrible things I said about Danny 
Pink last week, here he is, snuffing it before the opening credits. And, as 
suspected, part of his attitude comes from the bleak revelation that he killed 
a civilian child in the line of duty. There are not a lot of laughs here, are 
there, readers? For a show so steeped in death,Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> very rarely tackles the 
consequences of grief. Clara’s ordeal enables another incredible Jenna Coleman 
performance to sit alongside the rest she’s racked up this year. Yet, the way 
Clara deals with it underlines once more how much she has changed. Her biggest 
complaint about Danny’s passing is how boring it was, how ordinary. That’s 
understandable: a death like thatis cruel and pointless. But, for a woman who 
has seen so much sacrifice and heroism, she feels cheated. What does a Tardis 
life turn you into? And what does a bereavement like this bring out in you? Not 
necessarily something good, and certainly not the best.

Do you think I care for you so little that betraying me would make a 
difference?

With so much going on in every corner of the story, this episode once again 
runs the risk of becoming one in which the Doctor is something of a side part 
in his own show. There’s nothing wrong with that in itself; this year’s reboot 
of sorts has restored the show to its 2005 Ecclestone formula where the Doctor 
is an uncertain alien who arrives in an already established world that he 
doesn’t quite comprehend. It’s the true measure of Capaldi to see how much of 
his character is sold when he isn’t talking nine to the dozen, when he isn’t
doing as much. But as Clara turning to an apparent “dark side” gets shoved 
aside by her bereavement, so does his softening continue. Clara’s betrayal – 
the betrayal that she thinks she’s making while in the dream state – shocks 
them both. In her mind, she’s thrown all the Tardis keys into an active volcano 
and left them stranded. Mad with grief, she says she’d do it again. And yet 
while this Doctor might not completely understand these human impulses, it 
doesn’t even touch the sides of his loyalty towards her. Of course, they’re 
going to break every known law of time and go and try to rescue Danny.
 The Doctor with the not-so-mysterious Missy. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
Fear factor


Unless something goes badly wrong next week, it looks as if Moffat has pulled 
off something that has evaded Doctor Who since the 2005 revival: a decent 
Cybermen episode, with an actual plot that holds water, even if it’s still 
coming together. The blank-eyed cyphers, their arrival looming throughout the 
episode, are back to something approaching the menace of their 1960s heyday. 
And so, quite deliberately, the episode comes embellished with throwbacks to 
the Troughton-era greatest hits. The widely publicised picture sequence of them 
descending the steps of St Paul’s is a direct reference to 1968 story The 
Invasion, in which they did the very same. And the catacombs, with the dark 
water masking the skeletons’ true nature, recalls 1968 classic The Tomb of the 
Cybermen. But what’s with the tear-duct iconography of the decor at the 3H HQ?

Time-space debris

• 3W = three words: “Don’t cremate me!” Blimey, that’s dark.

• Excellent creepery from Doctor Chang, a toilet weirdo who pervs on people in 
swimming pools and has so much internalised anger that he turns psychic paper 
blue.


• A welcome return from Sheila Reid as Clara’s lovely gran.


• The Doctor keeps a copy of Audrey Niffenegger’s The Time Traveler’s Wife. I 
wonder if he’s noticed his life recently played out that book’s plot, in the 
form of the River Song saga.


• So it looks like the Master has just snogged the Doctor. And away with the 
fanfic ...


• “Sorry everyone, another ranting Scotsman in the street, I had no idea there 
was a match on!”


Next week!

It’s all to play for. I have absolutely no idea where we’re going to taken 
with the series finale, Death in Heaven. But you’ll need to bring some tissues 
– probably.
 