
"And now it's time for one last now, like all your other selves. Eleven's hour 
is over now, the clock is striking Twelve's."

They told us so many times what an exciting time this was going to be for a 
Doctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> fan, and 
because they starved us for so long, we refused to believe them. But these past 
two months amounted to what can reasonably claim to be Doctor Who's biggest 
year. This end of days even gave us a fleeting return of Amy Pond. Yes, the 
Time of The Doctor was awfully good.

Steven Moffat chose the audacious route, as it was widely rumoured that he 
would. He performed the fourth remix of the show's mythology in a row, tying up 
strands that date back to the beginning of Matt Smith's run. The mystery of 
Trenzalore was quickly whipped up then resolved as an innocent-enough planet on 
which the Doctor took pity. The religious order of the Silence was founded, and 
Silence fell. We even found out why the Tardis exploded all those years ago in 
series five.

Normally I get to see the episode once socially and then go over it again with 
very detailed notes. The security surrounding such a big episode meant only 
seeing it once, with gasps and feelings instead of notes, so the depth of 
theory won't be as great this time, for fear of getting such big events wrong. 
I'll come back to the comments on Christmas night for that.

But simply, in the end, the Doctor simply aged to death. Knowing his time was 
up, having used all his regenerations, he chose not to even try to save 
himself, instead standing guard over the town called Christmas, on that fabled 
planet of Trenzalore, always, to the end, the better man. Perfectly, the 
rebooting of his regeneration cycle was done simply, falling to Clara dealing 
with those other hanging plot threads, of the crack in time and the whole 
MacGuffin of the Timelords being back. Who predicted we would revisit that so 
quickly? Who could have guessed the Doctor's renewed regeneration cycle would 
be dealt with as simply as his best friend just asking nicely?

And with all this going on, it was perhaps the most Christmassy Christmas 
special they've ever pulled off. I'm sure Doctor Who has thrilled me more in 
the past. It's certainly blindsided me more. And it may well have made me cry 
more, although it feels difficult to imagine such a moment right now. But I'm 
certain it's never managed to do all three so successfully at once. Merry 
Christmas. I hope we can all be there for each other at this difficult time.

"This is my boyfriend, the Doctor."

Meanwhile, Clara came back into her own as quickly as she lost her way in her 
first Impossible Girl arc. Back as a normal person and freed from a mystery, 
she's getting the roots that I suspected they were holding back. And her gran 
looks a hoot. But now it's established that yes, she does look at him with 
lust, it's going to be quite a shock to her that her fancy alien friend has 
turned into … this guy.

"Have you any idea how to fly this thing?"

Fan chat in the run-up to the episode involved whether Capaldi might appear 
earlier, have a longer entrance, or even have a go at saving the universe 
himself. That didn't happen, and it would have been wrong if it had happened. 
The new (twelfth? First?) Doctor's arrival was quick and explosive. We didn't 
even get a changing-faces scene, which felt like an appropriate tease. But dear 
lord, he certainly looks like he's going to be angry. Should we wonder whether 
this new First Doctor is going to be based on the other First Doctor? Or are 
they doing a new, and hopefully better, version of the Sixth Doctor's violent, 
unstable regeneration?

Fear factor

In the end, it wasn't the 50th anniversary episode that provided the Greatest 
Hits of monsters that Moffat had been denying would ever happen. Daleks, 
Cybermen, Weeping Angels and Silents all popped up (well, we knew that from the 
trailer) and despite this, the episode was not so crowded as to detract from 
this being the Doctor's story.

The Weeping Angels can now also hide in the snow and grab at your ankles. Good 
skills, Weeping Angels.

Mysteries and questions

For once, I feel little need to even have this subsection. We've found almost 
everything out! One does wonder quite how the Doctor got all those lives back, 
but on this special occasion I'm prepared to put that down as one of those 
questions you're just not supposed to ask.

Time-space debris

• The only unfortunate thing about Karen's wonderful cameo? How obvious it was 
that she was wearing a wig.

• Tasha Lem is now possibly my new favourite incidental character.

• I am still not sure what any of this means regarding the events of The End 
of Time.

• Is this going to be the last we see of the crack in Amy's wall?

• Another shout out to Caitlin Blackwood, once again a true hero of Doctor Who.

Next time!

Well that is a very long time away. Merry Christmas everyone.
 