
SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don't read ahead if you haven't seen episode five – The Angels Take Manhattan

Dan Martin's episode four blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/sep/22/doctor-who-power-of-three>

'This is not any old future Amy, it's ours. Once we know what's coming, it's 
written in stone …'

Those who complain that in Doctor Who love always saves the day, please hang 
your heads in shame. Love just ruined everything! The Doctor will never see the 
Ponds again, and neither will we. Amy and Rory's bond was always going to win 
through – it has done for many months – but it has never been played better 
than this. From the Doctor's point of view, however, it tore everything else 
apart.

Amy and Rory left the only way they really could. The Weeping Angels felt like 
they were created for this very scene: Amy and Rory zapped back in time to live 
out their long, happy lives without the Doctor. Since the Tardis crashlanded 
into her back garden, Amy's story had been one about growing up. At the start, 
she chose a life of adventure with her Raggedy Man over the prospect of 
normality with Rory. But now, faced with that decision again, there was no 
contest.

This was a fitting end to a golden era, and bravo to Steven Moffat for telling 
such an involving, emotional story with such style. That last scene, as the 
Doctor darted through the streets of New York – grabbing at the final page as 
it flapped in the wind, speeding toward the ending he'd refused to accept was 
coming! Here ended Doctor Who's ultimate fairytale in the way it had begun – in 
the pages of a storybook.

'When one's in love with an ageless god who doesn't age, one does one's best 
to hide the damage'

River returned, free from the shackles of last year's big mystery and able to 
wreak havoc as she does best. Yet it's proper that the story didn't shy away 
from the tragedy of her unconventional marriage. And it's nice to know that she 
can still return.

But I'm now rather flummoxed by where we're supposed to be in River's 
timeline. She has long since been pardoned (the man she killed "never 
existed"), so we should be further along in her timeline – probably somewhere 
between The Time of Angels and Silence in the Library. But inour timeline, this 
is after the events of Demon's Run and she is already "married". Should she not 
be getting younger? Surely, from her perspective, the astronaut shooting hasn't 
happened yet? Have we done away with the reverse-timeline thing? Or, as we 
shall get to – is there all together more going on here?

Fear factor

It's a marvellous play to put the Angels in New York, feeding on time energy 
off the city that never sleeps. But it also gives a new sphere to their terror; 
a new time and place. The gangster stylings play nicely against their very 
gothic horror, andof course the Statue of Liberty is the mightiest Angel of 
all. Fear that they would become less effective with each appearance seems 
unfounded – this was easily this year's scariest episode.

As for those cherubs … There's nothing worse than an evil baby. Not since the 
dancing babies of Ally McBeal have I been more freaked out by a child .

Mysteries and questions

We've spent the last month coming up with endless theories about flickering 
light bulbs and eggs and Christmas. In the end, none of it factored at all – or 
not yet, at least. But one theory that is still a goer is the that these 
adventures have happened in an order that's different from the one we're 
watching them in.

River's confused timeline would support that, as would the references to the 
phone charger in Henry VIII's en suite. And the Doctor's tortured manner for 
much of this year. When he told Amy last week that he'd known for a while they 
would stop one day (and youcould definitely read Amy's sacrifice as a decision 
to stop), is that because this adventure happened before a lot of those other 
episodes? That maybe, sick with grief, the Doctor's done something reckless 
with time and gone back to see them? Could it be his fault that new companion 
Jenna Louise-Coleman appears to be fractured across space and time.

I may be reading far too much into events, but there's still one thing I don't 
understand. The timelines are so scrambled that the Tardis can never go back to 
New York, meaning Amy and Rory are trapped. But couldn't they just travel to 
Washington or Boston and see him again that way?

Time-space debris

• Some nice New York references scattered throughout here. Voiceover guy Mr 
Garner tells Mr Grayle that for $25 a day, plus expenses, he'll believe 
anything you say. That's an echo of Winston in Ghostbusters. And Amy's round 
glasses are surely a nod to Diane Keaton's in Annie Hall.

• The New York shoot was the final proof that Doctor Who is now officially a 
Big Deal in America. There were 1,000 onlookers watching in admiration, and 
mobbing the cast.

• Did you recognise Mike McShane <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mike_McShane> 
from 1990s late-night improv show Whose Line Is It Anyway?

• "My lipstick was primed and ready, and I was packing cleavage that would 
fell an ox at 20ft." Would the Doctor not have known that this was River 
talking?

• Think I could've done without Englishman in New York. Bloody Sting.

• "You think you'll just come back to life?" "When don't I?!" Good to see 
they're remembering how many times they've killed Rory off."

• Hopefully the events of this episode mean Daleks in Manhattan never happened 
too.

Next week!

Nothing. Nothing until December. We'll just have to watch The X Factor live 
shows. See you all at Christmas!
 