
9.16pm GMT 

Thank you so much for joining us both for this live blog. I hope the episode 
moved you as much as it moved me. Here’s to the next 50 years!

9.15pm GMT 

Sue: I need to watch it again. It’s a lot to take in. I’m not sure I really 
“get it”. But I loved the way they got out of blowing up Gallifrey. I never 
liked that. The Doctor shouldn’t blow up planets.

I don’t care if it made sense or not. Tom Baker was in it!

Sue: Stop crying and pull yourself together, man!

I think the last few minutes affected me quite deeply. I’ve waited over 40 
years to see that. The rest of it didn’t make a lot of sense on first viewing, 
but I don’t care - I'll be watching it again this evening. 

9.08pm GMT 

Well, that was mad. It was definitely better than Dimensions in Time in 1993, 
that’s for sure! TOM BLOODY BAKER!

9.07pm GMT 

WOW. That was amazing.

Sue: Christmas can’t come soon enough. I can’t wait to see Peter Capaldi.

9.06pm GMT 

Sue loves to hear trumpets, drums and electric guitar in the theme tune. She's 
playing air guitar right now. Amazingly, I still love her.

9.05pm GMT 

That last image is so going to be the wallpaper for my computer.

9.05pm GMT 

All 12 Doctors on screen at once!

DOUBLE SQUEE! 

9.04pm GMT 

So does this mean the next series takes place in a series of art galleries?

Sue: Or car boot sales?

9.04pm GMT 

Sue: Tom’s still got it.

9.03pm GMT 

Tom is back and I am seven years old again…

9.02pm GMT 

TOM BLOODY BAKER!

9.02pm GMT 

OH MY GOD!

Sue: Neil has fainted again.

9.00pm GMT 

HA! Cheated out of seeing the moment. Sorry, Christopher Eccleston fans.

9.00pm GMT 

SQUEE!

Updated at 9.01pm GMT

8.59pm GMT 

Sue: So what does not blowing up Gallifrey do to Doctor Who’s history? I’m 
confused.

Don’t look at me! I haven’t got a clue!

8.57pm GMT 

Sue: I bet that looked great in 3D!

8.57pm GMT 

Sue: I think Neil just fainted. Neil! NEIL! WAKE UP! I'm not live blogging 
this on my own.

8.57pm GMT 

HERE THEY ARE!

That was Peter Capaldi!

8.56pm GMT 

Sue: Why are the Time Lords complaing about being trapped in a painting? It’s 
better than being blown up, you idiots!

8.55pm GMT 

Either Tom Baker was lying last week or this is his last chance to turn up and 
save the day.

8.55pm GMT 

If there are any cameos yet to come, they have to come in the next five 
minutes.

8.55pm GMT 

Sue: Putting Gallifrey into a painting to save it is very clever.

8.52pm GMT 

Sue: The episode is redeeming itself with this lovely moment of indecision, 
here.

8.51pm GMT 

Sue: There are a lot of kids on Gallifrey.

They are called Time Tots.

Sue: Don’t be stupid.

I’m not kidding!

8.50pm GMT 

The Doctors decide to do the deadly deed together. I think I may have 
something in my eye.

8.48pm GMT 

Sue: You don’t see two TARDISes together every day of the week. Or is it TARDI?

8.48pm GMT 

Sue: So is he called the War Doctor?

Yes.

Sue: I think sounds a bit Geordie to me. "I'm going to see War Doctor, pet."

8.46pm GMT 

John Hurt’s Doctor hasn’t actually done the deed yet. Sue is extremely 
impressed by this twist.

8.44pm GMT 

There's a little bit of disappointment in the comments:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11578336> ghostwhistler  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11578336> 23 November 2013 
8:39pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29158196> 
This...is underwhelming.

I was expecting Davros, Omega, Time War madness.

Zygons are cool and everything, but this...

8.43pm GMT 

Three Doctors fighting Daleks!

It doesn’t get any better than this, quite frankly.

8.42pm GMT 

Sue: All these references to Cup-a-Soup. I could murder a Cup-a-Soup.

8.41pm GMT 

Those photos on the wall of the old companions just made me squee.

Sue: What does squee mean?

I’ll explain later.

8.40pm GMT 

A few commenters are saying that not a lot is happening at the moment.

Sue: There’s a nuclear warhead about to go off. What more do they want?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10175536> theok89  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10175536> 23 November 2013 
8:33pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29158062> 
there's 30 minutes left for them to do something fantastic, because nothing 
has happened yet.

8.38pm GMT 

Sue: I love Tennant’s TARDIS.

It looks like something you’d find at the bottom of a goldfish bowl.

8.38pm GMT 

Finally! The Doctor and Queen Elizabeth are married. Fans can sleep well 
tonight.

8.37pm GMT 

The Doctor doesn’t believe that Elizabeth is who she says she is.

Sue: Are you sure it’s not just because Elizabeth is a bad kisser?

8.35pm GMT 

Sue: Do you know what’s going on at the moment?

Me: Not really.

Sue: Same as usual, then.

8.33pm GMT 

I am ashamed to admit that Sue just guessed that using the sonics together 
like this would get them out of this mess. Or at least they would have if Clara 
hadn’t just opened the door.

8.31pm GMT 

The Doctor can’t remember things after 400 years. Sue can’t remember things 
after 400 seconds.

8.30pm GMT 

A popular fan theory is that the Time Lords fired the first shot in the Time 
War when they sent Tom Baker back in time to wipe them out before the Daleks 
could be created. The swines! It's all their fault, you know.

8.29pm GMT 

Sue: If this has already happened to the Doctor in the past, why can't he 
remember how he saved the day?

Me: It doesn't work like that.

Sue: Why not?

Me: I don't know.

8.27pm GMT 

We are now in UNIT’s Black Archive. Fans - prepare to Squee!

8.26pm GMT 

Fascinating Fact: the Zygons and the Daleks are the only Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> monsters who have 
appeared in softcore pornography. Allegedly.

8.25pm GMT 

ZYGONS!

LOADS OF ZYGONS!

8.25pm GMT 

Sue: I bet those statues are Weeping Angels.

Don’t get your hopes up.

8.23pm GMT 

"It's a timey-wimey thing"

Timey-wimey basically means “we don’t know how to explain it”.

8.21pm GMT 

Sue: I can’t help but feel that this should have been Christopher Eccleston is 
this scene…

8.20pm GMT 

“Reversing the polarity” is the Doctor’s most famous and least-used 
catchphrase.

8.20pm GMT 

I think it's safe to say that this is the real tenth Doctor and not the sex 
toy version given to Rose.

Sue: Every version of the tenth Doctor is a sex toy version, Neil.

8.19pm GMT 

The Doctor snogging the face off Queen Elizabeth just proves to her that the 
Doctor must be half-human.

8.17pm GMT 

Sue: Matt’s sonic is so much better. Nice action. I love this.

8.17pm GMT 

Doctors should never meet themselves - it breaks the First Law of Time. 
Therefore, it only ever happens during times of grave danger and anniversary 
celebrations.

8.17pm GMT 

INCREDIBLY EXCITING MOMENT!

TWO DOCTORS MEET! 

8.15pm GMT 

The second Doctor was the first Doctor who was obsessed with hats. He even had 
a catchphrase: "I'd like a hat like that!"

Sue: Troughton's taste in hats make that fez look positively understated.

8.15pm GMT 

That woman really should have some celery in her lapel. What an amateur.

8.13pm GMT 

Sue wants the Doctor to take that bunny with him as his next companion.

8.12pm GMT 

The Zygons were invented by the writer Robert Banks Stewart - the same man who 
invented Shoestring and Bergerac. Zygons don't do any detective work in their 
spare time, as far as I know.

8.11pm GMT 

It's the Zygons!

Not seen in Doctor Who since 1975. To be honest, I think I prefer the old 
design. This one looks like he's been to the gym.

Sue: What a shame. They should let Zygons be Zygons.

8.10pm GMT 

Sue is now drooling at the sight of her third husband, David Tennant.

8.09pm GMT 

The 10th Doctor and Good Queen Bess have an out-of-sync relationship (much 
like the 11th and River Song). I did have a Venn diagram that explained it all 
but I accidentally left it on the train.

8.08pm GMT 

At least one mystery will be solved tonight: When exactly did the Doctor bonk 
the Virgin Queen?

Sue: And is it on the Red Button later?

8.07pm GMT 

Sue’s theory: when John Hurt’s Doctor dies, his regenerations will reboot back 
to Number One. What do we think? 

8.06pm GMT 

Of course, this begs the question: why didn't the Doctor renounce his name the 
three times he tried to commit genocide before?

8.05pm GMT 

This clearly can’t be Rose. So who is it?

8.04pm GMT 

Sue: Is Rose in a Temporal Orbit?

Stop pretending that you know what a Temporal Orbit is, Sue.

8.03pm GMT 

This is Sue’s idea of heaven. Just look at the woodwork!

8.02pm GMT 

Sue: I'm really excited to see John Hurt as the Doctor.

Neil: Yes, even though you were convinced that Paul McGann regenerated into 
Martin Freeman last week…

8.01pm GMT 

This is at least the second Time War the Time Lords have been involved in. The 
first took place in the pages of Doctor Who Magazine in a comic strip written 
by Alan Moore. He knew the score.

8.00pm GMT 

Two Doctor Who stories are now happening simultaneously. While John Hurt's 
Doctor prepares to use the Moment, Timothy Dalton is ranting and raving through 
David Tennant's final story, The End of Time. You could probably edit those 
scenes together. Check YouTube later because somebody probably will.

7.59pm GMT 

Sue: I bet that looked good in 3D!

Please stop saying that, Sue!

7.58pm GMT 

Arcadia - not only is it supposed to be the safest place on Gallifrey, it's 
also the band Duran Duran could have been.

7.57pm GMT 

Finally! The Time War! In 3D! Interestingly, the Time War was created by 
Russell T Davies to remove excess baggage from Doctor's Who's continuity. 
Ironically, today, the Time War is that excess baggage.

Sue: I bet this looks great in 3D.

7.57pm GMT 

Sue: There are far worst Doctors to be ashamed of. Jon Pertwee, for example.

7.56pm GMT 

I've only noticed recently that Clara has very strange eyebrows. I can't take 
my eyes off them.

Sue: Pull the other one, Neil. You're not looking at her eyebrows.

7.54pm GMT 

That’s the Brigadier’s daughter with the blonde hair. The other woman appears 
to be a Doctor Who fan. If this woman was really such a big fan of the Doctor, 
she'd be wearing the much more difficult to pull off question-mark jumper.

7.52pm GMT 

Sue just amazed me by recognising UNIT's call sign. There’s hope for her yet.

Updated at 7.53pm GMT

7.52pm GMT 

The motorcycle into the TARDIS - a lovely nod to the 1996 TV movie, there.

7.51pm GMT 

Clara is in Coal Hill School - the location of the very first episode. How mad 
is that?

7.50pm GMT 

They appear to be playing the wrong episode…

7.50pm GMT 

It’s started! Happy Birthday, Doctor Who!

Updated at 7.50pm GMT

7.45pm GMT 

I honestly haven’t been this excited since 1983.

Sue: I just want to say that you never get this excited when it's our 
anniversary, Neil.

7.42pm GMT 

Guardian writer and Doctor Who fan Sam Wolfson is at a London cinema for a 
live 3D screening of the episode. Lots of enthusiasts have dressed up for the 
occasion, including this pair. 
 Doctor Who fans dress up for The Day of the Doctor screening. Photograph: 
/Sam Wolfson 
7.01pm GMT 

Hello, I'm Neil Perryman and I'll be live blogging Doctor Who's 50th 
anniversary special, The Day of the Doctor. Instead of watching it in a cinema 
- in 3D - with a big tub of popcorn. You know, like every other Doctor Who fan 
on the planet.

I'm joined tonight by my wife, Sue, who recently agreed to sit through every 
episode of Doctor Who with me - even the ones that didn't exist - for a blog 
and book project calledAdventures with the Wife in Space 
<http://wifeinspace.com/>. Amazingly, we are still married to each other.

As a recent convert to the programme, Sue is here to lust after David Tennant 
and be confused by all the timey-wimey stuff, while I hope to point out some of 
episode's kisses to the series' past in my capacity as a fully paid-up fanboy. 
That's if I'm not freaking out over some game-changing revelation that I never 
saw coming, of course.

So join us tonight from 7.30pm GMT when we hope to answer the following 
questions:

Will we meet the Skaro Degradations? Will the Could-Have-Been King and His 
Army of Meanwhiles and Never-Weres turn up? Is David Tennant playing the tenth 
Doctor, or is he just the sex toy given to Rose during Journey's End? Has Tom 
Baker been pulling our legs all week? And if John Hurt is really the Doctor, 
what does that do to the numbering system of our DVD collections? Actually, 
that doesn't bear thinking about…

Updated at 7.20pm GMT
 