
On the anniversary of its decisions striking down laws banning “sodomy” and a 
key provision of the Defense of Marriage Act that prevented legally-married 
same-sex couples from obtaining federal recognition, the Supreme Court on 
Friday declared a full national right to same-sex marriage.

The court’s decision was 5-4, with Justice Anthony Kennedy writing the 
decision and joined by the court’s four Democratic nominees. But though the 
conservative dissents will garner the most attention from critics, it’s 
actually the majority opinion that may cause LGBT rights advocates the most 
headaches in the years to come.

'We did it, babe!' – love won the day on the same-sex marriage decision | 
Steven W Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/26/gay-marriage-lgbt-rights-equality-fight>
While Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Antonin Scalia, Samuel Alito and 
Clarence Thomas are wrong about same-sex marriage, they weren’t wrong about 
Kennedy’s majority opinion, which leaves a lot to be desired. All of Kennedy’s 
same-sex marriage opinions have all contained passages whose legal reach 
exceeds their rhetorical grasp, and even people sympathetic to Kennedy’s 
conclusions will wince in recognition when reading Scalia’s snarky lines about 
Kennedy’s “straining-to-be-memorable passages” and “inspirational 
pop-philosophy.”

Much worse than its aesthetic problems, however, is where Kennedy leaves equal 
protection law as it pertains to LGBT rights more generally. As with Kennedy’s 
Doma opinion – about whichI wrote that 
<http://prospect.org/article/four-lessons-learned-years-stuffed-supreme-court-docket>
 he “flirt[ed] awkwardly with federalism, due process and equal protection 
rationales without ever quite summoning up the courage to invite one to the 
prom” – he maddeningly continued in this opinion to vaguely invoke both equal 
protection and due process theories without clarifying the applicable standard 
when it comes to LGBT rights more generally. “Each concept – liberty and equal 
protection – leads to a stronger understanding of the other,” asserted Kennedy.

The problem with Kennedy’s judicial vagueness is that public officials and 
lower courts need to know whether classifications based on sexual orientation 
should be subject to heightened scrutiny, like those based on race or gender, or
whether such classifications require only a “rational basis” 
<http://prospect.org/article/stronger-argument-against-doma>, like economic 
regulation. If heightened scrutiny applies, states can only use sexual 
orientation classifications in law if it they are closely related to a 
compelling state interest – a test states usually fail. If states need only a 
“rational basis,” courts are generally very deferential to the state. After 
Friday’s opinion, it seems obvious that heightened scrutiny is being applied in 
practice, but Kennedy inexplicably refuses to say so. The refusal to define 
sexual orientation as subject to heightened scrutiny will lead to unnecessary 
confusion, and possibly permit federal and state judges to deny LBGT rights 
claims that even Kennedy might think should be upheld.

By not being more specific about his rationale for forcing all states to 
recognize and perform same-sex marriages, Kennedy leaves open the legal 
possibility that marriage is the only form of discrimination against same-sex 
people that is covered by the 14th Amendment. But LGBT people face many other 
types of discrimination – in public accommodations and in employment, for 
example – that now may have to be fought out case by never-ending case in the 
lower courts.

Still, the dissenting opinions are at least as interesting than Kennedy’s 
majority, because they reveal how much American attitudes towards LGBT people 
have changed over the years.


For instance, for the first time, the dissents hold substantive opposition to 
same-sex marriage rights at arm’s length: Roberts’s opinion (joined in full by 
Scalia and Thomas) began by arguing that proponents of the right to same-sex 
marriage “make strong arguments rooted in social policy and considerations of 
fairness” and concluded by saying that “If you are among the many Americans – 
of whatever sexual orientation – who favor expanding same-sex marriage, by all 
means celebrate today’s decision.” Justice Scalia’s dissent observed that “The 
substance of today’s decree is not of immense personal importance to me.” Only 
Alito refused to distance himself from the policy (and personal) consequences 
of his legal conclusions.

But that even Scalia felt a need to express a marginally-tolerant view of LGBT 
people helps to explain why the court recognized a right to same-sex marriage. 
Contrast the dissents to the majority opinion in the 1986 sodomy-ban case 
Bowers v Hardwick, when the court declared that the idea of a right to engage 
in consensual same-sex intimacy “facetious”, and Chief Justice Burger’s 
concurrence asserted that “To hold that the act of homosexual sodomy is somehow 
protected as a fundamental right would be to cast aside millennia of moral 
teaching.” In Romer v Evans, Scalia himself compared laws that discriminated 
against LGBT people to laws against “murder … or cruelty to animals” and 
asserted that the state could express “animus” towards their conduct; in 
Lawrence v Texas he railed against “the so-called homosexual agenda.”

Scalia’s dissent on Friday was markedly more muted: space he would have once 
taken up complaining about the pernicious effects of LGBT people on American 
political culture was spent instead trying out material in case the 
now-shuttered nightclubs in the Catskills reopen and need a “take my wife, 
please” comedy act: “one would think Freedom of Intimacy is abridged rather 
than expanded by marriage. Ask the nearest hippie” he wrote, followed by 
“[marriage] constricts, rather than expands, what one can prudently say.”

Rather than making policy arguments or railing against LGBT people, Roberts 
and Scalia focused on judicial restraint. “Do not celebrate the Constitution,” 
said Justice Roberts, “[i]t had nothing to do with” Friday’s outcome. “This is 
a naked judicial claim to legislative – indeed, super-legislative – power; a 
claim fundamentally at odds with our system of government,” averred Scalia.

Their arguments about judicial discretion are highly unconvincing: as long as 
there is judicial review, judges will have the discretion to make judgments 
about the meaning of broadly worded constitutional clauses in ways that have 
important policy consequences. And the pleas for judicial modesty are 
particularly hard to take coming from today’s dissenters, all of whom just two 
years ago put their names to an opinion gutting the Voting Rights Act based ona 
judicially invented theory of states’ rights 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2013/07/the-hidden-antebellum-roots-of-shelby-county>
 last seen in a 1857 opinion in which Chief Justice Roger Taney found that 
Congress could not ban slavery in its territories and African Americans could 
never be American citizens.

But while today’s opinion would have almost certainly been much better had 
Kennedy assigned it to Ruth Bader Ginsburg rather than keeping it for himself 
(as is his prerogative as the senior justice in the majority), it still gets to 
the right conclusion. As frustrating as his opinion might end up being for LGBT 
more generally, on Friday, Kennedy was still the swing vote in the Brown v 
Board decision of LGBT rights. Today, his recognition of one of the fundamental 
rights of same-sex couples in all 50 states is what matters most; if they have 
to come back to him for the others, at least it’s clear to lawyers where he’ll 
likely stand.
 