
Last week’s autumn statement overshadowed two other significant political 
events. One was the announcement byGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> that he was stepping down 
as an MP. The other was the passage of a private member’s bill through the 
House of Commons enshrining in law the commitment of the UK to spend 0.7% of 
its annual income on aid.

Given the difficulty George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> is having making his sums 
add up, the aid pledge seems extraordinary. The police, the courts, the army, 
and local government face eye-watering cuts during the next parliament but the 
budget for overseas development will rise in line with the growth of the 
economy.

There is one final hurdle for the aid bill: it has to pass through the House 
of Lords before the election. But if peers do give their support the bill would 
bind any future government unless they decided to repeal it.

The all-party consensus on aid is one of Brown’s most important legacies. 
There was much talk last week of how he would be remembered for keeping Britain 
out of the euro, for his handling of the global financial crisis and for his 
last-ditch intervention to keep Scotland as part of the UK. But he should also 
be remembered as the politician who forced the fight against poverty onto the 
political agenda – and kept it there.

How long the legacy will last is another matter. Half way through a decade of 
austerity, aid is becoming politically toxic. The Department for International 
Development is the most hated in Whitehall. A decade ago it was the left that 
bossed the aid agenda. Today it is the right making the political weather. Last 
week’s aid bill passed through the Commons but only a few Cabinet ministers 
turned up to vote for the aid bill last week: David Cameron, Ed Miliband and 
Nick Clegg were all absent.

The consensus on aid is weak. The energy that drove the agenda forward has 
dissipated. DfID, once an intellectual powerhouse, is a pale shadow of its 
former self. NGOs have become complacent and defensive.

As a result, it is easy to imagine a future Conservative government saying 
that there can be no economic development without military security as it hives 
part of DfID’s budget off to the Ministry of Defence. It is conceivable that 
cost saving could see DfID abolished altogether, with its functions subsumed 
into the Foreign Office. And there are circumstances in which it is entirely 
plausible that a future parliament would rescind the aid bill. Imagine, for 
example, that the budget deficit remains stubbornly high but the pressures on 
the NHS intensify. Ministers say there is a choice: the public can pay to see 
their GP or there can be cuts elsewhere, including in the aid budget. You do 
not need to be a genius to see that international development would be as 
friendless as it was in the 1980s, a decade when Britain cut its budget, and 
undermined attempts, such as the Brandt report, to forge international 
co-operation on aid, trade and development. The UK’s aid budget when Labour 
came to power in 1997 was 0.27% of national income. There was an international 
attempt to provide debt relief through the Heavily Indebted Poor Country 
initiative (HIPC) but it was going nowhere fast.

Brown, together with Tony Blair, turned things around. Labour set up DfID as 
an independent department under Clare Short, ensuring that development would 
have a strong voice in Cabinet. They banged heads together over debt relief, 
tapping in to the verve of the Jubilee 2000 campaign to force often unwilling 
global leaders to act.

Debt relief worked. The International Monetary Fund says that HIPC has helped 
36 of the world’s poorest countries and delivered $74bn (£47.5bn) of help. 
“Before the HIPC Initiative, eligible countries were, on average, spending 
slightly more on debt service than on health and education combined”, the IMF 
said. “Now, they have increased markedly their expenditures on health, 
education, and other social services. On average, such spending is about five 
times the amount of debt-service payments.”

Brown and Blair strongly backed the Global Fund to fight AIDS, TB and malaria; 
they championed the cause of universal health coverage and education; they put 
Africa on the G8 agenda. Brown had a new initiative at every one of the 
half-yearly meetings of the IMF and the World Bank, and while not all of them 
came to anything it was clear that the UK government was prepared to spend time 
and political capital pushing the development agenda.

There were a number of features to this push: a commitment to 
multi-lateralism; a focus on poverty reduction; a determination to win the 
intellectual argument for debt relief and aid; and the use of DfID as a 
laboratory for new ideas.

Nearly all this momentum has now been lost. The financial crisis and Great 
Recession have sapped support for multi-lateralism; DfID disburses its growing 
budget without any sense of strategic purpose apart from to encourage the role 
of the private sector; and while the Conservatives have bought into the 0.7% 
aid pledge, the commitment is only skin deep. Cameron has shown an interest in 
development, and sought to crack down on the tax evasion that costs poor 
countries so dearly. But he doesn’t really carry his party with him. Indeed, it 
is far from certain he even carries his chancellor with him. The contrast with 
Brown and Osborne at meetings of the IMF and World Bank is a stark one: 
international development simply does not float the current chancellor’s boat.

So, here’s how things stand. Britain has a large aid budget but doesn’t really 
know what to spend it on. There is a leadership vacuum and an intellectual 
vacuum. NGOs are pulling their punches either because they don’t want to fuel 
growing anti-aid sentiment or because they are dependent on DfID for chunks of 
their funding. Sadly, the stories of bureaucracy and waste are not without 
foundation.

There is now a choice. Those who support aid can make the case that it is 
needed to meet the big development challenges: to provide universal health care 
and education; to combat child labour and forced marriage; to deliver global 
public goods such as helping poor countries cope with climate change or 
eradicating infectious diseases. They can argue that DfID’s budget be married 
to a strategic purpose, and that in an inter-connected world social justice and 
self-interest are indistinguishable. They can make the point that the Ebola 
epidemic in West African countries with only the most rudimentary of health 
systems shows what needs to be done.

Put simply, the NGOs and the new generation of political leaders have to show 
there is a rationale for aid. As of now, they are failing to do so, which is 
why the passing of the 0.7% bill is a classic case of a battle being won while 
a war is being lost.
 