
Jane Foley, senior currency strategist at Rabobank International

The arrest of the IMF chief at the weekend has been taken by the market as 
adding another element of uncertainty into the outlook for risk. Although the 
IMF is playing a key part in the peripheral bailouts, it is unlikely that this 
incident will obstruct the progress made in either the Portuguese orGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> packages.

The Portuguese situation is scheduled to take centre stage during today's EU 
finance ministers meeting. Approval of a bailout is widely expected to be 
given; the bond market is awaiting to see whether or not the interest rate tied 
to the loan can be viewed as punitive or not.

Joshua Raymond, market strategist at City Index

The arrest over the weekend of Dominique Strauss-Kahn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dominique-strauss-kahn> has done little to 
upset stock markets today, whilst the euro, having initially suffered in early 
trade, has bounced back to gain against the dollar and sterling.

Naturally traders are attempting to speculate as to what the impact of no 
Strauss-Kahn could have on today's talks with EU finance ministers on Greece. 
The truth of the matter is it is likely to make little difference. Manchester 
United would have still won the Premier League title without Sir Alex Ferguson 
at the game against Blackburn Rovers over the weekend and the IMF's goals will 
maintain in the short term until there is clarity over the validity of 
allegations made against the IMF's leader.

In truth, the allegations over the weekend may have only served to speed up 
Strauss-Kahn's expected departure from the IMF. He had been long expected to 
run for the French presidency next year, and had he done so, a change in 
leadership at the IMF was likely to be only months away.

The impact of Strauss-Kahn not heading up the IMF, should this turn out to be 
the case, could be more in the shape of a change in long-term strategy, 
particularly if his replacement is not European. The "special relationship" 
between the IMF and Europe has been long heralded over the last few years. 
Under Strauss-Kahn's stewardship, the body has been hugely beneficial in 
attempting to proactively stabilise the eurozone debt situation, and so a new 
leader may attempt to strengthen the IMF's scope of activities to outside of 
the eurozone, particularly emerging markets and helping to correct the global 
imbalances of currency manipulation.

Gavan Nolan, director of credit research at Markit

The news about Dominique Strauss-Kahn is dominating the headlines but having 
little impact on sentiment in the financial markets. Some have suggested that 
his potential removal as head of the IMF could derail bailouts for peripheral 
eurozone countries. But the sovereign market is outperforming today, suggesting 
that investors see the news as a non-issue.

Gary Jenkins, head of fixed income research at Evolution Securities

Over time it is possible that the IMF could adopt a tougher stance towards 
European countries under a different leader if the arrest of IMF head leads to 
his departure as managing director (deputy managing director Nemat Shafik will 
represent the IMF at today's Ecofin meeting) but it is difficult to believe 
that it will have a short-term impact.
 