
Art does not take place in a vacuum. It maintains an ineradicable, if often 
troubled, relation to power. Renaissance painters understood this, and 
allegorised it in their canvases, which often recast in a mythical light the 
systems of patronage that had occasioned them in the first place. So did 
20th-century dramatists. Both Yeats and Brian Friel wrote plays featuring court 
scribes tasked not only with recording political events but also, more subtly, 
with generating the narratives and symbolism that consolidate the authority of 
the monarchs they work for.

I'm being stripped of my citizenship – along with 65 million other Britons | 
David Shariatmadari
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/eu-citizenship-stripped-brexit-theresa-may>
In our society, the artist may have no executive power whatsoever, but their 
ace-card lies in the fact that they command a means – perhaps the primal one – 
of putting value in the world: a means of making meaning. They can use this 
status to subvert, or to shore up, power – sometimes both at the same time – 
and they can do this well, badly or indifferently; but one thing they can never 
do is be politically neutral.

A few weeks ago I received an invitation to a special reception to be held at 
the Royal Academy for “British artists” to celebrate “British creativity”. In 
normal times such a gesture might have seemed a little jingoistic, but 
essentially innocuous. But these are not normal times. Given the extraordinary 
far-right takeover the country seems to be undergoing, current talk of 
“British” X or Y or Z (“values” or “decency” or “culture”) usually marks one 
end of a chain, at the other end of which someone is being shunned in a 
playground, spat at in a supermarket, or worse. The invitation mentioned 
designers and businesses who “shape our culture”, and outlined the security 
procedures that would surround the event. It wasn’t hard to read between the 
lines: whileMartin Roth at the V&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/05/german-v-and-a-director-martin-roth-quits-brexit-vote>
 had made it clear his institution would have no truck with such nonsense, the 
RA was helping to assemble a roll-call of figures from the arts to pose 
arm-in-arm with ministers, royalty and innovators of the James Dyson variety, 
for a soft-power, post-Brexit rebrand of “British” culture.

Setting aside the fact that, since Dyson threw his lot in with Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/11/eu-referendum-live-senior-labour-figures-urge-party-to-step-up-campaign>
, I don’t even dry my hands in public toilets, the whole premise seems to me 
conceptually wrong. It’s wrong for the same reason the Blair government’s 
co-option of Britpop and Cool Britannia was wrong (although no one was being 
beaten up on the underbelly of the cognitive error back then).

Like all English-language writers, I’m thoroughly European

The fact is, I’m not an example of “British creativity”. Like all 
English-language writers, I’m thoroughly European. To read Shakespeare is to 
read a rich remix of Ovid, Petrarch and Lucretius; to read Joyce (a British 
passport-holder) is to read Mallarmé, Laforgue, Goethe. The wellspring of our 
shared archive is Greek – and since the Hellenic world was in fact spread all 
around the Mediterranean basin, this means that to be European is already to be 
African and Asian.

Millennia of trade and empire, of diaspora and endlessly crisscrossing 
migration, have produced a culture that is and always will be cross-pollinated. 
If London and other British cities have become cultural hubs, this is because 
they stand at intersections within larger, international flows and networks. To 
credit an intersection with creating (“innovating”) the currents from which it 
merely feeds, though, is like calling a lightbulb a generator.

About the same time, I received another invitation, this time to read from my 
work at an anti-Brexit art festival in Hackney’s gallery-filled Vyner Street. 
Beneath bunting designed by Fiona Banner, Bob and Roberta Smith and Jessica 
Voorsanger played a gig, Katrin Plavcak and Ulrika Segerberg did an electronic 
sewing machine-enhanced performance, Lucy Reynolds conducted a “choir” who 
chanted in 20 languages at once, and a large crowd who could trace their 
heritage to every corner of the Earth ate, drank and generally had fun 
celebrating internationalism and renouncing tribalist bigotry, while children 
darted round their legs.

It’s quite possible that several of the Vyner Street participants, being 
high-profile culture-shaping innovators, were invited to the RA too. I doubt 
they’ll go, though, any more than I will.

It’s struck me more and more of late that the capacity to operate well as an 
artist comes with a requirement to think through the contexts within which 
you’re operating. Yeats’s and Friel’s court scribes understood this, and so did 
the many bands who thought twice about performing in apartheid-era South 
Africa. Right now, in a country wherepeople are being killed in the street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/05/death-arkadiusz-jozwik-post-referendum-racism-xenophobes-brexit-vote>
 for not sounding or looking “British” enough, artists should be very careful 
whose summons they accept.

• The fee for this article will be donated to City of Sanctuary 
<https://cityofsanctuary.org/>
 