
Presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump has been fairly straightforward 
regarding how he feels in general about black people in America – hefailed 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/02/28/politics/donald-trump-white-supremacists/> to 
swiftly and effectively disavow former KKK grand wizard David Duke in May, 
referred to the Black Lives Matter movement as “trouble 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/253031-trump-on-black-lives-matter-i-think-theyre-trouble>
” last fall, and during the course of his campaign other things have surfaced, 
such ashis idea 
<http://www.usmagazine.com/celebrity-news/news/donald-trump-proposed-white-vs-black-season-of-the-apprentice-w207167>
 to air a “white v black” season of The Apprentice.

Publicly, however, his most brazen racist remarks have been directed primarily 
at Muslims (a relatively small percentage of whom are black) and Mexicans. If 
it’s a backhanded political strategy to court the black vote (which he will 
ultimately need), he has underestimated the strength of our bond with other 
groups who have been marginalized and discriminated against.

Still, it’s oddly perplexing that in a country whose culture is so firmly 
rooted in systemic anti-black racism, Trump, who never hesitates to snatch the 
low hanging fruit of bigotry, hasn’t gone into hyper-drive about black people 
in America – all the standard black people tropes seem right in his wheelhouse. 
Of course, just as President Richard Nixon’s use of the term “silent majority” 
was widely understood as code for “white people”, Trump’s campaign slogan “Make 
America Great Again” refers to a racially divided past. Alongside his marquee 
plan to build a border wall to keep immigrants out of the United States, it’s 
pretty clearly that what he means by that is Make America White Again. But 
black folks still don’t seem to really be on his radar – as either a problem or 
a target market.

Is it because the Latino population has become the largest minority group and 
will only continue to grow, whereas the black population is not expected to 
change to any great degree? Or does Trump feels like his biggest contingency – 
the white working class – might feel Latino immigrants are more direct 
competition when it comes to all the jobs Trump claims he will create? Is it 
because mass incarceration, the main repressive tactic used against black 
people in America, is ludicrously expensive and also losing political support 
among both Republicans and Democrats? But that would be strange given that 
Trump’s proposed “solution” to Latino immigration – mass deportation – would 
also cost millions.

Maybe the only black people Trump is able to acknowledge are those who are 
supporting his campaign – the high-profile celebrity deflectors like Omarosa 
Manigault and Dennis Rodman. Maybe he even believes his own delusionalstatement 
that 
<http://gawker.com/the-collected-quotes-of-donald-trump-on-the-blacks-1719961925>
 “ the African Americans love me”. Or maybe he really doesn’t see us at all. I 
am actually not sure he sees any of humanity. It’s not just that he’s running 
against candidates who represent socialism (a belief predicated on the 
wellbeing of the public) and feminism (if there’s anything Trump dislikes more 
than Mexicans and Muslims, it’s women) – although that heightens his 
callousness – but more that right now in America, we are in the middle of an 
undeniable moment of black cultural ascension. Black people are visible and 
being heard in ways we’ve not been in decades.

Both Democratic candidates have met with members of Black Lives Matter, and 
are addressingsystemic racism 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/hillary-clinton-calls-facing-the-reality-systemic-racism>
 as well as concepts of whiteprivilege 
<http://insider.foxnews.com/2016/04/13/hillary-clinton-white-people-need-recognize-our-privilege>
 and intersectionality in their campaigning. Black people did that. Three young 
black women started Black Lives Matter, and the first to protest at any 
candidate speech (Bernie Sanders in Seattle) were young people affiliated with 
the movement. Clinton has made sure that she is everywhere that black women 
are, pushing uncomfortably hard to demonstrate that she is an ally – televised 
black award shows, black hosted podcasts, weighing in on the impact of 
Beyoncé’s Lemonade – while Sanders, a former civil rights activist, hasn’t 
wasted a single opportunity to remind everyone of that. Trump, though, comes 
across as if black people are not even worthy of his overt racism.

And perhaps ultimately, that is what Trump means when he says Make America 
Great Again – not simply let’s make America white again, let’s make America a 
place where the dismissal, debasement and ruination of black lives is the norm 
again. When racism wasn’t even called racism, before it was even a word – when 
it was just plain old America. Trump might want to wake up, though, to the fact 
that, just as then, America now or in the future cannot not exist without black 
people. And we stand in solidarity with his more favored targets of racism, 
misogyny and xenophobia.
 