
Douglas Alexander <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/douglasalexander>, 
Labour's 2015 election co-ordinator warned his party the Scottish referendum 
campaign has revealed the extent to which voters are demanding change, but have 
a contempt bordering on hatred towards politicians.

He also said the party must not underestimate the extent to which warnings by 
business can still influence public opinion.

Offering an assessment of the implications of the referendum campaign for 
Labour 2015, he said: "The referendum has been almost as much about politics 
and politicians, as aboutScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and 
Scotland's future. The result is a wake-up call to all of us and politics in 
general.

"It is deeply worrying for anyone that cares about the power of democratic 
politics to change people's lives for the better to see the overwhelming lack 
of trust and respect for politicians on all sides.

"The overwhelming emotion is one of distrust and hatred of politicans. This is 
not a problem for individual politicians, or parties, but politics as a whole. 
Whatever party you are from, you are struck by the contempt bordering on hatred 
for politicians. Anyone who reduces this result down to simple party politics 
is going to misinderstand the power and breadth of the forces at work."

He added: "What was striking on both sides of the argument is that change is 
wanted. Both the yes and no campaigns were driven by a rejection of the status 
quo."

He also suggested the old methods of campaigning had been shown even less 
effective than previously thought. "The nationalist success was in part down to 
the grassroots campaigning. We have started that work, but going into 2015Labour
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> needs to work like a movement 
and not a machine. I did a Facebook debate that several hundreds of thousands 
watched. Gordon's speech on the final evening of the campaign was watched by 
hundreds of thousands on YouTube. He was sceptical about the importance of 
twitter saying the total number of twitter followers in Scotland is 75,000, 
slightly larger than one parliamentary constituency. We as politicians have to 
do a much better job at taking politics to where people are.

"It is no longer possible to turn up to local Labour club or trade union club 
and expect to address 300 people. The traditional structures of class 
identification have been under severe strain."

He also suggested that Labour could would weaken its campaign if it did not 
draw on all the voices in the party.

He said: "We won because we used all the talents we had. The campaign saw our 
party come together in a new way. It's no secret if I say that is not how 
Labour in Scotland has always conducted itself.Alistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling>, Jim Murphy, Ed Miliband 
and Gordon Brown each brought something to the campaign and proved in their own 
way that Labour is better together too.

"Moden politics demands it. We need a campaign with an orchestra with 
different instruments and voices in harmony. You need to harness all the skills 
making distinctive messages."

Finally he urged his party to recognise that critical business voices can 
damage any campaign: "Don't discount the capacity of business still to have 
influence in the business square. It's naive to think it does not matter at 
all."

He said: "Economic credibility remains key. Business attitudes mattered in a 
way that some people had not fully expected before the campaign. The 
nationalists went into the campaign with a clearly ill thought through economic 
policy and currency policy, and it fell apart under the scrutiny of the 
electorate and business. Labour learnt that lesson in 1992 and many elections 
prior to that so we will not be making that mistakes next year.

"Although business has not had the easiest of time recently especially 
financial services when they voiced genuine concerns about the impact of 
policies on jobs and investment then people here in Scotland listened. In an 
era where politicians are less trusted other sources of information are 
increasingly prized."

He acknowledged that the party will need to balance reassurance with change.

He said: "In the final weeks of the campaign we got a better equilibruium on 
change and risk. If we had not had that offer of faster, safer, better change 
even if people had real doubts about independence, we would not have got the 
support that we did.

"Faster safer better change is much more potent than talking exclusively about 
more powers for the Scottish parliament. The foundational appetite of the 
electorate was for change."

Alexander conceded there had been a shift away from working class voters 
towards Yes partly because voters with less stake in society are less persuaded 
by risk arguments .
 