
Number 10 tried to rewrite the resignation statement of Jeremy Hunt's former 
special adviser using language that would have implied that the 30-year-old 
official had strayed beyond his remit in communicating withNews Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> about its BSkyB takeover 
bid.

Adam Smith told the Leveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> on Friday that he objected 
to a last-minute rewrite to his resignation letter, which had been proposed by 
the office of cabinet secretary, Sir Jeremy Heywood. He successfully insisted 
that it be removed.

The special adviser also revealed that he had initially been told by Hunt, the 
culture secretary, that "it won't come" to his resignation on 24 April, 
immediately after it emerged in evidence submitted to the Leveson inquiry that 
he had been in regular contact with the News Corp lobbyistFrédéric Michel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/frederic-michel> during the company's bid 
for BSkyB.

However, the following day Smith arrived at work only to be told by the 
culture secretary that "everybody here thinks you need to go". The special 
adviser – who had previously been praised for his work – was handed a draft 
resignation letter to sign.

Colleagues of David Cameron's most senior civil servant then requested that 
the first line in the proposed letter that was put out last month be amended to 
read: "While I believed it was my role to keep News Corporation informed". The 
initial draft adopted a more neutral tone, and read: "While it was part of my 
role to keep News Corporation informed."

However, Smith said he objected to the unexpected change because "the 
department had known that that's what my role had been" and the original 
version was reinstated.

Smith has always said he was given the task of acting as a link between News 
Corp and Hunt during the period when the Department for Culture, Media and 
Sport (DCMS) was adjudicating on the Murdoch company's £8bn bid for BSkyB.

Smith had been tipped off that as part of James Murdoch's evidence the inquiry 
would see emails written by Michel and relating to their contact between June 
2010 and July 2011. He watched Murdoch's Leveson appearance live and shortly 
after met Hunt to offer his resignation on 24 April.

He said the culture secretary told him he did not think that would be 
necessary, and heard Smith's version of events. Recalling their conversation, 
Smith said he told his former boss that the Michel emails "were a one-sided 
reflection and in many cases exaggerated".

Smith then went for a drink with colleagues, where the mood was "very 
pressured and one of the most stressful days that I'd certainly had to deal 
with". Overnight, however, pressure on Smith mounted – and when he arrived the 
next day Hunt made it clear that he would have to quit.

The former special adviser described the conversation at the critical meeting 
with his boss: "We did discuss how we'd enjoyed working with each other and how 
it was going to be tough and it wasn't just a one-line conversation, no."

Smith added that he had offered to resign because "I thought by this stage 
that the perception had been created that something untoward had gone on".

On the day he left, Smith also received a private note from Jonathan Stephens, 
the DCMS permanent secretary, praising his work. Stephens wrote: "I've seen 
many special advisers – you have undoubtedly [been] the best and straightest. 
You've worked smoothly and professional … You've given great service to Jeremy 
… How you left today was characteristic of the selfless and self-effacing way 
that you've approached your role."
 