
If the word "salad" makes you feel a little bit sad and unenthused – or, 
indeed, if you think salads simply shouldn't be eaten when there's an R in the 
month – let's see what we can do to put that right. For salad is, or should be, 
an elastic concept, a word that can be applied to all manner of fabulous 
assemblies: sometimes on the light and nibblish side, but often decidedly 
hearty.

So forget tired combinations of wan lettuce and wet cucumber. Kick that crappy 
deli-counter coleslaw into the long grass. Instead, roast some roots or 
squashes until their corners go toffeeish. Toss them with some fleshy, peppery 
winter leaves. Scatter over some seeds, maybe toasted, or some lentils, al 
dente. Crumble or shave on some salty, tangy cheese. And dress with a gutsy 
vinaigrette.

Such dishes are liberating: you don't need to follow recipes slavishly. Make 
the most of what you've got; replace carrots with parsnips or jerusalem 
artichokes, red cabbage with green, one nut with another. It's the spirit of 
the dish that's important: think generous, think vibrant, think big flavours 
and lots of textures.

As with any meal, a loose adherence to the basic trinity of starch, protein 
and fresh, seasonal veg tends to lead to maximum satisfaction. What makes a 
salad truly hearty is often a carb or pulsey element. This might be bread: 
never overlook the crunchy potential of the wholemeal or sourdough crouton. It 
could be winter potatoes, which, roasted in small chunks, are as good in a 
salad as their waxy summer brethren. Often, for me, it means a plump grain such 
as bulgur or barley, spelt or brown rice – best when they are an element in the 
salad, not the bulk of it.

Chickpeas or lentils are fabulous in a serious salad, ably bridging the gap 
between carbs and protein, and having the added benefit, if you tumble them in 
while still warm, of absorbing a dressing, thus holding flavour all the way 
through the dish. Nuts have a similar appeal, especially if toasted until 
lightly charred.

Cheese is the obvious contribution from the dairy, but big dots of thick 
yoghurt are also good; and eggs, soft-hardboiled or in omelette strips, give a 
good proteinaceous boost. You can throw in some crisped-up shards of leftover 
meat or flakes of cooked fish (especially smoked), but, as this week's recipes 
demonstrate, a vegetarian salad can have just as much muscle as a meaty one.

Remember that a good salad looks good. Your eyes will tell you whether you've 
mustered up a winner, or need to dip back into the fridge in pursuit of one 
more thing to get that hunger-sating harmony, and keep the "al" in your salad.

Warm salad of roast squash and fried mushrooms


A wonderful, earthy-sweet combination. I like to use blue cheese, but you 
could use pretty much any well-flavoured cheese. Serves four.

About 1kg small squash (butternut, crown prince, harlequin etc), peeled, 
deseeded and cut into 2-3cm chunks
12 sage leaves, bruised
4 garlic cloves, peeld and thickly sliced
4 tbsp rapeseed or olive oil
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
Large knob of butter
300g open-cap mushrooms, thickly sliced
1 small bunch rocket or flat-leaf parsley
150g blue cheese such as harbourne blue <http://culturecheesemag.com/node/1140>
 or stilton, crumbled

For the dressing
3 tbsp rapeseed or olive oil
1 tbsp apple balsamic vinegar

Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5. Put the squash in a roasting tin with 
the sage, garlic and three tablespoons of oil, and season well. Roast for about 
40 minutes, stirring once, until the squash is soft and coloured round the 
edges.

Put the remaining tablespoon of oil with the butter into a frying pan over a 
medium heat. Throw in the mushrooms and a little salt and pepper, and fry for 
four or five minutes, until any liquid they release has evaporated, and set 
aside.

In a bowl, combine the squash and the just-warm mushrooms with the rocket and 
cheese. Whisk together the dressing ingredients, add enough to the salad 
to dress it lightly, toss and serve.

Roast beetroot and bulgur wheat salad

 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's roast beetroot and bulgur wheat salad: 'Perfect 
winter fare.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
With a whiff of the Baltic about it, this is perfect winter fare, combining 
the sweetness of beetroot, the lushness of sour cream and the nutty bite of 
bulgur. Serves two.

500g beetroot
4 garlic cloves, skin on, bashed
4 sprigs fresh thyme
3 bay leaves
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
2 tbsp olive oil
50g bulgur wheat
½ tsp vegetable bouillon powder or ¼ of a veg stock cube (optional)
About 75g watercress

For the dressing
2 tbsp plain, full-fat yoghurt
1 tbsp sour cream
¼ garlic clove, peeled

First, roast the beetroot. Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6. Peel the 
beetroot, then cut into slim wedges (1-2cm thick at the outside edge). Place in 
a baking tin, scatter with the garlic, thyme and bay, season and trickle over 
the olive oil. Toss together, then cover with foil and roast for 30 minutes. 
Take off the foil, give the beetroot a stir, and roast for a further 20 
minutes. Make sure the beetroot is completely tender, then leave to cool.

Meanwhile, put the bulgur in a saucepan with the vegetable bouillon or stock 
cube (if using) and cover with plenty of water (around four times as much water 
as bulgur). Bring to a boil, then simmer for 10-15 minutes, until tender. 
Drain, toss with a trickle of olive oil and some seasoning, and leave to cool.

Combine the yoghurt and sour cream. Crush the little bit of garlic with a good 
pinch of salt and stir into the yoghurt mix, along with some pepper. Add the 
cooled beetroot and turn over once or twice, so the beetroot is partly covered 
and the creamy dressing marbled with pink.

Arrange the watercress on two plates. Scatter over the cooled bulgur. Arrange 
the dressed beetroot over the top, trickling over any dressing that remains in 
the bowl. Give the plates a trickle of extra-virgin olive oil and a grinding of 
pepper, and serve.

Red cabbage slaw with marinated tofu


You don't have to include dairy products to make a salad hearty. This vegan 
combo is rammed with flavour, and bursting with colour and texture. Serves two.

250g firm tofu
75g cashew nuts
A trickle of sunflower oil
¼ red cabbage (about 250g)
1 large or 2 medium carrots (about 200g in all)
1 small bunch spring onions (about 100g or so)
Coriander leaves, to finish

For the marinade/dressing
1 small clove garlic, peeled and finely grated
1 tsp finely grated ginger
½ lime, juiced
3 tbsp soy sauce
1 tsp honey
1 tbsp rice vinegar
2 tbsp rice wine
A shake of cayenne pepper

Mix together the marinade/dressing ingredients. Drain the tofu, pat it dry 
with kitchen paper and cut into 2-3cm cubes. Put it in a bowl with four 
tablespoons of marinade, stir, cover and set aside for an hour or so.

Heat a nonstick frying pan over a medium heat. Add the cashew nuts and toast 
lightly for a few minutes, until patched with golden brown. Set aside in a dish.

Add a trickle of sunflower oil to the pan. Add the tofu and its marinade, and 
cook, stirring, until all the liquid has evaporated. Add to the cashews and 
leave to cool.

Remove any tough core and damaged outer leaves from the cabbage, then shred it 
as finely as you can, working across the quarter so you get relatively short 
lengths (much easier to eat). Put the cabbage in a bowl. Peel the carrots and 
grate coarsely into the bowl. Trim and slice the spring onions and add these, 
too, along with the remaining dressing. Toss, cover and leave for an hour or so.

Give the slaw another good stir, taste and add more lime juice or soy sauce if 
necessary. Arrange on serving plates. Top with the tofu and cashews, add a 
generous scattering of coriander, and serve.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 