
You might think that a question about taxation would be equally valid whether 
asked by Jack the Ripper or Mother Teresa.

But you would be wrong.

The ruthless campaign against Duncan Storrar after his intervention on Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/13/duncan-storrar-qanda-personal-life-dragged-through-mud>
 illustrates the ongoing political utility of moral assessments of the poor.

The earliest iterations of what we’d now call welfare policy developed after 
the accession of Edward VI in 1547 distinguished very explicitly between the 
“deserving” and the “undeserving” poor.

Duncan Storrar responds to Q&A furore: 'I didn't want this'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/17/duncan-storrar-q-and-a-furore-news-corp>
Capitalism requires a certain level of unemployment. As Richard Dennis notes 
in his book Econobabble, “governments in Australia like to have at least half a 
million unemployed people at any point in time”.

But discussions about the structural necessity of human misery easily push in 
radical directions. If the problem’s recognised as systemic, people might 
demand that the system be changed.

Election 2016: Shorten 'cannot deliver' on border control, says Turnbull – 
politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/17/australian-election-2016-sophie-mirabella-suspects-liberal-party-leaking-against-her-politics-live>
That was why the early poor laws emphasised the morality of the individual 
supplicant rather than the ethics of the social order.

It’s an emphasis that resonates today.

The sociologist Abram de Swaan argues that, all across Europe, three main 
criteria have been used to separate the deserving poor from their undeserving 
brethren.

The first of them is proximity.

It’s only “our” poor who deserve succour. Foreigners, immigrants, minorities, 
and anyone else deemed somehow “other” are entitled to nothing. At best, 
they’re someone else’s problem; at worst, they’re spongers and parasites. The 
contemporary asylum seeker debate provides an obvious example.

The second criteria is (dis)ability.

If the poor are assessed as being physically capable of work, they’re 
undeserving – and they probably need to be punished. The English Poor Act of 
1552 duly decreed:

If any man or woman, able to work, should refuse to labour and live idly for 
three days, he or she should be branded with a red hot iron on the breast with 
the letter V and should be judged the slave for two years of any person who 
should inform against such idler.

That’s tough love, Tudor-style.

The final criteria is docility. In many ways, it’s the most interesting of the 
three.

The Poor Law Amendment Act of 1834 established the workhouse system, in which 
the destitute would only receive relief if they entered a prison-like facility. 
The idea was that, as a royal commission into the operation of the poor laws 
explained, “work, confinement, and discipline will deter the indolent and 
vicious”.

But it wasn’t enough merely for the poor to work. They also had to display the 
right attitude.

In 1867, the children of the workhouse in Wrexham in North Wales staged a 
Christmas concert. To demonstrate, they’d absorbed the sentiment fitting to 
their station, the infants carolled a “Song of Gratitude” to celebrate their 
confinement:

God bless our kindly Master
Likewise the Matron too:
So wise to rule, so kind to bear,
With faults we often do.
Now while we are singing
Our thanks to all we give
Who smile on lowly children,
Long may they happy live.

The Daily Telegraph recently provided an illustration of what a similar 
attitude might look like today.

“ScoMo, Hero of the Hard Worker,” proclaimed the Tele’s headline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/06/scott-morrison-budget-daily-telegraph-news-corp-fairfax-abc-weekly-beast>
, the day after the most recent budget. The accompanying cartoon portrayed 
Scott Morrison as seen by these hypothetical workers, who apparently envisage 
their treasurer as a buffed-up Superman.

God bless our kindly master, indeed.

The corollary of this emphasis is that, by definition, those who ask for alms 
shouldn’t be given them.

In Oliver Twist, Charles Dickens famously describes what happens when one 
impoverished boy chooses not to be docile.
 Photograph: Daily Telegraph 
The board were sitting in solemn conclave, when Mr. Bumble rushed into the 
room in great excitement, and addressing the gentleman in the high chair, said, 
‘Mr. Limbkins, I beg your pardon, sir! Oliver Twist has asked for more!’

There was a general start. Horror was depicted on every countenance.

‘For more!’ said Mr. Limbkins. ‘Compose yourself, Bumble, and answer me 
distinctly. Do I understand that he asked for more, after he had eaten the 
supper allotted by the dietary?’

‘He did, sir,’ replied Bumble.

‘That boy will be hung,’ said the gentleman in the white waistcoat. ‘I know 
that boy will be hung.’

You can see, then, where Duncan Storrar went wrong. By posing a question of 
assistant treasurer Kelly O’Dwyer – and, what’s worse, a question that she 
couldn’t answer – he displayed a disturbing level of self-confidence. The 
resulting headlines declaring him a thug and a criminal duly played upon 
centuries of tropes about dangerous vagabonds and impudent paupers.

But the intensity of the reaction also reflects the peculiar conjunction in 
which we find ourselves: on the one hand, an economic situation akin the early 
20th century; on the other hand, a political environment more reminiscent of a 
hundred years earlier.

Since the global financial crisis, the sclerotic global economy has generated 
a level of inequality reminiscent of the Jazz Age. At the same time, the 
vehicles of mass democracy developed during the 20th century (political 
parties, trade unions, pressure groups, etc) have been either destroyed or 
hollowed out of all social content. An apathetic cynicism now prevails 
throughout most industrialised countries about a political process perceived as 
irrelevant to ordinary people’s lives.

In that context, it’s not surprising that interventions by outsiders can 
spectacularly break through the status quo. A zinger about tax from the Labor 
party wouldn’t have had nearly the same impact: Duncan Storrar’s words 
resonated because we almost never hear poor people speaking on their own behalf.

Of course, that’s also the reason for the backlash. If the poor lose their 
docility, there’s no telling what might happen.
 