
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> advocates have 
welcomed court action against two e-cigarette manufacturers, arguing it 
strengthens the case for proposed Victorian laws which would regulate 
electronic cigarettes in the same way as traditional tobacco products.

The consumer watchdog is taking two companies to the federal court after both 
allegedly claimed their e-cigarettes didn’t contain cancer-causing chemicals 
when in fact they did.

“It beggars belief that you can have a rechargeable battery device heating up 
a liquid of unknown composition, which you use at your mouth for hours at [sic] 
end, with no safety standards at all,” Quit Victoria director Dr Sarah White 
said on Monday.

The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission alleges that the two 
companies, Social-Lites and Elusion New Zealand, breached Australian consumer 
law by making representations on their websites from at least August 2015 that 
the e-cigarette products being sold did not contain carcinogens or toxic 
chemicals, and did not contain any of the chemicals found in conventional 
cigarettes.

Can e-cigarette makers stub out addiction concerns?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/29/e-cigarette-addiction-nicotine-smoking-vaping>
The e-cigarettes sold by the two companies do contain harmful carcinogens and 
toxic chemicals, including formaldehyde acetaldehyde and acrolein, the ACCC 
alleges.

Formaldehyde is classified by the World Health Organisation international 
agency for cancer research as a Group 1A carcinogen, meaning there is 
sufficient evidence to show it causes cancer in humans. Acetaldehyde is 
classified as a Group 2B carcinogen, while Acrolein is classified as a toxic 
chemical.

“It is imperative that suppliers have scientific evidence to support claims 
that their products do not contain carcinogens and toxic chemicals such as 
formaldehyde and acetaldehyde,” ACCC chairman Rod Sims said.

“There is an increasing level of concern among international, national and 
state authorities regarding the composition of e-cigarettes, and the likely 
effects of their use. The ACCC will continue to work with its local and 
international counterparts to ensure consumers are receiving accurate 
information about these products,” Sims said.

The ACCC also alleges that the chief executive of Social-Lites and the 
director of Elusion were knowingly concerned in the alleged contraventions.

E-cigarettes <https://www.theguardian.com/society/e-cigarettes> are metal 
tubes that heat liquids typically laced with nicotine and deliver vapour when 
inhaled. The liquids come in thousands of flavours, from cotton candy to pizza.

Use of the devices has grown quickly in the past decade and experts fiercely 
debate whether they can help people give up smoking and whether they are safe, 
with some studies raising concerns about the toxicity of some of the 
ingredients.
 