
Some years it’s rather subtle and others it’s as blunt as a butter knife. This 
seasonal shift has been the latter: the house fire has already been lit a few 
times and the jackets dusted off. There is no doubt. Autumn has arrived.


When it comes to seasons, Autumn rates highly in my books. All the growing 
I’ve done over summer means there’s food ready to be harvested, eaten, 
preserved and stored. It’s my busiest time of year: my fingers become 
prune-like from cutting fruit for the preserving jars, and I wash so many 
bottles for passata that my hands appear as worn out as a retired goanna skin 
<https://www.google.com.au/search?q=goanna+skin&espv=210&es_sm=91&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=w4YvU4iPAoiPkwXos4C4Cg&ved=0CAkQ_AUoAQ&biw=1827&bih=1066&dpr=0.67>
. So I relish the opportunity for a break, and the chance to head out on the 
water to hunt water fowl.

I’ve only been hunting birds since I decided to stop eating supermarket meat. 
Before that I was anti-duck hunting. I’d seen the horrible footage of hunting 
carnage in the 80s and 90s and I never imagined I’d have anything to do with 
the “sport”. But here I am, a man excited aboutthe new duck season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/18/duck-hunting-season-opens-with-tougher-laws-aimed-at-protesters>
, as I have been for the last four years. It’s not about the shooting – it’s 
that wild duck tastes beautiful. These are birds that live free, without a 
factory-farm cage to be seen, and during autumn they are at their peak. 
Healthy, wild, and free-range. A few boxes ticked there.

Before dawn, I roll out of bed and gear up. My 12 gauge is loaded and my 
pockets filled with some extra shells. The morning is often crisp and the sun 
is still in slumber. In the darkness I walk in fields of long wet grass, my 
boots soaked from the evening’s dew. The early morning birds perform a symphony 
that can bring goosebumps and a tear. I’m all alone bar my hunting dog Henry, 
who heels beside me.

I’m here for the duck meat, not to just shoot something moving fast. So I’m 
careful not to mess things up. I crawl up an embankment, my eyes level with the 
grass line, scanning for any shadowy figure on the water; any sign of ripple. 
My ears single out anything that resembles a wood duck or a pacific black (the 
two most common local species). As the sun rises and the time is right, I make 
myself known to the ducks. Away they scatter! I raise the gun and slide the 
safety off. Bang! Bang! And it’s over.

Henry is released from his lead and bounds into the freezing water, dutifully 
and obediently. The duck is retrieved and handed to me at the bank –a wet shake 
from the dog ensures I too become covered in the water from which the bird was 
delivered. Not only does the duck provide prized meat, but aesthetically you 
can’t ask for a prettier thing. The pacific black has a set of emerald feathers 
on each wing, only eight to 10. The colour is amazing, shimmering in the light. 
These feathers are prized by my children.

I may stalk another body of water but usually with one duck in my hand I head 
home for cooking. As an immediate treat I cook the heart and the liver and eat 
it with breakfast. The heart is a hard working muscle so I boil it for half an 
hour before frying it in butter, thyme and sage. If there’s some in the store, 
I’ll glaze it with Pedro Ximenez sherry to add sweetness to this rich meat. I 
take the same approach to the liver.

It’s a sad tradition, but many hunters in Australia simply remove the breast 
and discard the rest of the bird. I tend to poach, roast or steam the ducks so 
I can retrieve every morsel of meat from the life I have just taken. The meat 
is then often added to a risotto, my daughter’s favourite dish. I put the 
carcass into a large pot with about three litres of water to make a stock – a 
great addition to soups, stews, casseroles, risotto and paella. The bones end 
up either with the chooks or in the compost.

This wild duck is cherished when it’s in season and longed for off season. The 
rich meat is used sparingly and spread out in a dishes such as ragu, allowing 
the whole family to get a good taste of this autumnal delight. The season has 
just begun. I’ve bagged two birds. I hope for my luck to continue.
 