
The European Central Bank has adopted a wait-and-see approach to the UK’s 
Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>decision and will 
wait for at least another six weeks before deciding whether it needs to boost 
growth in the eurozone.

The ECB president, Mario Draghi, said  
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2016/html/is160721.en.html>his staff 
would “continue to monitor economic and financial market developments very 
closely” but gave no clues as to what the bank might do.

Financial markets had not expected any action from the ECB but saw Draghi’s 
comment that the bank had a “readiness, willingness and ability” to act as a 
clear sign that further stimulus was on the way.

The ECB president said over the coming months his organisation would be in a 
better position to assess the state of the eurozone economy and the impact of 
Brexit on growth and inflation.

Draghi added that, if warranted, the ECB would use all the “instruments 
available within its mandate”, leaving open the possibility of fresh cuts in 
interest rates or an expansion of its quantitative easing (QE) programme.

Following the example of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/bank-of-england-leaves-uk-interest-rates-on-hold-at-05>
, the ECB made no changes to policy at the first meeting of its governing 
council since the UK’s referendum, leaving interest rates unchanged and 
deciding to continue to buy €80bn (£67bn) of assets a month under its QE 
programme.

Marc Ostwald, strategist at ADM investor services, said Draghi had given a 
“masterclass in stonewalling” at a press conference to explain the ECB’s lack 
of action.

 “Overall, Draghi appeared to be very determined to say nothing of any 
significance. To be fair, he and the rest of the council have stressed for a 
number of months that the existing package of policy measures must be given 
time to work, and that an assessment of whether there might be a need to do 
more would not happen before the September meeting and staff forecast update,” 
he said.

“Thus the message was that the ECB is ‘ready, willing and able’ to act ‘if 
needed’, while stressing that risks are to the downside of their forecasts, to 
underline a dovish bias.”

Ian Kernohan, economist at Royal London Asset Management, said: “While we 
think Brexit uncertainty is mainly an issue for the UK economy, there is also 
bound to be some knock-on impact on the eurozone. With post-Brexit evidence 
still patchy, we think the ECB will wait until the September meeting before 
extending its QE timetable.


 “Inflation remains far below the ECB’s target of 2% and while headline 
inflation will rise later in the year, thanks to the fading impact of a lower 
oil price, underlying inflationary pressures still remain very low. Delaying 
until September will allow an assessment of any Brexit impact to be outlined in 
the new ECB staff forecasts.”
 