
Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> will depict 
Labour as "the party of small business and enterprise" on Saturday , arguing 
that his plans to address the cost of living crisis will benefit entrepreneurs 
as well as householders.

The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader will use an 
event in south London to highlight party proposals that could help small 
businesses, buoyed by an analysis on Friday from the Institute for Fiscal 
Studies that backs Labour's claims that people will be worse off in 2015 than 
they were in 2010, and by initial polling suggesting that people think George 
Osborne's autumn statement will not benefit them.

Labour's plan to freeze energy bills has generally been presented as a measure 
to help householders, but Miliband will argue that it could also save the 
typical small business £5,000 a year.

"It is one nation Labour which recognised that small firms need help with 
escalating business rates and soaring energy costs, just as big firms have had 
cuts in corporation tax," he will say.

"It is one nation Labour which recognises that if we are to build prosperity 
for the long term, we must give help to the many businesses which will create 
most of the jobs and the wealth of the future – not just a few. That is why 
Labour is changing so that we can go into the next election as the party of 
small business and enterprise."

The chancellor used his autumn statement to confirm a series of measures 
intended to address cost of living grievances highlighted by Labour, such as 
fuel bills and business rates. But a poll released by Ipsos Mori on Friday, 
based on interviews conducted with 1,071 adults on Thursday night, suggests 
that the early perceptions were negative.

Some 42% of respondents said that they thought that on balance Osborne's 
package of measures was bad for them, while just 15% said they thought it was 
good for them, said Ipsos Mori, which also admitted that many people at that 
point did not feel sufficiently informed to have a clear view on this point.

But the poll found clear opposition to Osborne's decision to increase the 
state pension age in line with life expectancy. Some 58% of respondents were 
opposed, and only 30% were in favour.

Ipsos Mori also found, when forced to chose between two rival propositions, 
40% said they agreed with shadow chancellor Ed Balls's claim that Osborne was 
in denial about the cost of living crisis, while ony 24% said they agreed with 
Osborne that his long-term plan for economic recovery was working. More than a 
quarter of respondents said they did not agree with either.

To mark the fact that this Saturday has been designated Small Business Saturday
 <http://www.smallbusinesssaturdayuk.com/> in an attempt to encourage consumers 
to support small businesses, emulating a US scheme, Miliband will be visiting 
shops in Crystal Palace, south London.

In its own initiative, the Department for Business will publish its own 
manifesto, Small Business, GREAT Ambition, highlighting government commitments 
to help small firms. The measures included: allowing firms in 22 cities to 
benefit from a fund that could pay them up to £3,000 to enable them to access 
better broadband; a commitment to ensure small firms supplying the public 
sector in a supply chain are not paid late; and measures to make it easier for 
small firms to tender for public sector contracts.
 