
1 The camp

As word comes out about how at ease England are in their own company – little 
things, like how they can have a couple of beers and how James Haskell and 
Billy Vunipola now talk about, you know, stuff – it does suggest that life may 
have been a little stifled under the old regime. This may be unfair on Stuart 
Lancaster, but putting a lid on excess was very much part of his early brief 
and perhaps he couldn’t stop pressing down. Or maybe all the questions about 
Sam Burgess – should he play, where might he play, how would he play? – were 
the whispers that made it seem like here was a camp that dared not speak its 
mind. Rugby, unless you want to lob something politically incorrect the way of 
your opposite number, is not a game best playedsotto voce.

England win Six Nations grand slam for Eddie Jones against France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-win-six-nations-grand-slam-france-match-report>
It is clear that England like Eddie Jones, and Eddie likes England. From the 
very start he asked his players to be less buttoned up and play closer to the 
edge. He has responded to their wholeheartedness by defending them when, 
inevitably on stages of easily ignited passions, they have strayed beyond the 
mark. And not just defending them, but counterattacking, too. To make Wales the 
guilty party in the continuing Joe Marler affair –Eddie accused them in the 
week of using it to derail England’s grand slam preparations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/englands-eddie-jones-accuses-wales-as-rancour-deepens-over-joe-marler-jibe>
 – was a remarkably inventive way of making the purveyors of the original 
insult into the victims of an anti-England conspiracy. Such deviancy by Wales 
was almost racist, Eddie might have been thinking, and Marler so wounded by the 
experience, poor dab, that he was best taken out of the fray and stuck on the 
bench.

Without wishing to add fresh undertones to the unseemly din, it is very 
Antipodean to turn a disadvantage into a cause. As the All Blacks said after 
Brian O’Driscoll was drilled head first into the turf in 2005: “Circle the 
wagons, they’ll be out to get us.” Old England always seemed to be saying sorry 
for past sins; Eddie’s England apologise to no one (other than to Samson Lee at 
half-time).

2 The captain

Dylan Hartley <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dylan-hartley>, with a string 
of convictions to his name and with Jamie George’s form putting him under even 
greater strain at hooker, has been inspirational as captain. Taken off on a 
stretcher against France, he has played well and spoken well; has taken no 
nonsense and yet has been entertaining and frank. Chris Robshaw has played like 
a No6 relieved to be in his rightful position and glad to have shed a burden. 
The retention of the old captain, happily reduced to the ranks in his new team, 
revealed a compassionate side to Jones. The players must have heard all the 
tales of the coach’s ruthlessness but he has embraced them and turned two 
careers around. He even found time to praise the work of Lancaster, his 
predecessor. Of such management are loyalties made.

3 The second-rows

Joe Launchbury and Courtney Lawes have not exactly gone away but the rise of 
George Kruis and the appearance of Maro Itoje have been so startlingly 
impressive that it will take strong arms to prise the second-row shirts away 
from the Saracens duo. England have never been short of locks but this looks a 
rare pairing – powerful as one and yet individually prominent at the same time. 
Kruis has been commanding on the England throw and has run low to the ground 
and made solid contact at ruck and maul. Itoje has stolen ball and has run with 
real speed and guile. England have brawn and brains where they matter.

4 The back three

Not many would accuse Mike Brown of putting thought before instinct, but the 
full-back has been as engaged and as effective as ever. His aggression no 
longer stands out – Owen Farrell and Marler have helped share the role of 
pantomime villain – and he seems to have put all his anger into catching and 
running. His understanding with Anthony Watson and Jack Nowell is a work in 
progress but they are beginning to understand each other’s whereabouts and 
their intentions. Add this back-three threat to the efforts of the pack and 
England will be able to attack on many fronts, sparkle and grunt in harmony.

Eddie Jones’ revolution: how he led England to Six Nations grand slam | Eddie 
Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/19/eddie-jones-revolution-england-six-nations-grand-slam>
5 Billy Vunipola

He is more than a one-man attack and credit must go to Haskell and Robshaw at 
his sides – the back-row must be as complementary to one another as they are 
duty-bound to their specific and very different duties. But Billy V has been 
sensational, the quiet No8 who plays noisily, the humble servant who runs the 
England game. He’s larger than life and difficult to miss, but the more he has 
been the object of defensive planning, the more he has found space and bounced 
tacklers out of the way.

6 Defence 

The coach Paul Gustard has injected pace into the line speed of the tacklers. 
Wales looked devoid of skill in the first half at Twickenham but that was 
because they were confronted by a defence that was in their faces and around 
their knees before they had a firm grasp of the ball. We keep waiting for that 
point beyond which defences can get no more watertight, but it appears we are 
not there yet. Players are approaching the tackle faster as runners and faster 
as ball-carriers. The question is whether the laws need to be changed to avoid 
serious damage at this point of contact – or whether good technique will 
suffice. The odds favour (wrong word) injury at the moment as concern for 
personal safety remains invisible. For their own good, players will need to be 
slowed down, but for the moment England lead the charge.
 