
With two away games to break him into life as England coach, Eddie Jones was 
careful not to promise too much. Well, Jones the Wary obviously wanted England 
to be the best but was coy about how to make them so.An unspectacular, 
professional suffocation of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/06/scotland-england-six-nations-match-report>
 at Murrayfield was a very pleasing start for him.

The new coach may have thought he could take a risk or two for Sunday’s game 
in Rome. That was before Italy took France apart up front in Paris and passed 
without fear – if not always with absolute precision – out of contact. The 
lugubrious Jacques Brunel, stuck in the coaching job untilhis expected 
replacement, Conor O’Shea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/20/harlequins-director-rugby-conor-oshea-leaves-club-rugby>
, is officially anointed, was supposed to have lost contact with the Italian 
changing room. The performance of his neglected team just goes to show that 
perhaps the coach does not have his finger permanently feeling for the pulse of 
the collective wrist.

In the light of Italy’s display, Jones the Good Start has made only a few 
adjustments: Ben Youngs for Danny Care as starting scrum-half; Mako Vunipola 
instead of Joe Marler first up at loosehead prop; Courtney Lawes and Joe 
Launchbury similarly swapping in the second row. Maro Itoje sits on the bench, 
his gentle introduction to international rugby continuing until he is unleashed 
and told to be anything but delicate. England have six forwards parked on the 
bench, an indication of where they expect to need freshening up.

Eddie Jones’s forward thinking could backfire for England in Italy | Dean Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/12/eddie-jones-england-italy-six-nations>
Billy Vunipola was the star of the Scotland game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/06/scotland-england-six-nations-player-ratings>
, as much for his defensive effort as for converting awkward ball in attack 
into forward motion. He did not, however, try to make passes out of contact and 
until this becomes built into the England repertoire, they may struggle to turn 
forward motion into tries. They are like a drill set to penetrate deep into 
wood, but slipped passes are the percussion setting that can get through 
concrete. It is not easy. Contact defenders aim at pinning arms and preventing 
release. Non-contact defenders invade the space that support runners would love 
to occupy. Defences had the upper hand in round one. But a further week of 
rehearsals will have honed sharpness, heightened the awareness of the ball 
carriers as to the whereabouts of their support-runners.

It took the New Zealand All Blacks time to find their rhythm at the World Cup –
Argentina was a decidedly tricky opener for them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/20/new-zealand-argentina-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
 – and it will take the lesser mortals of the Six Nations a little longer to be 
at home in the increasingly speedy environment that Jones is trying to create. 
England didn’t need a No7 in Scotland – and perhaps he is not the player to 
take a pass from Billy V – but the more they look to Jonathan Joseph and Mike 
Brown to pass rather than go to ground, the more they will need James Haskell 
to play the part of bounding hound, ever there on the shoulder to serve.

Youngs will bring accuracy of a different kind of pass to the proceedings. His 
kicking, too, tends to be more pinpoint than Care’s. In short, he should 
initiate fluency in the eight-nine-10 operation, the development of something 
more positive after Billy V’s salvage operation. And by extension that means a 
greater understanding between George Ford and Owen Farrell.

There were quite a few who remembered them playing together for England at 
junior level, and expressed doubts about their capacity to work together. Jones 
the Independent of Thought decided that the fault for not making any sparks fly 
in midfield lay in the processes before the two Fs came into play. But they 
will need to turn his theory into reality pretty quickly, because nothing 
really happened to stretch Scotland’s primary defence – let alone the 
scrambling that must deal with what follows a clean break.

Ben Youngs replaces Danny Care as England scrum-half for match against Italy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/12/ben-youngs-danny-care-england-six-nations-rugby-italy>
Is Rome the place to turn away-game professionalism into something – anything 
– a little livelier, a filler until Manu Tuilagi returns? For an hour England 
may be pleased to be in any sort of control, be it professional or plain old 
hanging on grimly. Italy are very together, their cohesion weakened not at all, 
even without Leonardo Ghiraldini and Martin Castrogiovanni (to begin with), 
their bonding agents down the years.

The All Blacks, out there in the forefront of shaping the game’s future, seem 
to view the third quarter as the most telling. It should be said that in the 
World Cup final, that particular period belonged to Australia, and the All 
Blacks had to wait until the fourth to make their definitive strikes. The last 
quarter is still bountiful for teams that take to it with ambition and skills 
intact. It is a horrible place for the aerobically challenged, whose patterns 
are adversely affected by the introduction of replacements and the declining 
thought processes of those that must go the full distance.

Jones the Doubter did not think England were fit enough yet to maintain a 
tempo that can allow them to cut loose in the closing minutes of the game. But 
this is the time to strike against Italy. Sergio Parisse and his pack can 
rumble around all day and can go a full 80 if not asked to stretch themselves 
wide and far. England have to take them there. It is time to unleash Jack 
Nowell and Anthony Watson and time to ask Mike Brown to be as keen as Billy V 
to give the ball before going to ground.

England have never lost to Italy. It hangs there, the only fixture in the Six 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> where such an 
uninterrupted sequence applies. England have already won in the first round and 
Italy have lost. Why try to change a winning formula or risk disturbing 
history? Take the heat, cool it and crush it. It’s the England way.

Perhaps it is. But Italy should have won in Paris. And they played with an 
adventure never seen before. It is time to accept the Roman invitation and join 
the party. To give Italy the hiding Jones the Jackhammer would like, it is time 
to change the setting.
 