
Cardiff Blues v Leicester

Today, 2.35pm, Arms Park, BBC1

Leicester's selections make them the one English club with serious pretensions 
to win thisAnglo-Welsh Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglo-welsh-cup> 
and Derick Hougaard, outstanding in the win at Bath, is given an opportunity at 
fly-half today as Toby Flood moves to inside-centre. Cardiff, impressive in 
beating Gloucester next door at the Millennium Stadium last Sunday, recall the 
wing Jamie Roberts, with Robin Sowden-Taylor on the open-side flank.

Match pointers The Blues are unbeaten at home since January 4 ... Tigers have 
won their past five away games.

Gloucester v Dragons

Today, 3pm, Kingsholm

Gloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> are reeling 
after a bad week in which they lost at Cardiff in the Heineken Cup and lost 
James Simpson-Daniel for three months with an ankle injury. Alasdair Dickinson 
and Scott Lawson make up two-thirds of a Scottish front row. The Dragons coach, 
Paul Turner, opts for youth, with the 21-year-old centre Ashley Smith becoming 
their youngest ever captain.

Match pointers Dragons won the only previous meeting between the sides, 13-11 
last season.

Harlequins v London Irish

Today, 3pm, The Stoop

The Exiles made a startling comeback to win this fixture in the Premiership 
last month and Shane Geraghty, making a first start of the season at fly-half, 
may torment Quins again. Irish have a good blend of youth and experience with 
the All Black Clarke Dermody leading them from the front row. The Springbok 
centre De Wet Barry is recalled to Quins' bench after injury.

Match pointers Quins have won their past four games in all competitions ... 
Irish have won four in five.

Ospreys v Worcester

Tomorrow, 3.05pm, Liberty Stadium, BBC Wales

Worcester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby>, haunted by their 
47-16 defeat by the Ospreys in this competition last year, will be up against 
Gavin Henson, who returns after a one-match ban and an afternoon on the bench 
last week. Dan Biggar, the 19-year-old fly-half named in the Wales squad this 
week, is on the cup-holders' bench and Matthew Jones wears the Warriors' No10 
shirt against his former club.

Match pointers The Warriors are attempting to win back-to-back games in the 
competition for the first time.

Saracens v Northampton

Tomorrow, 3pm, Vicarage Road

Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>, who won this fixture in 
the Premiership last month, pick two of their new breed of backs at Watford 
tomorrow, Alex Goode at full-back and Noah Cato on the wing. The lock Tom Ryder 
is on the bench after his spell in New Zealand. The Saints, who once more 
prefer Stephen Myler over Carlos Spencer at fly-half, give the promising 
19-year-old lock Courtney Lawes, outstanding in the European Challenge Cup, a 
start at blind-side flanker.

Match pointers Saracens have won six of their past seven games against the 
Saints ...Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> 
have won three matches in a row.
 