
This statement covers all our significant findings regarding issues covered in 
theEditorial <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/editorial> section of 
the Living our Values report to date. As we are using a rolling assurance 
process alongside the rolling publication of sections in the report, we may add 
additional findings that come to light as we investigate each section. All 
significant claims made in this section have been assured.

Last year we stated: "In a year of ongoing change, Guardian News & Media (GNM) 
continued to promote open journalism across a wide range of editorial areas, 
aligned with its core values. The company has rightly highlighted its success 
stories… many of which highlight the link between the Guardian's values and 
high-quality journalism while tackling key sustainability issues. The ongoing 
phone-hacking story is perhaps the most potent demonstration of the impact GNM 
can have, affecting issues such as governance, leadership and accountability in 
business, media, politics and the police."

We found a similar story this year. With the News of the World story leading 
to theLeveson inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>, one 
area of focus for us has been the Guardian's response to the issues raised and 
how it ensures ethical values are maintained in its own journalism. Theopen 
journalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/sustainability-report-2012-operations-assurance>
 approach in itself provides one level of reassurance. Another level is the 
existence ofreaders' editors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/page/readerseditor> and Leveson has 
shown that such checks and balances are needed. GNM has also updated its
editorial code of conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code> and this year 
included a piece on the role of freelances. Beyond that, the level of 
independent checks is less clear and we encourage the Guardian to continue to 
engage in the wider debate on press regulation and how it should work more 
effectively in future.

The upsurge in work for the Guardian readers' editor reminds us of the need 
for such oversight – and shows again that GNM has taken a leading position in 
how it ensures it behaves ethically. The pieces openly discuss the challenges 
and errors during the year. It would be helpful for the Guardian to explain 
what it is doing to ensure similar incidents do not happen again.

Open involvement of readers is now an integral part of much of the Guardian's 
journalism. This participation in the core of the organisation's products is a 
leading demonstration of sustainable practices. The readers survey provides 
further evidence that overall the Guardian's customers believe its content 
demonstrates it is living its values. This extends to GNM's openness in its 
business dealings, reflecting the way it has dealt with the challenges it faces 
in developing a new business model.

Beyond confirming a generally positive view by readers, the survey raises some 
points that the Guardian should consider. We would like to hear how the GNM 
will respond to readers' demand for more information on Ethical Finance and 
Business as well as the relatively low score on disability and regional 
diversity.

Across the board there has been a generally lower score for web readers than 
paper readers. As paper readership declines and online readership continues to 
rise, the Guardian will need to consider the extent to which it is meeting 
expectations around these issues. An exception seems to be the higher demand 
online for an assured sustainability report.

One interesting result is the gap between the expectation that ethical and 
environmental concerns should be reflected in content and readers views of how 
much this is achieved. It is an area we explored significantly over the past 
two years of our assurance. While it is challenging to assure the overall 
content, we found that staff were engaged in sustainability and aware of the 
environmental, social and economic challenges relating to their subject areas. 
However, the survey shows this is not necessarily being felt by readers. We 
would encourage the Guardian to consider further ways to demonstrate its 
editorial thinking to readers – a good example being the publication of the
daily news list <https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/open-newslist>.

Finally, it is encouraging to see the high level of trust in GNM's content and 
awareness of theScott Trust <http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/>. We 
would encourage the Guardian to consider ways to broaden awareness of the 
Living our Values report.
 