
Like its post-Renaissance prequel, the Edwardian baroque revival prized one 
thing above all: showing off. But this time it was not the Roman church 
responding to the Reformation, it was the British Empire barking loudly through 
its final years as top dog.

By the time the first quarter of the 20th century was over, the country had 
changed utterly: into a place with women voters, radio, aeroplanes, and many, 
many unhealed war wounds.

Suburbs were the Edwardians' most enduring legacy. Today, many of the most 
pleasant commuter homes are still their roomy, elegant semis, built to house a 
prospering middle class. Yet the spirit of the age – and of its vivacious, 
cosmopolitan king, the antithesis of his perma-grieving mother - is seen more 
clearly in its grand public buildings. Here columns, domes and statuary 
proclaim their lineage from Wren, and Rome before him.

1. County Hall, London

Not Norman Foster's melting Easter egg – that's City Hall – but the epic curve 
of Portland stone two miles west along the Thames. The central terrace was not 
completed until 1922, and the remaining blocks stuttered into life some decades 
later. It says much about the Edwardians that this waterfront palace was their 
idea of a municipal office block.

2. Admiralty Arch, London

Another office building, but no ordinary one, as this was commissioned by 
Edward VII himself in memory of his mother. The Italianate exuberance of Sir 
Aston Webb's design is almost eclipsed in popularity by a famous but 
unexplained "nose-shaped" moulding in the northernmost arch. A joke on 
a memorial? We will never know.

3. Bristol Museum and Art Gallery

Tobacco baron William Wills was in his mid-70s in 1904 when he presented the 
people of Bristol with this lavish gift. Looking at its wildly ornate interior, 
its rusticated outer masonry, domes and statues, there is little doubt that the 
old man had done well, and was very grateful.

4. Port of Liverpool Building, Liverpool

Though not as tall as its contemporary the Liver Building, this too is a 
display of what technology, as well as artistry, can do. With its dome and 
cupolas, it might be a Renaissance palace, yet the entire structure is 
supported by a reinforced concrete frame – one of the earliest anywhere in the 
world.

5. Dennistoun Public Library, Glasgow

Andrew Carnegie's great library-building programme allowed the Scottish 
architect James Robert Rhind to realise seven of his improbable designs. Though 
not vast in scale, the profusion of columns and sculptures makes a public 
declaration of the esteem in which learning should be held. With its cupola, 
its angel, and its reliefs showing studious scenes, Dennistoun is a particular 
gem.
 