
It is an established principle of parenthood that one of your chief functions 
is to teach your children – although it’s never quite clear what you should put 
on the curriculum. However, I have learned more from my children than they have 
ever learned from me:

You have less power than you think.

The amount of influence you have on children – or anyone else – is limited. 
Children, supposedly the most malleable individuals we come into close contact 
with, are nevertheless fully their own people. Children are not just small 
adults, but creatures with a whole range of distinct belief systems – and many 
of these are not susceptible to reason, argument or anything else. They are 
extraordinarily impressionable, it is true – but, crucially, not in the ways 
you think or expect.

Selfishness, laziness and egotism can be beautiful.

No, I’m not talking about fathers. I don’t know how they get away with it, but 
children are highly inclined towards all of the above and yet remain wondrous, 
charming and irresistible. It’s a trick some try to carry on into adult life. 
This tends not to work out well.

Rationality and justice do not rule. 

Children are inclined to make the deluded assumption that there is a just 
solution to any dispute – and that their parents will duly impose it. Parents 
often start off parenthood believing the same thing. However, it turns out that 
the way blame and punishment is apportioned for any particular alleged 
misdemeanour is as often as not determined by, at best, limited facts and the 
boundaries of adult reason; at worst by mendacity and low cunning, usually on 
the part of a sibling. Any given act is always unfair to someone. Parents 
discover that, like governments, they have to make do with order rather than 
justice.

You are not as important as you thought you were.

This often comes as a particular shock to fathers (mothers work it out the 
moment they get pregnant or long before). Fatherhood is largely an exercise in 
attaining humility in the face of brute circumstance. Until they have children, 
a lot of men entertain the conceit, consciously or not, that the world revolves 
around them. After children arrive, they realise they have just made way for 
something much more important than themselves – the next generation, which, at 
birth, is beginning the urgent project of edging their parents out of the 
way.Mothers tend to take this for granted. Fathers need to have to have it 
spelled out – repeatedly, and in some cases, indefinitely.

Time moves faster than you thought.

Once it passed at a stately pace marked by the odd wrinkle. Now you see it in 
constant rapid motion as you witness the unending transformations of your 
children. Children teach you about ephemerality. And therefore mortality.

Loving and liking are largely unrelated.

If you haven’t learned this already from your partner, your children are here 
to clarify it for you.

Loving is better than being loved.

You always thought you wanted someone to love you. Then you discover that the 
big payoff for being a parent is not so much to be a target of someone else’s 
love but to have a repository for your own. To be loved is desirable. To be 
able to love, it turns out, is indispensable.

The world is more complicated than you thought.

Once upon a time, you thought someone, somewhere knew most of the answers even 
if you didn’t. But subject to the simple, relentless questioning of a child, 
you soon realise that the world mostly comprises unanswerable questions. How 
can you tell when sour cream goes bad? What colour is a mirror? If a person is 
born deaf, what language do they think in?

It’s not that these questions didn’t exist before. It’s just that you didn’t 
have to think about them. Now you know how little you know. And, as Socrates’ 
son or daughter doubtless patiently explained to him, that is the beginning of 
wisdom.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 