
George Osborne’s attempts to slash state funding for opposition parties is bad 
news for democracy as it increases reliance on donors and raises the potential 
for corruption, the Electoral Reform Society (ERS) has warned.

After the government announced a 19% funding cut for Labour and other 
opposition parties, Katie Ghose, the chief executive of the ERS, said the move 
was a step in the wrong direction and could be “deeply damaging for 
accountability”.

“The whole party funding system is a complete mess as it is, but this measure 
risks making it worse,” she said. “By removing public money from the mix, this 
cut risks making parties even more reliant on big donors – with all the 
potential for corruption that entails.

“Unilateral moves like this risk being seen as overtly partisan, and could 
make it even harder for parties to get round the table and thrash out a deal on 
the real problem: their over-reliance on big donors’ money. Until we see a cap 
on donations and a lower spending limit, taking away public money from 
opposition parties will just make things worse.”

The funding, known as Short money, is named after the former minister Edward 
Short, who devised the system in 1974 to compensate opposition parties for not 
having access to Whitehall resources.

Osborne said in the autumn statement that opposition parties should lose money 
in line with the 19% cuts to Whitehall spending. Allocations will then be 
frozen in cash terms for the rest of the parliament, removing the automatic 
increase in line with inflation. Policy development grant allocations will also 
be reduced by a similar proportion.

Labour is set to lose more than £1m under the plans, while the SNP is set for 
a cut of more than £200,000 and the Lib Dems could lose around £100,000.

Osborne will now either have to get the proposal through a committee of MPs on 
which the Speaker sits and the Tories have no majority, or a vote of the whole 
House of Commons.

Chris Bryant, the shadow leader of the House of Commons, said it was 
“despicable rigging of the political system” and urged the chancellor to think 
again.

“We were generous to the Conservatives when we were in power because good 
government needs a strong opposition,” he said. “I think there will be 
Conservatives who will also be thinking that what goes around comes around.”

Bryant said he would be more inclined to think favourably about the proposal 
if the Conservatives were reducing the cost of their own special advisers.

The government said Short money for all opposition parties had risen in cost 
from £6.9m in 2010-11 to £9.3m in 2015-16.

Labour pointed out that in the meantime the cost of special advisers for 
Conservative government ministers has gone up from £5.9m in 2009 to £8.4m last 
year.


The Lib Dems also criticised the move, calling it “an attack on democracy”. 

“While on the one hand the government wants to cut Short money, they are 
spending £289m this year alone on spinners and marketing,” a spokesman said. 
“This proposal is a purely partisan move that will backfire on the government 
disastrously.”

The Green party accused Osborne of making “efforts to limit the democratic 
scrutiny of his austerity agenda”.


“Short money contributes to the legislature’s ability to properly hold the 
executive to account and put forward alternatives to government policy,” a 
spokesman said. “To parties such as the Green party, who do not receive large 
donations from multinational companies, Short money helps our parliamentarians 
to carry out scrutiny of the government.

“The Conservative government’s efforts to hamstring opposition parties is an 
assault on democracy and we will do all we can to resist these changes.”
 