
Facebook, as everyone knows, is the devil. And Facebook in December is the 
devil’s armpit. We are approximately one week from the absolute nadir of 
it all, when the whole platform will collapse in on itself in a dismal, needy 
flurry of jet-propelled Aren’t-I-Lucky consumerist gift-haul photos. But by 
then at least we’ll all be hardened towards it, because by then we’ll have 
suffered through an entire month of Elf on the Shelf.

Now, I know that the Guardian doesn’t have a particularly festive reputation 
<https://twitter.com/JamesFl/status/805855095879565312>, and I realise that 
what I’m about to say isn’t exactly going to help this reputation. But hear me 
out: all I want for Christmas is to stamp on Elf on the Shelf’s throat until it 
coughs up blood and dies.

I know this is going to sound like hyperbole, given everything that has 
happened this year, but Elf on the Shelf is easily the most violently dreadful 
thing to happen in 2016. How I long for the happier days of 2015, when nobody 
knew what an Elf on the Shelf was, back before it spawned and multiplied like 
the Zika virus and threatened to monopolise every home in the country. What I’d 
give to go back in time, Inception myself inside the mind of the Elf on 
the Shelf creator and scream the word “bastards” at them so loudly that they 
forgot to ever invent the bloody thing.

There is a chance – a minuscule chance, admittedly – that you don’t know what 
anElf on the Shelf <http://www.elfontheshelf.co.uk> is. If that’s the case, 
allow me to fill you in. An Elf on the Shelf is a small, posable toy elf that 
costs £31.95 and ostensibly acts as a scout for Father Christmas.

You put the elf on a shelf in early December and inform your children that he 
will always be watching and judging them for signs of bad behaviour. Then, just 
as your children learn to fear this nightmarish, murderer-looking totalitarian 
snitch, you start to move it around at night. Your children will wake up, look 
at the empty shelf, wonder where the elf has gone, and then find him, say, next 
to the toothbrushes in the bathroom. “Wow, this elf really enjoys scrutinising 
your entire life for traces of unacceptable behaviour,” you tell your child, 
who has now subconsciously made the decision to grow up under a pseudonym in an 
off-grid hut with tape covering their laptop’s webcam, just to escape the 
relentless corrosive judgment of the Elf on the Shelf.

Although Elf on the Shelf feels like it has gained ubiquity overnight, in 
reality it has enjoyed a sinister slow burn. It began 12 years ago as a 
self-published picture book in the US, and has gradually snowballed to the 
point that transatlantic success felt painfully inevitable. There were 
murmurings about Elf on the Shelf in Britain last year, but this is the year 
when it has really taken hold. Type “Elf” into Google and one of the first 
autocomplete suggestions is “on the Shelf”.The Elf on the Shelf Twitter account 
<https://twitter.com/elfontheshelf> has 138,000 followers. According to Google 
News, almost 20 new articles about Elf on the Shelf are being published every 
single day. If you’ve got Instagram and a follow a certain type of person, you 
will see just how unstoppable this mangy little intruder has become.

The thing that most rankles about all this is just how aggressively Elf on the 
Shelf wants to become a timeless Christmas tradition. Every Elf on the Shelf 
comes emblazoned with the phrase “AChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> Tradition”, which is 
immediately undone by the slightly needier “Adopt a New Family Tradition This 
Holiday Season” right underneath it. So it’s not really a tradition at all, but 
it figures that it can be if it tells you often enough. It’s the festive 
equivalent of Donald Trump’s Make America Great Again hat, determined to string 
you along until it’s too late. It’s a post-truth doll for a post-truth age.

And this hurts, because Christmas traditions are hard-won things. For example, 
my wife and I come from vastly different backgrounds, and Christmas Day is 
essentially a battle between the pair of us to see who gets to relive their 
childhood most vividly. Her dream Christmas is ornate and frilly, involving 
long walks in the country and carefully staggered presents that, for some 
reason, must definitely include a walnut in a shoe. Mine basically just 
involves me walking downstairs with a hangover, tearing open all my presents in 
30 seconds flat like some ridiculous fat Godzilla, and then lying on the sofa 
with a tummy ache for the rest of the day. Both days are equally valid, because 
they have both been carefully forged over decades. And whatever ungainly 
walnuts-and-tummy-ache compromise we will end up reaching as a married couple 
will be just as valid, because we will have made it ourselves.

But buying into a sinister, scowling, Santa-hatted Chucky doll whose sole 
purpose is to intimidate children into meekness, simply because it has the word 
“tradition” printed across its front, isn’t valid at all. It’s terrifying and 
cynical, it sends a bizarre message to children and it couldn’t be any less 
Christmassy if it was a bucket of vomit that sing-cries The Greatest Love of 
All whenever it senses that someone is near. Honestly, you may as well wrap 
tinsel around a CCTV camera and pass that off as a fun new festive activity.

In summary, I would rather die than live under the harrowing 
surveillance-state gaze of Elf on the Shelf. Have a lovely Christmas, everyone.
 