
We cannot be blamed for feeling nervous when this government talks of 
criminalising lack of parental love. There are uber-Thatcherites in its ranks 
who talk up the 'big society' but blame the individual. A wheeze for dumping 
their failure to support parents back on them would be no surprise.

However, in proposing to criminalise emotional abuse and neglect crimes, I am 
inclined to give them the benefit of the doubt. Many estimable campaigning 
groups, such as Action forChildren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children>, have advocated such legislation.

The case for it comes from the nature as well as nurture side of the child 
development debate. In an astonishing admission in the Guardian last month, 
Robert Plomin, the country's leading genetic psychologist, admitted of the 
Human Genome Project'squest for genes for psychological traits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/18/psychologist-robert-plomin-says-genes-crucial-education>
 of all kinds: "I've been looking for these genes for 15 years and I don't have 
any."

On the other side of the equation, the evidence for the role of maltreatment 
in causing emotional distress in general, and emotional abuse and neglect in 
particular, has become overwhelming. This applies as much to the extreme 
disturbance of psychosis (mostly schizophrenia and bipolar disorder) as to more 
common problems such as depression and anxiety.

A definitive analysis 
<http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/content/38/4/661.short> of the 
41 best studies into the impact of childhood adversity on the risk of psychosis 
(mostly schizophrenia and bipolar disorder) was published in 2012. It broke 
down the role of different kinds of maltreatment. Emotional abuse meant 
exposure to behaviour such as harshness and name-calling from parents. 
Emotional neglect meant lack of love and responsiveness. Overall, in order of 
impact, emotional abuse increased the risk of psychosis the most (by 3.4 times, 
physical abuse and emotional neglect did so by 2.9, sexual abuse and bullying 
by peers by 2.4).

That emotional abuse is more damaging than sexual and physical abuse may seem 
surprising, although they tend to go together. One study found that the 
emotionally abused were 12 times more likely to be schizophrenic than the 
general population (compared with six times for the physically abused and twice 
as likely for the sexually abused). Another study followed adolescents for 15 
years and found that over a third became schizophrenic if both parents were 
hostile, critical and intrusive, compared with none where only one parent was 
or neither were. In his definitive book, Models of Madness, John Read, a 
clinical psychologist at Liverpool University, shows that in the 10 studies 
testing the matter, the more extreme the childhood adversity, the greater the 
risk of adult psychosis. The results are similar for the number of adversities. 
In one large study, those subjected to five or more adversities were 193 times 
more likely to suffer psychosis than those with none.

Similar findings come from studies of less extreme emotional distress. In the 
definitive one 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Development-Person-Minnesota-Adaptation/dp/1606232495>
, which followed 180 children from infancy to the age of 18, 90% of those who 
suffered early maltreatment qualified for a mental illness. Emotional neglect 
under the age of two was a critical predictor.

It is in light of this evidence that the government's plans must be 
understood: the crucial role of early nurture seems to be accepted in a 
cross-party consensus.

The null hypothesis of the Human Genome Project will almost certainly have to 
be accepted: that genes play almost no role in explaining why one sibling is 
different from another. In the meantime, we need not fear Orwellian intrusion 
on parents by social workers measuring how much we love our children.

If there were laws against hitting children, as there should be, it would not 
result in many, or even any, convictions. It will be the same with this law. 
What is important is for the authorities to signal clearly that, as John Bowlby 
pointed out 60 years ago, love is as vital as vitamins for a child to flourish.

• Oliver James' book, Not in your Genes – the Truth about the Findings of the 
Human Genome Project, is published early next year.
 