
The number of customers complaining to the independent ombudsman about their 
energy bills has soared with more people making official complaints in the 
first six months of this year than the whole of last year put together.

Official complaints more than doubled to 22,671 in the first six months of 
2014 from 10,598 in the previous six months. The 2013 total was 17,960.

Complaints to the ombudsman – who deals with disputes unresolved after at 
least eight weeks – also reached a record for one month at 4,124 in June, an 
increase of 216% on a year ago.

Chief energy ombudsman Lewis Shand Smith said: "The spike in complaints is in 
part a result of the rising cost of living, but also as a result of consumers 
becoming more aware of their rights and feeling more empowered to act and fight 
for a fair deal. Addressing these concerns is crucial to restoring consumer 
confidence in the sector." Billing-related issues accounted for 84% (19,009) of 
complaints between January and June 2014. Transfer issues, over switching to a 
new energy provider, were the second largest cause for complaints at 13% 
(2,988).

A spokesman for Energy UK, the industry trade body, said:"The energy industry 
works hard to provide the best service for its customers but in an industry 
serving 27 million households sometimes things go wrong. However no one wants 
to see complaints rise and each complaint is taken very seriously with 
companies working hard and investing in resources and new systems to resolve 
issues as quickly as possible. Most complaints are dealt with by the end of the 
next working day with no more than a phone call." Energy UK added that it 
launch a consultation this summer about dealing with complaints it cannot fix 
in 48 hours.

Energy watchdog Ofgem last month warned npower to resolve its billing problems 
by the end of August or halt all telephone sales to new customers, in the 
latest regulatory skirmish to hit the energy sector. The big six energy firms – 
Centrica, EDF Energy, RWE npower, SSE, E.ON and Scottish Power – have been 
warned by Labour leader Ed Miliband that they will be hit with a price freeze 
if his party wins the general election Last month the energy watchdog, Ofgem, 
referred the power industry to a formal investigation by the Competition and 
Markets Authority.

The 18-month investigation will look at whether the big have been profiteering 
and whether they should be broken up by separating their power generating 
businesses from the units that sell energy to households. Announcing the 
referral, the chief executive of Ofgem, Dermot Nolan, said: "Now is the right 
time to refer the energy market to the CMA for the benefit of consumers. This 
will help rebuild consumer trust and confidence in the energy market as well as 
provide the certainty investors have called for."

The CMA will also look at "tacit" co-ordination between firms over the timing 
of price rise anouncements, as well as new evidence that points to prices 
rising faster when industry costs increase - but declining more slowly when 
costs fall

The ombudsman figures come a week after Citizens Advice and Citizens Advice 
Scotland said complaints about npower and Scottish Power doubled in the first 
three months of 2014. Complaints about npower rose from 306.8 for every 100,000 
customers to 592, in the last quarter of 2013. The remaining members of the big 
six also fared badly. Complaints about Scottish Power rose from 100.5 per 
100,000 customers to 197.7, followed by SSE (34.1), British Gas (75.4), E.ON 
(83.6) and EDF Energy (84.5).
 