
1. Australia 17 England 20, Rugby World Cup final, Sydney, 22 November 2003

It has to be the top, even if the winning England team were a little past 
their peak. Martin Johnson carried his side to the final and Jonny Wilkinson, 
who had been one of the surprising burdens the captain had had to shoulder (at 
least until the semi‑final against France), won it with his right‑footed drop 
goal in extra-time. Freefall lay on the other side of the apogee of 2003, a 
descent halted only by Eddie Jones, coach of the beaten Australia in the final.

England’s luck against Australia was the fortune of the deserving | Eddie 
Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/18/england-australia-second-test-luck-deserving>
2. Australia 14 England 25, Tour match, Melbourne, 21 June 2003

Now this was the great England side of 2003 at their best. They had dug in 
with 13 players at one stage against New Zealand on their pre-World Cup tour of 
Australasia, and now they played with both control and aplomb in Melbourne. 
They had won the Six Nations grand slam in style and now they sent a shiver 
through the southern hemisphere. They were magnificent and would never be quite 
the same again.

3. Australia 7 England 23, Tour match, Melbourne, 18 June 2016

A tour win in Australia, another complement to a grand slam won in the Six 
Nations, but this one with greater resonance: this completes a first series win 
in Australia. England’s history of multiple-Test series in Australia is not 
extensive, but they come with a hostility that sets them apart. Australia are 
remarkably difficult to beat on home soil, and England have defeated the 2015 
World Cup finalists with something to spare.

4. New Zealand 10 England 16, Tour match, Auckland, 15 September 1973

England went on tour to New Zealand in the late summer of 1973 – strange time 
to tour – and lost three games against Taranaki, Wellington and Canterbury. 
Nobody gave them any chance at all when it came to the one-off Test at Eden 
Park, but they won. The scrum‑half Jan Webster was inspired. Since wins in New 
Zealand, then as now, are very rare and precious, this unexpected little gem 
from a bygone age stands out.

5. France 13 England 31, Five Nations, Paris, 15 February 1992

The highlight of the grand slam of 1992. England had beaten France in Paris in 
the World Cup the previous autumn and this game was supercharged with hostile 
intent. England taunted the hosts with their rugby and mocked them cruelly in 
the darkness of the scrum, causing Vincent Moscato and Gregoire Lascubé to 
explode – not literally but sufficiently for the Irish referee Stephen Hilditch 
to send the hooker and prop off. Wonderfully melodramatic stuff.
 