
It is still probably a good idea in the minds of the coaches. And presumably 
they will be telling their players that if they, the privileged to be wearing 
the shirt, don’t think it’s a good idea, then their careers are definitely not 
going to be extended much beyond this afternoon. So, in all in all, 
England-Wales can’t be such a bad idea.

It is, after all, a series decider, what with the teams level on one victory 
apiece over the course of the season.Wales won in the World Cup at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/26/england-wales-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 andEngland won there in the Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/england-wales-six-nations-match-report>
 on their way to the grand slam. What’s wrong with acclimatising the sides to 
the notion of a showdown? They’ll both be off to the southern hemisphere soon 
enough for three-match series, and what wouldn’t they both give to be in 
contention after two Tests? One-all with one to play; get used to the feeling – 
think big, England and Wales.

England’s Eddie Jones warns Australia to expect an ‘enormous scrap’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/england-rugby-union-eddie-jones-australia>
It was still a good idea when England knew they would be without their 
Saracens and Exeter players. Unavailability is an everyday reality, and at the 
end of any campaign teams have to be able to absorb the loss of any number of 
players and keep their spirits up, their shape intact and their set-plays 
memorised. So, get out there and play.

How shall they play? England have a little bit of the throwback about them, 
with Courtney Lawes and Joe Launchbury reunited in the second row. The rise of 
Maro Itoje and George Kruis in Eddie Jones’s first chapter with England helped 
underline not only the new coach’s daring in selection but also the role of the 
lock as a sexy place to play. Sure, they have to be big, but they have to be 
athletic and even silky, especially while going for the ball dropping out of 
the sky.

On the Wales side, Luke Charteris will be missed. He is not exactly the 
silkiest, being half a metre too long of back and limb to be anything more 
elegant than an invader from the War of the Worlds, but he stretches his arms 
to remarkable effect. His tackle count led the way in Europe and he is a most 
intelligent infiltrator of mauls. Jake Ball, who comes in for the Racing 92 
player still involved in the regular season of the Top 14 – that is, they 
haven’t even started the play-offs – is a different sort of lock, more dynamic 
off the mark, but not as telescopic as Charteris.

That leaves Alun Wyn Jones, a stalwart of the Wales pack in the age of Warren 
Gatland. He has been recovering from a heel injury, and his nation has been 
pleased to see him take time out. If ever a player has flogged himself season 
in, season out for region and country, it has been AWJ. The problem now for a 
32-year old with 98 caps to his name is that the world catches up, and it will 
take a ferocious determination to reimpose himself on a game that has grown 
accustomed to the sight of Kruis and Itoje dominating individually and as a 
duo. On the other hand, it has never dared to be suggested that AWJ lacks 
devotion to the cause. His comeback will be … interesting.

The second rows deserve top billing because they may well have more of a say 
on Sunday than players in daintier positions. Wales, encouraged by their coach 
to be a little less cautious, are trying to push up the tempo, in readiness for 
the fields of New Zealand, but it has been difficult for them to abandon the 
style that the very same coach imposed on them when he arrived in 2008.

Warren Gatland wants Wales to accentuate the positive against England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/27/wales-england-warren-gatland-rugby-union>
And very successful that forthright, power-based game was. It’s just time to 
update it, and Wales are not entirely comfortable when egged on to be more 
elastic. Even in theirconcluding and resounding 67-14 dispatch of Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/wales-italy-six-nations-match-report>
 in the last game of the Six Nations, there were times in the first half when 
their passing made their coaches wince. There is no guarantee, after a break 
from international intensity, that they will be fluid from the off. The second 
rows may have a heavy load if the ball does not go accurately to other quarters.

England, too, may take time to settle. It’s a reason to play this game – 
wire-brush the rust off the rhythms here at Twickenham in order to hit the 
ground running and passing in Australia and New Zealand, go one-nil up and take 
the series to a decider. It’s a sound theory.

It’s just that the sun is shining (sort of) and the second Test of the cricket 
summer is under way and the French Open is here and somehow it doesn’t feel 
quite right, even if it serves to settle a series that has never been short of 
drama, to have England-Wales at Twickenham.
 