
This is going to be about England against Wales, but a week out from the game 
to relish in a championship that has been esoteric in its virtues, there’s no 
escaping the spotlight turned on the wider game of rugby. In my living memory, 
which so many doctors are suddenly telling me is much impaired through the 
clouts of old, there has never been such a campaign tolessen the “contact” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/02/uk-health-experts-call-for-ban-on-tackling-in-school-rugby>
 bit of this contact sport.

At this point I think I am supposed to leap in and say that if I told 
youngsters currently playing at school that they had to tag rather than tackle 
they would give up. And I think they would – and not just renounce the rugby, 
which still works its magic in adhering those not automatically devoted to 
their studies to the notion of sticking at them. You need a lot of glue 
sometimes. Loosen the bond of shared physical endeavour, undo the trust that 
goes into making a team stronger than the sum of its individual parts, and the 
relationship between school and student is altered, and not necessarily for the 
better.

England’s Billy Vunipola thrashes his way through Ireland’s defence | Eddie 
Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/27/billy-vunipola-england-ireland-johnny-sexton>
At the same time, I have to say that I witnessed in the past 12 months such a 
jarring excess among the coaching staff of one London school in particular that 
the notion of sport as a healthy part of their institution’s life would have to 
be questioned. From the tone of their emails questioning the standard of 
facilities (even including the bus parking space) of the school to host them in 
the late stages of a national cup competition, to their hoisting of a camera on 
a special pole to provide overhead coverage not available to their strutting 
ubiquity around the entire field, they sucked the joy out of the day. In 
particular by barking out orders to their team to be more dominant physically.

Theirs was an adult world gone mad. If any danger needs to be eradicated it is 
among those who have taken their young players, ever willing and prone to 
over-excitability, to places that should be firmly declared out of bounds. A 
little less of the intimidation and a little more on correct tackling technique 
would make rugby a safer sport.

It won’t be at Twickenham. It is an extension of the same debate – that rugby, 
designed for all shapes and sizes and played under one set of laws, is now 
split into two, and that the young and the amateur should be protected against 
trying to emulate the professionals – but it must be put on hold. You can’t 
wring your hands and cross your fingers at the same time. Not without 
dislocating a few knuckles, and imagine the signatures that would add to the 
letters.

Anyway, it’s going to be Billy Vunipola against Taulupe Faletau; the No8s of 
England and Wales going mano a mano. Billy is still learning the position, 
according to his coach, Eddie Jones, who has succeeded in wrapping his old 
hooker’s arms around his boy’s massive shoulders and cuddling himinto explosive 
action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/27/billy-vunipola-england-ireland-johnny-sexton>
. In its midst he will repeatedly find his cousin, who at all of 25 years of 
age, is a veteran of 55 Tests.

It’s another debate. How much credit can go to England or Wales for producing 
these players? Ebbw Vale and Pontypool, from the same corner of south-east 
Wales, signed the respective fathers – Kuli Faletau and Fe’ao Vunipola – but 
the talents of their sons say something more about Tonga. Whatever comes out of 
the collisions between the cousins – or whatever is left after them – a little 
thank you might go to the 177 islands and their combined population of just 
over 100,000, that have done it again. They gave New Zealand Jonah Lomu; they 
have given us this pair.

A final point on the safety debate. Faletau leads the tackle count in the Six 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations>. Most of them, touch 
wood, have been a technical masterclass – with the shoulder leading, the arms 
wrapping and the head on the safe side of the victim. Stick that up your camera 
on a pole.

It is possible that Billy will pass before contact at first. That Jamie 
Roberts will be a decoy runner in the opening moves. That Manu Tuilagi, should 
he be selected, will take to the No12 shirt with the subtle touch of a second 
five-eighth. All things are possible, but since Billy has been the source of 
just about all forward momentum, it is hard to see him being unemployed for 
long.

And that if Tuilagi is to play it is surely to share Billy’s physical load. 
Billy has to charge but if he is the only runner coming Wales’s way he will be 
easily felled by a side in contention through defence. Faletau, Sam Warburton 
and Dan Lydiate will be waiting to take him low, medium and legally high. Billy 
needs help.

England “walked in” tries against Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/27/england-ireland-six-nations-match-report>
, a sign of buildup work patiently controlled and multiple phases well 
constructed. Wales will have pored over the tapes and Shaun Edwards will have 
identified the stress points – and reinforced them accordingly. Wales do not 
break easily under extended pressure. They will have berated themselves for
yielding a late try from a driving maul to France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/26/wales-france-six-nations-match-report>
. Defence is their point of honour.

As it is with England. For all that they finished well, they missed other 
opportunities against Ireland. Defence is still a much more developed and honed 
element than attack. Wales are struggling to identify the right moment to keep 
the ball in hand or flood the runner who makes a break with support. They have 
their patterns and structures and have so far been resistant to breaking them. 
They have yet to go off-piste, although they yearn to play a little more 
expansively.

Both teams are looking to the future and perhaps they will take a risk or two. 
But both are aware of the past. Their history is long; memories are short of the
showdown at the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/26/england-wales-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. Anybody on the England side who froths over that, rather than thinking of 
this new hour, will jeopardise the work of Billy. This won’t be beautiful, but 
it may hinge on cool decision-making rather than the all-too-obvious contact.
 