
I’m on thin ice telling Guardian readers that being an ethical consumer makes 
you irritating, but you can’t argue with science. In a recent study, US 
researchers offered people various information before buying jeans, but said 
they could only know two of the following: price, style, colour, and whether 
child labour was involved. Those who chose not to learn about child labour were 
asked to assess the kind of person who would. Did they judge them to be more 
sexy, stylish or charismatic? No: they found them unattractive, boring and odd. 
Life – unlike the labour practices behind your ethical wardrobe – isn’t fair.

Still, it’s clear what’s happening here, and it ought to offer ethical types 
some solace. It’s called social comparison theory. The non-ethical shoppers 
knew they should care about child labour but didn’t want to think about it, so 
felt threatened by those who did. And no, it’s not that ethical shoppers are 
just insufferably smug and therefore annoying. Another part of the study 
confirmed the theory: when people were given the chance to make a donation to 
charity at no cost to themselves, they didn’t feel the need to put others down. 
“They’d had a chance to shore up their ethical identity,” researcherRebecca 
Reczek told Harvard Business Review 
<https://hbr.org/2016/04/ethical-shoppers-dont-inspire-us-they-bug-us>. “[So 
they] didn’t experience the same sense of threat.”

When it comes to making the world a better place, this is dispiriting. It’d be 
nice to think that making ethical choices inspired others to do the same. And 
it’s true that outstandingly moral people – Nelson Mandela, for example – do 
serve as inspiration. But that’s partly because we rarely compare ourselves to 
them. You didn’t have the option of suffering in jail to lead South Africa out 
of apartheid, so there’s no shame in the fact that you didn’t. By contrast, 
small-scale virtuous behaviour – the kind we could emulate, if we could be 
bothered – triggers comparison and guilt. The end result is that we’reless 
motivated to be virtuous. Having dismissed ethical consumers as tedious 
weirdos, study participants were less angry about child labour than before.

The underlying problem goes way beyond shopping. Faced with any ethical 
outrage, there are two ways to make your negative feelings go away. One is to 
address the outrage; the other is to try not to think about it – as with the 
people who chose not to learn about child labour. You can deal with the horrors 
of factory farming by becoming vegetarian – or by not hanging out with 
vegetarians who bang on about factory farms.

How to love your daily commute | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/08/how-to-love-your-daily-commute-oliver-burkeman>
Yet there’s cause for optimism. After all, those “non-ethical” shoppers 
weren’t really non-ethical: they only reacted how they did because they knew 
ethics mattered. Just don’t try to persuade such people by telling them their 
choices are evil. To assuage their guilt, they’ll block that message out – or 
conveniently convince themselves you’re a freak.




• Oliver Burkeman explores the phenomenon of feeling like a fraud in The 
Impostors’ Survival Guide on BBC Radio 4 on 26 April at 11am and 2 May at 9pm.
 