
Jean-Claude Trichet, say his fans, has been a supremely successful second 
president of theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>. During his 
eight-year reign he has delivered inflation in the eurozone "below but close to 
2%", just as the ECB's primary mandate demands. He has also been a constant 
voice warning governments about the need for budgetary discipline; if any 
central banker has the right to say "I told you so", it's Trichet.

But Trichet's ECB has also been too slow to respond to the pressures on the 
peripheral members on the eurozone; in raising interest rates earlier this 
year, it was too obsessed by an inflation risk that is now rapidly disappearing 
from the radar. He has risked making a bad situation worse by sticking to his 
line that countries must start to put their own houses in order before the ECB 
will intervene by buying their bonds.

It was on this principle, it appeared, that the ECB on Thursday resumed 
purchases of Irish and Portuguese bonds but left those of Spain andItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> untouched. But on Friday night, as 
details of frantic telephone conference calls between EU leaders emerged and 
Silvio Berlusconi announced he was bringing forward his plan to trim €48bn from 
the budget deficit, it started to look as if Trichet's intransigence may have 
prompted the very action he has been demanding.

The fires in Rome and Madrid are raging. Trichet's stance so far has been like 
that of a fire brigade that refuses to send its engines because the occupants 
contributed to the blaze through their carelessness. The diagnosis of the cause 
of the fire is spot on, but that does not help to quell flames that are 
threatening the entire neighbourhood.

This is the problem of "moral hazard" last encountered during the banking 
crisis. At what point should a central bank intervene for the greater good? The 
ECB's answer on Thursday was to extend support for euro-area banks by providing 
extra liquidity on a six-month basis. A good thing, too – strains on the 
banking system in southernEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>
 have been appearing as money seeks safety in Germany. But it's the sovereign 
bond market, where Italy and Spain must finance themselves, that is the most 
visible expression of the crisis. Those 6%-plus yields have terrified investors 
and undermined business leaders' confidence in hiring new workers and putting 
cash to work.

Trichet's supporters make two arguments. First, that he has played a deft 
game, gambling that Italian politicians would be more likely to make the tough 
budgetary decisions to reduce the country's 120% debt-to-GDP ratio if the ECB 
took a dim view of their previous efforts. Second, that the ECB lacks the 
authority and the balance sheet to buy Italian and Spanish bonds on a scale 
that would bring a permanent improvement in borrowing costs.

There are stronger counter-arguments. First, Trichet is playing a dangerous 
game. We know from experience with Greece, Ireland and Portugal that once bond 
yields pass 6% the plot can become unpredictable. If the ECB continues to stand 
in the wings, the opportunity to intervene before panic gets out of hand could 
be lost.

The second – technical – point about the ECB's powers has more merit. But 
Trichet could at least sound as if he wants more powers. At the moment, 
investors know that the European financial stability facility, the current 
rescue fund, is underpowered and lacks the necessary approvals from member 
states to intervene in bond markets. The ECB should be filling the gap; it is 
failing to do so. Disagreements within the ranks of its governing council don't 
make the job easy. But neither does Trichet's seeming lack of appetite for a 
fight.

Diamond is the commission's best friend

In the midst of the market mayhem last week, all the banks listed in London 
announced their results. Just two reported higher profits: Standard Chartered 
and HSBC.

Three, however – Barclays and the bailed-out Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds 
Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group – revealed 
performances that were sharply down, and the rescued banks slumped into losses 
for the first six months of 2011.

HSBC, Barclays, RBS and Lloyds were all hit by multibillion-pound provisions 
to compensate customers mis-sold payment protection insurance. RBS has also 
taken a painful £733m hit from exposure to Greece.

But the stand-out theme was frustration with the independent banking 
commission, chaired by Sir John Vickers. HSBC's chairman Douglas Flint started 
the week with a veiled threat that if its recommendations were too radical, 
more jobs would face the axe. Stephen Hester, the chief executive of RBS, ended 
the week without even attempting to hide his contempt for the process.

But Barclays boss Bob Diamond made an interesting plea, calling for regulatory 
certainty so investors could decide whether to buy shares in banks.

Diamond has a point. Banks need to be "investable", and if the government is 
ever to profitably unload its stakes in RBS and Lloyds, it needs to convince 
big City investors to buy them. And they won't while the uncertainty remains.
 