
In dismissing the opinions of those he refers to as “luvvies” (The luvvies’ 
Brexit letter only shows most people vote with their wallets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/20/luvvies-brexit-letter-eu-largesse>
, theguardian.com, 20 May), Simon Jenkins ensures that the debate about Europe 
continues to be limited to an imprecise and confusing argument about the 
financial consequences (which no one can be sure about), fragile prophecies 
about immigration, and anecdotal stories of Brussels’ interference in our daily 
lives, including dictating the size of bananas.

Europe is a common market that trades in ideas as well as materials. It is 
based on the premise that we can profit from each other, not only in fiscal but 
in social and intellectual terms. For those engaged in the arts and the 
creative industries, Europe is a reality. Our artists, actors, musicians, 
dancers and designers establish collaborations and dialogue beyond the normal 
reach of the worlds of finance and politics. The forging of cultural 
connections and the search for common understanding cannot be brushed aside as 
the romantic drivel of the so-called “luvvies”. It must be regarded in our 
increasingly synthetic world as central to a healthy society, spiritually and 
commercially.

We cannot base this enormous decision on the anecdotal stories of European 
meddling in our affairs, on the fear of immigration or on foggy economic 
predictions. We must decide whether our future and the future of our children 
should be based on building up barriers or breaking them down. Given that we 
have emasculated our manufacturing base and that we are slowly realising the 
dangers of leveraging our future on an overreliance on the financial, don’t we 
seriously need to build a society that engages wider ambitions than those 
measured in conventional terms?

There is one way of handicapping our intellectual and creative talent, and it 
is by cutting off its oxygen, suffocating it with our little island mentality, 
isolating ourselves from diverse influences and common interests.
David Chipperfield
David Chipperfield Architects Ltd

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 