
6.06pm BST 

FTSE 100 falls to the lowest since March

Shares across Europe ended the day down sharply after the ECB failed to 
unleash any fresh economic stimulus. The pan-European FTSEurofirst 300 closed 
1.1% lower at 1,180.65 points.

The FTSE 100 closed down 76.16 points, or 1.2%, to 6,344.12 points - the 
lowest finish since 4 March. Germany's Dax closed down 0.7%, France's Cac is 
down 0.47%.

And with that we'll wrap up the blog, and see you again tomorrow. 

5.51pm BST 

US unemployment claims rise to 385,000

Over in the US, American unemployment claims have hit a four-month high - up 
28,000 to 385,000 - the Labor Department said.

It was the third straight week of gains in claims and confounded economists' 
expectations for a drop to 350,000.

Coming on the heels of data on Wednesday showing private employers added the 
fewest jobs in five months in March, the report implied some weakening in job 
growth after hiring accelerated in February.

The four-week moving average for new claims, a better measure of labor market 
trends, rose 11,250 to 354,250.

More details here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/apr/04/us-unemployment-claims-four-month-high>
.

Updated at 6.06pm BST

5.10pm BST 

German, French and Austrian bond yields fall on fear of ECB rate cut

German bond yields have dropped to an 8-month low following Draghi's dovish 
comments that suggest a ECB rate cut is likely soon. The German 10-year yields 
fell four basis points, or 0.04 percentage point, to 1.24% the lowest since 
August.

French and Austrian 10-year yields fell to records as Draghi said monetary 
policy will “remain accommodative for as long as needed” to boost growth. 
Spanish and Italian bonds pared gains as the ECB president said the central 
bank won’t immediately implement measures to ease funding strains for smaller 
companies.

3.37pm BST 

Euro and dollar surge against the yen

FX watch. The euro has now risen to a session high against the dollar, 
reversing a previous slide to a four-and-a-half month low. The Euro was trading 
at $1.2880 just after 3pm, a 0.2% rise on the day.

The euro and the dollar have both risen by more than 3% against the yen, 
following theBank of Japan's announcement of massive monetary easing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/apr/04/japan-bank-money-supply-inflation-deflation>
. The dollar reached a session peak of 95.91 yen, a 3.1% rise over the day. The 
euro rose 3.2% to 123.36 yen, having hit as high as 123.47 yen. It is currently 
the biggest one day euro-yen rise since March 2011.

Updated at 4.26pm BST

3.29pm BST 

Economist predicts ECB rate cut soon

Howard Archer, Chief European & UK Economist at IHS Global Insight, reckons 
Draghi's dovish comments suggest an interest rate cut is looking even more 
probable and is likely to be sooner rather than later.

While the ECB made no policy changes at its April meeting, the overall tone of 
its statement and Mr. Draghi’s comments were markedly more dovish and an 
interest rate cut from 0.75% to 0.50% now looks highly likely. Indeed, it is 
very possible that the ECB could trim interest rates to 0.50% as soon as its 
May policy meeting.

Significantly, ECB President Mario Draghi revealed that there had been 
“extensive” discussion on interest rates. Furthermore, he reported that the 
decision to keep interest rates at 0.75% was by consensus, so not unanimous.

We suspect that likely ongoing disappointing Eurozone economic news will 
continue to push the ECB towards cutting interest rates, and likely sooner 
rather than later. We expect a cut from 0.75% to 0.50% in the second quarter, 
and consider a move as soon as May as highly possible.

Not only does further Eurozone GDP contraction now seem highly probable in the 
first quarter, but prospects for the second quarter are looking increasingly 
worrying. With Eurozone consumer price inflation down at a 31-month low of 1.7% 
in March, wage growth generally weak and most inflationary measures currently 
muted, the ECB has ample scope to cut interest rates.

Updated at 4.24pm BST

2.50pm BST 

Draghi: Cyprus bailout is not a template for other rescues

Draghi stressed that the Cyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> 
bailout, which involved losses imposed on richer bank depositors, was not a 
template for future rescues.

"Cyprus is no template. I am absolutely sure that the chairman of the 
eurogroup has been misunderstood[he had previously been interrupted as having 
suggested that]. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/mar/25/eurozone-crisis-cyprus-bailout-deal-agreed#block-51508097b5795d794abf4461>

The press conference has finished. 

2.23pm BST 

Cyprus growth forecasts: varied

While we're talking Cyprus look at the range of forecasts on how long it will 
take for the Island's economy to recover
 Comparison of Cyrpus growth forecasts (%GDP). Source: OpenEurope Photograph: 
OpenEurope 
Updated at 2.24pm BST

2.14pm BST 

Draghi: Leaving the Euro won't help Cyprus

Draghi says Cyprus leaving the Eurozone won't make any difference to its 
economy. 

What was wrong with Cyprus' economy doesn't stop if they are outside of the 
Euro.

And he added that there are big risks attached to leaving the single currency.

2.02pm BST 

Euro drops further on Draghi's dovish comments

The Euro is falling fast. It's now dropped to a four-month low against the 
dollar on Draghi's dovish comments.

1.58pm BST 

Draghi says Cyprus was

Draghi says Cyprus officials were "not smart" in proposing a levy on ordinary 
savers with less than €100,000 in Cypriot banks.

The ECB had presented a proposal where no levy on insured depositors was 
foreseen. And let me also tell you this was almost exactly the same as all of 
the other proposals by the (European) Commission, the IMF - the exactly the 
same picture.

Then we started a prolonged negotiation with the Cyprus... with the parties 
present at the meeting, the outcome of which was what you saw - namely a levy 
on uninsured depositors.That was not smart, to say the least, and it was 
quickly corrected the day after in the Eurogroup conference.
 ECB President Mario Draghi Photograph: OLIVIER HOSLET/EPA 
Updated at 2.09pm BST

1.53pm BST 

The ECB have released the full text of Draghi's statement.

Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the 
key ECB interest rates unchanged. HICP inflation rates have declined further, 
as anticipated, and price developments over the medium term should remain 
contained. Monetary and loan dynamics remain subdued. Inflation expectations 
for the euro area continue to be firmly anchored in line with our aim of 
maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. At 
the same time, weak economic activity has extended into the early part of the 
year and a gradual recovery is projected for the second half of this year, 
subject to downside risks.

You can read the whole thing here 
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pressconf/2013/html/is130404.en.html>.

1.44pm BST 

Euro falls as Draghi speaks

Draghi's lack of optimism is not going down to well with FX traders.

Updated at 1.46pm BST

1.39pm BST 

Draghi: Eurozone recovery to start in second-half of 2013

Draghi says the Eurozone should start to recover in the second-half of the 
year, subject to "downside risks".

Updated at 1.40pm BST

1.31pm BST 

Draghi press conference

European Central Bank President Mario Draghi is about to start his press 
conference. You can watch it livehere 
<http://www.ecb.int/press/tvservices/webcast/html/webcast_130404.en.html>. 
(There's some lovely hold music...)

Updated at 1.32pm BST

12.46pm BST 

ECB leaves interest rate unchanged

The ECB has left the benchmark interest rate unchanged at 0.75%, as expected.

12.05pm BST 

Pound up slightly on rates held decision

Sterling has risen slightly from $1.5054 to $1.5066 on the bank of the Bank's 
decision to leave rates unchanged.

The Bank made no statement on the MPC's decision to hold rates.

12.01pm BST 

Bank of England leaves interest rate and QE unchanged

The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has left interest 
rate unchanged at 0.5% and QE unchanged at £375bn.

Updated at 12.02pm BST

11.57am BST 

Greece sells its London counsul official residence for £23.3m

And over to Greece where our correspondent Helena Smith says the debt-stricken 
country’s privatisation drive has been energized by news of the sale of four 
diplomatic missions abroad - including the counsul's official residence in 
Holland Park for £23.3m

She writes:

The quest to reduce Greece’s monumental debt mountain received a much-needed 
boost this morning with the announcement that four high-end properties, 
including the London home of the Greek consul, had fetched far more under the 
hammer than initially expected.

In a surprise announcement, the Hellenic Republic Asset Development Fund 
(TAIPED) overseeing the country’s privatization drive, said the diplomatic 
missions had raised 41.1 million euro – 27.7 higher than the initial valuation 
of the properties.

The consul’s home, a 10,000 ft double-fronted Victorian townhouse in London’s 
fashionable Holland Park district sold for 23.3 million pounds (27.462 eur0). 
When Greek authorities announced the sale in September, under international 
pressure to reign in revenues, UK real estate agents had valued the residence 
at 20 million pounds.

TAIPED said other sales included diplomatic buildings in Nicosia, Brussels and 
Belgrade with respective price tags of 8.3 million euro, 3.24 million euro and 
2.075 million.

Officials said the proceeds would be handed over to the country’s creditors at 
the EU, ECB and IMF. “After all the delays in our privatisation programme this 
has to be good news,” one insider said.
 The Greek Consulate in Holland Park undergoing extensive renovation last 
year. Photograph: Sarah Lee 
Savills, which sold the Grade II-listed property 9 bedroom town house, 
described it as: "An incredible opportunity to modernise a wonderful Grade II 
listed detached Italianate Villa on the most desirable southern leg of the 
street. The property benefits from a 136' x 49' garden backing directly onto 
the park."

Click here for a pdf of the brochure 
<http://search.savills.com/Content/assets/properties/gbnnrsnot120034/NOT120034_NOT12000123.PDF>
. It's nice, but the garden looks like could do with some work.

More details from Unmodernised 
<http://unmodernised.com/a-palatial-part-of-greece-on-the-market-in-holland-park/>

To all you millionaires out there, this is one for those of you with tens of 
millions* at your disposal, rather than the mere several million that you may 
have been thinking would suffice. Certainly at the business end of the 
unmodernised property market, this ‘Grade II listed detached Italianate Villa’ 
is certainly spot-on in terms of location.

The next thing to worry about is the works involved to convert the property 
from it’s former use as an annexe to the Greek Embassy. We reckon you’d 
probably be looking at around £600 per square foot on all your refurb costs 
(yes, that’s a renovation budget of +/- £5.25m). It’s endowed with a superb 
garden, and there’s probably potential to extend beyond the current 8700 sq ft.

Updated at 12.35pm BST

11.52am BST 

Centre-left challenge in Italy

Over in Italy the centre-left Mayor of Florence Matteo Renzi has called for a 
government coalition with former premier Silvio Berlusconi or new elections in 
June. It is a clear challenge to Italian center-left leader Pier Luigi Bersani.

More from Reuters  
<http://news.yahoo.com/florence-mayor-challenges-bersani-calls-coalition-berlusconi-100454042.html>

Bersani won a majority in the lower house but not the Senate in February 
elections, leaving his center-left group unable to govern alone. He failed last 
week in efforts to forge a viable majority in parliament after his overtures to 
the anti-establishment 5-Star Movement were rebuffed.

Renzi, 38, who lost to Bersani last December in a vote to be the center-left 
election candidate, gave interviews to several Italian newspapers saying he was 
ready to be a candidate in new leadership primaries.

Renzi had previously hesitated to challenge Bersani, a former communist 
politician who threw away a 10-point opinion poll lead in the February 24-25 
election which left Italy in political deadlock.

But in recent days he has become increasingly outspoken in attacking Bersani's 
line that a "grand coalition" alliance with scandal-plagued center-right leader 
Berlusconi is unthinkable.

And Gazzetta del Sud 
<http://www.gazzettadelsud.it/news/english/41072/Renzi-says-gridlocked-Italy--wasting-time-.html>

"We are going through a political-institutional period in which time is being 
wasted, while the world is asking us to run twice as fast" said Renzi, who is 
expected to challenge to lead the centre left if Italy returns to the polls 
later this year after losing the last primary to the head of his Democratic 
Party (PD), Pier Luigi Bersani. Italian President Giorgio Napolitano at the 
weekend asked a group of 10 'wise men' to try to break the stalemate by 
producing a government programme capable of winning cross-party support.

11.11am BST 

French bond auction

France posted a dire set of services PMIs for March today, coming in at 41.3 
and further underlining the country's economic divergence from Germany. 
Nonetheless, France sold nearly €7bn worth of sovereign debt this morning - at 
the upper echelons of expectations. According to Adam Parry at International 
Financing Review:

Once again, the French primary dealers did their usual efficient job of 
placing auction paper with domestic accounts, ensuring a solid set of results 
despite those awful PMI numbers.

Updated at 11.13am BST

11.02am BST 

Bank of Japan and Spanish bond auction impact

The Bank of Japan announcement has not shifted the dial for western investors, 
and neither has the successful Spanish bond auction. The pan-European 
FTSEurofirst 300 index was up slightly - slightly - at 1,193 points and 
France's CAC index is up 0.75% with Spain's Ibex the best performer, up 1.4%. 
The FTSE is down slightly and it is safe to say that excitement over the 
imminent Bank of England andEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> statements is not 
building.

10.38am BST 

Yen falls in wake of Bank of Japan statement

The early indications are that the Bank of Japan's announcement of a massive 
increase in quantitative easing has had the desired effect of pushing down the 
yen against the dollar. The phrase chō endaka - or "super-strong yen" - is a 
common refrain among Japanese manufacturers who have been forced to base their 
operations abroad in a bid to stay competitive.

The dollar rose more than 2.5% to 95.69 yen this morning and analysts expect 
it to rise further against the Japanese currency. Lee Hardman, currency 
economist at BTMU, said:

The BoJ has set in play a very aggressive expansion of monetary policy and 
it's very likely dollar/yen will continue to rise.

Updated at 11.14am BST

10.23am BST 

Hopes rise that triple-dip will be ducked

Here's Heather Stewart's take on the UK services PMI data 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/apr/04/services-data-uk-triple-dip-recession-pmi>
 for March, which could strengthen the arm of hawks on the Bank of England's 
monetary policy committee, who fear that further quantitative easing could 
stoke inflation.

10.15am BST 

Spanish bond sale reaction

Nicholas Spiro at Spiro Sovereign Strategy argues that Spain's "remarkable" 
performance in the bond markets indicates that investors are no longer 
concerned about the threat to the eurozone's fourth largest economy.

Spanish debt, and Italian paper for that matter, continues to confound the 
sceptics. One can no longer attribute the resilience of Spain's debt market to 
the ECB's bond-buying programme alone, whose credibility and effectiveness are 
increasingly in doubt. For the time being, investors are simply no longer 
sufficiently concerned about Spain to force a sharp and sustained sell-off. The 
result of this morning's auction, with the Treasury getting all its debt out 
the door (and then some) and a further dip in yields, underscores markets' 
muted reaction to the harsh treatment meted out to private creditors in Cyprus.

Updated at 11.14am BST

10.07am BST 

Spanish bond auction

Reuters is reporting that Spain sold more sovereign debt than it expected at a 
bond auction today, getting away €4.3bn of bonds compared with the anticipated 
€3bn to €4bn. The yields - or interest rate payments - were at similar levels 
to recent auctions.

Updated at 10.07am BST

9.59am BST 

Eurozone facing sixth successive fall in GDP

There is less optimism, however, about the eurozone's performance in the first 
quarter of the year. Howard Archer at IHS Global Insight says the contraction 
in eurozone services in March indicates that the area suffered a sixth 
successive quarter of GDP contraction in the first quarter of 2013. This is bad 
news for UK exports, and therefore the British economy as a whole.

Looking ahead to the European Central Bank interest rate announcement this 
afternoon, Archer adds:

Despite mounting signs that the already weak eurozone economic situation is 
deteriorating anew and muted inflationary pressures, the ECB still seems 
unlikely to cut interest rates from 0.75% to 0.50% at today’s April policy 
meeting.
 
The ECB currently seems reluctant to take interest rates down from 0.75% to 
0.50%, partly due to some doubts that such a move would have a beneficial 
impact given current fragmented conditions in credit markets. And there is a 
risk that this fragmentation could be magnified by the recent events in Cyprus.

Updated at 11.14am BST

9.53am BST 

Will the UK avoid a triple-dip?

ING Bank says the services PMI, the strongest since August, increases the 
chances of the UK avoiding its third recession in less than five years, also 
described as a "triple-dip" downturn.

Nonetheless, ING's James Knightley argues that it will be close, thanks to the 
chilling effect of the recent weather:

[The PMI data] supports the evidence seen in the broader British Chambers of 
Commerce survey earlier this week, that the UK did post modest growth in the 
quarter. Consequently, this will further diminish the probability of any policy 
change at today’s Bank of England MPC meeting. Nonetheless, we are concerned 
that bad weather in January and March could impact on the GDP calculations so 
we still think it will be 50:50 on whether the UK does indeed post a positive 
1Q13 GDP number on 25 April.

Updated at 11.14am BST

9.46am BST 

Looking ahead to the BoE and ECB decisions

Here are a couple of previews of today's big bank announcements from RAN 
Squawk, on theBank of England 
<http://docs.ransquawk.com/document/preview-boe-rate-decision_2013-04-04_udkyby6pdfyl1>
 at noon and, soon after, theEuropean Central Bank 
<http://docs.ransquawk.com/document/preview-ecb-rate-decision_2013-04-04_pwb0nh6q2b4aj>
. Analysts appear to believe that the doves will again be in the minority on 
Threadneedle Street, with just three out of 37 contacted by RAN Squawk 
estimating a £25bn increase in quantitative easing to £400bn.

9.40am BST 

Services data indicates growth in Q1

Markit, the data company that compiles the PMIs, says that the UK services 
data points to economic growth of 0.1% in the first three months of 2013. So 
the UK will just about squeak past the threat of a triple-dip recession after 
the economy contracted by 0.3% in the final quarter of last year.

Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit, said:

The government and Bank of England will breathe sighs of relief in seeing 
signs of a gathering upturn in the service sector during March, which looks set 
to have helped the UK avoid a triple-dip recession by the narrowest of margins.

A caveat: Markit's survey does not include the public sector or retailers and 
focuses on areas such as transport and communication, business services and 
entertainment.

Updated at 11.15am BST

9.32am BST 

UK services sector grows

Good news for the UK economy: Britain's services sector recorded its strongest 
expansion in seven months in March. This indicates that the UK will have 
escaped a triple dip recession, and George Osborne a horde of rampaging back 
benchers.

The Markit/CIPS purchasing managers' index for the service sector - 
three-quarters of the UK economy - climbed to 52.4 in March compared with 51.8 
in February. Anything above 50 denotes growth, and good news for the growth 
engine of the UK economy.

9.28am BST 
Anatole Kaletsky (@Kaletsky) 
Japan news is huge: monthly QE same as US in an economy 1/3 the size. This may 
or may not fix the economy, but Nikkei will go ballistic!
 <https://twitter.com/Kaletsky/status/319700395578494976> April 4, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/Kaletsky/status/319700395578494976> 
And Anatole Kaletsky's take...

9.27am BST 

More on Japan

Here is the FT's take 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/81fbc13c-9cd6-11e2-9a4b-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2PInfaWA9>
 on the Bank of Japan announcement.

9.20am BST 

European services contract

The PMI for the European services sector in March is out and it is poor. 
Markit's Eurozone services PMI, which surveys thousands of companies from 
restaurants to banks, showed a fall from 47.9 in February to 46.4 in March. 
Anything below the 50 threshold denotes contraction and this index has been 
below that level for all but one of the last 20 months. France's data in 
particular was worrying, falling to 41.9 compared with 43.1 in February.

Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit, said the Cypriot crisis had yet 
to register on the eurozone economy.

The recession is deepening once again as businesses report that they have 
become increasingly worried about the region's debt crisis and political 
instability. The unresolved election in Italy was commonly cited as a key 
factor clouding the economic outlook in March, and the botched bail-out of 
Cyprus could well filter through to a further worsening of business sentiment 
across the region in April.

9.13am BST 

Traders expect ECB to leave rates unchanged

The futures market for German sovereign debt is indicating that the ECB will 
keep its key interest rate at a record low of 0.75%, but will give some 
positive hints about hints of monetary policy easing in the future. One trader 
told Reuters: "Given where yields are, the risk is for the market to be 
disappointed if [ECB President mario Draghi] is not as dovish [as the market 
expects]."

The so-called "Draghi put", when the ECB boss said last year that he would do 
whatever it takes to save the euro, has played a key role in calming the 
markets. So Draghi is expected to keep up the interventionist rhetoric.

Updated at 9.13am BST

9.02am BST 

Japan: the next crisis?

This morning's announcement by the Bank of Japan is a significant development. 
It will boost the economy in the short-term but it has long-term implications 
for a gross national debt burden that, at more than 200% of GDP, is too big.

An article on this subject appeared in the Atlantic Monthly a few months ago. 
It is worth reading 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/10/the-next-panic/309081/> 
because it implies that the BoJ can't just start the quantitative easing pump 
without fixing wider problems in its economy. An ageing population, and 
therefore a shrinking tax base, will not be able to pay off the debt.
 New Bank of Japan governor Haruhiko Kuroda (centre) and other officials at 
Kuroda's first policy board meeting today. Photograph: Jiji Press/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Updated at 9.12am BST

8.51am BST 

Spanish bond sale

Spain is expecting to get away a €4bn bond sale with little difficulty today, 
because lower-rated sovereign debt has not been knocked heavily by events in 
Cyprus. Spanish 10-year bonds are trading with a yield - or interest rate - of 
around 4.9% this morning, well below the 7% that would have Mario Draghi and 
the bailout doctors running over the hill to Madrid.

Mathias van der Jeugt, a rate strategist at KCB, says investors remain 
reassured by Draghi's promise last year to do whatever it takes to save the 
euro.

The amount is quite low so it is easy to digest for investors ... [and] the 
Draghi put remains effective.

Elsewhere, France plans to sell €6bn-€7bn of bonds this afternoon. France also 
has issues over growth but its main problem at the moment isthe Cahuzac scandal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/apr/03/hollande-denies-covering-up-tax-tsar>
. As one of our correspondents described it yesterday: "Think of the Huhne 
scandal and multiply it by 1,000%."

8.35am BST 

Bank of Japan in radical change of direction

The UK economy may be stuck in a rut, but spare a thought for Japan after more 
than two "lost decades" of stagnant growth. This morning the Bank of Japan, 
under pressure from the new Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, rather 
uncharacteristically brought out its bazooka.Read about it here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/apr/04/japan-bank-money-supply-inflation-deflation>
. European stock markets have barely flickered, perhaps because they are used 
to central bank activism.

8.31am BST 

Spain's services sector shrinks again

Perhaps this will quell that positive start for the Spanish stock market: 
Spain's services sector has shrunk for the 21st successive month in March. 
Markit's Purchasing Managers' Index of services companies stood at 45.3, up 
slightly from February but still below the 50+ level that indicates growth.

Markit's Andrew Harker said there were "no real signs" of encouragement for 
the services sector. He added:

A number of firms envisage economic conditions to start improving towards the 
end of 2013m but it seems that in the near-term companies will have to continue 
operating in a worsening economic environment.

Spain's economy entered its second recession since 2009 at the end of 2011, as 
the repercussions of a burst property bubble continue to rock the economy. The 
services sector - which accounts for just under half of GDP - has suffered the 
collateral damage as families rein in spending on restaurants and holidays. The 
UK is no different.

8.22am BST 

Greek business leader warns on Cyprus

The first, and most obvious, signs of wider repercussions to the Cypriot 
crisis.
Efthimia Efthimiou (@EfiEfthimiou) 
#Cyprus <https://twitter.com/search/%23Cyprus> crisis to deepen #Greece 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23Greece> recession - business leaderreut.rs/Xr0Nfg
 <http://t.co/h89hrj76LI>
 <https://twitter.com/EfiEfthimiou/status/319709148839288832> April 4, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/EfiEfthimiou/status/319709148839288832> 
Updated at 8.22am BST

8.20am BST 

Markets off to a quiet start

Judging by investors' reactions this morning, there is not much hope of the 
Bank of England and European Central bank taking a leaf out of thebook of 
Abenomics. <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/apr/02/japan-abenomics>

The FTSE is down 10 points at 6410 while its blue-chip counterparts are barely 
up. France's CAC 40 is up 0.4%, Spain's Ibex has risen 0.8% and Germany's Dax 
is up 0.4%.

8.13am BST 

Ireland's services sector slows

The first of the services PMI figures are out, from Ireland. They show that 
the country's services sector expanded at a slower pace in March, but at least 
the number is in positive territory. It slipped from 53.6 in February to 52.3 
in March. Philip O'Sullivan, chief economist at NCB stockbrokers, said:

The key positive from this morning's report is the continued strength in new 
export business.

That Irish export boom - much of it thanks to non-Irish companies based in 
Ireland - is making finance ministers across Europe, including Mr Osborne, 
peruse Ireland's corporate tax rate of 12.5% and wonder whether it is worth 
copying.

7.55am BST 

UK on the hook for Cyprus

What price economic stability? It seems a snip at €45m (£38.2m) but that's the 
price to the UK taxpayer that theTelegraph is putting on the €1bn bailout 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/financialcrisis/9968675/British-taxpayers-to-fork-out-45m-to-rescue-Cyprus.html>
 of Cyprus by the International Monetary Fund. The cost of letting Cyprus go 
under would have been greater though.

7.48am BST 

Good morning

Good morning everyone and welcome to today’s eurozone blog. The main events 
today are interest rate and quantitative easing decisions at the Bank of 
England and European Central Bank, as well as services data from the UK and 
major eurozone economies.

The outgoing governor of the BoE, Mervyn King, has swung behind further QE – 
injecting money into the economy by acquiring sovereign debt off institutions – 
but he is in a minority on the Bank’s monetary policy committee.

There is also mild expectation that the latest phase of the eurozone crisis in 
Cyprus will persuade the ECB under Mario Draghi to cut interest rates from 
0.75% – where they have been since July 2012. Either way, both banks will do 
well to match the Bank of Japan for impact. This morning it
confirmed radical changes to its approach, including the adoption of a
substantial quantitative easing programme. The BoJ is trying to blow two
decades of deflation out of the water.

Back in Europe, there is a wave of purchasing managers index [PMI]
data for the services industries in March. PMIs are culled from surveys of 
private sector companies, including indicators such as new orders and 
production. A reading of more than 50 indicates expansion and the data for the 
UK is viewed as a crucial factor in determining whether we avoid a triple dip 
recession or not. Services account for three-quarters of our economy.

Updated at 7.56am BST
 