
The International Monetary Fund has warned that Ireland's rescue plans  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/nov/24/ireland-bailout-plan-unveiled>
could be blown off course as markets lose confidence in the eurozone's indebted 
nations and drive up borrowing costs.

Without a comprehensive rescue plan covering the eurozone, Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> could be blocked from borrowing on 
the international money markets until at least 2013, leading to a prolonged 
period of public spending cuts and lower growth, the Washington-based 
organisation said.

"Slower growth, and higher unemployment, further ratings downgrades and 
developments in other euro area countries have contributed to a rise in bond 
spreads that hinders Ireland's prospects to regain market access on affordable 
terms in the near future," it said.

The IMF praised Ireland's determination to tackle government spending and bank 
deficits, saying it was making good progress towards meeting targets set by the 
EU and the IMF. Dublin's plans to boost jobs with extra cash for training and 
incentives for businesses also gave the country the best chance of generating 
growth and tax receipts, it said.

The IMF, which is in the process of finding a replacement for its former boss 
Dominique Strauss-Kahn, has spent several weeks in Dublin examining the 
government's rescue plans.

It has dismissed claims that its work is being undermined by the scandal 
surrounding its former managing director and will continue to monitor countries 
that have accessed IMF lifeboat funds. Deputy managing John Lipsky, who has 
stepped into the top role, is considered a strong stop-gap by US treasury 
secretary Tim Geithner, but is due to leave the organisation in August.

The message that Ireland could see its debt reduction plan undermined by 
wrangling among the EU's creditor countries – including France, Germany, Sweden 
and Finland – came as the IMF approved a €26bn (£22.6bn) loan for Portugal. The 
money is the Fund's portion of a €78bn EU-IMF bailout agreed this month. The 
IMF said that €6bn would be given toPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal> immediately to ease investor 
concern over its debts.

Also on Friday Greece was downgraded by the ratings agency Fitch and Spain's 
ruling socialist party promised "no more spending cuts" in a desperate attempt 
to shore up its dwindling support ahead of elections this weekend.

As anti-cuts protesters took to the streets in Spain, the Greek socialist 
government was also under pressure from anti-poverty campaigners angry at 
stringent public sector pay cuts.

Protests have grown increasingly violent and unnerved investors wary of the 
government's ability to meet bailout demands imposed by Brussels. A recent poll 
of international investors found that 85% believed Athens would need to default 
on at least some of its debt.

This gloomy view of Greece's rescue plans was reinforced by a three-notch 
downgrade by the ratings agency Fitch to B+ from BB+, taking the country even 
deeper into junk bond territory, which sent the yield on 10-year Greek bonds to 
a euro-era record of 16.74%.

Derviss rules himself out for top IMF job

"The rating downgrade reflects the scale of the challenge facing Greece in 
implementing a radical fiscal and structural reform programme necessary to 
secure solvency of the state and the foundations for sustained economic 
recovery," said Fitch.

Greece said the rating agency's decision was influenced by "intense rumours" 
in the press about debt restructuring at a time when Greece's programme was 
being assessed by its lenders, and ignored new government pledges to speed up 
its privatisation programme.

Former Turkish economy minister Kemal Dervis, who had been widely cited as a 
possible candidate to succeed Dominique Strauss-Kahn as head of the IMF, said 
on Friday that he would not put himself forward for the job. "Speculation has 
included me in the group of persons with relevant experience. But I have not 
been, and will not be, a candidate," Dervis said.

A former head of the UN Development Programme, Derviss had been seen as one of 
the frontrunners to lead the IMF. Many analysts thought emerging market nations 
might back his candidacy.Reuters
 