
When the Bank of England reduced the base rate to a record low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 this month, there was one, tiny consolation for savers. The governor, Mark 
Carney – almost the only individual to have emerged from the Brexit shambles 
unscathed – said he was “not a fan” ofnegative interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/negative-interest-rates-what-you-need-to-know>
. He thus seemed to rule out the nightmare – for anyone even just in the black 
– that we would have to pay the banks for keeping our money, rather than 
the other way round.

Carney’s effective rejection of negative rates – as already introduced in 
Japan and Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/25/negative-interest-rates-the-case-against-john-maynard-keynes>
 – was welcome. But it does little to help UK savers, who are recommended, in 
that infuriating phrase, to “shop around” for higher rates. Shop around if you 
like, but I was recently informed by two banks that rates were being reduced 
below 0.5%, and short of entrusting your cash to an emerging market, real 
options are few.

Want to avoid recession? Then shower UK households with cash | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/05/recession-bank-england-money-uk-households>
If the next thing is overt, as opposed to covert – charging for current 
accounts – then we will be in negative territory in fact if not in name. Then 
what? Despite everything I was brought up to believe, stashing cash under the 
mattress suddenly looks like sage planning.

The catastrophic fall in returns to savers over the past few years is, of 
course, a long-term consequence of the financial crisis; but a grievously 
neglected one. Each time rates have been reduced, the loudest voice has been 
that of creditors and their advocates. The supposed rationale is that low rates 
will get us all spending so as to get the economy growing again.

For those acclimatised to living not just with mortgages at absurdly low 
levels, but with overdrafts and credit-card debt as well – the benefits are 
evident. The cost of servicing that debt is reduced, and repay-day is again 
postponed. Small matter that the credit bonanza of the early 2000s was a direct 
cause of the financial crisis, and that we are also being urged to save for our 
retirement: ever-cheaper credit remains the economic growth hormone of choice.

For those of us told from childhood not to live beyond our means, who have 
also done our best to save for retirement, the potential effects are dire. 
Whenever I hear any mention of a new round of quantitative easing or a cut in 
interest rates, another dark cloud appears on my financial horizon – and not 
mine alone. We were led to expect a return on our savings that would supplement 
our pensions; a half of 1% even on a goodly sum will not do that.

Those now contemplating retirement on private sector, non-final salary, 
non-index-linked pensions – the majority – will see the rewards for their 
prudence not just trimmed, but slashed.

With interest rates low, investment funds look attractive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/12/low-interest-rates-investment-funds-savers>
All the talk of intergenerational strife and the “plight of the millennials” 
omits the betrayal and impoverishment of savers, who are mostly older and have 
no means of increasing their income. What use is cheap credit to them? You 
don’t get a 1% tracker mortgage on care home fees.

The focus on house prices as the evil of evils for the young is also 
misleading. Low interest rates have helped push up housing costs in areas of 
high demand by making mammoth mortgages affordable. Saving for a deposit is the 
problem, and low interest rates don’t help.

There are signs, though, that the doctrine of ever-lower interest rates may be 
starting to run out of road. In the Financial Times last week a fund manager 
dared to challenge the orthodoxy that low interest rates necessarily stimulate 
demand. In the same paper, a reader argued that lower rates made him sit on his 
savings rather than spend. I suspect it has the same effect on others.

There are surely compelling reasons for a rethink. Reducing the cost of 
borrowing has not, in fact, led to a consumer boom, nor even to more modest 
growth. Without a perceptible rise in their incomes, it would seem that most  
people err on the side of caution. Either that, or their credit, however cheap, 
is maxed out.

We savers, meanwhile, are hanging on to what we have, for fear of even worse 
returns, and perhaps higher inflation, to come. Nor are negative rates likely 
to change this. The Japanese have not gone out to spend, even though this might 
seem a logical response; the result has rather been less money in banks and 
more, it is assumed, under beds.

So if ultra-low interest rates are not stimulating growth, and if they are 
simultaneously undermining messages about sound money and saving for 
retirement, how about trying the opposite? A rise in rates, perhaps?

The very idea would, of course, be greeted by warnings about mortgage 
defaults, repossessions, and hitting the poor disproportionately. But low rates 
tend not to benefit those on the brink; and an initially modest rise would 
offer a salutary reminder that borrowing has a cost. It could also exert 
downward pressure on house prices.

More immediately, it could encourage those of us in the black to indulge in a 
spot of so-called discretionary spending. In all, we could be reaching a point 
where the pluses of a rate increase outweigh the minuses. For savers, that 
point can’t come soon enough.
 