
Three former Tesco executives are to appear in crown court to face charges of 
fraud and false accounting in relation to a scandal at Britain’s biggest 
supermarket that left a black hole of up to £326m in its accounts.

Christopher Bush, the former managing director of Tesco UK, Carl Rogberg, the 
former finance director of Tesco UK, and John Scouler, the supermarket group’s 
former commercial director for food, will appear at Southwark crown court for a 
plea and case management hearing on Thursday.

The former Tesco bosses are all charged with one count of fraud by abuse of 
position and one count of false accounting. The three men could face up to 10 
years in jail if found guilty of the fraud charge and seven years for false 
accounting.

They pleaded not guilty to the charges at a hearing at Westminster magistrates 
court last month.

The charges read out at the magistrates court alleged that as senior employees 
at the supermarket they had abused their positions for personal gain. The trio 
were accused of dishonestly falsifying Tesco’s digital accounting records and 
its draft interim accounts by the “inputting of and/or reliance upon commercial 
income figures which gave a false account of the financial position of Tesco”.

The Serious Fraud Office investigation into Tesco is ongoing and it is still 
possible that further individuals could face action. However, it is understood 
that the former chief executive Philip Clarke, who was questioned under caution 
by the SFO, will not be charged.

When the SFO announced it had charged the executives last month, Tesco said it 
continued to cooperate with the investigation. “The last two years have seen an 
extensive programme of change at Tesco, but given this is an ongoing legal 
matter, we are unable to provide any further comment at this time,” the company 
said.

The SFO launched a criminal investigation into accounting practices at Tesco 
in October 2014 after the company admitted it had overstated profits by £263m 
by incorrectly booking payments from suppliers. It later revised the 
overstatement up to £326m.
 