
The afternoon started badly for Quins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> with their young wings Seb 
Stegmann and Charlie Amesbury bumping into each other as they ran on to the 
field. Otherwise, though, Dean Richards' young side were not exactly falling 
over themselves to reach the last four of this competition and it isLondon Irish
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish> who will contest a place in 
the last four with the Ospreys at Reading next Sunday.

Quins' gamble with playing a virtual second team at the Ospreys in this 
Anglo-Welsh cup three weeks earlier almost paid off with only a late James Hook 
conversion handing the holders victory. Quins have some of the most talented 
young players in England and, as Amesbury ran in their second try after a 
flowing move to help them take a 12-0 lead in the first quarter of an hour, it 
looked as though revenge was on the cards for last month's comeback victory 
here by Irish in the Premiership.

"Little bit of deja vu, wasn't it?" said Irish's head coach Toby Booth, 
however, after three tries in nine minutes in the third quarter turned the game 
on its head again. Booth had given Shane Geraghty his first start at fly-half 
this season. The 22-year-old's run of injuries may have put him behind Danny 
Cipriani and Toby Flood in the pecking order of young England playmakers in the 
past year but Geraghty could well be appearing across the road for the senior 
side next month.

"He helped give us some control and he's getting back to where he used to be," 
said Booth of the fly-half who has recovered from a shoulder injury and, in 
front of England's new backs coach Brian Smith, showed some of his old 
attacking qualities, as demonstrated by his part in the first of Peter Hewat's 
tries that helped bring Irish back into the game.

Smith, of course, knows all about Geraghty, having left Irish in the summer to 
take up his England role. Like Mike Catt, Geraghty's mentor and now the attack 
coach at Irish, the young player is equally at home at inside-centre and could 
play that role alongside Cipriani when the Pacific Islanders visit Twickenham 
on Saturday week. But if he is not picked in England's 22 for that game he will 
be a key figure against the Ospreys next Sunday.

Inside Geraghty for much of the second half the replacement scrum-half Alfredo 
Lalanne helped up the tempo and provide a winning service for the Irish backs. 
The 25-year-old arrived from his Buenos Aires club, San Isidro, only last 
Wednesday and spent about 45 minutes training with his new team-mates. Lalanne 
will stay for the season as cover for Paul Hodgson and Peter Richards, who may 
be on international duty. He looks a useful acquisition.

Quins' Argentinian, the tubby prop Ignacio Elosu, made a less worthy 
contribution as a replacement. He had been on the field only four minutes when 
he was sent to the sin-bin for a stamp on Richard Thorpe and the yellow card 
helped the Exiles dominate the second half.

Harlequins Williams; Stegmann, Masson, Taione (Barry, 56), Amesbury; Jewell 
(Malone, 59), Williams (Care, 59); Croall, Brooker, Lambert (Elosu, 56), 
Percival, Robson, Davies (Rogers, 62), McMillan (capt), Guest.

Tries Robson, Amesbury, McMillan. Con Jewell.

Sin-bin Elosu, 60 

London Irish Hewat; Bailey, Shabbo, Gower, Thompstone (Homer, 63); Geraghty 
(Hickey, 79), Parker (Lalanne, 47); Dermody (capt), Buckland (Paice, h-t), 
Rautenbach (Murphy, 70), Johnson (Casey, 70), Hudson, Danaher, S Armitage, 
Fisher (Thorpe, 34).

Tries Thorpe, Hewat 2, Thompstone, Bailey. Cons Hewat, Hickey. Pen Geraghty. 

Referee G Garner (London). Attendance 11,173.
 