
Since the late 1980s Kusumben Amin, now 82, has scrimped and saved to build a 
nest egg for her two daughters. But after handing over £35,000 to a reputable 
insurance firm over a period of 29 years, she has now discovered it is worth a 
paltry £1,227.

Although Amin, who speaks little English and reads none, thought she had taken 
out a savings policy, what she had been sold was a complex life insurance 
policy only of use to the very rich. But Amin is far from rich. Her total 
income is the state pension plus another £191 from her deceased husband’s 
pension. The insurance firm Phoenix Life has been taking £247.83 a month for 
the policy, leaving Amin almost on the breadline. In March she showed her 
daughters a letter from Phoenix. They were horrified. It asked Amin to pay even 
more – up to £458.85 a month, equal to more than half her total income.

Amin’s daughters, who prefer not to be named, have struggled to understand 
what’s been going on. “We lived in a council house, so this policy was what my 
mother thought was a way of leaving us something.”

What emerges is the murky world of commission-driven policy sales in the 
1980s, confusion about the insurance and savings elements of products, 
companies with multiple name changes and a regulatory environment that at the 
time failed consumers. Behind it all lies one of the most controversial 
products created by the life insurance industry: the whole of life policy.

When Amin was sold the policy in 1987 her husband had recently died. Her 
daughters say the salesman told Amin the policy would pay out £40,000 on her 
death, while the money invested would also provide her with a payout if she 
cashed it in before dying.

This was before the 1988 Financial Services Act, when insurance sales were 
mostly unregulated. Insurers paid out large commissions, often the first two 
years’ premiums, which prompted mis-selling and lies from many salespeople.

The reality is that Amin’s policy only had a tiny savings element. Phoenix 
says: “The policy was taken out to provide life cover only and was not a 
savings or investment plan. As at 19 April 2016, the policy has a small cash-in 
value of £1,227.29. But this was never intended to be a savings plan and 
cashing it in now would mean the end of any life cover.”

The original premium was £44 a month, but in 2003 it leapt to £247.83 a month. 
Now Phoenix has told Amin that she must pay £343.50 a month – £4,122 a year – 
if she still wants to receive £40,000 on death. But even that doesn’t guarantee 
that she won’t be asked to raise the premium again as she gets older. Phoenix 
says that to make a £40,000 payout “sustainable” the premium will have to rise 
to £458.85 a month, or £5,506 a year.

Amin, through her daughters, says she never realised she would face such steep 
increases. She is not alone. Around 5m whole of life policies have been sold, 
and rising premiums are at the heart of most complaints. Many say they were not 
told at the point of sale that the policies could be reviewed at regular 
intervals, with premiums rising or benefits being cut.

In Amin’s case, the premium is going up 10-fold. Even when it started at £44 a 
month in 1987 it was poor value: a 53-year-old wanting £40,000 of life 
insurance cover for 10 years could find policies for just £10 a month. These 
are called “term” policies and are what Amin should have taken out if she 
simply wanted cover until her daughters were older. But that would not have 
paid the salesman a large commission.

She now faces a near-impossible dilemma. If she stops paying in but dies in 
the next few years, her premiums will have been wasted. Or she can pay 
£4,000-£5,000 a year and throw good money after bad. The typical life 
expectancy of an 82-year-old female in the UK is an additional 8.4 years, so 
she’ll have to pay another £40,000 or so just to be sure of a £40,000 payout.

Amin’s daughters sought answers from Phoenix but were rebuffed. So we asked it 
to take another look at the case. First, we asked why was she sold a whole of 
life rather than a term policy. In a statement Phoenix says: “Term insurance 
policies usually only run to a certain age such as 70 or 75, or for a specific 
period such as when a borrower is paying off a mortgage. In the communications 
we received from Mrs Amin and her daughters, they were clear that she wanted a 
policy to last her lifetime.”

But why did Amin think she had a savings policy? Was it a case of the salesman 
saying anything to earn commission? Phoenix says: “The policy was sold in 1987, 
29 years ago. We have limited documentation so cannot confirm the commission 
paid. However, the policy has not been worthless to Mrs Amin. It would have 
paid out on her death regardless of her age.”

We asked if Phoenix would offer compensation to Amin, but it refused. “Mrs 
Amin has been fully engaged with the policy throughout its lifetime and was 
aware as early as 2003 that the premiums would need to rise to continue to 
offer the level of cover required. At this time, and every year from 2007 
onwards, Mrs Amin has made decisions whether to increase the premiums to 
maintain the cover.”

Amin is far from alone in complaining to Guardian Money about whole of life 
policies. Colin Bradberry (not his real name) from Nottingham had a Friends 
Life policy into which he’s paid £30 a month since May 1986, but in March he 
was told he would have to raise his premiums to £154.61 a month – a 415% 
increase. Like Phoenix, Friends Life is unapologetic. “Our terms and 
conditions, and product literature, explained that the policy was designed to 
have regular reviews and what the consequences might be.”

What you can do

Complaints about whole of life policies should first go to the insurer. If the 
business doesn’t answer within eight weeks, or you’re unhappy with what it 
says, get in touch with the Financial Ombudsman Service at
Financial-ombudsman.org.uk <http://financial-ombudsman.org.uk/> or call 0300 
123 9 123.

Many people complaining to the FOS – including the Amins – were told that 
because their policy was sold before the 1988 Financial Services Act, it could 
not be looked at by the ombudsman. But when Guardian Money spoke to the 
ombudsman service, it said there may be grounds on which it can make an 
adjudication.

The FOS says that, although many endowment and pension complaints pre-date 
1988, it may have the power to adjudicate under its “compulsory jurisdiction” 
rules. It is likely to examine the documents a firm holds from when the policy 
was sold, as firms are required to be able to trace back policies to the point 
of sale. The FOS will want to know the buyer was adequately informed about the 
risks, and that for non-English speakers, such as Mrs Amin, that communications 
were clear.
 