 This is a story about a lethal injection, a body in the back of a hired car, a 
cabin in the wilds of Texas, a gallery of death masks, the theme song of the TV 
series The Sopranos, the son of the mastermind of the great train robbery and 
an artist baroness from Chiswick who wears a bra made out of latex pigs' heads.
Last things first. John Joe "Ash" Amador, a 30-year-old American, was executed 
last month in Huntsville, Texas for the 1994 murder of a San Antonio taxi 
driver. He went to his death, still protesting his innocence, with an armful of 
lethal sodium pentathol and the words, "God forgive them, for they know not 
what they do" on his lips.

During his final weeks as a resident of Texas's death row, he had been in 
touch with Baroness Von Carrie Reichardt, a ceramicist who operates out of a 
studio called the Treatment Rooms in Chiswick. She also performs in spectacular 
costumes (viz, that bra) with the band Anarchist wood, who often open for the
Alabama 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-3>, the London-based group 
who gave us the Sopranos theme song, Woke Up This Morning. "The Baroness", as 
everyone seems to know her, has long been campaigning against the death penalty 
in the US and has been in correspondence with Amador for the past year or so. 
When it became clear that all his appeals were likely to be turned down, Amador 
asked her if she would join his wife and family as one of his five witnesses 
when he took the long walk.

The Baroness is a friend of Nick Reynolds, harmonica player with the Alabama 
3, former Royal Navy diver during the Falklands war, son of Bruce, the great 
train robber, and, most relevantly, a sculptor who specialises in death masks. 
So when she said she was going out to witness Amador's death and make a film 
about it, he suggested coming along and making a mask, so that the person whom 
the Texas justice system was about to snuff out would have a sort of life after 
death.

Reynolds became interested in the lost art of death masks about a decade ago. 
Mary, Queen of Scots and Napoleon, Stalin, Ned Kelly and many of the 
aristocrats who lost their heads during the French revolution have all been 
immortalised in this way, but the art has, as it were, died out, its function 
replaced by photography and, more recently, videos of departed loved ones. 
Reynolds decided to continue the tradition, using a mixture of the old 
materials and modern technology - plaster of Paris and alginate moulds. "I 
really like doing it," says Reynolds, over a plate of sea bass in a Clerkenwell 
cafe. "I get a great deal of pleasure in giving something to someone that is a 
memory of the person. They're not forgotten, not underground, not in a jar full 
of ashes."

His first subject was George "Taters" Chatham, once the best-known thief in 
Britain and a man with a big gambling habit; if he ran out of money during a 
poker game in the West End, he would ask to be excused for half an hour, slip 
up the drainpipe of a nearby Mayfair house and return with enough jewellery to 
stay in the game. Chatham's sister had initially not wanted a death mask done 
but finally agreed because Taters, a notoriously grumpy individual, died with a 
sweet smile on his face. "It was due to gravity, to be honest," says Reynolds. 
"The weight of his cheeks made it look like he was smiling."

Others have followed: Pat Castange, the composer of the national anthem of 
Trinidad and Tobago ; a veteran UN official; and, most recently, Lord Jago 
Elliot, the performance artist, surfer and all-round good guy who was a friend 
of Reynolds and who died last year after suffering an epileptic fit.

"In most cases, the people I've done have been dead for a while and they have 
about as much personality as a bit of clingfilmed chicken on the cold counter 
at Sainsburys', so generally I can detach myself," says Reynolds. "But in the 
case of Jago, it was tragic because he was so young - he was only 40 - and a 
friend of mine. He had told a friend that, if he was to die, he wanted a cast 
made of his body which would be taken to all the places in the world he never 
got to see."

Reynolds has seen quite a few places in his life. As a boy, when his father 
was on the run and living under an assumed name, the family hid out for a while 
in Mexico and young Reynolds went to school there. Life in the Royal Navy then 
took him with the Falklands taskforce to the south Atlantic in 1982, and a few 
other seas besides. Anyway, he was happy to go to Texas to make a death mask of 
Amador.

"They didn't let me meet him, but he spoke to me by phone from what they call 
the hospitality room just before they executed him," says Reynolds, "and he was 
saying that having a death mask made was a real honour because it was something 
normally reserved for kings and people like that. He was really up for it. I've 
looked into his case and I really do believe he is innocent, and that the odds 
were stacked against him because he was black and Hispanic. He told me in that 
conversation just before he died that it's called capital punishment because 
it's for people with no capital - there are no rich people on death row."

After they had finished chatting, and less than an hour after the US Supreme 
Court had predictably turned down his appeal, Amador was spread-eagled on a 
gurney and given the last rites and a lethal injection. He made his fi nal 
statement: "God forgive them, for they know not what they do. After all these 
years, our people are still lost in hatred and anger. Give them peace, God, for 
people seeking revenge toward me." To which he added, as he slipped away: 
"Freedom ... I'm ready," and, finally, "Wow."

The Baroness, who is 41, sat with the family watching him as he died. Her 
title, by the way, has a connection with the last tsar of Russia, who made her 
grandfather an honorary general for helping the allied forces in the first 
world war; her grandfather was 80 when her father was born, and the family 
changed its name to Richards because Germanic names were not a good idea in 
Britain at the time: thus Carrie Richards. Her connection with death row goes 
back to a small ad she saw in the Big Issue in 2000 that asked for pen pals for 
blokes awaiting execution. Her first pen pal, Luis Ramirez, who has also been 
executed, had put her in touch with Amador.

"It is very hard to put into words what it's like," she says of the execution. 
"It is totally surreal. You have to try to smile for them and he was trying to 
smile for us. It's very hard and it took him nine minutes to die, but when he 
said 'Wow', he was looking so serene, it was as if he was looking at the 
angels."

The version of his last words that appeared in the local press included the 
phrase, "God forgive me" which, says the Baroness, was inaccurate. Reynolds 
says that Amador's family "were really angry because it made it look like he 
was finally saying he was guilty, which he never did". He was the 402nd person 
to be executed in Texas since the reintroduction of the death penalty in 1982.

Once Amador had been certified dead, his body was taken to the local 
undertakers, but they were not too receptive to the idea of a cadaverous 
Englishman making a death mask on their premises, despite the wishes of the 
family. "They were dead against it," says Reynolds. "They thought we were 
freaks, twisted. Also, there's a law there that you can't be near a body unless 
it's been embalmed."

So Reynolds and the family carried the still warm body out and placed it in 
the back of a hired car for a one-hour trip to the woods near a town called 
Livingston, where Amador's widow, Linda, had a small cabin. "We just put him on 
the back seat, unzipped the body-bag and took his arm out so that his wife 
could hold his hand," says Reynolds.

At one point, the three-car convoy was stopped by the police for speeding, but 
fortunately, the car they examined was not the one with the corpse on its back 
seat.

At the cabin, Reynolds set to work. "It only took about two hours because we 
were paranoid that the police would arrive and ask what we were doing with the 
body," he says. "So there we were, hiding out in this little wooden bungalow in 
the middle of the woods, like a Friday the 13th movie. I don't normally talk to 
the bodies, but I did on this occasion. He looked so young because, although he 
was 30, he had hardly been outside for the past 12 years."

The journey to the woods was not the last trip Amador - or at least his death 
mask - would take. The Baroness brought the mask home with her and placed it on 
top of a specially designed and decorated truck, the Tiki Love Truck, with "In 
memoriam JJ Amador" in lettering down the side - which was duly entered in last 
week's inauguralArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Car Parade 
in Manchester.

"Ash knew what we were going to do with it," the Baroness says, "and he was 
very pleased because he said that he used to feel he was real trash, but having 
a death mask made him feel he was somebody." The spectacular truck drove off 
with one of the main prizes. It was quite possibly the first time that a 
vehicle with the death mask of a recently executed Texan had been driven down a 
Manchester thoroughfare.

The mask will get further exposure in an exhibition planned for the new year 
in London's East End. It will sit alongside those of Chatham and the others, a 
s well as some of Reynolds' masks of the living, including a rogues' gallery of 
villains such as "Mad" Frank Fraser, Freddie Foreman, Peter Scott, and his 
father, Bruce, plus that of Andy McNab, the bestselling author of Bravo Two 
Zero. The exhibition will be called - in light of the numbers of those executed 
in Texas - 402 and Rising. Reynolds' company, Memorial Casts, is also off ering 
anyone a chance to have their loved ones cast in bronze, and will throw the 
ashes into the mould if requested.

That's not all Amador has waiting for him. The Alabama 3, who found fame when 
Woke Up This Morning was chosen for the opening sequence of The Sopranos, as 
Tony Soprano cruises through New Jersey with murder in his heart, have taken a 
big interest both in miscarriages of justice and the death penalty. So there 
will be a song about Amador and death row on their next CD.

"We have a lot of Alabama 3 fans on death row in Texas and they are sending us 
lyrics of the songs they have written," says Larry Love, who writes some of the 
band's songs, although he is from Merthyr Tydfil rather than Alabama. They have 
just released a new album , called MOR. "We have one song [on it] called Locked 
Down and Loaded but I Love You, which is written from the point of view of a 
spouse," says Love. "In fact, Woke Up This Morning was written after I read 
about the case of Sara Thornton and how she had killed her husband. It was 
meant to be about female empowerment, and it ends up becoming a gangster 
anthem. "

From Mary, Queen of Scots' beheading in 1587 to John Joe Amador's lethal 
injection in 2007: the styles in execution may have changed, but the death 
mask, it seems, lives on.
 