
When a friend I have known for half my life accused me recently of behaving 
like my birthmother during one of our ongoing discussions about race in 
America, I panicked. Like many adults in the throes of raising a family, just 
trying to get everything right, I live in fear of becoming my parents – 
specifically, of becoming my birthmother, and being the kind of person who will 
hold someone emotionally hostage and demand a ransom of total deference.

I met her when I was 11, and I loved her immediately. She was wry and 
brilliant and charismatic, and there remain many things one can admire about 
her. Even her mastery of punch-packing repartee is not without merit, except 
when it’s used as a weapon.

Facing my fear: I watched too many friends die of Aids. Then I was diagnosed | 
Trevor Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/15/aids-virus-facing-my-fear-hiv>
As a teenager, when I was in my birthmother’s company and received praise or 
awards or special treatment from adults for being what they deemed precocious, 
she was always quick to remind me: “Your packaging misrepresents your 
substance.” Which was to say, I may look cute and sound smart, but I was, in 
fact, neither of those things.


The first couple of times she said this, it seemed like a kind of insightful 
quick-take. A lesson on the perils of unsolicited exotification in the 
all-white town where I grew up. It was something I could use, borrow even, to 
grow and be a more interesting person. But it very quickly began to have a 
different effect, and it took me decades to convince myself that I was not 
actually a fraud.

My birthmother’s carefully crafted barbs were counterbalanced by my profound, 
almost debilitating, desire to be near her. I had fallen for the romance of a 
perfectly imagined mother-daughter bond. But the comment that altered our 
relationship forever was when my birthmother told me that because she had given 
birth to me, I could not identify myself as black. (My adopted family is white. 
My birthmother is white, and my birthfather is black.)

Her intention was not merely to erase me, but to erase my blackness – and 
perhaps worse, to make clear that if I wanted her to consider me as her 
daughter, it would require that I value my whiteness above my blackness. As a 
black woman, this hit especially deep, since our erasure is so pervasive in 
both historical and contemporary America.


When my friend accused me of being overly judgmental, my response reeked of my 
birthmother’s attacks on my character

So when my friend, who is white, accused me years later of being overly 
judgmental in regard to her white privilege, my response was swift and yes, it 
reeked of my birthmother’s relentlessly self-serving attacks on my character.

I leveled all of my anger and resentment over the ubiquity of white privilege 
and systemic racism solely at my friend, even as I knew that she would not be 
able to give me the answer I wanted – that the playing field is far from level, 
the system is rigged, black people are dying and that white people, starting 
with her, need to stand up and vow to spend as much of their time thinking 
about this reality as black people do feeling its impact.


The truth is, in this particular friendship, I have long felt unsettled by 
what I see as my friend’s inability to reconcile her white privilege with my 
blackness. There were numerous incidents that occurred when we were in college 
that, in hindsight, had clear racial implications, but that I didn’t confront 
at the time because all I could hear in my head was that white friend from high 
school who said to me: “Why is it always about race for you?”

While I believe that any and every black person in America is entitled to be 
the authority on race as he or she or they experience it, there is, of course, 
also a need to remember that people respond to love, not persecution. I’d like 
to believe that however traumatic, I learned this lesson most pointedly from my 
birthmother, who effectively taught me how to push through one of my biggest 
fears – being as intensely judgmental as she is. In the process, I failed my 
friend. I’m sorry about that. But now, having faced down that bitter legacy, I 
won’t make that mistake again.

Open contributions: When have you faced your fear? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/25/tell-us-about-a-time-you-faced-your-fear>
 