
With the school holidays in full flow, for many parents the thought of how to 
occupy their offspring during the six-week recess without breaking the bank is 
foremost on their mind.

American Express figures indicate families expect to spend an average of £640 
on activities and treats to entertain children during the break. “Big ticket” 
purchases could weigh particularly heavily on the wallet; four tickets to 
Thorpe Park or Legoland can set a family back more than £200. Coupled with 
other expenses such as meals and travel, the cost of a day out could mount to 
much more if deals or promotions are not taken advantage of. But there are 
plenty of ways to ensure that summer fun need not cost a fortune.

Free activities

There are more than 180 free museums across the UK covering everything from 
science and history to comics and film, and many run workshops and special 
events during the holidays.

In the capital, family favourites such as the Science Museum and Natural 
History Museum are free, and there is plenty on offer outside of London, 
including the World Museum in Liverpool, the National Football Museum in 
Manchester and the Stephenson Railway Museum in Newcastle.

“Every town and city will have a heap of free activities on offer during the 
summer break, including free festivals and events at local leisure centres, 
galleries, libraries and churches,” says Anita Naik fromVouchercodes.co.uk 
<https://www.vouchercodes.co.uk>. “Check the website of your local newspaper or 
council.”

Among them, Southsea Common is set to host the Portsmouth kite-flying 
festival, Kettlewell in the Yorkshire Dales is hosting aScarecrow Festival 
<http://www.kettlewellscarecrowfestival.co.uk> while the Kelvingrove Art 
Gallery in Glasgow is hosting events such as ‘Wacky Weaving’ and silk painting.

Most local councils also run summer sports sessions at a low price. “This 
means children can try activities such as trampolining, ballet and street 
danceover the holidays for next to nothing,” says Naik. “Alternatively, little 
ones aged five to 11 could brush up on their sports skills with a scheme such 
as the Football Association’s Skill Training.”

It’s worth looking at what’s on offer on the high street. “Pets At Home is 
running free workshops where children get to pet and learn about animals,” says 
Jody Leggett fromBargainbuysforbusymums.co.uk 
<http://www.bargainbuysforbusymums.co.uk>. “Bookworms should check out 
Waterstones, as many have children’s novelists doing talks and story-time 
readings. There are also free seed-planting and ‘learn about nature’ workshops 
at Dobbies Garden Centres.”

The Woodland Trust <http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk> offers heaps of great 
activity ideas; simple suggestions include making sensory boxes and taking part 
in leaf and animal track hunts, whileViewRanger 
<http://www.viewranger.com/en-GB>, the outdo or GPS app, has launched a 
collection of family-friendly walks to enjoy. The School’s Out collection of 
walks can be downloaded free of charge.

Under £20

Signing up for National Trust membership will open up the outdoors. Families 
can join up for the year for £111 – a cost of under £20 for July and August – 
and take part in activities, such as bike rides, themed trails, and tree 
climbing.

Another good way to reduce the cost of days out is by using points earned 
through supermarket schemes. “Families who have collected Tesco Clubcard or 
Nectar points can exchange them for up to four times their value,” says Megan 
French from Moneysavingexpert.com. “For example, if you bought two adult 
tickets and two children’s tickets for Adventure Island Southend, this would 
normally cost £71.40. But you could swap £17.50 of Clubcard vouchers then just 
add £0.40. Similarly, it would normally cost £22 for two adults and two 
children at Rokt climbing, but with 2,000 Nectar points, it would cost just £7.”

Many bowling complexes put on summer deals. With Bowlplex, for example, a 
“family bowl off” costs from £17.29.

Local cinemas typically also have summer holiday events. Odeon runs Odeon Kids 
with tickets to family-friendly films starting from just £2.40, while Vue 
Cinemas runs Mini Mornings with tickets starting from just £1.99 for adults and 
children.

Under £30

For those planning to travel by train, it’s worth investing in a Family & 
Friends Railcard 
<http://www.familyandfriends-railcard.co.uk/online10/?utm_medium=cpc&gclid=CMPiv-7JmM4CFaQW0wod954LFQ&gclsrc=aw.ds>
. Costing just £30 this is a brilliant money-saver, as aside from getting a 
third off adult fares – and 60% off kids’ fares – on travel throughout the UK 
for a whole year, families also get access to discounts from partner 
organisations. This includes two-for-one entry to more than 150 city 
attractions, restaurants, theatres and exhibitions in the capital, such as the 
Tower of London, ZSL London Zoo and the London Eye. Up to four adults and four 
children can travel on one card.

Under £50

There’s plenty of fun to be had at historical attractions such as castles, 
forts and ruins this summer, and annualEnglish Heritage membership 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/join/?utm_source=Google&utm_medium=Yucca_PPC&utm_campaign=Brand_Y2_B4&gclid=CKetm7PKmM4CFUW4GwodEk8Phg>
 costs from £43.50, giving access to more than 400 historical places across the 
UK, and also means that kids go free.

Culture vultures should take advantage of the “Kids Week” promotion throughout 
August in the capital. With this, there is free entrance to a range of West End 
shows, such asThe Gruffalo, The Lion King and Matilda, for any child 
accompanied by an adult paying full-price. Sites such asLastminute.com 
<http://www.lastminute.com> are useful for finding discounted tickets elsewhere 
in the country.

For teenagers aged 16 to 17, there are opportunities in programmes through the 
National Citizen Service <http://www.ncsyes.co.uk>.

“They can take part in activities such as canoeing, climbing and hiking, 
followed by a team project in the community,” says Leggett. “Programmes run for 
two to four weeks and cost £50. The government invests more than £100 per place 
and all meals are included.”

While theme parks and zoos can be expensive, Thorpe Park, Legoland, and 
Drayton Manor often run voucher deals giving up to 50% off tickets. Check out 
sites such asVouchercodes.co.uk <https://www.vouchercodes.co.uk> and 
Netvouchercodes.co.uk <https://www.netvouchercodes.co.uk>.

Elsewhere, with Topcashback <https://www.topcashback.co.uk>, a saving of 5.25% 
can be had on trips to London Zoo and Whipsnade Zoo, meaning adult tickets are 
£22.98 and child tickets £16.68. There is also 7.35% cashback on tickets to the
Eden Project <http://www.edenproject.com> in Cornwall, bring a family ticket 
down to just £57.44.

I’m always coming up with activities that don’t cost anything

Constantly trying to keep costs to a minimum, Louise Upton is always on the 
look-out for activities that don’t cost anything to keep the children happy.

The 43-year-old data and exams manager spends a lot of the summer helping her 
sister, Sarah Hartley, look after her two children (above): Macie, five, and 
Taylor, who is nearly two. Her 20-year-old son Connor also comes home from 
university at this time of year.

“It’s important for me to keep costs down as much as possible,” says Upton, 
who is from Doncaster. “When looking after Macie and Taylor, I’m always coming 
up with activities that don’t cost anything – such as baking, drawing and 
gardening.”

She has used cashback website Topcashback, which pays a cash reward when users 
click through it to shop at specific online retailers, and has earned £300. “I 
spend this buying more items for activities at home, and also for days out,” 
she says. “That way, we can constantly have fun on the cheap.”

In Northampton, Amanda Blakey is very resourceful when it comes to keeping her 
two children entertained on a shoestring.

“I keep a list of places to visit – such as parks and museums – which are 
free, or where you only have to pay for parking,” she says.

“I also keep a close eye on the local council website, as there are always a 
host of free summer activities listed there. The Canal and River Trust is 
another useful resource for activity packs and days out.”

She collects Tesco Clubcard points which she uses to help reduce the cost of 
days out – such as Woburn Safari Park - for her and husband Richard and 
children Aaron (11) and Amber (6).

“Aaron has a Blue Peter badge which means he can get into a host of 
attractions for free,” says Amanda.

“With a bit of forward planning, we can significantly reduce the cost of a day 
out. On one occasion last summer, I applied for discounted train tickets 
through Bedford Tourist Information and used these to take the whole family to 
the beach at Brighton. Aaron then used his Blue Peter badge to get free access 
to the Sea Life centre.

“On another day, Richard and I got free entry to Warwick castle with a 
newspaper promotion, while Aaron got in free with his badge. I then got a 
discounted ticket for Amber on eBay.”



 