
The family of a woman who was killed in an incident that also left a man dead 
and another with stab wounds to his face have paid tribute to a “beautiful 
mother, daughter and sister”.

Claire Nagle, 38, was found at a house in Derbyshire on Friday morning after a 
seriously injured 22-year-old man raised the alarm by running to nearby shops 
shouting: “Help me, please help me.”

Thirty minutes later a 44-year-old man died in a collision with a lorry on the 
M1, a short distance away from where Nagle was found.

Derbyshire police have said they are not looking for anyone else in connection 
with the death of Nagle, who is related to both men.

The 22-year-old man was being treated for head injuries in the Queen’s Medical 
Centre in Nottingham, police said.

In a statement on behalf of the family, Nagle’s father, Martin Paton, said: 
“We are devastated at the loss of a much loved, beautiful and vibrant mother, 
daughter and sister, Claire.

“We believe this was a tragic incident for everyone involved and their 
families. We don’t want to apportion any blame and wish to be left alone to 
grieve as a family.

“We’d also like to thank everyone who has offered us messages of support.”

The family tribute came as more detail emerged about the bloody scenes at 11am 
on Friday in the village of Borrowash.

Witnesses said they saw a “young lad” with a blood-covered face desperately 
pleading for help before the emergency services were called.

Local resident Michael Nightingale said the man ran into a flower shop with 
stab wounds to his face. “I saw the police wrapping up a young lad in tin 
foil,” he said. “He was on the ground, so I drove down into my drive and then a 
police van turned up and cordoned off the house.

“I have lived here for 10 years and I have never seen anything like this. He 
ran over the road - that’s where they wrapped him up. He was shouting: ‘Help 
me, help me.’”

Florist Louise Winson told the BBC: “I just heard shouting: ‘Help me, please 
help me.’

“I looked round, the guy’s just stood there, I couldn’t even see his face for 
blood – it was just pouring.

“I just shut the door to be honest, I was in absolute shock and then I picked 
my phone up to ring 999 but somebody had already done it and then I went out 
and he was laying on the side of the road. [It was] just a mess.”

It is believed the 22-year-old man alerted police officers to the incident at 
a house where they found Nagle seriously injured. She later died in hospital.

A cameraman for BBC East Midlands Today reported seeing a body on the M1. Both 
carriageways of the motorwaywere closed for most of Friday, causing traffic 
disruption in the area.

DCI Gareth Meadows, who is leading the murder investigation, said he was keen 
to hear from anyone who may have seen anything suspicious in the area of either 
Station Road or Charnwood Avenue in Borrowash on Friday morning.

Meadows said: “I’d also be particularly interested in hearing from motorists 
on the M1 who were driving between junctions 25 and 26 at around 11.15 am to 
11.30am on Friday.

“Did you see a white Ford Focus on the hard shoulder? Did you see two men on 
an overbridge behaving in a way you now think was out of place? If anyone has 
any dashboard camera footage from that time please contact the incident room on 
101.”
 