
The arrival off the bench of Owen Farrell, the son of the Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> centre and rugby league great Andy 
Farrell, as the youngest player ever to play in English professional rugby, at 
17 years and 11 days, highlighted one of the great redeeming features of the 
EDF Energy Cup. The much-maligned tournament can often be a showcase for 
up-and-coming talent in the Anglo-Welsh game.

Farrell, who came on after 62 minutes, is slightly older than his illustrious 
(and currently injured) father was when he made his Wigan rugby league debut, 
at 16. However, in a match in which Saracens opted for youth against an 
altogether more gnarled Scarlets outfit, it was too much to expect a fairytale 
baptism for Farrell the younger - who beat Danny Cipriani's record by 36 days. 
After a couple of deft touches he joined the legion of players unable to 
control the ball in the wet conditions, conceding a knock-on.

This was never trench warfare, however, and both sides did their best to play 
with the ball in hand, but Saracens needed to be more pragmatic if they were to 
upset a full-strength Scarlets side who are treating this tournament as their 
best chance of silverware this season. The Welsh region, fielding an 
all-international pack including two new signings, the New Zealand tighthead 
prop Kees Meeuws and the Australia No8 David Lyons, had the better of it in the 
close combat, and were also cleverly marshalled by Stephen Jones. The Wales 
fly-half nursed the Scarlets through their ropier patches, and also nailed the 
majority of his goal-kicks, six out of eight, giving the visitors a 16-14 
half-time lead and then closing the game out as the Scarlets got a crucial edge 
after the break.

That edge came courtesy of a try by the powerful Meeuws seven minutes into the 
second half. With the Scarlets trailing 17-16 and battering away at Saracens' 
line, the prop smashed his way over in the left-hand corner, Jones converting 
for a 23-17 lead. Jones stretched that scoreline to the final winning margin 
just after the hour, when Dan Scarbrough was sent to the
sin-bin for tripping Gavin Evans as the Scarlets centre was threatening a try. 
It was a harsh call, because Scarbrough appeared to slip as Evans chipped the 
ball over him.

Saracens were unable to unlock the Scarlets defence thereafter, despite the 
best efforts of Noah Cato. The England Under-20 full-back or wing combines 
power with sinuous grace and was the pick of the six players aged 20 or under 
that Saracens fielded yesterday.

The Scarlets made the first inroads of the match when the Saracens captain, 
the Fijian scrum-half Moses Rauluni, was forced to carry the ball into his own 
in-goal area. From the third of three successive five-metre scrums, Lyons got 
the touchdown.

Jones converted, but five minutes later Saracens levelled matters at 7-7 when 
a decoy run by Cato drew defenders wide and Francisco Leonelli cut through to 
score, Gordon Ross converting. Cato went one better when he ran in an overlap 
midway through the half, beating Cieron Thomas and Jones on the way. Ross 
converted for a 14-7 lead.

However, with Jones kicking three penalties in succession it was the Scarlets 
who led at the break, and although Ross gave Saracens the lead again briefly 
with an early second-half penalty, the result finished in favour of experience 
rather than youth.

Afterwards Saracens' coach, Eddie Jones, paid tribute to Farrell and the other 
youngsters in his side.

"We have six or seven guys who have good futures if they work hard - and they 
will work hard - and Owen is one of them. He's got a very serious attitude and 
he's desperate to make it. He has the right attitude and good footballing nous 
- he's been hearing about rugby ever since he was born, so consistent education 
works."

Although it did not reap an immediate dividend here, on this evidence 
Saracens' youth will have its day.

Saracens Scarbrough; Thrower (Penney, 65), Leonelli, Goode 

(O Farrell, 62), Cato; Ross, Rauluni (Wilson, 78); Lloyd, Cairns (Walker, 78), 
Mercey (Visagie, 52), Chesney, Spencer (Smith, 58), Barrell, Saull (Wray, 57), 
Skirving.

Tries Leonelli, Cato Cons Ross 2 Pen Ross.

Sin-bin Scarbrough, 62. 

Scarlets C Thomas; M Jones, King, G Evans, Brew; S Jones, Roberts (Martens, 
75); I Thomas (John, 72), Rees (Owen, 76), Meeuws, Cooper (MacLeod, 66), 
Maling, Easterby, G Thomas, Lyons.

Tries Lyons, Meeuws Cons S Jones 2 Pens S Jones 4.

Sin-bin Roberts, 65. 

Referee J Jones (WRU). Attendance 6,068. 

Heineken Cup one to watch: Regan King(Scarlets)

King is one of the best centres not playing international rugby 
and if the Harlequins midfield fails to shut down the New Zealander's space at 
Stradey Park this Saturday - the last Heineken Cup match before the bulldozers 
move in - they will pay the price. The centre was influential again in 
difficult conditions in Watford yesterday
 