
With the title decided after round four and points difference irrelevant, it 
was never going to be a last day to rival 2015’s. There would be no unfettered 
Celtic pursuit of the leaders, only a chance for Scotland and Ireland to 
reshuffle the minor places among themselves behind Wales. England’s quest for 
the grand slam was the single story of the day.

Wales against Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/wales-italy-six-nations-match-report>
 came, then, with no great stress. Win and Warren Gatland’s team would finish 
second – never bad, but not quite as good as their hopes at the start of the 
February. If there was a sense of strain, it presumably came as a reminder of 
the last time these two met in Cardiff, in the terrible World Cup warm-up game 
that cost Wales the services of Leigh Halfpenny to this day and Rhys Webb until 
last Saturday, when he made a successful re-entry off the bench at Twickenham.

Wales romp past Italy with George North scoring the pick of nine tries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/wales-italy-six-nations-match-report>
The scrum half’s reintegration continued when, as if he had never been away, 
he nipped over with a dummy and dart. It is his trademark try, as it is of the 
No9 he replaced, Gareth Davies. Both have pace to spare; Webb perhaps brings a 
broader understanding and a greater audible authority to the position.

Faced by Italy, who wilted with the passing of the weeks, this was now a 
chance to cut loose. It happened, but not without some equally telling moments 
when passes from Bradley and Jonathan Davies (twice each) and Liam Williams 
missed their targets, or were so inaccurate that they stopped the moves in 
their tracks. Wales are totally at home in hot contact but their skills can 
desert them in open play. They did so when it mattered at Twickenham and they 
did so again when it did not to such an extent here.

To make progress to the next level, Wales have to be as at home in space as 
they are in contact. It has been the question of this Six Nations: would the 
All Blacks have been so careless with their handling? No, they would not.

The best passes were the simple ones – certainly not the long, looping numbers 
that left the catcher’s ribs exposed to tacklers. The combinations between Dan 
Biggar and Jamie Roberts for the outside-half’s try, and by these same players 
with George North and Jonathan Davies for the outside-centre’s were beautifully 
short and crisp and precise. North’s delivery to Roberts for the first try of 
the second half was a gem; his run for his own try a whole fistful of stones.

All those names were entirely familiar. Was there anybody new on display? 
There was. Ross Moriarty is an altogether rougher diamond than North, but he 
brought real power to the Wales game. And not just leg-pumping brute strength, 
but carefully considered surges between defenders, plus a try from a maul that 
was not so much driving as sprinting. It was sad to see Justin Tipuric go off 
on a day ready-made for his style, but Moriarty made an emphatic statement 
about planning for the future. The campaign was not everything Wales had hoped 
for, but it was far from fruitless.

Scotland and Ireland began in Dublin as if the subplots – the visitors trying 
to win three games in succession for the first time in 20 years and Ireland 
trying not to be defending champions coming down to earth with a bump that 
might cause even more injuries – might yet reduce this to familiar caution. 
Four penalties led the way.

Stuart Hogg then opened up a gap and a new chapter with a try against the 
flow. After the full-back’s solo run, Jonathan Sexton starting going for the 
corner rather than more points from penalties. Hogg had a set a new tone, 
although he was left thumping the turf as Tommy Seymour and he collided after 
the sweetest of left-footed dinks between them by Sexton. Anguish is good as an 
indicator that willy-nilly has not taken over from respectfully competitive.

CJ Stander’s eyes, raised in thanks after his try was awarded, confirmed the 
game’s authenticity. To opt for the flamboyant, as in a dive over a ruck on the 
Scottish line, is acceptable when it works. The flourish was a nice touch on 
top of all the thumpingly direct running of the wing forward in his firstSix 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations>.

Conor Murray added a short-range try, but this had turned fully into a 
long-range game. Scotland ran and ran, gloriously from their own line – 
hopelessly from so far out. They scored a scintillating try through Richie Gray 
and lost Alex Dunbar for tipping Sexton over in a ruck. How out of position 
they all were.

Wales-Italy had scored exactly the same number of points as last year – 81 
(20-61 and 67-14). Ireland and Scotland, with the try by Devin Toner now went 
through the 50 they managed last year at Murrayfield. This was not the last day 
of 2015; it was even more bountiful, begging another question of the Celts in 
the old championship. If you can finish like this in March, why not start like 
it in February?
 