
Florida <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> might need to consider 
redesigning its license plates. The state’s plates feature a pair of ripe 
oranges above the famous “Sunshine State” slogan, but the region is in the 
midst of the worst orange harvest crisis since records began in 1913 – and 
prices are soaring.


Rude awakening as price of coffee and orange juice shoots up 20%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/rude-awakening-as-price-of-coffee-and-orange-juice-shoots-up-20>
The state’s orange trees, which are mostly used to produce juice, have been 
devastated by disease and hurricanes, causing harvest totals to fall for five 
successive seasons. The US Department of Agriculture this week predicted that 
the 2016 harvest would amount to just 70m boxes of oranges, a 14% drop on last 
year and a huge decline from bountiful days at the turn of this century when 
more than 230m boxes, each containing 90lb of fruit, were produced each year.


The steep drop in production has led orange juice futures prices to nearly 
double in 13 months, pushing producers to reduce the size of cartons and make 
more drinks that blend orange with other juices, in order to avoid shocking 
consumers with too big a price increase at the checkout. Orange juice futures 
traded on the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) rose from $1.03 a pound in 
September 2015 to $2.05 last week. Some analysts predict that the price could 
reach $2.20 by the end of the year.

The orange crop devastation began in 2005 when a bacterium that causes 
huanglongbing – better known as citrus greening or HLB disease – was found in 
southern Florida. Since then, the Asian citrus psyllid, a tiny flying insect 
which transmits the disease, has been blown across Florida by various 
hurricanes, which also brought down orange trees.

Farmers have spent more than $100m on research into ways to combat the 
disease, but so far scientists are stumped.

“Farmers are giving up on oranges altogether,” said Judith Ganes, president of 
the commodities research firm J Ganes Consulting. “Normally after a freeze or a 
hurricane [which both kill lots of trees], the growers would replant 100% of 
their plants.


“But the disease has been spread all over by hurricanes, and made it totally 
uncontrollable. Farmers are giving up and turning to other crops or turning 
land over to housing.”

Ganes said the disease, which causes fruit to drop prematurely and eventually 
kills the trees, was “effectively like the trees having cancer with very low 
survival rates”. Last month, the US agriculture department said that in the 
most recent season, almost a third of Florida’s orange crop fell from the trees 
before it could be harvested – compared with just 7% five years ago.

Ganes said prices had been surging as both Florida and São Paulo state in 
Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/rude-awakening-as-price-of-coffee-and-orange-juice-shoots-up-20>
, the world’s other big source of orange juice, both suffered from HLB disease.

As the wholesale price has risen, Ganes said, orange juice companies such as 
Pepsi’s Tropicana and Coca-Cola’s Minute Maid have had to get more creative 
with how they sell juice to consumers.

“To get round the price rise, they are making the cartons smaller or blending 
orange with other fruits or water,” she said.

Andrew Meadows of Florida Citrus Mutual, a cooperative that represents many of 
the 62,000 people employed in the state’s citrus industry, said there was no 
denying oranges were in crisis but the state’s farmers were not giving up yet.

“We’ve been through things like this before. We’re not packing up and giving 
up on the industry,” he said on the phone from the organisation’s offices on 
Orange Street in Lakeland, a town in Polk County in the heart of the state’s 
orange groves.

Consumers have, so far, been saved from big price increases in supermarkets 
because as well as decreasing carton sizes, consumers are downing less 
breakfast OJ than previous generations – which means demand is also in decline.

John Michalik, a beverages expert at the Canadian division of the market 
research group Global Data, said orange juice demand had been decreasing for 
more than a decade as consumers skip proper breakfasts and worry about the 
juice’s high sugar content.

“US consumers have it in their mind that orange juice is high in sugar, which 
it is, but it’s natural sugars that don’t contribute to obesity,” he said.

“People are not having the full breakfast at home like they used to. Now 
almost all breakfasts are a coffee and sandwich or snack on the go.”

• This article was amended on 17 October 2016 to correct the figure for the 
orange harvest at the turn of the century. It was 230m boxes, not 23m.
 