
With our prisons bursting at the seams, it is shocking to hear Sir David 
Calvert-Smith, who chairs theParole Board for England and Wales 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/parole-board>, say that prisoners 
are not being released as early as they should be. He lays the blame at the 
board's increased workload following asupreme court ruling last year 
<http://www.gcnchambers.co.uk/news/prisoners_succeed_in_oral_hearings_challenges_in_the_supreme_court>
 which has led to a huge backlog in parole board hearings.

"The pressure brought upon us by the Osborn ruling, has meant, and will 
continue to mean for some months that the backlogs will grow. And that means 
more people staying in prison for longer than they would otherwise have done," 
says Calvert-Smith. "We have already increased our workload by 45% by working 
more smartly, running pilots in which instead of having three panel members we 
have two so we can hold more hearings."

In July, the board had 780 cases against the usual 400-500. "In due course, if 
the delays get any longer or a delay in a particular case gets longer we will 
have to pay damages," he says. "Even though it's not our fault, we owe them a 
hearing and we haven't given them one."

Ever since its inception under a Labour government in 1967 the decision-making 
process of the parole board has been a bit of a mystery to prisoners. A bigger 
mystery for today's prison population is when they might actually get a 
hearing. Before the supreme court ruling in October 2013, the majority of 
prisoners who wanted to challenge the lawfulness of their imprisonment had 
their case decided at paper hearings where a panel of one, two or three members 
sat and made their decision after reading a dossier of reports and 
representations. Oral hearings numbered around 5,000 a year. Now, prisoners 
have the right to a face-to-face oral hearing. As a result, the number has 
doubled, creating a huge backlog with hearings being delayed by six months or 
more. To cope with the mounting workload the government increased the board's 
budget by 10% to £12.6m.

The ruling was made to give "fairness" to prisoners but has resulted in the 
prospect of compensation payments for those whose hearings have been unfairly 
delayed due to the backlog, a detail not lost on Calvert-Smith.

Does he ever feel under pressure to let people out when prisons are 
overcrowded, or political pressure to keep people in following failures in high 
profile cases?

"Both these pressures have been apparent during the life of the parole board," 
he says. "We act under a strict statutory regime – the pressure we feel is the 
pressure of the statute which says we will direct release if it's deemed no 
longer necessary for the safety of the public for an individual to be confined. 
And that's about it."

Before he was a high court judge Calvert-Smith was the director of public 
prosecutions (DPP). He successfully prosecuted the mass murdererHarold Shipman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2005/aug/25/health.shipman> and the spy 
David Shaylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/jul/30/davidshayler.richardnortontaylor>, 
though he failed to secure a conviction against Princess Diana's former butler, 
Paul Burrell, for theft. He took on his current position soon after he retired 
from the bench two years ago. What drew him to the other side, so to speak? 
"It's a career circle," he says. As a student he helped out on a weekend 
probation rehabilitation programme for young people and in his early legal 
career he mainly defended, before turning to prosecution at the Old Bailey 
working on murders. "Coming to this job feels like I have come full circle. 
Having spent so much of my time trying to get people put away or putting them 
away, I'm interested to see what happens to them when they get to the other 
end. Every story is fascinating and it's a privilege and an honour to be 
involved at this stage of the process."

How annoyed does he get when politicians make public pronouncements when 
things appear to have gone awry? The Conservative MP Philip Davies, for example,
said that whoever made the decision to move violent armed robber Michael 
Wheatley, the so called Skull Cracker, to an open prison – from where he 
absconded in May – was "a berk". 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/06/governors-defend-open-prisons-michael-wheatley-skull-cracker-case>

"I was DPP for five years and off-the-cuff remarks by MPs who haven't read the 
papers and know nothing about the case don't surprise me," says Calvert-Smith. 
"They've stopped annoying me."

So do cases such as Wheatley's incline the parole board to become more risk 
averse? "Not in the slightest," he replies. "The parole board recommended that 
he be moved to open conditions. That's a recommendation which can be accepted 
or rejected. It was accepted by the Ministry of Justice, but the conditions 
under which he was held in open conditions were entirely a matter for the 
prison service. All we do is recommend on the basis that he had done all the 
work necessary in closed conditions. But 'testing in open conditions' is 
supposed to mean what it says. Some people pass tests and some people fail 
them. When you get a big failure of a parolee, we take that very seriously."

Does he ever feel the justice secretary, Chris Grayling, breathing down his 
neck?

"He has never, would never interfere with us. If he did, you, the press, would 
be the first to hear about it," replies Calvert-Smith. Does he speak to him? 
"Yes. I saw him last week."

And the head of the prison service? "Yes, regularly."

Do they discuss their mutual crises? "We discuss that, of course. We discuss a 
full range of issues frequently, it's a service that we perform for each other. 
'How can we improve our service to each other?' That sort of thing."

But when I ask if all three of them ever get together to try to work out 
solutions to the problems facing the whole of the criminal justice system, his 
reply is telling: "I don't think we have ever been in the same room together, 
no."

Calvert-Smith says he last visited prison last month. "When I was a judge I 
often visited prisons and was shown around by the governor and regularly met 
with prisoners. I also readInside Time <http://www.insidetime.co.uk/>, the 
national newspapers for prisons, I think it is one of the best papers you can 
read."

Considering the scale of the work facing the parole board he seems 
surprisingly calm. "This job is much more relaxed than being a judge or a 
prosecutor," he says. "It's a huge privilege at the twilight of my career to be 
allowed to see how we as a country try to manage criminal justice in a balanced 
and a civilised way as best we can."

Curriculum vitae

Age 69.

Lives London.

Family Married, two children, three grandchildren.

Education Eton, LLB law, Kings College, MA, law, Cambridge.

Career 2012-present: judge, the courts of appeal of Jersey and Guernsey; 
2005-12: judge in charge of Terrorism List; 2006-10: presiding judge south-east 
circuit; 2005-12: high court judge; 2004: temporary solicitor of Customs and 
Excise; 1998–2003, director of public prosecutions; 1997: made a QC; 1995-97: 
first senior treasury counsel; 1991: senior treasury counsel, central criminal 
court; 1986-98: recorder; 1986: junior treasury counsel, central criminal 
court; 1981-86: assistant recorder; 1969-present: barrister, QEB Hollis 
Whiteman .

Public life 2012-present: chair, Parole Board for England and Wales; 2004-5: 
head, Commission for Racial Equality's investigation of racism in the Police 
Service of England and Wales; 1998: chair, Criminal Bar Association; 1997: 
chair, Bar Counsel Education and Training Committee; 1995-97: vice chair, 
Criminal Bar Association

Interests Athletics, squash, singing, piano playing, cinema.
 