
The mass walk-out by A-League active supporters began in the 30th minute of 
Saturday night’s clash betweenMelbourne Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-victory> and Adelaide United. A 
heaving, colourful block of Victory supporters departed in a matter of minutes, 
leaving behind an eerily quiet stadium.


As the supporters walked out they sang “we are not criminals”, but outside, as 
they continued to watch the game on the big screen, they were ringed by a heavy 
police contingent.

Western Sydney Wanderers win again as fans make good on promise of protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/western-sydney-wanderers-win-again-as-fans-make-good-on-promise-of-protest>
On Sunday, the Western Sydney Wanderers’ supporter group walked out on the 
Wanderers match against the Central Coast Mariners. Banners were displayed by 
several active supporter groups over the weekend, many of which were critical 
of Football Federation of Australia for their treatment of fans. Essentially it 
was a league-wide revolt.

Although the Sunday Telegraph’s recent “name and shame” file of banned 
football fans caused plenty of outrage, primarily the walk-outs and banners 
were a message to FFA.

If you believe the word coming from various A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> supporter groups, many of the 
people included in the published ban list have had their confidence shattered, 
their reputations destroyed and some have even lost their jobs. Many are 
seeking legal advice. Of the people labelled “grubby pack animals” by one 
member of the NSW Police, some supporters seem to have been banned on very 
dubious grounds. Most importantly, they have had no right to appeal.

The solidarity among supporters – those who walked out on Saturday and Sunday 
were mostly supported by the ones that remained – shows how deeply this has cut 
the football community. Indeed when a detailed banned list, curated and 
maintained with the FFA’s input, is flashed on the front page of Australia’s 
best selling newspaper it is a “there but for the grace of God go I” moment for 
every person who stands in an active supporter bay.

Steven Issa, the Deputy Lord Mayor of Parramatta and Wanderers member, 
supported the walk-outs by Wanderers and Victory fans.

“For me, it makes me not only nervous, but it makes me angry,” he told 
Guardian Australia. “There’s people that have been banned for being guilty by 
association… I could have been acquitted by the court as innocent, and still 
got a ban. I would have been on the front page of the Daily Telegraph, my 
political career, my professional career and my family all would have been 
jeopardised.

“I know some of the people banned. They’ve come and spoken to me after they’ve 
been banned to see if I can do anything, but there is no FFA appeals process. 
In some of the cases, they’ve gone to court, been acquitted by a court of law, 
and yet the ban is still upheld. Now is the FFA above the law?”

Indeed the lack of a transparent appeals process has frustrated supporters of 
all clubs for several seasons, and yeton Thursday, FFA said 
<http://www.footballaustralia.com.au/article/ffa-clarifies-banning-process/1isx558wvyfvd15dd4c06e4kmg#QDS59IhcBfkdY6E0.99>
: “Since the inception of the banning process, it has always been the case that 
if a banned person can prove that they did not engage in the relevant behaviour 
the ban will not apply. If a banned person can bring the evidence that proves 
this to FFA through their club, the ban will be lifted.”

But at the beginning of November, head of the A-League Damien de Bohun said 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/sport/football/football-federation-australia-has-moral-obligation-to-allow-banned-fans-to-appeal-warns-senator/story-fnp0lxay-1227596457019>
: “FFA takes the view that we have a right to decide if a person is welcome 
among the football community at our matches. It’s a general deterrent to those 
who cause trouble that they face long bans with no right of appeal.”

Football Federation Australia to open formal appeals process for banned fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/football-federation-australia-to-open-formal-appeals-process-for-banned-fans>
And then, on Sunday night, De Bohun said: “We will be formalising a process 
where if there is a banned fan who can bring evidence to prove that they didn’t 
participate in the actions that they’re alleged to do, they need to take that 
to their club. We will review that with them and the club and we will overturn 
the ban if that evidence proves that in fact they didn’t do it.”

So has it “always been the case” that there is an appeals process, or not? How 
can anybody trust an organisation this lost and tongue-tied?

The FFA response has been arrogant and condescending. They have not stood for 
the interests of their own, and worse, they have not been straight with them. 
Regardless of the latest statement by De Bohun, FFA seem more concerned with 
its own reputation than with the wellbeing of its constituents.

It may be that FFA are furious that the banned list was leaked to the media, 
but ultimately, the original sin is in their own processes. By not having a 
clear appeals pathway for supporters from the beginning, fundamentally they 
loaded the gun and then left it lying around for the Telegraph to pick up and 
fire off a few rounds. They are accountable for this mess.

Here is the ultimate irony. Outside Etihad Stadium on Saturday night there was 
no fear of violence, or flares, or rude words. Yet having witnessed friends 
banned for trivial offences, their privacy breached and reputations destroyed 
without a fair hearing, more than ever A-League fans now have cause for fear. 
Regardless of FFA’s promise to formalise an appeals process, it is still 
unclear how a banned fan is supposed to access the evidence to clear their name.

“You’re not guilty until proven innocent,” said Issa. “[De Bohun] has come out 
and said ‘show us substantial evidence that it wasn’t you’. Well no, you show 
me substantial evidence that it was mebefore you ban me.”
 