
The shortfalls in final-salary pension funds remain "stubbornly high" at 
£150bn, despite a surge in stock market values since the financial crash, 
according to a report.

The pensions adviser JLT Employee Benefits says the costs of rising life 
expectancy, and low returns from safe-haven assets such as government bonds, 
have offset many of the gains from the growth in share prices.

The deficit for all UK private-sector pension schemes shrank from £172bn to 
£150bn in the last year, JLT said. Total assets stood at £1,133bn, compared 
with liabilities of £1,283bn.

Charles Cowling, the firm's director, warned that funds were facing an added 
burden from higher inflation expectations, and this would play a part in 
raising costs. Most schemes offered index-linked benefits, and higher inflation 
would increase the financial burden.

He said: "Most of the improvements experienced over the year have been 
cancelled out by the sharp increase in inflation expectations earlier in the 
year."

He said a steady recovery in returns from safe-haven assets, which have become 
less popular since the euro crisis settled down in 2012, would also lower 
longstanding shortfalls.

"Increases in gilt yields since April have led to lower values being placed on 
liabilities, which will reduce deficits for schemes with more recent valuation 
dates. This should help to reduce cash contribution requirements for recovery 
plans being agreed in the new year."

Final-salary schemes, which guarantee a retirement income based on workers' 
final pay cheques, account for a dwindling proportion of pension provision 
after a decade in which most were made unavailable to new entrants and were 
subsequently closed to further contributions.

Most UK workers contribute to personal pension-style schemes, which pay an 
income in retirement based on stock-market returns.

However, the shortfalls in the schemes are still a burden on employers, and 
many are forced by the pensions regulator to make extra annual contributions to 
close deficits more quickly.

Cowling said: "In the last five years, since the financial crisis, the equity 
market has performed strongly, with the FTSE 100 up 52% since 31 December 2008. 
But for pension schemes there has been no such cheer, with the total deficit in 
the pension schemes of FTSE 100 companies up by £71bn over the same period.

"What will 2014 bring? Potentially, more of the same. It is not clear how 
markets will react as the UK economy continues to strengthen. 
Counter-intuitively, a stronger economy may lead to increased insolvencies and 
debt compromises as the banks take the opportunity to realise cash where it is 
available."

A report last year by the independent pensions and risk consultancy Hymans 
Robertson showed that Scottish businesses were in an even worse position after 
suffering a near doubling in deficits in the last 12 months. The rise from 
£3.2bn to £6bn was due to a fall in the corporate bond yields used to value 
company pension liabilities, the firm said.
 