
➺ No big company would dare to forecast its performance over five years. Most 
executives know it's silly to offer hostages to fortune when there are so many 
uncertainties. Even City analysts, spreadsheet junkies, tend to look no further 
than three years when plotting corporate courses.

Yet, when it comes to budgets and autumn statements, we are expected to hold 
our breath as the chancellor unveils hot-off-the-press estimates from theOffice 
for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/office-for-budget-responsibility>.

Thus George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> on 
Thursday could trumpet the OBR's new growth forecasts: 1.4% this year – much 
higher than March's guess – to be followed by 2.4%, 2.2%, 2.6%, 2.7% and 2.7% 
again in 2019-19.

Such precision. Unfortunately, its impact was undone in the previous passage 
where the chancellor said the Office for National Statistics had reassessed the 
depth of the 2008-09 recession and found the peak-to-trough fall in GDP to be 
7.2%, not 6.3% as previously thought.

If measuring the past is so tricky, forecasts for what might happen in the 
next half-decade require a hefty helping of salt.

None of which is to suggest that the OBR's predictions are worthless; the 
Treasury requires a model of the economy and it's a good thing that the OBR 
works independently. And one can't really blame Osborne for milking the moment 
for political advantage.

But look at the detail of the OBR's projections in two areas – business 
investment and exports. This is the crucial territory where the numbers must 
improve if the recovery is to become more substantial than a housing-induced 
sugar-rush.

The good news is that the OBR expects good news. But take a step back, examine 
these two graphs and ask yourself: on the evidence of the past (the stuff to 
the left of the dotted line), do the forecasts (the stuff to the right) strike 
you as solid?

The projections for business investment are, perhaps, credible possibilities 
because we know surges do happen – one can clearly see the late-1980s Lawson 
boom and the late-1990s dotcom and technology excitement.

So, on paper, one could construct an argument that we stand on the brink on 
another sudden uplift and that bosses were just waiting for consumer confidence 
to return before dipping into the corporate coffers.

On the other hand, that jag upwards from 2014-19 looks heroic. As recently as 
March, the OBR expected a 2% rise in business investment this year; it now 
thinks the outcome will be minus 5.5%. Yet consistent gains of 8%-plus are 
still on the cards, apparently.

Similarly, on export market share, the chart heads steadily downwards for 15 
years and then, miraculously, almost goes sideways for five years. That takes 
some believing, notwithstanding welcome developments like JCB's big expansion 
announced on Friday. Sterling, unhelpfully for exporters, is now strengthening.

Yes, a £1.5tn economy and a company are very different beasts. Maybe the high 
hopes will be fulfilled. But if those graphs were presented as part of 
corporate turnaround plan, the shareholders would be deeply sceptical.

 ➺ Aviva's prospects (but not the dividend) started to improve when John 
McFarlane arrived on the board in 2011. He helped to ditch the unloved chief 
executive, Andrew Moss.

Then he filled that front-line role himself for eight months until promising 
recruit, Mark Wilson, arrived. And then took up the job of non-executive 
chairman, the post originally intended. Despite this year's dividend cut, 
Aviva's message of greater cost-control and concentration on cash sounds more 
believable this days.

So one can understand why FirstGroup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/firstgroup>, the Aberdeen-based bus and 
rail firm, would also wish to have the plain-speaking McFarlane as its chairman.

FirstGroup, too, is a company recovering from a heart attack. It had a big 
rights issue this year to tackle sky-high debts and also now preaches a gospel 
on tighter management. McFarlane, a well travelled Scot, seems a decent pick 
for chairman, as the 5% rise in the share price on news of the appointment 
suggested.

Harder to understand, though, is why Aviva's board has allowed McFarlane to 
take another chairmanship at a large company.

Aren't big insurers, like big banks, meant to be so important that the 
chairman, whatever it says in the contract about a three-day week, must be on 
hand at all times if required?

Aviva's crisis, it might be argued, passed when Wilson arrived and a heap of 
under-powered foreign units were sold.

Life may indeed turn out swimmingly, but Aviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> retains a big presence in 
the eurozone, where the crisis looks as if it's been suppressed rather than 
resolved.

It's a little early, surely, for simultaneously chairing another large 
business. FirstGroup is still a company with 120,000 employees on two 
continents.

McFarlane is an experienced chap, but a chairmanship double-header at two 
companies that have just left the emergency ward is asking a lot.

Aviva's shareholders may note that Paul Manduca, chairman of the Prudential, 
shuffled off most of his other roles soon after appointment and has accepted no 
other major gig since.

➺ Royal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> watch: the 
shares briefly touched 600p this week, for a gain of 82% since privatisation in 
October, or one-third since the first day of trading when business secretary 
Vince Cable predicted the "froth" would blow away.

An outbreak of peace between the company and the Communication Workers Union 
was a mini-trigger for the latest improvement in the share price.

So the government, defending itself against the charge of woeful under-pricing 
of the shares, might argue that factor could not possibly have been foreseen in 
October.

But a successful negotiation was always the way to bet. The two sides never 
looked far apart and the CWU knew public sympathy for a prolonged strike would 
be limited.

A nurse, for example, might regard Royal Mail's original pay offer of 8.6% 
over three years, plus legal protections on conditions, as not so bad.

➺ This is no way to run a pizza joint. Lance Batchelor resigned on Friday as 
chief executive ofDomino's Pizza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominospizza> Group, the UK master 
franchisee for the US brand. Where's he off to? Domino's seems to want 
shareholders to play guessing games.

"Lance has been offered a new role in a significant private equity-backed 
company," says chairman Stephen Hemsley. Yes, but which one? "His new company 
operates in a non-competing sector."

This is a high-handed way to treat shareholders, who will pay Batchelor's 
£452,000 salary until his departure next April. He has been in the post for 
only two years.

If he has lost his appetite for Domino's so quickly, he should do the 
courteous thing and say why.

In the absence of information, you can't blame investors for assuming Domino's 
troubles in Germany have worsened and that Batchelor thinks performance-related 
jackpots are out of reach. Shares fell 9% – understandably so.
 