

A “fair banking” scheme backed by the archbishop of Canterbury has given its 
blessing to products offered by 11 financial firms, including Barclays bank’s 
main current account, held by several million people.

The Fairbanking Foundation <http://www.fairbanking.org.uk>, a not-for-profit 
charity of which Justin Welby is a patron, operates a scheme to encourage 
financial institutions to develop products that help customers improve their 
financial wellbeing and manage their money better. It awards star ratings to 
certain products – current accounts, credit cards, savings accounts and 
personal loans – that pass a number of tests on issues such as fairness, 
interest rates and fees, the number of complaints received, and what customers 
say.


At an event in London, the charity awarded its Fairbanking Mark to products 
offered by 11 institutions: Barclays, Halifax, Bank of Scotland, Lloyds, 
NatWest, Royal Bank of Scotland and Capital One, plus four credit unions - 
London Capital, Central Liverpool, Enterprise and 1st Alliance (Ayrshire). They 
join three other firms that have previously been recognised.


Many of the products that received praise are personal loans, credit cards and 
Isas, although they include a mainstream current account in the form of the 
Barclays Bank Account, which won a three-star rating for its features designed 
to help people monitor their spending and avoid bank charges.


Firms seeking to gain a Fairbanking Mark must submit their product for 
detailed testing by the foundation, which includes a poll of customers by an 
independent research firm. The firm must confirm that a significant percentage 
of people find it useful in helping them manage their money better and achieve 
their savings goals.


Welby welcomed the fact that some financial firms were demonstrating a 
commitment to the financial wellbeing of their customers: “We are all acutely 
aware that we need a change of culture within the banking sector if we are to 
avoid some of the problems and excesses that led to the financial crash of 
2008.”


He added: “As well as developing smart regulation, we also need financial 
institutions to do the right thing, not because of reward and sanction, but 
because it is the right thing to do. Because it is good for customers and for 
the wider common good.”


However, research carried out for the charity found there was “still work to 
be done”, with nearly two out of five customers (38%) believing the banking 
industry’s image had deteriorated over the past year. Its study found that 13% 
believed the image of banks had deteriorated significantly. The main issue 
identified by the research was a lack of focus on customer needs, said the 
charity.
 