
Property <https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> purchases by first-time 
buyers in November reached their highest level since the financial crisis as 
falling mortgage rates and rising prices encouraged more people on to the 
property ladder.

Figures from the property firm LSL show that across the UK 34,300 first-time 
buyers completed on sales during the month, the highest number since August 
2007, when the housing market was reaching its last peak.

The increase was driven by a fall in the cost of mortgages to a four-year low, 
according to the firm, which owns estate agency brands Your Move and Reeds 
Rains and uses data from its sales and from the Council of Mortgage Lenders to 
compile its figures.

Transactions by new entrants in the market were up by 14.7% on October’s 
figure and by 29.9% year on year, while at £151,020 the average purchase price 
was up 3.9% on the same month last year and 0.8% higher than in October. LSL 
said first-time buyers during the month typically put down a 17% deposit on 
their purchase, worth £25,991.

First-time buyers were hit hard by the credit crunch that took hold in 2008 
and resulted in lenders pulling mortgages for borrowers with small deposits and 
imposing stricter lending policies that shut some would-be buyers out of the 
market. Since then, government stimulus in the shape of the Funding for Lending 
Scheme, which channelled cheaper money through banks, and the Help to Buy 
mortgage guarantee scheme has encouraged banks and building societies to 
increase their maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratios.

Although there has been no return to the 125% mortgages on offer before the 
crash, rates have been falling even on mortgages based on smaller deposits. LSL 
said that even though property prices had risen over the past year, monthly 
repayments had not. In November 2013, first-time buyers typically paid 20.9% of 
their monthly income towards their home loan, against 20.2% a year later.

Stamp duty <https://www.theguardian.com/money/stampduty> changes introduced in 
December’s autumn statement have further reduced the cost of buying in some 
parts of the country, although this saving is made upfront. LSL said that under 
the new regime, first-time buyers in London would save an average of £4,200 on 
the typical £290,158 they were paying for a home. However in many areas outside 
southern England, first homes were typically changing hands for prices below 
the first stamp duty threshold of £125,000.

Adrian Gill, director of Your Move and Reeds Rains, said: “The government 
unveiled a revised stamp duty structure in the autumn statement, and this will 
further nurture demand at the lower end of the market.

“But while it will have a big impact in the capital, the changes will be less 
noticeable elsewhere – and in some areas where the average price of a 
first-time buyer property is still beneath the bottom tier, they may be 
negligible. Still, the media buzz surrounding the announcement has pepped up 
interest, regardless.”

David Hollingworth, of the mortgage brokers London & Country, said a lot had 
been happening in the first-time buyer market this year.

“You will still pay more if you have a small deposit but there is a lot more 
choice and innovation.”

The Help to Buy mortgage guarantee scheme, which many lenders joined in 
January this year, had helped push down interest rates on 95% loans. The 
best-buy mortgage was a two-year fixed-rate at 4.64%, while buyers able to 
raise a 10% deposit could get interest rates below 3%. This time last year the 
cheapest two-year deal on a 90% mortgage was 3.49%.

“This encourages more people to decide that actually now is the time to buy, 
he said. “Prices have also started to go up, so if you’re confident you can 
afford it, and you think that houses are going to continue to rise, it may look 
like a good time to buy.”

LSL’s figures show the market was busiest in London and the south-east of 
England in the three months to the end of November, with 14,100 and 18,800 
first-time buyer completions respectively out of the UK total of 89,100. In the 
north-west, 8,500 new buyers bought homes. In the north-east the figure was 
3,500.
 