
They have become the must-have for fitness fans but wearable gadgets that 
track users’ physical activity may not help people lose weight, a new study has 
found.

Instead of motivating users to do more exercise over the day, the two-year 
survey found the devices were actually less effective at encouraging people to 
lose weight than simply following a diet and exercise plan.

Scientists suspect that people become overly dependent on the gadgets to help 
them change their health, developing a false sense of security – and would do 
better by relying on simple willpower.

Costing up to £150, the devices by technology firms including Fitbit, Jawbone 
and Misfit are worn on the wrist or arm, monitor physical activity, steps 
taken, calories burnt, heart rate and quality of sleep – and feed the data 
directly into a smartphone.

The researchers tracked 470 overweight or obese people, aged 18 to 35, for 24 
months. Everyone in the study was put on a low-calorie diet, given an exercise 
plan and invited to regular group sessions.

Fitness trackers: healthy little helpers or no-good gadgets?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/28/fitness-trackers-healthy-helpers-motivation-inefficient>
After six months, half the group was given a Fit Core armband, which tracks 
activity and feeds it into a computer programme that also allows people to log 
their diet. The other half were simply told to monitor their exercise and diet 
by themselves.

The researchers, whose results are published in the Journal of the American 
Medical Association <http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2553448>
 (JAMA), found that patients given the armbands lost less weight than those who 
monitored their own activity.

The group using the Fit Core gadgets lost an average of 7.7lb over two years, 
compared with an average 13lb in the self-monitored group.

A spokesman for Jawbone, which owns BodyMedia, the manufacturer of Fit Core, 
told theDaily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3798588/Why-Fitbits-Jawbone-waste-time-Diets-just-effective-weight-loss.html>
: “The results of the study do not suggest that wearable devices should not be 
used for positive weight loss outcomes.

“In fact, the study demonstrated positive weight loss in both groups. Wearable 
tech helps to bridge the gap between patients who have access to rather 
intensive weight loss treatments and the very many who don’t.”

A spokeswoman for Fitbit said: “The researchers point out that a limitation of 
their work includes the fact that they did not use a modern wearable device 
such as those offered by Fitbit. The upper arm device used in the study was 
limited to automatic data collection only.

“Most wearables today, including those offered by Fitbit, go far beyond data 
collection, offering individuals real-time access to their information, 
insights, motivation from associated social networks, and guidance about their 
health. We would strongly caution against any conclusion that these findings 
apply to the wearable technology category as a whole.”

 