
The headlines were dismissive. Fitness trackers “can make you fatter”, scoffed 
one 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/fitness-trackers-can-make-you-fatter-mpzjr6slk>
. They have “no weight-loss benefit” warnedanother 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/21/fitness-trackers-offer-no-weight-loss-benefit-and-can-actually-m/>
. It was enough to make you rip off your Fibit, Garmin or Jawbone device and 
chuck it in your bedside drawer – if you hadn’t already.

Yet the study they were referring to – by the University of Pittsburgh, 
published in the journal of the American Medical Association, which followed 
471 young adults trying to lose weight – was nowhere near as damning as the 
stories claimed (100 mandatory press-ups for those headline writers). After six 
months of receiving weight-loss advice, half the group were given a fitness 
tracker, half were not. All were placed on a low-calorie diet and prescribed 
more physical activity. Both groups lost weight, so no one got fatter. But 
there was a twist: those using the fitness tracker lost less than those who 
didn’t, an average of 3.5kg versus 5.9kg over two years.

10 fitness apps to put more zip in our workouts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/10/-sp-10-best-fitness-apps-review>
The researchers themselves admit to being baffled, with one theory being that 
constant awareness of activity actually led people to “treat” themselves more 
often; or conversely, that watching how few steps they took led to despondency. 
As they themselves admitted: “We stepped back and said wait a minute, maybe 
these devices aren’t as effective for everyone.”

If you don’t ‘fess up to that extra helping of pudding how will your device 
know it must chide you into an evening walk?

Well, no surprises there. Aside from the fact that the study was small and 
limited in scope, it is worth pointing out that a fitness tracker is a tool, 
and as with all tools it has to be used correctly. Much as having a shiny gym 
membership card in your wallet doesn’t magically make you fitter, a tracker can 
only track; you have to do the work yourself. At least until they invent the 
one that takes your cardiovascular system out for a spin without you.

Trackers aren’t infallible and neither are their users. Sometimes they will 
give inaccurate step counts or heart-rate data; and sometimes you forget to 
charge them, or enter the wrong info in the accompanying app. If you don’t 
’fess up to that extra helping of pudding, then how will that bossy little 
device know it must chide you into an evening walk?

Many, if not most, trackers are bought with virtuous intent, only to end up 
lurking in the bottom of a drawer six months later. And lurk they do: that 
chivvying and chiding into more activity can sometimes take on a slightly 
sinister tone. In my more paranoid moments I’ve wondered if the slick-looking 
device on my wrist has an agenda of its own. Or at least if it’s trying to 
break me. Why does it always cut out when I go for a run? I have found myself 
jogging up and down the stairs on run-tired legs at 9.30pm to hit my step 
count, just to placate it. Sometimes I find myself talking to it. “You’ve been 
unusually slow off the mark today,” it tuts. “But I’m running a marathon on 
Sunday, I need to rest!” I plead. Our relationship is strained: I fear we need 
therapy.

Purely anecdotally, many of the people I know who are most devoted to their 
trackables are those who are very active anyway. Perhaps us smug runner-types 
just need the constant validation – though I do also find it useful to remind 
me to get up and away from the other bit of tyrannical technology in my life – 
the computer screen. At any rate, one thing I am sure of is that of all the 
aspects of modern life that might be making us fat, fitness trackers are not 
high on the suspect list.
 