
The crisis of the eurozone seems to be going from bad to worse. Not only have 
the key players not yet found convincing solutions for the fiscal problems in
Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, Ireland and Portugal but we 
are already witnessing the beginning of a political backlash that could 
undermine the achievements of decades of European integration. There is 
generally a lack of ideas about what needs to be done to turn things around so 
here are my suggestions:

1. Say it as it is: it's about politics, not economics 

As Wolfgang Muenchau observed 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/3eb6bbc8-796c-11e0-86bd-00144feabdc0,dwp_uuid=c8e15fd6-3658-11da-bedc-00000e2511c8,print=yes.html>
, the debt to GDP ratio of the eurozone as a whole is less than that of the UK 
or the US and does not pose an overall economic problem. The problem is that 
there is a lack of political mechanisms to deal with fiscal crises in some 
areas of the eurozone. So this crisis is not about economics, it is about 
politics and economically illiterate politicians.

2. There are no payments – be honest with Europe's citizens 

It is frankly shameful that most European leaders, especially in Germany, keep 
their population believing that there are direct payments to countries such as 
Greece. This nurtures the wrong assumption that the German taxpayer pays for 
early retirement and other luxuries they themselves do not enjoy.

This is just wrong. The bailout is not a direct payment – it provides IMF and 
EU lending facilities that lend at lower than market interest rates butat 
higher rates 
<http://www.social-europe.eu/2010/11/the-so-called-bail-out-europe-and-ireland-in-a-sado-masochistic-relationship/>
 than the countries that underwrite it can get money for. So the bailout 
(actually a misnomer) is not a handout but a loan at a profitable rate if there 
is no default.

What this dishonesty does, however, is to undermine solidarity and to create a 
widespread mood againstEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
in debtor as well as creditor countries.

The fact that anti-European parties are on the rise all over the place is 
therefore unsurprising and to a significant extent due to the mainstream 
parties not being honest about what is going on.

3. Stop the banking socialism 

But why are Europe's leaders not straight? Almost certainly there has to be a 
debt restructuring at some point and it should naturally be the investors that 
take the first hit, not the taxpayers.

A significant part of the bailout is used to service sovereign debt so the 
money goes straight into the pockets of the bondholders and not to the people 
in the crisis countries who are actually exposed to crippling austerity 
measures. In essence, the bailouts help banks holding sovereign debt of crisis 
countries to socialise their investment risk. And the more debt is bought up by 
the ECB – or maybe by the lending facilities themselves – the more the 
taxpayers are liable.

Of course, if a haircut or some other form of immediate restructuring brought 
certain banks into trouble they would have to be supported if they are 
systemically relevant. But in such a situation it would at least be clear that 
normal capitalist rules still apply and the primary investment risk lies with 
the investor who was already compensated for this risk via the interest rate. 
At the moment we have privatised profits and socialised risks while keeping 
people in the dark about it. This cannot continue.

4. Breaking up the eurozone is the most expensive option – admit it

It also requires some political honesty to admit that there are no cheap 
options left to resolve this crisis. But breaking up the eurozone would be the 
most expensive one. Why?

Imagine Greece leaving the euro and reintroducing the drachma. Apart from the 
practical problems and costs a currency switch would create an immediate run on 
the Greek banks by savers wanting to take their assets abroad because the 
drachma would radically depreciate against the euro.

The debt to GDP ratio would also increase drastically as the debt would still 
be in euro, making a default much more likely. Given thelow proportion of 
exports 
<http://www.social-europe.eu/2011/02/promotion-of-export-driven-growth-the-first-pillar-of-our-progressive-response-to-the-crisis/>
 as a share of Greek GDP, the resulting increase in competitiveness would not 
outweigh the costs. So this surely looks like the worst option.

5. Forget the stability and growth pact – we need proper economic governance

It is simply wrong for some commentators to say that diluting the stability 
and growth pact <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stability_and_Growth_Pact> was 
the reason for the euro crisis. First of all the pact is based on random 
figures. The 60% overall debt to GDP and the 3% annual deficit limits were just 
based on the average debt and growth rates of 1990. There is no economic 
rationale for these figures and they do not allow for specific circumstances 
either.

Germany was one of the first countries to break these rules as they do not 
allow for country-specific circumstances to be considered. Therefore the huge 
costs produced by German reunification could not be taken into account when 
judging German fiscal policy.

It is true that Greece's real fiscal position has been obscured by wrong 
figures, but Ireland for instance was in a very strong fiscal position – well 
within the pact criteria – when the crisis broke out. The pact did not, 
however, prevent Irish banks from creating balance sheets of a multiple of GDP, 
and it did not prevent the building up of a housing bubble and aggressive 
beggar-thy-neighbour tax policies either.
 