
After hosting nearly 2,600 matches, the most evocative club ground in Wales 
hosted its final 80 minutes last night before being turned into a housing 
estate. The game went the way of 78.5% of the rest, a home victory, but did not 
survive in the memory beyond the final whistle.

Bristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> hardly made for 
worthy opponents: even at full strength they would have offered little in terms 
of creativity, and a largely reserve platoon barely mounted a meaningful attack.

The emotions of the crowds were stoked by a parade of former captains before 
the match, with 21 of the 23 survivors present; Peter Evans, who led the side 
for two seasons in the 1950s, was ill and Simon Easterby was leading the team 
against Bristol. Special cheers were reserved for Delme Thomas, the captain 
against the 1972 All Blacks, and Phil Bennett, the former Llanelli, Wales and 
Lions captain.

A presentation was made to Gareth Jenkins, the Scarlets' development director 
who, as a player from 1967 and then as coach, was involved in 1,196 matches 
combined for the Llanelli club and the region. No one personifies more the 
umbilical link between the town, the wider Carmarthenshire area and the rugby 
club but, even though Stradey was a stadium fit for the amateur era, it has 
held back theScarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> in the 
professional age.

From the moment the full-back, Morgan Stoddart, gave the Scarlets the lead 
within two minutes of the start the outcome was never in doubt and the crowd, 
after a few early bursts of Sospan Fach, had little to get excited about. It 
was not until stoppage time in the opening half that the Scarlets scored their 
second try through Easterby, but it was always going to be a night when it was 
those who had come to watch who took centre stage.

The match sold out weeks ago. "If only that were the case every week," said 
one of the many Llanelli legends on display last night, Derek Quinnell.

The Scarlets led 17-0 at the interval and maintained their dominance to the 
end. It was left to a former Bristol player, Rob Higgitt, to score the final 
try at the ground before the final final whistle gave the cue for the flowing 
of tears and ale.

"We wanted to do the place justice and not let all the emotion get to us," 
said Stephen Jones. "I think we did that."

Scarlets Stoddart; Higgitt, King, Evans (Davies, 61), M Jones (C Thomas, 70); 
S Jones, Martens; I Thomas, Owens (Rees, 52), Meeuws (John, 52), Cooper (D 
Jones, h-t), Day, N Thomas, Easterby (capt), Lyons.

Tries Stoddart, Easterby, Higgitt. Cons S Jones 3. Pens S Jones 2.

Bristol Elliott; Robinson, Eves, Fatialofa (Maggs, 58), Turner; Ashwin 
(Barden, 71), Thomas (Alford, 70); Irish, Linklater (Blaney, 61), Crompton 
(Bracken, 64), Sambucetti, Sidoli, Salter (capt), B Pennycook, Blowers (C 
Pennycook, 64).

Referee D Bodilly (Cardiff) 

Attendance 10,800
 