
The change in the season has been pronounced. Unlike a politician's promise, 
you can actually count on it. Here in Ballarat, the last few weeks have really 
had us reaching for our jackets and wool-lined boots. It’s a beautiful time of 
the year and marks the harvest season for much of what grows in my garden.


It's a time of transition. I’ve pulled out my main summer crops of beans and 
set them out to dry for our winter stores. I’ve reluctantly pulled out the last 
of the zucchini, eggplant and tomato, and it's with these chores that I have to 
concede that summer really is over.


 With that thought lingering in the back of my mind, my next duty is to secure 
some meat for the freezer stores. I’ve been hunting rabbit and hare in winter 
for years, but I’ll be honest, at times it’s just plain ugly out there. I 
always hunt at night, and it's often wet, cold and miserable. Sure there are 
times when cabin fever sets in and I’ll do anything to get out of the house, so 
a-hunting I will go. But most of the time in winter I like the thought of a 
beast sitting in the freezer ready for me to put it into some sort of 
heartwarming meal.


It’s not like I have much choice of large animals to hunt. Feral goats are few 
and far between around here and hunting the most sustainable meat is illegal 
(kangaroo, possum and wallaby). So my last option is deer. Well, who can 
complain about that?
 Butchering a stag. Photograph: Rohan Anderson/The Guardian 
Wild deer have been managed as a "game" species for years but despite this, 
their numbers have fluctuated and have now become a bit of a problem in some 
parts, notably where people are trying to grow trees and lawn in their 
backyard, semi-rural retreats. But there are still places in Victoria that are 
a bit more on the wild side, away from houses, set deep in bush where the deer 
population has been left to its own devices.


These are the places I keep my ear open for, and this year, after a tip-off 
from a mate, I headed to a spot that apparently had deer in big numbers. With 
my truck packed with three empty Eskys and my swag, off hunting I went. Two 
days of hunting and enjoying the bush and I had a stag and a young doe hanging 
ready for me to butcher.

I butchered and bagged the beasts taking care to label each bag with the name 
of the cuts and which animal it came from. You see, the stag has a bit more of 
a gamey flavour – in fact stinks this time of year, in the rut. It’s when the 
males fight for the females' affection, and in doing so their scent glands go 
into hyperdrive. It’s an unpleasant, pungent aroma, that can work its way into 
the meat sometimes making it close to becoming dog meat. That's why I prefer to 
hunt for a doe: the meat is better quality and there is no shortage of the 
animals.

There are some fine meals residing in these vacuum-sealed bags now. Plenty of 
slow, day-long roasts, stews, sausages and fry ups. I can’t wait to try the 
tenderloin, the shoulder and haunch. It’s all a bit overwhelming to be honest. 
My first winter with a deer-filled freezer! I wonder how I’ll come out on the 
other side? Will I be plumper and full of red venison? Or will I keep fit by 
hunting those cold winter nights for rabbit and hare? Hopefully I’ll meet 
somewhere in the middle. In any case, I'll be well fed.

 