
When times are tough, humans become resourceful; out of adversity and struggle 
comes some great inventiveness. I think that's an admirable trait. This winter 
has been particularly tough for me in the patch and I've relied on a mixture of 
wild food and last summer's produce to pull many family meals together.

I'll be the first to admit that this self-reliant lifestyle encourages a man 
to be a real opportunist. And when good opportunities present, it simply 
becomes a matter of strike while the iron is hot.

With that in mind, I pulled over on a country road near home, intrigued by a 
hand-drawn sign: "sheep for sale $170". After a quick phone call, we secured 
ourselves a whole lamb, butchered and delivered straight from the farmer. What 
a great system!

For many years now, I've shied away from purchasing lamb purely because I 
couldn't be sure of its origin and the food miles. But this was an opportunity 
I couldn't pass up. The very rare opportunity to buy direct from a farmer only 
a half-hour drive from home? What more could I ask for? Well, organic would 
have been nice – but, hell, I figure ticking a few boxes is a damn fine start.

Over the last few weeks, we've watched rain stream in sideways, fog and mist 
blanket the valley and snow drift gently on the grass. Each week I've split 
wood for the fire and stacked a heart-warming pile at the side of the old farm 
house. Each day the fire burns away, its glow doing sweet things for the soul 
and the warmth carrying through the house.

We eat well in winter, even though we've had some hard times with failures in 
the garden. I've lost all my broccoli, kale and most of my pea crop to bush 
rats and possums. But I did manage to save the swiss chard, which I've enjoyed 
eating immensely this winter as the only source of fresh greens from the patch.
 Resourceful eating: lamb, swiss chard, chevre, butter and sauvignon blanc. 
Photograph: Rohan Anderson 
This is where I've been a little resourceful, using whatever is on hand to 
turn out something that might not be haute cuisine, but is still an enjoyable 
dish. In the fridge I had the ever-reliable butter, a little left over 
sauvignon blanc, some smelly chevre and of course those lamb chops.

The swiss chard is a rainbow of colours, so rich and natural. I simply sliced 
them finely until the chopping board had a pile of green, red and yellow chard 
slithers covering it, melted some butter on the hot plate with a splash of 
olive juice and slid them in. After a few minutes the fresh greens' crispness 
gave way to a soft wilt, and I added some chevre and a splash of the wine, the 
cheese melting and forming a dressing over the cooked chard.

The chops, meanwhile, were sizzling away on the cast iron skillet, seasoned 
with salt and pepper with a sprinkle of dried rosemary. The smell was 
intoxicating. Red meat is such a treat in my kitchen and I savoured every part 
of the experience.

One last knob of butter for extra naughtiness, and I was ready to eat – a meal 
to nourish me and put a smile on my face. It tasted delicious. Once again 
working with less seems to have delivered so much more than just cooking with 
what I wanted.

• Read more from Rohan Anderson on his blog, Whole Larder Love 
<http://wholelarderlove.com/>. His book of the same name is published by Penguin
 
<http://www.penguin.com.au/products/9780670076918/whole-larder-love/311295/q-rohan-anderson>
.
 