
There's a question I'm often asked about self-sufficiency: "Where do I begin? 
Like I have the answer! The best I can do (after some head scratching and shoe 
shuffling) is to reply: "Why don't you put a seed into the soil?"

It's an obvious metaphor, blunt and simple. The questioner wishes to make 
change and grow as a person, to become self sufficient. The seed wants to 
germinate, to form into a plant, to become something new. It's a simple piece 
of advice, but along with it I offer encouragement: from little seeds, big 
vegetables grow.

My most vivid memory is when Mum and I worked the soil of our new family plot. 
My father had done the initial work by running over a stretch of quite useless 
and unproductive grass with a motorised rotary hoe which shook and rattled 
every muscle and bone in his body. He transformed the lawn into a family food 
bowl. Mum, my brother and I then dug over the clumps of turned grass, discarded 
the roots and tilled the fresh rich worm-filled soil. It was damp, moist and 
friable. That dark earth had sat idle for many seasons, home to all kinds of 
detritavores constantly adding to the soil's potential. This great quality soil 
would soon become our family's food future.

Mum ripped open packets of seeds: purple king climbing beans, carrots, brown 
onions, leeks, peas, potato and many more. We'd made rows separated by walking 
paths, and upon those neat rows sat shallow channels for the seeds to be 
dropped into. A small boy excited by dirt, by working, by not knowing what 
would happen as a result of our efforts, couldn't help but want to plant the 
seeds. Mum demonstrated the simplicity of the process and in doing so 
encouraged me to grow.

I remember that first afternoon we created the garden. After we downed tools, 
the sun dipped low and the valley began to chill. Before I walked back to the 
house I looked at the orderly rows of soil and wondered how long the garden 
would take to grow. I've always been impatient. Here I learnt to distract 
myself from constantly checking for signs of germination with other chores. 
There was a good deal of firewood chopped in those few weeks.

As a teenager and young adult, many years seemed to drift past living as a 
city dweller. Somehow though, the older I became, the more I wanted to be 
involved with that natural process again. Now I'm sharing the experience with 
my children: "Put the seed in the soil, cover it and it will grow."

The soil is cold this time of year – only a week ago snow fell on the garden. 
The vegetables I grow this time of year are resilient. The have to be – and so 
does a gardener – tough, and compelled to work in unpleasant conditions. My 
kids and I have been out working the garden: poking small holes in the freshly 
turned soil, dropping in a sprouting garlic clove, a dried pea, a broad bean or 
thousands of tiny onion and carrot seeds.

All these inanimate seeds, lying in the soil, to be woken in the coming weeks 
from their slumber – in a few months time we shall feast on quiche, soup, 
pasta, salads and stews full of ingredients that got their kick start in this 
world because we put seeds in the soil.

This time of year is also the prime time to be hanging a good deal of our 
dry-cured meats. We have just sliced open last year's Jamon – and as soon as 
one Jamon is started, it is time to hang the next. We do this by laying an 
entire leg of pork in a bath of dry salt for a few weeks. Then it's hung in a 
bug-proof cage for 12 months, slowly perfecting into a pure porky indulgence.

Last week I was offered two large sows. The next month I'll finish them off 
out on a mate's farm, then off to the slaughterhouse they'll go, before 
eventually being turned into jamon, chorizo, bacon and pancetta. I love making 
food from animals you've been in contact with yourself. In my previous life I'd 
select it from a supermarket shelf. Nowadays it's a much more connected process.

This system, well, I reckon it's more nourishing for the body, but more 
importably though, it's food for the soul. There is such pride to be felt in 
what we've achieved, what we are capable of doing – especially when I'm 
enjoying that warm stew, soup or pasta. My internal tears of joy are often 
expressed with repeated bursts of embarrassing food groans at the table. The 
sweetness of the fresh green peas, the richness of a bean, the crunch of a 
carrot, the fulfilment of a dream. There is purpose in what we do.
 The dark soil which has been lying dormant for weeks comes to life with 
abundance. Photograph: Guardian 
Read more from Rohan Anderson on his blog, Whole Larder Love. His book of the 
same name is published by Penguin.
 