
As fans of the Harry Potter series will know, a bezoar is a solid mass found 
in thegastrointestinal tract of goats that is believed to have poison-curing 
properties and in JK Rowling’s books is used by the eponymous wizard to save 
Ron Weasley from some very nasty mead.

Soon we will discover if Arsène Wenger, a bespectacled professor of 
near-Dumbledorian age and wisdom, plans to use one to cure his poisoned 
midfield. TheAjax head coach, Peter Bosz, has kicked off something of a 
footballing whodoingit by revealing that Riechedly Bazoer is about to announce 
a move to somewhere, but refusing to say precisely where. “Riechedly reported 
that his transfer is in the final phase,” said Bosz. “He has a view to a new 
club, which is why we gave him freedom from training. We shook hands and parted 
in a good way.” Eagle-eyed Mill readers will remember Bazoer from various April 
tittle-tattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/15/football-transfer-rumours-arsenal-chelsea-tottenham-riechedly-bazoer>
 linking him with moves toArsenal, Chelsea, Manchester United and Tottenham – 
just a Liverpool short of a full house – though it is Wenger whose interest has 
apparently been most sustained, making north London his most likely destination.

Antonio Conte calls possibility of Chelsea points deduction ‘a joke’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/antonio-conte-chelsea-points-deduction-joke-manchester-city>
But the Dutch international midfielder should be warned that life at Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> isn’t always easy. Wenger’s 
claim last week that the club “have started talking toAlex Oxlade-Chamberlain” 
about a new contract has left the player feeling “frustrated and bemused”, 
according to the Mirror, on the basis that no talks have taken place, and that 
he’s far from sure he wants a new contract anyway, given the fact that when he 
plays he’s nearly always either a substitute or substituted (just three of 21 
appearances this season in all competitions have lasted 90 minutes). He’s got 
18 months left on his current deal, after which he may well be tempted to 
flounce out of the Emirates for good and proper.

Edinson Cavani is very much of the same mind, and though the striker’s 
contract at Paris Saint-Germain doesn’t end until 2018 he is reportedly 
stalling on a new one, amid rumours thatManchester United will come a-knockin’ 
come the summer.

But the Uruguayan international forward should be warned that life at United 
isn’t always easy. In the Sun, a source laments thatJosé Mourinho “has 
effectively cancelledChrimbo” by scheduling an afternoon training session on 
the big day, instead of followingManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> tradition by letting 
his players train in the morning before going home to spend the rest of the day 
wearing embarrassing jumpers and paper party hats and putting on their best 
fake smile like the rest of us.

Mark Hughes has dropped a subtle hint that Stoke would like to complete a 
permanent deal for on-loan Porto defenderBruno Martins Indi. “If we can, yes. 
He wants to do well in the Premier League and we want that to be with us.” In 
rumourmongering, as in football itself Hughes, it seems, is all about the end 
result and not so keen on nuance.


Everton have sent scouts to watch CSKA Moscow’s Alan Dzagoev, and could be 
tempted to splash £15m on the 26-year-old in January as Ronald Koeman looks to 
make Ross Barkley feel even more peripheral and unwelcome.West Brom are going 
to hand Tony Pulis an enormous January warchest and tell him to make his team – 
inasmuch as the idea is even feasible – better than they already are, and the 
resulting spree is going to see the Baggies bid for Manchester City’sFabian 
Delph and Bournemouth’s Benik Afobe. 

Sunderland and Nottingham Forest have both got designs on 17-year-old St 
Mirren wingerKyle McAllister, who has also been scouted by Leicester and Aston 
Villa as well as a variety of Scottish sides. AndReading would like to sign 
Jordon Mutchfrom Crystal Palace. 
 