
One day last week an email arrived at Manchester United marked for the 
attention of Sir Alex Ferguson. They probably get a lot of emails for Ferguson, 
one imagines. He still has an office at Old Trafford, he is a director of the 
club and, though nobody should imagine they go straight into his personal 
inbox, there is a small army of staff to sift through all the correspondence.

This one came from the family of Matthew Monaghan and it was written in the 
hope that Ferguson would get a better understanding, almost 30 years on, as to 
why one of the players from the club’s youth system went so badly off the rails 
he lasted only two months as a professional before eventually walking away from 
football for good.

Monaghan had waived his anonymity to talk, in depth, about what happened to 
him in the junior setup at Crewe in the 1980s and how those experiences had 
shaped his life. A television appearance was booked in and his stepdad, Geoff, 
decided Ferguson ought to know. “I think it will answer a question that you may 
have asked yourself so many years ago,” he wrote to the former United manager. 
“The reason you lost what, in my personal opinion, would have been one of your 
best players.”

To give United their due, the reply – all 22 words of it – came back within 24 
hours. It was from their customer-care department and a remarkable piece of 
work given the way it managed to say so little yet so much. “Dear Geoff. Thank 
you for your email. We are sorry but we are unable to pass on your email. Kind 
regards.” And I have left off the person’s name who sent it, out of a spirit of 
generosity that I’m not absolutely sure is merited.

Remember that trend a while back when people would make a W for “whatever” 
with their fingers? There has been a lot of that over the past two decades, 
unfortunately, when it comes to the story that has been dominating football’s 
landscape over the last few weeks.

It also goes much higher up the chain judging by the letters that have been 
passed my way from various people – parents, for the most part – trying to 
alert MPs, the Football Association, the Professional Footballers’ Association 
and many others that the sport had better wise up. Nobody, until now, seemed 
willing to absorb what they were being told and take decisive action. Some of 
the people writing these letters did not even get replies or, failing that, 
were fobbed off with the standard corporate-speak of people too busy with other 
matters, politely passing the buck and explaining in the briefest terms that it 
was one for another department, but thank you very much for writing in anyway.

Knowing what we do now, it stinks. It was a “whitewash”, according to one 
parent who spent years trying to be heard, and it would certainly be 
appreciated if Martin Glenn, the current chief executive of the FA, could 
elaborate on his comments the other day when he was emboldened enough to say he 
did not think there had been any kind of cover-up – especially when the 
chairman of the same organisation, Greg Clarke, had already said it could not 
be ruled out.

In an ideal world, it would be nice to think this was more than wishful 
thinking on Glenn’s part, but it isn’t easy knowing what is going through his 
mind when he does not even sound sure that the numbers involved (around 1,000 
calls to the FA’s hotline, at the last count) are that mind‑boggling. “Child 
abuse is a society issue and because of football’s importance – we have three 
million people playing every weekend, 800,000 volunteers – the scale is big,” 
Glenn explained. “So it is hard to say of those calls, whether that is a large 
number or a small one.”

Glenn, to recap, introduced himself in his first press conference at the top 
of English football by telling everyone he was not an expert when it came to 
football. He is clearly not an expert in numbers, either. Sport England’s last 
figures show 1.9 million people in England play football once a week (though 
not necessarily at weekends) and the FA’s own website puts the number of 
volunteers at 400,000. Yet, whatever his reasons for this kind of exaggeration, 
it strikes me that it is a large number of calls, rather than a small one. Most 
people, I presume, would think the same when at least 350 people have made 
complaints to the police and, bearing in mind that was Thursday’s figure, 
heaven knows what the number is now, or where it will stop.

We also don’t know how many others are still holding back but nobody should 
think that figure will be small. Again, a number of former players have been in 
touch over the last week with their own harrowing accounts. It just isn’t easy 
for everyone to go public when there are children to tell, or elderly parents 
who might not have known anything about it. Others have explained that it is 
too raw, too early, and it isn’t hugely encouraging for them that Glenn, 
meanwhile, appears to be questioning whether some of the claims might be bogus 
– “I don’t know how many are real or how many will be followed up,” being 
another line – and concluding that English football is far too noble to have 
concealed anything untoward.

Chelsea apologises 'profusely' to former player over alleged abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/03/chelsea-apologises-profusely-to-former-player-abused-while-at-club>
Back in the real world, Chelsea’s £50,000 payment to dissuade their former 
player Gary Johnson from going public about what he experienced with Eddie 
Heath, a scout at Stamford Bridge in the 1970s, provides hard evidence about 
what the sport is really like.

Money talks but it also stops talk and, however cynical this might sound, 
there is absolutely nothing about the Chelsea story that is in the slightest 
bit surprising. Football clubs pay for confidentiality agreements when a 
manager leaves – as, indeed, do the FA – so nobody should be shocked that 
Chelsea offered hush money to a victim of sexual abuse. Heath cannot be 
prosecuted because he is dead. That does not make Chelsea’s approach any more 
appealing but, however much you and I might dislike it, don’t think for a 
second that other clubs would not do the same if they could get away with it.
The club’s statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/03/chelsea-apologises-profusely-to-former-player-abused-while-at-club>
 on Saturday acknowledges it could have been handled better but, if nothing 
else, at least there was a willingness to confront the issues in a way we have 
not seen from Crewe, among others.

All that can really be said is that there is still an awful lot more to come 
out and, when everything is done, there are many people within the sport who 
will have serious questions to answer about what they knew and what they did, 
or didn’t do, about that information.

At least 55 clubs, at professional and amateur level, have been named so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/football-abuse-scandal-grows-55-clubs-now-involved>
. Eighteen different police forces are investigating and in the last week I 
have seen a written admission, dating back to 2000, from the now-deceased 
official of one club accepting his colleagues made a terrible error of judgment 
appointing one man, acknowledging “suspicions were aired on many an occasion” 
and expressing his wish that the boys and parents who had suffered might 
eventually forgive them.

The mother of one former youth‑team player has been in touch and, among many 
worrying recollections, wanted to know if I was aware that the boys at another 
club were sometimes photographed stepping out of the showers. Further inquiries 
revealed that, yes, a number of players could remember it, too. They were just 
too young at the time to realise that it was wrong. For now, these people 
cannot be named. But they will be, in due course.

There are some formidable journalists covering this story now but it is also 
becoming increasingly obvious that it was very different back when it really 
mattered. One newspaper review of theDispatches documentary in 1997 hardens 
those suspicions given that its author talks of “scare-mongering” and accuses 
the programme of being “too busy charging around, looking for somewhere to bang 
in its nails. It found a couple of clubs, who it claimed were slow to respond 
to reports of abuse. And it found the Football Association, who were said to be 
guilty of failing to issue ‘guidelines’. I felt slightly sorry at this point 
for the FA, who might quite honourably have assumed that sending instructions 
‘Don’t let child molesters run your youth team’ was somehow surplus to 
requirement.”

What a pity Deborah Davies, the Dispatches reporter, was not afforded more 
respect. Instead, a fine piece of investigative journalism attracted something 
bordering on ridicule – “It seemed for a second thatDispatches was going to 
argue for a total ban on football” – and maybe, if there had been a warmer 
response, it might not have taken almost 20 years before Andy Woodward felt 
emboldened enough to start the process that has empowered so many others to do 
the same.

Football abuse scandal grows with 55 clubs now involved
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/football-abuse-scandal-grows-55-clubs-now-involved>
Many of them are old friends, back in touch with each other for the first time 
in 20 years, and it has been quite something to see the way they relate to one 
another. If one of them is having a tough day, the others rally round. If 
anyone seems low, someone else in the group will notice. It has been difficult, 
emotionally sapping and all‑consuming like no other story that I have covered, 
but when people ask if it has been harrowing it would be extraordinarily lame 
to indulge in self‑pity given everything they have endured, their comradeship 
and remarkable endurance.

It has actually been uplifting to be in their company, to help them tell their 
stories and to see where they were a few weeks ago and where they are now. 
Messages of support have arrived from all across the world. People have written 
to these men to say it has changed – and, in some cases, saved – their lives 
and everything has moved so quickly there are already plans for a new 
independent trust, the Offside Trust, involving Woodward, Steve Walters and 
Chris Unsworth, and providing support for anyone who has suffered abuse in 
football.

That group will need financial assistance and perhaps the PFA might wish to 
contribute, if we remember this is the organisation that gave its chief 
executive, Gordon Taylor, a pay rise from £1.13m a year to £3.37m in 2015. 
Woodward, meanwhile, received a call from the PFA earlier this year to inform 
him it was withdrawing its funding for the counselling that had brought him 
back from the point of suicide.

It is true what Gareth Southgate said – you can love this sport, but the more 
you get to know about it the less likable it becomes.

• The NSPCC’s hotline is 0800 023 2642 and ChildLine’s is 0800 1111.

• The National Association for People Abused in Childhood can be contacted on 
0808-801 0331.

• In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 