
Virgil van Dijk is named after a Latin poet famous for telling the story of a 
hero’s epic journey and subsequent ascent to glory on the battlefield, and it 
is proving an apt sobriquet for the heroic Dutch defender, who the Mail report 
in their outsize back-page splash is about to set off on another voyage as soon 
asManchester City formalise their £50m bid. The best part of the deal is that 
not only would the move strengthen City’s own porous defence, it would have the 
happy side-effect of forcing Southampton to cling on to José Fonte, otherwise 
expected to move to their arch-rivals from Old Trafford. They are not alone in 
considering a big-money move for Van Dijk, however, with the Star and the 
Mirror both countering thatParis Saint-Germain will pay £40m for him.

The French giants would do well not to undertake any long-term transfer 
planning, with the Sun reporting that they are ready to make a third attempt to 
convinceArsène Wenger to return to France – and that their target is finally 
“ready to sayoui”. The 67-year-old Arsenal manager will remain in London for 
the remainder of this season, after which he may pack his bags and head for 
home. “Unai Emery could be sacked if PSG go out of the Champions League in 
February,” they write, “and an interim coach will be appointed until Wenger 
gives his answer.” Roberto Mancini, Louis van Gaal and Clarence Seedorf are 
mentioned as potential alternatives should Wenger, in the end, saynon. Again.

Manchester United close in on Benfica’s Victor Lindelof to strengthen defence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/manchester-united-benfica-victor-lindelof-jose-mourinho>
The Star’s big transfer exclusive is news that José Mourinho has entered the 
race to signDimitri Payet, a sprint previously dominated by Arsenal. “Old 
Trafford bosses have asked sources close to Payet to keep them informed of the 
situation,” they report, adding thatManchester United would be willing to 
nearly double his £120,000-a-week salary. The Express however insist thatWest 
Ham “will resist all offers for Payet”, and that ideally they would like to 
improve their squad in January, standing poised to pounce should 34-year-old
Darijo Srna’s move to Barcelona break down, ready to snap up Bournemouth’s Max 
Gradel on loan and preparing a £12m bid for Atlético Mineiro striker Lucas 
Pratto. Slaven Bilic also hopes to usher quietly towards the exit a small 
gaggle of his most hopeless summer signings, including Sofiane Feghouli, Arthur 
Masuaku and Álvaro Arbeloa, as well as loanees Simone Zaza, Gokhan Tore and 
Jonathan Calleri.

Manchester United may have other priorities beyond Payet, however. The 
Telegraph detail a £180m quartet of imminent arrivals, withthe Benfica defender 
Victor Lindelof likely to be the first of them to arrive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/manchester-united-benfica-victor-lindelof-jose-mourinho>
, and indeed the only one to turn up in January. He will be followed, when 
summer comes, by his current team-mate Nélson Semedo – who, like Lindelof and 
Mourinho, is represented by Jorge Mendes, but is also wanted by Bayern Munich – 
theMonaco midfielder Tiemoué Bakayoko – on whom Chelsea are also keen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/chelsea-tiemoue-bakayoko-djibril-sidibe-oscar-windfall>
 – and by way of cherry on this extraordinarily rich cake, Atlético Madrid’s
Antoine Griezmann, whose club may come to regret setting his release clause at 
the eminently affordable €100m.

Robert Snodgrass could be playing in the Championship even sooner than the 
rest of the Hull team, if he accepts a January move toNewcastle. The Star 
reports that there are two clubs chasing the midfielder, withWest Bromwich 
Albion offering some competition, that the player “looks set to quit” the KCOM 
Stadium in the new year, and also that “Snodgrass has no concerns about 
dropping into the Championship”. A fee of £10m is suggested, for a player whose 
contract is due to end next summer. He may not arrive in Newcastle in time to 
play alongside Aleksandar Mitrovic, who is valued at £15m and is apparently on 
the shopping list at Swansea, West Ham and Crystal Palace.
 