
Manchester United are neck-deep in talks with Benfica over their Swedish 
defenderVictor Lindelof, who the Portuguese club apparently values at a cool 
£42m. The Sun report that the player’s agent is currently in England for 
discussions with the United hierarchy, while the Mail expand this to declare 
the arrival of “a delegation from the Portuguese club” and O Jogo announce that 
Benfica president Luís Filipe Vieira is in town, but the former paper warns 
that he “may have to drop [his] asking price as United’s need is no longer so 
great”, given the form of Phil Jones and the fact that Marcus Rojo has 
miraculously managed to avoid long-term suspension for a number of games now. 
Clubs whose need is no longer so great should probably avoid talking terms with 
£42m-rated defenders, you’d have thought.

Chelsea to reject loan offers for deputy striker Michy Batshuayi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/chelsea-to-reject-loan-offers-michy-batshuayi>
Anyway, United are planning to sell a few players to rustle up some transfer 
funds. One of them isMemphis Depay, on whom the Red Devils are ready to take a 
£13m hit, having decided to accept as little as £12m for the Dutchman, who cost 
– and maths fans might already have figured this out – £25m when he arrived 
from PSV Eindhoven in June last year.Everton, Lazio, Southampton and Sevilla 
are among the clubs rumoured to be interested, with a loan deal also possible.
Marouane Fellaini meanwhile was spotted in Milan on Monday with his 
uncannily-coiffed twin brother Mansour, leading the Mail to suggest he could 
head to either of the city’s giant clubs in January. Also on their way out if 
buyers can be found are Bastian Schweinsteiger and Morgan Schneiderlin.

Marseille may be only sixth in Ligue 1, fully 16 points away from the summit, 
but having recently been taken over by an American billionaire they’re not an 
unattractive destination for footballers – as their former starDimitri Payet 
proved when asked if he could be tempted to return. “Marseille have a new 
project which seems interesting,” he said. “They know how attached I am to the 
club. I am not closing the door to anything.” But some players are happy to 
swap the south coast of France for the dark clouds but bright future offered in 
England, withSouthampton hoping to wrap up a deal for the Nice midfielder Wylan 
Cyprien. In other Anglo-Franco news, Hull are tempted by Saint-Etienne’s 
£4m-rated Moroccan winger Oussama Tannane.

Chelsea want to sign Genoa’s Diego Laxalt, according to Diego Laxalt’s agent. 
Less than five months after he negotiated the Uruguayan wideman’s first 
permanent contract at Genoa, Vincenzo d’Ippolito is eyeing another bumper 
payday. “Genoa believe in him, but they are always open to selling their 
players for the right offer,” he trilled. “Conte scouted Laxalt when he was in 
Italy and he’d love him at Chelsea now.” He’d also loveJames Rodríguez, and is 
apparently ready to splash €90m to make sure Chelsea beatInternazionale, 
Juventus, Manchester United and Paris St-Germain to his signature.

Rudy Gestede, who has scored one league goal in the last three months and 
can’t even get in the Aston Villa team, has another top-flight suitor in the 
shape ofWest Bromwich Albion, having already been linked with a January move to 
either Middlesbrough or Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/middlesbrough-crystal-palace-aston-villa-rudy-gestede>
. Villa have already identified a replacement in the shape of Brentford’sScott 
Hogan, who failed to score against them in September but does seem to have 
scored against most other people this season.

Bournemouth have come up with a cunning ruse to stop Chelsea exercising the 
January recall clause onNathan Aké’s loan deal: buying him for £10m. The 
Cherries are however prepared to letMax Gradel depart, with Burnley and West 
Ham both keen on taking the 29-year-old Ivorian on loan in the new year, so 
long as he doesn’t insist on representing his country at the African Cup of 
Nations.
 