
Leeds United and Blackpool are the latest football clubs to be engulfed by 
allegations of child sexual abuse within the sport, according to the chief 
executive of the Professional Footballers’ Association.

Gordon Taylor said a number of former players had come forward to say they had 
been abused by staff at the two clubs as well as at Crewe, Manchester City, 
Stoke and Newcastle.

“Of those who became apprentices and senior players, over 20 players have come 
forward,” he said. “We’d start at Crewe, go to Man City, Stoke, Blackpool, 
Newcastle, Leeds.

“I’m expecting there will be more. I can’t believe it’s just going to be in 
the north-west and north-east. We need to be mindful this could be throughout 
the country in the same way it’s been in other professions where children are 
there – in the church, in schools.”

Football’s governing body has been forced to launch an independent 
investigation into the escalating scandal, vowing to determine how a suspected 
paedophile ring was allowed to prey on youth players.

The Football Association recruited an independent QC to oversee an internal 
review after former players came forward to claim they were abused by coaches 
and trainers.

The Guardian is aware of many others from junior teams who have done the same 
and the FA has acknowledged its initial investigation could eventually lead to 
a full-scale inquiry into the sport.

The review will seek to establish how much information was available at the 
time about the alleged activities of Barry Bennell, the convicted paedophile at 
the centre of the scandal.

Andy Woodward and Steve Walters, former players at Crewe Alexandra, waived 
their anonymity to tell the Guardian that they had been sexually abused when 
Bennell was running the club’s youth system.

Bennell, now 62, has served three prison sentences totalling 15 years for 
multiple offences involving Crewe and various other teams, but there are 
growing fears that he was colluding with at least one other paedophile.

The FA’s hotline, set up with the NSPCC and described as “a safe space for any 
further whistleblowing”, has received more than 100 calls.

Taylor suggested that some of the issues his organisation had encountered with 
players suffering from mental health issues could be linked to the crimes of 
Bennell and others.

“We’ve had issues of depression and, of course, issues that caused suicides – 
some of what might be coming out might help explain that as well,” he said.

Many of the players who have already come forward have voiced similar fears. 
The FA said it was now looking at how the system allowed Bennell to get away 
with it for so long and whether the two clubs where he had the strongest links, 
Crewe and Manchester City, ought to have done more to investigate allegations 
about his behaviour.

“The internal review will look into what information the FA was aware of at 
the relevant times … what clubs were aware of, and what action was or should 
have been taken,” a statement read.

“The FA has instructed independent leading counsel Kate Gallafent QC to assist 
it with a review into the abuse cases which have recently come to light. At 
this time, with acknowledgement that a wide-ranging inquiry may be required in 
time, we are working closely with the police to support their lead 
investigations and must ensure we do not do anything to interfere with, or 
jeopardise, the criminal process.”

Edward Timpson, MP for Crewe and Nantwich, said: “The players that have broken 
their silence to speak out about the abuse they suffered have shown immense 
courage. No one must ever feel they can’t or shouldn’t be able to do the same. 
It’s now important to understand what happened and why, and let all those 
affected know that they don’t need to be alone.”

Bennell started coaching in 1970 and worked with numerous teams in Greater 
Manchester, Cheshire, Staffordshire and Derbyshire before serving his first 
prison sentence in 1994 in Florida, having molested a British boy on a tour.

 Crewe have stated they are holding their own investigation into how the club 
dealt with allegations about their employee, and another of their former 
youth-team players, Anthony Hughes, has joined the growing number of victims to 
go public, telling the Sunday Mirror he was also targeted by a man the US 
authorities have described as having “almost an insatiable appetite” for young 
boys.

The Metropolitan police as well as the Hampshire and Cheshire forces have 
confirmed they are investigating complaints within the football world. 
Northumbria police said they were investigating an allegation from a former 
Newcastle player that he was abused in the club’s youth system. Newcastle said 
they would cooperate with authorities “if or when the club receives further 
information” but that all they knew currently came from what was printed in the 
Guardian.

Stoke have said they had not been approached about any specific allegation but 
were ready to investigate if necessary while Manchester City, where Bennell was 
affiliated with their junior teams for seven years, have said in a statement: 
“[We are] currently undertaking a thorough investigation of any past links he 
might have had with the organisation.”

Tony Book, Manchester City’s youth-team coach when Bennell was coaching 
junior teams affiliated to the club, declined to comment. “The club are 
handling it and I’m not getting involved at all,” he said. Bernard Halford, 
the former club secretary and honorary life president, also said he did not 
want to talk about the issue.

Blackpool said they had not received any information from the authorities but 
that if they were to do so the club would “provide every assistance”.


Leeds United said they had not been made aware of any allegations regarding 
sexual abuse from the PFA or any other governing bodies to date.


The club added they would take any complaints seriously and would cooperate 
fully with the PFA and the FA with any such investigations.

“The safeguarding of our young players is of the upmost importance to Leeds 
United,” they said.

 * Anyone with any complaints or concerns should contact the NSPCC helpline on 
0800 023 2642 <> or contact the Club’s Safeguarding Officer via email on 
safeguarding@leedsunited.com <mailto:safeguarding@leedsunited.com>
 