
The process of adoption is considered over when the paperwork is signed, 
notarized and final – and, perhaps for the adopted parents, it does feel that 
way. But the process of being adopted, and of being a child coming to the 
awareness that your familial building blocks are inchoate, doesn’t end when the 
paperwork is signed or when you reach adulthood. Being adopted is something 
that many adoptees continue to have to work through – a process that can be 
made more difficult by the ability or willingness of your parents to understand 
that it’s not over for you.


For some of the original children of transracial adoption, that difficulty is 
often heightened by the fact that we are regularly singled out not as our 
parents’ offspring, but as their adopted children, by virtue of how we look. 
But maybe that’s changing.

Adoption was first legalized in the 1850s, according to the Adoption History 
Project <http://pages.uoregon.edu/adoption/>, and encouraged “based on child 
welfare rather than adult interests”. But if that basis was ever true, we saw 
it change dramatically over the succeeding century. There are many recent 
stories about adopteesbeing returned 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/11/15/cleveland-and-lisa-cox-give-back-adopted-son_n_4283178.html>
 orabused  <http://www.people.com/article/nebraska-couple-charged-child-abuse> 
or “saved 
<http://gazillionvoices.com/guest-piece-by-christina-majaski-10-things-adoptees-dont-want-to-hear/#.VlHuRmRJYnU>
”; there are any number of examples of exactly the worst possible language used 
by parents and others in conversations about adoption. I have often wondered, 
in the act of adoption, how much the adopted child’s reality is taken into 
consideration at all.

I was adopted in the late 1960s when, despite massive pushback from the 
National Association of Black Social Workers <http://nabsw.org/?page=History>, 
white parents began adopting black kidsin greater and greater numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/05/race-matters-not-bar-adoption>
. My own parents, zero-population-believing hippies, told me that they adopted 
me because “We had two biological children and we wanted another child, but 
didn’t want to bring another person into an already overpopulated world.” Their 
decision was definitely more about their interests than my welfare; their 
ideals, always deployed with love, made it hard to really understand and move 
on from the pain of being given away.

So I almost never accept invitations to speak publicly about adoption and my 
own personal adoption story, mostly because the invitations primarily come from 
groups of adoptive parents. I have never been sure that I could look them in 
the eyes and tell them that there is something very wrong about adoption, that 
it’s not the same as having a biological child, that there are so many moving 
parts and conflicting emotions or that so much language needs to shift and 
roles reexamined.

Still, I have always wanted to tell adopted parents that when you adopt a 
child, everyone’s pain is palpable and it should be, because it’s not OK for a 
baby to be detached and then reattached like some sort of Snap-on tool. And 
I’ve wanted to acknowledge, and have them acknowledge, that the intentions of 
all involved in an adoption are not always pure.

Recently, though, I accepted an invitation to speak to a group of parents who 
had adopted children outside their race, and was pleasantly surprised to 
discover that the focus of adoptive parents is shifting.

I admit that I expected to meet a group of parents with “white savior” 
complexes who regarded their adopted children of color as “precious gifts” that 
they had effectively protected from a life of poverty, homelessness or worse. 
Rather, I found a group of curious, engaged and thoughtful parents who were 
ready to hear what I had to tell them, however difficult it was to reconcile.

I was moved by their willingness to embrace and help build new narratives for 
their adopted children beyond the replication of a biological connection – 
including, if their children desired, reunions with their children’s birth 
parents on their children’s terms with guided parental support. And perhaps 
most importantly, I saw them willing to center an understanding of race and 
racial conversancy as the critical and essential charge for white parents who 
adopt children of color.

“I think there is a real starvation among progressive adoptive parents to be 
able to support their kids squarely and bravely in matters of race,” Martha 
Crawford, a writer, psychotherapist, transracial adoptive parent and co-founder 
of adoption network All Together Now (ATN) told me.

“They have no language, no skills, no place to practice or build competence. 
The agencies don’t create much in this area with regard to post-adoption 
services. That is why we founded ATN. We were starving ourselves and needed a 
space as white people to practice these hard discussions.”

Arissa Oh, an assistant professor in the history department at Boston College 
and author ofTo Save the Children of Korea: The Cold War Origins of 
International Adoption 
<http://www.amazon.com/To-Save-Children-Korea-International/dp/0804795320>, 
told me that the current conversation about adoption has come about largely due 
to the demands made by those of us adoptees who are now grown and want to help 
improve on the experience. “In the long view, I do think people are taking the 
importance of talking about race – in intelligent ways – more seriously. And I 
think a lot of this is because of adult adoptees.”


I agree, but I also know that nothing would change if adoptive parents weren’t 
willing to listen– and it seems that they are. “There are parents really eager 
and ready to do the work,” Kera Bolonik,a writer, editor and white parent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/04/adoptees-annul-relationship-adoptive-parents>
 to a young black son, Theo, told me.

She added that the language is slowly changing too. “For example, we always 
say to Theo ‘when we first met you’ or ‘the moment you came into our lives.’ 
And we read books together not only about adoptive families but transracial 
families, and books with black children and themes.”

I am heartened by this progress: as a child, I had always wished for an 
acknowledgement that being adopted did make me absolutely different if not 
lesser than my parents’ biological children, for better conversations and more 
work helping me come to terms both with my blackness and where it fit in our 
family. Maybe nobody had the words then – but for the first time in a long 
time, I feel hopeful that the process of adoption is shifting to focus on the 
emotional well-being of the children, and who they grow up to become.
 