
Ten years ago I treated a fifty-year old man with progressive prostate cancer 
and had to deliver the news that the only chemotherapy available at the time 
had failed him. I told a young woman, a lifelong non-smoker with lung cancer, 
that it was unlikely she would be present at her daughter’s first day of 
school. And I recall a genial grandfather with bowel cancer whose greatest 
desire was to stop vomiting – I had to keep apologising that there weren’t 
better drugs to help him.

If genius is 99% perspiration and 1% inspiration, it’s fair to say that 
scientists and clinicians have successfully combined the two to forever alter 
the landscape of cancer medicine, at least in the first world. Today, the 
unprecedented dilemma for an oncologist stems not from the depressing lack of 
treatment options but indeed, from not knowing precisely how to sequence the 
bewildering array of therapies on offer.

Global spending on cancer has reached $100 billion, up from $75 billion only 
six years ago, and it seems countries who can afford these drugs are reaping 
the benefits. Survival rates have increased and supportive care is far more 
sophisticated. There is greater awareness and less stigma about cancer because 
we all know someone who has been brushed by the experience. In all, we are 
living in optimistic times, echoed recently by Joe Biden in his sincere, though 
somewhat misguided, “cancer moonshot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/14/cancer-cure-joe-biden-medical-research>
” initiative to find a cure.

Cancer survival rates worse for people in poorer areas, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/25/cancer-survival-rates-worse-for-people-in-poorer-areas-study-finds>
And perhaps it is because we are aiming for the moon that the latest Cancer 
Council report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/25/cancer-survival-rates-worse-for-people-in-poorer-areas-study-finds>
 hurts so much by bringing us down to earth with a thud. The report’s key 
message is that cancer survival rates are significantly worse for people in 
lower socioeconomic areas. The researchers studied a large cohort of nearly 
400,000 patients, identified 52,000 deaths caused by cancer and concluded that 
a full 13% of cancer deaths could have been prevented if health disparities, 
such as higher smoking rates and poor access to general practitioners, did not 
exist.

Some of the worst survival outcomes were for common cancers of the bowel, 
lung, breast and prostate. Starkly put, your chance of surviving cancer depends 
not only on disease and doctor but also on how educated you are and what job 
you hold. This in a country that prides itself on fair and equitable medical 
treatment for all regardless of colour, creed or cash. How could it be?

For ten years I have worked as an oncologist in an area of severe social 
disadvantage. Here, adult literacy levels are the lowest in the state. Compared 
to their peers, youth are more likely to leave school early, less inclined to 
attend university and are more likely to be neither employed nor engaged in 
education. Unemployment is over 20%. Most people don’t speak English well. 
Fully one third of people over 65 and two thirds of those over 85 are living 
with a severe and profound disability, requiring assistance with communication, 
mobility or self-care. No wonder a doctor who came from the posh end of town 
remarked, “Well,this is different!”

What happens when such patients are diagnosed with cancer? For a start, many 
don’t appreciate the ramifications, through no fault of their own. They may 
have heard that cancer is deadly but not much more. They confuse cancer with 
other conditions and may not appreciate the urgency of diagnosis and treatment. 
They delay consultations or fail to show up for tests that cannot be easily 
rescheduled. You must be thinking that describing such woes is surely blaming 
the patient when the doctor’s communication is at fault.

When recognised, miscommunication is fixable but how do you contact the 
patient who has no fixed home address, boards with her heroin-addicted 
daughter, or who needs to bail her son out of prison on the day of 
chemotherapy? What do you say to a migrant who says she has a choice between 
continuing chemotherapy or going back to work before she is fired from her 
casual job that supports a family of four? How can you help a disabled patient 
who refuses to wait hours for transport because he is worried about his 
demented wife burning herself on the stove? All these patients have said very 
politely that our sympathy is rather nice but quite pointless.

Some time ago I needed to see a patient in three weeks but a system error 
meant that he was given an appointment in three months. He rang me 
apologetically to query this but it wasn’t his fault. For a chemotherapy 
patient, this error could have been significant and dangerous and I was 
thrilled that he questioned it, for difficult as it may be to believe, every 
year there are patients who accidentally fall out of the loop to their great 
detriment.

These patients invest tremendous faith in the ability of the hospital system 
to keep track of them and believe that no news must be good news when 
unfortunately, it’s quite possible that no news just means they are on nobody’s 
personal radar.

My worst memory is of a patient who said she kept calling her hospital for an 
appointment but never got a straight answer until her GP forced her into the 
emergency department with an ultimately fatal problem. “I figured if they 
didn’t call back, I didn’t need to see them,” she said plainly.

Why Joe Biden's call for a 'moonshot to cure cancer' may not be far-fetched
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/14/cancer-cure-joe-biden-medical-research>
Tellingly, this rarely happens to people who are well-educated, articulate and 
able to advocate for themselves. They are the ones who write down everything, 
question everything, bring a friend, ask for interpreters, second opinions and 
more. They have figured out that the healthcare system is very good but not 
perfect but they are capable of filling in the gaps because they are 
functionally literate, are well supported and can afford extended leave without 
worrying about the week’s grocery bill.

The real lesson of the Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> 
Council report might be in pondering how to tackle the highlighted health 
inequity. There are patient factors and system factors but the problem is not 
for healthcare professionals to shoulder alone. Addressing the socioeconomic 
determinants of health calls for thoughtful, directed and consistent policy 
aimed at improving the overall circumstances of the most disadvantaged amongst 
us.

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> professionals must aspire 
to better outcomes, but even the most caring and competent among us cannot 
solve a fraction of the prickly problems of social and economic disadvantage 
that imperil many of our patients. So in the end we consign ourselves to doing 
what we know best, treating their cancer as best we can.

Then, we try to silence the roar of William Osler’s sage observation ringing 
in our ears, “The good physician treats the disease; the great physician treats 
the patient who has the disease.”
 