
If the Conservative party forms the next government, by 2020 the state will 
probably be the smallest it has been – in relation to GDP – for 80 years. So 
declared theOffice for Budget Responsibility  
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/>last Wednesday, in the wake of the autumn 
statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/autumn-statement-2014-george-osborne-spending-cuts>
. By 2020, spending per head of population will have fallen by around a third 
in 10 years. In some areas – in our cities and our criminal justice system – 
the reductions will be even more draconian. This is the most dramatic change in 
state capability that any British government has ever engineered.

The chancellor may complain about the “hyperbolic” tone of some BBC  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/04/osborne-accuses-bbc-hyperbolic-coverage-spending-cuts>
reporting. But surely only in a one-party state would this dramatic plan not be 
discussed in appropriately dramatic terms. Britain is to become the site of a 
massive experiment in economic and social libertarianism whose authors have 
never fessed up to the sheer audacity and scale of what they are doing. They 
have just dumbly insisted there is no alternative. The autumn statement was the 
moment the implications became clear.

A financial crisis has been allowed to morph into a crisis of public provision 
because the government of the day will not lift a finger to compensate for the 
haemorrhaging of the UK tax base. What the state does is not the subject of a 
collective decision with concerned weighing of options. Instead, it’s an 
afterthought, with the greater priorities a reduction in public borrowing and 
freezing or lowering tax rates.

All the state can spend is what is left after those two greater priorities are 
met, and if it has to shrink to pre-modern levels then so be it. The market 
will provide: charity will alleviate suffering; people will get by; the roof 
will not fall in. Lifting taxation can never be considered to close the gap. It 
is, it is alleged, both economically self-defeating and immoral.

A cool £54bn has gone missing since 2010. Then the government projected that 
in 2014/15 its total tax revenues would be £700bn. In fact, they will be£646bn 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/category/topics/economic-forecasts/>, 
according to the OBR. Public spending, on the other hand, has behaved almost 
exactly as forecast. In 2010, the government projected that its spending would 
be £738bn in this financial year. The Treasury is to be congratulated on its 
capacities as national book-keeper in chief. The actual figure is £737bn, an 
accuracy I doubt many private companies could reproduce – or even individual 
readers of theObserver. It is not runaway public spending that is causing 
borrowing to stay stubbornly high, thus triggering the extreme shrinkage of the 
state: it is the hollowing out of the tax base.

There are three principal causes. The first is that the structure of the 
economic recovery is delivering a reduced tax yield. There are too many 
low-paying jobs and pay on average is stagnating, so that aggregate income tax 
revenues are growing much less rapidly than in previous recoveries. We are 
drinking and smoking less, so there is less revenue from alcohol and tobacco 
duties. Altogether this accounts for around a third of the shortfall.

Another third is a result of the chancellor wanting to show his tax-cutting 
credentials as a true Thatcherite man: he has cut corporate tax rates, frozen 
the business rate, not adjusted council tax bands upwards, not increased petrol 
duties, lowered the top rate of tax and increased personal allowances. The last 
element is down to our living with an epidemic of tax avoidance and evasion, as 
the last G20 summit recognised – and which even Osborne says he deplores. Too 
many companies and rich individuals are gaming the system.

Put all this together and Britain has lost that £54bn. But matters are made 
worse by the interaction of Britain’s highly centralised Treasury and a 
chancellor with Osborne’s instincts.Giles Wilkes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/giles-wilkes>, former adviser to Vince 
Cable, andStian Westlake <http://www.nesta.org.uk/users/stian-westlake>, 
research director atNesta, 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/?gclid=CjwKEAiA74qkBRCdrM-6or7U73QSJABCDL9pRhSXGY25jI8g4Cs1dXfeXcuYNclpTBPtat-vGIRNVhoCWpLw_wcB>
 write in an important paper,The End of the Treasury 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/publications/end-treasury-breaking-uks-finance-ministry>
, that the Treasury inverts the way that spending and taxing decisions should 
be made. It starts with a target for borrowing, not differentiating great 
capital projects such as London’sCrossrail <http://www.crossrail.co.uk/> from 
spending on the NHS. Then it projects tax revenues assuming no changes, and 
sets aside money for fixed obligations, such as pensions.

Finally, departments fight over the left-overs on a year by year basis, with 
the Treasury policing spending with a ferocious rigidity. The benefit is that 
it can control spending to the last billion. The cost is that there is never a 
weighing up of the benefits of raising taxes against a particular use for 
public spending, nor any strategic long-term programme of investment.

This is bad enough in ordinary times, but when a chancellor refuses to 
consider raising taxes as the tax base collapses it is a recipe for disaster. 
It results in a minimal state, with implications for prisons, schools, courts, 
policing, legal aid, care, security and defence that are profound. Some of this 
could be avoided if, as both Labour and the LibDems propose, capital investment 
was not lumped in with current spending so that virtuous borrowing could be 
separated out. The country may also get lucky: wages stop stagnating and income 
tax receipts rise.

But the bigger truth is that if Britain wants the scale of public activity 
congruent with a civilised society, it has to be paid for. The reaction will be 
hysterical, but lifting taxes by 3% of GDP to 38.5% to find the missing £54bn 
will still leave Britain below the crucial 40% benchmark, thus undertaxed by 
comparison with most advanced countries. The whole system of property taxation 
needs overhauling. The VAT base can be broadened. Environmental taxes can be 
extended. Osborne’s proposals to ensure companies pay tax on UK revenues need 
to be tougher and introduced earlier. The income tax system needs reshaping.

None of this is easy. But neither is reducing the state to its smallest level 
for 80 years. Reducing spending on schools further is surely short changing our 
children. How much smaller should the army, navy and air force become? Is the 
welfare system to return to a system of discretionary poor relief? Do we share 
the libertarian view that the state is worthless – and there is no 
co-dependency between public and private? What role do we want the state to 
have in our civilisation? The right would have it that none of these questions 
can be asked because all involve an increase in taxation: our only future is a 
1930s scale state.

There is a different future, and our politicians of the centre and left have 
to argue for it, but they must accept it has to be paid for. This has become an 
existential divide. Politics and political argument have never mattered more.
 