
A senior former banker at HBOS received a string of bribes over five years – 
including cash, use of a credit card, luxury holidays and payments for 
prostitutes – in exchange for agreeing bank loans channelled to ailing business 
with little or no hope of recovery, a court has heard.

Lynden Scourfield had been in charge of dealing with many businesses across 
the South of England and Wales that were struggling to repay HBOS loans, 
deciding whether the bank should waive repayments, offer further funding, or 
allow the business to go bust.

A jury at Southwark crown court was told on Monday that he had been engaged in 
a corrupt relationship with former banker and venture capitalist David Mills, 
who had set up a turnaround consultancy business called Quayside Corporate 
Services.

Scourfield insisted that struggling businesses dependent on HBOS funding must 
hire the services of Quayside before he would advance further loans. He then 
signed off further high-risk loans that were not in the interests of the bank.


“Scourfield advanced huge sums to the businesses, and continued to do so well 
past the point when it would have been obvious to any honest banker that the 
bank debt could and would never be repaid,” prosecution counsel Brian O’Neill 
QC told the court.

This allowed Mills and his associates to demand allegedly excessive fees for 
consultancy services and, in some instances, provided an opportunity for them 
to take control of the struggling companies, running them for their own benefit.

More than £28m passed from HBOS through the bank accounts of either Mills, his 
wife or companies under his control, O’Neill said. Not all of that sum stayed 
with the defendants, he conceded, though Mills and his wife “did benefit 
enormously”.

Meanwhile, HBOS incurred losses of about £245m on lending managed by 
Scourfield, the jury heard, all of which ultimately had to be written off.

 “The motivation was greed,” O’Neill told the court. “Police ... uncovered 
evidence of huge rewards provided by Mills to Scourfield to effect his 
corruption.


“This took the form of money transfers, cash, expensive gifts, use of an 
American Express card for personal spending, unauthorised and inappropriately 
lavish hospitality, luxurious foreign travel and sexual encounters with high 
class escorts.”

The jury were told to ignore the fact that Scourfield was not sitting 
alongside Mills and five other defendants in the dock. “He is not on trial and 
you must not speculate about his absence or the reasons for it,” O’Neill 
explained.

Mills faces charges of conspiracy to corrupt, fraudulent trading and 
conspiracy to conceal criminal property. His wife and former business 
associates Michael Bancroft, Tony Cartwright and Jonathan Cohen, together with 
a second former HBOS banker Mark Dobson, variously face similar charges.


Struggling businesses the alleged conspirators were said to have used to 
conceal their corruption included a textile business called Magenta and a 
pornographic magazine firm called Remnant.


The trial continues.

 