
Andy Norman, once touted as the most powerful man in British athletics, died 
yesterday as he arrived back in Britain after a weekend working at the world 
athletics final in Stuttgart.

Norman, 64, who was married to the former javelin world record holder and 
world champion Fatima Whitbread until the couple split almost three years ago, 
remained one of the key figures in the sport worldwide.

He had lost any official status in Britain 13 years ago after he was dismissed 
from his position as the promotions officer at the British Athletic Federation 
after the coroner implicated him in the suicide of Cliff Temple, the former 
Sunday Times journalist. Yet Norman had an important role in the sport both in 
Europe and South Africa and during his career represented many of Britain's top 
athletes including Jonathan Edwards, the triple jump world record holder, and 
Kelly Holmes, Britain's double Olympic gold medallist.

Holmes was left stunned when she heard the news last night of the death of 
Norman who was her first manager back in the early 1990s and was instrumental 
on setting her on the road to the success which saw her win the 800 metres and 
1500m in Athens in 2004.

Holmes said: "I am shocked. Andy has been at the core of British athletics and 
he played a big part in my career. In terms of racing on the circuit, he 
started me off as an athlete, he got me into races and I remember in Stockholm 
one year he said follow that girl - indicating Maria Mutola."

Holmes and Mutola eventually became training partners and the Briton succeeded 
the Mozambique star as the Olympic 800m champion.

Holmes added: "I remember the 1994 European Championships in Helsinki, Andy's 
told me to follow the Russians. I finished second. He said to me what about 
first place. A few weeks later I won the Commonwealth 1500m title and said hope 
that is OK for you. Andy worked with so many of our big named athletes, he ran 
British athletics at one stage. My thoughts are with Fatima and their son 
[Ryan]."

Norman, a former police officer, had been working at the final European grand 
prix of the season as advertising commissioner for the International 
Association ofAthletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> 
Federations. He had regularly been a meeting promoter in South Africa and in 
eastern Europe and was a race agent for a number of Britain's athletes.

But it was in 1994 that his name became known to the public beyond athletics 
following the death of Temple. In a highly controversial case Norman lost his 
position three months after Temple died.

Ricky Simms, the athletes representative for Britain's Christine Ohuruogu, the 
400m world champion among others, was with Norman in Stuttgart at the weekend 
and he said: "Everyone is shocked by the news. Three or four of us were sitting 
around talking with him only yesterday and he was not scared to say how he saw 
it. He was happy that our British girls were running well in the 400m but he 
was also saying how important it was for the sport to make sure the stadiums 
were full.

"I have been working on the athletics circuit for eight years and I have 
learnt many things from Andy he was always there giving me words of wisdom."
 