
A 79-year-old widow was strangled to death by a debt-ridden drug user who 
phoned “soft porn” chatlines while she lay dying before burning her house down, 
a court heard.

Norma Bell, a foster carer to more than 50 children, was throttled with an 
electrical cord so that her alleged killer could steal a new television and 
£700 in cash, jurors were told.

Gareth Dack, 33, is accused of murdering Bell before setting fire to her home 
to cover his tracks. He denies murder and arson.

On the first day of the trial at Teesside crown court, Christopher Tehrani QC, 
prosecuting, told the jury that Dack called the adult television station 
Babestation several times while his elderly victim lay dead or dying in her 
home in Hartlepool.

Dack, a childhood friend of one of her sons, was penniless and high on cocaine 
and cannabis when he strangled her to death on 3 April last year, the court 
heard. Only a week before the killing, the jury heard, Bell lent Dack £10 when 
he asked to borrow money because he was off work sick.

Tehrani told jurors that Bell’s badly beaten body was found on the ground 
floor of her burning home shortly after 8.20am on 3 April.

She had 15 injuries, including fractured ribs, and an electrical cord was 
wrapped tightly round her neck. Her trousers had been pulled down and her 
tights and underwear cut, the jury heard.

An unboxed 49in television, which Bell had been looking after for her 
grandson, was stolen from her home along with £700 in cash, the court heard.

The prosecution alleges that Dack stole the television and sold it to a friend 
for £60 before returning to Bell’s home with cocaine and cannabis.

He then called Babestation a number of times, the jury heard, including twice 
to speak to the adult performers on screen. A voice recognition expert later 
identified Dack’s voice from a recording of his calls, the court heard.

Detectives also found £405 in cash in the glove box of his car, the jury was 
told.

Tehrani said: “For a man who was not in work at the time, was selling a 
brand-new television for £60 and had been borrowing money from all-comers in 
the previous few weeks, you may wish to ask yourselves as you listen to the 
evidence where this money had come from.

“The prosecution say that there is a clear inference that this money is part 
of a total of £700 stolen from Norma Bell’s house.”

The court heard that Dack’s DNA was found on a used match on the kitchen 
floor, inside her handbag and on the ligature around her neck.

Bell’s mobile phone, which had an emergency button on the back, was found in 
the garage of Dack’s parents’ home on the same street as his victim, the court 
heard.

“A new boxed TV was stolen from Mrs Bell’s house and sold by Gareth Dack to 
another man at about 10pm on the evening of 2 April 2016,” Tehrani said. “The 
television has been recovered. Mr Dack’s fingerprints have been found on it.”

Bell, a widow since her husband John died in 2010, fostered more than 50 
babies and toddlers before retiring in the 1990s, the court heard. She had 
three biological children plus six long-term foster children who were treated 
as their own, the jury was told.

More than a dozen of Bell’s friends and relatives packed the public gallery as 
the trial was opened, some weeping and others turning to stare at Dack in the 
glass-enclosed dock behind them.

Dack denies murder and arson. The trial continues.






 