
Until 24 April, when as a result of James Murdoch's evidence to the Leveson 
inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> he was frogmarched 
towards the nearest cliff face and invited to fling himself forth, Adam Smith 
was extremely close to his boss, Jeremy Hunt. He was "under the wing" of the 
culture secretary, he said on Thursday, his "eyes and ears", his "early warning 
system", his "buffer". They would speak two, three, four times a day, fostering 
an intimacy so great that even when the minister wasn't present, in Hunt's own 
assessment, "[Smith] knows exactly what I would want to happen".

Which is just another reason – along with all the other ones – to wonder just 
what and how much Hunt knew about Smith's bit on the side. For however much 
attentive buffering the Spad performed to and for the minister, his attentions 
between the summer of 2010 and the following year were being claimed by 
another, a seduction to which the young special adviser was more than willing 
to submit.

How else were we to interpret the evidence that emerged when the two former 
intimates – the ministerial adviser tasked with handling the "interested 
parties" in News Corp's bid to take full control of BSkyB, andFrédéric Michel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/frederic-michel>, the company's chief 
lobbyist – were reunited once more?

In the 13 months from June 2010, it emerged, when News Corp announced its 
intention to buy the remainder of the company, Michel made 191 phone calls, 
wrote 158 emails and sent 799 texts to Hunt's office, the overwhelming majority 
of them to Smith. He, in turn, texted Michel 257 times between November of the 
same year and July 2011.

On one night alone, on the eve of Hunt's announcement that he intended to 
accept News Corp's undertakings in lieu for the bid, the two men were still 
exchanging texts and calls at 1.09am, 2.59am, 3.05am. "This is in the middle of 
the night!" noted Lord Leveson, not incorrectly. There are lovers who have less 
contact.

Such a shame these things don't last. When Murdoch decided to release to the 
inquiry 163 pages of emails detailing News Corp's contact with Jeremy Hunt's 
office, their proxies found themselves forced to turn on each other. Although 
he resigned, Smith insisted he didn't recognise much of Michel's account of 
their contact.

The reputation of each now depends to an extent on how persuasively they can 
portray the other to the inquiry as a liar.

Though Michel was first to take the stand, Smith was in court 73, accompanied 
by his lawyer and a formidable stash of folders, almost from the moment the 
hearing opened. They sat at the back, side by side, on each of their laps a 
small yellow Post-It pad, ready to scribble discreet notes throughout the 
Frenchman's testimony.

Smith, who is 30 but blessed with such a youthful complexion that Leveson 
couldn't resist asking his age when he later took the stand himself, was 
impassive as the Frenchman gave evidence, only his eyes flicking between 
witness and interrogator.

Would Michel deliver the fatal blow to Hunt? Offer corroboration of some of 
the more apparently damning claims in his emails? Damn his former friend to 
shore up his own job at News Corp, which he still holds, apparently with the 
Murdochs' full confidence?

What he offered instead, as Robert Jay QC led him through selected highlights 
from his cache of emails, was a masterclass in the arts of advocacy.

There are, it transpires, a number of key attributes to being a successful 
director of public affairs for a major media behemoth. Chutzpah, for instance, 
is handy. The court had access not only to the original cache of his emails but 
to texts from Smith and Hunt among other records.

More than once, as Jay pointed out, his exuberant accounts to his News Corp 
team demonstrably bore little resemblance to the correspondence on which they 
were based. Was he exaggerating? "No." Perhaps to "puff himself up" in the eyes 
of his colleagues? "No, I don't think I need to puff myself up." (A healthy 
vanity also helps.)

Flattery is useful. "You were very impressive yesterday," he had texted Hunt 
after a meeting at the department in January 2011. "You were great at the 
Commons today," read another on 3 March; "Very good on Marr" on 13 March. "Is 
this an example of, to use the vernacular, ofschmoozing, Mr Michel?" asked Jay. 
Michel gave a smile and a sad little shake of his head. "No. It's a friendly 
text." "Humph," grunted Jay.

If all else failed, it was apparent, Michel had one further weapon in his 
arsenal: be French. Yes, perhaps his account on that occasion had been 
overblown – he had obviously been "melodramatising". He was French, you see.

OK, so maybe the last sentence of that email was overblown – "you could 
probably put that on my sort of … way of writing English".

And his description to his bosses of a "one hour" conversation with Smith that 
the phone records showed had in fact been 34 minutes? "French time." Oh, and 
while we're at it, je ne regrette rien.

His evidence done, he stepped down from the stand to give way to Smith, a 
manoeuvre that forced them to shuffle around each other.

As they passed, the two former intimates exchanged the briefest ghost of a 
smile.
 