
The travel editor: Jean-Pierre Chanial

I spend my holidays every year in La Lozère in southern France. It's not easy 
to get to – there are no direct fast trains and no airport – but that protects 
the character of the area and there are lots of things to do. One of the major 
draws of the départment is nature; it's the last relatively untouched great 
expanse in France and it contains the Causses (limestone plateaux) which are 
almost completely uninhabited and very wild.

Because there's so much forest, the area is very rich in bird life. It's a 
place where the eagle is king and there are many different birds of prey. If 
you want to see animals, there's a park full of wolves that was established by 
a wolf fanatic in a village called Sainte Lucie close to Marvejols. And there 
are wild horses that live freely on the Causses. There are also beautiful hikes 
that can stretch over several days, and you can do treks on horseback. It's 
also one of the French départments most reputed for fly-fishing. It's for real 
enthusiasts because the rivers are difficult to fish – but there are great 
rewards if you can do it.

Many of the larger villages and small towns are extremely attractive. One of 
the prettiest is Châteauneuf de Randon (cantonchateauneufderandon.fr 
<http://www.cantonchateauneufderandon.fr>), which is of particular significance 
to British visitors because it is where the 14th-century warrior Bertrand du 
Guesclin repelled the English army during the Hundred Years War. The village is 
completely medieval and is situated on a small hill which provides a glorious 
view over the surrounding area. The tourist office organises guided visits.

There may not be many Michelin-starred restaurants in the region but there are 
plenty of terrific places to eat: rustic places with honest food and excellent 
prices. You're not far from the area where Roquefort cheese is produced and 
there's Tomme de Lozère, a big round cheese made from cow's milk which, for my 
money, is the best cheese in France.

Jean-Pierre Chanial is travel editor of Le Figaro.

• How to do it La Lozère (lozere-uk.com <http://www.lozere-uk.com>) is 192km 
from Nîmes. Fly from London Luton or Liverpool to Nîmes with Ryanair (
ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>) and hire a car through Auto Europe (
auto-europe.co.uk <http://www.auto-europe.co.uk>). Or, take Euro-star from 
London St Pancras to Paris, then take a train (changing at Clermond-Ferrand) to 
Langogne in the heart of La Lozère. From £136 through Rail Europe (0844 848 
4070;raileurope.co.uk <http://www.raileurope.co.uk>).

The celebrity chef: Cyril Lignac

Aveyron, in the Midi-Pyrenees region, is where I was born and where I learnt 
to cook. A few English people have discovered it but, compared with places like 
Provence, it's a hidden gem. Cuisine is part of the culture there because you 
have everything you need for cooking. It's a farming region, very green and 
similar to the most beautiful parts of the British countryside. There are lots 
of specialities: wine, cheese and meat.

My favourite restaurant in the north of the region is Bras, in Laguiole on the 
Aubrac plateau (00 33 5 6551 1820;michel-bras.com <http://www.michel-bras.com>
). It's run by Michel Bras, a chef quite unlike any other, who strikes a 
balance between the most modern styles of cooking and those rooted in the 
history of the region. One of his specialities is gargouillou – an assortment 
of baby vegetables, herbs and flowers from the area, cooked in a buttery sauce. 
He also has a dish called ombre et lumière (light and shade) which is fish 
cooked with olives. It's absolutely divine; you have to try that.

There's a fantastic market every Saturday morning in Rodez, where I was born. 
It's in the town square just behind the cathedral and people come from across 
the region to sell their produce. There are little cafes all around the square 
where you can sit and relax.

I learnt my trade at the Restaurant du Vieux Pont in Belcastel, a historic 
village in the centre of the region (00 33 5 6564 5229; hotelbelcastel.com). 
Run by two sisters, it has a Michelin star and serves food from the region 
cooked with real sensitivity and subtlety. It was once an auberge run by their 
mother, where all the local labourers used to eat. It has expanded since then 
but has retained that spirit.

If you want to work up an appetite, there are some beautiful lakes in the 
region such as Lac de Pareloup, where you can go boating, windsurfing or jet 
skiing, or just bathe. It's really a region where you have everything; great 
food, markets, a lake and lots of beautiful little medieval villages.
Cyril Lignac runs Le Quinzieme Cuisine Attitude in Paris (cyrillignac.com 
<http://www.cyrillignac.com>).

• How to do it Fly from London Stansted to Rodez (ot-rodez.fr 
<http://www.ot-rodez.fr>) with Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>), 
then hire a car through Avis (avis.co.uk <http://www.avis.co.uk>). 

The Music insider: Cécile Revenu


La Route du Rock festival takes place in Brittany at a beautiful site in 
Saint-Malo, a fortified town surrounded by beaches and the sea. And it's not 
far from the village of Cancale, which is one of the best places in France for 
eating oysters, so it's great for anyone who wants to combine the best of 
France with music. It is a completely independent festival and is one for real 
music aficionados. There's a good mix of big names – they've had the Cure, 
Franz Ferdinand and Pulp in the past – and less well-known bands. People come 
to see the main bands but also to discover new ones.

The main concerts take place in the evening at an 18th-century fort, but there 
are also free concerts on one of the beaches in Saint-Malo. So you can get up 
late and wander down to the beach to listen to music and go for a dip at the 
same time. I remember the French artist Camille playing a gig with Nouvelle 
Vague on the beach and midway through the song she ran out to the sea, plunged 
in, came back and carried on. The organisers also put on beach football 
tournaments involving artists, journalists and fans.

It's always a really convivial atmosphere – lots of Bretons but also lots of 
other French people – all having a good time. I have been most years for the 
past 10 years. The weather can be a bit variable but the worst is that it's 
going to be a little bit cold – there's no risk of mud. I saw the New York band 
Interpol in the rain once there and it was magical.

Another good bet is the Garden Nef Party (17-18 July; garden-nef-party.com 
<http://www.garden-nef-party.com>), which takes place at Angoulême, a historic 
town surrounded by ramparts. It's only been going a few years and is not 
expensive. The festival site is opposite the town on a hill, so you have this 
stunning view over Angoulême.

Cecile Revenu works for Les Inrockuptibles, the French equivalent of NME. 

• How to do it Route de Rock (laroutedurock.com <http://www.laroutedurock.com>
) takes place on 14-16 August this year and features My Bloody Valentine, the 
Kills and Simian Mobile Disco. Tickets for the three days cost ¤94. Take the 
overnight ferry from Portsmouth to Saint-Malo with Brittany Ferries (0871 244 
0744;brittany-ferries.co.uk <http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk>) from £172 
return for a car and two adults. See alsosaint-malo-tourisme.com 
<http://www.saint-malo-tourisme.com>.

The fashion designer: Alexis Mabille

Arles is a very beautiful town with a strong sense of its cultural identity. 
The festival of photography (rencontres-arles.com 
<http://www.rencontres-arles.com>), which takes place from July to September, 
is quite well known but it's fantastic. The whole city is taken over by 
photography; churches, restaurants, even private homes are all invaded by the 
artists. And the old SNCF train station is transformed into a massive space for 
installations and graphics.

Fashion is very well represented, as quite a lot of well-known fashion 
photographers, such as Peter Lindbergh, exhibit. There's a fantastic museum – 
Musée Arlatan on rue de la Republique (00 33 4 9093 5811) – where you can find 
costumes from the 16th and 17th centuries. Arles has seen lots of immigration 
and there is a strong gypsy influence. It's a very interesting place, with a 
real diversity of people – a lot of stars live in the area – and it's quite 
glamorous in the summer.

The trendiest place to stay is the Grand Hotel Nord-Pinus (00 33 4 9093 4444; 
nord-pinus.com <http://www.nord-pinus.com>). It's where the bullfighters used 
to prepare before going to the arena. You can also go there to eat. They serve 
a local speciality – a ragoût of bull meat with spices and a heavy wine sauce. 
I don't like it very much but it is very traditional and you should at least 
try it. There are lots of great coffee shops, and I'd recommend the Hôtel de la 
Poste on rue Molière for a drink – it has a lovely terrace with trees and it's 
very traditional.

A place that is great fun at night is El Patio (00 33 4 9049 5176; 
patiodecamargue.com <http://www.patiodecamargue.com>), a restaurant owned by 
one of the members of the Gypsy Kings. It's like a big hacienda: you eat 
outside and there are musical performances and entertainment in the style of a 
19th-century circus. It's lots of fun and great for children.

Alexis Mabille has created dresses for Keira Knightley and Carla Bruni and 
designs jewellery for Yves Saint Laurent.

• How to do it Arles (arlestourisme.com <http://www.arlestourisme.com>) is 
32kms from Nîmes. Fly from London Luton or Liverpool to Nîmes with Ryanair (
ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>), then hire a car through Auto Europe (
auto-europe.co.uk <http://www.auto-europe.co.uk>).

The champion surfer: Jeremy Flores
 Surfers at Hossegor Beach in France, 20 Aug 2004. Photograph: Henrik 
Trygg/Corbis 
Hossegor is about half an hour from Biarritz in the Pays Basque, and 40 
minutes from the Spanish border. Some of the best surfers in France are from 
around the area. It hosts international surfing competitions, so the waves are 
first-class, and for an experienced surfer there's every type of wave to have 
fun. Close to the shore you get very powerful ones, which are good for doing 
barrels, and further out there are long point breaks where you can do turns. 
There are lots of clubs where you can hire surf boards and take lessons. If you 
want to learn, I'd recommend the summer because the waves are smaller.

People from all over the world come to see the famous waves but it's not just 
a place for surfers: the beaches are really nice and it's a great place to 
sunbathe. It's becoming the destination for people who like beach holidays, but 
it's a pretty mellow place. Fifteen minutes from the city, you can be in the 
surrounding pine forests with absolutely no one around. There are routes for 
cycling, walking and running through the forests. And you can go through the 
forests and across the sand dunes to get into the ocean in places which are 
deserted. Those are the coolest spots.

In terms of places to stay, there's something for everyone. There are lots of 
cool campsites with a relaxed atmosphere and people from all over having fun. 
Or there are big houses with swimming pools to rent just next to the beach. As 
for nightlife, there's a part of Hossegor called La Centrale where all the bars 
are. If you ask for a good place to party, everyone will tell you the same 
thing: Rockfood (rockfoodhossegor.com <http://www.rockfoodhossegor.com>). It's 
a restaurant and bar right on the beach decorated with surfboards signed by the 
world's best surfers, and after 11pm it turns into a club. No one actually 
holds parties at night on the beach itself though; everyone is very 
eco-conscious and they try to preserve this paradise.

Jeremy Flores, 21, is the wunderkind of French surfing and the youngest-ever 
competitor in the ASP (Association of Surfing Professionals) World Tour.

• How to do it Hossegor (hossegor.fr <http://www.hossegor.fr>) is 41km from 
Biarritz. Fly from Gatwick or Bristol to Biarritz with Easyjet (easyjet.com 
<http://www.easyjet.com>), then hire a car through Carrentals.co.uk (
carrentals.co.uk <http://www.carrentals.co.uk>).

The architect: Manuelle Gautrand

I spent three years in Lyon in the early 90s and the more time I spent there, 
the more I discovered. It may not be thought of as a tourist town but it has 
beautiful architectural monuments, a lovely setting and lots of cultural 
heritage. Two historic parts of the city are great to wander around. La Croix 
Rousse is the old silk-weaving quarter, where the artisans of Lyon had 
beautiful apartments and workshops. It has a lot of historical charm, with a 
flavour of 19th century industry.

The Saint-Jean quarter is another wonderfully historic area in the west of the 
city. It can be a bit touristy so you have to go as far west and upwards as 
possible to lose yourself in the little alleyways. Up there, it's inaccessible 
to cars so you almost have the impression of being in the country. There's a 
real sense of peace and calm.

Lyon has a great mix of traditional and modern architecture. The opera house 
on the main square was restored by the top French architect Jean Nouvel. I 
think it's beautiful, very contemporary but retaining a sense of history. The 
interior is shiny and glossy – Nouvel's style in the 80s – and magnificent. I 
also love the Cité Internationale de Renzo Piano, a massive complex on the 
banks of the Rhône with hotels, conference centres, a museum and a casino.

Another really notable aspect of architecture in Lyon is the Art Deco 
skyscrapers in Villeurbanne. They were built in the 30s – the first in France – 
and are incredible. People live there but if you're feeling adventurous you can 
ask if they'll let you in. Lots of the inhabitants are aware how significant 
their buildings are and are quite willing to let you in to climb up the inside.
Manuelle Gautrand's award-winning projects have included the Centre for 
Contemporary Music in Paris and the Lille Modern Art Museum.

• How to do it Take the Eurostar from London St Pancras to Lyon (via Paris) 
through Rail Europe (as before) from £99 return. See alsolyon-france.com 
<http://www.lyon-france.com>.
 