
Two of the World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> 
semi-finalists from 2006 are in danger of missing out in 2010 after 
disappointing 1-1 draws on Saturday.France, with Franck Ribéry controversially 
starting on the bench, were held at home byRomania while Portugal needed an 
86th-minute equaliser to avoid defeat inDenmark.

The French must now avoid defeat in Serbia on Wednesday if they are to have 
any chance of winning their group. But the full-back Patrice Evra insists his 
side, who took the lead through Thierry Henry only for Julien Escudé to score 
an own-goal shortly afterwards, should have beatenRomania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/romania>. "People who say we did not play 
well don't know anything about football," he said. "If we play like that in 
Serbia, why should we not bring the points back?"

Portugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> meanwhile needed an 
86th-minute strike from Liédson, a 31-year-old naturalised Brazilian making his 
debut, to earn a draw after Arsenal's Nicklas Bendnter put Denmark ahead in the 
42nd minute. The 21-year-old suggested after the game that he is unhappy with 
his role at Arsenal: "I'm a central striker, not a winger," he said. "Last 
season I was primarily used on the left side, this season I'm being used on the 
right but I just want to play centre."

The Spain coach Vicente del Bosque insisted that his side could not take 
qualification for granted despite a 100% record and a six-point lead in Group 
Five. Their latest win was a 5-0 thrashing ofBelgium, David Villa and David 
Silva each scoring twice. Second-placedBosnia-Herzogovina beat Armenia 2-0 in 
Yerevan to remain six points behind the Spanish.

The Ivory Coast are a single point away from qualification following a 5-0 win 
over their nearest rivals,Burkina Faso, in which Didier Drogba scored twice. 
Cameroonresurrected their chances of qualifying by beating Gabon 2-0 in 
Libreville. The game was played under intense security due to the presence of 
Ali Bongo, whose contested victory in last week's presidential election has led 
to violent protests. Tottenham's Sébastien Bassong was injured in the first 
half. The teams meet again on Wednesday in Yaoundé.

In South America, second-placed Chile's seemingly serene campaign faltered 
with a 2-2 home draw withVenezuela. Paraguay drew level on points with a 1-0 
home win overBolivia, and will qualify themselves if they beat Argentina at 
home on Wednesday.
 