
You haven’t played any festivals for a few years. Are you looking forward to 
performing at the V festival?
As a 42-year-old man, I’m going to enjoy it for the overpowering feeling of 
alienation that I can achieve only by playing to a half-filled tent in front of 
a crowd that looks like Halloween at Hogwarts. A year ago these people were at 
school, and now they’re wandering around some provincial town with a beard they 
don’t want and a tattoo they don’t understand.

I will see confusion in their darting eyes. They run a social media site – are 
they supposed to look like a Victorian strongman? Should they buy a vintage 
camper van and turn it into a craft brewery, or kill themselves while people 
still care? Think about how confusing life is when you go to restaurants in 
abandoned swimming pools; nightclubs in shipping containers; have food served 
on miniature bookshelves and drinks poured from watering cans into jam jars.

One day, you have an ontological 
<http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/ontology?q=ontological#ontology__6>
 crisis and are cornered by an armed response unit in an old Spanish woman’s 
house, screaming that you thought it was a library while you take a shit in the 
tumble drier. Actually, I don’t know what the crowd at V will be like. I’m 
planning on wearing sunglasses so I can keep my eyes closed during the 
performance.

What’s your favourite festival memory?
I did a ski festival in Austria once. I was struck by how friendly Austrians 
were, before gradually realising it’s more that Glaswegians are awful.

There's only one thing that will make you happy to fork out a fiver for a 
bottle of water, and that’s 20mg of Valium

What would you change about festivals?
Different drugs. There’s only one thing that’s going to make you happy to fork 
out a fiver for a bottle of water, and that’s 20mg of Valium. I only agreed to 
do the V festival because I thought it was something to do with Valium.

Why do you think festivals are so popular?
I think we’re trying to empathise with the rest of the world by placing 
ourselves temporarily at the centre of a humanitarian crisis, but with Calvin 
Harris playing somewhere in the background.

Do you go to any of the Scottish festivals?
I’ve been to T in the Park. Not so much Glastonbury as Glassed and Buried.

Have you ever died onstage at a festival?
No, but I’ve thought about suicide a lot.

Do you think bands enjoy playing festivals?
I think they barely know that they are playing one. A top band with a tight 
schedule is playing about three festivals a day. They are simply performing to 
a throng that grows slightly larger or smaller: to them it is little more than 
a throbbing mass that they try to placate with songs about feelings they can’t 
experience any more.

They will play the same set so often that, though they seem to be emoting on 
stage, their minds will retreat into the most baroque and detailed fantasies. A 
great performer will seem to be singing just for you, but in her head she’ll be 
imagining being a deaf woman in Kentucky on trial for murder, who accidentally 
looks round at the exact moment when a kid pops a balloon in court, so 
everybody thinks she can hear. The judge will sentence her to the electric 
chair and she won’t even know. She’ll protest her innocence, but it’s almost 
impossible to sign properly in handcuffs.

Over the years on death row, the cuffs will force her to develop a sign 
language of very small gestures, and other deaf people will find her 
hilariously wry and understated, like Alan Bennett. A huge crowd of deaf 
supporters will turn up to her execution and weep with laughter at her final 
words. An emotional governor will misinterpret this and cry out for her to be 
pardoned, and – tragically – she will accidentally turn towards him at exactly 
the wrong moment.

I suppose I’m saying that band members will go on the very same flights of 
fancy that comedians who rarely go to festivals go on when asked to fill out 
questionnaires about festivals.



 