
It was far from pretty and even farther from perfect, but France added a 
second narrow victory to their portfolio. Guy Novès has two out of two, making 
him on paper about as successful as a new coach can be. The reality was that 
France slogged through the rain a little less painfully than Ireland.

France’s Maxime Médard scores try to shred Ireland’s Six Nations hopes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/13/france-ireland-six-nations-match-report>
There may well be an aftertaste to the meal – to call it a feast would be 
gastronomically wide of the mark. In their keenness to target Jonathan Sexton, 
France were a little wayward. Or just very late. Yonn Maestri and Wenceslas 
Lauret couldn’t resist giving the fly-half a little nudge in the back, seconds 
after the ball had gone.Bargès en passant, that may interest the citing 
commissioner.

Sexton left the field, clouted once too often – not so much by these 
basement-bargain shots as by the swirl of limbs that went with France’s 
mounting frenzy for the match-winning try. Sexton was the last victim, dazed 
and bowed, but it could be said that at least he left at a time when Ian 
Madigan was being considered for entry off the bench.

He was, that is, part of the managed coming and going. What took a much 
heavier toll were the injuries to Sean O’Brien, Dave Kearney and Mike McCarthy, 
knocked clean out, in the first half. The wing seemed to damage a shoulder in a 
terrifying – and yet magnificent – tackle on him by Guilhem Guirado, a 
horizontal drive by the hooker that threatened to shake Kearney apart. To 
injury only a shoulder may have been to escape lightly. The threat of serious 
damage in the modern game shows no sign of going down any time soon.

O’Brien seemed to hurt his knee while executing a side-step to the dummy he 
had just sold. Injured by excess of skill – a rare way to do yourself damage. 
Considering he was only just back from injury, this was utterly depressing for 
a player built to be the very best at what the French callle puncheur – not of 
people but of holes.

Ireland then had a day of improvising, which they took in their stride until 
late in the game. They controlled the first half with the calmness that goes 
with being the reigning champions and at ease in each other’s company. They are 
masters of rugby without fuss and on this day of fine vertical rain they were 
in their element. It looked for all the wet world that they were on course for 
beating France for the fourth time in succession, the first time they would 
have achieved this since the late 1920s.

Instead, as the long dark minutes wore on and as the French rejigged their 
front row, taking off the heavyweights, Uini Atonio and Jefferson Poirot, and 
bringing on the more compact scrummagers, Eddy Ben Arous and Rabah Slimani, the 
game settled into a period drama. It became a scrum-fest out of the 1980s – 
which may trigger nostalgia but is not what the 2016Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> is supposed to promote.

Ireland didn’t exactly retreat at pace at the set piece, but they gave enough 
ground to turn the referee, Jaco Peyper, against them. It also brought the 
crowd to life and the hymns and arias rang around the Stade like they used to 
reverberate around the Parc des Princes. This was truly a throwback occasion 
now.

Guy Novès defies doubts he has skills to end France’s Six Nations slump | 
Gavin Mortimer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/05/france-six-nations-guy-noves-stade-de-france>
The strange thing was that after four resets at the critical moment and place 
– under the Ireland posts with 10 minutes to go – the try did not come with a 
massive heave and bobble of the ball to the line under the No8’s feet. In that 
respect, this was more like the try by Taulupe Faletau for Wales against 
Ireland, the result of ball squirting out of the side of a scrum before a drive 
could be concerted. Improvisation. Wonders never ceased last Sunday and they 
didn’t stop here either.

France had gone for the same as Wales – the big heave – when the ball came out 
as channel one. It was the biggest flashback moment of the day, a little piece 
of kitchen-sink drama, when sides that feared the might of the crushing scrums 
of those days used to open up a gap between the loosehead prop’s legs and fly 
the ball out of the scrum asap.

It was obviously not meant to happen here but it had the desired effect. Maxim 
Médard has run beautiful lines in two games now, a glider to compare with the 
B52 bomber that is Virimi Vakatawa. The full-back slid inside Robbie Henshaw 
and took Jules Plisson’s pass and scored.

It was the only try of the game. How very 80s. And it left France protecting a 
one-point lead. They played their most effective rugby in doing so. Scoring – 
or even creating chances – may be a problem for new France but they held on 
lustily. They may be excessive off the ball at given moments but there are 
clear signs that they are prepared to go many an extra mile to be part of a 
rebuilding process. This was horrible in many respects – petulant and mean – 
but it is part of a healthy process. France and their public have reconnected.
 