
Room 101 
8.30pm, BBC1 


Frank Skinner clears some space in a basement bulging with bugbears, as a 
fresh series of the comedy panel show beckons. Catherine Tate, Nigel Havers and 
TV presenter Rylan Clark-Neal offer pet peeves for Skinner’s Orwellian alcove; 
picks from the pissed-off participants include try-hard hipster restaurants, 
prearranged paparazzi shoots and – in a move that may well goad viewers into 
using a BBC bias hashtag or 10 – Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn.Mark Gibbings-Jones

Tina & Bobby 
9pm, ITV


“He’s a bit square.” Such is the assessment made by proto-Wag Tina Dean 
(Michelle Keegan) when she first spies future husband Bobby Moore (Lorne 
MacFadyen). Yes, but he’s also going to become a pop culture icon, so problem 
solved. The first episode of this three-part dramatisation covers courting, 
Moore’s appointment as England football captain and a hushed-up brush with 
cancer via some clunky dialogue, but it’s evocative and entertaining, too.
Jonathan Wright

Not Going Out 
9pm, BBC1


Lee Mack’s comedy has bounded forward seven years: Lee and Lucy now have three 
kids and a classic family sitcom set-up – stairs at the back, front door on the 
left, through-kitchen on the right – and jokes about how annoyed they are by 
each other’s habits. As they spar over who’s responsible for the lost romance, 
the relentless wisecracking style makes the ensuing screwball battle veer close 
to unpleasant bitterness. Still plenty of great gags, though.Jack Seale

Celebrity Big Brother: Live Eviction 
9pm, Channel 5


Which of the less than sufferable housemates in this – CBB’s 19th run – will 
be first to get their marching orders? With a pop art theme doubtless intended 
to encourage colourful and dramatic explosion among the All Stars, there is 
bound to be friction and battle lines drawn. The overall thinness of the 
concept seems to be confirmed by the presence of celebrities whose celebrity 
now consists of having appeared on Celebrity Big Brother.David Stubbs

Sound of Musicals With Neil Brand 
9pm, BBC4


This new three-parter charts the evolution of musical theatre, from Jerome 
Kern and Oscar Hammerstein’s groundbreaking Show Boat in 1927 to contemporary 
global phenoms like Wicked. As well as shading in historical context, 
super-chill composer Brand casually sits at his piano to drill deep into 
standards such as Oh, What A Beautiful Mornin’, breaking down complex 
songwriting techniques in accessible fashion.Graeme Virtue

The Eighties 
9pm, Sky Arts


It wasn’t all tousled hair, shoulder pads and keytars. Well, it was, but the 
1980s was also a time of seismic shift both culturally and politically for the 
United States of America. In the first of eight episodes, this new documentary 
series looks into key events and figures of the decade, from David Bowie and 
hip-hop heroes Run DMC to Dallas, the emergence of primetime pioneer Oprah 
Winfrey, the Reagan presidency and the Challenger space shuttle disaster.Ben 
Arnold

Bull 
10pm, Fox

Opening episode of a US comedy-drama based on the early exploits of Phil 
McGraw, who – prior to becoming a household name in the US as the host of Dr 
Phil – worked in trial consultancy. As it kicks off, the teen son of a 
billionaire is accused of murdering his girlfriend. When it transpires that he 
may also have been seeing someone else, things turn nasty, but that’s not the 
only twist in the tale. Hammy and unoriginal, this isn’t only bull by name but 
by nature, too.Hannah J Davies

Film choice


The Black Balloon (Elissa Down, 2008) 12.35am, BBC1
Director and co-writer Elissa Down drew on her own experience of growing up 
with two autistic brothers for this portrait of a family under huge strain. 
Toni Collette stars as Maggie, mother of the autistic Charlie (Luke Ford). She 
exudes unconditional love as the mute teenager lurches from sweetly lovable to 
impossible. Charlie is also a challenge for his younger brother Thomas (Rhys 
Wakefield) and his girlfriend Jackie (Gemma Ward), in a heartfelt but 
unsentimental Australian drama.

Today’s best live sport


European Challenge Cup Rugby: Bristol v Bath 7pm, BT Sport 2 Coverage of the 
Pool Four contest (Kick-off 7.45pm).

Championship Football: Leeds United v Derby County 7pm, Sky Sports 1 Two 
playoff contenders meet at Elland Road (kick-off 7.45pm).

La Liga Football: Malaga v Real Sociedad 7.40pm, Sky Sports 2 A Spanish 
top-flight clash at the Estadio La Rosaleda (kick-off 7.45pm).
 