
There is an image of David Carney that Sydney FC twice posted on social media 
last week <https://twitter.com/SydneyFC/status/694675192623165440>. It is not 
an iconic image in the pictorial history of Australian football. Rather, it is 
a young man with filthy-blonde hair, well before the onset of male-pattern 
baldness, celebrating a goal by throwing the sign of the horn with both hands. 
It is the hand-signal of the cocky daredevil, popularised by rock and rollers 
who lived fast and died young.

 As the years have passed, his youth deserted him and the grim reality of 
existence set in, Carney has done away with the sign of the horn celebration. 
Against Nigeria in 2007, hewheeled away from a wonder-strike 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uj0QyNQYH1A> with knees up, cheeks puffed, 
looking like an out-of-towner who stopped at a country pub for a meal and ended 
up winning the meat raffle. In 2009 against Ireland, after scoring an absolute 
screamer, Carney eschewed celebrations andhumbly accepted the congratulations 
of his team-mates <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NLLyPbaCH4M> while Ireland 
coach Giovanni Trapattoni nearly died of mirth on the sideline.

Australian football has lost 'Hewitt-like' winning mentality, says Graham 
Arnold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/australian-football-has-lost-hewitt-like-winning-mentality-says-graham-arnold>
 More recently for Newcastle Jets, Carney scored an excellent free-kick 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-nJHP9h13hY>, which had clearly been worked on 
for more than five minutes at training. Leonardo, who laid off the set piece 
for Carney, rushes like a man possessed to the bench. The rest stack on the 
goalscorer, who emerges comb-over askew, like a bloke who has been captured on 
camera just as his car won the Bathurst 1000: “Yeah, baby,” he says 
emphatically in his mongrel Australian-British accent.

Carney is no longer a Jets player. Having departed the 13th club in his career 
Carney is back at Sydney, the place where “Super Dav”’ first caught the 
attention ofA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> fans.

Back to the future? Sydney FC will argue, and not entirely without reason, 
that Carney has plenty left in him. He is (or at least was a decade ago) a fan 
favourite, that left foot is still as sweet as ever, and he will provide 
important cover asSydney FC <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> 
head into the Asian Champions League. Importantly, he has worked with Graham 
Arnold before.

 Still it is hard to see Carney as an inspired signing. He’s 32, has a 
questionable track record at club level, and to this day remains unable to find 
a pair of shorts that fits him properly. You would hope after 10-and-a-half 
seasons that Sydney FC, who have the biggest catchment area of talent in the 
country to hoover from, there would be a hungry youngster ready to fill any 
vacant spot.

 But under Arnold’s leadership Sydney FC are not an inspired team. 
Short-termism reigns, “Bling FC” is dead, class and poise are out the window. 
No matter the weekend’s result, Arnold carries the demeanour of a injured 
yabbie trapped in a large bucket, snarling, clawing and dragging down any other 
yabbies who may want to escape to reach for a new and exciting future. If he’s 
not blaming the referee, then it’s the inconveniences of the fixture list, if 
not the fixture list it’s the cheating opposition. That was OK at a smaller 
club like Central Coast Mariners. Sydney FC however are one of three, perhaps 
four, major levers for the competition’s growth.

 Carney’s relationship with Arnold goes back to the days when he played more 
regularly for the Socceroos than he did for his club side. Incredibly, Carney 
has 48 caps for the national team, but has failed to appear more than 40 times 
for any one club. From Sydney to Sheffield, Norwich, the Netherlands, Madrid, 
Uzbekistan and New York, between 2007 and 2013 Carney became infamous for his 
decidedly offbeat world tour. Seven foreign clubs in seven seasons, all the 
while holding down his spot as Socceroos left-back. At club level these were 
the lost years of David Carney. At international level, it was the time of his 
life.

 The fact that anybody even talks about Carney at all is reflective of two, 
not unrelated, accidents of history. The first, of course, was him being born 
left-footed. The second was the crisis of talent following the retirement of 
the Socceroos golden generation, particularly on the left side. Put simply, if 
he had been born right-footed, would he have ever been even remotely considered 
for the national team? Probably not. He was the Clayton’s left-back – the 
left-back you have when you don’t have one.

Graham Arnold satisfied with Sydney FC's draw away to Adelaide United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/06/graham-arnold-satisfied-with-sydney-fcs-draw-away-to-adelaide-united>
 And yet for the Socceroos he played quite well. Lack of match fitness was a 
constant concern, but he continued to hold his own. He couldn’t be un-selected, 
as it were. In 2012 the wise Uzbek coach Mirjalol Qosimov concluded: “When he 
plays for the national team, he shows more and plays better than for our club.” 
Afterone particular piece of avant-garde defending 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8jpS7rkMiP0> for New York Red Bulls in 2013, 
much of America was inclined to agree.

 Sydney FC face arch-rivals Western Sydney Wanderers and Melbourne Victory 
before season’s end, and finals football after that. The stage is set for 
Carney’s ultimate redemption. Supposing that happens, where does that leave us?

 When Carney first signed for Sydney FC, he was a young player with talent to 
burn and plenty to prove, who could use the fledgling competition as a platform 
to go on to bigger and better things. He was supposed to come back after those 
great things had been accomplished, like Ned Zelic did at Newcastle Jets, or 
Kevin Muscat did at Melbourne Victory.

 Have his achievements earned him a right of return to the club that likes to 
think of itself as the biggest in Australia? If Carney personified the type of 
player the A-League hoped to attract in 2005 – and knowing his subsequent 
failure to become the player we hoped he’d be – what does that say about the 
competition in 2016? Is the A-League simply the safety net for our battlers 
fallen on hard times?
 