
This weekend a new Melbourne derby will be born. Melbourne City have entered 
theW-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/w-league>, and before they 
even kicked a ball, their presence has drastically altered the competition. For 
better or worse, the first club to be affected by City’s arrival has been 
Melbourne Victory.


 The drama surrounding the two Melbourne W-League teams is a contest between 
ambition and business as usual. With deep-pocketed owners, City have signed a 
star-studded squad, while Victory were caught in a predictable impasse with the 
state body, the Football Federation of Victoria.

Currently there are three W-League clubs run by member federations: Canberra 
United (Capital Football), Newcastle Jets (Northern NSW Football) and Adelaide 
United (Football Federation of South Australia). Besides City, the rest are run 
on a shoestring budget by the A-League sides.

For the first seven seasons, Victory left most of the cost and organisation of 
their W-League side to FFV. Naturally, this created a conflict of interest when 
Melbourne City were granted a W-League licence in May 2015.

FFV, like all of the other federations with myriad other obligations, were 
forced to run their W-League club on a tiny budget. It is understood Melbourne 
City approached FFV for similar financial support. There was no way that FFV, 
who already ran Victory under duress, could afford this. Not for the first 
time, in June 2015 FFV asked Victory whether they would take over the running 
of the W-League club which carries their brand.

“It was important for Victory to take over the licence, because it was seen 
that FFV was doing Victory’s bidding,” a FFV source told Guardian Australia.

Fifa 16: Matildas' Steph Catley to be first ever woman on cover, alongside 
Messi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/10/fifa-16-matildas-steph-catley-to-be-first-ever-woman-on-cover-alongside-messi>
It took until late September for Victory to make a firm decision. In a 
statement 
<http://www.w-league.com.au/article/melbourne-victory-take-control-of-westfield-w-league-outfit/sbaxkmw3zuu51u8wh5ra5qydi>
, Victory chief executive Ian Robson thanked FFV for growing the identity of 
the club, and said: “The prominence of women’s football is growing all the time 
and we are thrilled to be able to bring the team under our care and help to 
further enhance the profile of the Melbourne Victory players and women’s 
football in general.”

Truth be told, Victory would never have taken over without the pressure 
exerted by their new cross-town rivals. Currently FFV are supporting Victory in 
the transition, but otherwise it is a completely new back-room operation.

In the months it took for Victory to decide to take over the licence, their 
fans watched as many of their star players signed for City. High profile 
defections include former coach Joe Montemurro and Matildas stars Lisa De Vanna 
and Steph Catley. Amy Jackson – who took out four awards at FFV’s 2015 Gold 
Medal night – and Young Matildas Brianna Davey and Beattie Goad also made the 
cross-town move.

Losing Catley was a major blow to Victory. A senior Matilda, popular local 
product and former Victory captain, Catley made history by becoming the first 
female player to feature on the cover of a popular video game series. Without 
the support of Victory fans in the voting, it’s unlikely that ever would have 
happened. And yet Victory’s inertia in the off-season left Catley with little 
choice but to accept a better offer from City.

 And so Victory let go one of the most marketable female players in Australia, 
something that is inconceivable had Catley been male. Roughly it’s the 
equivalent of Victory losing Archie Thompson or Besart Berisha to City, without 
so much as making them an offer. That is Victory’s glaring weakness as a club – 
they have been intently focused on the A-League while, until recently, 
abdicating their responsibility to the W-League.

After City’s raid in the off-season, the Victory squad is a thrown-together 
mix of rookie players out of the FFV National Training Centre; a few W-League 
regulars; veterans Melissa Barbieri and Thea Slatyer (who has been brought out 
of retirement); and star import Christine Nairn (USA).

Last Saturday Victory lost 2-1 in their first match of the season against 
Perth Glory. Slatyer hobbled off with cramp after 70 minutes, while Selin 
Kuralay was stretchered off having injured her ACL. Not a great start, by any 
measure.

Of course, Victory are not the only club who will be affected by City’s 
arrival. In their first outing last Sunday, City steamrolled Sydney FC 6-0.

Melbourne City trounce Sydney FC as W-League begins with a bang
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/18/melbourne-city-trounce-sydney-fc-as-w-league-begins-with-a-bang>
Heather Reid, the chief executive of Canberra United, says that her preference 
would have been to see the W-League extended to a full season before the 
inclusion of another club. “A full home and away season is important for a 
level playing field,” Reid told Guardian Australia. “We’re still not playing 
everybody twice. I said to the FFA that it was too early to add another club, 
like Melbourne City, and that their influence on player recruitment could skew 
the market. That’s what seems to have happened.”

City have poached Adelaide United pair Alex Chidiac and Monique Iannella; 
Brisbane Roar duo Larissa Crummer and Laura Alleway (also a foundation Victory 
player); and Perth Glory mainstay Marianna Tabain. Added to this already 
impressive list are international stars Jess Fishlock (Wales) and Kim Little 
(Scotland).

Due to FFA scheduling games on an international break, this weekend City will 
play their first derby without many of these high profile foreigners and 
Matildas. Still, there are fears that City will trounce every team and cause an 
uncompetitive league. Certainly after their thumping round one win, it seems 
City are at the very least title contenders in their first season.

But there is also faint hope that City will raise the bar for a competition 
badly in need of exposure and investment. Just by City being there, Victory are 
now finally involved in the W-League, not just as a brand but as a proper 
A-League supported team. Indeed this new Melbourne rivalry has been a microcosm 
of a wider dilemma facing the relationship between the A-League and the 
W-League.

“The best case scenario is that City will send a message to the other A-League 
clubs that they need to lift their game and lift their level of resources that 
go into the women’s teams,” said Reid. “It also gives the federation-run clubs 
a greater lever to move the women’s teams on to the A-League if there is an 
assurance that the A-League clubs are capable of doing a better job.”

 