
Big Dreams Small Spaces 
7pm, BBC2


You don’t mess with Monty Don, who’s back for a new series teaching amateur 
gardeners some hard lessons. One of those, Valerie, is ready to transform her 
backyard, but will a high wall be the solution to her needs? Frazzled parents 
Helen and Dax need an outside space that works for the family. Their digging 
exposes a bees’ nest and a second world war hand grenade, but there are bigger 
shocks when Don looms at their apple tree with a saw.Hannah Verdier

Top of the Pops: The Story of 1983
9pm, BBC4


This was a year when TOTP was a venerable bastion under siege from incoming 
marauders. The proliferation of the music video, gleefully seized upon by a 
generation of poseurs, threatened its hegemony. The Beeb responded by 
refreshing the presenter roster, dismissing the in-house dancers – and the show 
flourished. Interviewees in this inevitably entertaining doc include members of 
the Smiths, New Order and Kajagoogoo.Andrew Mueller

The Big Fat Quiz of Everything
9pm, Channel 4


No sooner has the Big Fat Quiz Of The Year conga’d by, than a new series 
returns with more questions pertaining to the past 100,000 years of human 
history. Jonathan Ross, David Walliams, Katherine Ryan, Aisling Bea, Noel 
Fielding and Richard Ayoade will once again be answering headscratchers posed 
by Jimmy Carr, such as why do tennis players wear white? And what diet did 
William the Conqueror attempt?Ali Catterall

NCIS 
9pm, Fox


The military crime drama that’s reliably never quite dull returns for a 14th 
series. First up, the team investigate a car explosion that leaves a man dead. 
Turns out it’s linked to an undercover operation targeting a corrupt 
businessman in Buenos Aires. Meantime, inscrutable special agent Gibbs tries to 
recruit new agents, which proves tricky as he’s “very particular” about who 
he’ll employ. For true fans, two vintage episodes precede this opener.Jonathan 
Wright

Delicious 
9pm, Sky1


The soapy Dawn French chef/sex drama continues, and emotions are running 
unsurprisingly high as friends and family descend upon she and Iain “Game Of 
Thrones” Glen’s emotionally tangled Cornish idyll for a funeral, with one or 
two relationships taking a new turn, notably that of Michael and Teresa. 
Elsewhere, Gina (French) is given the opportunity to show off her considerable 
culinary skills, while the reading of the will throws up some surprises.Ben 
Arnold

Lip Sync Battle UK: Danny Dyer v Craig Revel Horwood
10pm, Channel 5


Much like a Comic Relief sketch, Lip Sync Battle is a bit of fun that hinges 
on the participating celebrity being willing to take the absurd enterprise 
seriously and to laugh at themselves. No surprise that Vic Reeves and Johnny 
Vegas have been pretty good at it in the past. Tonight, Professor Green and Mel 
B host a must-watch edition, in which the Strictly judge takes on the nation’s 
favourite geezer.John Robinson

Graham Norton’s Big Red Chair 
10.35pm, BBC1 


Whether you love it or loathe it, the last 10 minutes of The Graham Norton 
Show – where muggles tell the nation an anecdote and risk the indignity of 
being flung backwards on the whim of the host – is a distinctly British 
talkshow tradition. There have been a whopping 500 red-chair stories, and this 
behind-the-scenes special sees repeats of Graham’s favourites, and interviews 
with those who have faced the infamous flip.Grace Rahman

Film choice


Chronicle (Josh Trank, 2012) 12.55am, Channel 4
Trank’s debut feature has three kids investigating a large hole in the ground 
that turns them into superheroes. It’s filmed “found footage” style, like 
Kick-Ass via The Blair Witch Project. The screenplay by Max Landis (son of 
director John) plays cleverly with the teen/super powers dynamic and there are 
fine performances from Dane DeHaan, Alex Russell and Michael B Jordan.

Live sport


Premiership Rugby Union: Newcastle Falcons v Bath, 7pm, BT Sport 1 Action from 
Kingston Park.

FA Cup Football: West Ham United v Manchester City, 7.30pm, BBC1 The Hammers 
host Pep Guardiola’s Citizens in the third round (kick-off 7.55pm).

Test Cricket: Australia v Pakistan, 11.30pm, BT Sport 3 The final day of the 
third Test gets under way in Sydney.
 