
Ten years since the A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> 
began, there is more support than ever for a national second division and 
promotion and relegation. Put it down to the success of the FFA Cup, the grand 
final of which takes place on Saturday night between Perth Glory and Melbourne 
Victory.


In two seasons of the FFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ffa-cup> 
impressive crowds have turned up to watch A-League clubs play lower league 
sides such as South Coast Wolves, St. Albans Saints, Balmain Tigers, Sorrento, 
Darwin Olympic, Hume City, Bentleigh Greens, Tuggeranong United, Sydney United 
and Heidelberg United. 

Most intriguing, however, was the crowd of 1,857 people who turned up to see 
the round of 32 match between Rockdale City and Perth SC in August. Nothing 
special at first glance, but it was a great atmosphere and a respectable 
turn-out considering it was a cold Wednesday night, there were no A-League 
clubs involved, and neither side has a history in the old National Soccer 
League. 

Melbourne Victory see off Hume City to reach FFA Cup final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/28/melbourne-victory-see-off-hume-city-to-reach-ffa-cup-final>
In their respective leagues, neither Rockdale nor Perth SC could hope to draw 
a crowd anywhere near that size. The grim reality is that spectators don’t care 
for the National Premier Leagues, which are national in name only – basically 
it’s a re-badged state league with an end of season play-off between the 
winners of each state. Indeed such is the lure of a true national audience, 
many clubs are realising that one game in the FFA Cup can do more for a club’s 
finances and reputation than years of solid performance in the state league. 

Perth Glory CEO Peter Filopolous believes promotion and relegation is an 
“ideal” which will need to come after the introduction of a national second 
division. “I think you’re building a second-tier of football brands at a 
national level,” says Filopolous. “You’re giving them an ability to grow and 
invest in their football infrastructure, and one day in the future, as the game 
grows, they could be the next A-League clubs – even if it’s 20 years away.”

The familiar advocates for a two-tiered system are the former NSL clubs, 
particularly Melbourne Knights, Sydney Olympic and South Melbourne. When FFA 
released it’s Whole of Football Plan in May,with no plans for promotion and 
relegation to the A-League 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/ffa-rules-out-promotion-and-relegation-in-future-of-aleague-20150504-ggtwdy.html>
, South Melbourne somewhat histrionically called it “the possible end of 
aspiration football 
<http://www.smfc.com.au/media-release-the-possible-end-of-aspirational-football/>
”.

Of course it is self-interest rather than commitment to principle guiding this 
view – South Melbourne were hardly manning the barricades during the periods in 
which the NSL scrapped promotion and relegation.

Still, the advocates of promotion and relegation are no longer fringe-dwellers 
and dreamers. Former SBS commentator Les Murray, Fairfax’sMichael Cockerill 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/why-the-aleague-cant-ignore-promotion-and-relegation-20151001-gjzgv9.html>
 andMichael Lynch 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/promotion-and-relegation-dont-expect-it-soon-but-it-must-come-some-time-20150220-13k9pb.html>
, and Fox Sports commentatorsSimon Hill 
<http://www.news.com.au/sport/football/asian-cup-2015-as-tempting-as-it-is-to-say-footballs-made-it-in-australia-theres-still-work-to-do/story-fnqpoci8-1227207275693>
 andMark Bosnich 
<http://blogs.theage.com.au/executive-style/sportandstyle/bencoady/2009/11/26/howtopromote.html>
 have all argued for its introduction, based on notions of fairness and 
football principles. As Cockerill writes: “If a team like Nieclecza can play in 
the top tier of Poland representing a village of just 750 people, why should 
Australia deny the dream?”

Yet the A-League was never supposed to be fair. It was established as a 
corporate cartel with privately-owned franchises given privileged access to 
colonise regions that community clubs had spent decades investing in. It’s a 
thoroughly undemocratic system but it has powerful currency – consider Sydney 
FC’s reaction when Melbourne City decided they wanted to wear sky blue, for 
example, or their recent outcry at FFA’s plans to bring in a third team in the 
south of Sydney.

This is reality, not criticism. The model, undemocratic as it is, has found 
more support than any other football experiment in this country. But there is 
also a growing desire, brought on in large part by the wonderfully anarchic 
spirit of the FFA Cup, to give the lower league clubs an opportunity.

Australia has its own dramatic stories to tell in this department. When St. 
George-Budapest were relegated from the national league in 1980, they brought 
Frank Arok back from Yugoslavia to coach the club. In 1981 they won promotion, 
by 1982 they finished second, and in 1983 they won the NSL. Arok was promptly 
appointed Socceroos coach.

However history also shows that promotion and relegation favours clubs in the 
populous states of Sydney and Melbourne, and can be wildly chaotic. As the 
Bradley Report noted in 1990, promotion and relegation led to “instability in 
the league”, and neglect of important areas such as facilities and spectator 
recruitment in favour of on-field results. 

Moreover, since the state-based NPL system was established, the winners have 
been Sydney United, North Eastern MetroStars and Blacktown City. The latter two 
don’t even closely resemble a potential A-League side. 

“The gap is wide between the NPL and the A-League, it’s a big jump,” says 
Filopolous. “We need to spread the next best tier of talent across 10 clubs. 
Given the distance, the airfares required, the costs associated with a second 
tier are challenging. In terms of an economic model you’d need to see how 
viable it is.”

For Filopolous, who has worked in sports administration across many codes, a 
national second division would help promote Australian talent. “You’re helping 
fix that pathway and bridge that gap between NPL and A-League and so that the 
step between NPL and A-League is easier,” he says.

The best idea yet is for the states to run a national second division. FFA 
have absolutely no plans to roll out another competition, and with their 
resources already stretched, nor should they. For a national second division 
there is some movement and plenty of support at Football Federation Victoria, 
but at the moment no concrete plans have been made.

“I think we have to have a sustainable A-League and a successful A-League 
before we embark on promotion and relegation,” says Filipolous. “I think you 
say ‘never say never’. The day that it happens is the day we know that football 
has arrived and is a very successful, strong, viable competition.”

 