
From the aerial shots of Los Angeles provided by news helicopters, the city 
looks like a war zone. The flames devouring sections of this sprawling southern 
California metropolis were started by arsonists and fuelled by righteous anger 
over the not guilty verdict in theRodney King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rodney-king> police brutality case.

The casualty figures are also those of a war zone. Murderous mobs howling "No 
justice, no peace!" have left more than 10 people dead and 140 wounded in less 
than 24 hours. As I write the entire south central section of Los Angeles is 
under a state of emergency as 2,000 national guardsmen armed with military 
weaponry converge on the area.

To those familiar with police-community relations in Los Angeles all of this 
was predictable. It is the inevitable explosion that will result when 
unanswered cases are allowed to fester until they become social dynamite.

For years now there has been a steady stream of complaints against the Los 
Angeles police department and its chief, Daryll Gates, alleging a policy of 
excessive use of force when arresting criminal suspects. These complaints 
generally came to nothing when brought before a police review board dominated 
by officials from the police hierarchy.

Repeated calls for an expanded review board that would include civilians have 
gone unheeded. Most complainants in a police brutality case have not been able 
to provide sufficient evidence to support criminal charges against officers.

That was why the Rodney King case was welcomed by civil libertarians. The 
brutality long acknowledged against the LA police department was finally 
captured live on video tape. When the images of Rodney King, sprawled on the 
ground being viciously clubbed by a group of white cops, were broadcast on 
national television it elicited outrage from all sectors of the public 
including the Oval Office.

For millions of Americans witnessing the event it was a prima facie case of 
police brutality. This was why the announcement of a not guilty verdict 
provoked shock and outrage across the nation and led to an immediate outburst 
of rioting.

The question that demanded an answer was how the jury could arrive at a not 
guilty verdict when all the world saw the evidence on television.

Mr Bush, who expressed outrage at the King case more than a year ago as 
thousands of black soldiers were returning from the Persian Gulf, yesterday 
made it clear that arson and looting would be suppressed by any means necessary.

Mr Gates's contribution was to call the looters "gang members and drunks who 
were just waiting on an opportunity". It is difficult to believe that more 
blood - mainly black blood - will not be spilled.

The factors leading up to the present crisis in Los Angeles are not unique to 
that city. There are similar problems with white police brutality, and the lack 
of legal redress for black victims, in every major American metropolis. Some 
lawyers, both black and white, believe that American society is so racially 
polarised that it is nearly impossible to find a predominantly white jury who 
will convict white policemen for the abuse of their authority by using 
excessive violence against blacks and other non-white minorities.

It should be remembered that the acquittal of the police in this case follows 
a long-standing pattern, a recent example of which was the effective slap on 
the wrist given to a Korean grocer for the murder of a 15-year-old black girl 
whom she shot in the back because she thought the teenager had stolen a bottle 
of fruit juice.

The grocer was sentenced by a white judge to a few months of community 
service. This incident occurred in Compton,California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, just a few miles away from 
the present conflict.

The real tragedy for black Americans is that the looters have robbed the 
Afro-American community of the moral high ground. The tragedy for all Americans 
is that the present conflict in Los Angeles will exacerbate rather than calm 
racial antagonisms nationally. For, as graphic pictures of inner city black 
youth and impoverished adult looters filter into the dining rooms of the white 
suburbs in living colour, the question on everybody's minds will cease to be 
whether Rodney King received justice in court and turn to demands for the 
immediate restoration of law and order by any means necessary.

Playthell Benjamin is an award-winning black American journalist based in New 
York.
 