
"I'm a work in progress," says Anthony Kelly, former career criminal, 
long-term drug abuser and one-time star trainee in TV chefGordon Ramsay's Bad 
Boys' Bakery <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/gordon-behind-bars/>. Before 
taking part in last year's surprise-hit reality TV programme, Gordon Behind 
Bars, in which Ramsay set up a professional bakery in the bowels of London's 
Brixton prison, Kelly, 34, had spent a total of 16 years in a variety of jails 
around the country serving time for burglary, drug dealing, stealing from heavy 
goods vehicles and innumerable other felonious activities.

Now, a year after the series ended, the fast-talking cockney's life has taken 
a dramatic change in direction. For the first time since he was 10 years old, 
and after a long stint in a rehabilitation clinic in Devon, Kelly is clear of 
drugs.

"I never knew life could be this good," he says when we meet in Anchor House, 
a former seafarer's mission that serves the needs of homeless people in Canning 
Town, eastLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. He smiles a lot as we 
chat and looks much fitter and healthier than he did on TV. "No drugs, no 
crime. I can't imagine going back to the way I lived before," he says.

It would be hard to imagine anyone living the way Kelly did before. He was 
born in the East End of London in 1978 and brought up in Canning Town with his 
four siblings. His mother was Glaswegian; his father a seaman from Liverpool. 
Both were alcoholics.

"They fought constantly," he says, "I mean with bottles, knives, a tin-opener, 
anything they could get their hands on, when they were drunk. Once, my mother 
put a hot iron on my dad's back when he was asleep and he almost jumped out of 
the window. The bath was full of mouldy towels. The kitchen was covered in 
filth. It was squalor."

He recounts how, as a six-year-old, he did "bob-a-job, a Saturday job, washing 
cars, even penny for the guy, anything to get money for booze for my mother. 
When she was drunk, I could just run on the streets. It was more comfortable 
out there than it was in that shithole of a house." He started "smoking puff" 
when he was seven, and by 10 he was sniffing cocaine and passing painkillers 
off as ecstasy tablets at rave parties. Perhaps it was inevitable he would end 
up in the care system. "They put me into care for not going to school, but once 
I was in care I never went to school ever again," he says. He ran away from 
care homes dozens of times, sleeping in cars, sheds, squats, and committing 
relatively petty crimes to survive. He was 12 when his mother, aged just 39, 
died from alcohol-related illnesses, and his criminal behaviour escalated. At 
15, he was sent to a young offenders' institution for theft, and his future as 
an established "prolific and priority offender" was secured.

Dysfunction-causing issues that have festered and fed criminality and 
antisocial behaviour from an early age often become so deep-rooted that by 
adulthood they are almost impossible to resolve. To change such a damaged life 
takes courage, commitment and, above all, support. How much of Kelly's 
turnaround does he owe to his prison encounter withGordon Ramsay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gordonramsay>?

"I owe Gordon a lot," he says. "He was totally genuine in the prison. Away 
from the cameras, he was as good as gold. He told us about his own troubles – 
his brother has addiction problems and his old man was an alcoholic. But as 
much as I got from that experience, it was this place that has really given me 
what I needed to change."

Kelly is referring to Anchor House; he has been in and out of its doors since 
his days on the streets as a child. "These people have never turned me away," 
he says. He explains that he made a decision to change before he went in to 
serve his last prison sentence. "I was sick of living in constant embarrassment 
and shame; sick of being a criminal causing untold misery," he says. The people 
who run Anchor House offered him a way out. "It was them who paid the £10,000 
for my stay in rehab. Without them, I don't think I would have made it."

And what about Ramsay's programme? "What he did is highlight the fact that 
there are plenty of people in prison who want to change, and he gave a few of 
us the chance to show that. I was never going to be a cook," he says, laughing. 
"But I wanted to prove myself to the doubters. Some of the guys on the course 
went on to work in restaurants. A couple ended up back inside. It's hard to 
change when you've been in and out of prison all your life. Gordon gave us a 
chance to show we were willing. But not everybody gets the chance that I've 
been given. I'm lucky I've got the support I need to keep this up, and now I'm 
determined to put my experience to good use to help others who've been through 
it like me."

Post-prison, Kelly has worked with prisoner peer-mentoring charity the 
St Giles Trust and done a stint as an actor at the Theatre Royal in Plymouth. 
"I only went there as a volunteer helper [as part of his rehab programme] and 
they got me up on stage, acting," he says. Currently, he is undertaking 
training, supported by Anchor House, to become a "lifestyle architect", a sort 
of life coach-cum-counsellor for those struggling with troubled and troublesome 
lives.

In the meantime, Brixton's Bad Boys' Bakery continues to thrive. Since the 
kitchen and the training programme were taken over by welfare-to-work provider 
Working Links, the bakery has provided more than 15,000 products to 14 branches 
of the coffee house chain Caffè Nero.

Our conversation at an end, Kelly and I shake hands and I wish him luck. But 
just before we part, I ask him: "So do you think you really have changed?" 
He laughs again."Oh, mate," he says, "I'm doing my best. As I said, I'm a work 
in progress."
 