
"Is this it?" asks the back of the 276. It's an advert for the Alpha Course 
<http://uk.alpha.org/>, Christianity's pseudo-philosophical middle class 
recruitment drive, public transport again being thepreferred method of mass 
communication <https://www.theguardian.com/world/atheist-bus> for religious 
matters.

Alpha is officially described as being an "opportunity for anyone to explore 
the Christian faith in a relaxed setting". It was created in the 1970s at the
Holy Trinity Brompton <http://www.htb.org.uk/>, a big church in South 
Kensington, but was revamped in the 90s and has since become a global 
phenomenon. They claim that 2 million people have attended in the UK and 13 
million worldwide. That makes it a significant movement in modern Christianity. 
Alpha's enormous wealth, mostly from private donations, is most visible in its 
advertising, not just on buses, but also on big and small screens.

But within and without the Christian faith Alpha is controversial. It operates 
as a franchise with a basic curriculum, open to interpretation by church 
leaders. Thus there is denominational variation in how the course is taught. 
Contentious issues include its prescriptive charismatic slant. Midway through 
the 10 week course, participants may be urged to allow the Holy Spirit to fill 
them up such that they enjoy glossolalia, or speaking in tongues. It's a 
bizarre thing to watch, and certainly not to every Christian's taste. 
Furthermore, some of its evangelical practitioners betray a nasty homophobic 
attitude.

Over the next 10 weeks I shall be blogging each session of the Alpha Course at 
St Mary's in Islington 
<http://www.stmaryislington.co.uk/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=13&Itemid=27>
, and exploring it as a phenomenon. Before the first, I feel weirdly nervous. 
Am I entering a lions' den? I nip across the road to the Kings Head for a 
solitary sharpener.

The gate to the crypt is locked, but after wandering around, I find a room 
with about a dozen men chatting. There's an oddness to entering such an enclave 
of peace in the midst of the post-work drinking yahoos of Upper Street. But I'm 
surprised that most of the group are also young and trendy: all neat beards, 
sharp jackets and absurd trainers. There are a couple of older guys who could 
do with a proper shave. One of the neat beards smiles warmly and says hullo, 
asks my name, and then asks:

"Is this your first time at Alcoholics Anonymous?"

I'm in the wrong room. I overhear a chap next to me say that he's been dry for 
6 weeks. I wonder if he can smell the Talisker on my breath, poorly disguised 
with chewing gum.

Upstairs in the church, the Alpha group is not dissimilar to look at, although 
there are some women. Toby Hole is the leader of the course and a curate at St 
Mary's. He is as bright as a button and thoroughly nice, in a young vicarly 
sort of way. One of the key aspects to Alpha is having a slap up meal before 
getting stuck intoChristianity <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity>
, and lo, there is bountiful pizza, and it is good. We make small talk, I am 
open that I am blogging about the course, and that I am an orthodox atheist.

Toby introduces the course with a spiel about Christianity in the modern 
world. He wants to emphasise that Alpha is a way of showing us that 
Christianity is none of the three following popular misconceptions: boring, 
untrue and irrelevant. Framing it thus seems to me to be setting up at least 
two straw-men. We shall see.

This success of Alpha has been put down to us, the "de-churched". These are, 
like me, a generation of people who were raised within a Christian cultural 
context, at school, home, or wherever, but who now do not engage in formal 
church-based religion. The currently emerging generation may be referred to as 
"un-churched", in that they don't have those cultural inputs. Simply put, the 
de-churched know who Jesus was, the un-churched may not.

The group comprises nine de-churchers, including a young couple, and a mix of 
late 20s/early 30s middle class people and one older Sri Lankan man who 
casually quotes the Buddha, the Qur'an and Jainism.

The couple, John and Lucinda, explain that they both come from evangelical 
Christian families, but are doubtful believers searching for that faith 
clincher for themselves. Both have attended Alpha before. I've heard that 
repeaters are common, which somewhat calls into question that claim of 20 
million attendees worldwide. In the first session I am paired with Barbara, who 
within minutes is talking sincerely about the death of her father to me, a 
complete stranger. It seems there is robust cynicism filter on the door.

Toby says the course is about Jesus and his teachings. To my mind the Jesus 
character in the Bible is a pretty sound bloke, someone with conviction, 
compassion and a touch of rebellion. These are all traits I respect. But Toby 
asserts that Jesus was definitely a real person who died but defeated death. I 
have issues with both of these statements. I ask about the notion of a 
historical Jesus. "Does anyone here doubt that Jesus was a real man?" I am 
firmly told that this is the subject of next week's discussion.

The nearest I've come to a religious experience recently is my nightly dose of 
the Wire. Ain no thang. But I leave St Mary's looking forward to next week's 
session. I spend precisely no time with people openly discussing their faith in 
a very personal way. Mostly when I think about religion it's the foolish edicts 
of preposterous old men in dresses. But sitting down with people who choose to 
spend a sunny Tuesday evening discussing the meaning of life with strangers 
seems to be a much more interesting insight into what makes people of faith 
tick. We shall see.
 