
Mrs Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington yesterday let slip what her most fervent 
admirers must have suspected all along. The legendary social ambition of the 
former president of the Cambridge Union may no longer be satisfied until she 
has captured an even more important presidency - the one which would entitle 
her to hold parties at the White House.

Aficionadoes of the Stassinopoulos phenomenon will be disappointed to discover 
that the author of Callas and mother-to-be is not eyeing the Presidency for 
herself.

It would be for her husband, a shy Texan oilman and opera buff, Michael 
Huffington, who has been appointed to the middle-ranking Pentagon post of 
deputy assistant secretary of defence for negotiations sincemarrying Arianna in 
a glitzy New York setting last April 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/2/18/1424281261808/Michael-and-Arianna-Huffi-001.jpg>
.

As a Greek-born Washingtonian, Mrs Huffington would be ineligible for the 
Presidency in any case, and has her long-awaited book of Picasso to finish. She 
must also establish herself as firmly into the power-conscious social scene in 
provincial Washington as she did in metropolitan London and New York.

She is making huge strides and yesterday earned the town’s nearest equivalent 
to a discreet mention in the court circular back in London - a full-page 
profile in the Style section of theWashington Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/washington-post>.

Among its many revelations was that Mrs Huffington, aged 36, now regards 
Washington as her favourite city, that her bedroom is the ‘nerve centre’ of her 
existence, and that her friends are speculating that her ambitions may now be 
leaning towards being an ambassador’s wife at the very least with First Lady 
not ruled out.

‘It’s impossible for me to answer that hypothetical question,’ she told the 
Post with commendable fatalism.

She was spotted sitting next to the Defence Secretary, Mr Caspar Weinberger, 
at a high-powered dinner last autumn - the seating-plan was arranged by her 
friend, Mary Jane Wick, wife of President Reagan’s information chief. None the 
less, Mrs Huffington laughs off any suggestion that she had a role in obtaining 
the Pentagon job for her husband. He is a long-time friend and supporter of the 
Vice-President, George Bush, has a Harvard MBA and is now ‘responsible for the 
formulation of policy regarding various arms control forums,’ the Pentagon 
confirmed yesterday.

But from a five-storey house which the couple have rented in fashionable 
Georgetown, she has enlarged a circle of powerful friends who already include 
Mrs Anne Getty and Selma ‘Lucky’ Roosevelt, the White House chief of protocol. 
A charity performance she is chairing was co-chaired last year by Mrs J. D. 
Rockefeller IV. She has won over Mr Richard Perle, the influential Assistant 
Secretary for Defence.

The Post profile prompted mixed opinions among observers of the social scene. 
The article dwelt at length on the influence upon Mrs Huffington of a teacher 
turned Californian guru, called John-Roger, who is credited with the credo, 
‘use everything to your advantage.’

News of Mrs Huffington’s summer baby seeped into Liz Smith’s gossip column in 
the tabloid New York Daily News when the pregnancy still had 8 1/2 months to 
run.
 