
This week, I'm celebrating a flavour combination that underpins many of 
my favourite fish dishes. Passionate piscine fan that I am, I often want 
a fairly quick meal that makes the most of whatever fish, shellfish or 
crustacea I've mustered, whether by rod, net, creel or, if needs must, wallet. 
Often, along with the stalwart seasonings of salt, pepper and lemon, something 
with an aniseedy tang will be involved. And more often than not that 
means fennel.

Fish <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fish> and fennel go together 
like pork and apple or lamb and garlic. Or even better: the sharp-sweet, 
aniseed notes of fennel enhance, define and underline the quintessential 
fishiness of fish. September, which segues gently from the heat of summer into 
the coolness of autumn, seems a particularly apt time to enjoy this delicate, 
subtle but warming combination. It's also a good time for fresh fennel. And, 
of course, it's when "r"s start reappearing in the months. That is a genuinely 
useful, albeit very rough, barometer for fish quality: many fish and shellfish 
really do get better in the colder months, improving in plumpness and condition 
as they feed hard and fast to regain condition after their summer spawning.

One of the beauties of the fish and fennel partnership is its elasticity. 
Almost any fish tastes good with almost any kind of fennel. Just as "fish" is a 
broad bracket, so "fennel" comes in more than one guise, too. Take your pick 
from fennel seeds, the fronds of herb fennel and the fat bulb of Florence 
fennel, which is closely related to, but not exactly the same, as the plant 
from which we get the seeds and leaves.

Herb fennel is a glorious flavouring. Freshly picked, it unfurls in the mouth 
in a cascade of floral, fragrant, sweet aniseedy-ness. It's not easy to find in 
shops, but it is a cinch to grow. It requires a bit of space (though you can 
confine it to a large pot), but you'll be rewarded with a statuesque, 
feathery-leaved beauty of a plant, a hardy perennial that will keep you in 
leaves and seeds year after year.

By late September fennel plants are coming to the end of their leafy phase, 
and their umbelliferous flowerheads will soon be forming hundreds of 
flavour-packed seeds. You can pick these when still green and juicy: just chew 
them straight off the plant, or crush into dressings or sauces. Once dried, 
they're intensely flavoured, with a stronger and more penetrating taste than 
the leaves, as well as wonderfully warming and slightly citrussy.

Florence fennel offers a much more subtle but no less delicious fennelly tang. 
Its creamy, crisp flesh is refreshing and juicy when raw and thinly sliced (try 
it in a salad with smoked mackerel), and mellow and nutty when braised, 
sauteed, roasted or pureed into a soup.

So, really, this week's recipes celebrate not two single foods but rather two 
groups of ingredients, the possible permutations of which you will never 
exhaust. Or ever wish to.

Florence fennel and celeriac soup with oysters

I love this luxurious soup. If you don't fancy oysters, add flakes of 
hot-smoked organic salmon instead. Serves six.

3-4 fennel bulbs (about 800g, untrimmed weight)
50g butter
1 tbsp olive oil
400g celeriac, trimmed and roughly chopped
1 large leek, white only, quartered lengthways and finely sliced
1 onion, peeled and sliced
2 garlic cloves, peeled and chopped
750ml fish stock
½ glass dry white wine
18 fresh oysters
100ml double cream
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Trim the fennel, discarding the more fibrous parts (ie, the stalks and at 
least two of the outer layers), then slice fairly thinly, core and all.

Set a large saucepan over a medium heat and add the butter and oil. Add the 
fennel, the other chopped vegetables and garlic, cover and sweat gently for 10 
minutes, until softened. Add the stock and wine, bring to a simmer, cover again 
and cook for about 25 minutes, until all the vegetables are soft, then puree 
until smooth.

Meanwhile, put a large pan on a high heat and add half a glass of water. When 
it's boiling, put in six oysters, cover and steam for two minutes: the shells 
will open enough for you to get an oyster knife inside, so you can remove the 
meat (take care not to lose the juices). Repeat with the remaining oysters.

Finish the soup by stirring in the cream and the juice from the oysters, and 
season to taste. Divide the oysters between warmed bowls, ladle over the hot 
soup and serve.

Slashed fish with fennel seeds, garlic and ginger
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's slashed fish with fennel seeds, garlic and 
ginger: 'Easy but impressive.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
An easy but impressive way to serve a whole fish. Serves two to three.

1 large (about 1kg) or 2 small (500g) line-caught bream, bass or grey mullet, 
gutted and descaled
A few bay leaves
1 tbsp sunflower or rapeseed oil

For the fennel seed paste
1 tbsp fennel seeds
2–3cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and finely grated
2 fat garlic cloves, peeled and finely grated
½–1 small, hot red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped 
Finely grated zest of half a lemon, plus a squeeze of juice
A little olive or rapeseed oil
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5, then make the paste: lightly toast the 
fennel seeds in a dry frying pan until fragrant (this isn't essential, but it 
helps bring out the flavour). Transfer to a pestle and mortar, and grind to a 
coarse powder. Mix in the ginger, garlic, chilli and lemon zest, add enough oil 
to make a thick paste, and season.

Lay the fish on a well-oiled baking sheet. Cut three or four 1-2cm-deep 
slashes in the thickest part of the fish, taking care not to cut through to the 
bone, then turn and repeat on the other side. Rub the paste into the slashes, 
and smear the rest inside the cavity and over the fish.

Tuck bay leaves into the slashes and cavity. Trickle a little oil over the 
fish, and roast for 20–25 minutes, until just cooked through (check by pushing 
a fine-bladed knife into the thickest part, between two slashes: the flesh 
should be opaque and just coming away from the backbone).

Bring the fish to the table in its roasting dish and ease chunks of the flesh 
away from the bones with a knife and fork. Turn over and remove the remaining 
flesh, then spoon any pan juices on to each portion.

Pasta with sardines and fresh fennel

If you can't get fresh herb fennel, use a tablespoon of fennel seeds, lightly 
toasted and finely ground. Serves four.

Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
300g linguine or spaghetti
4 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, peeled, quartered and finely sliced
1 garlic clove, peeled and cut into thin slivers
3-4 tbsp chopped fennel herb
50g sultanas or raisins
50g pine nuts, toasted
2 tsp balsamic vinegar
A few squeezes of lemon juice
8 sardine fillets (or 4 whole sardines)

Bring a large pan of well-salted water to a boil, add the pasta and cook until 
al dente.

Meanwhile, heat three tablespoons of oil in a frying pan over medium heat. Add 
the onion with a pinch each of salt and pepper and sweat for 10 minutes, until 
soft and golden. Add the garlic, most of the fennel (or all of it if using 
crushed seeds), the sultanas and pine nuts, cook for two minutes, then stir in 
the vinegar and turn off the heat.

Drain the pasta and tip it into the pan. Stir, then return the lot to the hot 
pasta pan, scraping in all the oil and flavourings. Add a squeeze of lemon 
juice and toss. Season to taste, then cover to keep everything warm.

Cook the sardines quickly: wipe out the frying pan with kitchen paper, add the 
remaining tablespoon of oil and put on a medium heat. Generously season the 
flesh side of the sardine fillets, then lay them skin side down in the pan and 
cook for about two minutes, until the flesh is just about all opaque. Flip over 
and cook for another minute.

Heap the pasta into warmed dishes, top with the sardine fillets, give it a 
good squeeze of lemon juice and finish with a sprinkling of fennel herb.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://rivercottage.net> for the latest news from 
River Cottage HQ.
 