
George Osborne’s surprise cut to stamp duty could lift house sales by 5% over 
the next year, reversing a slowdown that has cooled surging price growth, 
surveyors said on Thursday.

The tax reform in the chancellor’s autumn statement last week came as the 
housing market had begun to run out of steam following months of rising prices. 
But theRoyal Institution of Chartered Surveyors <http://www.rics.org/uk/> 
(Rics) said its members expected the changes to boost sales across the country 
by 2 to 5%, although expectations were more muted in London.

The changes, which took effect immediately, mean homebuyers no longer pay a 
flat rate of tax on the whole price of a property, but a tiered rate on parts 
of the overall price that fall over each threshold. On a £275,000 housebuyers 
will pay £4,500 less tax than under the previous system, although estate agents 
have predicted that some of the savings will filter through to higher prices.

Rics’s latest monthly survey of members showed that house prices and activity 
had continued to decline in November. Around 15% more surveyors reported a 
decline in buyer and seller inquiries than reported a rise, and the number of 
homes for sale at each branch fell to 56, the second lowest level on record. 
The number of would-be buyers signing up with agents has fallen for five months 
running, with Rics members suggesting uncertainty before next May’s general 
election could be a factor.

The balance of members reporting house price rises in the last three months 
dropped for a sixth month running, to 13%, the lowest level since May 2013. In 
Scotland and the south-west the market was still rising with a balance of 37% 
reporting increases; in London a balance of 40% of surveyors reported prices 
had fallen.

Simon Rubinsohn, Rics chief economist, said: “The stamp duty reform could 
reverse the softer trend in buyer inquiries that has been visible in recent 
months but a critical issue in terms of how it plays out with prices is whether 
it also encourages more vendors to consider putting their properties back on 
the market.”

Surveyors’ predictions of a 5% increase in transactions suggested they 
believed that sellers would respond to the changes, he added.

The UK’s largest chartered surveyor, e.surv <http://www.esurv.co.uk/>, said it 
had seen a fall in the number of mortgages taken out by people with small 
deposits in November. The number of borrowers putting down 15% or less of the 
price of their new home was down by 12% year-on-year and at its lowest level 
since October 2013, when theHelp to Buy mortgage guarantee scheme 
<http://www.helptobuy.org.uk/> first offered 95% loans. There were 8,250 
approvals at a high loan-to-value ratio in November, e.surv said. However, the 
total number of approvals was higher than in October, at 61,108.
 