
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has been 
accused of using his autumn statement to give tax breaks to Tory supporters as 
it emerged that several companies run by Conservative donors stand to benefit 
from a more generous tax regime on the profits of the oil industry.

On Wednesday the chancellor announced that the charge on oil firms’ profits 
would be reduced from 32% to 30%, as well as other measures to help investment 
in the industry. The moves, which follow intensive lobbying by the oil sector 
and were welcomed by company executives, will cost the Treasury £470m over the 
next parliament.

In total, the Conservative party has received more than £2.5m since 2010 from 
donors associated with the oil industry. These include Amjad Bseisu, chief 
executive of EnQuest Oil; Alexander Temerko, director of Offshore Group 
Newcastle; and Ian Taylor, chief executive of Vitol, all of whom dined with 
senior ministers as part of the exclusive Conservative party Leaders Group in 
the summer. Such gatherings allow donors who give at least £50,000 to the party 
to socialise with senior ministers, including David Cameron, Osborne and others.

While there is no suggestion that rules on donations have been broken, 
Labour’s shadow cabinet office minister Jon Ashworth called on ministers to 
explain “why the Tories’ big-money backers have been benefiting from policy 
changes”.

He added: “We know the Tories’ election campaign depends on funding from a 
privileged few. Now we see many have a direct line to the Treasury.”

Last week’s changes were welcomed by Oil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> and Gas UK, the main representative 
body for the UK offshore oil and gas industry, as an “important first step” to 
help offshore exploration.

Bseisu donated £42,000 to the Tories in October 2013, a few weeks before being 
granted a licence to drill in the North Sea. He made a further donation of 
£15,000 on 27 May this year and £24,065 on 21 July, the month he welcomed 
Treasury moves to review the North Sea tax regime, calling it a “seminal moment 
for the industry”.

The government says the decision to change the rules has been driven by a 
desire to boost the industry and create jobs and is unrelated to donations to 
Tory coffers. Osborne has faced accusations from Labour that he used the autumn 
statement as an exercise to boost his party’s election chances while doing 
little to help the less well-off.

An Opinium poll for the Observer shows high levels of public scepticism about 
some of the chancellor’s pledges, including a promise to give £2bn more a year 
to the NHS and spend £15bn on improving roads. Forty-eight per cent said they 
believed the promise of more funds for the NHS was deliverable against 41% who 
thought it was not, while 47% of respondents believed the money on roads was 
deliverable against 40% who thought it was not.
 