
There are three things to say about the UK’s spending review. First of all it 
shows that this government is susceptible to pressure in reversing the tax 
credit and police cuts, and secondly, despite the inadequate BBC scrutiny and 
analysis, this was about consolidating austerity. Tax credit and police cut 
reversal was not new money. It was just not a cut. Meanwhile we are on course 
for public spending to be 36% of GDP, which means that public funding will kept 
at the cut level it is now. This is not enough for social care, libraries, 
children’s centres, housing benefit, youth clubs, fire services, policing, 
employment support allowance and social housing. Finally the OBR is forecasting 
five years of continuous growth, which means at the very least that the economy 
is stabilising. So we have a choice to fund the public services we need, and 
that is the alternative.
Barry Kushner
Liverpool

• The handy table of public spending “growth” (mostly cuts) highlighted on the 
Treasury website misses out local government due to an obscure accounting 
convention. You have to wade through to page 100 of the spending review 
document to find that central government support for councils is to be more 
than halved – cut by 56%. This is on top of the 28% cut we have already seen.
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> assumes 
that most of this can be made up by higher local taxes on business, residents 
and land sales. All very well if you live in a rich area with buoyant business 
and well-heeled taxpayers, but a disaster if you have neither. The net effect 
is yet again to protect the affluent south and south-east and visit the 
harshest cuts on the north, Midlands and west.
Professor Peter Taylor-Gooby
University of Kent

• What is the point of a spending review that purports to set the road map for 
the next five years but which is, apparently, wholly dependent on which month’s 
statistics are chosen as the baseline? July’s = austerity now and nasty. 
October’s = austerity postponed but still nasty. Could Larry Elliott write a 
short piece please on how many of these periodic “forecasts” over the years 
have actually turned out to be accurate? If the answer is “very few”, shouldn’t 
governments and their economists abandon this reactive short-termism and try 
something else. That way, at least, the poor would stop feeling like mice being 
tormented by cats.
Gillian Dalley
London 

• Your article on further education (Students fear squeeze on colleges could 
cut them out of education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/24/further-education-cuts-colleges-spending-review>
, 25 November) could not have come at a more timely moment for the sector. 
Though we welcome the government’s announcement on Wednesday that FE funding 
will be protected in cash terms for four years, the sector has suffered a 40% 
cut since 2010. This has resulted in 1m student places going and thousands of 
teaching posts. At a time when there are 700,000 16- to 24-year-olds without 
education, training or employment, and 15% of 16- to 65-year-olds have no 
qualifications whatsoever, these cuts are a national scandal.

Alongside these cuts the government has launched “area reviews”. The stated 
aim of these reviews will be to create “fewer but more resilient” colleges.

Your article rightly explains the unique role that FE plays. The sector 
provides second chance education for millions of people, young and old, who did 
not achieve what they were capable of at school. Three million attend FE 
colleges. The sector teaches more 16- to 18-year-olds than any other sector. 
Cuts in FE funding symbolise all that is wrong and unfair about the 
government’s austerity agenda: the poorest and the most marginalised in our 
society suffer the most.

These cuts have had a profound and devastating effect on community cohesion. 
This is why the University and College Union will continue to campaign for them 
to be reversed. The government must invest in our future, not simply protect a 
much reduced budget for four years.
Mandy Brown ESOL lecturer
Sean Vernell GCSE English teacher
Rhiannon Lockley Access to Higher Ed Social Sciences
Elaine White ESOL/English lecturer
Pete Bicknell Digital and information literacy coordinator
Richard McEwan Maths teacher
Lee Farrow Music lecturer
Wojciech Dmochowski ESOL teacher
Carly Grundle English lecturer
Hannah Wray ESOL lecturer
Julia Roberts Maths teacher
Adrian Whittaker GCSE English for adults teacher
Eamonn Leddy GCSE maths teacher
Veronika Johnson Art lecturer
Margot Hill Art lecturer
Michaela Hendrinks ESOL lecturer
Matt Pearly ESOL lecturer
Richard Palser Access lecturer

• The chancellor uses the well-known tactics that torturers have employed 
throughout the centuries. The hard cop/soft cop routine. For months breed fear 
among the poor, that working tax credits will be stopped, then, at the last 
minute, suddenly replace them. Hey presto, a sigh of relief all round, and 
everyone is grateful. He has done this before, and will do it again.

The volte-face is never truly genuine, and this time in the universal credit 
system to come there will be losers.

It is a cruel technique. How can anyone trust him?
Christina Naylor
Languenan, France

• On the government benches smoke and mirrors, rabbits out of hats, cloaks and 
daggers. From the opposition benches buffoonery and bathos. As ever, for the 
electorate, the joke’s on us.
Carolyn Kirton
Aberdeen

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 