
Your editorial on the chancellor's autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/05/autumn-statement-messy-realities-of-recovery>
 (6 December) points up many crucial questions about Britain's welcome but weak 
economic growth. What you do not say is how crucial has been the failure to 
rebalance the economy. Weaning it away from heavy dependence on banking and 
finance towards manufacturing, exports and housebuilding was central coalition 
policy in 2010. Yet recovery is still heavily dependent on consumer spending 
and rising house prices, largely in London and the south-east. Taken together 
with recent record fines imposed on the world's biggest banks for rigging 
Libor, it seems clear that, like the Bourbons, we have learned nothing and 
forgotten nothing. That annual borrowing is £111bn compared with the original 
target of £60bn speaks volumes. Moreover, public rage about utlility prices and 
failure to build sufficient affordable homes show we are finally reaping the 
harvest of Thatcherite privatisation and council tenants' "right to buy". What 
became of the confident promise that competition between private utility 
companies would drive down the price of electricity, gas and water? I fear your 
grim conclusion that the average worker is in for 15 lost years will seem 
optimistic if the economy suffers another crash caused by continued dependence 
on unreformed banking and consumer spending.
Patrick Renshaw
Sheffield

• George Osborne has a curious idea about his plan "working". Business 
confidence? According to the OBR, business investment will have fallen 5.5% in 
2013. Tackling the government deficit? His own forecasts expect net government 
borrowing in the next financial year (£96bn) of double his forecast three years 
ago. Helping the average wage earner? Retail price increases will climb over 
the next four years to 4%, leaving average earnings trailing behind again next 
year. And what about our growth path? With no growth last year to speak of 
(0.1%) while the world economy grew at over 3%, we are set to continue lagging 
behind the world for five years. If this is success, what does Osborne think 
failure looks like?
Adrian Ham
Cheltenham
 