
Worcester spoiled Shane Geraghty's return for London Irish with a 22-5 EDF 
Energy Cup win at Sixways yesterday. Mike Ruddock's team collected a bonus 
point for scoring four tries and thus sit on top of Group C, ahead of the 
Ospreys.

Miles Benjamin, a key player for England's grand slam-winning Under-20s last 
season, scored two of Worcester's tries from the wing. He was watched by Martin 
Johnson, the England manager, whose main concern would have been the form of 
Geraghty and London Irish's scrum-half, Peter Richards, another elite-squad 
member making his first start of the season. Geraghty played at inside-centre, 
his likely position for England in the autumn internationals. Gloucester's Olly 
Barkley and Wasps' Riki Flutey are Johnson's other options at No12.

Benjamin scored the first try of yesterday's match after a quarter of an hour, 
thanks to a long pass from the Welsh fly-half Matthew Jones. A missed tackle 
from Geraghty contributed to the nextWorcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> try, scored by the lock 
Graham Kitchener, and Irish's fly-half, Eoghan Hickey, missed three kicks at 
goal before his side got on to the scoreboard when Richards took a quick tap on 
the home 10-metre line and ran 40m for a try. Hickey, predictably, missed the 
conversion. Benjamin then scored Worcester's third from another Jones pass and 
Loki Crichton scored the bonus-point try.

On Saturday Bristol lost again, 30-17 in a Group D match at Northampton. One 
consolation was the performance of the 20-year-old wing Mathew Turner, who 
scored two tries four days after his arrival from South Africa. Chris Ashton, 
Lee Dickson, Paul Diggin and Chris Mayor touched down for Saints. The Welsh 
referee Nigel Owens showed five yellow cards, reducing Bristol to 13 men early 
in the second half.

Bristol's head coach, Richard Hill, said: "Things are picking up. We aren't 
playing terribly but we are shooting ourselves in the foot. The story of our 
season is that we tend to let the other team score within about 15 seconds of 
getting the ball. We tend to kick deep, they counter-attack and within 15 
seconds they are under our posts, which is killing us.

"I was delighted with Mathew Turner. He has only had two training sessions 
with us and he went on to score tries on both wings and make a try-saving 
tackle. He was spotted playing on the sevens circuit and I was told he was 
special, so we moved quickly."
 