
I was planning to visit family in China to celebrate Chinese New Year last 
February.

My Finnair flight from London via Helsinki was due to arrive in Beijing on New 
Year’s Eve at 7.50am local time. I booked an onward domestic flight in the 
early afternoon to give me time to visit my grandfather in hospital before the 
family party.

After two hours at Helsinki, we were told the Finnair flight was cancelled due 
to pilot sickness. I was rerouted, but this flight, too, was delayed and I 
arrived more than 20 hours late, missing my internal flight and the 
celebrations. As it was New Year’s Day, public services were not running and 
hotel costs were high.

My baggage was lost and I had to return to the airport when it was finally 
found but it was so damaged I had to buy bags to carry my stuff.

Worse, during my flight from Helsinki to Beijing, my grandfather died. If I 
had arrived on schedule, I would have seen him in his last hours.

Under EC denied boarding regulations I should be compensated, but Finnair says 
the cancellation was due to “extraordinary circumstances” and that they are not 
therefore liable to pay me anything. ZX, Hove, East Sussex

“Extraordinary circumstances” is the magic wand airlines like to wave to 
absolve themselves of liability. EC Regulation 261/2004 sets amounts of 
compensation payable to passengers depending on the length of the flight and of 
the delay.

Fortunately for airlines, it fails to provide a helpful list of “extraordinary 
circumstances”.

A number of court rulings have narrowed down qualifying excuses. Airlines are 
expected to have plans in place to cope with setbacks – such as bad weather or 
technical problems – considered an inherent part of flying. Crew sickness would 
certainly seem to qualify, as standby staff should be available.

Finnair insists its “back-up system is fully able to cover normal levels of 
absences”, but adds: “During the day in question there was an exceptional peak 
in sickness. We tried to recruit from day offs, but weren’t successful.”

The Finnish Consumer Disputes Board, to whom you then turned, agreed the 
situation was “exceptional”.

However, Kevin Clarke of Bott & Co, specialists in aviation law, says: 
“Finnair is essentially arguing that staff falling ill is not part and parcel 
of running the airline. This does not stand up to scrutiny; in any industry it 
is inevitable that employees will fall unexpectedly ill at some point.”

It took on your case free of charge and, seven months on, has won £601 
compensation, minus £122 court fees. This is, of course, is no real 
compensation for your emotional and financial losses.

Even when flight delays do qualify for compensation, airlines are not liable 
for any consequential losses so always buy comprehensive travel insurance and 
read the small print.

Meanwhile, you will hopefully have lodged a separate claim to the airline for 
your damaged luggage.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk  
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk>or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 