
Every cloud has a silver lining. And every interminable winter has a sunny 
green ending that, when it comes, seems all the more uplifting, inspiring and 
welcome for the wait. As the brutal season of late 2012/early 2013 is finally 
consigned to history, how wonderful it is to see stuff growing again – 
particularly edible stuff.

Let's grab it now. Fill your boots with the best fresh, local produce you can 
find. If you're not gathering your own garden crops, go to your farm shop, find 
the nearest farmers' market, book yourself on to a box scheme, scout out garden 
gate stalls – all are rich hunting grounds for today's ingredients. Wherever it 
comes from, the new growth is so often the best – the sweetest, crunchiest and 
sappiest.

There are three ingredients in particular I want to highlight this week: waxy, 
buttery little new potatoes; elegant, delicately pungent asparagus; and crisp, 
sweet lettuces. In the past, I've devoted whole columns to each of these 
beauties, and I could easily do so again, but I thought it would be fun to rack 
up a raft of dishes in which they co-mingle, their charms bouncing off each 
other and a few other spring treats such as golden-yolked eggs and fresh herbs, 
in a culinary game of spring pinball.

The new potato season usually begins late in April with jersey royals from the 
Channel Islands. These harbingers of all the good things to come are well worth 
enjoying, but don't buy them to the exclusion of other baby spud delights. 
Cornish earlies are also around now and, as we head into June, look out for 
varieties grown locally to you, such as lady christl, orla, charlotte and maris 
peer.

New potatoes don't keep well, so buy little and often, and use them quickly. 
Choose new pots that have a hard ping to them – any give at all and they are 
losing their charm. Remove any earth by running them under a cold tap and 
rubbing with your thumb. Alternatively, scrape the skins with a small, sharp 
knife. But avoid hard scrubbing, which can damage the surface. New potatoes 
need minimal cooking – if just-dug and smaller than golf ball-size, I often 
give them only five to seven minutes in a pan of boiling water. Shop-bought 
ones may take a little longer, but 10-12 minutes is likely to be the maximum 
needed.

The UK asparagus season ends around mid-June, so grab some of the good stuff 
while you can. The fresher it is, the better, of course, which is why farm 
shops and roadside stalls are generally the best source. Some PYOs now do 
asparagus, which is a brilliant idea (seebritish-asparagus.co.uk 
<http://www.british-asparagus.co.uk>). I like the farm shop habit of selling 
asparagus bundles with their cut ends in a tray of water. It helps to keep them 
fresh for 24 hours or so after cutting.

To prepare asparagus, wash it thoroughly, giving the tips a really good swish 
in a bowl of cold water. Then snap off the woody ends of the stalks with your 
hands – the stem breaks naturally at the point where tenderness ends. Cook in a 
large pan of boiling, lightly salted water for as little time as possible. 
Start testing at three minutes, which will be enough for just-picked, slim 
spears, drain and you're good to go.

As for lettuce – surely one of the most under-appreciated of all our homegrown 
veg – this is an ingredient that keeps giving and giving. Available almost all 
year round, it's nevertheless in spring and summer that it's at its 
crunchy-leaved best. The key to loving lettuce is to get more from it than just 
a few green leaves on the side. Spike your lettuce salads with fresh herbs 
(chives, for example) and chopped hard-boiled eggs. Remember lettuce can be 
cooked, too: sautéed, roasted, barbecued even.

Now let's toss this lively spring trio together and see how they land.

Roast new potatoes and asparagus with baked eggs

New potatoes and asparagus both respond so well to roasting, I often throw 
them in the oven together. Add some eggs and you've got a satisfying supper 
dish – I like to think of it as frittata-without-palaver. Serves four.

600-700g new potatoes, cleaned and cut into small chunks
5-6 whole garlic cloves, bashed
3 tbsp olive oil
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
About 400g asparagus
4 eggs
Chives, to serve

Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5. Put the potatoes into a roasting dish 
with the garlic. Trickle over the oil, add plenty of salt and pepper, toss and 
roast for 30 minutes, until tender.

Meanwhile, snap the woody ends off the asparagus and cut the spears into 3-4cm 
lengths. When the potatoes are tender, add the spears, toss and roast for 15 
minutes more, until the asparagus is tender.

Now create four little spaces among the veg for the eggs – you want to contain 
them as much as you can, so arrange the potato and asparagus pieces into 
reasonably snug bulwarks. Working quickly, so everything stays hot, break an 
egg into each space, then return the dish to the oven for about four minutes, 
until the whites are set and the yolks still runny.

Sprinkle some salt and pepper over the eggs, scatter some snipped chives over 
the whole dish and serve straight away (the eggs will continue to cook). If you 
don't have, or don't fancy, chives, grated parmesan is another very nice 
finishing touch.

Braised new potatoes and lettuce
 Hugh Fearnley Whittingstall's braised new potatoes and lettuce: based on the 
delicious petits pois à la française. Photograph: Colin Campbell for the 
Guardian 
This is based on the delicious petits pois à la française, only it's more 
petites pommes de terre. A little later in the season, you could throw in 
a handful of baby peas near the end of cooking. Serves four as a side dish.

25g butter
A trickle of olive or rapeseed oil
1 onion, peeled, quartered and sliced
1 clove garlic, peeled and chopped
350g new potatoes, cleaned and cut into 2-3cm pieces
About 400ml hot chicken stock
½ large head of romaine or 2 little gem lettuces, shredded
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Heat the butter and oil in a large frying pan over a medium-low heat. Add the 
onion, let it sweat for about 10 minutes, then add the garlic and cook for two 
minutes more. Add the potatoes and about 250ml of stock, bring to a simmer and 
cook, half-covered, for around 20 minutes, stirring occasionally, until the 
spuds are tender. Add a little more stock if you need to, but the idea is to 
end up with reasonably well-reduced juices, so don't go mad.

Add the shredded lettuce and a little more stock, stir, cover and cook for 
four to five minutes, until the lettuce is wilted. Season to taste and serve.

Char-grilled lettuce and asparagus with goat's cheese

Char-grilling is usually associated with meat, but it works wonders with 
vegetables, too, caramelising their natural sugars and leaving them tender and 
deliciously bittersweet. I like to use a firm goat's cheese here, such as
Woolsery English Goat 
<http://www.woolserycheese.co.uk/acatalog/copy_of_Hard_Goats_Cheese.html>, but 
any firm, not-too-pungent cheese would work well, or go for good old parmesan. 
Serves four.

About 400g asparagus
4 little gem lettuces
2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil, plus extra to serve
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
Around 75g firm, not-too-strong goat's cheese 

Bring a pan of salted water to a boil. Snap the woody ends off the asparagus 
and drop the spears into the boiling water. Blanch for a minute or two 
(depending on thickness), until al dente, then drain.

Meanwhile, cut the lettuces in half down the middle, leaving them joined at 
the root end. Put in a large bowl with the drained asparagus, add two 
tablespoons of olive oil, season generously and toss to coat, working the oil 
and seasoning into the lettuces a little with your hands.

Heat a ridged griddle pan or heavy-based frying pan until very hot. Add the 
lettuce halves cut-side down, cook for two minutes until golden brown and 
wilted on the base, then turn over and cook for a minute or two more. Transfer 
to a large, warmed serving platter.

Now add the asparagus to the pan and cook for about four minutes, turning 
occasionally, until tender and patched with brown. Arrange on the platter with 
the lettuce.

Thinly slice the cheese (or, if it's particularly crumbly, crumble it) and 
arrange over the griddled veg. Trickle with a little more oil and serve at 
once. Add some bread and this makes a great starter, but it's also a delicious 
side dish.

• For the latest news from River Cottage HQ, go to rivercottage.net 
<http://www.rivercottage.net>
 