
You don't need an uncommonly sweet tooth to get excited about honey. In fact, 
you need an uncommonly weird palate not to get excited about honey. The very 
word is full of the promise of loveliness, unfolding gently in the mouth and 
suggesting the essence of pleasure. It looks gorgeous, with its 
light-refracting, pellucid quality, and its unique flavour adds a fragrant, 
intense sweetness to all kinds of dishes, savoury, sweet and even in between.

The thing I love about honey is that it isn't merely sweet. Let it dissolve on 
your tongue, and it will reveal a spectrum of sweet aromatics: nutty, 
toffee-ish, floral, woody. And that taste will vary from batch to batch, month 
to month, place to place, depending on what's in bloom, the weather, where and 
what those bees have been busy consuming. It's a food that truly expresses its 
terroir.

This is true of any honey, but it's especially so of unblended honey that 
doesn't carry one of the big commercial labels. I like to buy local Devon or 
Dorset honey, ideally with the beekeeper's name on it; and, for a change, 
varietal honeys that owe their character to the diet of the bees: lavender, 
pine, orange blossom, heather. Honeys sourced from hives where such individual 
and fragrant plants are the dominant food source are often called "monofloral".

Small-scale beekeepers usually process their honey only minimally, separating 
it from the comb by spinning in a drum, then filtering through a sieve or 
muslin (or, occasionally I believe, a pair of tights) to remove any unwanted 
debris. That's pretty much it. This is known as "raw" honey. Big-brand honeys, 
however, may well have been heated so that they'll be able to pass through very 
fine filters, which can affect flavour, and many are blends, to ensure greater 
consistency of flavour. They are sourced from all over the globe (you may well 
have honey from several countries in one jar), because we eat far more honey in 
the UK than we produce. For this reason alone, I wouldn't dismiss mass-produced 
honey out of hand – I've never had a honey that didn't taste good – but a 
blended, super-filtered one is unlikely to match the charm of the local or 
specific.

The texture of honey depends on the balance of sugars in it: the more fructose 
it contains, the runnier it will be; the more glucose, the thicker and more 
crystalline. While a free-flowing honey is easiest to use in cooking, gentle 
heating brings set honey to pourability soon enough.

Aside from my breakfast toast and porridge, I use honey most often in 
dressings for salads. Do not fear its sweetness: used judiciously, it's a 
fantastic counterpoint to salty, bitter or nutty ingredients. Occasionally, 
I'll add some to roast root veg, along with mustard and herbs, but take care 
when exposing raw honey to the heat of an oven: it burns easily, so combine 
with oils and liquids such as orange juice to prevent blackening.

That said, honey is a wonderful ingredient in baking, where its hygroscopic 
(water-attracting) nature produces nicely moist results. Bear in mind that it 
contains a fair bit of water to start with, which can affect the consistency of 
a batter. It's also sweeter than sugar, so can usually be added in smaller 
quantities, though in cakes I get the best results using both. And sometimes I 
just trickle honey over the top of a still-warm cake, leaving it to permeate 
the sponge with unbridled loveliness.

Kipper, roasted carrot, orange and chicory salad with honey 

Honey is a very good partner to intense, salty ingredients such as blue cheese 
and ham; smoked fish is another great match. Serves four.

About 400g carrots
3 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil, plus extra to serve
2-3 bay leaves, torn
2 cloves garlic, squashed
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 small knob butter
2-3 kipper fillets (about 200g)
2 oranges
2 heads chicory, separated into leaves 
Runny honey
1 large sprig thyme, leaves picked

Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Peel the carrots and slice them about 
5mm thick on the diagonal. Put them in a roasting tin, and mix with two 
tablespoons of oil, the bay leaves, garlic and plenty of salt and pepper. Cover 
loosely with foil, roast for 30 minutes, then remove the foil and cook for 
another 30 minutes, until tender and lightly caramelised.

Meanwhile, heat the butter and a tablespoon of oil in a frying pan over a 
medium heat. Add the kipper fillets and cook for two to three minutes on each 
side, until just done, and set aside to cool.

Meanwhile, segment the oranges. Cut a slice off the base and top of each, and 
stand on a board. With a small, sharp knife, cut down through the peel and 
pith, slicing it away completely, in sections. Working over a bowl to catch the 
segments and any juice, cut out the orange segments from between the membranes.

Leave the carrots to cool for 10 minutes, then add the chicory to the pan, 
trickle over two or three tablespoons of orange juice and toss.

Arrange the warm carrots and chicory on four plates. Strain off any remaining 
juice from the orange segments and add the fruit to the salad. With your 
fingers, pull the kipper flesh off its skin and break into chunks, removing any 
obvious bones as you go, and strew over the veg. Trickle a teaspoon of honey 
over each plate, scatter over the thyme and some more pepper, and serve.

Chicken and pearled spelt with preserved lemon, honey and pistachios

This hearty, grainy salad is given a lovely, aromatic lift by the honey, 
salty-sour preserved lemons and a pinch of spice. Serves four.

200g pearled spelt (or pearl barley)
2 tbsp rapeseed or olive oil
1 onion, peeled and finely chopped
1 garlic clove, peeled and chopped
2 tbsp honey
½ tsp ground allspice
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
250-300g cold, cooked chicken, cut into small pieces
75g shelled pistachios
2 tbsp finely chopped preserved lemon rind
2-3 tbsp chopped parsley 
Lemon juice 

Rinse the spelt under cold running water, then put it in a saucepan, cover 
with plenty of cold water and bring to a simmer. Cook for 20 minutes, until 
tender (pearl barley will take up to 40 minutes).

Meanwhile, heat the oil in a frying pan over a medium-low heat and sweat the 
onion and garlic for 10-12 minutes, until soft. Take off the heat and stir in 
the honey and allspice.

Drain the spelt, stir in the onion mix, season and set aside to cool.

Toss the chicken, pistachios, preserved lemon rind, parsley and a squeeze of 
lemon juice into the spelt, taste, add more salt, pepper and lemon juice as 
needed, and serve.

Orange, honey and cardamom pannacotta 
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's orange, honey and cardamom panacotta: A great 
way to show off good honey. Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
Simple and elegant, pannacotta is the perfect way to show off the flavour of a 
good honey. Serves eight.

4 large oranges (or 6 small ones) 
200ml whole milk
500ml double cream
50g caster sugar
3 tbsp honey
10 cardamom pods, bashed or squashed
Gelatine leaves (enough to set 600ml of liquid)
300ml plain, wholemilk yoghurt

Finely grate the zest of one or two of the oranges into a saucepan. Add the 
milk, cream, sugar, honey and cardamom, and bring to a simmer, stirring to 
dissolve the sugar and honey. Remove from the heat.

Meanwhile, follow the instructions on the pack of gelatine (brands vary) to 
calculate how many leaves you need to set 600ml liquid (there's more than that 
in this recipe, but the yoghurt and cream make it quite thick to start with). 
Put the requisite number of gelatine leaves in a bowl of cold water for about 
10 minutes, to soften, then squeeze out the excess water, add the gelatine to 
the hot, infused cream and stir to dissolve. Leave to cool to room temperature, 
then stir in the yoghurt and strain through a fine sieve into a jug.

Pour the pannacotta mix into eight dariole moulds or small cups, and put them 
in the fridge for at least four hours, to set. Meanwhile, segment the oranges, 
as described in the recipe for the kipper salad above.

To serve, dip the moulds very briefly in warm water to loosen, then carefully 
turn out the pannacotta on to plates and serve with the orange segments and 
their juices.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 