
The very notion of American football at the home of England’s Rugby Football 
Union would have sounded implausible not so long ago but, after a decade of 
regular-season NFL games at Wembley, the sight of theLos Angeles Rams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/los-angeles-rams> and New York Giants duking 
it out at Twickenham seemed less like a revolutionary act than a natural 
evolutionary step.

The NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> has been eager to explore 
alternative venues for its International Series games and it should surprise no 
one that Billy Williams’ Cabbage Patch rose to the challenge. That old nickname 
endures but Twickenham today is a modern sporting venue that has hosted games 
in three Rugby World Cups.

Whether it makes a better stage for the NFL than Wembley will be a subject for 
debate among fans. Certainly Twickenham’s transport links are worse and the 
suggestion that those could be compensated by an expanded pre‑game Tailgate 
party in the West car park was undermined by painfully long queues to get into 
the sold-out game.

The sense remains that Tottenham Hotspur’s new stadium, with its NFL‑specific 
modifications, will become the league’s eventual venue of choice. That ground 
is not scheduled to open until 2018, however, and the NFL is committed to 
hosting at least another two games at Twickenham before then.

One must hope they can all be as closely fought as this one – if ideally of a 
higher quality; it ended with the Giants cornerback Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie 
intercepting the Rams quarterback Case Keenum in the end zone to seal a 17-10 
win.

American football shares a common heritage with rugby, having evolved from 
versions of the sport exported to the United States in the 19th century, and at 
the outset it appeared as though these surroundings had inspired both sets of 
players to try out the local code. NFL rules do not require a player to release 
the ball once tackled but the Giants’ tight end Larry Donnell did so all the 
same on the very first reception of the game. His fumble was recovered by the 
Rams’ cornerback EJ Gaines at the New York 35-yard line. Los Angeles would take 
the lead on a 10-yard touchdown pass from Keenum soon afterwards but not before 
the same wide receiver had also put the ball on the floor. Fortunately for him 
his fumble bobbled out of bounds before the Giants could recover.

If the Rams had started fast, then the head coach, Jeff Fisher, was hardly 
about to get carried away. He had brought his team to London once before, in 
2012, when they opened the scoring against the New England Patriots before 
getting blown out 45-7.

Back then the Rams were still based in St Louis. Their move to California made 
a trip like this even more complicated than before. The combination of an 
eight-hour time difference, together with a UK-friendly early kick-off time, 
presented an extreme test for players’ body clocks. It was 6.30am in LA when 
this game began.

Fisher had flown his team out directly from last week’s road game in Detroit – 
already three time zones closer to London – in an attempt to temper the 
ill‑effects. Early on that decision looked to be paying dividends. A swarming 
Rams defense forced New York into a quick punt and the Rams extended their lead 
with a 36-yard field goal.

By the end of the first quarter LA had a 10-0 lead and possession of the ball 
on the New York 44-yard line. But that was where their momentum stalled.

The Giants kicker Robbie Gould – signed and flown over from the States at 
short notice this week after the team’s incumbent starter, Josh Brown, was 
placed underinvestigation for alleged spousal abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/21/josh-brown-exempt-list-nfl-new-york-giants>
 – converted a short field goal to put his team on the board. On the second 
play of the ensuing Rams’ drive the Giants safety, Landon Collins, picked off a 
Keenum pass and returned it 44 yards for a touchdown to tie up the scores.

The afternoon would get worse for the Rams quarterback. After a scoreless 
third quarter he threw a further three interceptions in the fourth. The first – 
again snared by Collins – set the Giants up with a short field which they 
eventually converted into a one-yard Rashad Jennings touchdown run. The next 
came in the New York end zone, on a poorly thrown deep ball.

Keenum had failed to connect with an open Brian Quick on the previous play and 
recorded several more errant throws over the course of the game – including a 
bad overthrow of Kenny Britt as the receiver ran clear behind the Giants’ 
defense early in the second half. The pressure on Fisher to replace him with 
this year’s No1 overall draft pick, Jared Goff, after the team’s bye week will 
be significant.

Keenum had failed to connect with an open Brian Quick on the previous play and 
recorded several more errant throws over the course of the game, including a 
bad overthrow of Kenny Britt as the receiver ran clear behind the Giants’ 
defense early in the second half.

The pressure on Fisher to replace him with this year’s No1 overall draft pick, 
Jared Goff, after the team’s forthcoming bye week will be significant but the 
head coach struck a defiant note. “We’re staying with Case,” he said. “I’ll 
make changes at receiver before I make a change at QB.”

The Giants, whose record before kick-off was identical to the Rams’, leave 
Twickenham with an altogether more upbeat outlook. For them, just like the NFL 
officials who first proposed staging games at Twickenham, this was a productive 
business trip.
 