
Gillian Slovo <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gillian-slovo> is a South 
African-born novelist and playwright. She is the daughter of leading 
anti-apartheid activists, Ruth First, who was assassinated by the South African 
secret services in 1982, and Joe Slovo, leader of the South African communist 
party and a key figure in the ANC. Her latest novel,Ten Days, is a political 
thriller set against the backdrop of riots in London.

You once said you prefer to write about “countries with slightly more drama 
and slightly more emotion than England can ever supply”. But your latest novel 
is set in England. What’s changed?
I suppose 10 years ago I couldn’t access a way of writing readable fiction 
that was also about politics in England. Perhaps I’ve now been in England long 
enough, which is most of my life, to work out how to do that. And then I think 
the2011 riots <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-riots> sparked something 
in me, some way of writing about power and how big politics impacts on ordinary 
people.

What was your initial response to the riots?
I think, like very many people, complete astonishment. I was actually in 
Scotland when it happened and watched it on TV like most people. The question 
in my mind was “What on earth is going on?” The fact that it spread throughout 
England was just astonishing. That’s why when Nick Kent of the Tricycle came to 
me suggestinga verbatim on the riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/23/the-riots-tricycle-review> I 
absolutely leapt at it. For me it was a way of finding out what was going on.

Burn Britain Burn: Gillian Slovo's The Riots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/22/gillian-slovo-the-riots-play> 
You’ve also written a verbatim on young people going to join Isis. Where did 
you start?
The play is going to be on at the National in April 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/another-world-losing-our-children-to-islamic-state>
. The starting off point was: why are our kids from Europe attracted to this 
murderous organisation, which represents some of the worst ideas about women 
and homosexuals and kills people who are not like them? Why is it that kids 
from our societies are attracted to this? We started before Paris had happened, 
but even then it was very hard to find anyone in England who would talk to us. 
So we went to Belgium to Molenbeek, the place the killers in Paris came from, 
and we talked to a group of the most wonderful mothers whose kids had gone to 
Isis.

Did you come to any conclusions?
In Belgium it is very clear racism has something to do with it, but it’s not 
as clearcut in England. In general it’s young people who do stupid things and 
don’t think. They just go over there and get trapped. But some of this I think 
is about young people not having enough meaning in their lives. You could say 
the same about the people who rioted in 2011. Not enough to lose or stop 
yourself going crazy in the street. Some people are going for an adventure. 
Some are going for a video game. Some are very damaged. And some are going to 
build a better life because they haven’t got enough meaning here.

Is there an ideological appeal of power, like the lure of fascism in the 1930s?
I actually think it’s ideologically attractive because it is completely 
anti-capitalist. If you look at this society you can see what capitalism 
delivers to people who have money. But if you don’t happen to be one of those 
people, you also see what it doesn’t deliver to you. And that’s exactly what 
these jihadis are saying: your system is messed up and it’s unfair. It isn’t 
one of the principles of Islam, which is about people being equal.

It’s ironic then that millions of people are busily heading towards western 
capitalism.
The Syrians are actually fleeing violence. The reality of capitalism is not 
everyone gets what it promises, like the people in Sangatte. One of the 
strongest pieces of Isis propaganda I’ve heard is the attack on the way women 
are “forced” to dress in the west. Scantily clad women. They are talking about 
something real in our society. In the sense that what an ideal woman’s body 
should be in our society stresses out an enormous number of young women, and 
increasingly the majority of women, and Isis propaganda is targeted at that. 
I’m not defending Isis in any way whatsoever, but some of the things they say 
make a kind of sense to you if you are unhappy or vulnerable.

You arrived in England as a 12-year-old in 1964. What was your first 
impression of London?
Grey. I actually came on my 12th birthday. That trip from Heathrow into London 
is burned on my memory. It was March and it was snowing, but the snow I 
imagined in South Africa came from Dickens and Jane Austen and was beautifully 
white and gorgeous, not the dirty grey of London when it’s snowed a bit and 
melted. I was a white South African kid who came from a lot of stress, given 
that my father had disappeared and we didn’t know where he was, and my mother 
had been in prison. It was a relief to be in England but I had never taken a 
bus on my own. To learn to find my own way was quite a difficult thing to do. I 
went back to Lyme Street when they wereputting up the plaque 
<http://openplaques.org/plaques/497> [in 2003, to mark her parents’ home]. My 
first thought – how could five of us have lived in such a small house? A bit 
like a prison cell, but at the time I don’t remember thinking that.

What do you think about South Africa now, a quarter of a century on from 
liberation?
I’m disappointed and depressed, but I’m optimistic because it always amazes me 
how magnificent most people in South Africa can be. That’s the miracle ofSouth 
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>. That’s how that 
transition was made possible, by people trying to lead decent lives. My father 
said: “You think it’s been difficult to make the change – just see what it’s 
going to be like to rule this country given its history.” He was right. [Jacob] 
Zuma’s presidency is very depressing, with increasing tales of corruption. 
School books being sold off. It fills me with a lot of sadness because in a way 
this is my family and it’s not doing well.

Who are your literary heroes?
My literary hero of all time is probably Tolstoy but I like literary fiction 
that has good narrative drive. I couldn’t watch the TV adaptation ofWar and 
Peace after the first episode. I think if you really like a book it’s very hard 
to watch any adaptation. It wasn’tWar and Peace to me.

What do you do to relax?
One of the things I do is I listen to music. I walk. I like walking. I feel 
most relaxed when walking in that English countryside that I’ve learned to 
love. It’s taken me a very long time to appreciate English light. Probably 
about 10 or 15 years ago I was walking on Hampstead Heath and I looked at the 
sky, a winter day with watery sun, and I thought, Oh my God it’s beautiful. 
Then I realised I’d finally adjusted to English weather.

Ten Days is published by Canongate on 3 March (£14.99). Click here to preorder 
a copy for £11.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377451/>
 