
Last week, the world was as it should have been. Gary Barlow was number one, 
the summer's foreign novelty hit, Macarena, was panting just behind and the 
charts were serenely progressing toward autumn. On Sunday, though, the balance 
was disturbed when a record called Wannabe by five unknown 20-year-olds, the 
Spice Girls, elbowed Barlow aside at the top of the chart. There's nothing like 
that kind of sudden rise to make pop fans feel out of touch - how could these 
Spice Girls have done this without our knowing? - but this time it's not our 
fault. Before about 10 days ago, there was nothing to know.

Although Spice's puppyish lineup have been together since 1993, and with 
Virgin Records for the last year, they've never played live or undergone the 
other usual new-band initiations. They simply emerged, Wonderbraed and 
oven-ready, and became number one. The apparent lack of effort has infuriated 
many, including Chris Evans, who compared the bouncy little Wannabe to 
yester-classics by Big Fun. Speaking of whom ...

The Girls will undoubtedly be insulted by this, but they have more in common 
with Big Fun - a faceless boy-trio who had some feeble hitlets around 1989 - 
than they think. Both groups have a showbiz tang to them rather than the 
up-from-the-streets feel that is still crucial if a band is to be taken 
seriously.

One member, Emma Bunton, went to stage school, and the others had acted, 
danced and auditioned for West End musicals. They met on the auditions circuit, 
where, they now make a point of explaining, 'We were always the rejects.' Their 
stagey backgrounds are something they're keen to de-emphasise. 'We've just 
landed on the planet, five girlies with something to say,' says Geri Halliwell 
(who is 'only for the headstrong', it says on the Wannabe sleeve), phoning from 
Japan, where the single is making the Spice chicks the latest western stars.

They're even more anxious to deny a rumour that the group was conceived by two 
male managers, who supposedly recruited the girls through an ad in the Stage, 
then lodged them in Berkshire while they worked on their act. Rather, they 
don't so much deny it as evade the question. They admit to having shared the 
house, but claim it was to save themselves the commute from their homes in far 
flung Liverpool, Leeds and London.

'We've had so many people try to say they managed us, but we've all been in 
the music industry for years and we've done it ourselves. We do everything 
ourselves we're completely into girl power, and there's nothing us lot can't 
handle,' says Mel Brown, 'wild spirit' and only black Girl. Highly likeable, 
she has a big Northern voice that probably comes into its own in pubs. And 
Spice like their pubs - drinking, dancing and nightclubbing are their favourite 
female-bonding activities.

'We take care of the business side, too,' adds Emma (a democratic bunch, they 
insist on passing the phone around, though Geri, with her perception of the 
Spice Girls as 'a mission, a projection of female power', shows clear leaderene 
potential).

'We wanna know what's going on. Vicky checks the accounts, we all have a say 
in how we do our videos . . . it would be easy to say to our manager (Simon 
Fuller, who also handles Annie Lennox), 'You do it all,' but we don't. People 
have these preconceptions that we're manufactured, but we're not.'

Well, so what if they are? ('They definitely met through an ad,' someone at 
Virgin confirms. 'I don't know why they're not being upfront about it.') Plenty 
of bands have been, from the Monkees to Take That. You could even argue that 
the Beatles and the Stones wouldn't have got where they did without a little 
discreet help from Carnaby Street stylists.

But that doesn't cut much ice at Virgin, where Spice are the odd ones out on a 
roster that includes the unimpeachably cool Massive Attack and Iggy Pop. 'The 
ad was a catalyst for them meeting, but they didn't have a very long or 
fruitful liaison (with the original managers),' says deputy MD Ashley Newton, 
who, like everyone around Spice, is playing down their origins. 'When we saw 
them singing in our office, we realised they weren't some pieced-together 
vision by some male svengali. They have their own agenda.'

Whatever the story, the Girls broke away from their first managers after a 
year and shopped for a replacement. A showcase gig in November 1994 resulted in 
a dozen offers, of which Fuller's was accepted because 'so many others were 
saying 'Dress like this, sing that song', and he was cool and understood we 
wanted a say in our careers,' says Mel.

When Fuller unveiled them to record companies six months later, they were 
overwhelmed with offers. Considering the slightness of Wannabe, which fuses 
cute hip pop and a vaguely feminist lyric ('If you wanna be my lover, you gotta 
get with my friends'), that may seem surprising, but in the Spice Girls Newton 
saw the future.

'We could tell a movement away from male-dominated pop was coming, and that's 
true right across the board, from indie and dance to pop. There's a gender 
shift happening, and they're exactly right for now.'

Interestingly, Spice's success comes at the expense of Gary Barlow, himself a 
monument to the power of manufactured pop. Take That's former singer is a rare 
exception, however. The list of other battery-farmed groups makes unedifying 
reading. Apart from the Monkees (who were created for a sixties TV series and 
ridiculed at the time, but who've now acquired great retro-hipness) and Take 
That, no one has made a lasting musical contribution. Big Fun, New Kids on the 
Block, Worlds Apart - where are you now?

Whether the current biggest manufactured group, Boyzone, who were invented 
through an ad in an Irish paper, will survive when their young fans grow up 
remains to be seen. They shouldn't count on it. A recent documentary on the 
creation of the boy band Upside Down dispelled the notion, if anyone was 
romantic enough to have one, that music is the top priority for such groups. It 
actually fits in somewhere between dance routines and merchandising deals, and 
tends to be written by someone other than the act. In the notorious case of 
German disco bunnies Milli Vanilli, it turned out to be sung by someone other 
than the act, too, spurring disgruntled American fans to launch a law suit.

So what, one might argue. A great record is a great record, whether by the New 
Kids or the achingly authentic Ocean Colour Scene. In fact, the New Kids were 
frequently the more listenable. But there is something about 
artificially-created bands that chills the blood. When the fleetingly-popular 
Take That clones, Worlds Apart, were assembled via ads in modelling agencies, 
managers Gary Wilson and Simon Cowell admitted they were in it for the money. 
No nonsense about wanting to traverse rock's lost highway, just money.

The Spice Girls are easier to like - they really do seem to be in it 'for girl 
power' and as an example of what 'strong female women' (as opposed, presumably, 
to male ones) can accomplish. If they fulfil their promise, we can probably 
forget their beginnings.

· Spice Girls' next single, Say You'll Be There, is released on September 30.

Plastic bands - from Monkees to flunkies

The Monkees
 Formed in 1965 by Bob Rafelson and Bert Schneider, who ran an ad for four 
boys aged between 17-21. They picked Davy Jones, Mickey Dolenz, Mike Nesmith 
and Peter Tork. Successful TV show followed.

Take That
 The ultimate boy band, adored by teeny-boppers and adults alike. Reported to 
be worth pounds 12.5 million, they recently split to follow solo careers.

Boyzone
 One thousand Dubliners phoned Louis Walsh after he joked he wanted to create 
'the Irish Take That'. String of hits followed.

Upside Down
 Ad appeared in national papers last year to find four new stars. Nearly 7,500 
hopefuls applied. Nine months of styling, singing and dancing lessons 
culminated in a single, Change Your Mind.

· This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 Years 
of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 