
No one is relishing the prospect of tomorrow afternoon's EDF Energy Cup final 
more than Gareth Delve. Gloucester's No8 was born in Cardiff, brought up in 
Rumney and used to attend games at the Arms Park as a kid with his father, 
Steve, a former Mr Wales bodybuilder who appeared in Mr Universe contests. He 
will be wearing cherry and white today but rarely can an English club captain 
have walked out for a big game at Twickenham with such divided Anglo-Welsh 
loyalties.

It will count for nothing once the whistle blows because Delve, and Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby>, can sniff redemption. The 
club's only tangible success in six years has been the European Challenge Cup 
in 2006, and this is a chance to make up for years of unfulfilled hard labour. 
"There's a desperation to win a cup," he admits softly. "You don't even want to 
consider the emotion of losing because it's so draining."

According to his head coach, Dean Ryan, today's watching Lions coaches, Ian 
McGeechan and Shaun Edwards, could do worse on Tuesday than name the 
26-year-oldin the squad to tour South Africa. "He's missed the international 
window but if there is a joker to be picked I'd like to think he's pushing his 
name forward," says Ryan. Had it not been for injuries, Delve would already be 
"a household name" according to theCardiff Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> coach, Dai Young. When Andy 
Powell rumbles off the bench, the

Three cruciate ligament reconstructions, two shoulder operations and two 
separated AC joints may have held back the schoolboy talent since he left 
Colston's in Bristol to play professionally for Bath but hardship has been the 
making of him. "In many ways it reveals your character. You either push on and 
try to come back a better player or you don't." In addition, he feels a real 
sense of unfinished business. During his first start for Wales in South Africa 
last June Delve was carried off on a stretcher with a shattered left knee and 
the spectre of never playing again at the highest level was a huge spur during 
his six-month rehabilitation. "I thought I need to be back here again, I can't 
finish on that note,'" he murmurs. "Those Tests out in South Africa reinforced 
to me the importance of strength of character. The likes of Bakkies Botha are 
aggressive people and when they step on the pitch their personality comes 
through. Sometimes you can get too bogged down with tactics rather than playing 
the way you are."

In Delve's case that means full-on. "The aggression builds up over the course 
of six or seven months on the sidelines. Rugby is a good release, you can get 
away with things you'd be arrested for otherwise." The boy who used to play 
with his dad's weights now weighs 18st and stands 6ft 3in and has equally 
strong views on the subject of training. Too often, he admits, he played 
injured and paid the price by missing out on two World Cups. "When I was 
younger my esteem and a lot of other things were linked to how well I was 
performing on the rugby field. It probably pushed me into playing when I 
shouldn't have."

He is keen that others do not see the gym as the only place in which to 
further their rugby education. "You do wonder if the academies have the right 
balance. Some of the guys will go in at 16 and all they'll do is lift weights. 
You need to be playing and getting better match understanding."

Gloucester will need all the power and passion Delve can muster as they 
prepare for three big games in eight days. Next week's vital league encounters 
with Worcester and Wasps cannot be allowed to obscure the most urgent priority. 
"We've got to go in thinking that this is the only thing that matters," 
cautions Delve. "If we don't it'll be like a house of cards, it'll all come 
falling down. In terms of my allegiance to Cardiff there is none this weekend. 
I'm all about Gloucester and I want to bring some silverware back."
 