
Lions boss Ian McGeechan was potentially the biggest loser of a miserable 
match asGloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> ended 
Ospreys' reign as EDF Energy Cup holders.

McGeechan might have winced after three of his possible South Africa-bound 
tourists this summer - Gavin Henson, Ian Gough and Mike Tindall - all failed to 
last the distance at Coventry's Ricoh Arena.

And a Lions fringe candidate, Gloucester wing James Simpson-Daniel, joined the 
trio in failing to reappear for the second period.

Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> ace Henson, playing at 
full-back instead of injured Wales colleague Lee Byrne, limped off nursing a 
lower leg problem, following Gloucester captain Tindall and Gough in making an 
early exit.

McGeechan's tour squad is due to be announced at Heathrow on April 21 and he 
can only hope for encouraging fitness bulletins from the Gloucester and Ospreys 
camps.

Ospreys' hopes of retaining Anglo-Welsh silverware were dashed by Gloucester 
fly-half Ryan Lamb, whose penalties after three and 43 minutes gave his team a 
critical edge before a 68th-minute drop-goal and third penalty sealed the deal. 
And, just to confirm Gloucester's dominance, wing Iain Balshaw ran in a late 
interception try from deep inside his own half.

However much the Ospreys huffed and puffed, they could not smash spirited 
Gloucester's defensive resistance. And, while they remain in contention for 
Heineken Cup and Magners League silverware this season, their EDF demise will 
frustrate them after failing to deliver on the big occasion.

Neither side produced memorable rugby as the semi-final suffered an acute 
hangover from last weekend's frenzied RBS 6 Nations finale.

Not even Ospreys wing and Ireland Grand Slam hero Tommy Bowe could lighten the 
gloom on a blustery, overcast afternoon in the west midlands, barely receiving 
a pass following his try-scoring glory at the Millennium Stadium last Saturday. 
Gloucester, though, now march on to Twickenham, where they will play either 
Cardiff Blues or Northampton in three weeks' time knowing victory guarantees 
Heineken Cup qualification next term.

The Ospreys, targeting a third successive Twickenham appearance, welcomed back 
several of their Wales players from Six Nations duty against Ireland. But there 
was a surprising element to Ospreys head coach Sean Holley's team selection, 
with Wales stars Mike Phillips and Alun-Wyn Jones - together with back-row 
gamebreaker Filo Tiatia - on bench duty.

Tindall at least made Gloucester's XV in a game that saw the starting line-ups 
parade a combined total of 27 internationals. But the opening quarter fell way 
short of expectations as both sides struggled to inject any pace into the 
contest.

Lamb, whose Gloucester future is under scrutiny following the recent signings 
of Carlos Spencer and Nicky Robinson, booted Gloucester into an early lead 
following obstruction by Henson on his opposite number Olly Morgan.

And, while the Ospreys looked more threatening with ball in hand, James Hook 
hardly helped their cause by missing two penalties that were well within his 
range. Errors abounded, yet the Ospreys looked most likely to score a try, with 
Gloucester pinned on the back foot as Hook looked to orchestrate his fellow 
backs.

But the Welsh side were fortunate to escape a sin-binning for their former New 
Zealand Test flanker Marty Holah, whose blatant trip on Gloucester scrum-half 
Rory Lawson was missed by referee Nigel Owens and his assistants.

Gloucester suffered a major injury blow 11 minutes before half-time when 
Tindall limped out of the action with what appeared to be a knee injury. He was 
replaced by Matthew Watkins and there was an immediate defensive role for the 
Wales international as the Ospreys continued to press.

Hook even sacrificed a kickable penalty for attacking position but an Ospreys 
handling blunder ruined the chance and Gloucester cleared their lines. And 
there was injury gloom for the Ospreys as half-time approached, with Henson and 
his Wales team-mate Gough both failing to last the distance as Gloucester led 
3-0.

Gloucester made an interval change, sending on Olly Barkley for wing 
Simpson-Daniel, and Lamb's second penalty after 43 minutes doubled the west 
country club's advantage. It gave Gloucester renewed optimism and Lamb's 
drop-goal 12 minutes from time left the Ospreys with a mountain to climb.

And, when he completed his penalty hat-trick in the 72nd minute, there was no 
way back for an Ospreys side that never remotely threatened to take off. 
Phillips' lazy pass then sounded the death knell for his team, with Balshaw 
intercepting and sprinting 70 metres to the line.
 