
It’s hard to miss the Good Hotel, floating on the water of the London 
Docklands. On a dark night, the words that form its name shimmer in white neon 
above the river. It stands out from the homogeneous corporate skyscrapers and 
offices lining the streets nearby.

It looks different and it is different. Unlike neighbouring Novotel and Ibis 
chain hotels, its profits don’t go to the company’s owners or shareholders, 
they go back into the business, which offers training and jobs to long-term 
unemployed people in the local community.

From the outside it looks like a giant, black shipping container, with green 
astroturf on the roof and small, square windows. But step inside and the design 
and atmosphere immediately reflect the community ethos. The ground floor is 
open plan: called the “living room”, it’s a bar, reception and library in one – 
a lounging area with communal tables that encourage groups to sit, eat and chat 
together. A sign on the wall reads: “Create beauty, do good.” The minimalist, 
slick industrial decor (lots of black and white and grey, with wooden tables 
dotted about) is tempered by snug, dimly lit corners, with sofas and 
comfy-looking cushions. “The idea is that local people or freelancers can just 
wander in, sit down, set up their laptops and work,” says marketing manager 
Marie. “It’s a real space for people to come together.”

The floating platform was transported by submersible barge over the North Sea, 
from Amsterdam, where founder Marten Dresen had launched the concept – 
originally for 12 months. It came to London (a short walk from Royal Victoria 
station on the DLR) in November and will stay for five years.

In the Netherlands, around 100 long-term unemployed received hospitality 
training. They were offered three-month contracts at the end (they could stay 
for longer if they needed to) or were helped to find work elsewhere. In London, 
working with the borough of Newham, the Good Hotel’s plan is to train 15 new 
people every three months.

We head upstairs to our cosy room, one of 148: it reminds me of a nautical 
cabin – compact, with a low ceiling. But rather than a small porthole we look 
out through an expansive window onto a frosty-looking Thames, where ducks and 
fearless (crazy?) swimmers brave the water. The room is small (there are two 
room sizes – 13 and 30 square metres), and the bathroom door doubles as a 
shower door, but it doesn’t feel cramped.

In the spirit of sharing, the restaurant menu is largely tapas and small plate 
based, courtesy of Spanish chef Miguel. We try a plate of sweet potato fries 
with okra, meat and vegetable balls, stuffed aubergine and a giant vegetarian 
protein burger in an impressive black bean bun. It’s all tasty and reasonably 
priced (the burger is £11), and they also offer a variety of sandwiches for 
around £8.

But it’s the atmosphere that makes this place special – it all feels very 
un-London, with a laid-back vibe. Afterwards we lounge on a sofa by the bar, 
before dragging ourselves to bed (from where the views over the water are 
great), where we sleep soundly.

Breakfast offers fluffy croissants and pastries, Greek yoghurt and porridge. 
Outside, London looks cold and misty. On my way home I find myself thinking how 
nice it is that community ventures like this exist in our increasingly 
corporate-looking capital.

• Accommodation was provided by Good Hotel (0759 630 1537, goodhotellondon.com 
<http://www.goodhotellondon.com/>, rooms from £80 a night, breakfast from 
£13.50)

Ask a local


Angela Dunn, owner Bow Creek cafe <https://www.facebook.com/bowcreekcafe/>
 Cable cars crossing the river Thames near the O2 venue. Photograph: Tony 
Watson/Alamy 
• Shop 
Royal Victoria has its charm, but there’s not a lot going on there. Greenwich 
isn’t too far away though, and it has a wonderfulindoor market 
<http://www.greenwichmarketlondon.com/>, selling everything from original 
artworks to antiques and food.

• Drink 
A really nice traditional pub with a fire is The Gun 
<http://www.thegundocklands.com/>. It’s not too far a walk from Royal Victoria 
and has views of the O2 arena.

• Eat 
In Royal Victoria there’s a lovely restaurant called Nakhon Thai 
<http://nakhonthai.co.uk/>. It’s on the water and in the summer you can watch 
people wakeboarding as you eat.The Grocer is a little Italian on City Island, 
with an espresso bar and grocery store.

• Do 
You can take the cable car from Royal Victoria dock to the 02 
<http://www.theo2.co.uk/>, where there’s a bowling alley, cinema, pubs, 
restaurants, sculpture and art installations. Weather permitting, you can do 
water sports, such as wakeboarding, in Royal Victoria dock, right next to the 
hotel. As for live music, we have acoustic musicians playing most evenings in 
our cafe.
 