
The owner of Scotland's largest oil refinery has warned he is not bluffing 
about threats to close the site permanently this week if 1,300 staff do not 
agree to pensions cuts.

Grangemouth, which provides 85% of Scotland's petrol, was shut down last 
Wednesday in an escalation of a rancorous industrial dispute between Ineos, the 
plant's owner, andUnite <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite>, Britain's 
largest trade union.

Jim Ratcliffe, the chairman of Ineos, said a decision on the site's future 
would be announced on Tuesday following a staff consultation.

"This is not a bluff. The clock is ticking, Grangemouth could have a future 
but that is absolutely in the hands of the workers," he said in an interview 
with the Sunday Times. "The situation is very serious but I want to emphasise 
that there is light at the end of the tunnel. Grangemouth can have a 
potentially exciting future."

Grangemouth has been shut since Wednesday after Unite called a two-day strike, 
which it later cancelled. On Sunday the union staged a protest at the plant on 
the Firth of Forth near Edinburgh.

At the rally, Unite's Scottish secretary, Pat Rafferty, urged Ineos to resume 
negotiations over changes to terms and conditions, which include the company's 
demand for an end to a final salary pension scheme.

Rafferty said: "It's the company that set this deadline so we're not quite 
sure what happens after that. We still believe there is time for it to be 
called off and to get back to negotiations, as has been called for.

"We're recommending to our members that they do not opt in and sign this 
offer, we want them to reject it and then get it back to us and we can 
negotiate with Ineos."

Despite the disagreement over pensions, the dispute is rooted in a row over 
the site's chief shop steward, Stephen Deans, who was implicated in allegations 
of ballot fixing for the Labour party candidate in the Falkirk constituency. 
The police and Labour have cleared him of wrongdoing but Ineos has angered 
Unite by continuing its own investigation into Deans.

Ineos said more than 250 workers had accepted the new terms and conditions by 
the end of Saturday, which it viewed as a positive development. The company 
sent out a letter on Thursday to all 1,350 workers at the site asking them to 
indicate their support or rejection of the company's plan by 6pm on Tuesday.

Calum MacLean, head of the Grangemouth site, said: "Whilst it's early days, 
the initial response to the survival plan has been pleasing. We weren't 
expecting many returns before Monday, so we are taking this as a positive 
development."

Ineos also plans to build a £300m gas import terminal at Grangemouth.

Workers who accept the company's pension proposals will receive a transitional 
payment of up to £15,000 which the company said they can use as they wish, plus 
an enhanced employer contribution to a new money-purchase pension scheme. Ineos 
claims that Grangemouth is losing £150m a year, with the shutdown costing the 
company at least £20m.

Ratcliffe said: "If it stays shut, Grangemouth runs out of money quite quickly 
on that basis. Ineos won't continue funding it beyond a reasonable amount of 
time and certainly has no obligation to."

The Scottish first minister, Alex Salmond, has urged Ineos to "fire up the 
plant and do it now".

Speaking on the BBC's Sunday Politics Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> programme, he added that Unite should 
accede to the company's demand for a no-strike pledge.

He said: "I think Unite should give a no strike – without strings – guarantee. 
Once that is done Ineos should fire up the plant and then the various 
discussions, negotiations, consultations on terms and conditions, should take 
place against the background of a working plant, not a plant that is lying 
cold."
 