
Having sat back and let Maxime Machenaud run the show in the semi against 
Leicester, what wouldDan Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dan-carter> 
do in the final? The great New Zealander has hardly ever been intimidated by 
the grand occasion – his performance last October in the World Cup big one was 
sublime – and this was a chance to shine, perhaps for the last time. It was too 
alluring to do anything but bring out the best in him again, wasn’t it?

There was by way of an alternative scenario a recent history with his knee and 
rumours that he had a niggle in a hamstring, too. Nor did he did look too happy 
on one of his ankles. Machenaud started taking the kicks and Johan Goosen had 
the second go. Dan was nowhere to be seen, perhaps because in the 13th minute 
he clashed heads with Brad Barritt. From top to toe, Carter was struggling.

Owen Farrell kicks Saracens to European glory after Racing 92 lose Carter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/14/saracens-racing-92-european-rugby-champions-cup-final-match-report>
Besides his personal welfare, there was clearly a hiccup in the strategy when 
Machenaud exited, shaking his head carefully. He failed the concussion 
assessment and eight minutes after banging his head, Carter had Mike Phillips 
as his partner. The Welshman is never uninteresting but he is from a different 
mould than the thoughtful and low-slung Frenchman.

Just to make Carter’s day thoroughly miserable, it began to rain. Not the cold 
rain of winter over the Canterbury plain but a summer downpour in Lyon, with 
the huge drops of a French monsoon. It didn’t last long but even Carter spilled 
the ball. When he gave way to Rémi Talès two minutes into the second half, it 
was no surprise. This was to be no grand adieu; just the slightly strained, 
rueful smile of a veteran struggling to overcome odds stacked against him.

Could Owen Farrell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/owen-farrell> fill the 
role of match-winner? He had the advantage of playing behind a pack that was 
tightknit and ferocious, their fire complemented by the intelligence and 
coolness of Richard Wigglesworth at scrum-half. Maro Itoje and Will Fraser 
stepped out of the ensemble to perform individual acts of theft at the 
breakdown and Billy Vunipola put in any number of tackles that reduced the 
chances of this game ever breaking out into something more flowing. The rain 
was the only thing that would flow in Lyon.

In these conditions Farrell played his part almost to perfection. He kicked 
high for Chris Ashton and Chris Wyles to chase, he prodded little kicks behind 
the Racing defenders for Brad Barritt and Duncan Taylor to pursue. He even hit 
the post he was aiming for, thinking a rebound generally favoured the attacking 
side. On this occasion the deflection probably worked against Ashton, but it 
was still a probe of wonderful deftness.

What wasn’t so skilful was the old trademark tackle on Chris Masoe, the day’s 
one true star on the Racing team, a venerable New Zealander who ran and 
wrestled to the very last drop in his 36-year-old body. Nigel Owens reviewed 
the tackle and awarded a penalty against Farrell. In a season when he has 
received harsher sanctions for his technique, it was a let-off.

Farrell obviously will concede to no view that he should go lower into the 
tackle. His job is to stand tall and prevent the pass out of the tackle. It is 
a courageous view and to go high on Masoe spoke volumes about devotion to the 
cause. In more clinical debriefings the question may be asked again about the 
pros and cons of the Farrell tackling style, but it costSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> nothing on this day.

Far from it, because this day became his day. Farrell’s day, when he accounted 
for every point on his team’s side of the board. He kicked his penalties from 
first to seventh, calmly, without fuss.

It was not exactly the seal of perfection on a game of beauty. Saracens went 
about their work in almost retro style, fighting for each other and putting the 
needs of the hour way before any expression of flamboyance. It tends to be the 
way when a side has been to a final and lost – that they tighten their vision 
and increase the tightness of their squeeze on opponents who have never been in 
this position before. This European final was all new toRacing 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/racing-metro-92>.

To have a chance they needed the player who had been through all this before 
to steer them through. They needed Carter at his best. Or for they needed the 
double act of Carter and Machenaud to ask questions of Saracens.

There were no questions other than the courage and indomitability of Masoe. 
Saracens lapped that up, drawing the lone wolf into their trap. It was the 
age-old way – nothing fancy dreamt up for the big day; rather a return to old 
values. Playing in the rain can be brilliant when you all know what you’re 
doing.

Saracens are the first English winners for nearly a decade. Their success 
matches the grand slam of the England team in the Six Nations. England have 
returned to form across the board. With a sparkle during the winter and with 
icy resolution on a summer’s day.

Both styles confirm that a revolution is firmly under way. It comes a little 
later than anticipated – 13 years after England won the World Cup, but it is 
real and it is comprehensive. Saracens of England are on top of the continent, 
and just for once Carter could only sit and watch.
 