
With England <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> full-backs 
either suffering a dive in form, picking up injuries or wearing any number 
other than the No15 Martin Johnson would like to put on their backs, a 
discarded old boy chose the weekend when the national team met up to prepare 
for the autumn internationals to put in one of those performances that used to 
get selectorial tongues talking.

At 29 Iain Balshaw is so far off the England radar that even his own words on 
a recall sound empty, but in a couple of minutes on Saturday he helped paper 
over more of the cracks created by those more central to Johnson's thinking. He 
also dugGloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> out of a 
hole against the have-nots of Welsh rugby, inching his side closer to some 
silverware. Gloucester's head coach, Dean Ryan, says he is taking the EDF 
seriously this year, but after 65 minutes his side looked second best to a 
Newport Gwent Dragons XV that had needed a serious makeover after getting 
within four points of thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> leaders Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> the previous weekend.

Injuries and exhaustion forced the Dragons head coach, Paul Turner, to make 
nine changes, but clever kicking from the stand-in fly-half Shaun Connor and 
the replacement centre, Jason Tovey, hadGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> three points adrift. The 
wing Richard Fussell was causing palpitations every time he touched the ball, 
and the flanker Danny Lydiate was on Connor's wavelength whenever Gloucester's 
midfield needed softening up.

After the home side's porous display against Cardiff, Turner saw Olly Barkley 
and Mike Tindall as weak links - and Fussell, thanks to breaks by Rhodri 
Gomer-Davies and Lydiate after yet another link with Connor, had again proved 
the former Gloucester coach's tactical nous. "We had been targeting them all 
week and as the tries showed, it worked," said Turner.

So well that Gloucester were on the ropes and Ryan was on the warpath when 
Balshaw collected a loose kick to set off on one of those runs which used to be 
two a penny back in 2000 and 2001, but were sadly lacking when Brian Ashton 
turned to him last season.

Here, however, the full-back outpaced half a dozen Welsh chasers to make 
Lesley Vainikolo's second try a formality. Three minutes later Balshaw timed 
his entry into the Gloucester line perfectly to score one of his own, his sixth 
in five matches and third in a week. "He looked dynamic," said Ryan, pointing 
out that in an "unstructured" - he could have said "scruffy" - game there is no 
better balanced runner.

"Balsh was harshly done by last season. In the game against Wales he played 
really well, but then there was a mistake and suddenly everyone heaps history 
on him. He's a decisive player, but being a decisive player he sometimes gets 
decisions wrong."

Gloucester Balshaw; Foster, Tindall (capt), Barkley, Vainikolo; Walker (Adams, 
58), R Lawson (Lewis, 28); Dickinson (Satala, 67), S Lawson (Titterrell, 53), 
Nieto (Forster, h-t), Eustace, Bortolami, Buxton, Hazell, Strokosch.

Tries Vainikolo 2, S Lawson, Balshaw. Con Barkley. Pen Barkley.Sin-bin Satala, 
71.

Newport Gwent Dragons Dollman; Selley, Gomer-Davies (Tovey, 22), Smith (capt), 
Fussell; Connor, Evans; Black (Maule, 73), S Jones (Willis, 60),Thomas, A 
Jones, Hall, Lydiate, Parks (Ringer, 52), Webb (Bearman, 58).

Tries Fussell, Webb, Tovey. Con Connor. Pen Connor. 

Sin-bin Black, 61.

Referee N Owens (Wales). Attendance 8,057..
 