
I could never get overexcited about a marrow. Unless it was diced and made 
into a chutney with apples and lashings of ginger. Or stuffed with chorizo, 
breadcrumbs and pine nuts. Or scooped out, filled with sugar and the resulting 
juice fermented into rum. OK, maybe I could get excited about a marrow, but I 
rarely get the chance, because I am a fiend for courgettes – baby marrows – 
which I cut from my plants as soon as they're thumb-thick.

The very first harvest will be even more diminutive, in fact. I pick them when 
they're barely there: fingerling courgettes with their big, blowsy flowers 
attached (or, in the case of male flowers, with no actual courgette there at 
all). That's because a deep-fried courgette flower is one of my favourite 
things, though it's not something you're likely to be able to enjoy unless you 
grow your own (or shell out in a fancy Italian restaurant). If you do come by 
some of these lovely blooms, fill them carefully with a toothsome stuffing – 
herby, garlicky ricotta is good – or leave them as they are. Dip them in a 
simple batter (flour, salt, pepper, a dash of olive oil, whisked with enough 
water or beer to get a thick paint consistency), deep-fry in sunflower oil for 
a minute or two until crisp and golden brown, sprinkle with sea salt and devour 
with a glass of chilled rosé. They'll be off the scale.

As for the little courgette-ettes that follow the flowers, these are so tender 
I often eat them raw, thinly sliced and dressed with olive oil and lemon juice, 
and sprinkled with a few herbs such as basil, thyme or parsley.

But once the crop gets going, or if you're buying courgettes, you'll need 
recipes that make the most of more conventionally sized examples – the kind 
that slice so nicely into 10p piece-size discs (or slightly bigger). Look for 
the smallest, hardest, glossiest specimens you can find: once the colour dulls 
and the ends are a bit squishy, they are starting to lose their charm.

Courgettes are part of the cucurbit family, and over the next few weeks I'll 
be looking at their brethren, cucumbers and melons. One of the defining 
characteristics of this group is their moisture-packed flesh. When you cook 
courgettes, a lot of that juice is released and the way you cook them makes all 
the difference between a watery plateful and a deliciously tender one.

I long ago devised a basic method for processing large quantities of 
courgettes, and it's the starting point for a host of recipes. I cook them 
slowly to a tender mush. That may not sound appetising, but bear with me. A 
fairly long, gentle cook drives off the moisture, concentrating the flavour and 
tenderising and ever so slightly caramelising the veg.

Heat two or three tablespoons of olive oil in a large saucepan, add a clove or 
two of finely chopped garlic, a kilo of thinly sliced courgettes and a little 
salt. Now cook at a slow sizzle, so the courgettes soften without browning, 
until they are completely tender and starting to break up, and almost all their 
water has evaporated. This can take 20 minutes or more, so be patient and stir 
regularly. A bit more vigorous stirring will break them up into a pulpy mush.

Serve this as it is as a side dish, or pile on to garlic-rubbed toast to make 
a bruschetta (top it with crumbled goat's cheese or shaved parmesan). Or loosen 
with a bit of cream and stir into pasta, with lots of grated parmesan or 
cheddar. Or fold into a béchamel sauce as the base for a soufflé. With a bit 
more mashing, it makes a great foundation for a soup.

Of course, these are not the only ways to do something winning with 
courgettes. They barbecue very well, for a start. Finely grated, they make 
deliciously moist cakes. They can also be excellent in ratatouille, though 
that's easy to get wrong. Some versions are little more than diced veg boiled 
to blandness in an insipid tomato bath. But if you take the time separately to 
sauté onions, tomatoes, aubergines and courgettes, each in olive oil and 
garlic, until tender, lightly browned, concentrated and sweet, and only then 
introduce them to each other, you'll understand what all the fuss is about.

It's a dish, like this week's recipes, that demonstrates what delicious 
results you can get if you handle your courgettes with care.

Courgette polpette

This recipe comes, via various tweaks, from the Italian cookery writer Ursula 
Ferrigno <http://uktv.co.uk/food/chef/aid/530509>. Polpette are usually 
meatballs, but these delicious little meat-free nuggets make great nibbles or 
picnic fare. Makes about 12.

2 tbsp rapeseed or olive oil
500g courgettes, diced
Grated zest of ½ lemon
1 egg, lightly beaten
2 heaped tbsp finely grated parmesan (or other well-flavoured hard cheese)
½ ball of buffalo mozzarella, diced
50g white breadcrumbs
50g pine nuts, lightly toasted (optional)
1 tbsp chopped parsley
1 garlic clove, peeled and finely chopped
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6. Grease a large baking sheet.Heat the 
oil in a large frying pan over medium heat, add the courgettes and fry until 
golden and tender. Drain on kitchen paper. Mix the cooled courgettes with the 
other ingredients, season, then form into small balls the size of a walnut. 
Place on the baking sheet and bake for 10-15 minutes, until golden brown. Serve 
hot, warm or cold, alone or with bread and a tomato salad.

Courgette and goat's cheese soup with basil
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's courgette and goat's cheese soup with basil: 
thick and velvety, yet light. Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
Quite an unusual soup: thick, velvety, yet light. It's lovely chilled, too. 
Serves four.

2 tbsp olive oil
1kg very firm small courgettes, sliced 3-4mm thick
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped
About 750ml whole milk (or use half milk, half veg stock)
1-2 bay leaves
100g rindless mild goat's cheese
Basil leaves (or mint, if you prefer)

Heat the oil in a large saucepan over a medium heat. Add the courgettes and, 
once they're sizzling nicely but before they start to brown, turn down the 
heat, season with a little salt (it helps draw out the moisture) and cook 
gently, stirring often. As they become tender, break them down a little until 
they have softened almost to the point of mushiness; this can take up to half 
an hour. Add the garlic when the courgettes are almost done, so it gets a 
chance to cook but not burn. You should end up with a fragrant, garlicky, rough 
courgette puree. Leave it coarse like this, or blitz in a food processor if you 
prefer a less chunky soup.

While the courgettes are cooking, put the milk in a pan with the bay leaves. 
Bring up to just below boiling, then leave to infuse.

Stir the cheese into the courgette mixture, then strain in the hot milk a 
little at a time and stirring all the while, until the soup is a consistency 
you like (I like mine fairly thick). Bring the soup scarcely to boiling point, 
season and ladle into warmed bowls. Top with a good trickle of extra-virgin 
rapeseed or olive oil, and a few shredded basil leaves.

Marinated courgettes with mozzarella

This looks particularly good made with a mixture of green and yellow 
courgettes. Serves two.

4 medium courgettes (about 500g)
5 tbsp extra-virgin olive or rapeseed oil
1 large clove garlic, peeled and cut into thin slivers
Grated zest of 1 lemon, plus a little juice
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 tbsp shredded mint or basil
1 ball buffalo mozzarella (or another mild, soft cheese)

Top and tail the courgettes, then cut them lengthwise into 1mm-thick slices. 
Put them in a bowl with two tablespoons of oil and use a pastry brush to coat 
them lightly all over.

Heat a large nonstick frying pan on a high heat. Working in batches, sear the 
courgettes for two minutes on each side, until tender and golden, and transfer 
to a shallow dish.

Take the pan off the heat and leave to cool down a bit. Add the rest of the 
oil, the garlic and the lemon zest, and heat very gently for a few minutes (the 
residual heat in the pan may be enough: you just want to take the raw edge off 
the garlic and infuse the flavours into the oil). Pour over the courgettes. 
Season, squeeze over a little lemon juice and add the mint or basil. Toss, 
cover and leave for an hour at room temperature. Strew with torn strips of 
mozzarella and serve with good bread or, better still, warm pitta or flatbreads.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 