
Once we've made the brave decision to fire up the grill for an outdoor feast, 
I don't think many of us have much trouble deciding what to put on a barbie. 
Even if it's just the classic burgers and bangers, so long as you have 
good-quality examples in the first place, you won't be disappointed. 
There's something about smoky, caramelised, a-little-bit-burnt-at-the-edges 
meat that's pretty much guaranteed to please.

If you do think outside the burger box, so much the better. Consider oily fish 
such as sardines, stuffed with fragrant herbs; or cubes of lamb marinated in 
garlic and olive oil, lemon zest and rosemary, and threaded on to skewers with 
fresh figs or apricots. Think spatchcocked whole free-range chicken, rubbed 
with spices. And that's before we get into the realm of barbecued veg.

I'll be writing more about char-fired chow in a few weeks, so for now I want 
to concentrate on what I think of as "barbecue ballast": those starchy, carby 
side dishes that are so crucial to a really memorable, satisfying alfresco 
eating experience, and yet so often fail to deliver. Why is that? For a start, 
they aren't cooked on the barbie, so lack that seductive, smoky quality. 
Alongside all that gorgeous chargrilled protein, they can seem like 
afterthoughts, mere stodge. Who hasn't come across a profoundly unedifying rice 
salad or greasy, mayo-smeared potatoes, and passed over them in favour of a bit 
more meat and a dollop of ketchup?

It shouldn't be like that. These supporting acts can be right up there with 
the main draw, transforming a barbecue from an unmitigated meat-fest into a 
well-rounded, nicely balanced meal. A feast, by all means, but not just a beast 
feast.

One tack worth exploring is to get the barbecue grill involved in the carbs, 
as well as the meat. In place of the usual buns, for instance, I often make 
flatbreads directly over the coals. They work a treat: use a basic pizza dough 
recipe, leave it to rise as normal, then "knock back" and cut into egg-sized 
portions. Roll out as thin as you can and whack them straight on to a hot 
barbecue. In a matter of minutes, you'll have hot, puffy, deliciously charred 
bread, just waiting to be wrapped around the nearest sausage or slice of 
grilled aubergine. Brush the hot flatbreads with a little garlic-infused olive 
oil, and they're pretty much a barbie starter in their own right.

Often, however, the grill gets pretty chocker, so it's helpful to be able to 
make your starchy sides separately and/or ahead of time. That's where this 
week's recipes come in. They're all substantial, flavour-packed big bowlfuls 
that will complement your grill stars, soaking up the delectable juices 
of seared meat or fish, softening the edges of hot, spicy marinades and sauces, 
and generally filling everyone up. Take the time to taste them, tweak the 
seasoning accordingly and with a bit of care – not just with salt and pepper, 
but with lemon juice and zest, punchy extra-virgin oils, and lots and lots 
of herbs – and they'll be more than a match for the meat.

Spelt tabbouleh

Classic tabbouleh is made with bulgar wheat. Whole grains of pearled spelt 
provide a slightly chunkier, more satisfying texture. If you can't get pearled 
spelt, use pearl barley instead, though that will take longer to cook. This is 
a great side dish to make ahead of time. Serves six.

200g pearled spelt (or pearl barley)
3 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
350g cherry tomatoes (a mix of colours, if possible)
100g bunch flat-leaf parsley, leaves picked and chopped
½ clove garlic, peeled and grated or crushed
Juice of ½ lemon

Rinse the spelt, put it in a saucepan and cover with plenty of cold water. 
Bring to a boil, turn down to a simmer and cook for 15-20 minutes, until tender 
but still nutty (if using pearl barley, this will take more like 40 minutes). 
Drain, stir in two tablespoons of olive oil, season, and set aside to cool.

Cut the tomatoes into quarters or eighths, and add to the spelt; add the 
parsley, too. Put the garlic in a jam jar with the remaining oil, the lemon 
juice, and plenty of salt and pepper. Put the lid on the jar and shake well. 
Tip into the spelt and stir. Taste, add salt, pepper and lemon juice as needed, 
and serve. (If making this ahead of time, refrigerate the spelt as soon as it 
is cool.)

Salad of roast beetroot, sourdough and chickpeas
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's salad of roast beetroot, sourdough and 
chickpeas recipe. Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
I love roast beetroot blitzed with tahini paste and breadcrumbs into a version 
of hummus. This is a sort of chunky, deconstructed – or, more accurately, 
preconstructed – version of that: sweet, aromatic beetroot, toasted bread, 
chickpeas and a lemony, garlicky dressing. The sesame seeds echo the tahini; 
they are not essential but they finish it off beautifully. Serves six to eight 
as a side dish.

500g small beetroot, scrubbed
2-3 garlic cloves, bashed
1 bay leaf, twisted or torn (optional)
1 sprig fresh thyme (optional)
1 tbsp olive oil
225g slightly stale sourdough bread, cut into 2cm chunks
2 400g tins chickpeas, drained and rinsed
1 large bunch flat-leaf parsley, leaves picked and roughly chopped
2 tbsp sesame seeds

For the dressing 
4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
1½ tbsp lemon juice
½ tsp English mustard
½ clove garlic, peeled and crushed or finely grated
½ tsp ground cumin (optional)
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5. Put the scrubbed beetroot in an oven 
dish, add the garlic, bay leaf and thyme (if using), a good scattering of salt 
and pepper, and the oil. Stir, cover with foil and roast until tender – 
depending on the size of the beetroot, it'll take one to two hours. Leave until 
cool enough to handle.

Spread the bread on a baking sheet and toast in the oven for five to 10 
minutes, stirring once or twice.

Use a small, sharp knife and/or your fingers to remove the tops, tails and 
skins of the roast beetroot. Cut the beets into 2cm chunks (or small wedges) 
and put in a large bowl. Add the toasted bread and the chickpeas.

Put all the dressing ingredients in a jam jar with a lid, and shake to 
amalgamate. Pour this over the beetroot, bread and chickpeas, mix, and leave 
for 10 minutes, so the bread absorbs some of the dressing. Meanwhile, toast the 
sesame seeds, if using, in a dry frying pan over a medium heat for a couple of 
minutes, until golden and fragrant.

Toss the parsley into the salad. Taste, add salt, pepper and lemon juice as 
necessary, then scatter over the sesame seeds and serve.

Bashed new potatoes with herbs

One of my favourite ways with new potatoes: bashed so their surfaces are 
roughened, all the better to absorb the flavours of summer herbs, garlic and 
peppery extra-virgin olive oil. Serves six as a side dish.

1.5kg small new or salad potatoes, scrubbed
5-6 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
1 knob butter
1 small clove garlic, peeled and very finely chopped (optional)
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
At least 4 tbsp chopped fresh herbs, such as parsley, chives and thyme

You want the potatoes roughly the same size, and that size should be small 
(walnut-ish), so cut up any that are too large. Put in a large saucepan, cover 
with water, add salt and bring to a boil. Lower the heat, but keeping the 
potatoes at a brisk simmer, and cook until tender. If anything, you want them 
very slightly overcooked, so that they are soft enough to crumble and break 
when you "bash" them – around eight to 15 minutes, depending on the variety and 
freshness of your spuds.

When the potatoes are cooked, drain, leave them to steam off for a minute or 
two, then return to the hot pan. Add three tablespoons of olive oil, the 
butter, the garlic, if using, and a good seasoning of salt and pepper. Put on 
the lid and shake the pan vigorously up and down to bash the potatoes – the 
idea is to get them to break down a bit, but not too much: you want some of 
them whole, some more or less collapsed and some in between. Once the potatoes 
are bashed to your liking, trickle over more olive oil to taste and scatter 
over the herbs. Stir lightly, or give them a bit more of a bash, to distribute 
the herbs and oil, transfer to a warmed serving dish and serve.

guardian.co.uk/hughfearnleywhittingstall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/hughfearnleywhittingstall>

Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news from 
River Cottage HQ.
 