
It's all very well us believing that we are doing a good job upholding the 
values of the Guardian, but what do the readers and users of our newspapers and 
family of websites think?

Guardian News & Media carries out an annual survey of thousands of readers of 
the Guardian and Observer, as well as users of theguardian.com to find out just 
that.

Once again, they have given a ringing endorsement that the Guardian is indeed 
living its values and is considered a force for good in society.

The survey results show sustainability continues to be an extremely important 
issue and that there is high praise for our coverage in key areas such as 
social justice and human rights.

The survey, which was completed by 5,064 readers and users, shows strong 
awareness of the mission of our owners, theScott Trust 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/>, with an overwhelming majority 
believing that the trust'spurpose 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/purpose/> is reflected in our content.

There has been a sharp increase to 90% (80%) in the number of Guardian and 
Observer newspaper readers who value GNM's sustainability strategy, with a 
smaller increase to 80% (77%) of theguardian.com users saying it was either 
"very important" or "quite important".

However, there was a lower interest among our audience for producing an 
independently assured sustainability report, with 59% of web users and 43% of 
Guardian readers saying it was important.

On the question of whether it is important for the Guardian to be open with 
readers in the way it makes editorial decisions and operates as a business, the 
results were slightly higher overall this year, with 96% of Guardian and 
Observer readers, and 93% of theguardian.com users, agreeing.

This year, for the first time we asked whether we are in fact open about our 
business practices. Three-quarters of newspaper readers felt we are, with 
two-thirds of web users also agreeing. Only a tiny percentage disagreed, with 
many saying they neither agree nor disagree, suggesting they may not have 
enough information on which to base their answer.

We also asked in 2012 whether readers and users felt there was any difference 
in importance between providing high-quality content, increasing the amount of 
recycled and certified newsprint in our newspapers, and reducing our carbon 
footprint. The results show that there was almost equal concern about all these 
aspects of our business.

Our content continues to have a significant influence on the ethical behaviour 
of our audience, with a high proportion stating that the Guardian and Observer 
as well as theguardian.com had helped them take a more active role in society, 
particularly in terms of discussing issues raised in the newspaper with friends 
or colleagues, boycotting products or brands, signing petitions and becoming 
involved with charities.

Many readers and users also state that our coverage has influenced their 
behaviour with regard to buying fair-trade products as well as encouraging them 
to save energy and travel less.

Does Guardian content reflect society?

Guardian and Observer readers are more likely than theguardian.com users to 
think that the content of the newspaper reflects society demographically. For 
example, nearly three-quarters (72%) of Guardian readers and 70% of Observer 
readers felt that the ethnicity of UK society is adequately reflected, compared 
with nearly two-thirds of Observer readers and theguardian.com users.

The areas of society where all GNM platforms perform well is gender and sexual 
orientation – 85% of Guardian readers, 83% Observer and 80% theguardian.com 
believe gender is adequately reflected in our content.

On the issue of sexual orientation, the figures were 79% for the Guardian, 78% 
for the Observer and 73% for theguardian.com.

Across all three brands, the content seen to be least representative is 
disability and regional diversity in UK society. Observer readers feel 
particularly strongly that regionality is under-reflected in its content, with 
fewer than four out of 10 readers feeling it is representative, a similar 
result to the previous two years.

Similarly, disability is seen as being distinctly under-reflected. However, 
there was a slight improvement to 54% (53%) for Guardian readers and 45% (39%) 
for the Observer.

Coverage of sustainability issues

In line with the previous two years' scores, the coverage ratings on 
sustainability issues are higher for the Guardian and Observer than for 
theguardian.com.

Content on social justice and human rights gained the highest scores, and 
improved on the previous year, with 91% of Guardian and Observer readers, and 
83% of theguardian.com users, rating it as excellent or good.

Next was our coverage of climate change, with 77% of Guardian readers giving 
it an excellent or good rating, compared with 75% of Observer readers and 67% 
of web users.

On global development, the scores were 73% for the Guardian, 71% for the 
Observer and 65% for the website.

Ethical finance and business scored one of the lowest rankings, with only half 
of all respondents rating it as excellent or good, but this was the area that 
the largest number of readers and users wanted to see more coverage of.

Influence on readers' sustainable behaviours

GNM's carbon-positive ambition is based on the recognition that while we 
should concentrate on minimising the negative impacts of our operations, the 
most important step we can take is to positively influence readers, businesses, 
institutions and politicians through our editorial content.

The annual readers' survey is a key method by which we can create a basic 
measurement of whether we are succeeding in this.

Once again, the survey shows that readers and users perceive our coverage as 
having some influence on a number of areas of their everyday lives.

Where we have the strongest influence is in changing purchasing decisions due 
to corporate behaviour, with 82% of Guardian readers, 79% of Observer readers 
and 69% of website users saying our content has had an impact.

Three-quarters of newspaper readers and 56% of online respondents also said 
our coverage encouraged them to purchase more fair-trade and sustainable 
products.

A majority say that our content has led them to consume less, with more than 
half our newspaper readers saying it has had an impact in helping them find new 
ways to save water and energy at home, as well as identifying and supporting 
social charities.

Encouraging a more active role in society

GNM brands perform well when it comes to encouraging readers to take a more 
active role in society.

The Guardian appears to have more of an influence than the other two brands. 
More than 80% of Guardian readers say they have talked to friends and 
colleagues about issues raised in the paper, compared with 71% of 
theguardian.com users.

More than two-thirds of Guardian and Observer readers have boycotted a product 
or brand because of our coverage, compared with just over half for 
theguardian.com.

A little over half of respondents for the newspapers said they have signed 
petitions as a result of being prompted by coverage, and just under a third 
have written to a politician and campaigned on a issue.

Editorial content

When asked whether certain areas of editorial content should be influenced by 
environmental and ethical concerns, the overwhelming response to every area of 
content was yes. As seen on other issues, the results show the online audience 
feel slightly less strongly about this than the newspaper readers, but overall 
are still firmly in agreement.

For example, more than 80% of Guardian and Observer readers feel that the 
motoring editorial coverage should be guided by ethical and environmental 
concerns. Other areas considered important were travel (86% Guardian, 83% 
Observer), food and drink (85% and 84%), and finance (86% and 83%).

However, there was a big gap between what readers and users think should 
happen and whether they believe specific editorial areas do indeed reflect 
ethical and environmental concerns. For our motoring coverage, for example, 
only about half our readers and users believe these issues are embedded in what 
we write.

Trust and bias

This year has seen another rise in the number of readers and users who believe 
our coverage is trustworthy to more than 90% of Guardian readers, 92% of 
Observer readers and 86% for theguardian.com.

The percentage of respondents who believe that our news coverage is unbiased 
has also risen to 58% for the Guardian and Observer and 44% for the web, 
although it is still well below the figures for trustworthiness.

On the question of whether our writers cover a broad range of perspectives, 
another improvement was seen, with more than 80% of Guardian and Observer 
readers agreeing, falling to 73% among online users.

There was also a strengthening in the number of overall respondents believing 
we give under-represented groups in society a voice – 70% of Guardian readers, 
60% at the Observer, and 62% on theguardian.com.

When asked about policies in place that ensure GNM's openness and 
accountability, there was high awareness and advocacy of the corrections 
columns andComment is Free 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/uk-edition> (CiF).

About three-quarters are aware of CiF, but there is little awareness of the 
Living Our Values sustainability audit, with 11% of Guardian readers and only 
8% of online users aware of it.

Scott Trust

With regard to the Scott Trust <http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/>, 
Guardian and Observer readers (75% and 80% respectively) were far more likely 
to be aware of the ownership of GNM and its mission than theguardian.com users 
(54%). These percentage scores have showed a real rise since 2009, which were 
70% (Guardian), 62% (Observer) and 45% (theguardian.com).

When asked whether they felt the trust's mission is reflected in the content 
of the newspaper/website, 94% of Guardian readers, 96% of Observer readers and 
90% of website users agreed.
 