
1. The Guardian Travel readers’ photography competition 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2017/jan/13/readers-travel-photography-competition-2017-launch>
 (the “Competition”) is open to UK residents aged 18 and over subject to 
paragraphs 2-4 below.


2. Employees or agencies of Guardian News & Media Limited (“GNM”), Exodus 
Travels, their group companies or their family members, freelance contributors 
to GNM or anyone else connected with the Competition may not enter the 
Competition.

3. Entrants must be resident in the UK from the time they submit their entry 
into the Competition until the time they are selected as a winner (as a Monthly 
Winner and/or as the Overall Winner, both as defined in paragraphs 15 and 18 
respectively below).

4. The Competition is open to all photographers (both amateur and 
professional).

5. Entrants into the Competition shall be deemed to have accepted these terms 
and conditions.

6. To enter the Competition, you must sign in to GuardianWitness (on desktop, 
Android or iPhone app) using your Guardian, Facebook or Google account then 
search for the assignment labelled Guardian Travel readers’ photography 
competition. You must submit the original high-resolution jpeg photographic 
image, taken by you. You must include your full name, a short caption (maximum 
100 words) explaining what the photograph shows and where it was taken, and 
your email address.

7. If you have any questions about how to enter or in connection with the 
Competition, please e-mail gavin.mcowan@theguardian.com with “Monthly photo 
competition” in the subject line.

8. You are responsible for the cost (if any) of sending your Competition entry 
to us.

9. The Competition is divided into 12 separate monthly competitions. The first 
monthly competition runs from 13th January 2017, and the following monthly 
competitions then start on the 1st day of each month from February 2017 until 
December 2017. The opening date and time of the first monthly competition is 
4.15pm on 13th January 2017. The opening date and time of each subsequent 
monthly competition is the 1st of each month at 12.01am. The closing date for 
the first monthly competition is the 31st January at 11.00pm and for each 
subsequent monthly competition the closing date is the 25th of each month at 
11.00pm, with the exception of the December monthly competition, which closes 
at 11.00pm on 18th December 2017. Entries received outside the applicable time 
period for each month will not be considered for the competition for that 
month. GNM reserves the right in its absolute discretion to extend any relevant 
closing date where the entries received are of insufficient quality.

10. Only one entry is permitted per person in each monthly competition but 
entrants can enter as many monthly competitions as they wish. The winner shall 
be the owner of the Guardian, Facebook or Google account from which the 
selected winning entry is sent.

11. By submitting an entry to the Competition, You grant GNM:

a. Permission for your entry to be published on GNM websites including but not 
limited to witness.theguardian.com and theguardian.com and on any social media 
account controlled by GNM, including but not limited to Facebook and Twitter 
accounts, and you grant GNM a non-exclusive, irrevocable, royalty-free, 
worldwide, perpetual licence (with a right to sub-license) to use, republish, 
edit and/or modify your Competition entry in any/all media (including in 
electronic format, hard copy and in GNM publications) for purposes connected 
with the Competition and as described in these Terms and Conditions; and

b. The right to use your name and county of residence for the sole purpose of 
identifying you as the author of your entry and/or as a winner in the 
Competition.

12. You also hereby waive all your moral rights in your entry. Notwithstanding 
the afore-going waiver, in order to use entries as intended and advised in 
these Terms and Conditions, (i) GNM may need to modify entries, including but 
not limited to resizing, cropping or colour adjustment as necessary, provided 
that GNM shall endeavour in undertaking such modifications to maintain the 
integrity of your entry as originally created; and (ii) GNM shall provide a 
picture credit for all entries.

13. You own the copyright to your Competition entry as its author. Your entry 
must be your own work, must not be copied, must not contain any third-party 
materials and/or content that you do not have permission to use, must not 
include any trade marks, and must not show inappropriate or dangerous 
behaviour, or otherwise be obscene, defamatory, distasteful, offensive, or in 
breach of any applicable law or regulation, or in breach of any confidentiality 
obligations owed by you to third parties. If GNM has reason to believe your 
entry is not your own work or otherwise breaches these terms and conditions, 
then GNM may not consider it and may disqualify it.

14. Entrants confirm that each individual whose image is featured in the 
Competition entry has given consent for the use of his/her image in connection 
with this Competition and in accordance with these terms and conditions. Where 
an individual whose image is featured in a Competition entry is aged less than 
18 years the entrant confirms that the parent or guardian of that individual 
has given the relevant consent.

Picking the winners

15. The Guardian Travel Desk together with an independent judge, photographer 
Paul Goldstein, will choose one winning entry each month from all the valid 
Competition entries received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions (the 
“Monthly Winner”) and two runners up. Full details of the judging process and 
the names of the Judges are available on request by emailing 
gavin.mcowan@theguardian.com. Entrants must not contact, or try to contact, the 
Judges in any way in connection with the Competition, or otherwise try to 
influence the Judges’ selection of the winners.

16. When choosing the winners and runners up, the Judges will be looking for 
the most well composed, artistic and original image.

17. The Judges’ decision of who the Monthly Winner is will be made on or 
before the 1st of the month following the end of the relevant monthly 
competition (so, for example, the Monthly Winner for December 2017 will be 
chosen on or before 1st January 2018). The Judges’ decision is final and no 
correspondence will be entered into.

18. The winning entry from each monthly competition will be entered into the 
overall competition and a winning entry from the 12 Monthly Winners (the 
“Overall Winner”) will be chosen by an independent judge, Paul Goldstein, on or 
before 1st January 2018. Paul’s decision is final and no correspondence will be 
entered into.

The Prizes

19. The Monthly Winners will each receive a £200 voucher to be redeemed 
against an Exodus holiday. The vouchers are valid for three years.

20. The Overall Winner for 2017 will win a 14-night escorted Discover Costa 
Rica small group holiday for two people with Exodus. Further details of the 
holiday and its itinerary can be found at:exodus.co.uk 
<https://www.exodus.co.uk/costa-rica-holidays/wildlife/discover-costa-rica/wuc-86197?setcountry=GB>

The holiday must be taken before 31 December 2018. The Overall Winner may 
choose the exact departure date within these dates, subject to availability. 
The Overall Winner must give at least one month’s notice in advance of their 
desired dates of travel.

The prize cannot be exchanged for another trip or a cash alternative, and is 
subject to availability.

The promoter reserves the right to provide an alternative prize of similar 
value should the specified prize become unavailable for any unforeseeable 
reason.

21. Included in the Overall Winner’s prize (the “Overall Prize”) is:

(a) Two return economy flights from a London airport (including airport taxes);

(b) Comfortable accommodation for 2 people sharing a room with private 
facilities on a breakfast basis. The type of accommodation will vary (e.g. may 
be a hotel or a forest lodge and details can be confirmed to the Overall Winner 
on request). All breakfasts, eight lunches and six dinners are included. All 
other meals and drinks will be at the Overall Winner’s expense. Snack lunches 
will cost approximately USD 15-18 each and evening meals will cost 
approximately USD 25-32 each (excluding drinks).

(c) Group sizes vary from four to 16 people. Transport is provided by 
air-conditioned bus or boat.

(d) Airport transfers to and from San Jose airport will be included.

(e) The Overall Prize does not include anything other than the elements stated 
above. In particular, the Overall Winner will need to arrange and pay for (as 
applicable) their own passport, visas and travel insurance sufficient for the 
type of trip referred to above, and any transfers to and from the London 
airport, personal expenses, and any tips and gratuities. Optional excursions 
also cost extra.

The Overall Winner’s companion must be aged 16 or over.

The Overall Prize is also subject to these booking terms and conditions: 
exodus.co.uk <https://www.exodus.co.uk/about-exodus/exodus-booking-conditions>

22. Each Monthly Winner will be notified by GNM by telephone or email on or 
before the 1st of the month after the month of the Competition in which the 
Monthly Winner’s winning entry was entered. On the date of notification each 
Monthly Winner will receive via email details of how to redeem their travel 
voucher prize.

23. The Overall Winner will be notified by GNM by telephone or email by 30 
December 2017 and given details of how to claim their prize. If the Overall 
Winner does not respond to GNM within 14 days of being notified of their win, 
then the Overall Prize will be forfeited and the judges shall be entitled to 
select another Overall Winner using the process referred to above (and that 
winner will also have to respond to notification of their win within 14 days or 
else they will also forfeit the Overall Prize). If a selected Overall Winner 
rejects the Overall Prize or their entry is found to be invalid or in breach of 
these terms, then the selected Overall Winner’s prize will be forfeited and the 
judges shall be entitled to select another Overall Winner using the process 
referred to above.

24. The Overall Winner will be required to write a feature about the trip, and 
take accompanying photographs, which (at GNM’s sole discretion) will be 
published in the Travel section of the Guardian and on theguardian.com/travel 
at a later date. We are looking for a well-written feature that meets Guardian 
standards. It will not run if it is deemed not to meet the required standard. 
The same goes for the photographs, which must be high-quality, original and 
evoke a sense of place. You grant GNM a non-exclusive, irrevocable, 
royalty-free, worldwide, perpetual licence (with a right to sub-license) to 
use, republish, edit and/or modify your trip report and photos in any/all media 
(including in electronic format, hard copy and in GNM publications) for such 
purposes. The exact word count (it will be no more than 1,500 words) and number 
of photographs will be agreed before the departure date. You hereby waive all 
your moral rights in your trip report and photos. Notwithstanding the 
afore-going waiver, in order to use your trip report and photos as intended in 
this paragraph 24, (i) GNM may need to modify your report and photos, including 
but not limited to resizing, cropping or colour adjustment as necessary, 
provided that GNM shall endeavour in undertaking such modifications to maintain 
the integrity of your report and photos as originally created; and (ii) GNM 
shall provide a picture credit for your photos.

25. The prizes cannot be exchanged or transferred by you and cannot be 
redeemed by you for cash or any other prize. You must pay all other costs 
associated with the prize that are not expressly included in the prize.

26. We retain the right to substitute the prizes with another prize of similar 
value in the event that the original prize offered is not available.

Some other rules

27. Entries on behalf of another person will not be accepted and joint 
submissions are not allowed.

28. We take no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected 
or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other 
reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt.

29. The name and county of the winners can be obtained by sending a stamped 
addressed envelope to the following address: Travel Readers’ Monthly Photo 
Competition, Guardian Travel desk, Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU.

30. No purchase is necessary.

31. The winners may be required to take part in promotional activity related 
to the Competition and the winners shall participate in such activity on GNM’s 
reasonable request. The winners consent to the use by GNM and its related 
companies, both before and after the closing date of the Competition for an 
unlimited time, of the winners’ voice, image, photograph and name for publicity 
purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, and on the 
internet, including any websites hosted by GNM and its related companies) and 
in advertising, marketing or promotional material without additional 
compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Competition, all entrants 
consent to the same.

32. GNM shall use and take care of any personal information you supply to it 
as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at
theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Competition, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Competition entry, and for the 
purposes outlined in these terms and conditions.

33. GNM may pass entrants’ details to third parties and/or otherwise engage 
third party providers in connection with this Competition where the third party 
is acting on GNM’s behalf for the purposes of administering this Competition 
and/or any subsequent publicity, and/or as otherwise required by law.

34. The Promoter of the Competition is Guardian News & Media Limited whose 
address is Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Any complaints regarding 
the Competition should be sent to this address.

35. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation or for death or personal injury 
resulting from its negligence.

36. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the 
Competition or accepting any prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any 
injury or damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or 
resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with 
the Competition.

37. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Competition with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Competition is final and binding 
and no correspondence will be entered into.

38. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
relating to this Competition where the failure is caused by something outside 
its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure.

39. The Competition and these terms and conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Competition submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of 
the English courts.
 