
Introduction <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/sustainability-vision>

The past year has been among the most extraordinary in our history. We have 
broken stories that have shaped the news agenda and built a global audience 
that is larger and more active than could have been imagined a few years ago.

However, Guardian News & Media (GNM) continues to face daunting challenges. We 
are driving into fierce financial headwinds caused by the decline of revenues 
from print sales and advertising. Meanwhile, the regulation and legislation 
that governs our industry are under intense scrutiny.

In order to meet these challenges, in 2011 GNM embarked on a five-year 
transformation strategy designed to ensure that the business is sustainable 
financially and able to make the most of the opportunities presented by the 
various digital platforms.

One year into the strategy, GNM is performing as planned. Digital revenues 
grew by more than 16% in the financial year ending 1 April 2012 to £45.7m. But 
the costs involved in creating new digital platforms and ways of working 
resulted in an operating loss before exceptional items and amortisation of 
£44.2m. The five-year plan calls for GNM to make cost savings of £25m by 2017.

Over the past year, we have reinvented the Monday-to-Friday newspaper and 
beefed up digital development. We have pioneered live blogging, opened up our 
newsroom and launched a number of digital products (our iPad app was downloaded 
more than 800,000 times in the year ending March 2012; the Facebook app was 
installed 9.4m times).

We continue to lead the way in the development of open journalism, which puts 
our audience at the heart of what we do. In essence, we believe in the open 
exchange of information, ideas and opinions and its power to bring about change.

We have attracted more than 200,000 members to our professional networks, and 
we've begun a digital-only operation in the US.

Our website, theguardian.com, enjoyed an audience of 67.8m monthly unique 
browsers, a 38% growth on March 2011, and our mobile site reaches more than 8m 
unique browsers a month. In March 2012, the combined weekly print and digital 
readership of the Guardian and the Observer reached 5.8m in the calendar year 
2011.

This is the 10th anniversary of our sustainability reporting. We believe that 
we should offer our stakeholders the same level of scrutiny of our performance 
as we expect from others, and the Guardian was the first media company to have 
its sustainability report independently audited.

In an ever more crowded media world, the Guardian occupies a clear space of 
its own. We believe we have an inspiring vision for the future and a clear 
strategy for achieving our aims.

Editorial: our core mission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/editorial>

When the Living our Values sustainability report was created a decade ago, it 
seemed crucial that we give our readers an insight into the way we created our 
newspapers and the reasons behind our editorial decisions.

The digital revolution has introduced a level of transparency which has 
transformed the relationship with our readers to the point where they are now 
key partners in helping us to generate news, analysis and debate.

Given that so much of what we do is instantly accessible on the web, it feels 
appropriate for the sustainability report to highlight key editorial activities 
and to provide links to more detailed coverage, rather than to create new 
content that replicates what is already on theguardian.com.

The Guardian's investigation into phone hacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/phone-hacking> at the News of the World is 
continuing to have a profound effect on the media industry as well as politics, 
and we have also been playing a prominent role in theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>. To ensure the continuing 
trust of our audience, we brought ourown journalists' code of conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code> up to date.

The Guardian also continues to support the community of Katine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine>, in north east Uganda, which it has 
reported on for the past four years. The project, in partnership with African 
NGO Amref and Barclays, has been extended until the end of 2013.

Sustainability plays a central role in the coverage through our environment 
website as well asGuardian Sustainable Business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sustainable-business>, which encourages 
companies to embed social, ethical and environmental considerations into the 
heart of their strategy.

People <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/people>

In June 2011, GNM announced a strategy that would accelerate its transition to 
digital publication platforms and address the challenges created by the decline 
of print sales.

It called for a root-and-branch review of all of GNM's operations. Above all, 
it was clear that the strategy meant asking our people to embrace a digital 
future earlier than their peers at other companies.

One year on, the strategy is on track. GNM's publications reach more people 
than ever before and theguardian.com is now the third most read newspaper 
website in the world. The Guardian and the Observer reach more people in 
Britain than any other quality title: 5.8 million every week

GNM's employees have risen to the challenges posed by the strategy. 
Journalists learned new ways of working, using digital technologies to enhance 
reporting and presentation and abandoning the constraints of the daily print 
news cycle. Their commercial colleagues built new businesses and pushed old 
ones online.

This, however, is just the beginning. There are more challenges to come and 
some painful decisions to be taken. GNM's headcount remained steady through the 
past year at around 1,600, but the company needs to make more savings, and that 
will inevitably mean losing some valued colleagues.

On the commercial side of GNM, several departments have been restructured, and 
the process of getting the company to the right size, with resources shifted to 
digital growth areas, will continue.Guardian Media Group 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/> has reduced its headcount to 35.

Change, however, is not just about reducing headcount and shifting resources. 
It is also about helping our people to succeed in the digital era and working 
to ensure that the Guardian's traditional commitment to fairness and respect in 
the workplace is at the heart of the organisation.

We are therefore developing a digital training plan, which was still being 
finalised at the time of the publication of Living our Values. The scheme will 
be introduced in stages during 2012-13.

Commercial <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/commercial>

Guardian News & Media not only wants to grow digital revenues but also be a 
force for good in society. As part of that, the commercial departments are 
looking to find innovative, efficient and profitable ways to champion social 
and environmental justice.

At the heart of the commercial strategy is changing the way we think about, 
relate to, and engage with our audience, with the objectives to retain existing 
readers, deepen these relationships as well as encourage new readers and users.

From a commercial perspective, open is about bringing us closer to our global 
audience as advertisers are also looking to form deeper and more targeted 
relationships with their consumers.

This means moving beyond simple advertising to creating more dynamic and 
engaging sponsored content and events.

In order to protect the Guardian's all-important reputation for independent 
journalism, strict guidelines have been put in place to ensure our readers know 
where we have entered into a commercial relationship. These were recently 
updated to provide even more clarity.

Rather than seek to be all things to all people, Guardian News & Media is 
concentrating on attracting and retaining 'progressives'. Progressives are 
people who embrace new experiences, technology and new ways of thinking.

One example is the development of the Guardian Sustainable Business (GSB) 
website, which aims to support the engagement of business in seeking solutions 
to the multiple challenges of climate change, resource depletion, ecosystem 
degradation and social inequality.

Another innovation is the 'Select' advertising model 
<https://www.theguardian.com/select>, which works by bringing together the best 
independent publishers and blogs from across the web and helping them monetise 
their sites by running premium advertising campaigns across them. The benefit 
to GNM is access to excellent content sites and extended reach to a quality 
audience above and beyond theguardian.com users.

Even though GNM is facing a tough economic climate, the Guardian increased 
overall environmental and ethical revenue for the financial year ending March 
2011. GNM's environmental and ethical income has grown to a 5.9% share of total 
revenues.

Operations <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/operations>

A few years ago, Guardian News and Media (GNM) set an ambitious challenge to 
be carbon positive. Carbon positive, for operations, means achieving best 
practice in reducing our direct and indirect environmental impacts as well as 
supporting social justice within the boundaries we can control or influence.

Of course, carbon is only one of the issues we face in our operations. That is 
why we also concentrate on other key impacts such as resource consumption 
including water and paper as well as waste creation from across the business.

GNM is planning to transform into a digital-first company, which means that 
our impacts from traditional newspaper production will diminish over time while 
our digital environmental impacts will grow.

In recognition of the importance of this, a board level sponsor, Tanya 
Cordrey, Director of Digital Development, has been appointed to establish a 
leadership position in digital sustainability.

We continue to commit to supporting research in this area through a number of 
collaborations that aim to make a genuine contribution to knowledge in this 
field.

This year for the first time we include the carbon footprint of our digital 
operations in this report, based on the work by theSympact project 
<http://www.sympact.org/>. We believe we are also the first media company to 
estimate the annual carbon emissions from our website.

In the financial year ending March 2012, we lowered carbon emissions at 
sources where we have direct control (including offices, data centres, print 
sites and business travel) by 3%, saved 16% in water usage at the print sites, 
improved office recycling rates to 78%, lowered print waste by 13% and made 
advances in our sustainable paper sourcing with 98% of all newsprint being 
sustainably sourced (either from recycled or certified virgin source).

While sustainability audits report year on year changes, it is also important 
to consider the long-term performance of GNM. In fact, carbon emissions have 
fallen since our base year of 2009/10 by 25%.

In order to gauge the perceptions of our staff, we carried out a brief survey 
in June 2012 and 981 people responded out of a total of around 1600. While 67% 
of respondents said they believed GNM has effective environmental practices in 
place, only 47% felt that GNM encourages them to take an active part reducing 
their environmental impact at work.

Community <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/community>

The Guardian's community programme, which delivers significant benefits to a 
number of charities, schools and other projects engaged in social justice, is 
re-focusing its resources as it faces budget cuts along with all other 
departments.

It has therefore been looking to develop more creative collaborations such as 
matching volunteer skills to organisations and a better use of existing 
resources, for example allowing partners to use conference and meeting rooms 
for events.

Project highlights during the last financial year included the Live Magazine 
summer project <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/live-north> and the 
co-delivery of a Level 2 Business BTEC withGlobal Generation 
<http://www.globalgeneration.org.uk/>. The last year also saw the first 
independent monitoring and evaluation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/blog/community-sustainability-shared-value>
 of the community programme.

Overall the number of staff volunteers fell during the last financial year to 
210 people, who contributed 1,741 hours. This is equivalent to 13% of staff 
volunteering. This compared with 307 volunteers and 4,268 hours the previous 
year when 24% of staff volunteered. This was largely due to the postponement of 
the annual volunteering week, which was moved from March to September which 
falls outside the reporting year .

The Guardian continues to support a payroll-giving scheme, which is one of the 
most popular in the country. GNM was awarded the Platinum Award Quality Mark in 
recognition of the fact that 26% of staff supported 195 charities giving a 
total of £83,320. GNM also supported individual staff fundraising through 
£8,000 worth of match-funding donating.

The Guardian/Observer Christmas appeal raised a total of £416,406 for eight 
youth charities featured in theGuardian and Observer's 2011 Christmas appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/feb/10/guardian-observer-2011-christmas-appeal>
.

The annual appeal distributed the cash equally between the charities, all of 
which help marginalised young people to turn their lives around.
 