
There has been a curious and increasingly glaring gap in journalism and on the 
web. The Department For International Development has a considerably larger 
budget than the Foreign Office and, unlike every other UK government 
department, its budget is set to increase over the next few years, yet there 
are few if any journalists dedicated to shadowing this department and tracking 
aid – where it goes, what it achieves, and does the ministerial rhetoric stand 
up.

Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> is now a 
multi-million pound industry across the world, yet it is a largely secret 
garden – hard for outsiders to understand, often coded in acronyms and highly 
technical.

Several years ago, the editor-in-chief of this paper, Alan Rusbridger, argued 
that there were certain types of stories which news media are not always good 
at reporting; they move slowly, incrementally, they may affect millions of 
lives but they do not grab headlines because there often aren't crisis moments. 
The environment has often fallen into this category in the past, and so does 
development. Into this gulf steps the Guardian's new section on the web, 
guardian.co.uk/global-development. It is a bold enterprise because it is 
breaking new ground on two fronts.

It is the first time the Guardian has developed a partnership with a major 
charitable foundation to fund a strand of its core journalism. It is envisaged 
that the Gates Foundation will contribute financially to the new site up to 
2015 as part of its commitment to the millennium development goals.

Part of the agreement includes safeguarding the Guardian's editorial 
independence. Both organisations are committed to making achievement of the UN 
goals a central strand of the new site. But alongside the challenge of working 
in a partnership with a foundation, the site has set itself a big ambition of 
curating a global conversation about development.

Acting as a hub on the web, it will point to and pick up on the best material 
and best blogs on the web about this huge subject. Central to the site will be 
a new group blog which will include daily comment from columnists such as Larry 
Elliott and Sarah Boseley.

But what makes this a tough task is that development is a subject with a very 
fragmented community. As we researched the web for the new site we could see 
how the academic-research community has one form of conversation – detailed, 
expert and often intimidating – while non-governmental organisations have a 
completely different one which is focussed around campaigning and fundraising 
with often quite simple and emotional messages.

And finally, there is another conversation on the web about development which 
has become deeply cynical of aid and what it can achieve. This last can be 
quite an energetic conversation – it often bulks large on Comment is Free for 
example – and it has gathered force from well publicised advocates such as 
Dambisa Moyo and the US economist Bill Easterly. The problem about these 
different audiences is that while they often have much knowledge of the 
subject, they don't much like talking to each other. Part of the challenge on 
the new site will be to host all these conversations – all of which are crucial 
to the debate in their very different ways. Will that mean that everyone gets 
cross at some point or another with the site? Probably.

The new global development site takes over from the Guardian's three-year 
Katine project, which tracked a development project in a remote rural area of 
Uganda as a one way to cover development. The reporting of the project comes to 
an end in October.

One of the strengths of the Katine project has been to explain, through 
powerful stories of individual lives, big problems such as the crisis of 
maternal mortality which claims half a million lives a year. Behind these kinds 
of statistics lie a complex set of inter-related causes – inadequate health 
care systems, bad roads and the subordinate position of women in making 
household decisions. It is never simple. The new site aims to build on 
different ways of drawing original stories from the developing world in text 
and multimedia, getting people to tell their own stories. As the increasing 
pressure on Dfid to defend its budget indicates, the public want to know more 
about where the aid budget is going, what aid is and if it works. This site 
will be about meeting that need.
 