
The Guardian Foundation 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/the-scott-trust-foundation/the-guardian-foundation/>
 has been the overseas training arm of the Guardian for two decades. It aims to 
put experienced Guardian journalists, editors and managers in touch with their 
opposite numbers in papers or on websites overseas, sharing experience and 
wisdom.

That work continued unabated in 2011-12 under its two co-directors, Peter 
Preston <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/peterpreston> and Ian Wright. We 
welcomed journalists from Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Argentina to 
Kings Place. We sent journalists to work and advise in Cairo, Sofia, Maribor 
(amongst other far flung places). We cemented existing relations with partners 
such as the Soros Foundation, the BBC World Service Trust, the Thomson Reuters 
Foundation, and Transition Online in Prague. We continued our funding of the 
Mail and Guardian's training scheme in Johannesburg.

All this is rewarding activity on both sides. The Guardian makes friends and 
influences people across Europe and the wider world; but it also helps explain 
our core values to journalists and editors in every country we touch. And now, 
perhaps, that reputation may increase still further as a result of the year's 
most significant new initiative. 

In July 2011, four of Europe's most important media foundations (owners of 
market-leading papers in Denmark and Holland) asked us to a meeting in 
Amsterdam aimed at developing more co-operation between foundations who believe 
in quality journalism.

From that meeting came the idea of founding a European Press Prize 
<http://www.europeanpressprize.com/about-the-foundation/> open to journalism 
from the 47 nations that make up the Council of Europe. That project has 
developed at a startling rate. The first contest - for journalism in four 
different categories, each of them for 10,000 euros - is underway from July 1. 
The first prize-giving is scheduled in Amsterdam on February 26, 2013, after 
the first judging panel, chaired by Sir Harold Evans, has completed its 
deliberations. 

It's an exciting idea. The Reuters Foundation has joined our ranks; more 
foundations are knocking on the door. And the message it conveys is clear: that 
journalism, good journalism, is vital to a free society - or, in this case, 47 
different societies.
 