
Last week, the talented and multi-award winning Aboriginal singer Geoffrey 
Gurrumul Yunupingu made the news for another reason when his nephrologist
alleged that his patient’s care at Royal Darwin Hospital was compromised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/04/hospital-accused-of-incompetence-or-racially-profiling-in-gurrumul-treatment>
 by the assumption that his chronic liver disease was related to alcohol abuse 
rather than hepatitis, from which may have followed other medical decisions 
when he presented very unwell to emergency.

Alcohol is a real scourge on Australian society and especially so in the 
Indigenous population but the specialist made the sensible point that a 
fundamental erroneous assumption about a patient can have serious downstream 
consequences, in this instance, excluding “a drinker” from a potential liver 
transplant.

Darwin hospital chief defends treatment of singer Gurrumul Yunupingu
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/06/darwin-hospital-chief-defends-treatment-of-singer-gurrumul-yunupingu>
The hospital administration bristled at the accusation of racial profiling; 
the Northern Territory health minister John Elferink joined the fray with the 
singularly unhelpfulsuggestion that this was a pre-tour publicity stunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/06/gurrumul-complaint-is-a-publicity-stunt-nt-health-minister-suggests>
 and before you knew it, the spotlight was back on race and medicine.

But as I read the discharge summary (which clearly identifies alcohol abuse as 
the cause of liver disease, with hepatitis B almost represented as a peripheral 
issue), I couldn’t help but think of the doctor who wrote the summary. If Royal 
Darwin is like every other public hospital, this task would have fallen to a 
hapless intern, whose first real job started three months ago.

The discharge summary should have been co-signed by a registrar, who in turn 
should have been supervised by a specialist. The specialist does not read every 
discharge summary but at its best, the document should reflect the essence of 
what the specialist, the doctor with the most knowledge and perspective, 
determined the problem to be. From this follows the investigations that 
occurred and the outcomes as well as a plan to maintain good health beyond the 
hospital.

A sound hospital discharge summary that represents the team’s thinking is 
therefore the patient’s ally – it helps the GP and everyone else, especially in 
an era of fractured medical care. And yet, ask any GP or even the hospital 
doctors who spend precious overtime typing them, the typical discharge summary 
is unduly verbose, maddeningly unenlightening and notoriously unreliable. It is 
completed in haste and like a host of medical notes, is increasingly a cut and 
paste job, the harried intern’s fingers battling the administrative demand to 
produce discharge summaries in time with quick discharges.

To know our patients involves talking to them, in other words, taking a 
history. Illness is not an isolated occurrence.

Quality takes time but what would you rather have? A thoughtful, 
well-considered, slightly delayed discharge summary that actually reflects your 
care or yet another form that you shove at the bottom of the drawer? Most 
patients who bring me their copy have not even opened the envelope: they assume 
that the communication is between doctors and they are merely a more 
trustworthy messenger than the fax. Most say they don’t understand the jargon 
anyway.

The quality of discharge summaries has always been substandard; I should know 
because I wrote a few of them myself as an intern. It’s no excuse but 20 years 
ago, the stakes were different. Today’s wards are filled with very sick and 
mostly elderly patients with multiple co-morbidities managed by a host of 
specialists who don’t communicate with each other.

Cognitive loss, mental illness, substance abuse, economic stress and warring 
families are a strong feature. A good discharge summary cogently, sensitively 
and intelligently unites these issues so that the patient feels understood and 
other doctors feel informed. But such a summary can only be written when we 
actually know our patients. And to know our patients involves talking to them, 
in other words, taking a history. Illness is not an isolated occurrence; it 
happens in the context of our lives – to make sense of a disease, you have to 
understand the person. And here, we fail.

In the eagerness to deliver better healthcare, amid the constant chatter of 
design, innovation and streamlining, what is neglected is the importance of the 
patient narrative. Somehow, we have fooled ourselves into thinking that if we 
conduct enough sophisticated tests, entertain enough fanciful diagnoses, and 
attend enough team meetings, talking to the actual patient can be optional.

For patients who are frequent attenders, we rely on old notes and assumptions 
without checking their provenance. We fall prey to groupthink far more than 
we’d like. But despite all the advances technology affords, the greatest value 
in medicine still comes from actually talking to the patient. And while 
patients may not know the technical details, they know themselves and inhabit 
their illness like no doctor ever can.

I recently met a new patient who was said to have suffered a stroke. As the 
medical student related the story outside, I told her that the patient’s 
inability to move one leg didn’t make sense.

“It’s weird, I know.”

“What does she think is going on?”

“I didn’t ask, I just read the notes.”

An MRI had been booked overnight to solve the mystery but I wanted to talk to 
our patient. We walked in to find a dishevelled elderly woman whose eyes darted 
suspiciously. She was cooperative enough with her story but refused to move her 
leg or let me move it. Taking her history told me it wasn’t a stroke. Then 
tucked away in the triage notes, I spotted a line about the same presentation 
some days ago when she decided not to wait for assessment. It sounded like her 
first cry for help.

“Who brought you to hospital?”

“A taxi.”

“And how did you get inside?”

“I walked.”

Eyes widened but I let her talk, mostly about her being home alone and how she 
managed. Poorly, it seemed. Finally, I ventured, “I suspect you are worried 
about a stroke but you’re safe. We’ve just met, I know, but I wonder if you 
might be depressed.”

Gurrumul complaint is a publicity stunt, NT health minister suggests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/06/gurrumul-complaint-is-a-publicity-stunt-nt-health-minister-suggests>
At this, the poor woman burst into tears, conceding that this was indeed her 
problem. We comforted her and promised help, then I asked her to reassure us 
that her leg was alright. Gingerly, she sat up. Then an intern held out his 
hand, saying “I’ve got you” and she walked.

A dutiful son arrived, himself overwhelmed because his mother was losing her 
memory, had signed over her house to a stranger she met via the internet, and 
viewed his help as interference. The patient was treated for depression, 
assessed for dementia, and discharged to assisted accommodation. She didn’t 
need any of the tests lined up to explain her immobile leg, just someone to 
look beyond it. The diagnosis lay in her history.


Gurrumul’s high-profile case has now been referred to the health commissioner 
but there is a salient lesson in it for all patients. Inaccurate discharge 
summaries are not a typing error; they are a reflection of rushed medicine.

The next time you receive a hospital discharge summary read it for accuracy. 
If it’s accurate, keep it safely and share a copy. If it doesn’t make sense, 
ask your family doctor. And if it still doesn’t make sense, or worse, if it’s 
plainly wrong, tell the hospital to fix the problem. This, I concede, will be 
ridiculously difficult, but let your impetus be the knowledge that the next 
time you are sick, the first document your doctors will turn to will be your 
most recent discharge summary.

Meanwhile, my thoughts are with the intern who wrote Gurrumul’s summary, whose 
career does not deserve to be clouded by the incident.
 