
Never has a clip-on tie looked so sinister as when attached to the collar of 
fast-food king and drug lord Gus Fring. The enigmatic Breaking Bad favourite 
was last seen dropping to the ground with half his face blown off, but now he’s 
back, with his visage intact, in a new trailer forBetter Call Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul>.


The Breaking Bad spin-off has long teased the return of Gus with sly little 
easter eggs, but the new trailer goes further. It’s an advert for Los Pollos 
Hermanos, in which Gus Fring pops up at the end. We’ll admit, we thought his 
return to the Breaking Bad universe might have been a tad more dramatic than 
recommending curly fries, but, nonetheless, we’re thrilled to see him. 
Giancarlo Esposito was an immense presence onBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> and his backstory was 
left shrouded in mystery, so there are plenty of places for his character to 
go, even if we do already know his ultimate end. Here are all the burning 
questions about Gus that Better Call Saul should address.

What was his history?

He was originally from Chile, but left in the 1980s to go to Mexico, before 
eventually ending up in Albuquerque. Gus Fring is almost certainly not the name 
he was born with. This is all we know about him for sure.


But the stuff we don’t know is far more intriguing. In the one Gus flashback 
that Breaking Bad generously gave us, we learned that he was important enough 
in his abandoned homeland for the Mexican Juárez Cartel to spare his life. 
Whether it was out of respect or out of fear, we don’t know. Hector Salamanca 
once referred to Gus as “Grand Generalissimo”, suggesting a connection to 
Pinochet, though he left Chile during Pinochet’s regime. Did he manage to anger 
the dictator, somehow? And just how important was he?

Who was his business partner?

Back to that troublesome flashback. His business partner Max, with whom he 
approached the Juárez Cartel back in the 80s, was murdered by them on the spot. 
Gus spent the next 20 or so years working with the cartel and plotting his 
vengeance. This man does not go in for short-term gratification. If there’s one 
thing we know for sure, it’s that his forward planning skills are second to 
none.


But two decades is a long time to put into avenging a business partner. 
Clearly Max meant more to him than that. Were they friends or lovers? Max’s 
death was the only time we saw raw emotion on Gus’s face. Maybe we’ll finally 
find out why.

Related: Magic Mike: how Jonathan Banks became TV’s best-loved hitman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/11/breaking-bad-and-better-call-saul-star-jonathan-banks>

How did he and Mike come to work together?

Better Call Saul has already shown how Saul/Jimmy and Mike Ehrmantraut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/11/breaking-bad-and-better-call-saul-star-jonathan-banks>
 met. But in Breaking Bad Mike is an enforcer for Gus, trying to keep the peace 
between Gus and Walt. In fact, Gus is about the only person Mike doesn’t treat 
as though they’re an idiot (apart from his granddaughter, of course).

But how did Mike and Gus come to respect each other? When Gus finally makes 
his debut on Better Call Saul, I’d expect it to be via one of Mike’s storylines 
rather than Jimmy’s.

Does he have a family?

On Breaking Bad Gus claimed to have children, but they were neither seen nor 
heard. Does he have a family, either back in Chile or in America, or is that 
just a lie he spins to back up Los Pollos Hermanos’ family ethos? The advert in 
the teaser is certainly focused on the fast-food chain’s family credentials, so 
does that mean we’ll get some background on his family at last? At this point, 
we’d settle for finding out if he has any pets.


 Just how does he put up with Saul’s lax business practices?

Gus is controlled, organised and rigid in his business endeavours. Saul 
Goodman, meanwhile, has an inflatable Statue of Liberty on his office roof. So 
how on Earth did they come to know and – more importantly – tolerate each other?

In Breaking Bad, Saul is rightly wary of Gus, and yet he does put Walt in 
touch with him. In retrospect, the idea that Gus would take a business 
recommendation from Saul seems highly unlikely. I would guess that Mike becomes 
the facilitator between the pair, someone who they both trust and respect. But 
watching these poles-apart businessmen meet for the first time has the 
potential to be flat-out hilarious.
 