
You'll never again hear anyone speaking Laghu, and anyone yearning to 
communicate in Old Kentish Sign Language is out of luck: it, too, has gone the 
way of the dodo. But there's still a chance to track down a conversation in 
Gamilaraay, or Southern Pomo – if you're prepared to trek to visit to one the 
few native Americans still speaking it in California. Of the 6,500 living 
languages currently being used around the world, around half are expected to be 
extinct by the end of this century.

It was concern about the cultural and historical losses that result from a 
language disappearing that inspired the World Oral Literature Project, an 
online collection of some of the 3,500-plus "endangered languages" struggling 
for survival in the world.

The heart of the project, run by Cambridge University, is a large database 
listing thousands of languages alongside details such as where they are spoken 
and by whom, plus audio clips. On the site, surfers can discover that Laghu was 
a language spoken in the Solomon Islands until it disappeared in 1984, Old 
Kentish Sign Language was a precursor to the modern-day version, and Gamilaraay 
is still used by the Kamilaroi tribe of New South Wales.

The project is the brainchild of Mark Turin, 37, a research associate at 
Cambridge University's Museum of Archaeology andAnthropology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/anthropology>. He grew up in London 
speaking Dutch and English and had planned to study linguistics at university, 
but on a gap year in Nepal realised he was interested in "what language 
unlocked, not just the nuts and bolts of linguistics", and switched to 
anthropology.

"We know very little about most of the world's languages, and an incredible 
amount about the histories and changes of a handful of western European 
languages," Turin explains. And he has devoted his academic career to trying to 
open up little-known languages. "Most endangered languages are primarily oral, 
and are vehicles for the transmission of a great deal of oral culture," he 
says. "That's at risk of being lost when speakers abandon their languages in 
favour of regional, national or international tongues."

So the World Oral Literature Project aims to document vanishing languages – 
and everything about the culture and society they convey – before they 
disappear. Its database used three major sources to collate the information 
about the disappearing languages, including Unesco's Atlas of the World's
Languages <https://www.theguardian.com/education/languages> in Danger. About 
150 of its listed languages are in an "extremely critical" condition, where the 
number of known living speakers has slipped to single figures, or even just one.

"As soon as a scholar declares a language to be extinct, you get a phone call 
from someone furious who says 'my mother still speaks it'," Turin says. "But in 
a way, these corrections are all part of the process of drawing attention to 
the cause and the sense of urgency involved in careful documentation and 
description of endangered speech forms the world over."

The project also provides funds for local fieldworkers in countries including 
Malawi, India, Mongolia and Colombia to collect data and recordings about 
little-spoken languages. In the past, Turin says, major collections of 
recordings were lost because they weren't deemed important. He sees the new 
site as a "safe haven" for fieldwork on languages that might otherwise be lost. 
"The vast majority of tapes are just kept in dusty boxes, but to put them on 
our database we digitise and hopefully future-proof them," he adds.

"All manner of people have been getting in touch to give us their collections, 
including missionaries, retired scholars and community activists." One early 
donor was Reverend John Whitehorn, a former missionary and Cambridge linguist 
who lived with an indigenous community in Taiwan in the 1950s. "When he came 
back to England, he walked into Cambridge's Museum of Anthropology and said, 
'I've got books, textiles and tape recordings, are you interested?' The museum 
took it all apart from the recordings because they didn't know what to do with 
them," Turin explains. "He went home and stored his collection around the house 
in plastic carrier bags, where they stayed until he walked into my office with 
the bags under his arm, and asked, 'do you want them now?' The tapes are 
brilliant, with songs and interviews and linguistic information that might 
otherwise have disappeared."

The database is currently updated exclusively by academics (though users are 
encouraged to send in contributions), but Turin hopes that it will ultimately 
become a Wikipedia-style web 2.0 project "that people want to contribute to", 
with user uploads, recordings and discussion to help keep languages alive. To 
that aim, Turin organises lectures and workshops for linguists, librarians, 
academics and members of the public to discuss the best strategies for 
collecting and protecting languages and their research.

But he worries that, in academia, funding pressures mean the importance of 
languages is being overlooked. "These days, students are in a huge rush to 
finish their PhDs due to time and funding requirements," he says. "They often 
don't have the time to develop a linguistic awareness for the people they're 
studying, and have to rely on interpreters and translators. But it's just not 
the same."

Turin is used to hearing sceptics dismiss the research. "I get a lot of people 
saying that they think this work is pointless as all minority languages that 
have no utility are better off dying off anyway – a kind of social Darwinian 
position," he says. "But I usually ask them whether they feel the same about 
all the old churches and buildings that Heritage Lottery money is helping to 
restore – or the plight of species around the world. Our work means we're 
helping not only endangered languages to stay with us, but all the culture and 
history that they denote."
Watch the video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/video/2011/feb/22/language-researchers-vanishing-voices-video>

www.oralliterature.org/database 
<http://oralliterature.org/research/databaseterms.html> 
 