
Fans of The Archers <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> are 
being offered the chance to own a stake in the farm that inspired the 
long-running radio soap opera, and earn a predicted 5% a year interest for a 
minimum investment of £100.

Rush Farm is a family-run 190-acre organic farm, which is located near 
Redditch in Worcestershire, and is run on biodynamic lines. It is looking to 
raise £700,000 to buy the remaining 35 acres of the farm’s land which is 
currently in private ownership, plus install solar panels and ground-source 
heat pumps at its business park, which is housed in an old stable block.

Stockwood Community Benefit Society (which is similar to a co-operative) 
bought the farm and business park in June 2014 following a successful share 
offer the previous year. It is now offering investors another chance to buy 
shares, with a minimum investment of £100. The maximum amount is £100,000.

The society says it expects to pay 5% annual interest on the shares, financed 
by rents from the business park, but adds that “this is not guaranteed”. 
However, investors who signed up for the previous offer received their first 5% 
payments in April this year and the farm has outperformed its financial targets.

The business park is run on sustainable and ethical principles, is home to 21 
businesses (including one that upcycles old cars, a chocolate company and an 
online ethical department store) and generates £200,000 a year in rents.

The Archers link may be a draw for some: Godfrey Baseley, the programme’s 
creator, was said to be a friend of the former owners and some episodes were 
written and recorded there in the early 1950s.

Lesley White, an accountant and business park tenant who helps out at lambing 
time, is one of those who has invested. “I love Rush Farm; for me it is all to 
do with the land and the sheep,” she says. “I now feel I am part of the farm 
and that I own a small piece of it.”

The offer is due to close on 30 November. Shares are available through ethical 
investment platform Ethex, and investors who buy at least £5,000 worth will 
have the opportunity to make a further investment of £5,000 or more in “loan 
stock” (where you lend a sum of money for a set period) paying 3% interest.

The loan stock is expected to qualify for social investment tax relief, 
entitling investors to an upfront 30% income tax relief – giving a combined 
9.9% return over six years. More information can be found atstockwoodcbs.org 
<http://www.stockwoodcbs.org>.
 