
US medical authorities have launched an investigation into the sudden death of 
triple surfing world championAndy Irons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-irons>, 32.

The Hawaiian native, known for riding the world's biggest waves and the only 
surfer to consistently challenge the recent supremacy of nine-times world 
champion Kelly Slater, pulled out of a contest in Puerto Rico blaming a bout of 
dengue fever, the mosquito-borne virus.

Irons was on his way home to Kauai, Hawaii 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hawaii>, where he was due to compete next 
week, but was reportedly too ill to make his connecting flight and checked into 
the Grant Hyatt hotel at Dallas airport where he was found dead shortly before 
10am yesterday morning by a hotel employee.

He is survived by his wife, Lyndie Dupuis, who is seven months pregnant with 
their first child.

An autopsy has been scheduled for tomorrow with possible toxicology tests to 
follow. A supply of methadone, the powerful painkiller, was discovered in a 
container for zolpidem, an insomnia drug, along with other medications in the 
hotel, according to an official at Tarrant County Medical Examiner's Office in 
Fort Worth quoted by the Star Advertiser newspaper in Hawaii.

The Association of Professional Surfers, which is running the Puerto Rico 
competition, said Irons died "from complications due to illness".

"He fell ill in Puerto Rico and went to see the contest doctor," said Stephane 
Tenailleau, European spokesman for Billabong, Irons's sponsor. "The doctor told 
him to withdraw from the contest and go back home to fix the disease."

"The world of surfing mourns an incredibly sad loss today with the news that 
Hawaii's Andy Irons has died," read a statement from Irons's family. "At this 
time the family sincerely thanks his friends and fans for their support and 
asks that the community respect their privacy. The family also asks not to be 
contacted so their focus can remain on one another during this time of profound 
loss. Aloha."

Irons's surfing achievements had turned him into a national hero in Hawaii, 
where the state's governor declared 13 February forever "Andy Irons Day". His 
brother, Bruce Irons, is also a professional surfer.

"Andy was one of the greatest surfers of our time," said a statement from 
Billabong. "More than that, he was a much loved son, a devoted husband and a 
soon-to-be father. The thoughts of all Billabong employees worldwide are with 
wife Lyndie and Andy's family at this most devastating time."

Mark Occhilupo, a former world champion and friend of Irons, told Fox Sports 
news that Irons had contracted dengue fever before and that it normally 
returned when he was run down. There has been a spike in the disease in the 
central American and across parts of the Caribbean during the autumn hurricane 
season.
 