
A senior HBOS banker accused of corruption allegedly received regular bribes 
in the form of envelopes stuffed with thousands of pounds in cash to pay for 
prostitutes at a flat in Marylebone, central London, a court has been told.

Lynden Scourfield, who dealt with many of HBOS’s most financially distressed 
borrower clients, is accused of playing a central role in a multimillion pound 
corruption plot along with a former venture capitalist David Mills, a jury at 
Southwark crown court has been told.

Between 2003 and 2007, a string of businesses with little or no hope of 
survival were fed with fresh loans by Scourfield, allegedly so that the money 
could be channelled – in “consultancy fees” and other charges – to Quayside 
Corporate Services, a turnaround consultancy controlled by Mills.

Mills, his wife and three other of his business associates – along with a 
second HBOS banker – are all on trial, charged with various offences relating 
to the alleged plot. All have denied wrongdoing. Scourfield, meanwhile, is not 
in the dock. Jurors have been told they “must not speculate about his absence 
or the reasons for it”.

Prosecuting, Brian O’Neill QC told the court: “As the figure who held the key 
to continued funding, Scourfield could exercise enormous power over the 
directors of the companies under his supervision. Many felt they had no choice 
but to comply with his or Mills’ demands.”

On the second day of his opening remarks, O’Neill painted a detailed picture 
of how some of the alleged conspirators had used prostitutes at the flat on 
Portman Square, in Marylebone, London. Rent for the flat, O’Neill told the 
jury, was paid for by one of the distressed companies linked to Scourfield and 
Mills, while another struggling business allegedly had paid for prostitutes.

The court heard how a Quayside employee had visited the flat three times to 
deliver envelopes in 2005. On one occasion, having seen the envelope being 
filled, the Quayside worker estimated it contained £3,000 to £4,000. He was 
later told by a senior colleague that this was “funny money” for Scourfield to 
pay for women.

On his first visit to the flat, the Quayside worker had let himself in, 
O’Neill told the jury. He found Scourfield emerging from the bedroom in just a 
towel. The court was told the banker allegedly said words to the effect: “Hi 
Terry, you got some stuff for me?” As he was speaking, a women in her twenties 
also allegedly emerged from the bedroom.

Later, the prosecution said, a businessman who ran a struggling pornographic 
magazine company was asked by a Quayside consultant, Michael Bancroft – one of 
the defendants on trial – to arrange prostitutes for Scourfield.

The businessman took this to be a demand rather than a request and believed 
that he was expected to pay. He therefore arranged for Bancroft’s number to be 
given to a fixer who was able to arrange women on two occasions.

The fixer later told police how the “bank man” – alleged by the prosecution to 
be Scourfield – was particularly rude to the women. One of the prostitutes 
later described him to police as being “a bit edgy”. A diary entry from one of 
the prostitutes read: “Met guys, me, Amber and Suzie. Chinese meal. Then drinks 
at flat and quick shag. Easy £1,500.”

O’Neill told the jury none of the defendants were intending to contest the 
evidence of the prostitutes.

The jury heard alleged payments for sex were only part of the corrupt rewards 
said to have been taken by Scourfield. In addition, he stayed at Mayfair 
hotels, took trips to Las Vegas and Barbados, bought a £3,220 Cartier watch and 
enjoyed three nights on a six-star cruise from Nice to Saint Tropez.

The trial continues.

 