
At first, softly spoken Dr Charles Onyait Oluka, head of Tiriri health centre, 
the largest health facility in Katine, comes across as rather laidback and 
distracted. But his demeanour belies a passion for orderliness and 
professionalism. He is a man who shies away from any form of self-promotion.

"We are hoping for the best," Oluka vows solemnly. "Given all the support, we 
want to have this place like a model health centre. It is my dream. Other 
districts would come and say, what are these people doing here that we can also 
do? And I think with time we shall get there."

According to Uganda's healthcare system, Tiriri health centre is a 
mini-hospital that is supposed to have two medical officers leading 45 health 
cadres. For the first three years of theKatine project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news>, however, 
Tiriri did not have a single medical officer. Oluka is now in his fourth month 
here.

"There are many things lacking here; resources are not enough," says Oluka. 
"But I see human resource deficit as the biggest challenge. We are supposed to 
have 47 workers, but we are only 26. The few who are around are supposed to do 
the work of 47 people."

Oluka, who previously worked in a neighbouring district as acting health 
officer, still commutes from Soroti town, about 30km from Katine sub-county, 
north-eastUganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>. At the moment, his 
doctor's house is shared by four other health workers (he did not want to throw 
out people who kept the place running), but, with two staff houses under 
construction, the housing situation is expected to improve. For now, Oluka 
simply wants to have the basics in place. "Setting up systems is the first 
thing we are trying to do, and after that we can talk about other issues," he 
says.

Among those other issues is the surgical theatre, currently being renovated 
with funding from the project under the supervision of the Ministry ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/health> in Kampala and the Soroti district 
health department. Joseph Otim, the project officer in charge of health for the 
African Medical and Research Foundation (Amref), which is implementing the 
Katine project, highlights the renovation of the theatre, including connecting 
it and the maternity ward to the water mains, as the major achievement of the 
past year. With a new white floor, fittings and window panes, the theatre 
sparkles promisingly. The final touches, such as shutters and inspection 
chambers, are expected to be added over the coming months.

The main reason for having surgical theatres at facilities like Tiriri is to 
perform emergency obstetric operations on mothers with obstructed labour, one 
of the major causes of maternal deaths in Uganda. To do that, Oluka says he 
would need a dedicated team of theatre staff, but he is optimistic the district 
authorities would post the necessary personnel once a fully functional theatre 
was in place.

One remaining challenge is the lack of electricity, which is needed for 
lighting and running sterilising and other equipment. The health centre has a 
generator, which is connected to the theatre, but can barely afford to fuel it. 
Still, Oluka argues, this is a bridge that can be crossed in the future; after 
all, even hospitals connected to the electricity grid often suffer power 
outages.

Amref says that over the next two years, it will continue to lobby the local 
government to post the required personnel to run the theatre. Amref Uganda's 
head of programmes, Susan Wandera, points to Ojom health centre, about 15km 
from Tiriri, as an example of what can be achieved. Amref built a laboratory at 
Ojom and successfully lobbied the Soroti district health authorities to post a 
lab assistant.

Ojom also received solar power and a vaccines fridge from SolarAid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2010/feb/04/solar-panels-ojom-health-centre>
; this had meant that instead of ferrying vaccines using ice packs from – and 
back to – Tiriri health centre every Wednesday, Ojom is able to store its own 
vaccines. This had enabled the health centre to carry out immunisations on 
Wednesdays in addition to the usual Friday. It also has security lighting and 
has even started a phone-charging business on the side. But returning to Ojom 
last month, I found that the fridge has not been used since February. The 
digital thermostat malfunctioned, meaning that instead of keeping the vaccines 
at optimum temperatures, the fridge freezes them.

"This has really affected us," says John Richard Okello, the nurse in charge 
of Ojom. "We now have to carry the vaccines from Tiriri health centre on 
bicycle – not even motorcycle – and again take the balance back. We used to do 
outreach immunisations on Friday but now we have stopped that." But, on the 
plus side, Okello says he is happy with the solar power system. Recently, four 
bulbs blew and the centre was able to replace them using proceeds from its 
phone-charging business.

Otim says he was told by a technician from the Ugandan Ministry of Health that 
the SolarAid fridge was not best suited to Soroti's extreme temperature 
variations. District health authorities are now considering giving Ojom a new 
fridge allocated to the district from Kampala, and using the SolarAid one for 
freezing ice packs.

Community health workers

If Okello can't ride the bicycle to get vaccines from Tiriri, he sometimes 
asks another member of staff or a member of a village health team (VHT) to do 
the journey. As community health workers, VHTs are supposed to be the first 
point of call but they have proved to be inconsistent: active when there is an 
NGO or government-funded project with allowances, and hibernating when the 
project ends. Here in Katine, those VHTs specifically trained as community 
medicine distributors, have never received the anticipated medicines from the 
government. In March 2010,VHTs went on strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2010/mar/29/vht-health-strike> after Amref 
moved to abolish a daily transport allowance paid to them when they attended 
training sessions. Amref later agreed to reinstate the payment, albeit reducing 
it from UShs 5,000 to UShs 3,000 a day, but the row calls into question the 
faith invested in VHTs as unpaid community health volunteers.

"The VHTs agreed to continue working, but they are not happy that their 
allowance was reduced," said Michael Achol, a co-ordinator for VHTs in Ojama 
parish.

And as this controversial payment is only for training, one gets the 
impression that without someone – the government or an NGO – paying for it, 
VHTs will not undertake community health work such as sharing knowledge and 
educating people, or data collection. This suggests there is a need for new 
strategic thinking about VHTs. Amref is hoping that organising VHTs and other 
community groups as savings and loans associations will help to keep them 
active; if and how that will work remains to be seen.

"This opens up a much wider question, namely what is the future of the whole 
VHT movement in Uganda?" says Alistair Boyd, a former board chairman of Amref 
UK. "NGOs are all struggling with what happens when the NGO leaves. This is an 
attempt to find a solution to the sustainability of the VHT concept."

Back at Tiriri health centre, Oluka remains saddled with the problems of his 
predecessors: inadequate funding, inadequate staffing, insufficient supplies of 
essential medicines. But he remains optimistic: "We have been offering 
antiretroviral therapy since May this year. And our lab is now functioning; we 
can do both the blood smear test for malaria and sputum for tuberculosis, which 
we had not been doing for months because the microscope had broken down."
 