
The fiance of the children’s author found dead in a cesspit told police 
“things just haven’t been going well” before her disappearance, a court has 
heard.


Ian Stewart, 56, of Royston, Hertfordshire, is on trial accused of drugging 
and killing Helen Bailey and then concealing her remains in human sewage 
beneath the home they shared.


In a recording of his missing person report to police, played to the jury at 
St Albans crown court, he said the Electra Brown writer mentioned that she had 
been “wanting space”.


His trial previously heard that on the morning of her disappearance, she had 
been planning the couple’s wedding. But Stewart later told officers that Bailey 
had been “concerned” that he did not want to marry her, the court was told.

Asked whether he was surprised about her sudden departure, Stewart told the 
police call handler: “No, I wasn’t. Well, yes, it was a shock, she had talked 
about it but it was still a shock. She has talked about wanting space because 
things just haven’t been going well for her recently, or for us.”

During the call, which was made on 15 April 2016 – four days after the 
51-year-old was allegedly murdered – he also told police she had been “very, 
very anxious and very worried about lots of things”.


In Stewart’s account of that day, Bailey “wasn’t calm” during a dog walk due 
to problems with a wedding venue and had returned from a trip out saying she 
never wanted to drive again, one police officer told the court.


Stewart claimed that when he last saw his fiancee, they had kissed goodbye and 
he asked her what she wanted for tea. Then, as he left for a doctor’s 
appointment, he saw her for the final time at the window, clutching her dog 
Boris, the jury were told.

Notes of a conversation he had with DS Sarah Gilbertson when she visited the 
home on the day Bailey was reported missing were read to the court. One said: 
“She is concerned whether I want to marry her.”

He told officers that Bailey had left a note saying she had gone to stay at a 
cottage she owned on the Kent coast and did not want to be contacted.


Another officer, PC Richard Webster, told the court of his conversation with 
Stewart on 15 April: “He said he was a bit annoyed about the suddenness of 
Helen’s going away and was a bit puzzled.”


Three months after she vanished, Bailey’s body was discovered, alongside that 
of her dachshund, in the waste tank below her £1.5m property.


When the phone operator asked Stewart on 15 April if he was sure she was not 
at home, he said: “I’ve literally checked everywhere – we have got quite a 
large house and I have literally checked everywhere. I know she’s a very strong 
person. It would be very hard to abuse Helen. She’d come back at you strongly.”

The defendant denies charges of murder, preventing a lawful burial, fraud and 
three counts of perverting the course of justice. The court also heard that 
Bailey had planned to quit her career as an author due to stress.

Gilbertson’s notes of her conversation with Stewart stated: “She had no plans 
to write another book, but she had written a blog called Planet Grief. She 
described that it was stressful when she wrote it and, with hindsight, she 
wouldn’t have done.”

Bailey had written the blog about her experiences of becoming a widow after 
her first husband, John Sinfield, drowned in 2011. She was said to be “really 
annoyed” after several venues for her marriage to Stewart, which was pencilled 
in for September, had fallen through.

According to Stewart, the couple had spent only one day apart in three years – 
when he was in intensive care. The court heard that he told officers he had a 
“gut feeling” she had gone to a dog-friendly hotel and she “wouldn’t try to 
harm herself”.

Earlier, the girlfriend of Stewart’s son Oliver told jurors he had not been in 
good physical health before Bailey disappeared.


Alexandra McGarry said: “He was frail. Oliver told me he was even struggling 
to reach up into the cupboards and get food out and things like that.”


Another officer, DC Kerry Burrows, described how Stewart seemed distracted 
when he saw police walking around his house. He told the court: “Some time 
further into speaking with him, he seemed to pay attention to the movements 
going on in the hallway. He moved back in his chair, he seemed to be focusing 
his attention there.”

The trial continues.
 