 Women and children sleep two to a bed. Others sleep on the kitchen floor and 
in the sitting-room. There are about 120 people in a house suitable for 36. It 
is like moving from one sort of hell to another, said a social worker.
That's one view of Chiswick Women's Aid Centre, Erin Pizzey's refuge for 
battered wives which faces a crisis following Hounslow Council's decision to 
withdraw part of its £10,000 urban aid grant unless it complies with 
regulations on fire, health and over-crowding.

Erin Pizzey and colleague Ann Ashby say they will go to gaol rather than 
comply with the regulations. This week the electricity was nearly cut off but 
they won a seven-day reprieve. Erin Pizzey points out: "Without the urban aid 
grant how can we pay our bills? This makes more of a fire hazard." They will 
not end their policy of running the Chiswick centre as an open-door refuge.

Ann Ashby reports the case of a woman who arrived a few nights ago: "Her 
husband had pulled her trousers down and poured boiling water between her legs. 
He'd beaten her about so she had six broken ribs as well, and bruises and cuts 
all over. Her children were suffering too. She came to us, we took her to 
hospital and brought her back with us. She can stay as long as she likes. You 
can't expect us to turn a woman like that away".

Chiswick Women's Aid Centre is important. It was masterminded and created by 
Erin Pizzey, 36, the wife of a TV reporter and a forceful, powerful personality 
who - even her critics admit - was the right person to bring her energy and 
publicity-conscious mind to bear on the problem of battered wives. It is 
difficult not to make the whole row centre around the personality of Erin 
Pizzey, there is so much strength in feelings for or against her.

She persuaded Barbara Castle to authorise a £2,000-a-month grant from the 
Department of Health and Social Security. This summer she took a van load of 
wives around the Continent raising money. Refuges that have grown up in the 
wake of the Chiswick centre are often run on money raised from jumble-sales and 
coffee-mornings. They feel it is wrong that only the one centre should have the 
DHSS money, and an Urban Aid Grant. But then Chiswick claims to be the only 
open-door centre in the country.

Women come to Erin Pizzey's centre from all over the country. They ring up, 
hitch a lift, creep out of their homes in the dead of night - one just wearing 
a nightie and clutching her children's hands. The tragedy of their cases cannot 
be denied. Nor can Hounslow's problems. The council says it is "bearing the 
brunt of a national problem, being asked to sort out the rehousing problems of 
women from all over the country. Our ratepayers just won't stand for it."

The open-door policy has finally driven the council to withdraw support. The 
large Victorian house on Chiswick High Road was given to the centre by Bovis. 
It has six bedrooms, with reception rooms, kitchen and a garden. Hounslow 
Environmental Department said the house could hold 36 women and children. Not 
the 120-odd who are there at the moment. It's a health hazard and a fire 
hazard, and we cannot let it go like that," said a spokesman.

Erin Pizzey says the council should give them more properties to run as 
open-door centres. Her critics say she should use that house as a crisis 
centre, taking women in for the night, and then rerouting them to smaller 
refuges the next day.

Last month the Select Committee on Violence in Marriage recommended the use of 
smaller refuges for four or five families. But Ann Ashby says that would not 
work. "We'd have to turn people away. We get women here who've been around six 
or seven refuges and have been turned away. You can't shunt women around just 
because you've no room. Maybe after a few momths, when they've regained their 
self-confidence they are ready to move on. Companies and individuals offer 
houses and when a place comes up we sit and discuss it and mums who've made 
friends with each other decide they might go and live together in what we call 
community houses. That way they continue to get support from living together. 
I'm not saying they'll want to spend the rest of their lives living solely with 
other women and children, but at this therapeutic stage it's very important."

A student who visited the Chiswick centre believes the overcrowding is almost 
a necessary part of it: "Erin Pizzey's theory is that by coming together in 
this way the women learn how to help each other. The cycle of violence has to 
be broken. It's more important to get that through to the kids than the adults, 
as these things move from generation to generation. So, the idea is to have a 
busy atmosphere.

"There is no violence in the house. If one woman wants to go off to the pub 
and is about to leave her child, the other women stop her.

"Some of the refuges set up by local authorities with three or four families 
living there, are women's aid centres in name only. They aren't offering the 
same therapeutic process."

A neighbouring women's aid centre at Acton, running on a smaller budget and 
with only 16 women and 45 children, does not follow the open-door plan. Rose 
Allbrow, their chairman, explains: "Chiswick had so much publicity and was so 
well known nationally that they were getting too many women. There were other 
dangers. The husbands knew where to find their wives. We've seen frightened 
women who daren't stay there because of the men prowling outside."

"Our closed-door policy isn't as regimented as it sounds. The women run the 
house and they choose who to let in. If a woman turns up in the night, she 
comes in: if she 'phones up in the night she come in. But if some other agency 
rings us and we are full, we ask them to try elsewhere. If they can't find a 
place we will take the woman for the night. Our 'phone number is secret. The 
right people know it: the police, social services, the Samaritans and other 
centres. The woman herself is unlikely to know. Nor would her husband be able 
to find it. I'd be loth to criticise Chiswick. Their publicity does them a 
disservice and helps us. We need a places like Chiswick to act as a crisis 
centres for overnight stay - and we need them all over the country."

So who is right? Erin Pizzey has clashed head-on with the council because she 
does not feel obliged to comply with regulations. Local authority rules often 
seem designed to close any place that is run with imagination and initiative.

Hounslow council say they are peeved because in March they offered to take 
over the financial and management concerns of the Chiswick centre and the offer 
was refused. Battered women run to these refuges to get out of the way of the 
eternal round of social services, and bureaucratic red tape. They don't need 
social workers who will put them in bed and breakfast or a lonely bedsitter."

But Chiswick residents are up in arms about the centre: the undisciplined 
kids, the noise, shouting, angry scenes with angry husbands. One resident 
commented: "These women look more like batterers than the battered. People who 
leap to their defence should know how unpleasant it is to live near them."

Some social workers are equally alarmed at the way the centre is run and fear 
that what started off with good intentions, of helping women in trouble, has 
been taken over by a political imperative of making their plight seen and 
heard. One worker said: "Erin Pizzey seems determined to be anti-council and 
bloody minded."

Meanwhile Hounslow council say "If Erin Pizzey wants to go to gaol that is her 
prerogative. We'll keep a sharp eye on the situation."

· This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 Years 
of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 