
Failure to replace the help-to-buy mortgage guarantee scheme when it comes to 
an end next year will choke off competition and push the first-time buyer 
market back into decline, lenders have warned.

The scheme, which offers banks and building societies a government guarantee 
on mortgages of up to 95% loan to value (LTV) on existing properties, was 
launched in late 2013 as part of a series of measures to kickstart the housing 
market. But it is scheduled to end in 2016.

The government has committed to continuing the help-to-buy loan scheme on 
newbuild properties until 2020.

The Intermediary Mortgage Lenders Association (IMLA), which represents firms 
that market their products through brokers and advisers, said 65% of its 
members believed competition would fall unless a permanent indemnity scheme was 
brought in to replace Help-to-Buy 2.

IMLA’s research found 75% of brokers and 65% of lenders expected first-time 
buyer numbers to drop if the scheme ends without a replacement, while 75% of 
brokers and 85% of lenders thought access to homeownership would suffer as a 
result.

Housing experts: Tory plans neglect those who need affordable homes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/02/housing-experts-tory-plans-neglect-those-who-need-affordable-homes>
The mortgage market has recovered recently for those with low deposits, with 
an increase in the choice of loans and rate cuts on high LTV deals.Mortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/mortgages> are now available at rates below 
4% to borrowers with a 5% deposit, while someone with 10% to put down can get a 
rate as low as 1.99%.

IMLA said a permanent guarantee would relieve the pressure of capital 
requirements on lenders, which limit their capacity to offer these loans.

Peter Williams, executive director of IMLA, said: “The help-to-buy mortgage 
guarantee has breathed new life into the market and opened the door to more 
prospective homeowners without sacrificing standards when it comes to 
affordability checks.

“It is encouraging to see more lenders offering 95% LTV products outside of 
the scheme – but it would be a big gamble to rely on this continuing without 
the boost that the government has brought to the first-time buyer market.”

The housing charity Shelter has published figures showing how the gap has 
grown between first time buyers’ earnings and the cost of a home in the years 
since older generations stepped on the housing ladder.

It said that if house prices had risen in line with earnings between 1969 and 
2013, the average cost of a home in England would have grown to £121,166. In 
fact it is almost £77,000 more at £198,039.

House price growth was closest to income growth in the north-east, where house 
prices increased by 34 times over the 44-year period in question, while income 
increased by 24 times. However, at £113,606, average prices were still £34,178 
higher than if they had tracked wage growth.

The biggest discrepancy was in London where, even before last year’s price 
leaps, Shelter found prices were £139,203 higher than if they had risen in line 
with wages, at £333,057.

The charity’s chief executive, Campbell Robb, said: “When wages and house 
prices are so out of sync that first time buyers are having to pay tens of 
thousands of pounds more for a foot on the ladder, it’s a clear sign that our 
housing market is out of control.

“Without access to a lump sum from the bank of mum and dad, millions of young 
people and families are facing a lifetime in expensive private renting, or 
stuck in their childhood bedrooms well into adulthood.”
 