
A tax-free payment from the government of up to £6,000 for couples buying 
their first home, and interest rates of up to 4% when saving for a deposit, 
will be on offer to young buyers who take up the new help-to-buy Isa, which 
will launch next week.


The 4% interest rate will be on offer in branches and online from Halifax from 
Tuesday, and is so far above the standard rates available on deposits that it 
is likely to spark a rush for the government scheme.

Help-to-buy Isas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> are tax-free 
accounts for people saving for a deposit on a home, with the huge bonus that 
the government will add 25% to the value of whatever is saved. The top up is 
worth up to £3,000 per person, or £6,000 for a couple hoping to get on the 
property ladder for the first time.

The housing market is broken - people need help to rent, let alone buy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/the-housing-market-is-broken-people-need-help-to-rent-let-alone-buy>
The new Isa accounts go live on 1 December, and so far 14 organisations have 
signed up. Halifax is the market leader with its 4% interest offer, while 
NatWest has come in at 2%.

How they work 
Like normal cash Isas, the help to buy version will offer a place to put money 
and earn interest free of tax. When an account is first opened savers will be 
able to deposit up to £1,000 as a lump sum, then up to £200 a month (not 
necessarily in a single payment), until the account holds a maximum of £12,000. 
When the saver comes to buy a home the government will pay a bonus of 25% – 
which means up to £3,000 is available per head.


With the average house price for first-time buyers currently £216,000, 
according to the Office for National Statistics, the bonus is worth more than a 
quarter of a 5% deposit. The Isa can also be used alongside other government 
schemes like the help to buy interest-free loan on new-builds and the mortgage 
guarantee scheme for lenders.

The accounts will be available to anyone aged 16 and over and can be opened 
between 1 December 2015 and 30 November 2019. To get the bonus the money must 
be used to buy a house before the end of 2030.

To open a help-to-buy Isa you must be saving to buy your first home – and if 
you buy with another first-time buyer you can each have your own and earn the 
bonus. For a couple where both partners have never owned a home before that 
means up to £6,000 of government help.

The Isa can be closed and the money withdrawn to use for something else if you 
want, but if you are using it to buy a home you should not just withdraw it. 
You must ask for a closing statement which you hand to your solicitor who will 
claim your bonus for you – they can charge up to £50 plus VAT for doing so.

When the saver comes to buy, the government will pay a bonus of 25% – which 
means up to £3,000 per head

What your money could be worth 
A couple buying together, both for the first time, save (let’s say) £750 
upfront each, then £100 a month each for five years at the Halifax. Interest on 
the accounts is 4% paid annually. Their total pot before interest would be 
worth £13,500. With the interest added it goes up to £15,105. Then with the 
government bonus it adds up to £18,880.


A single person saves, let’s say, £500 upfront, then £150 a month for three 
years. They are with NatWest and the interest rate on the account is 2% paid 
annually. The total pot before interest would be worth £5,900, then £6,099 
after the interest. With the government bonus it goes up to £7,624.

What you can spend the money on 
There is a limit on the price of the property that can be bought – outside 
London it is £250,000, while within the capital it is £450,000 – the same as 
applies to the other help-to-buy schemes.


Minimum savings required 
The minimum amount you can save before you can claim a bonus is £1,600, which 
could be made up of a £1,000 lump sum and three months of £200 payments. The 
payments are in calendar months, rather than four weeks apart. Nationwide says 
that “if you pay in on the last day of January, pay in again on the first day 
of February and close it on 1 March, you will just need a 30-day window to make 
use of it”. In that time you could earn £400, so it’s well worth considering.


Andrew Montlake at mortgage brokers Coreco says he will be advising people who 
are at the early stages of looking for a property to make the most of the Isas. 
“Mortgage affordability is an issue, but the real hurdle is the deposit for 
most people, especially when they are renting in areas where that is expensive. 
Anything that can help towards the deposit is a good thing,” he says.

Mortgage affordability is an issue, but the real hurdle is the deposit for 
most people
Andrew Montlake, Coreco 
Montlake says it is useful for buyers to get in the budgeting habit so they 
are prepared for when they take on a mortgage, and that a track record of 
saving could be a point in your favour when you come to buy. “If there are any 
on-the-cusp cases, potentially it could make a difference – another positive is 
that it shows lenders that you do have financial discipline.”

What happens when you decide to buy, or decide to give up 
When you take the plunge and buy you will be able to take a mortgage from a 
different bank or building society and should shop around to make sure you get 
the best deal. It is likely that there will be incentives to stay with your Isa 
provider – Nationwide, for example, will shave 0.2% off 90% and 95% mortgage 
rates – but you should compare these rates with those in the rest of the market.


Along the way to your new home you can’t withdraw money and put it back, or 
make up for months when you were unable to make payments in, but if the worst 
does happen and you shut the account and the purchase falls through at the last 
minute you can put the money back.

If you abandon your plans to buy a home you can decide to withdraw the money 
from the Isa. The interest will be tax-free but there will be no government 
bonus.

Several providers, including Aldermore, Nationwide, Newcastle building society 
and NatWest, however, operate their Isas inside a wrapper, which means you can 
transfer all your money to them and distribute it between the help-to-buy Isa 
and their other cash Isas.

If you already have an Isa this year you will not be able to transfer more 
than £1,200 held in it into a new help-to-buy Isa. With most providers this 
will mean taking the remaining amount out of the Isa, or moving it into stocks 
and shares.

Help-to-buy Isa providers

The following banks and building societies have signed up to offer the new 
account: Aldermore, Barclays, Bank of Scotland, Clydesdale Bank, Halifax, HSBC, 
Lloyds, Nationwide, NatWest, Newcastle building society, Santander, Ulster 
North, Virgin Money and Yorkshire Bank

Knocking on the door

Alex Jeffers says he will be one of the first people through the Halifax’s 
door when the help-to-buy scheme opens for business next week,writes Miles 
Brignall. 

The 26-year-old, who lives and works in Cardiff, hopes to use the initiative 
to build up the £11,000 deposit he estimates he and his girlfriend Carol will 
need.

Jeffers, a creative manager for a small media company that develops apps, is 
about to rent a flat with Carol, a freelance illustrator, until they can get a 
mortgage. “We really like Cardiff and want to buy n the city. I realised a 
while ago that if I were ever going to get on the housing ladder I would need 
to build up some savings. A friend put me on to this scheme when it was 
announced – and the timing of the launch couldn’t have been better. I’ve got 
the first £1,000 to kick it off, and plan to try save at least £100 a month – 
more if I can afford it.”

The government top-up of £3,000 per person could, he reckons, be key for many 
first-time buyers.

He would like to open the account with Halifax, as it is where he banks. 
“There are lots of new-build flats ll over Cardiff, but frankly most are tiny 
and in really odd areas – in short, they are all a bit crap. We want to buy an 
older place in a more established area where there’s a bit of life. Hopefully 
it won’t take for ever to save up enough and to get a mortgage,” he says.
 