
For Manchester United, the importance of this victory could probably be summed 
up by the fact they began this match in danger of becoming little more than a 
speck in the distance when it came to the title race. The gap is still 
considerable, at 13 points, and “you’re not special any more” seems to be the 
soundtrack from Old Trafford’s away end these days but, ultimately, José 
Mourinho’s team could reflect ona satisfying afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/11/manchester-united-v-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-live>
, featuring some encouraging news about the injury sustained by Henrikh 
Mkhitaryan, their match-winner.

Southampton beat Middlesbrough thanks to Sofiane Boufal’s stunning goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/southampton-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
Mkhitaryan was taken off on a stretcher after damaging his left ankle trying 
to elude Danny Rose’s sliding challenge and it would have been rotten luck for 
the Armenian if it had meant a long period of rehabilitation just as he was 
finally demonstrating why Mourinho was so keen tobring him to the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/manchester-united-henrikh-mkhitaryan-signs>
 in the first place. His 29th-minute goal followedthe one he scored against 
Zorya Luhansk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/manchester-united-zorya-europa-league-match-report>
 in the Europa League last Thursday and, although Paul Pogba was the 
outstanding performer in their latest victory, Mkhitaryan had shown again that 
he was adjusting to Mourinho’s demands and is capable of shaping the team’s 
fortunes. His goal spared United from going three months since the last time 
they won a league fixture on their own ground and there was considerable 
relief, an hour or so after the final whistle, when the initial prognosis was 
merely a one or two-week lay-off.

United still have a few issues, judging by the jarring boos when Marouane 
Fellaini, the player the crowd like the least, started warming up in the second 
half and Victor Wanyama might wake in a cold sweat when he thinks about the 
headed opportunity, 10 minutes after the interval, that could have changed the 
complexion of the match. Yet it was still an encouraging victory for Mourinho’s 
team and a difficult afternoon forTottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> was probably summed up 
by the moment Dele Alli, the impudent young buck, tried to upstage Michael 
Carrick by slipping the ball through his opponent’s legs. Carrick, the older 
man by 15 years, was much too wise for that kind of frivolity. The nutmeg 
jammed, Carrick came away with the ball and United went on the attack again.

Can this team find a way back into the title race? That might be pushing it 
but Pogba’s form is certainly a cause for optimism and Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s 
range of qualities make up for his lack of movement on the frontline. United 
always look better with Carrick’s elegance in midfield and, defensively, it 
should not be overlooked Mourinho has been making do without three-quarters of 
his first-choice back four. A quartet of, right to left, Antonio Valencia, Phil 
Jones, Marcos Rojo and Matteo Darmian might be thought of as potentially 
vulnerable but they restricted Spurs to only one clear opportunity. Jones, in 
particular, deserves to keep his place even when Chris Smalling and Eric Bailly 
are fully fit and on the one occasion Valencia switched off, failing to react 
when Christian Eriksen swung a free-kick into the penalty area, Wanyama’s 
header was horribly misplaced when he had a golden chance to equalise.

Diego Costa strikes again as Chelsea go top with win over West Brom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/chelsea-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
Mauricio Pochettino’s team can certainly play much better, although, in 
fairness to Mourinho, perhaps the credit should go to the home side for 
operating with a structure that successfully negated the attacking threat of 
Kyle Walker and Rose, the opposition’s forward-thinking full-backs. It was 
unusual to see Tottenham play with so little width or penetration and, although 
there were long-range efforts from Eriksen and Son Heung-Min, Harry Kane had a 
difficult afternoon, not least as it was his mistake that led to the 
decisive moment.

Spurs had been breaking forward when the ball reached Kane in the centre 
circle but when he looked to his right, perhaps expecting one of Walker’s 
overlapping runs, there was nobody in support. Kane came back the other way but 
succeeded only in playing the ball to Ander Herrera and suddenly Tottenham were 
in trouble. Herrera’s pass was weighted expertly for Mkhitaryan to run clear 
and a powerful right-foot shot was still rising as it soared above Hugo Lloris 
into the roof of the net.

The closest United came from that point was the free-kick that Pogba curled 
against the crossbar in the 63rd minute. Soon afterwards, Pogba was denied by 
Lloris’s save but it was not just the midfielder’s attacking threat that caught 
the eye. Pogba’s athleticism and high-kneed running style makes him a 
fiendishly difficult opponent and, if anything, he needs some of the players 
around him to raise their own level of performance. Anthony Martial, once 
again, looked considerably less effective than in his first season in 
Manchester.

Mourinho resisted any temptation to bring on Wayne Rooney in the closing 
stages and chose instead to introduce Marcus Rashford, hoping that his speed 
might help on the counterattack. Rashford seems to have misplaced his wow 
factor and the tactic seldom worked but United reached the final whistle 
without too many problems and Pochettino had to face questions afterwards about 
why,having beaten Manchester City in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, his side have subsequently taken only a solitary point against Arsenal, 
Chelsea and United.

The Spurs manager did not really have any answers, a little like his team.
 