
A pop-up version of Heston Blumenthal’s the Fat Duck restaurant opened on 
Tuesday evening, while the real version in Bray, England, is undergoing a 
makeover. Not since the Embassy Taxi Cafe in West Melbourne received a makeover 
back in 1998 has such a big culinary occasion hit the city.

Fat Duck sates Heston Blumenthal's diners at Melbourne opening
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/04/fat-duck-sates-heston-blumenthals-diners-at-melbourne-opening>
In the same way I assumed to never see Topshop grace Australian shores, not in 
my wildest dreams did I think that anything other than a pricey flight to the 
UK would lead to an opportunity to eat at this foodie holy grail. Not that 
shuffling through Crown Casino, avoiding the pokies and cash machines that dot 
the joint like wild mushrooms, offers quite the same adventure as driving into 
a small English country town and fine dining in a gorgeous heritage building.

The ballot system used to gain entry takes the very now “we don’t take 
bookings” trend to the next level. At Heston’s, unless you won the lucky dip 
you simply have no chance to go at all. Game over. I understand that a ballot 
works well for those who plan their lives six months in advance, but surely 
even the disorganised among us deserves the chance to be turned down by a surly 
maître d’ on the end of the phone, who is practically sneering at the fact that 
one thought it vaguely possible to snare a table for two on a Saturday night 
only three weeks in advance?

Also, “pop-up”: are we done with that term yet? It was once used for temporary 
shops that would miraculously appear in a disused retail space and could only 
stay for a short while due to things like the lack of a functioning loo out 
back. The basic nature of these venues meant tenants could pack up and clear 
out the minute the landlord whispered “rent increase”. At $525 per diner, and a 
sure-bet long line of clientele feasting on Heston’s delights for the entire 
six months, I have a feeling the Fat Duck doesn’t quite qualify as a pop-up. 
It’s a temporary relocation. Paid for by a huge casino conglomerate.

Create your own Fat Duck dinner party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/feb/04/create-your-own-fat-duck-dinner-party>
The rules for dining at the Fat Duck are also a little on the absurd side. 
Diners are not allowed to take any pictures with a flash, it seems. While I 
adore the idea of forcing people to be in the moment so they can fully 
appreciate the genuine artistry of Blumenthal’s creations, let’s remember, a 
restaurant is not an art gallery. The food quality won’t diminish if exposed to 
a flash, in the way a delicate lithograph from 1770 would be. As for upsetting 
other diners – I don’t remember ever getting upset when someone’s Aunty Marge 
couldn’t work out how to turn the flash off her smartphone, while taking a 
happy snap of the family dinner. Lighten up, people!

Small quibbles aside (because let’s face it, irritation is often a symptom of 
green-eyed envy) for food lovers in Melbourne, this is agenuinely exciting 
occasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2014/sep/18/heston-blumenthals-fat-duck-melbourne>
. Blumenthal is a known creative in the kitchen and a whiz at food theatre; 
adding all the dramatic flutter of a Siegfried and Roy magic show to things 
like cabbage and snails. And maybe anyone who can transform those two 
ingredients into something mind-blowing deserves a few diva-ish demands.
 