
There are any number of neglected and marginalised groups in society, but one 
of the largest is barely recognised. I am talking of introverts, who constitute 
between a third and a half of society, according to a new book for adolescents. 
Quiet Power: Growing Up as an Introvert in a World That Can’t Stop Talking by 
Susan Cain is currently being devoured by my (introvert) 14-year-old daughter 
and it needs to be read, I think, by parents as well as teenagers.

Cain is best known for her earlier book for adults, Quiet: The Power of 
Introverts in a World That Can’t Stop Talking 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/quiet-3.html>. In it she calls out the 
extrovert society in which we live for marginalising people such as her (and 
me) for, well, just wanting to be left alone sometimes.

Her new book is directly aimed at adolescents, and urges that we give 
introverts special attention at an early age. She is keen to reassure 
introverts they are not weird or geeky. Introversion is their “secret 
superpower” and she points to some of the very successful world-historical 
introverts: Gandhi, Einstein and (more surprisingly) Beyoncé and Emma Watson.

Introverts are not to be confused with shy people, who may well be introverts, 
but may equally well be socially awkward extroverts. Introverts can be outgoing 
and confident. There are those in between (ambiverts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/22/quiet-power-introverts-susan-cain-review>
) but most people are closer to one end of the spectrum than the other. Each 
group has trouble understanding the other because, according to Cain, they have 
differently configured nervous systems.

Introverts construct their reality in their own heads. Inner structure, order 
and meaning is more important to them than external connection or the world in 
front of their eyes. Some extroverts – I suspect – almost never give any 
thought to what is going on in their own heads. They are practical people who 
“just get on with it”. They are team players, joiners in, partygoers. They are 
the television performers and cultural role models.

Extroverts often think introverts are just plain weird. As Cain puts it: 
“Society often overlooks introverts … we’re all supposed to be quick thinking, 
charismatic risk takers who prefer action to contemplation.” Society, she says, 
imposes “the pressure to be rowdy”. Being an introvert, as one interviewee in 
the book says, is rather like “being stuck in your own head”.

Introverts can find noise and fuss overwhelming. Whereas extroverts draw 
energy from social situations, introverts need to save energy to deal with 
them. Introverts like to be left alone – usually to pursue some singular 
passion that absorbs them overwhelmingly (in my case it was books). “It’s about 
having a deep inner life and believing that inner life to be important,” says 
Cain.

The introvert’s dilemma resonates with me greatly, and I wish I had had Cain’s 
book when I was 13, as I was a very quiet, bookish child who kept himself to 
himself and had only one real friend (introverts typically only have one or two 
friends). At around the age of 14, it occurred to me that I simply couldn’t 
survive as an introvert in the world. So I put on a loud, aggressive mask, 
which I didn’t take off again probably until I had a nervous breakdown at the 
age of 30. The weight of the mask was too much.

At the end of the book, Cain offers a chapter on what a parent who has an 
introvert child should do – get out of the way, and let their introvert child 
have down time without constantly insisting they “do” something or bullying 
them into making new friends – “They need time to decompress and daydream and 
do absolutely nothing”.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 