
A £500 tax cut for the “squeezed middle” formed the centrepiece of a budget 
that promised to reverse the march of millions of workers into the higher rate 
tax band.

Since George Osborne became chancellor, the number of employees paying the 40% 
higher rate tax has soared from 3.3 million to nearly 5 million, prompting 
widespread alarm within the Conservative party. Butin the budget  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/budget-2016-george-osbornes-speech>
Osborne said the higher rate band would rise from £43,000 to £45,000 for the 
2017-18 tax year.

“It is going to lift over half a million people who should never have been 
paying the higher rate out of that higher tax band altogether. And it’s the 
biggest above-inflation cash increase since Nigel Lawson introduced the 40p 
rate almost 30 years ago,” he said.

George Osborne backs sugar tax and £3.5bn of Whitehall cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/george-osbornes-sugar-tax-economic-fears-budget>
The £2,000 rise in the starting point for 40% tax means a £400 annual saving 
for everyone who earns between £45,000 and £100,000. After that level of 
income, the value of the allowance tapers off.

Lower down the income scale, there were further tax cuts, although less 
generous. The personal allowance – that part of a worker’s pay that is not 
liable for any income tax – will rise from £11,000 for 2016-17 to £11,500 for 
the tax year starting in April 2017.

The £500 rise in the allowance works out at a £100 tax saving for everyone who 
earns over £11,500 a year. It also means that the total tax saving for higher 
rate taxpayers will be £500, as they will also benefit from the change to the 
personal allowance.

“That’s a tax cut for 31 million people,” said the chancellor. “It means a 
typical basic rate taxpayer will be paying over £1,000 less income tax than 
five years ago. And it means another 1.3 million of the lowest paid taken out 
of tax altogether.”

The tax savings for middle England could be as high as £900 a head once other 
giveaways are included. The chancellor introduceda new “sharing economy” 
allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/16/landlords-and-traders-receive-2000-tax-allowance-to-boost-sharing-economy>
of £1,000 for earnings from letting property such as through Airbnb - worth 
£400 to a higher rate taxpayer. He will also call HMRC inspectors off the trail 
of eBay traders, who will no longer have to pay tax on profits of less than 
£1,000.

Iain McCluskey of accountants PwC said: “Tethered to his manifesto promise not 
to increase headline tax rates, [the chancellor’s] moves could be seen as 
tinkering rather than transforming. He used the little money he had to take 
more people out of the 40p tax band, a reminder to middle England that he is 
looking out for them.”

Documents 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/budget-2016-documents/budget-2016> 
issued after the budget show that the total cost of the rise in the personal 
allowance would be around £1.5bn in 2017-18, with a further £500m cost for the 
rise in the higher rate band.

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, while stepping back from directly 
criticising the increase in tax allowances, called the new tax breaks unfair. 
“This budget has unfairness at its very core, paid for by those who can least 
afford it. He could not have made his priorities clearer – while half a million 
people with disabilities are losing over £1bn in personal independence 
payments, corporation tax is being cut and billions handed out in tax cuts to 
the very wealthy.”

While the chancellor made much of his income tax cuts, the other major 
“stoppage” from workers’ pay packets – national insurance – was largely frozen. 
Osborne said he would scrap Class 2 payments made by the self-employed, 
currently set at £2.80 a week. “To help the self-employed I’m going to fulfil 
the manifesto commitment we made, and from 2018 abolish Class 2 national 
insurance contributions altogether,” he said.

But for conventional employees, the NIC burden may rise, as a frozen threshold 
means more people pay as their earnings rise. Patricia Mock, tax director at 
Deloitte, said: “There is no indication that the lower earnings threshold for 
Class 1 national insurance has been increased, so lower earners will still 
suffer this 12% charge on their income between around £8,060 (although this is 
set to increase by 1% in 2017-18) and the new personal allowance. Given the 
cost of equalising the starting points for income tax and national insurance is 
estimated to be around £6.35bn it is hardly surprising that this gap has yet to 
be closed.”

The feared raid on pension tax relief was abandoned in the week before the 
budget, with the chancellor instead surprising the pensions and investment 
industry with a new “Lifetime Isa”. The scheme is aimed at helping young people 
to save for their first home or retirement. In a concession to “Generation Y” 
excluded from the property market and final salary schemes, the scheme will 
allow those under 40 years old to put up to £4,000 a year into the Isa with the 
bonus of a free £1,000 top up from the government.

Savers with conventional Isas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> will 
also receive a boost, with a new tax-free ceiling of £20,000 from April next 
year.

Nick Hungerford of investment group Nutmeg said: “It’s excellent to see a new, 
more flexible way for younger people to save and invest. We wonder whether the 
Lifetime Isa will lead more people to direct savings towards a property, 
leaving less money for pension savings. It’s possible that this is the 
beginning of a new shift, away from pensions as a long-term savings vehicle and 
towards Isas.”

Absent from the chancellor’s speech were many of the cuts in tax credits that 
come into force in just a fortnight’s time, but which were announced a year 
ago. The freeze in working-age benefits, tax credits and local housing 
allowances for four years from April 2016 will save the chancellor £9.3bn 
between now and 2021, according to estimates released after the speech. Thecuts 
to aids and appliances used by the disabled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/15/disability-cuts-cutbacks-destroy-independent-living-budget>
, released earlier this week, will save a further £4.3bn for the Treasury’s 
coffers.

Jeremy Corbyn said the impact on the disabled could be severe. “I simply ask 
the chancellor this: if you can finance the giveaways that you have put in your 
budget to different sectors, why can’t you fund the need for dignity for the 
disabled people of this country?”
 