 A parade by hundreds of Hindus through the holy city of Ayodhya in north-west 
India passed off peacefully today after police detained more than 18,000 Hindu 
nationalists throughout the country to prevent another bloody round of 
sectarian violence.
Police had feared that plans to hold a Hindu ceremony near the site of a 
destroyed mosque could trigger new religious violence. More than 700 people 
have died in mob violence in the last three weeks, after Muslim extremists in 
the western state of Gujarat set fire to a train filled with Hindu pilgrims 
returning fromAyodhya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya>.

The fire killed 58 people - mostly Hindus - and sparked violence and protests 
in Gujarat and beyond. Hindus turned on their Muslim neighbours, burning 
villages and housing complexes.

Today's procession was a compromise deal with Hindu nationalists who are 
seeking to build a temple to Rama, the chief Hindu deity, on the disputed site 
of a mosque they destroyed 10 years ago.

Hindus claim the 16th-century mosque was built on the site of a temple to 
Rama. Muslims want to see the mosque rebuilt. The destruction of the mosque in 
1992 sparked off riots that killed 3,000 people.

Thousands of police and paramilitary troops, most of them Hindus, had sealed 
off Ayodhya to stop Hindu nationalists from holding the ceremony on government 
land around the disputed site. Earlier this week the supreme court ruled that 
religious activities were barred from the area until the court determines its 
ownership.

Today security forces detained 1,000 activists tramping through rice fields or 
trying to cross the Saryu River, which surrounds the town.

Police escorted a priest and two temple pillars - carried on marigold-decked 
bicycle rickshaws - through this tense town as hundreds of chanting supporters 
crowded its narrow lanes. Hindu nationalists, led by 93-year-old hardline 
priest Ramchandra Das, then handed the pillars over to an official from the 
prime minister's office.

The consecrated pillars were meant to be the first in the temple, large parts 
of which have already been constructed off-site.

The ceremony was peaceful, with white-clothed Brahmins chanting mantras and 
onlookers holding up small votive lamps. Several hundred Hindu holy men shouted 
anti-government slogans and angrily beat their chests. Mr Das calmed them, 
saying: "I don't want any bloodshed."

Elsewhere in India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, from Bombay to 
Lucknow, the capital of Uttar Pradesh state where Ayodhya is located, police 
detained more than 17,000 people to keep them from going to the ceremony or 
engaging in local mob violence or provocative demonstrations.

Police detained hundreds of members of the World Hindu Council, which has 
spearheaded plans to build the temple to Rama, on the rubble of the 16th 
century mosque.

Police and paramilitary troops armed with automatic weapons and tear gas were 
clustered at every corner, and posted in the ancient alleyways of Ayodhya. 
Snipers dotted the ragged rooftops.

Newspapers said members of prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee's cabinet 
arranged a compromise last night with Mr Das and leaders of the World Hindu 
Council.

Mr Vajpayee's Hindu nationalist party is closely linked to the World Hindu 
Council and the prime minister favours the building of the temple on the 
disputed site. But he heads a fragile 22-party coalition, including many 
secular parties, and has said the supreme court order will be enforced.
 