 A group of independent archaelogists and historians is to challenge a report 
by the archaeological survey of India that a Hindu temple existed at the holy 
city of Ayodhya beneath the ruins of a mosque destroyed in 1992.
At a news conference in New Delhi yesterday, the group said it would file its 
objections in court. "It is all a figment of the imagination," said historian 
Irfan Habib, who claimed that the government archaeologists had "monkeyed" with 
the structure they excavated to establish that they had uncovered a Hindu 
shrine.

Suraj Bhan, a professor of archaeology, who visited the site during the 
archaeological dig, maintained that there was enough evidence to show that the 
burnt-brick structure uncovered under the razed Babri mosque was actually 
another mosque dating from the Sultanate period, another phase of Muslim rule 
before the Mughals.

The ASI's report, following a five-month court-ordered excavation, claimed to 
have found evidence of a large, 11th century temple beneath the site in the 
northern Indian town ofAyodhya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya>. 
Such a finding would establish the legitimacy of the area as a Hindu shrine 
rather than a Muslim site.

Ayodhya has become the most explosive issue in Indian politics. Hindus and 
Muslims are engaged in a long-running and often bloody dispute for possession 
of the two-acre site. In 1992 Hindu zealots destroyed the mosque, which led to 
rioting acrossIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> in which 
thousands were killed.

India's governing party, the BJP, came to power in New Delhi largely through 
the movement launched by radical Hindus to build a temple at the site of the 
mosque. The party has been accused of placing its supporters on the ASI.

With a recent national opinion poll showing that the BJP is losing support 
even in strongholds such as Uttar Pradesh, the party is under pressure to show 
that it intends to live up to its old election promise of building a Ram temple 
at the site of the razed Babri mosque. The ASI findings thus acquire tremendous 
political signigicance, and radical Hindu leaders now believe the court 
considering the issue would find it difficult to allow Muslims to repossess the 
disputed land.

Yesterday, the independent archaeologists pointed out several discrepancies - 
glazed pottery and lime mortar has been found at the excavated site, both 
having been introduced in India after the Muslim invasions, and the site of the 
buried structure corresponds exactly to the plan of the Babri mosque. Moreover, 
the report glosses over the unearthing of animal bones, unthinkable at a Hindu 
temple site. "It was normal for Muslims to construct a new mosque at the site 
of an old one to claim merit in the eyes of God," said Mr Habib.

"This may well be a tampered report, which has no legal significance, only 
political significance," said lawyer Rajeev Dhawan. "No expert evidence has any 
value in court unless subjected to cross-examination. And that will happen."
 