
There are certain foods that exert an almost narcotic pull, things so tempting 
that the urge to keep going back for more is nigh on irresistible. For many, 
it's chocolate. I can take a lot of chocolate, with great pleasure, but I can 
also leave it. Caramel, however… caramel hooks me deep and keeps me close.

I don't know who discovered that seriously burning sugar was a good idea, but 
I take my hat off to them. Transforming snow-white sugar into a glistening, 
dark brown lava that sets hard as glass pretty much reinvents it as an 
ingredient. It no longer delivers mere neutral sweetness; it acquires a 
sophisticated range of aromatic and bitter notes that include leather, vanilla, 
tobacco and coffee. You can then introduce your caramel to all kinds of other 
ingredients – cream, nuts, citrus fruits, to name but three classics – and take 
the blending of sophisticates to a new level.

If you've never made caramel, do give it a go. This golden-brown temptress has 
a reputation for being difficult, and I won't deny you need bottle to approach 
her for the first time, but the process is very simple. Caramelisation is the 
point at which molten sugar gets so hot that its molecules begin to break down. 
To quote the brilliant Harold McGee inOn Food & Cooking 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=0340831499>
, "This destruction triggers a remarkable cascade of chemical creation… The 
more sugar is cooked, the less sugar and sweetness remain, and the darker and 
more bitter it gets." Take it all the way to black, however, and it becomes 
horribly bitter.

Catching caramel at the point of perfection, when sweetness, bitterness and 
those rich aromas are in exquisite balance, comes down to confidence. The more 
you make caramel, the better you'll get at it. Even experienced cooks (myself 
included) have the occasional nightmare when the molten sugar gathers into 
claggy lumps, or when a moment's inattention results in something black and 
inedible. But, apart from having to clean the pan and start again, it's no big 
deal. Caramel, despite its luxurious flavour and classy looks, is not only 
quick, but cheap as chips (strictly speaking, cheap as sugar) to make.

As a rule, I prefer golden sugar to white because it is less refined. However, 
if you're making a "wet" caramel, golden sugar can make it hard to judge the 
shade. Some chefs also say that the natural impurities in golden sugars mean 
they don't caramelise cleanly. I have found that to be the case with one or two 
brands – they can produce a curious, opaque caramel – but I've found others to 
work very well. You might, for your first foray, prefer to use a white sugar, 
but as soon as your confidence is up, there's no reason not to switch to a 
golden variety. Caramel can be made with caster or granulated sugar. At a push, 
I prefer caster, because I find it melts more easily.

A word of warning: molten caramel is extremely hot – the sugar starts to brown 
at around 170C. So, in order to avoid very nasty burns, never touch or taste it 
until it has cooled right down. Once it has, you'll be unable to resist it, or 
whatever delicious dish you have conjured from it.

Basic caramel

This is for a "dry" caramel, produced by simply melting sugar. It's quick to 
make, if a touch scary as you wait for the sugar granules to melt smoothly. If 
you're feeling nervous, you can make a "wet" caramel by adding two tablespoons 
of water at the start, dissolving the sugar over a low heat, then boiling until 
golden brown. You get the same end result, but it takes longer and the bubbling 
syrup makes it a bit harder to judge the colour.

100g caster or granulated sugar

Choose a good, heavy-based saucepan or small frying pan – thin, tinny pans 
conduct heat unevenly. You also want a pan with a reasonably wide base, so the 
sugar is in a thin layer, which helps it melt quickly and evenly. A 
stainless-steel pan is better than a dark-based one, so you can see the colour 
of the caramel.

Tip the sugar into the pan, shake gently to spread it evenly and put on a 
medium-low heat. After a couple of minutes, the sugar will start to melt at the 
edges. Shake and swirl it gently as it starts to liquefy and brown. (You can 
stir it, but be restrained – stirring can cause it to recrystallise.) By the 
time all the sugar has melted, some of it will be quite brown. Cook for a 
minute or so more, swirling the pan gently, until the syrup has turned a rich, 
caramel colour – dark golden brown with a reddish tint. Hold your nerve and let 
it cook fully – underdone caramel is pale, sickly-sweet and bland. When it's 
ready, use your caramel at once – if left in the pan, even off the heat, it 
will carry on cooking and then set.

Crème caramel with a hint of orange

This is a classic pud, creamy and sweet with a lovely whisper of bitterness 
from the caramel. It's usually flavoured with vanilla alone, but I love the 
soft warmth you get from orange zest. Serves six.

1 quantity basic caramel
3 large eggs, plus 2 yolks
50g caster sugar
Finely grated zest of 1 large orange
½ vanilla pod (or 1 tsp vanilla extract)
500ml whole milk

Heat the oven to 150C/300F/gas mark 2 and have ready a soufflé dish or similar 
smallish, deep oven dish of around one-litre capacity. Make the caramel as 
before. When it's the right colour, remove from the heat and carefully add two 
tablespoons of hot water. Take care: the caramel will boil and steam 
ferociously. It will also form clumps, but don't panic: keep stirring until it 
is smooth again, then pour into the dish. Turn the dish so the caramel comes a 
little way up the sides, then leave to set.

Put all the eggs, sugar and orange zest in a bowl, add the seeds scraped out 
from the vanilla pod (or extract), and whisk. Put the milk in a pan with the 
scraped-out vanilla pod (if using), bring to just below boiling, then pour on 
to the egg mixture and whisk. Strain the resulting custard over the set caramel.

Put the dish into a roasting tin and pour in boiling water to come halfway up 
the sides of the tin. Bake for 45 minutes, until the custard is just set with a 
bit of a wobble (the time can vary depending on the dimensions of your dish, so 
check early). Remove from the tin, leave to cool, then refrigerate for at least 
a few hours and up to two days.

To serve, run the tip of a sharp knife around the rim of the custard, to 
release it. Place a deep plate on top (there'll be lots of liquid caramel 
waiting to flood out), invert and the caramel will flop on to the plate. 
Pour/scrape any caramel out of the dish and over the pud, and serve.

Salted walnut praline
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's salted walnut praline: Declicious! Photograph: 
Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
Delicious in chunky bits scattered over ice-cream or any creamy pud, 
especially if there's some fruit involved, such as roast peaches or fresh 
raspberries. Alternatively, blitz and add to homemade chocolate truffles. 
Change the nuts, if you fancy – blanched almonds and skinned hazelnuts also 
work well.

1 quantity basic caramel
50g walnut halves, roughly broken up
½ teaspoon flaky sea salt

Line a baking sheet with parchment. Make the caramel as above and, when it 
reaches the right colour, stir in the nuts and tip in a sticky lump on to the 
parchment. Spread out as best you can, sprinkle over the salt and leave to set. 
Break into small pieces with a blunt object such as a rolling pin and store in 
an airtight container.

Caramel sauce

Irresistible just as it comes, though you can add an unusual and delicious 
twist if you stir in a pinch of ground cumin. Use on ice-cream and in sundaes, 
fruity puddings or pancakes. Makes about 300ml.

Basic caramel made with 150g sugar

50g unsalted butter, at room temperature, cut into small pieces
150ml double cream, ideally not fridge-cold
A good pinch of salt 

Have your ingredients measured out. Prepare the caramel as before. When it 
reaches the right colour, remove from the heat, add the butter and let it melt 
– be careful, as the caramel will bubble and steam. Gently stir the melted 
butter into the caramel – don't worry if it doesn't seem to amalgamate fully at 
this stage. Now, working quickly but in a controlled fashion, add the cream bit 
by bit, stirring in each addition before adding the next, and adding the salt 
about halfway through, until you have a smooth, velvety sauce. There may be a 
few sticky bits lurking at the edges of the pan but, if your caramel was smooth 
to start with and you work quickly, you shouldn't get any crystallised lumps. 
If this happens, put the sauce on a gentle heat and stir to dissolve them as 
far as possible, then pass through a sieve. Serve warm or at room temperature. 
It will keep for a week in the fridge, and can be gently reheated.

• For the latest news from River Cottage HQ, go to rivercottage.net 
<http://www.rivercottage.net>
 