
The director Sam Mendes, who made Hollywood history yesterday by winning three 
Golden Globes for his debut filmAmerican Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-beauty>, confessed the key to his 
success was a piece of whispered advice from Steven Spielberg - "wear sensible 
shoes".

American Beauty, his scabrous suburban comedy about a middle-aged adman stuck 
in a stale job and staler marriage, won best feature-length drama, best 
director and best screenplay - putting it at the head of the pack for the 
Oscars in March.

Mendes, 34, from London, who admitted he knew "less than nothing" about 
film-making when Spielberg's studio DreamWorks asked him to direct it, thanked 
his stars Kevin Spacey and Annette Bening "for trusting me", and Spielberg for 
his tips on footwear and "letting me make the movie I wanted to make".

Champagne flowed yesterday at the Donmar Warehouse theatre, London, where 
Mendes is artistic director and he first directed his Tony award-winning 
version of Cabaret, which made his name in America.

But the biggest surprise of the night was the victory of another star of the 
London stage. Janet McTeer beat Sharon Stone and Julia Roberts to the best 
comedy actress globe for Tumbleweeds, a low-budget caper in which she plays a 
hippy, dippy Southern belle kept in line by her old-before-her-time daughter. 
"This is my first time at something like this," said McTeer, who won a Tony 
last year for her Broadway performance in A Doll's House.

Veteran pop star Phil Collins completed a British hattrick by winning the best 
original song with You Will Be In My Heart, from the new Tarzan movie. "All of 
us in this room know the flows and the ebbs of careers," he said. "Actors know 
this, musicians know this - and I would like to thank you for making me feel 
like my career is in a flow."

British films had dominated the shortlists for the Globes - once seen as a 
jamboree, but regarded now as a reliable guide to Oscar form - but neither 
Anthony Minghella's much-fancied The Talented Mr Ripley nor Neil Jordan's The 
End Of The Affair won anything. Even so, both are expected to be in the running 
with Mike Leigh's Topsy-Turvy when the Oscar nominations are announced in a 
fortnight.

The most poignant moment at the unusually subdued ceremony in Los Angeles came 
when Michael J Fox was named best TV actor for the comedy Spin City, which 
Parkinson's disease has forced him to quit. With his voice cracking, Fox said: 
"Who knows, you may be here next year. I won't."

Earlier, Denzel Washington had set the sombre tone after winning best actor 
for the miscarriage-of-justice tale The Hurricane. He invited Rubin "Hurricane" 
Carter, the former boxer he played, and who spent 20 years in prison for a 
crime he did not commit, to join him on stage and said: "This man is love."

Spanish film-maker Pedro Almodovar did his best to revive the Globes' 
reputation for wit and waywardness by ignoring the producers' increasingly 
frantic pleas for him to wind up his speech after winning best foreign-language 
film for All About My Mother.

He compared himself to Barbra Streisand, confessed to being "a dictator" and 
apologised to his brother and producer Agustin. "It is quite profitable to be 
my producer but sometimes it is not so easy to be my brother," he said. With 
the stage managers now making exaggerated gestures at him, he added: "This is 
one of the moments when you are not responsible ... when you behave like crazy. 
Because not every day does Hollywood give you a present like this, so I don't 
know what that means, adios."

 Who won what at the Globes

 Best drama:  American Beauty 

 Best drama actress: Hilary Swank for Boys Don't Cry 

 Best actor: Denzel Washington for The Hurricane 

 Best musical or comedy: Toy Story 2 

 Best actress in a musical or comedy: Janet McTeer for Tumbleweeds 

 Best actor in musical or comedy: Jim Carrey for Man On The Moon 

 Best foreign language film: All About My Mother 

 Best supporting actress:  Angelina Jolie for Girl, Interrupted 

 Best supporting actor: Tom Cruise for Magnolia 

 Best director:  Sam Mendes for American Beauty 

 Best screenplay: Alan Ball for American Beauty 

 Best original score:  Ennio Morricone for The Legend of 1900 

 Best original song: Phil Collins, You'll Be In My Heart from Tarzan
 