 Ayodhya is the city of Ram, the most virtuous and austere of Hindu gods. To 
travel there from Benares - across a wintry north Indian landscape of 
mustard-bright fields, hectic roadside bazaars and lonely columns of smoke - is 
to move between two very different Hindu myths, or visions of life. Shiva, the 
god of perpetual destruction and creation, rules Benares, where temple 
compounds conceal internet cafes and children fly kites next to open funeral 
pyres by the river. But the city's aggressive affluence and chaos feel far away 
in Ayodhya, which is small and drab, its alleys full of the dust of the 
surrounding fields. The peasants carrying unwieldy bundles bring to mind the 
pilgrims of medieval Indian miniature paintings; and, sitting by the Saryu 
river at dusk, as the devout tenderly set afloat tiny lamps in the slow-moving 
water, one feels the endurance and continuity of Hindu India.
After this vision of eternal Hinduism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hinduism>, the mosques and Moghul buildings 
of Ayodhya come as a surprise. Most are in ruins - especially the older ones 
built during the 16th and 17th centuries, when Ayodhya was the administrative 
centre of one of the Moghul empire's major provinces, Awadh. All but two were 
destroyed as recently as December 6 1992, the day, epochal now in India's 
history, when a crowd led by politicians from the Bharatiya Janata party (BJP), 
or Indian People's Party, demolished a mosque they claimed the 16th-century 
Moghul emperor Babur had built as an act of contempt on the site of the god 
Ram's birthplace.

Memories of that demolition, and the subsequent anti-Muslim pogroms, have been 
reawakened in the past two months after a Muslim crowd in Gujarat burned alive 
58 Hindu activists on a train. The activists were returning fromAyodhya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya>, where they had participated in 
preliminary rituals for building a new Ram temple, which BJP leaders, who now 
run the government in Delhi, had vowed to build on the site of Babur's mosque. 
Hindu militants in Gujarat retaliated by killing more than 600 Muslims. With 
Hindu passions so aroused, the construction of the new temple seems more, not 
less, likely. As for the mosques destroyed in 1992, they are unlikely ever to 
be restored. The Muslim presence in the town seems at an end for the first time 
in eight centuries.

That was the impression I got even in January, a full month before the 
anti-Muslim rage exploded, when I visited Digambar Akhara, the straw-littered 
compound of the militant Sadhu sect presided over by Ramchandra Paramhans, who 
in 1949 initiated the legal battle to reclaim Babur's mosque, or Babri Masjid, 
for the Hindu community. The sect, Paramhans told me, was established four 
centuries ago to fight Muslim invaders who had ravaged India since the 10th 
century, and erected mosques over temples in the holy cities of Ayodhya, 
Benares and Mathura. It had been involved, he said, in 76 wars for possession 
of the site of the Ayodhya mosque, during which more than 200,000 Hindus had 
been martyred.

Paramhans, who is now more than 90 years old, exuberantly directed the 
demolition squad in 1992, and now heads the trust in charge of the temple's 
construction. When we spoke, he expected up to a million Hindu volunteers to 
reach Ayodhya by March 15, defy a Supreme Court ban on construction at the 
site, and present a fait accompli to the world in the form of a 
semi-constructed temple.

Two bodyguards watched nervously as he told me of his plans; other armed men 
stood around the wall of the compound. The security seemed excessive in this 
exclusively Hindu environment but, as Paramhans said, caressing the tufts of 
white hair on the tip of his nose, the year before he'd been attacked by 
home-made bombs delivered by what he called "Muslim terrorists". "Before we 
take on Pakistani terrorists," he added, "we have to take care of the offspring 
Babur left behind in India - these 130 million Muslims of India have to be 
shown their place."

This message was briskly conveyed to the Muslims of Gujarat by Paramhans' 
associates, leaders of the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP), or World Hindu Council, 
a sister organisation of the BJP. According to reports from Gujarat, Hindu 
militants incited, and in some cases organised, the killing of more than 600 
Muslims during four hectic days in late February and early March. The chief 
minister of Gujarat, a hardline BJP leader, quoted the English scientist Newton 
while defending his government's inability or unwillingness to stop the 
massacres: "Every action," he said, "has an equal and opposite reaction."

The reaction wasn't equal, though - the final tally of Muslim dead may exceed 
1,000 - but it did display a high degree of administrative efficiency, as was 
also evident during the anti-Muslim pogroms in Bombay in 1992-93, when members 
of the Hindu extremist group, the Shiv Sena, went around mixed localities with 
electoral lists of Muslim homes. In Gujarat's cities last month, middle-class 
Hindu men drove up in new Japanese cars - the emblems of India's globalised 
economy - to cart off the loot from Muslim shops and businesses. These rich 
young Hindus in Benetton T-shirts and Nike sneakers seemed unlikely combatants 
in what Paramhans told me was a holy war against the traitorous 12% of India's 
population - both wealth and education separated them from the unemployed, 
listless young small-town Hindus I met in Ayodhya, one of whom is a local 
convenor of the Bajrang Dal, the stormtroopers of the Hindu nationalists.

What they shared, however, was a particular worldview, outlined most clearly 
by students at Saraswati Shishu Mandir, a primary school in Benares, one of 
15,000 such institutions run by the Rashtriya Swyamsevak Sangh (RSS), or 
Association of National Volunteers, the parent group of Hindu nationalism from 
which have emerged almost all the leaders of the BJP, the VHP and the Bajrang 
Dal. The themes of morning assembly were manliness and patriotism. In the 
gloomy hall, portraits of militant Hindu freedom fighters mingled with such 
signboarded exhortations as, "Give me blood and I'll give you freedom", and 
"Say with pride that you are a Hindu". For an hour, boys and girls marched in 
front of a stage, where a plaster of Paris statue of Mother India stood astride 
a map of south Asia, chanting about the perfidy of Pakistan, of Muslim invaders 
and of the gloriousness of India's past.

Most of the students came from middle-class areas of Benares. Their bare, thin 
limbs shook with their passion and efforts to memorise arcane Sanskrit words. 
The principal watched serenely. He told me that Joshi-ji, the education 
minister, was making sure that new history textbooks carried to every school in 
the country the message of Hindu pride and Muslim cruelty. It is a message that 
resonates at a level of caste and class privilege, flourishing in a society 
where deprivation is always close at hand. An out of work upper-caste 
advertising executive I met in Benares seemed to be speaking of his own 
insecurities when he said, after some talk of the latest iMac, "Man, I am 
scared of these Mozzies. We are a secular, modern nation, but we let them run 
these madrasas [religious schools], we let them breed like rabbits and one day 
they are going to outstrip the Hindu population, and will they then treat us as 
well as we treat them?"

 The Muslims, of course, have a different view of how they've been treated. In 
Madanpura, Benares's Muslim district, I met Najam, a scholar of Urdu and 
Persian literature. He is in his 30s, and grew up during some of the worst 
anti-Muslim violence of post-independence India - in the 1992 slaughter, he saw 
Hindu policemen beat his doctor to death with rifle butts. "I don't think the 
Muslims are angry any more," he said. "There is no point. The people who 
demolished the mosque at Ayodhya are now senior ministers. We know we will 
always be suspected of disloyalty, no matter what we say or do. Our madrasas 
will always be seen as producing fanatics and terrorists. There is no one ready 
to listen to us, and so we keep silent. We expect nothing from the government 
and political parties. We now depend on the goodwill of the Hindus we live 
with, and all that we hope for is survival with a bit of dignity."

Hindu devotees throng the Viswanath temple in Benares, but few, if any, 
Muslims dare negotiate a way through the armed police and sandbagged positions 
to the adjacent Gyanvapi mosque, one of two that the Hindu nationalists have 
threatened to destroy. It is not easy for an outsider to grasp the Muslim's 
sense of isolation here. There was little in my own background that could have 
prepared me to understand the complicated history behind it - being Brahmins 
with little money, we saw the Muslims as another threat to our aspirations for 
security and dignity. My sisters attended a RSS-run primary school, where 
pupils were indoctrinated into disfiguring images of Muslim rulers in their 
textbooks. At my English medium school, we were encouraged to think of 
ourselves as secular, modern citizens of India, and regard religion as 
something one outgrew. So when, in the 1970s and 1980s, I heard about 
Hindu-Muslim riots, or the insurgencies in Punjab and Kashmir, it seemed to me 
that religion-based identities were the cause of most conflict and violence in 
India. The word used in newspapers and academic analyses was "communalism", 
which was described as the antithesis of the kind of secularism advocated by 
the founding fathers of India, Gandhi and Nehru, and also of Hinduism itself, 
which was held to be innately tolerant and secular.

I spent several months in Benares in the late 1980s, unaware that this ancient 
pilgrimage centre of Hindus was also a holy city for Muslims - unaware, too, of 
the 17th-century Sufi shrine just behind the tea shack where I often spent my 
mornings. It was one of many in the city that both Hindus and Muslims visited, 
a legacy of the flowering of Sufi culture in medieval north India. Only this 
year I discovered from Najam that one of the great Shia philosophers of Persia 
had sought refuge at the court of a Hindu ruler of Benares in the 18th century. 
And it was after returning from my trip to Ayodhya that I read that Ram's 
primacy in this pilgrimage centre was relatively recent - for much of the 
medieval period, Ayodhya was the home of the much older sect of Shaivites, or 
Shiva-worshippers (Ram is one of many incarnations of Vishnu, one of the gods 
in the Hindu trinity, in which Shiva is the most important); that many of 
Ayodhya's temples and sects devoted to Ram had actually emerged under the 
patronage of the Shia Muslims who ruled Awadh in the early 18th century.

Paramhans had been quick to offer me a history full of temple-destroying 
Muslims and brave Hindu nationalists. But his own militant sect had been 
originally formed to fight not Muslims but Shiva-worshipping Hindus; and it had 
been favoured in that long and bloody conflict by the Muslim Nawabs. The 
Nawabs, whose administration and army were staffed by Hindus, kept a careful 
distance from Hindu-Muslim conflicts. One of the first such conflicts in 
Ayodhya came in 1855, when some Muslims accused Hindus of illegally 
constructing a temple over a mosque and militant Hindu sadhus (mendicants) 
massacred 75 Muslims. The then Nawab of Awadh, Wajid Ali Shah, a distinguished 
poet and composer, refused to support the Muslim claim, explaining, "We are 
devoted to love; do not know of religion. So what if it is Kaaba or a house of 
idols?"

Wajid Ali Shah, who was denounced as effeminate and inept and deposed a year 
later by British imperialists, was the last great exponent of the Indo-Persian 
culture that emerged in Awadh towards the end of the Moghul empire. India was 
then one of the great centres of the Islamic world, along with the Ottoman and 
Safavid empires. In India, Islam had lost some of its Arabian and Persian 
distinctiveness, and had blended with older cultures. Its legacy is still 
preserved - amid the squalor of a hundred small Indian towns, in the grace and 
elegance of Najam's Urdu, in numerous songs and dances that accompany 
festivals, in the subtle cuisines of north India - but one could continue to 
think of it, as I did, as something without a history or tradition. The 
Indo-Islamic is an embarrassment to the idea of India maintained by the 
modernising Hindu elite for the past 50 years.

That idea first emerged in the early 19th century, as the British consolidated 
their hold over India and found new allies among upper-caste Hindus. As 
elsewhere in their empire, the British encountered the stiffest resistance from 
Muslim rulers. So they tended to demonise the Muslims as fanatics and tyrants, 
and presented the British conquest as at least partly a humanitarian 
intervention on behalf of a once-great Hindu nation. Most of these British 
views of India were useful fictions at best - the Turks, Afghans, central 
Asians and Persians, who together with upper-caste Hindu elites had ruled a 
variety of Indian states for more than eight centuries, were more than 
plunderers and zealots. The bewildering diversity of people who inhabited India 
before the arrival of the Muslims in the 11th century hardly formed a 
community, much less a nation; and the word "Hinduism" barely hinted at the 
almost infinite number of folk and elite cultures, religious sects and 
philosophical traditions found in India.

But these novel British ideas were received well by upper-caste Hindus, who 
had previously worked with Muslim rulers and began to see opportunities in the 
new imperial order. British discoveries of India's classical sculpture, 
painting and literature had given them a fresh, invigorating sense of the 
pre-Islamic past; they found flattering and useful British Orientalist notions 
of India that identified Brahmanical scriptures and principles of tolerance as 
the core of Hinduism. In this view, practices such as widow-burning became 
proof of the degradation Hinduism had suffered under Muslim rule, and the 
cruelties of caste became an unfortunate consequence of their tyranny.

A wide range of Hindu thinkers, social reformers and politicians began to see 
imperial rule, with all its social reforms and scientific advances, as a 
preparation for self-rule. Some denounced British imperialism as exploitative, 
but even they welcomed the redeeming modernity it brought and, above all, the 
European idea of nation - of a cohesive community with a common history, 
culture, values and sense of purpose - that for many other colonised peoples 
appeared a way of duplicating the success of the all-conquering west. Muslim 
leaders, on the other hand, were slow to participate in the civilising mission 
of imperialism; they saw little place for themselves in the nation envisaged by 
the Hindu elite. British imperialists followed their own strategies of divide 
and rule: the decision to partition Bengal in 1905 and to have separate 
electorates for Muslims reinforced the sense among upwardly mobile Indians that 
they belonged to distinct communities defined by religion.

It is true that Gandhi and Nehru worked hard to attract low-caste Hindus and 
Muslims - they wanted to give a mass base and wider legitimacy to the political 
movement for self-rule under the leadership of the Congress party - but 
Gandhi's use of popular Hindu symbols, which made him a Mahatma, or sage, among 
Hindu masses, caused many Muslims to distrust him. Also, many Congress leaders 
shared the views of such upper-caste ideologues as Veer Savarkar and Guru 
Golwalkar. These men saw India as essentially the sacred indigenous nation of 
Hindus which had been divided and emasculated by Muslim invaders, and that 
could only be revived by uniting its diverse population, recovering ancient 
Hindu traditions, and weeding out corrupting influences from central Asia and 
Arabia. This meant forcing Muslims to give up their traditional allegiances and 
embrace the so-called "Hindu ethos", or Hindutva, of India - an ethos that was, 
ironically, imagined into being with the help of British Orientalist 
discoveries of India's past.

The idea of Hindutva included an admiration for Mussolini's fascism and 
Hitler's Germany, which, as Guru Golwalkar wrote in the Hindu nationalist 
bible, We or Our Nationhood Defined (1938), expressed "race pride at its 
highest" by purging the Jews. It inspired the Brahmin founders of the RSS in 
1925, and comforted many upper-caste Hindus who felt threatened by Gandhi's 
emphasis on a federal, socially egalitarian India. It was the rise of the Hindu 
dominated nation that Gandhi was accused of obstructing by his assassin, a 
Brahmin member of the RSS.

By the 1940s, the feudal and professional Muslim elite had grown extremely 
wary of the Hindu nationalist strain within the Congress. After many failed 
attempts at political rapprochement, they finally arrived at the demand for a 
separate homeland for Indian Muslims. The demand expressed the Muslim fear of 
being reduced to a perpetual minority in a Hindu majority state, and was, 
initially, a desire for a more federal polity for post-colonial India. But the 
Congress leaders chose to partition off the Muslim-majority provinces in the 
west and east, rather than share the centralised power of the colonial state 
that was their great inheritance from the British.

This led to the violent transfer of millions of Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims 
across hastily-drawn, artificial borders. Massacres, rapes and kidnappings 
further hardened sectarian feelings: the RSS, which was temporarily banned 
after Gandhi's assassination, found its most dedicated workers among 
middle-class Hindu refugees from Pakistan, among them the current home 
minister, Lal Krishna Advani, who was born in Karachi and joined the RSS as 
early as 1942. The RSS floated a new party and entered electoral politics in 
independent India in 1951 with the renewed promise of a Hindu nation; and 
although it worked for much of the next three decades under the gigantic shadow 
of the Congress party, its sudden popularity in the 1980s now seems part of the 
great disaster of the Partition, which locked the new nation states of India 
and Pakistan into stances of mutual hostility.
 