 In Pakistan, a shared faith failed to reconfigure the diverse regional and 
linguistic communities into a new nation. This was proved when the 
Bengali-speaking population of East Pakistan seceded, with Indian help, to form 
Bangladesh in 1971. The ideology of secularism, backed by the prestige and 
example of Nehru, seems to have had a more successful run in India, which after 
Partition had, among its vast population, almost as many Muslims as Pakistan. 
In reality, India's Muslims lost much of their educated elite to Pakistan, and 
since 1947 they have been a depressed minority. They continue to lack effective 
spokespersons, despite, or perhaps because of, a tokenist presence at the 
highest levels of government. Politically, they are significant only at 
election time, when they form a solid vote for Hindu politicians who promise to 
protect them from discrimination and violence. Urdu, the language the Muslim 
presence in India had created - which is barely distinguishable from spoken 
Hindi - was an early victim of attempts to institute a Sanskritised Hindi as 
the national language.
Secularism, the separation of religion from politics, was always going to be 
difficult to impose on a country where religion has long shaped political and 
cultural identities. But it was a useful basis upon which the Delhi government 
could, in the name of modernity and progress, establish its authority over a 
poor, chaotically fractious country. However, when Sikh and Muslim minorities 
in Punjab and Kashmir challenged the great arbitrary power of the government, 
Nehru's heirs - his daughter, Indira, and grandson, Rajiv - were quick to 
discard even the rhetoric of secularism and to turn Hindu majoritarianism into 
the official ideology of the Congress-run administration.

The uprisings in Punjab and then in Kashmir were represented by the government 
and the middle-class media as fundamentalist and terrorist assaults on a 
secular, democratic state. In fact, although tainted by association with 
Pakistan and religious fanaticism, the Sikhs and Kashmiri Muslims were 
expressing a long-simmering discontent with an anti-federalist state: a state 
that had retained most of the power of the old colonial dispensation, and often 
used it more brutally than the British ever had. The uprisings were part of a 
larger crisis common in post-colonial states: the failure of a corrupt, 
self-serving political and bureaucratic elite to ensure social and economic 
justice for those it had claimed to represent in its anti-colonial battles.

By the 1980s, the Congress party was in decline. It kept raising the bogey of 
national unity and external enemies, but the disturbances in Kashmir and Punjab 
only gave more substance to the Hindu nationalist allegation that the Congress 
had turned India into a "soft state" where Kashmiri Muslims could blithely 
conspire with Pakistan against Mother India. And, with the pseudo-socialist 
economy close to bankruptcy, the nationalists saw a chance to find new voters 
among upper-caste Hindus. Like the National Socialists in Germany in the early 
1930s, they offered not so much clear economic policies as fantasies of 
national rebirth and power. In 1984, the VHP announced a national campaign to 
rebuild the grand temple atAyodhya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya> 
that they claimed the first Moghul emperor Babur had destroyed. The mosque that 
replaced it, they said, was a symbol of national shame; removing it and 
rebuilding the temple was a matter of national honour.

Both history and archaeology were travestied in this account of the fall and 
rise of the eternal Hindu nation. There was no evidence that Babur had ever 
been to Ayodhya, or that this restless, melancholic conqueror from Samarkand, a 
connoisseur of architecture, could have built an ugly mosque over an existing 
Ram temple. Ram himself isn't known to recorded history - the cult of 
Ram-worship arrived in north India as late as the 10th century AD, and no 
persuasive evidence exists that a Ram temple ever stood on the site. But the 
myths were useful in shoring up the narrative of Muslim cruelty and contempt. 
They found their keenest audience at first among wealthy expatriate Hindus in 
the UK and US, who bankrolled a movement that, in upholding a strong, 
self-assertiveHinduism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hinduism>, seemed to 
allay their sense of inferiority induced by western images of India as 
miserably poor. In India itself, deeper anxieties made many upper-caste Hindus 
turn to the BJP.

In 1990, the government, which was then headed by defectors from the Congress 
party, decided to implement a longstanding proposal to reserve government jobs 
for poor, "backward-caste" Hindus. Upper-caste Hindus were enraged. The BJP saw 
the plan for affirmative action as potentially destructive of its old plan of 
persuading lower-caste groups to accept a paternalistic, upper-caste leadership 
in a united Hindu front against Muslims. Later that year, the leader of the 
BJP, LK Advani, decided to lead a ritual procession on a faux-chariot - 
actually a Chevrolet - from Gujarat to Ayodhya, where he intended to start the 
construction of the Ram temple.

The previous year, the BJP had passed an official resolution demanding that 
the temple be built on the exact spot where Babur's mosque now stood. Advani 
had then said, "I am sure it will translate into votes." Appropriately, he 
began his journey to Ayodhya from the temple in Somnath, Gujarat, which was 
looted by a Turk conqueror in the 11th century AD and which had been lavishly 
rebuilt in the early 1950s. Rapturous Hindu activists waited by the roadside to 
apply ritual marks of blood on his forehead. This was not just play-acting: 
more than 500 people, most of them Muslims, were killed in the rioting that 
accompanied Advani's progress across India. Hindu policemen were indifferent, 
as they were last month in Gujarat, and sometimes even joined in.

It is strange to look back now and see how little known the controversy in 
Ayodhya was only two decades ago. Local Hindus first staked a claim on the 
mosque in the mid-19th century, and were allowed by British officials to 
worship on a platform outside the building. In 1949, two years after 
independence, a Hindu civil servant working together with local abbots 
surreptitiously placed idols of Ram inside the mosque. The story that Lord Ram 
himself had appeared to install the idols inside the mosque quickly spread. 
Local Muslims protested. Nehru sensed that nothing less than India's secular 
identity was threatened. He ordered the mosque to be locked and sacked the 
district official, who promptly joined the Hindu nationalists. But the idols 
were not removed, and Muslims gradually gave up offering namaz, or prayers, at 
the mosque. In the following three decades, the courts were clogged with Hindu 
and Muslim claims on the site. In 1984, the VHP began a campaign to unlock the 
mosque. In 1986, a local judge allowed the Hindus to worship inside. A year 
later, Muslims held their largest protest demonstration since independence in 
Delhi.

Before then, Babur's mosque had primarily been of concern to a small circle of 
litigious, property-hungry abbots in Ayodhya. Religion was always a fiercely 
competitive business here: the abbots fought hard for a share of the donations 
from the millions of poor pilgrims, and, more recently, from wealthy Indians in 
the US and UK; they were also notorious for murder and pillage - the bomb 
attack on Paramhans, which he blamed on Muslim terrorists, was probably the 
work of rival abbots. But as the movement to build the temple intensified, 
entrepreneurs of religiosity such as Paramhans were repackaged by nationalist 
politicians as sages and saints, while Ram himself evolved from the benign, 
almost feminine, calendar-art divinity of my childhood to the vengeful Rambo of 
Hindu nationalist posters.

The myths multiplied when, in October 1990, Advani's procession was stopped 
and police in Ayodhya fired upon a crowd of Hindus attempting to assault the 
mosque. The largest circulation Hindi paper in north India spoke of 
"indiscriminate police firing" and "hundreds of dead devotees", and then 
reduced the death toll the next day to 32. These rumours and exaggerations, 
part of a slick propaganda campaign, helped the BJP win the elections in four 
north Indian states in 1991. The mosque seemed doomed - then, in December 1992, 
a crowd of mostly upper-caste Hindus armed with shovels, crowbars, pickaxes, 
sometimes only bare hands, demolished Babur's mosque, and the police simply 
watched from a distance. One of the more vocal Hindu nationalist politicians, 
Uma Bharati, who is now a senior minister in the central Indian government, 
urged on the crowd, shouting, "Give one more push and break the Babri Masjid." 
The president of the VHP announced the dawn of a "Hindu rebellion".

 That evening, a crowd rampaged through the town, killing 13 Muslims, 
including children, and destroying scores of mosques, shrines and Muslim-owned 
shops and homes. Protests and riots erupted across India. Altogether 2,000 
people, most of them Muslim, were killed. Three months after the massacres, 
Muslim gangsters retaliated with bomb attacks that killed more than 300 
civilians.

In Delhi, the elderly Congress prime minister, Narasimha Rao, napped through 
the demolition. The next day he dismissed the BJP governments, banned the RSS 
and its sister organisations, and promised to rebuild the mosque. The leaders 
of the BJP tried to distance themselves from the demolition, saying it was a 
spontaneous act of frustration, provoked by the government's anti-Hindu 
policies. But the Central Bureau of Investigation concluded that senior BJP 
leaders had planned the demolition well in advance. As for the anti-Muslim 
violence, Advani claimed in an article in The Times of India that it would not 
have taken place had Muslims identified themselves with Hindutva: a sentiment 
echoed after the recent riots in Gujarat.

Six years after the demolition, the BJP, benefiting from India's 
first-past-the-post electoral system, became the dominant party in the ruling 
National Democratic Alliance in Delhi. Despite being forced to share power with 
more secular parties, BJP's ideological fervour seems undiminished, if as yet 
unfulfilled. Responding to a question about the Ram temple two years ago, Prime 
Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee told expatriate Indians in New York that he 
needed a clear two-thirds majority in parliament in order to "build the India 
of our dreams". Certainly, the Hindu nationalists have tried hard to whip up 
Hindu passions. In their first few months in power, they conducted nuclear 
tests, explicitly aiming them against Pakistan, which responded with its own 
tests.

The VHP and Bajrang Dal, which distributed radioactive earth from the nuclear 
tests site as sacred offerings, were responsible for an unprecedented series of 
mob attacks on Christians across India. About half of these occurred in 
Gujarat, but Advani claimed that there was "no law and order problem in 
Gujarat", and shared the dais at a meeting of Hindu nationalists with the new 
chief of the RSS, KS Sudarshan, who asked Christians and Muslims to return to 
their "Hindu roots". Sudarshan also attacked secular intellectuals as "that 
class of bastards which tries to implant an alien culture in their land" and 
spoke of "an epic war between Hindus and anti-Hindus". Barely a week after the 
VHP's plans to start construction of the Ram temple caused some of the worst 
violence in India since independence, the BJP-led government asked the Supreme 
Court to allow VHP leaders to perform rituals at the site of the mosque on 
March 15 - an appeal wisely rejected.

Even so, the temple in Ayodhya seems inevitable. You reach Ramjanmabhoomi 
(Ram's birthplace), as it is now called, through a maze of narrow, barricaded 
paths. Armed men loom up abruptly with metal detectors and perform brisk 
body-searches. These are members of the Provincial Armed Constabulary (PAC), 
notorious for its pogroms of Muslims in north Indian towns. The men look mean 
for the cameras. Pictures of the site have not been allowed by the government 
for the past decade.

A canvas canopy protects a platform built above the rubble of the mosque, on 
which stand the idols draped in garlands and sequinned cloth. A priest sits 
below the platform, briskly dispensing prasad - tiny sugary balls - and 
squirreling away the soiled and wrinkled rupee notes tentatively offered by 
peasant pilgrims.

As I groped for small change, a PAC inspector wandered over, asked if I was a 
journalist from Delhi, and attempted a little history. He told me that Lord Ram 
had placed the idols inside the mosque in 1949; it was his wish that a temple 
be built on his birthplace. My companion, a resident of Benares, challenged 
this account, saying that the idols had been placed there by the then district 
official. The inspector did not defend his story; he only smiled and replied 
that this proved that the official was a true Hindu.

Many such "true Hindus" looked the other way while the temple was slowly 
prefabricated. In a vast shed near the Ramjanmabhoomi lie stacks of carved 
stone pillars. Here, you can buy promotional liter-ature - The Blood-Soaked 
History Of Ayodhya and Ayodhya: An Answer To Terrorism And Fundamentalism are 
the bestselling titles - and admire a miniature glass-cased model of the temple.

The labour is cheap - £2 a day for craftsmen - but the temple, whose architect 
previously designed the Swaminarayan temple in Neasden, north London, seems to 
have come out of a garish fantasy of marble and gold.

The impatience of abbots such as Paramhans is understandable. Offerings at the 
temple are likely to run into millions of dollars annually; much has already 
arrived from donors in India and abroad. No one knows where most of it has gone 
- rumours point to new buildings in Ayodhya and elsewhere, including some owned 
by Paramhans, who is moved to rage if you raise the possibility of Muslim 
opposition to the temple. "There are only two places Muslims can go to," he 
shouted, echoing a popular slogan of the early 1990s, "Pakistan or Kabristan 
[graveyard]."

As for the mosque - which appears now in memory as a melancholy symbol of a 
besieged secularism - there seems little doubt that it will never be rebuilt. 
It has fallen victim not just to the ideologues but to less perceptible changes 
in India's general mood in the past decade. The talk of social justice, the 
official culture of frugality, the appeal, however rhetorical, to traditions of 
tolerance and dialogue - all these seem to belong to the past, to the early 
decades of idealism and delusion. A decade of pro-globalisation policies has 
created a new, aggressive middle class whose concerns now dominate public life. 
This aspiring class replaced expatriate Indians as the BJP's primary 
constituency - referring to them in a recent cover story, India Today spoke of 
the "return of the militant Hindu".

This powerful Hindu minority supports the insidious campaign against madrasas, 
and the more brutal assertion of state power in Kashmir. It demands a nuclear 
attack on Pakistan; aspires to superpower status, and fervently courts the US 
as a political, economic and military ally. It is of this new India that 
Gujarat provided a glimpse last month, as young Hindus carted off looted 
digital cameras and DVD players in their new Japanese cars. It is of this India 
that Ayodhya presents both a miniature image and a sinister portent, with its 
syncretic past now irrevocably falsified, its mosques destroyed, its minorities 
suppressed: an Ayodhya where well-placed local abbots helped by politicians 
wait for lucrative connections to the global economy, and prove, along with 
much else, the profound modernity of religious nationalism.

· Pankaj Mishra is author of The Romantics (Picador).
 