
The proportion of 25-year-olds who own a home has more than halved over the 
past 20 years, according to a report that points to thegenerational impact of 
the housing crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/britains-housing-crisis-must-be-tackled-now>
.

Home ownership has dropped from 46% of all 25-year-olds two decades ago to 20% 
now, the Local Government Association said.

The LGA, which represents more than 370 councils in England and Wales, said 
more homes for affordable or social rent are needed to allow people to save up 
for a deposit and get on the housing ladder.

The LGA’s housing spokesman, Cllr Martin Tett, said: “Our figures show just 
how wide the generational home ownership gap is in this country. A shortage of 
houses is a top concern for people as homes are too often unavailable, 
unaffordable and not appropriate for the different needs in our communities.


“The housing crisis is complex and is forcing difficult choices on families, 
distorting places, and hampering growth. But there is a huge opportunity, as 
investment in building the right homes in the right places has massive wider 
benefits for people and places.”

Analysis for the LGA by the estate agent Savills found that the construction 
of social rented homes – owned and managed by local authorities and housing 
associations – plunged by 88% between 1995-96 and 2015-16. The association 
warned that the sharp fall, combined with rents rising at a faster pace than 
incomes, meant that home ownership was becoming more difficult for an 
increasing number of people.

Home ownership across all age groups has fallen by 4.4% since 2008, while 
private renters increased by 5.1%, the LGA said.

Council leaders also warned of an urgent need to provide more homes suitable 
for Britain’s ageing population, which would help reduce demand for NHS 
provision and other care services.

The government is expected to reveal how it plans to address Britain’s housing 
shortage and boost supply ina housing white paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/29/government-housing-white-paper-devolution-land-planning-london>
 in January. Tett said local councils would have a crucial role to play.

“There is no silver bullet and everyone must come together to meet the diverse 
housing needs in our villages, towns and cities,” he said. “The government’s 
housing white paper is an opportunity to boost housing supply and 
affordability. It must recognise that a renaissance in housebuilding by 
councils will be crucial to helping ensure the mix of homes to rent and buy 
that are affordable for those people that need them.

“This means powers and funding given to councils to replace sold homes and 
reinvest in building more of the genuinely affordable homes our communities 
desperately need.”

The LGA’s housing commission has set out more than 30 recommendations for how 
local and national government could work together to address the nation’s 
housing challenges.

The proposals include freeing councils from restrictions on their borrowing in 
order to help them build more affordable homes; making it easier for councils 
to purchase land ready for home building; and ensuring funding is available to 
enable older people to modify their own home.



 