
As a relatively young oncologist I saw a patient scheduled for surgery that 
morning. I didn’t know him but he was on my list because he needed 
chemotherapy. The story seemed routine enough but when I walked in, I found 
that the relatively young man looked terrible.

Since his overnight admission, he had been in considerable pain. His lips were 
parched and his skin sagged. He groaned from the work of making a few minutes 
of conversation and my gut instinct was that he must be terminally ill. But the 
difficulty was that I had only known him for the last minutes while the surgeon 
presumably knew him better and had thought him fit for the procedure he was 
about to have.

Nauru files: widespread condemnation of Australian government by UN and others
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/nauru-files-widespread-condemnation-of-australian-government-by-un-and-others>
 But even when we crossed paths in the corridor, I didn’t reveal to the 
surgeon the depth of my concern. I felt both foolish and relieved when the 
patient did just fine. But days later, when he failed to wake up in intensive 
care, and the ventilator was turned off, there was no end to my self-reproach 
and moral distress, which grew worse when the thoughtful surgeon said he would 
never have gone ahead if I’d flagged the problem.

“Why didn’t you tell me?” he rued.

I later wrote about the experience in the New England Journal of Medicine 
<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1212410> and something interesting 
happened when the piece was published. Doctors wrote in from all over the 
world, sharing their own stories, and thanking me for “courageously” 
illuminating an issue that also nagged at them. But since the essay was widely 
circulated, many non-doctors read it too and their response could be summarised 
by the excoriating words of one correspondent: “You were gutless to not speak 
up for your patient and I would never, ever want someone like you as my doctor.”

This stinging (and I thought, deserved) rebuke highlighted the extraordinary 
gap between how doctors and patients perceive the same set of events. And I 
couldn’t help but think of this as I read the damning reports of errors that 
recently came to light within theNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> public hospital 
system.

One baby died and another suffered serious brain damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/25/baby-dies-and-another-critical-after-they-were-given-nitrous-oxide-at-sydney-hospital>
 when nitrous oxide, instead of oxygen, was administered at birth. A hospital 
engineer has been stood down while the inquiry continues.Two oncologists stand 
accused of under-dosing chemotherapy patients. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/06/st-vincents-hospitals-chemotherapy-scandal-sparks-call-for-inquiry>
 They maintain that they acted in good faith and indeed, chemotherapy dosing is 
both science and art. It’s difficult to know if patients’ survival was impacted 
but nonetheless astonishing to discover that the practice continued in plain 
sight, and apparently troubled others, for 11 whole years before someone spoke 
up. The health minister asserts that the public was lied to but the question 
hospital executives were debating was,“Do patients need to be informed?” 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/do-patients-need-to-be-told-confidential-emails-reveal-undisclosed-extent-of-chemo-dosing-errors-at-st-vincents-hospital-20160322-gnolmi.html>

Spare a thought for the sick patients and hapless families caught up in this 
maze, not knowing where to turn and whose word to trust. From arrival to 
discharge, the average patient encounters a march-past of doctors, each 
responsible for a tiny fraction of care. How to tell the difference between 
honesty and evasion? How to gauge if one is receiving adequate care?

Most hospitalised patients have no idea whose care they are under; 
frustratingly, their doctors may not know either. Increasingly, in modern 
medicine, there is no such thing as the patient’s doctor – it’s the patient’s 
pulmonologist, oncologist, thoracic surgeon, psychiatrist and cardiologist. 
This fragmentation of care has deep consequences for decision-making and 
healthcare spending but there is another growing problem – the diffusion of 
accountability.

If you are one of five doctors tending a patient, it can be tricky to specify 
your personal responsibility.

If the person’s cancer is in remission but she has persistent abdominal pain, 
how much should you intervene? None, according to the gastroenterologist who 
told me to mind my own business until I could see a cancer on the scan. Imagine 
you are the infectious diseases consultant called to give an opinion on a 
last-ditch antibiotic for a transplant patient and the patient’s son correctly 
fears that his father is dying but no one will tell him. What should you do? 
Counsel the son, find the transplant physician, or just chart the drug, when 
past experience tells you that your role is viewed as antibiotic selection, not 
patient prognostication?

Hospitals ... should celebrate doctors who model outstanding behaviour and 
demonstrate personal integrity

There is by now a familiar array of reasons given for the mismatch between 
what the public expects and what doctors deliver. It appears that in New South 
Wales, like in other places,bullying is endemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/26/i-wasnt-surprised-by-four-corners-bullying-in-medicine-is-as-old-as-the-profession>
, hierarchies persist, and those who speak up risk losing not just their sleep 
but possibly their livelihood.

Witnessing such incidents disheartens doctors who feel that their diligent 
work is undone by poor institutional culture. They are particularly detrimental 
to medical students and young doctors who imbibe the message that their ethical 
actions won’t budge the status quo.

We drill into all doctors the idea of professional integrity – behaving in 
accordance with the norms of a hallowed profession. At corporate-style 
workshops held at enormous cost, institutions love to posit, “What kind of 
doctor do we want you to be?”

Implicit in this question is the message that a doctor’s conduct can be shaped 
by institutional expectation. So being a certain kind of doctor, say the kind 
that is a “team player”, or a “consensus builder”, you might avoid the bumps. 
But as countless unfortunate incidents show, a smooth, uncontroversial career 
for a doctor has little bearing on patient outcomes.Doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/doctors> whose highest aim is to keep the 
executive happy have different goals to the ones whose duty is to patients.

So, while professional integrity is necessary, I think the question we ought 
to periodically ask all doctors is actually a far simpler one. “What kind of a
persondo you want to be?” 

Implied in this question is an appeal to our better selves, a reminder to care 
about our patients as people and treat them with respect, compassion and 
understanding. If you see yourself as an upright, fair and considerate 
individual then you will treat the patient in a manner consistent with this and 
more importantly, do it fearlessly. After all, personal integrity does not need 
the imprimatur of the institution.

Doctors as an arm of border protection? That's a step too far | Ranjana 
Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/10/doctors-as-an-arm-of-border-protection-thats-a-step-too-far>
At its heart, medicine is a moral enterprise. For all the cynicism, the 
majority of doctors still enter medicine to make a difference. Along the way, 
we grapple with fundamental beliefs about what it means to be a doctor and how 
we will live up to many of our own high expectations.

In the same way as hospitals flaunt their most innovative researchers, adept 
surgeons and grant-winning physicians, they should celebrate doctors who model 
outstanding behaviour and demonstrate personal integrity because their impact 
is enduring.

The imbalance of information and power in the doctor-patient relationship is 
enormous and the temptation to take shortcuts is human and ever-present. This 
is why it helps to stop and ask, “What kind of a person do I want to be?”

Doctors lose count of the exhortations about how to be a better doctor because 
the institutional guidance regrettably seems like corporate advice. Patients 
are not clients, consumers or customers – they are people. People who are sick 
and afraid and vulnerable, who need doctors armed not only with skills but a 
sense of our shared humanity.

Someone once told me that personal integrity is how you behave when no one 
else is looking. The definition stuck with me. It’s simple enough to repeat and 
a powerful enough reminder about the importance of being a good person before 
being a good doctor.
 