
The head of the British intelligence agency MI6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6>, Alex Younger, has said cyber-attacks, 
propaganda and subversion from hostile states pose a “fundamental threat” to 
European democracies, including the UK.

In a rare speech by an MI6 chief while in office, Younger did not specifically 
name Russia but left no doubt that this was the target of his remarks. Russia 
has been accused ofinterfering in the US presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/obama-democrats-russia-role-elections>
 and there are concerns it could do the same in French and German elections 
next year.

He did mention Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> in relation 
to Syria, portraying Russian military support for the country’s president, 
Bashar al-Assad, in the takeover of Aleppo and elsewhere as potentially 
creating a long-term problem that could increase radicalisation.

“In Aleppo, Russia and the Syrian regime seek to make a desert and call it 
peace. The human tragedy is heartbreaking,” Younger said.

Russia has moved ever closer to centre stage for the US and UK intelligence 
agencies over the last year. During the US election campaign Donald Trump said 
he would seek to engage in some sort of discourse with Vladimir Putin, the 
Russian president.

German spy chief says Russian hackers could disrupt elections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/german-spy-chief-russian-hackers-could-disrupt-elections-bruno-kahl-cyber-attacks>
Younger delivered the speech at the headquarters of the Secret Intelligence 
Service, the official name for MI6, at Vauxhall Cross in central London. It was 
the first time an MI6 chief has made a speech at the HQ, a move aimed at trying 
to show the secret organisation is making an effort to be a bit more 
transparent.

He described the internet as having turned the work of the intelligence 
services on its head and said it represented “an existential threat” as well as 
an opportunity.


He said hybrid warfare – which Russia has employed in Ukraine, though he again 
did not mention Russia – was a dangerous phenomenon. “The connectivity that is 
at the heart of globalisation can be exploited by states with hostile intent to 
further their aims deniably,” he said.

“They do this through means as varied as cyber-attacks, propaganda or 
subversion of democratic process. Our job is to give the government the 
information advantage: to shine a light on these activities and help our 
country and our allies, in particular acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, build the resilience they need 
to protect themselves.

“The risks at stake are profound and represent a fundamental threat to our 
sovereignty. They should be a concern to all those who share democratic values.”

Younger declined to provide details of how Britain was responding to such 
threats, citing operational reasons, but it is known the UK government does not 
see a need to respond to Russia in a symmetrical way, such as launching a 
counter-cyber-attack. Instead it could launch a series of counter-measures such 
as sanctions.

The US intelligence services claim to have evidence that Russia was behind the 
leaking of information from the Democratic party that undermined Hillary 
Clinton’s presidential campaign. Senators are pushing for the White House to 
have any such intelligence declassified. Russia has denied any such involvement.

Russia accused of series of international cyber-attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/13/russia-accused-international-cyber-attacks-apt-28-sofacy-sandworm>
Younger ran through various threats posed to the UK other than cyber-security, 
noting that counter-terrorism, his speciality, had been a niche concern when he 
began his career but had now become central. He said the UK intelligence and 
security services had disrupted 12 terrorist plots in the UK since June 2013. 
MI5 and the police were running hundreds of investigations into those intent on 
carrying out or supporting terrorist atrocities.


“As I speak, the highly organised external attack-planning structures within 
Daesh [the preferred government name for Islamic State], even as they face 
military threat, are plotting ways to project violence against the UK and our 
allies without ever having to leave Syria.”

He said the events unfolding in Syria created as many, if not more, problems. 
The strongest weapon against international terrorism was legitimacy, he said, 
and Assad, backed by Russia, did not have it. The end result could be an 
increase in terrorism.

“If you doubt the link between legitimacy and effective counter-terrorism, 
then – albeit negatively – the unfolding tragedy in Syria will, I fear, provide 
proof. I believe Russian conduct in Syria, allied with that of Assad’s 
discredited regime, will, if they do not change course, provide a tragic 
example of the perils of forfeiting legitimacy.

“In defining as a terrorist anyone who opposes a brutal government, they 
alienate precisely that group that has to be on side if the extremists are to 
be defeated.”

In a reference to the Chilcot report on Iraq, he came as close as anyone from 
MI6 to acknowledging that the agency had made a huge mistake through its part 
in falsely claiming Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction before the 
2003 invasion. The Chilcot report singled out the intelligence agencies for 
falling into line with what Tony Blair’s government wanted rather challenging 
it over WMD.

“A vital lesson I take from the Chilcot report is the danger of groupthink. I 
will do anything I can to stimulate a contrary view: to create a culture where 
everyone has the confidence to challenge, whatever their seniority,” Younger 
said.

He played down the impact of Brexit and the Trump election win. “I’m often 
asked what effect the big political changes of 2016, Brexit and the US election 
result, will have on these relationships. My answer is that I will aim for, and 
expect, continuity.”

Comments made by Trump on the campaign trail such as support for the US 
resuming torture would create legal problems for MI6 if the president-elect was 
to follow through. But there is scepticism in the US intelligence community 
that Trump will actually implement this, and there are already signs that he is 
backing off.

Younger did not directly address the torture issue. But one remark could be 
read as a promise that MI6 would not be implicated in any such move. “We can 
work with a wide range of partner countries overseas, partners who often do not 
share our laws but who do know our red lines,” he said.
 