
Derick Hougaard, late of South Africa's Blue Bulls, must have known it was 
going to be his day when hisLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> debut saw the Tigers don 
shirts that look to have been borrowed from Manchester City and socks from 
Cambridge University. Sky blue was otherwise a little lacking on a horrible, 
murky afternoon at The Rec.

It was a long way from the high veldt but the former Springbok fly-half 
adapted well, landing 14 points including a drop- goal that put the game beyond
Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath>. Hougaard's signing by his former 
coach, Heyneke Meyer, was not the most high profile of the summer but it may be 
inspired.

Until now Hougaard, who has eight caps, is best remembered by northern 
hemisphere fans as being on the receiving end of a tackle from Samoa's Brian 
Lima in the 2003 World Cup that would have up-ended a double-decker bus. The 
25-year-old will be invaluable when Leicester's other No10, Toby Flood, is with 
England.

Meyer may play the pair together. "Derick will bring a lot to the 
Premiership," he said. "I think he is still the best South African fly-half and 
adapting to conditions like this will make him a better player."

Bath might have questioned Meyer's assertion that Hougaard was South Africa's 
leading No10, and their current Springbok fly-half, Butch James, who like so 
many frontline players sat out this game to prepare for this weekend's Heineken 
Cup, might not have allowed the wing Mike Stephenson to brush past him to set 
up the first of two tries for Andrew Higgins. But as Hougaard found his kicking 
range, his confidence grew.

Hougaard was even inspired by barracking from Bath fans when he took his time 
over a third successful penalty, on the hour, that put his side back into the 
lead. A pompous voice on the Bath PA admonished the fans for their bad manners. 
It is a bit much to be treated like children when you have paid good money to 
be soaked to the skin and told to behave as if you were at an opera, not a 
rugby match.

"To be jeered made me feel at home," said Hougaard. "I know I didn't start 
well. I missed a kick to touch and when I missed that tackle I thought, 'Shit'. 
But there was still 70-odd minutes to go and I just got on with it. Moving to 
Leicester opens a new chapter for me. I've still got aspirations to play for 
the Springboks and being surrounded by world-class players at Welford Road 
won't do me any harm."

In between Higgins' two tries, Leicester's 19-year-old scrum-half, Ben Youngs, 
dummied from a lineout to race through and score Leicester's only try.

Meyer, aware that Leicester's dismal performance in last April's EDF Energy 
Cup final against the Ospreys was the beginning of the end for their coach, 
Marcelo Loffreda, was relieved that his young side prevailed as Bath's kicker, 
Robbie Kydd, missed four of six attempts at goal. Shontayne Hape, Bath's rugby 
league recruit from Bradford, did enough on his competitive debut to suggest 
that his switch of codes will be a lot more successful here than that of Chev 
Walker, who returned north a year ago.

Bath Kydd; Stephenson, Hape, Cheeseman (Crane, 73), Higgins; Fuimaono-Sapolu; 
Bemand (Baxter, 71); Flatman (capt; Catt, 67), Hawkins (Dixon, 67), Ion 
(Jarvis, h-t), Harrison (Hooper, 28), Hobson (Griffiths, 71), Ovens, 
Scaysbrook, Jackson.

Tries Higgins 2 Con Kydd Pen Kydd.

Leicester Vesty; Varndell, Erinle, T Youngs, Tuilagi (Smith, 68); Hougaard, B 
Youngs; Stankovich (Bonorino, 61), Davies (Chuter, 56), Cole, Raven (Goldspink, 
71), Kay (capt), Hemingway, Pearson (Wentzel, 48), B Deacon.

Try B Youngs Con Hougaard Pens Hougaard 3 

Drop-goal Hougaard.

Referee D Richards (Berkshire) Attendance 10,600.

Heineken Cup one to watch: Alesana Tuilagi (Leicester)

The giant Samoan was back in a Tigers shirt at The Rec on Saturday and in 68 
minutes on the field he showed enough glimpses of his old power to worry next 
Sunday's Pool Three opponents, the Ospreys
 