
The estate agents are not panicking in Clapham, an area of south London where 
a family home typically costs between £1m and £2m and stamp duty charges will 
now be much higher.

The phones started ringing straight after the chancellor’s surprise 
announcement that wealthy homeowners will pay more tax. Robin Chatwin, who 
looks after sales for Savills said it was reminiscent of his first weeks as an 
agent, in 1988, when a mortgage interest tax break for couples was just about 
to be scrapped.

“Those two weeks were absolute madness – it was just like that on Wednesday 
night,” he said.

As well as rushing through deals that had already been agreed, the agency did 
one entire deal – from offer to exchange of contracts – in the same evening, 
saving the buyer of a £5m house more than £160,000.

Thomas Crabtree, area sales director at Marsh & Parsons, said clients were 
quickly on the phone asking what it meant, and there were concerns about 
potential sales falling through as buyers realised how much more they would 
have to pay.

By Thursday afternoon, things had settled down but there was some 
renegotiation going on. “I have a buyer who is trying to pass on the increase 
to the seller,” said Chatwin. “The vendor’s initial reaction is no.”

At James Pendleton, one of several high-end estate agents in a street near the 
common, advertising sizeable terraced properties for just under £1.5m, Peter 
Clarkson said he had heard from buyers trying to cut deals and a seller who 
thought they might be able to benefit.

“They asked if the buyer would split the difference on the money they were 
saving. You get nothing without asking,” he said. “He got nothing.”

The agents in Clapham thought the market might slow down for houses worth 
between £1.6m and £2m where the new rates hit especially hard - no one was 
worried about prices going down, even above £2m where the threat of a mansion 
tax still looms.

Annual price inflation in the borough of Wandsworth hit almost 25% this year, 
although prices have since fallen back a little. But the stamp duty change is 
not expected to cause any further drop.

“You are going to have buyers further down the market who suddenly have more 
money, which will lead to price inflation, which will automatically filter 
through to the higher band,” said Clarkson. “If you’re selling an £800,000 flat 
for £20,000 more than before then you’ll have more to spend.”

Crabtree said that the changes made a mansion tax less likely, and this would 
also lift the market above £2m.

“When the next £2.5m buyer comes in next year this will just be how things 
are.”
 