
Major housebuilders such as Taylor Wimpey and Persimmon may be forced to spend 
millions compensating home buyers locked into unfair leasehold contracts, 
following a warning by housing minister Gavin Barwell.


Amid accusations in the House of Commons of “the PPI scandal of the property 
sector”, Barwell ordered developers to halt future sales of leasehold houses or 
face government action next year.

New era of housebuilding needs new property laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/dec/03/new-era-housebuilding-new-property-laws>
He also told developers to come up with solutions for householders already 
stuck in homes where soaring ground rents have made their property virtually 
unsaleable.

“There is a widespread problem here that needs addressing. These practices are 
not illegal but it seems to be one of those cases where there is a gulf between 
the letter of the law and our sense of what is right.

“The secretary of state and I are clear that it is not just a matter of 
stopping this practice going forward, but it is also about addressing hard 
working people who believe they have bought their home but actually they are in 
a position where they may find they are unable to sell that home down the line.”

A series of reports in Guardian Money has revealed how developers have been 
selling detached and semi-detached houses as leasehold, with clauses which 
allow theground rent to double every 10 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/05/ground-rent-scandal-engulfing-new-home-buyers-leasehold>
. The freeholds are then sold on to private companies which extract the ground 
rent, charge high fees if a homeowner wishes to make alterations, and refuse to 
sell the freehold except for a huge premium.

Homebuyers have been left with houses they cannot sell  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/29/new-builds-house-buyers-leasehold-property-trap>
as lenders will no longer offer mortgages against them because of the ground 
rent clauses.


“My constituents have been comprehensively stitched up,” said Justin Madders 
MP, adding that in his Ellesmere Port constituency the practice of selling 
new-build houses as leasehold has become common place in recent years.

Government promises to stamp out abuses of new-build ground rent scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/government-promises-to-stamp-out-abuses-of-new-build-ground-rent-scandal>
He told the Commons how the buyer of a Bellway home in his constituency was 
told the freehold would cost £3,750 to purchase, but when it was sold on to a 
third party, Adriatic Land, the price went up to £12,750 the next year.

Madders said another constituent was told by Taylor Wimpey that they would be 
given first refusal on the purchase of the freehold, but it was then sold on 
without their knowledge or approval. In one extreme case a constituent will see 
the ground rent on their home rise to £11,000 a year by the middle of this 
century, and then to £367m a year by the end of the lease period.

“It can only be described as a racket by the country’s biggest developers,” he 
added.

Taylor Wimpey said it has stopped selling leasehold houses with ground rents 
that double every decade. Recent sales have moved to a formula based on the 
retail prices index.

The Commons debate highlighted numerous other abuses in the leasehold sector, 
including excessive service charges, 40% insurance commissions, manipulation of 
leasehold valuation tribunals, and even the forfeiture of homes by leaseholders 
who battle freeholders.

Barwell admitted that while leasehold can work, in many places it is failing. 
He said that while more than four out of 10 new properties in England and Wales 
are now sold as leasehold, 57% of buyers later regret purchasing such a 
property. “It’s a pretty sobering figure,” Barwell said.

Jim Fitzpatrick MP, whose Poplar and Limehouse constituency has among the 
highest concentrations of leasehold in England, told the Commons of battles 
between residents of one Canary Wharf block and their freeholder, billionaire 
John Christodoulou.

He said residents are likely to be landed with a legal bill for around 
£500,000 after challenging the freeholder. “The residents will be half a 
million pounds poorer with nowhere else to turn. None of this impacts the value 
of Christodoulou’s investment. The only people damaged are the leasees.”

In disputes between freeholders and leaseholders, freeholders are often able 
to charge their legal fees on to the service charge of the leaseholders.

Peter Bottomley MP told the Commons how one elderly couple challenged their 
£9,000 a year service charge and obtained a tribunal ruling striking out £7,000 
of the costs. Yet they ended up with a legal bill from the other side for 
£70,000 and faced the forfeiture of their home.
 