
On the weekend, my 3 year-old daughter found a dead bumble bee in the garden, 
one of those giant comically fluffy Zeppelins that look like they shouldn't be 
able to walk, let alone fly. In a moment that parents note as being 
developmentally significant, she asked me, unprompted, if we should bury it. I 
don't recall ever having talked about burials with her, and I'm fairly sure she 
has little concept of death. Nevertheless, we did, and marked the hymenopteric 
grave with a Mini Milk stick.

I'm recounting this tale to the Alpharinos as we chow down on our pizzas, and 
it leads us onto talking about comfort. Mike, the church layman who helps run 
the course, says how it's much more comforting to say that grandma is in heaven 
rather than rotting in the ground. I suggest that this is deceitful. When is 
the right time to explain to a child what death is? I don't know, but I'm sure 
that an honest fudge is better than an outright fairy tale.

We're meant to be talking about how God guides us, but it's a bit of a 
pleasant ramble today. I don't know whether it's that we're getting friendly 
now, or whether it's the subject matter, but the tone is gentle, peaceful and 
rather personal. Toby recounts tales of how he was called to re-affirm his 
Christianity and take it up professionally, via dreams and coincidences. Toby 
says that God's timing is great, which reminds me of the clearconfirmation bias 
<http://www.skepdic.com/confirmbias.html> we heard in last week's prayer 
session. One woman describes how whilst driving, she effectively had a message 
telling her it was time for her to have a baby. We hear how important it is to 
not think you are crazy when you start hearing from God.

Many Christians will tell of the moment when they felt something new and 
interpreted it to mean that they were in touch with the divine. Naturally, I 
believe that there must be a rational explanation. But with such personal 
experiences, so subject to later misremembering or partial interpretation, it's 
nigh-on impossible to give one.

Some readers have noted that this Cliff Richard 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=px7ilisAGj0> brand of Christianity is not very 
interesting. Certainly it's not nearly as easy to mock as out-and-out 
fundamentalist creationists. Some have pointed out that listening to voices in 
your head whilst praying might result in bizarre behaviour. Hearing from God in 
your dreams might also fit into that category. But I think these small personal 
tales of faith are experiences of the majority of Christians, and the wacky 
ones are the vocal minority. Our course is all very English, and not very 
evangelical. And, based on what I have read and heard about other courses and 
the official doctrine, not very Alpha.

We go off-piste again with Toby talking about how he's been involved in 
exorcisms. I am utterly bemused. I had no idea, but dioceses are required to 
have an exorcist. We're talking about demonic possession here. He explains that 
most are clearly the product of psychiatric disorders, and they approach each 
with that in mind. But others were not so easily explainable. "You're talking 
about ghosts?" I ask. "Oh no, not if you mean the spirits of the dead spooking 
around houses. These were poltergeists," he says. "Is that not just a type of 
ghost?" I ask, looking around for support to see if I have gone crazy. Toby 
says "I've seen things that I simply cannot explain."

I think I've gone soft. Fear not: Toby is already smacking his lips at the 
session in a fortnight's time for which the theme is "healing". I'll be fully 
tooled up for a barney. But today these are real people with genuine emotional 
beliefs. I may strenuously disagree, and certainly they may be ignorant or 
wrong, but I believe, as we become more familiar, that they deserve to be 
listened to. Does tolerance of these beliefs pave the way to more extreme 
ideology? Probably. But disparaging them surely only stokes those fires even 
more.

Meanwhile, the next day, I found my daughter had dug up the bee and was 
pulling its wings off. You can insert your own interpretation of this as 
allegory for human nature below.
 