
On the steps of Ojom health centre, they sit three deep. Nearly all are women, 
holding babies or minding small children. Brightly coloured skirts and the 
traditional full-length dresses of the older generation lend the humble brick 
building a festive look. And there is a sense of optimism in the air. Ojom is 
well-equipped and last week it had a drug delivery, prompting this hopeful 
flood of people.

Richard Okello, the young nurse in charge of Ojom, and the three other staff 
are run off their feet. Currently, at least 40 to 50 people – sometimes twice 
that number - are turning up every morning. It's only with the arrival of 
medicines from Kampala that you see the real health needs of Katine families. 
There are no worried-well here.

Three years ago, Ojom health centre was no more than two rooms and a couple of 
nursing staff. Now it has a lab, built by Amref, and – after a long wait – a 
full-time lab assistant, which means patients can be tested for malaria, HIV 
and other diseases, allowing them to get their results and be treated the same 
day.

When you look at the patiently waiting crowd at Ojom, you realise the 
significance of this. A grandmother sits upright on the ground, legs extended, 
under the shade of a tree. A girl, who must be six or seven, lies with her head 
on the old woman's lap, immobile. The grandmother flaps away flies from the 
child's lips and strokes her hair. How would they travel to Katine's main 
health centre at Tiriri, 15km away, and what difference to the outcome might 
the delay make?

On the steps, Loyce Akiro holds her young son on her lap. He too is in the 
deep sleep of sickness, sweat beads on his face and head. Almost certainly, 
both children have malaria, a regional curse more prevalent because of the 
rains. Parents bear it with stoic patience.

Akiro, waiting her turn to be seen, is very happy with the improvements to 
Ojom. "There is a great difference from before," she says. "Previously, we had 
to go to Tiriri [health centre] or even Soroti."

That happened to her in January last year, when one of her other children had 
the same symptoms. She had to travel with the sick child on the back of a 
bicycle to the district hospital in Soroti, 28km from Katine. Early diagnosis 
and drug treatment prevent children developing life-threatening severe malaria, 
which needs hospital admission and a quinine drip.

It's Wednesday, and the community vaccinators are here as well – two of the 15 
volunteers trained by Amref to immunise babies. The birth rate is such that it 
was hard before for the health centre to keep up. More than 15,500 children 
have been immunised against killer diseases since the start of the project – a 
rise from 43% to almost 96%.

It's so much easier these days, because Amref has provided a fridge to store 
vaccines and the centre has solar power to run it.

These, along with widespread distribution of insecticide-treated bednets, are 
success stories, but there has been a major disruption to the project's 
progress on health. Central to the plans are the village health teams (VHTs) 
recruited to educate families on staying well, spot malaria early and treat it 
with ACT (artimisinin combination therapy) drugs, and advise on family planning 
and HIV testing. They were to be the cheerleaders for health in their 
communities and the eyes and ears of the project and of health centre medical 
staff. Each month, they filled in detailed forms on issues ranging from births 
and deaths – especially of children and women in pregnancy – to the use of 
bednets, fever and diarrhoea in children, malnutrition, children not in school 
and progress in building latrines.

Last September, however, the VHTs downed tools, following a directive from 
Amref's headquarters in Kampala that they were no longer to be paid an 
allowance of 5,000 Ugandan shillings (about £1.50) for attending training 
sessions and bicycle maintenance.

Margaret Akileng is a VHT for the village of Ajonyi, but has not visited its 
75 households in nearly a year. "Maybe the Guardian could help to give us 
something to allow us to continue. We are the right people to be doing this 
job," she says. Without the VHTs, she argues, "the health of Katine people will 
change. There will be so many diseases.

"The project was very good and has been doing a lot, but when Amref came with 
a brief message to the VHTs, it disappointed them."

The VHTs feel a small allowance is appropriate for training sessions of a day 
or more, which prevent them working to feed their families. Until lately, 
Amref's response has been that payments had to stop because, once the project 
ended and VHTs were responsible to district government, there would be no money.

Amref has now changed its stance, recognising the VHTs would not return to 
work without support, and has agreed to provide the VHTs with a snack, instead 
of lunch as in the past, and 3,000 shillings in cash. But the dispute has 
caused damage. Progress has stalled and an entire year's data has been lost.

Some other issues are beyond Amref's control. Last year, the government banned 
traditional birth attendants (TBAs) from delivering babies because they cannot 
handle the complications that arise during delivery.

Amref had been training them to recognise and refer to the health centres any 
potential complications, understanding that women who live miles from the 
health centre and cannot afford the ambulance fuel charge of 35,000 shillings 
will try to deliver with only the help of neighbours. Ideally, all Katine's 
women should be delivering at Tiriri health centre.

Tiriri is a much bigger place than Ojom. Patients and relatives sit indoors on 
benches in the large but windowless dark of the reception area, waiting to see 
either a nurse or one of the two best qualified medical staff in Katine, who 
are clinical officers with three years' training.

There is no doctor. Tiriri, just shy of a hospital, has 25 staff, consulting 
rooms, a pharmacy and an operating theatre, but the doctor, Simon Oluka, left 
shortly after the Katine project began. He spent little of his time at Tiriri 
anyway, preferring Soroti town. He complained the accommodation was inadequate, 
the site insecure and the operating theatre unfit for purpose.

From the moment of the health centre's grand opening in 2006 by Janet 
Museveni, wife of the president, the theatre was a white elephant. It is full 
of shiny equipment, from oxygen cylinders to an ECG machine. None of it has 
ever been used. There was no mains electricity – only a generator – because the 
overhead power lines were destroyed years ago during fighting with invading 
insurgents from the north and the district government had no money to replace 
them. Until recently, when the government installed a tank, there was no 
running water either and the floor did not slope to allow blood and fluids to 
wash away.

It was not an early priority for the project, but Amref has now appointed a 
contractor to put it right. As early as next month, the theatre could be in 
business. Lives could be saved.

But Samuel Malinga, the clinical officer in charge, is strangely 
unenthusiastic. "We don't have a blood transfusion service here," he says. "And 
if there is only one medical officer here, I don't think he will be able to do 
many operations." He is afraid of creating a demand. There is so much unmet 
need. Staff at Tiriri are relieved if some of it goes to Soroti.

Malinga, who is new to Tiriri, does not think renovating the operating theatre 
is the most urgent need. "We appreciate the theatre, but if we could also have 
staff houses – it is one of the things that attract people to stay," he says.

The district health office has promised to recruit doctors. It's the rural 
syndrome. Qualified doctors want to be in town, where the lifestyle, housing 
and schools for their children are better, and where they may also pick up 
lucrative private work, often from NGOs who pay better than the government.

Without a qualified doctor, there will be no operations even if the theatre is 
renovated. Tiriri may well have to struggle on as best it can, but things are 
undoubtedly better than three years ago. Amref has trained the staff and 
management in vital skills such as budgeting and ordering drugs. The national 
health budget has just been cut by 14%, increasing the challenge. But 
healthcare in Katine has gone at least three steps forward for every two steps 
back. And its people are grateful for that.
 