
In Tuesday’s Daily Mail there is a feature 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3868712/Would-dare-ask-computer-old-look-Eight-brave-women-try-terrifyingly-simple-new-internet-craze.html>
 in which eight well-known women agreed to have their age estimated by some 
face recognition software. Photos of them were uploaded to Microsoft’s
how-old.net <http://how-old.net/>, which makes use of cloud-based algorithms to 
figure out how old you are. The Mail chose to call how-old.net “the 
terrifyingly simple new internet craze”, rather than “that app that became 
famous last week when we tried to use it to determine the age of some child 
migrants”.

One of the arriving migrants the Mail singled out, who perhaps looked a bit 
older than 18, was the subject of some confusion over whether he might have 
been an adult translator. It seems he wasn’t (his status is unconfirmed), 
although in subsequent reporting the Mail kept referring to him – inside 
quotation marks – as a “38-year-old child asylum seeker 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3854888/Charity-FALSELY-claims-38-year-old-child-asylum-seeker-actually-interpreter-one-migrant-Calais-confesses-course-majority-lie-age-UK.html>
”, the “38” having been the determination of how-old.net, which the Mail 
describes as offering “an unofficial ‘fun’ guess at ages”.

Refugees and Cindy Crawford’s daughter: an age-old problem for the tabloids
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/oct/20/refugees-and-cindy-crawfords-daughter-an-age-old-problem-for-the-tabloids>
There was no mention of migrants in Tuesday’s feature, which employed an 
expert – a consultant plastic surgeon – to explain why Mary Beard looks eight 
years older than she is, and Annabel Croft 11 years younger. The surgeon talked 
a lot about neck laxity, brow hooding and “mid-face descent”, although one 
might choose to conclude that the unofficial fun guessing app just doesn’t work.

In determining the ages of the eight participating women, how-old.net was out 
by an average of 9.75 years. It thought agony aunt Virginia Ironside looked 21 
years younger than her chronological age, a margin of error big enough to send 
a 38-year-old migrant back to the lower sixth. But who knows? He could be 
pushing 60.

For the record, I took part in this “terrifyingly simple new internet craze” 
when I wrote a piece about how-old.net over a year ago. The first photo I 
uploaded led the app to believe I was 37. When I submitted a second photo with 
a more pained expression, it said I was 53. I don’t do the second face any more.

Caught on Cameron



When I went to the corner shop to buy beer last week, I found the staff 
gathered round the high-mounted security monitor, reviewing old footage. I 
stopped to watch, wondering what kind of pre-recorded antisocial behaviour 
might be on offer. But it just seems to be a tape of a middle-aged man buying 
beer.

While I waited for something to happen, it dawned on me that the man buying 
the beer was David Cameron: unmistakable, even from the slightly overhead 
angle. The transaction concluded, as far as I could tell, without incident.

I thought it odd that people were filming the monitor screen on their phones, 
but I could see the fascination: a retired head of government caught fleetingly 
on camera going about his day. Where was he headed? Where had he been? What 
kind of beer did he buy? “This kind,” said the man behind the till, pointing at 
my beer.

After the Oval Office 

Racist bar brawl? Let me write a review | Tim Dowling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/racist-bar-brawl-yerkess-family-tripadvisor-review>
When I thought about it later, I was pleased by the idea that in Britain 
former PMs can revert so comprehensively to private citizens. In the US the 
lifelong security afforded ex-presidents means they don’t ever taste normal 
existence again. I don’t often regard my ability to shop for beer as a frail 
and precious liberty.

Decades ago I got jostled by two secret service agents in the course of my 
duties as an office temp in Connecticut. I didn’t understand what was happening 
at first – I was just trying to push my mail cart into the lift, and they kept 
pushing back. Just before the doors closed in my face, I glimpsed the bald and 
uneasy head of former presidentGerald Ford 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/1600/presidents/geraldford> behind them.

I complained about the incident all day, but now I see it from his point of 
view: three years an accidental president, a lifetime of pissing people off in 
lifts and car parks.
 