
Many seats on Ryanair flights could be free in a decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/ryanair-flights-free-michael-oleary-airports>
, with the airline making its money from sharing revenues with airports, boss 
Michael O’Leary said this week. But of course, flying isn’t – and won’t really 
be – free.

The average cost to Ryanair of carrying a passenger is €47.69 (£40.71 at 
current exchange rates), according to the company’s2016 annual report 
<https://investor.ryanair.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Ryanair-Annual-Report-FY16.pdf>
, while the average cost of a ticket is €46.67 (£39.85). That’s a loss of 
around £1 on every ticket it sells. But it was able to record a large profit 
because it made around £1bn from “ancillary revenues” – in other words, baggage 
charges, priority boarding, sandwiches and drinks sold on board, travel 
insurance and so on. It turns out the average traveller spends €14.74 on 
extras, which is where the real money is.

So if you really want to be a low-cost traveller, the trick is to avoid all 
the thingsRyanair <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ryanair> tries to sell 
you.

Don’t buy extra legroom or priority seats

Ryanair charges £15-£22.50 each way, on top of the normal fare, if you want to 
reserve a seat in rows one and two, or 16 and 17 by the emergency exits, as 
they have extra legroom.

Most other seats on Ryanair are charged at an extra £8 each way. Yet frequent 
travellers know a trick that works most of the time, whereby they obtain a 
premium seat without paying extra.

During the booking process you will be asked to reserve a seat. Just click “no 
thanks”. Ryanair will subsequently send out emails to remind you to check in, 
and imploring you to pay for a reserved seat.

Ignore them. The best time to check in is between two and three hours before 
your flight. In most cases you will then automatically be allocated one of the 
£15 premium seats. Crucially, make sure you complete check-in before the final 
two-hour deadline. After that, you will have to do it at the airport, at a cost 
of £45.

Why does this work? We have not had this confirmed by Ryanair, but the 
thinking is that it does not sell all its premium seats, but does fill most of 
its aircraft. It keeps the premium seats open until the last possible moment.

But the final few checking in have to be seated somewhere, so they are 
rewarded with one of the empty premium seats.

The problem with this trick is that it is not guaranteed and, crucially, only 
really works for solo travellers. If you are in a group then it will mean you 
are almost certainly split up.

Ryanair told us: “While we welcome enterprising ideas, it’s important to note 
that our load factor for October was 95%, and the only way for customers to 
guarantee their preferred seat is to purchase a reserved seat.”

Don’t waste £2.50 on a bottle of water

A 250g bag of M&Ms is €4 on its flights, but a 300g bag bought at Asda costs £2

We all know (or should by now) that you can’t take more than 100ml of liquid 
<https://www.gov.uk/hand-luggage-restrictions/overview> through security. On 
board, Ryanair capitalises on this by charging a stiff €3/£2.56 to thirsty 
travellers who want a bottle of water. But all you have to do is pack an empty 
plastic bottle and fill it up at a water fountain after security in the airport 
terminal. Some airports, presumably at the behest of retailers, will hide the 
water fountain as best they can, but there usually is one. At Gatwick’s south 
terminal it is on the upstairs concourse, down a corridor leading to the 
toilets. And there’s nearly always a savvy traveller there topping up their 
bottle.

Those dinky wine bottles can also be found for £2.50 in duty-free before 
flying, although Ryanair rules say you can’t drink your own alcohol on board. 
Of course, once on board it will sell you wine at €6-€7 per mini-bottle.

The same goes for snacks. You are perfectly free to carry fruit, vegetables 
and all solid foods 
<http://www.gatwickairport.com/at-the-airport/flying-out/security/security-restrictions/>
 through security in your hand baggage, although soup will breach the rules. 
Sandwiches on board Ryanair cost €4.50, but you can make some at home before: 
Ryanair says you are free to take your own food. And a 250g bag of M&Ms is 
€4/£3.40 on its flights, but a 300g bag bought at Asda costs £2.

Avoid £80 baggage costs

A 15kg bag costs £10-£40 each way, and another £5 or £10 if it’s 20kg. Above 
that, each kilo costs another tenner. Unless it’s the depths of winter and you 
need heaps of clothes, Ryanair’s free baggage allowance, though mean, should 
get you through: you are allowed a free 10kg hand luggage bag – the size of a 
small wheelie – plus a further small bag. Ryanair representatives used to have 
a stormtrooper reputation for seizing vaguely oversized bags, weighing them and 
charging accordingly, but in recent years have become more lenient.

Martin Lewis from MoneySavingExpert demonstrated on the ITV Tonight programme 
how to squash a vast amount of stuff into your jacket or coat. Wearing a 
22-pocket SCOTTeVEST US survivalist jacket, he managed to squeeze in a laptop, 
two books, a towel, passports, a T-shirt, socks, magazines and much more. “Even 
though it was heavier than hand luggage, airlines don’t have rules to stop it … 
yet,” he said.

Ignore the £5 priority boarding fee

It remains a mystery to frequent travellers why so many people opt for 
priority boarding, which will be £10 on a Ryanair return. It is not uncommon 
for priority customers to be first down the steps to be greeted by a bus 
waiting on the tarmac … but when the bus doors open it’s a free-for-all.

Some people opt for priority to ensure space in the luggage rack, but it can 
be easier, and faster, to leave your wheelie bag on the tarmac to be put in the 
hold, for free, and then collect it on arrival.




… but the hotel and car hire aren’t bad

Ryanair’s hotel booking service is provided by Booking.com and its car hire by 
Cartrawler.com, which pays a commission to the airline. We thought that might 
mean it’s cheaper to buy separately. But when we tested prices for hotels in 
Dublin for a weekend, we found that a stay at the Jurys Inn was actually 
cheaper through Ryanair’s website than anything we could find on comparison 
site Trivago, while the cars were £1-£2 less.
 