
David Cameron 


The prime minister emerged from Thursday's referendum with his reputation 
intact as a lucky man who too often flies by the seat of his pants.

Although he said his name was not on the ballot paper, he knew backbench MPs 
were lining up to call for his resignation if the referendum was lost.

He knew the vultures were circling to criticise him for ever ceding the 
referendum to the SNP or agreeing terms of a referendum so suitable to Alex 
Salmond, including the question on the ballot paper, the enfranchisement of 16- 
and 17-year-olds, and finally the exclusion of greater devolution. None of this 
now matters in light of the result. The referendum's outcome is the one he 
intended – the removal of the independence question for 15 years or more.

It is too early to say what impact this will have on the palsied state of the 
Conservatives inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, but there 
are tentative signs that some former Scottish Tories in rural areas may have 
been weaned off nationalism, and even the SNP. It is too early to talk of a 
revival of the Scots Tories, but it is not inconceivable.

His officials insist he did not panic in the campaign when the polls sharply 
narrowed, or make substantive concessions on devolution or its timetable in the 
final days.

But the impression remains that once YouGov showed a surprise lead for yes, 
Better Together did change tack and start to highlight how the choice was not 
between the status quo and change but between two different versions of change. 
Much of this was imposed on him byGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown>. Relying on the tactical 
campaigning insights of his predecessor in Downing Street to save his political 
skin must have been one of the more surreal moments of his career.

It must have been an unsavoury experience, and it has left some Tory 
backbenchers unclear as to precisely what Cameron guaranteed to Scotland. 
Bernard Jenkin, the Conservative chair of the public administration select 
committee, for instance, said: "We must honour the promises we have made to 
Scotland, whatever they are. We have got to find out what they are."

James Wharton, a Conservative MP in the north-east, also expressed his horror 
at the continuation of subsidies to Scotland, saying: "I cannot ignore the 
threat that devolution poses to my region."

Cameron now needs to balance the demands of his backbenchers and the need to 
fulfil the vows he made to the people of Scotland. In practice, those vows are 
quite limited: a promise of a draft bill on Scottish devolution.

Ed Miliband


The Scottish referendum campaign highlighted some of Ed Miliband's strengths 
as Labour leader. But it also pinpointed some dangers on the road towards next 
year's general election.

When the polls tightened in the final stages Miliband knew instinctively that 
the UK as a whole – and the Labour party in particular – was facing a perilous 
moment. His response, in suggesting to the prime minister that the three main 
UK party leaders should jointly set out plans to devolve further powers to 
Holyrood, will be remembered as one of his most astute moves.

But the campaign, which saw the yes side triumph in Labour's former stronghold 
of Glasgow, highlighted pitfalls for Miliband, who cannot hope to govern 
without a strong performance by Labour in Wales and Scotland in the general 
election. He is the first Labour leader since Harold Wilson, with the brief 
exception of Margaret Beckett, who has no personal connection in the UK beyond 
England.

It was not Miliband's fault that intransigent yes supporters barracked him in 
Edinburgh. But the referendum campaign showed that he needs to be careful not 
to sound like an outsider in Scotland and Wales, as he did when he tried to 
underline his links with Scotland by saying that his late father had served 
north of the border during the war.

The result also highlighted some potential structural weaknesses for Labour. 
Strategists are likely to have sleepless nights after the yes side secured a 
narrow victory in Glasgow, fearing the SNP could use the momentum to try to 
build a parliamentary base in the city.

Miliband began the momentous week in UK politics wondering in private whether 
he might have to table a vote of confidence inDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> after a yes vote. But he 
arrived in Manchester for the Labour conference facing a serious threat to 
Labour.

The prime minister's plan to restrict the voting rights of Scottish MPs 
contains a potentially lethal threat to his party which would find it all but 
impossible to govern without the support of its 41 MPs from north of the border.

Miliband could win an election, pass a Queen's speech and a budget and then 
find it impossible to pass legislation on schools and hospitals. Labour 
currently has 41 of the 59 Scottish MPs. The Tories have just one MP north of 
the border.

The prime minister announced that legislation on his plans would be introduced 
after the next general election in May 2015. This means that Miliband could 
dismiss Cameron's answer to the West Lothian question and seek to govern with 
the support of Scottish MPs.

But Cameron has set two traps for Miliband. He has said that if there is no 
agreement by the time of the general election he will seek a mandate for his 
proposals from voters. This could leave Miliband having to persuade English 
voters, who have displayed mixed thoughts about the Scottish referendum, to 
accept that Scottish MPs should have a say over English matters while English 
MPs have no say over devolved Scottish matters.

The second trap laid by the prime minister could lead to the whole 
constitutional process unravelling. Cameron regards his proposals as a 
"balanced settlement" in which the new rules for voting at Westminster "must 
take place in tandem with, and at the same time as, the settlement for 
Scotland". The clear implication is that if one element is rejected the whole 
process could fall apart.

Miliband warned the prime minister not to use this moment for what he called 
"narrow party political advantage". He announced plans to establish a 
constitutional convention in the autumn of next year, ensuring that Cameron's 
plans to limit the voting rights of Scottish MPs could not be in place by the 
time of the election.

Gordon Brown


Lampooned as the prime minister who failed to connect with Middle England 
voters, Gordon Brown has revived his political reputation after forming a 
startling connection with middle Scotland voters.

Brown's appearances on the stump in the final stages of the campaign 
electrified the no side and are likely to have played a key role in shoring up 
the support of natural Labour voters who appeared to be moving to the yes camp.

Even his critics described Brown's eve of poll speech in the Maryhill area of 
Glasgow as a barnstorming performance which combined an appeal from the heart 
with a demolition job on the SNP's economic proposals.

Brown transformed the Yes campaign with a simple, but penetrating, insight 
which he outlined in his book, My Scotland, Our Britain. This was that the 
Better Together campaign had made a mistake in allowing the SNP to frame the 
referendum campaign as a debate between Scotland and the rest of the UK. The 
former prime minister had been telling colleagues that the Better Together 
campaign needed to be reframed as a patriotic vision for what is best for 
Scotland.

The former prime minister's most significant intervention came when he bounced 
Downing Street into accepting his plans for a deepening of Scotland's 
devolution settlement, which he described as home rule within the UK.

Cameron is making it clear he greatly appreciates Brown's interventions. He 
may want to think with care about taking an overly partisan approach to the new 
constitutional settlement after his predecessor played such an important role 
in saving the union, thereby saving Cameron's premiership.

Alistair Darling


Alistair Darling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling> will 
probably conclude that his three years as chancellor of the exchequer during a 
period he famously described as "arguably" the worst global downturn in 60 
years was the most dramatic phase of his career.

But his role as leader of the Better Together campaign in the Scottish 
referendum will run a reasonably close second.

The relentless and intense pace of the campaign gave Darling a vivid – and 
unpleasant – taste of the old cliche about how easy it can be to go from hero 
to zero.

Darling's finest hour of the campaign came in his first televised debate with 
Alex Salmond when he pounded his opponent, reducing the normally silver-tongued 
first minister to a tongue-tied, cornered animal over his plans for a currency. 
The pugnacious performance by Darling, in which he repeatedly challenged 
Salmond to name his Plan B after the main UK parties had rejected a currency 
union, astonished his friends and his opponents.

Within weeks, however, Darling faltered when Salmond fought back in a 
combative performance in their second and final televised debate. The first 
minister neutralised the currency issue as he joked that he had three Plan Bs. 
Salmond also unsettled the Better Together campaign, and reached out to natural 
Labour supporters, by warning that the Tories would end up privatising the NHS 
in Scotland even though it is a devolved matter.

Darling's weak television performance prompted criticisms within the Better 
Together campaign that he was not quick-witted enough to cope with Salmond. 
There were also concerns that he had made an error of strategic proportions by 
allowing Salmond, in the words of one source, to "out-Labour" him.

But the qualities which had led to Darling's appointment to run the 
cross-party campaign in the first place came into play as he made way for 
Gordon Brown to take centre stage as Better Together moved to shore up the 
Labour vote. Darling's lack of ego meant that he easily made a hard-headed 
decision that it would be better if the former prime minister, with whom he has 
a testy relationship, appeared in the campaign's last election broadcast.

In the final rally of the campaign in Glasgow on Wednesday, Darling also made 
way for Brown who had tried to remove him as chancellor in the summer of 2009. 
Darling delivered a low key speech at the rally, ensuring that the final 
television bulletins would be dominated by Brown's speech.


 