
It's been raining in Katine. The genteel English expression doesn't do it 
justice. One moment the sun is out, the next instant the sky darkens and whole 
bathfuls of water tip from the skies. People flatten themselves against the mud 
walls of houses if they can. Those who can't, walking slowly with heavy loads 
on their heads or cycling with wife and children on the pannier, are drenched 
in an instant. And it keeps raining. The swamps overflow.

Three years ago, I watched women with yellow jerrycans on their heads wade 
through the swamp, their skirts gathered up in one hand as best they could. 
They were on their way to a place where the swamp bubbles. There is a spring 
beneath. Their pitiful hope was that the water there would be cleaner. In the 
dry season, they would frequent an old shallow well beside the swamp. In the 
rains, it disappears, overrun by the high water and full of mud.

Edith Apiango, 23, and her grandmother, Erima Anayo, who says she is around 
70, recall how it was. "When it rained, we crossed the swamp. The water came up 
to here," says Apiango, drawing a line with her hand just below her hips. "The 
water there was flowing a bit. We walked 4km. I had a 20-litre jerrycan. I had 
to rest on the way back. I was very tired because I had to make two journeys."

She has three small children – Irene Assege, eight (children take relatives' 
names, not those of their parents), Timothy Emuru, four, and Sarah Apeco, two. 
They all used to get ill. Diarrhoea, the biggest killer of small children here 
along with malaria, was a constant problem and so were worms.

"My boy almost died," said Apiango. "I took him to Ojom [the small local 
health centre] but there was no improvement, so I went to town [Soroti, which 
is 28km away]. They treated him but they said he will continue to get sick if 
you use that water."

Today, during the rainy season, they are nowhere near the swamp. They are 
pumping water at a new borehole, installed by Amref, near Ominit village where 
they live. The grandmother, who has brought a 10-litre can, is beside herself 
with enthusiasm, waving her hands in the air and beating them on her thighs to 
emphasise her words.

"We are very, very happy and very grateful to receive this borehole," she 
says. "We don't have diarrhoea these days – only malaria."

Ominit is one of 11 boreholes the project has installed, along with five 
shallow wells so far. One more borehole and two shallow wells are under 
construction – and one borehole needs redrilling because it takes half an hour 
of pumping to raise a trickle of water. "Water has been very successful," says 
Anthony Akello, Amref's assistant water and sanitation officer for the Katine 
project. When the project started, less than half of Katine families – 42% – 
had access to safe drinking water. Now it is up to 69.6%, he says, and will 
rise to 73.2% by the end of 2010.

Just as important as digging wells has been helping communities maintain them. 
It's where water projects fail. Inevitably, pumps break down. If the spare 
parts are not easy to obtain and there is no money to buy them, it's back to 
the swamp.

Apiango pays 500 Ugandan shillings (about 15p) every month to a water 
committee that Amref has helped set up and train. Each well has one, and each 
family contributes – around 300 households in most cases. Some tried to levy 
1,000 Ugandan shillings, but it was too much for these families. There is a 
caretaker at each well, chosen from those who live close by, who collects the 
money and keeps an eye on things. Each well has been surrounded with robust 
hedge plants to keep animals out. Women collecting water sweep away leaves 
every day.

The levy forms a fund to pay the handpump mechanic. Amref has trained three of 
them in Katine. Every six months, with the help of those on the water 
committee, the mechanic will clean the pipes, which can rust and develop holes 
because of the amount of iron in the water. Rust, in fact, has been an issue at 
one or two boreholes, where, understandably, people have refused to drink the 
brown and foul-tasting water. The district water department has installed an 
iron filtration plant which appears to be working.

But the most ambitious innovation to keep the wells working is a parts store, 
which will be run by a water and sanitation association representing all the 
individual well committees.

"Very few people locally will stock parts," says Akello. There's not a fast 
turnaround, so profits are limited. "The water and sanitation association 
opened an account at Barclays to stock pump parts in Katine."

The monthly levies will initially go towards stocking the parts store at the 
sub-county local government office in Katine. Once it is operational, villagers 
will save their funds so they can buy a needed part from the store – and the 
money they pay will be used to restock.

Then there are toilets. Or rather, their absence. It's the unsexy issue in 
development, but fundamental to saving lives. Faecal-borne diseases are a 
problem in Katine. Three years ago, only 7% of households had a latrine. Most 
people went in the bush - and handwashing afterwards was not even considered.

Amref trained village health teams (VHTs), comprising members of the 
community, to talk to families about the risks they ran without proper 
sanitation and hygiene. The same message was promoted in schools. Amref put 
together 240 dig-your-own latrine kits, consisting of wheelbarrows and tools 
such as spades and pickaxes, which were sent around the villages, remaining for 
a week or two at each. People got together to dig in groups. By last autumn, 
the proportion of households with a latrine had risen to 39%. Amref's target 
for the next year is to increase this to 75%.

It appeared to be going so well. But now, nobody knows whether the progress 
has been sustained. The best guess is that it has stalled.

The 272 VHT members stopped working last September in anger and dismay at a 
decision by Amref in Kampala not to continue paying them an allowance of 5,000 
shillings (about £1.50) every time they came to a training session, for the 
time they spent out of the fields and to help cover travel costs. Last month, 
Amref reinstated allowances.

If the health plan has suffered, the impact on hygiene and sanitation is not 
far behind. These were the educators, the motivators and the data collectors. 
Every month they filled in and submitted lists, which included the numbers of 
households with latrines. Even the act of touring homes asking whether people 
had dug a latrine helped push them to do it.

"It is critical," says Akello. "For about one year we have had no information 
about progress on latrine coverage." There is also talk of some of the 
latrine-digging tools having broken. Katine is too big and the homes too 
widespread, down rutted bush tracks, for project officers to get a clear idea 
of what is going on.

Recently, Akello and colleagues hit on an idea at least to get the hygiene and 
sanitation messages back into the community. They recruited young people into 
drama groups of the sort that sometimes put on performances to promulgate moral 
messages for the church. Two have got underway so far.

A central part of the project's sanitation component was equipping the schools 
with more toilets. The situation three years ago was dire. "In Ojago primary 
school, they didn't have any latrines at all," says Akello. "Elsewhere we found 
one traditional pit latrine shared between boys, girls and teachers." The worst 
consequence was that menstruating girls without separate facilities would stay 
at home out of embarrassment. That's changed. Some 116 toilets have been built 
in 13 schools and there are separate blocks for boys and girls.

There have been significant problems, however, with the design and choice of 
materials for the toilet blocks. Some of the 24 Ecosan toilets have failed 
because what should have been a sealed unit underneath for faeces and urine let 
in rainwater. Akello believes the roofs were not wide enough, allowing pools of 
water to collect at the base. Amref is now looking to renovate or replace them.

But the traditional-style toilets were not sufficiently robust, either. Some 
of the blocks were made of plastic and did not stand up to stormy weather. At 
Ojama school last year, two blocks of four were blown away. They were replaced, 
but parents asked for a brick structure instead when one was damaged a second 
time. The blue plastic structures could have been moved when the pit they 
covered was full, but Katine residents believe they are unsuited to local 
conditions. Seven of the nine plastic blocks are now being replaced.
 