
It’s hard to think of a situation in which it wouldn’t be extremely useful to 
have more willpower. For a start, your New Year’s resolutions would no longer 
be laughably short-lived. You could stop yourself spending all day on social 
media, spiralling into despair at the state of the world, yet also summon the 
self-discipline to do something about it by volunteering or donating to 
charity. And with more “political will”, which is really just willpower writ 
large, we could forestall the worst consequences of climate change, or stop 
quasi-fascist confidence tricksters from getting elected president. In short, 
if psychologists could figure out how to reliably build and sustain willpower, 
we’d be laughing.

Unfortunately, though, 2016 was the year in which psychologists had to admit 
they’d figured out no such thing, and that much of what they thought they knew 
about willpower was probably wrong. Changing your habits is certainly doable, 
but “more willpower” may not be the answer after all.

The received wisdom, for nearly two decades, was that willpower is like a 
muscle. That means you can strengthen it through regular use, but also that you 
can tire it out, so that expending willpower in one way (for example, by 
forcing yourself to work when you’d rather be checking Facebook) means there’ll 
be less left over for other purposes (such as resisting the lure of a third 
pint after work). Ina landmark 1998 study 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2012/04/the-chocolate-and-radish-experiment-that-birthed-the-modern-conception-of-willpower/255544/>
, the social psychologist Roy Bauermeister and his colleagues baked a batch of 
chocolate cookies and served them alongside a bowl of radishes. They brought 
two groups of subjects into the lab, instructing each to eat only cookies or 
only radishes; their reasoning was that it would take self-discipline for the 
radish-eaters to resist the cookies. In the second stage of the experiment, 
participants were given puzzles to solve, not realising that they were actually 
unsolvable. The cookie-eaters plugged away at the puzzles for an average of 19 
minutes each, while the radish-eaters gave up after eight, their willpower 
presumably already eroded by resisting the cookies.

Thus was born the theory of “ego depletion”, which holds that willpower is a 
limited resource. Pick your New Year resolutions sparingly, otherwise they’ll 
undermine each other. Your plan to meditate for 20 minutes each morning may 
actively obstruct your plan to learn Spanish, and vice versa, so you end up 
achieving neither.

Some scholars argue that willpower is better understood as being like an 
emotion: a feeling that comes and goes

Except willpower probably isn’t like a muscle after all: in recent years, 
attempts to reproduce the original results have failed, part of a wider 
credibility crisis in psychology. Meanwhile, a new consensus has begun to gain 
ground: that willpowerisn’t a limited resource, but believing that it is makes 
you less likely to follow through on your plans.

Some scholars argue that willpower is better understood as being like an 
emotion: a feeling that comes and goes, rather unpredictably, and that you 
shouldn’t expect to be able to force, just as you can’t force yourself to feel 
happy. And, like happiness, its chronic absence may be a warning that you’re on 
the wrong track. If a relationship reliably made you miserable, you might 
conclude that it wasn’t the relationship for you. Likewise, if you repeatedly 
fail to summon the willpower for a certain behaviour, it may be time to accept 
the fact: perhaps getting better at cooking, or learning to enjoy yoga, just 
isn’t on the cards for you, and you’d be better advised to focus on changes 
that truly inspire you. “If you decide you’re going to fight cravings, fight 
thoughts, fight emotions, you put all your energy and attention into trying to 
change the inner experiences,” thewillpower researcher Kelly McGonigal 
<http://kellymcgonigal.com/> has argued. And people who do that “tend to become 
more stuck, and more overwhelmed.” Instead, ask what changes you’d genuinely 
enjoy having made a year from now, as opposed to those you feel you ought to 
make.

One tactic is to manipulate your environment in such a way that willpower 
becomes less important

Lurking behind all this, though, is a more unsettling question: does willpower 
even exist? McGonigal defines people with willpower as those who demonstrate 
“the ability to do what matters most, even when it’s difficult, or when some 
part of [them] doesn’t want to”. Willpower, then, is a word ascribed to people 
who manage to do what they said they were going to do: it’s a judgment about 
their behaviour. But it doesn’t follow that willpower is a thing in itself, a 
substance or resource you either possess or you don’t, like money or muscle 
strength. Rather than “How can I build my willpower?”, it may be better to ask: 
“How can I make it more likely that I’ll do what I plan to do?”

One tactic is to manipulate your environment in such a way that willpower 
becomes less important. If you don’t keep your credit card in your wallet or 
handbag, it’ll be difficult to use it for unwise impulse purchases; if money is 
automatically transferred from your current account to a savings account the 
day you’re paid, your goal of saving won’t rely exclusively on strength of 
character. Then there’s a technique known as “strategic pre-commitment”: tell a 
friend about your plan, and the risk of mild public shame may help keep you on 
track. (Better yet, give them a cheque made out to an organisation you hate, 
and make them promise to donate it if you fail.) Use whatever tricks happen to 
fit your personality: the comedianJerry Seinfeld famously marked an X on a 
wallchart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jan/05/jerry-seinfeld-funny-sex-swearing-sitcom-comedy>
 for every day he managed to write, and soon became unwilling to break the 
chain of Xs. And exploit the power of “if-then plans”, which are backed by 
numerous research studies: think through the day ahead, envisaging the specific 
scenarios in which you might find yourself, and the specific ways you intend to 
respond when you do. (For example, you might decide that as soon as you feel 
sleepy after 10pm, you’ll go directly to bed; or that you’ll always put on your 
running shoes the moment you get home from work.)

The most important boost to your habit-changing plans, though, may lie not in 
any individual strategy, but in letting go of the idea of “willpower” 
altogether. If the word doesn’t really refer to an identifiable thing, there’s 
no need to devote energy to fretting over your lack of it. Behaviour change 
becomes a far more straightforward matter of assembling a toolbox of tricks 
that, in combination, should steer you well. Best of all, you’ll no longer be 
engaged in a battle with your own psyche: you can stop trying to “find the 
willpower” to live a healthier/kinder/less stressful/more high-achieving life – 
and just focus on living it instead.
 