 Look for Ann Clwyd in the Commons chamber and you will invariably find her on 
the "awkward" bench, sitting alongside such confirmed lefties as Alice Mahon, 
Alan Simpson and Jeremy Corbyn. Yet her natural friends think she has been 
keeping strange company recently.
The Cynon Valley Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP's 
support for the war put her shoulder to shoulder with Tony Blair, Jack Straw 
and the Tories. She is also, it turns out, on matey terms with Paul Wolfowitz, 
the US deputy defence secretary and his boss, Donald Rumsfeld - the two most 
hawkish members of the Bush administration.

It is such a surprising thought - like discovering that Bianca Jagger secretly 
nips out with Lord Tebbit and the Duke of Edinburgh for a spot of seal-clubbing 
- that at first I don't believe it. But it is true. The reason is a grim one, 
to do with a plastic shredder. Queasy readers should stop here.

In one of Iraq's most notorious prisons, Abu Ghraib in Baghdad, there were 
plastic shredders. They were a bit like an office paper shredder, except more 
robust, because they were designed to mince up old plastic. There, though, they 
were used to shred people. Just before the Americans arrived, Ms Clwyd says, 
the Iraqis "were executing all the remaining prisoners, and that's why nobody 
is found alive at any of the prisons".

But just before the war, Ms Clwyd met people in Kurdistan who had been in Abu 
Ghraib - "in fact they were the last people to come out alive" - and they 
confirmed the story. "People were either put in head first, or foot first. If 
you went in foot first, it took you longer."

She checked the story afterwards with someone from the prison "and they said 
yes, there were plastic shredders there and they were dismantled just before 
the military got there".

She wrote about the shredders and got an email from Mr Wolfowitz "who said he 
thought it was a spot-on piece and invited me to go and have a talk with him at 
some point. Well, I've been. It was too good an invitation to miss."

Ms Clwyd was clearly impressed: "What came out during that discussion is that 
Mr Wolfowitz himself had been a campaigner on Iraq since the end of the 1970s 
and that human rights inIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> was a 
major concern of his - which I'd never realised before, obviously. I had a very 
interesting hour and a quarter of conversation with him, on Afghanistan, and 
also on Israel-Palestine."

The idea that he is a superhawk "is a misconception", she says. "He's a very 
engaging personality, and prepared to discuss any issue. I found it very easy 
to talk to him and we had a good exchange. I hope that he will come here at 
some point and come and speak in the House of Commons, and let people put their 
concerns to him, because I think people will be very interested to meet him in 
the flesh."

Mentally rubbing my eyes at the thought of Mr Wolfowitz popping in to address 
the parliamentary Labour party, I asked Ms Clwyd whether, perhaps, she thought 
the whole Bush administration had been misrepresented?

"I think there is, among some people, a dislike of the US, also there's a view 
about what US policy might eventually mean. I can only say that Rumsfeld, while 
I was there, came into the room and I was introduced to him and he had a great 
line in self-deprecation, which is a welcome thing in a politician.

"I don't know what my colleagues would make of me sitting here, listening to 
neo-conservatives. It's why I haven't talked about it here, people might 
misunderstand it."

To understand Ms Clwyd's position, which has caused her considerable 
discomfort with friends, you have to understand her years of campaigning on 
Iraq. She set up Indict, an organisation to look into war crimes, but despite 
visiting 15 countries and collecting evidence from many of Saddam's victims, 
"we were not able to persuade the attorney general here to take the necessary 
action".

The idea was that this could have stopped the war, by singling out the bad 
guys at the top. "Over the last year, I've felt quite desperate at times 
because I knew that there was going to be a strong possibility of military 
action, but I also thought that the UN could have set up a war crimes tribunal 
on Iraq, as it did on the former Yugoslavia while Milosevic was still head of 
state."

Would that really have averted war? "It might have done. I was feeling frantic 
at times: I think from what our lawyer told us, a cracking international human 
rights lawyer, there was a possibility that it could be done and I had to 
exhaust every avenue in an attempt to get it done."

 The last stand


 In the end, of course, she failed, so Ms Clwyd supported the military action 
on human rights grounds. Weapons of mass destruction were never, for her, the 
main issue though she thinks Tony Blair genuinely believed they existed. "I 
still think people have to be a bit more patient. Maybe at the end of the day 
they will not be found, but I don't think that negates the humanitarian reasons 
for going to war."

During her campaigning, "We used to get documents saying who had died in a 
prison and their methods of execution. Sometimes I could hardly believe what I 
read myself, and I'd say, please check it."

After the 1988 Halabja chemical attack on the Kurds no one initially believed 
what had happened. "The Foreign Office ministers - Waldegrave and Mellor - said 
there's no proof, and we never got any proof for them because later in the year 
they went to a trade fair in Baghdad and shook hands with them." She has no 
doubt that Saddam did have chemical weapons before the war.

Since then Ms Clwyd has been to Iraq again, this time with a brief to report 
back directly to the prime minister. She was attacked in a convoy heading for 
Kurdistan - "it was a serious attack" - but says Baghdad itself is remarkably 
normal.

"When we saw those missiles night after night streaking across the sky I can't 
believe that there seems to be so little damage. Touring round the streets what 
you see is people going round the markets, like you would anywhere, and stores 
with fruit and vegetables and eggs, and legs of lamb hanging in butchers' 
windows."

The real issue, she argues, is security. Everyone she spoke to talked about 
the danger of spasmodic attacks by the Iraqi Republican Guard, fedayeen and 
high-ranking Ba'athists. She had seen a document she could not authenticate 
suggesting the Ba'ath party had been told to play a guerrilla role "ready for 
the big comeback - now if that were true it would obviously explain some of the 
sporadic attacks".

Talking to people on the street, though there was no antagonism, some had 
turned their heads away "and when I asked somebody else why they weren't 
speaking to me they said it was because they thought Ba'athists were watching 
and may come back, and then they'll get into trouble.

"They [the Iraqis] need to know what happened to Saddam and to his two sons as 
well. There is still a residual fear. The Iraqi people still need closure."

Back home, Ms Clwyd remains a target of anger for anti-war colleagues, but she 
downplays any problems in the Commons and insists she has barely changed her 
views since 1970. She's Labour, she says, not New Labour. She was disappointed 
not to be made international development secretary when the party came to 
power, but consoles herself with the work she did on Iraq and the Kurds.

And she is a little amused that the new development secretary, Baroness Amos, 
has cancelled her visit to Iraq. "A Foreign Office official who was supposed to 
come with me was told that she couldn't go because it was too dangerous. I 
thought it was quite amusing that it was all right for an elected politician to 
go but not for an official. I felt it was all right to go, but maybe a 
government minister would be more of a target. Things do happen."

Ann Clwyd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-clwyd> regrets more wasn't 
done about Iraq in the past. She wishes she could have done more at the time of 
the Shia and Kurd uprisings that were crushed cruelly. But unlike many in 
politics and the media, she is optimistic. The era of the plastic shredders is 
over.

The CV 

Ann Clwyd 

 Born: March 21 1937, Denbigh. 

 Education: Holywell Grammar School; Queen's School, Chester; University 
College of Wales, Bangor.

 Career: Student teacher, Hope School, Flintshire; BBC studio manager; 
Freelance reporter, producer; Welsh correspondent, Guardian and Observer 
1964-79; Vice-chair, Welsh arts council 1975-79; Member, Welsh hospital board 
1970-74; Cardiff community health council 1975-79

 Political career: MEP for Mid and West Wales 1979-84; MP for Cynon Valley 
since byelection in 1984; Chair, Labour backbench committee on defence, 
1985-87; Opposition frontbench spokesperson on women (1987-88), education 
(1987-88), overseas development and cooperation (1989-92), Wales (1992), 
national heritage (1992-93), employment (1993-94), and foreign affairs 
(1994-95); Member of the Shadow Cabinet 1989-93; Member of the International 
Development Select Committee 1997-01; Former Shadow Secretary of State for 
International Development; Former assistant to John Prescott as Deputy Leader 
of the Labour Party.

 High: Becoming special envoy on human rights in Iraq after helping Tony Blair 
minimise the Commons rebellion over the war.

 Low: Using her Commons privilege to verbally attack a plastic surgeon whom 
she referred to as a psychopath.
 