
'At 12, my daughter would come home from a party and say, 'Mum, Louisa was 
smoking, isn't that terrible!' But by 13 she'd changed. She took up with these 
very wild twin girls, who smoked dope and hitched rides at night. They were 
very persuasive. My daughter started smoking and almost immediately we weren't 
a big part of the picture anymore," says Elaine Mazlish, co-author with Adele 
Faber of How to Talk So Teens Will Listen, and Listen So Teens Will Talk, 
published here this summer. "The wild twins were taking over and I was afraid 
for my daughter's safety."

Already famous for their bestselling book How to Talk So Kids Will Listen and 
Listen So Kids Will Talk, the pair found that they were getting more and more 
letters from distressed parents of teenagers. "It gets harder as kids get older 
and it is even more difficult today than it was when we were raising kids," 
says Faber, a mother of three and grandmother of seven.

Faber was born into a family of Russian immigrants. Her parents barely spoke 
English and came from a background of deprivation and hunger. While hugely 
proud of their American-educated children, they were far too busy clothing and 
feeding them and keeping them safe (no roller skates, no bikes) to be much 
concerned with their internal life. Faber says: "I had a huge hunger for 
somebody to listen to me, to hear me."

When she became a mother herself, she says, she realised, "My parents just 
wanted to ensure that I never suffered the deprivation they had suffered. And I 
wanted to ensure that my children never suffered the [emotional] deprivation I 
suffered as a well-fed, well-cared-for American child."

Which is why she is so passionate about her work, particularly one of the core 
skills she and Mazlish teach: how to really listen. This is vital in the 
teenage years when children are moving out into the world and the influence of 
family is declining. If we want to know what is going on in our children's 
lives and to continue to pass on our values, we have to keep the communication 
channels open - and that is what the simple (though not necessarily easy) 
skills taught in this book (and the pair's earlier books) aim to help us to do.

Mazlish had a quite different upbringing from Faber. The only child of 
attentive parents and resident grandparents, she says, "I had truly the 
happiest childhood. I was never alone. I was never hit, rarely kept in. It was 
very respectful." As a result when she had her own three children she felt she 
knew naturally how to be a good parent: "I didn't need parenting experts!"

Faber, however, had been a teacher for some years before having her own kids 
and had always felt that there was something missing from her (generally very 
successful) communication with children. So when the child psychologist Haim 
Ginott ran a course in her area, she went along - and dragged her reluctant 
friend Mazlish with her.

"Did I need these skills?" says Mazlish, "Of course I did - especially with a 
lippy 13-year-old. Let's face it, these skills are not natural ... If someone 
is expressing something you really don't like, the natural thing is to push it 
away. For instance your child is upset. She says she hates her new haircut. The 
natural thing to do is to say 'It's fine, come on, let's do something else.' It 
is not natural to say 'You're really upset about that haircut.'" But that is 
exactly what Faber and Mazlish believe we should say.

"Feelings are never right or wrong," says Faber, "they just are. Only actions 
need to be limited. Feelings should always be accepted." So if your teenager is 
in a state, don't jump in with judgement, solution or even comfort, the authors 
say: show you are really listening ("ah"/"I see") and perhaps acknowledge how 
they feel ("he really hurt you") and wait. If he or she feels genuinely 
understood, the chances are your teenager will find their own solution - as 
they need to learn to do as they become adults.

One story in the book (which relies on true stories, though with changed names 
and circumstances) shows what can happen if you manage to bite your tongue: 
Jim's son has a part-time job and returns one Saturday in a foul mood, cursing 
his boss. He slams his backpack down and says that the boss had asked him the 
week before if he could do overtime this weekend and he'd replied, "Maybe". 
Arriving at work this Saturday willing to do the extra hours, he found that the 
boss had given the work to someone else.

Jim's natural reaction is to tell him to stop swearing and grow up: "What did 
you expect? How's a man supposed to run a business with an employee who says 
'maybe' he'll work?!" Instead the conversation goes like this:

Jim: "Uh-huh."

Son (still angry): "I've got a life besides this job you know!"

Jim thinks: "This isn't working" - but manages to say nothing.

After a while his son suddenly says, "I guess ... I should've called him when 
I got home and not left him hanging."

"When my first daughter was a teenager she used to make me so angry," says 
Mazlish, "She was very unreliable where time was concerned. She was supposed to 
be home and she wasn't, and she used to be so rude. She'd call me names and it 
was very hard not to call her names back. I had to learn to express myself with 
anger without insult." Most of the skills she teaches, Mazlish says, she now 
does without thinking, but this one she still has to work on consciously.

"You can only be a little bit nicer than you feel," says Faber, "or you may 
blow." So parents need to express their emotions without damaging their 
teenager's (often fragile) self-esteem. Instead of "You are so rude. When will 
you ever learn? ... And you think I'm going to help you now?!" You might say: 
"When you speak to me like that it makes me so angry I find it impossible to be 
helpful. I expect you to rephrase that."

The cartoons in the book, the authors admit, are simplistic: "Most issues are 
not resolved in four panels!" Change does take time, but it is remarkable how 
quickly it begins if you can make these skills your own. "These are not 
techniques to manipulate behaviour," the authors stress, "they are skills to 
create a positive emotional environment." One in which everyone feels they can 
express themselves and know they will be heard - an atmosphere of mutual 
respect that is particularly important at a time when children are trying to 
turn into adults.

If you can create such a family from the early years, you may escape the later 
traumas. "I don't want to sound smug," says Faber, "my kids didn't have a 
teenage explosion and I really enjoyed their teens." But both authors insist, 
"It is never, never too late to start ... We know lots of parents of teenagers 
and even twentysomethings who have turned their relationships around."

So what if your teenager is out of line? Punishment is not the answer. It 
interferes with your teenager taking responsibility, says Mazlish. Having been 
shouted at and punished, they are so full of resentment that they can't think 
about what they have done and why it matters.

"When our daughter came in late," says Mazlish, "I didn't yell, 'That's it, 
you're grounded.' I said, 'When you're not back, Dad and I get very worried.'" 
Of course, you can't go on saying that. If the behaviour continues it's time 
for problem solving - sitting down together and finding ways to meet as many of 
both parties needs as possible (teenagers will take account of parents' views 
when they know their own are being considered) and if that still fails - action.

In the case of the stop-out teenager, you might explain that you have had too 
many late nights worrying about her, so this weekend you need a break - so she 
will need to be at home. Beyond that, she has to find a way to avoid you having 
to worry and then she can go out again. This may sound like grounding, but it 
is different because it is not imposed from above in the same way, says 
Mazlish, "It is more like standing next to the child and expecting better of 
them."

Some parents may be impatient with all the discussion of how to handle minor 
infractions rather than getting straight to the big teenage issues (sex, drugs 
etc) but Mazlish says, "We deliberately put that off until the final chapter, 
because how we deal with the small stuff determines our ability to deal with 
the big stuff. If a teenager thinks he'll be shouted at, punished or lectured, 
he isn't going to tell you anything. He needs to feel safe to talk. Then you 
will get the chance to make your influence felt."

So what of Mazlish's 13-year-old daughter with the wild friends? She was 
tempted to ban her from seeing them and keep her in at weekends, but that would 
probably have led to lying and a breakdown of trust.

"So we did the opposite," Mazlish says, "We invited the twins over to dinner 
every Saturday night. We stocked the fridge and if the three of them wanted to 
go somewhere my husband would drive them. We didn't go out at the weekend for a 
year." By then, their daughter had moved on to other (safer) friends - and she 
stayed on the rails.

And it wasn't just Mazlish's family who benefited. A couple of decades later, 
Mazlish had just finished a parenting lecture when "a young woman came up to 
me. It was one of the twins, now the mother of four boys, and she told me how 
much it had meant to her to spend those evenings in our home."

· How to Talk So Teens Will Listen and Listen So Teens Will Talk, by Elaine 
Mazlish and Adele Faber is published by Piccadilly Press at £10.99

www.fabermazlish.com <http://www.fabermazlish.com>
 