
Two months after the change of regime in Downing Street, nothing has marked 
the difference between the Conservatism of Theresa May and the Conservatism of
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> more sharply 
than the question of grammar schools.

This week the grammar-school-educated new prime minister put educational 
selection back at the heart of Tory educational thinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
 for the first time since the 1970s – albeit in a very different way from the 
past. Yet her Eton-educated predecessor once defined himself by insisting that 
there would be “no return” to selection at 11 and no new grammar schools.


For May, the return of selection is part of an ambitious attempt to redefine 
theConservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> as a 
party of social mobility, meritocracy and opportunity for all. Cameron also saw 
the issue as a “key test” for the Tories, but in a very different way. In 2007 
the former prime minister said the issue would decide whether the Tories were a 
party of government or “a rightwing debating society”.


For Cameron, the Tory party’s continuing preoccupation with the return of 
grammar schools was a sure sign that it was backward looking, a party that 
regretted the kind of society that Britain had become in the 21st century. He 
accused his critics of “clinging on to outdated mantras that bear no relation 
to the reality of life”.


Many Tories have nevertheless clung on. Though probably only a minority of 
Conservative MPs actively supported the return of selection until May made it 
an issue again, Tory voters have continued to support grammar schools. A YouGov 
poll in August found that 59% of Conservative voters think the government 
should encourage academic selection and build more grammar schools, compared 
with 38% of the population as a whole.


One reason for that is that Ukip has made the return of grammars one of its 
central pledges. Many Tories fear that the issue helps to boost Ukip support at 
their expense. Though May has undoubtedly revived the issue as part of her 
distinctive one-nation vision, her speech this week could have the spin-off 
benefit for the Tories of stealing Ukip’s clothes while it is focused on 
choosing Nigel Farage’s successor.


Conservative reluctance to let go of grammar schools also has roots in 
history. The selective grammar schools that many revere were the creation of 
the liberal Tory minister RA Butler, whose Education Act of 1944, establishing 
universal free education with selection at 11, was one of the central social 
reforms of the wartime and postwar era, along with Labour’s creation of the 
National Health Service. Butler once argued that his act would “have the effect 
of welding us into one nation, instead of two nations as [the 19th-century Tory 
prime minister] Disraeli talked about”.


In the early years after 1944, it was a defensible view. The 20-year heyday of 
grammar schools coincided with a period of relatively strong social mobility as 
the economy revived from the disciplines of war and austerity. For a period, 
education was a quiet area of consensus politics. The education secretary did 
not even sit in the cabinet in the early years of Winston Churchill’s 1951 
government.


Economic decline and the rapid growth of comprehensives in the 1960s under 
Labour changed all that. Liberal Tories like Harold Macmillan’s education 
secretary Edward Boyle were comfortable with the change. But Margaret Thatcher 
– whose children were privately educated – wrote in her memoirs that she should 
have preserved the grammars on principle when she became education secretary in 
1970. By 1974, however, Thatcher had closed a record number of grammar schools 
and the number of children at comprehensives more than doubled.


For most of the past 40 years the Tory party has, sometimes grudgingly, 
accepted the victory of comprehensives over the binary system they replaced. 
The focus has shifted first to standards and the curriculum, and then, since 
1997, to school governance and leadership.


By 2014, 163 grammar schools still remained in England, a small minority among 
more than 3,000 secondaries. They were seemingly more an oddity of class-based 
survival in the shires than the beating heart of a future national revival. 
After becoming Tory leader in 2005, Cameron said he thought selection was 
unpopular with voters. His education spokesman David Willetts went further, 
telling the party that selection did not work either educationally or in 
helping social mobility.


May has now broken with that consensus, albeit on her own terms. Strongly 
influenced by her joint chief of staff Nick Timothy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/08/grammar-schools-theresa-may-plans-for-inclusive-grammar-schools-slammed-politics-live?page=with:block-57d16d8ae4b07ac3d446a3ad#block-57d16d8ae4b07ac3d446a3ad>
, who is a working-class grammar-school-educated Conservative, she has made 
selection – and the revival of grammar schools – part of a drive to regenerate 
the social mobility that has stalled so badly in post-crash Britain. She will 
find plenty of takers among Tories who see grammar schools as a symbol of a 
vanished Britain to which they wish to return. Whether she persuades the rest 
of the country that selection is one of the routes to greater opportunity is 
much less certain.
 