
Guacamole and I did not get off to a good start. We first met in the context 
of a home-assembly fajita kit – marinated chicken in a little plastic pouch, 
sachets of sour cream and salsa, a few desiccated tortillas and something 
distinctly unappetising looking in a small plastic pot. In those innocent 
pre-pesto and wasabi days, green food was a bit of a novelty outside the salad 
aisle, and the colour unnerved me until I realised the contents were, in 
reality, little more than double cream with a soupcon of avocado playing lip 
service to the original recipe. How exotic I felt, rolling my own dinner.

Now, this was 1994. Leggings and Take That were hot stuff. What puzzles me is 
why, nearly 20 years later, when both these things have fallen from grace at 
least twice, the same awful guacamole is still in fashion. It's not as if 
Mexican food is a novelty; why, these days you can even find restaurants that 
manage to make money without the help of a hat stand laden with amusing 
headgear and 15 types of tequila slammer. But somehow, thepea green sludge 
<http://www.pleasantmorningbuzz.com/blog/1130061>, heavy with dairy and low on 
flavour, still lurks alongside the hummus and the taramasalata in the chilled 
aisle.
As I discovered some years later, guacamole should be zingy and fresh tasting, 
to cut through the creamy richness of the ripe avocado.Rick Bayless 
<http://www.rickbayless.com/>, one of the finest Mexican chefs north of the Rio 
Grande, and an award-winning writer on the subject, describes it in his Mexican 
Kitchen cookbook as "a verdant, thick-textured bowl of festivity, ripe with the 
elusive flavour of avocado. Mash in a little lime, raw onion, coriander, 
chilli, perhaps tomato, and the avocado comes fully alive."

According to Bon Appetit 
<http://www.bonappetit.com/blogsandforums/blogs/badaily/2010/04/guacamole-tips-how-to-rick-bayless-recipe.html#ixzz0vlmX6fVU>
 magazine, down Mexico way, "some cooks coarsely mash avocados, season them 
with salt – maybe a little garlic – and call the result 'guacamole.'" Their 
point, I think, is that there is no definitive recipe, which means I won't have 
to worry too much about "authenticity", although I probably won't go as far as 
theLas Vegas restaurant <http://today.msnbc.msn.com/id/16359504/> that 
encouraged me to add lobster and mango as part of their guacamole masterclass.

The allium affair

Now, forgive me for boasting, but I'm kind of a big deal in the guacamole 
world – among my friends at least. I've had people threaten to pull out of 
parties if the customary 25-avocado bucket of the stuff isn't putting in an 
appearance, although that could be a reflection of the quality of the rest of 
the festivities I suppose. Anyway, I never put onions in. Ever. But many 
people, it seems, disagree.

Rick Bayless adds half a finely diced white onion to 3 mashed avocados, 2 
diced tomatoes, 2 finely chopped green chillies, and 3 tbsp chopped coriander, 
and seasons with salt, pepper, and 2–3 tbsp lime juice.Thomasina Miers 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_style/food_and_drink/recipes/article7041109.ece>
 of Mexican restaurant chain Wahaca advocates red onion instead, and Bon 
Appetit raises the issue of garlic: following advice online, I opt for 1 finely 
minced clove. Having read the relevant entry in Alan Davidson's indispensable 
Oxford Companion to Food, which informs me that the Aztecs would have used "New 
World onions", I decide to give spring onions a try as well, as these seem most 
similar to the wild onions native to north America.

Sadly I'm unable to get hold of a white onion, which seem to be strangely few 
and far between in my neck of the woods, so I substitute a pale yellow version 
instead. Although I quite like the sweetness of the red onion, I find the 
flavour of both this and the yellow one a bit too acrid for the delicate 
avocado – and as for the garlic, well, it's utterly overpowering, and jars with 
the rest of the ingredients. The spring onions are more of a success – cleaner 
and greener tasting, they add a slight onion heat without muddying the rest of 
the flavours. I suspect they may well be closer to the large white onion than 
the yellow varieties we get here.

Tomatoes
 A selection of guacamole ingredients. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Oddly enough, tomatoes seem to be considered an optional extra in guacamole: 
Thomasina Miers doesn't include them, and opinion online is divided. I do try 
one without, but it seems sadly one-dimensional without their acidic 
fruitiness. I also test aRick Bayless variation 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/features/food/chi-obama-party-recipe-1-14jan14,0,2798679.story>
 published online for an Obama victory party (Michelle O was apparently a big 
fan of the guacamole at his Chicago restaurant, Topolobampo) using sun-dried 
tomatoes. They're good, but I prefer the sharper taste of the fresh variety. 
Still, it's a good substitute to bear in mind for the long months ahead, when 
our tomatoes will be watery and thin on flavour.

Chillies

Fresh green chillies seem to be the consensus here – serrano or jalapeño – but 
I'm curious to know how dried chillies would fare in a last-minute guacamole 
emergency. I try shaking in some red chilli flakes, which produce an 
acceptable, but rather fiery result, and adding a smoked chipotle chilli in a 
spicy adobo sauce, following a suggestion from Mexican chefPati Jinich's blog 
<http://patismexicantable.com/2010/02/chipotle-guacamole-for-your-party.html>. 

The latter goes down very well with one of my testers, and not so well with 
the other, who describes it as "like bacon". (Apparently this is not a good 
thing in a guacamole; personally I'm not so sure.) Although the fresher flavour 
of the green chillies works better with the rest of the ingredients, this is 
certainly a variation I'd consider trying again in future, particularly if I 
was serving the guacamole with meat.

Dairy

Despite my antipathy towards supermarket versions, I'm forced to concede, 
after a little research, that adding sour cream to guacamole is quite usual in 
some Mexican regions. Online adherents, predominantly American, claim it adds a 
quite incredibly rich texture to the end result. I find it makes it bland, and 
heavy. If you want crema with my guac, add it yourself while I'm not looking.

Coriander and lime
 Coriander, aka cilantro. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Also questionable, according to some sources, but I couldn't imagine guacamole 
without either of them, and my experiments prove me right. The lime adds zing, 
and the coriander an aromatic quality which brings depth to the bright flavours 
of the other ingredients.

Method

There's a lot of talk online about molcajete 
<http://homesicktexan.blogspot.com/2009/07/how-to-season-molcajete.html>, the 
traditional Mexican mortar, made out of basalt. People attribute mystical 
qualities to this ancient piece of equipment, even down to claiming that the 
minerals of the rock itself, part of mother Mexico, imbue the guacamole with a 
particularly "authentic" flavour.

Sadly, I have only an ordinary stone mortar at my disposal, but obediently I 
grind together a teaspoon each of chopped chilli, spring onion and coriander to 
make a paste, and then gently mash in the cubes of avocado, being sure to leave 
some chunks intact. I then fold in the chopped tomato, and the rest of the 
chilli, coriander and spring onion, and sprinkle with lime juice and salt. 
Although I can't detect much difference in texture, the paste has combined 
better with the avocados, which gives the guacamole a more harmoniously spicy, 
well-rounded flavour.

Keeping it green

Ashamed as I am to admit this, I'd long believed that popping an avocado stone 
into the guacamole helped to delay discolouration. I'd even passed this cunning 
trick on to others. And now revered food writer Harold McGee has burst my 
bubble by claiming the only purpose the stone serves is to keep oxygen away 
from the guacamole beneath it – "there doesn't seem to be anything special 
about the pit" he concludes, after experimenting with a lightbulb of a similar 
shape and size. The only thing that slows down the browning process, he says, 
is excluding the air from it, which means pressing cling film on to the surface.
 Methods of keeping guacamole green - left to right, clingfilm on surface, 
clingfilm on top, stone in and open. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
McGee recommends Saran Wrap, made from something called PVdC, which does not 
appear to be widely available in this country, so I have to make do with 
ordinary supermarket stuff. I divide a batch of my final recipe between four 
bowls, and leave one open to the air, add a stone to the next, cover one with 
clingfilm, and press clingfilm on to the surface of the last. Two hours later, 
I take them out of the fridge, hoping to prove McGee wrong.

I don't, of course. Running from fresh green to sludge brown, we have the 
guacamole with the clingfilmed surface, which barely seems to have changed 
colour, the one with the cling film over the top of the bowl, which has visibly 
discoloured, the one with the stone, which is green underneath the object and 
elsewhere exactly the same colour as the open bowl: murky.

Guacamole is one of those dishes which is happy to be played around with 
according to taste. The only golden rule is – use ripe avocados!

Perfect guacamole
 Perfect guacamole. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
1–3 fresh green chillies, depending on heat, and your taste, finely chopped
2 spring onions, thinly sliced
Handful of fresh coriander, roughly chopped
3 ripe avocados (Hass, the knobbly brown ones, tend to be the creamiest and 
most flavoursome)
1 ripe medium tomato, cut into 3mm dice
Juice of 1 lime
Salt

1. Put a teaspoon each of the chilli, onion and coriander into a pestle and 
mortar, along with a pinch of coarse salt, and grind to a paste.

2. Peel the avocados and remove the stone. Cut into cubes, then mash into a 
chunky paste, leaving some pieces intact.

3. Stir the chilli paste into the avocado, and then gently fold in the 
tomatoes and the rest of the onions, chilli and coriander. Add lime juice and 
salt to taste. Serve immediately, or cover the surface with cling film and 
refrigerate.

What's your perfect guacamole recipe – is the avocado the only sacred 
ingredient, or would you fight like an Aztec warrior king for onions, 
coriander, or tomato? Do you prefer it chunky or smooth, is a molcajete worth 
the money; and has anyone found a good ready-made version?
 