
Patricia Asio is a precocious 13-year-old. At her current rate of progress she 
will be graduating to senior school next year, at least two years ahead of many 
of her fellow students.

This summer she scored the second highest grade in exams which mark the 
halfway point of P6, the penultimate year of primary school. Her explanation is 
simple. "I read very hard," she says.

Next year her school, Ogwolo primary in Katine, has ambitions of becoming the 
first school in the district to get students through their final P7 exams with 
top marks, grade one. Most rural schools are proud if a majority of students in 
the final year manage a grade five – a reflection not of the students' 
abilities, but of the desperate shortage of investment in almost all of 
Uganda's schools.

That Ogwolo looks set to triumph is a credit, above all, to the parents who 
run the community school. But it is also one of Amref's biggest success 
stories. The project played a vital role, constructing new classrooms and 
providing desks and textbooks.

Since the launch of the initiative, Amref has built 16 new classrooms and 
repaired a further 22. It has delivered more than 1,100 desks and distributed 
5,147 textbooks to the 15 primary schools in Katine. Five of those are 
community schools which, like Ogwolo, have been set up by parents and have no 
government support.

"Before, when it rained," says Patricia, "the books got wet and we got wet. 
Now I sit at a desk instead of on the floor. The new classrooms make me feel 
happy."

Ogwolo is a pioneering school in other ways. One of the parents' innovations – 
a much ignored recommendation from the government that has been supported by 
Amref – is to encourage all parents to provide some food for their children to 
eat during the day.

"When I am hungry," Patricia says in her excellent English, "I feel like I 
want to go to sleep. It is a big difference to have food."

Having built the classrooms, Amref also supplied 500 textbooks to the school 
(not enough, as Amref acknowledges) and 39 desks. The headteacher and members 
of the parent-teacher association (PTA) and the school management committee 
(SMC) take part in regular training sessions provided by the government, but 
organised by Amref.

When it works – as it plainly does in Ogwolo – the triumvirate at the top can 
be a powerful force. Francis Elietu, who chairs the Ogwolo SMC, found the 
training invaluable.

"I didn't know how to run a school," he says. "I learned how to co-ordinate 
activities and conduct meetings."

Elietu and his committee set the budget for the school, which dictates the 
fees. Martin Olipa, the chairman of the PTA, has to persuade the parents to pay 
them. "I explain the benefits. I discuss the amount we want to raise," says 
Olipa. "About 80% of parents pay." The ones who do not are supported by those 
who do.

Amref has trained dozens of Katine's parents and teachers in leadership and 
management skills. Samuel Esango runs the SMC at Kadinya, another community 
school that has sprung up to beat the overcrowding at Olwelai school. He has a 
special reason to appreciate the five new classrooms at the school built by 
Amref.

Twenty years ago, he was a pupil at the school when it was held in the house 
of a village elder who liked teaching. They later used the church, before 
finally building classrooms of grass and mud.

Esango's parents had been killed in one of the raids by the Karamojong tribe 
which catastrophically destabilised the area in the years after the Ugandan 
president, Yoweri Museveni, came to power in 1986.

Later Esango had to flee Katine again when the Lord's Resistance Army 
terrorised the area. That time, his brother died.

But he is back in his village, working his family's land, and his two older 
children have started at the school.

"We worked very hard to get the school, and we will work very hard to keep it 
going," he says, adding that the training organised by Amref has been 
invaluable.

"Since training, I have ideas about planning. I can set out a programme. I 
understand how to conduct a meeting."

There is a third community school in the area to cope with the Olwelai 
overflow, but one with a less happy story to tell.

Amorikot school became a kind of milestone in the progress of the Katine 
project. Its six new classrooms and its new latrines, opened two years ago amid 
great fanfare including a roasted ox and the presence of many of the most 
important local dignitaries, stilled anxieties that the project was focusing 
too much on "software" – training and education – and not enough on the 
"hardware", such as buildings.

But software matters: and development is not only about glossy new projects. 
At Amorikot, the first head swiftly acquired a local reputation for corruption, 
seriously undermining the trust between teachers and parents that is critical 
when parents pay the teachers' salaries.

The experience dealt a major blow to the school, one which the new head, Moses 
Emesu, is still struggling to overcome.

Last year, as the Guardian reported on the Katine website, there was an arson 
attack on his home. Attendance and enrolment at the school have become a 
problem. The day we visited, only about a third of the register of pupils were 
present. But the biggest problem is persuading parents to pay. Without pay, 
teachers leave. With only six teachers of the optimum 10, the school is now 
seriously understaffed.

A year ago, Amref stepped in to negotiate between the school and the parents. 
District education officials travelled to a meeting in Katine in an attempt to 
renew the parents' commitment.

Emesu was so worried by the arson attack, which destroyed almost all his 
possessions, that he had to be persuaded not to leave the school. Now he throws 
his heart into making it work. But it is clear that he is finding the fight 
almost beyond him.

"The parents here are so backward," he says in frustration as he tries to make 
up for the teacher shortage by juggling two classes at once. "The attitude of 
the community is so negative."

He lists the barriers to progress. "It is the traditional culture. Early 
marriage and the pursuit of status in the form of cattle, and a growing number 
of households in a family."

Talk to any girl in P6 or P7 in Katine and they tell the same tale: there is 
only a handful of girls left from the original group who joined the first year 
of primary school. At Amorikot, there were orginally 30 girls in the P4 year 
(average age 11); now, there are just seven.

Teddy Apio and Betty Akira, two of the seven, remember a girl who left last 
year when she was 14. "Her father quarrelled with her," Teddy says. "He abused 
her and called her stupid, and a widow. He said she should get married, not 
waste his money going to school."

Many other girls, they say, have babies. Others won't come because their 
parents won't buy the uniform, or the exercise books.

Teddy says her father is different. "It is difficult to find the money. But he 
wants me to be educated. I want to study in senior school and get a job, and 
then maybe I will get married."

The interrelationship between schooling, government and community attitudes 
has made education a tough component to tackle. Big progress has been made, but 
changing attitudes to education is a process, not an event.
 