
Julie Bindel <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/juliebindel>: Time to end our 
gender obsession
 Julie Bindel 
The reaction to the couple who have refused to announce the sex of their 
newborn baby 
<http://www.parentcentral.ca/parent/babiespregnancy/babies/article/995112--parents-keep-child-s-gender-secret>
 highlights the way we demand that boys and girls be treated differently, 
despite decades of feminism. The Canadian couple have told only one friend and 
their two other children whether the baby, Storm, is a boy or a girl. "We've 
decided not to share Storm's sex for now – a tribute to freedom and choice in 
place of limitation," says the father. Hear, hear! As a radical feminist I want 
to rid the world of gender. I am sick and tired of the way people insist on 
socialising little girls into pink-fluffy doll-lovers, and encourage boys to 
adopt the worst excesses of masculinity.

Storm has two brothers who, according to the parents, make their own decisions 
about their lifestyle regardless of gender rules. Both have long hair, and love 
purple and pink respectively. Most people assume they are girls. Why? Because 
boys should wear blue, silly!

People regularly confuse sex with gender. Sex is the biological and 
physiological characteristics that define male and female.Gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> is learned behaviour that society 
considers appropriate – a set of rules laid down to benefit men and keep women 
in our place. The minute we become aware of a child's sex, we police its 
behaviour like crazy.

Those who claim to be raising their children in a gender neutral way are 
fooling themselves. After the birth of her daughter, Marianne Grabrucker kept a 
diary in which she chronicled her child's behaviour, looking for "feminine 
traits". Grabrucker notedin the subsequent book 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1068373.There_s_a_Good_Girl> based on the 
diary that many of her friends were in denial about raising their children to 
conform to gender roles, and concluded that "everything happened like a 
computer program set to 'girl upbringing'".

Differences between the behaviour of boys and girls are not biological truths, 
but modern versions of old sexist ideas about how women should behave. Science 
is part of culture and is itself massively influenced by sexist stereotyping. 
There is no such thing as a male brain and a female brain, only brainwashing. 
Both women and men are severely punished for stepping out of line in terms of 
what is seen as appropriate male and female behaviour. Go into any schoolyard 
and hear the taunting of boys and girls who transgress.

Storm's parents, I expect, will soon be forced to reveal the sex of their 
child. But for now this cute little baby can enjoy the freedom it has to simply 
be itself.

• Julie Bindel writes on feminist issues

Oliver James <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/oliverjames>: Dismissing 
gender is easier said than done
 Oliver James 
There has been a grotesque overstatement of the evidence that males and 
females are born with different brains, as Cordelia Fine has documented in her 
book Delusions of Gender. The only biological certainty is that the differing 
sex chromosomes almost invariably result in differing reproductive kit and body 
shape. The most comprehensive survey of psychological differences was byJanet 
Shibley-Hyde <http://glial.psych.wisc.edu/index.php/psychsplashfacstaff/107>, 
of Wisconsin University. Her meta-analysis of the 46 meta-analyses showed that 
in a large majority of respects (78%), psychological differences between men 
and women are either nonexistent or small. There is a case for not disclosing 
your child's gender, to protect it from stereotyping. While it might then 
"naturally" begin to display some of the stereotypes, at least these would be 
coming from the child, not imposed.

However, there are several big buts. Leave aside the most obvious one – that a 
child who goes into the playground as gender neutral will quickly be 
stigmatised. The biggest problem is that identity is hugely influenced by the 
projections parents make on to children and that, without these, they are 
liable to lack a sense of self.

It has been proven pretty conclusively that children raised in institutions 
are often emotionally flat. This is largely because of neglect or maltreatment, 
but it is also caused by the absence of parents relating to them based on 
attributions of who they are. As Donald Winnicott famously put it, "there is no 
such thing as a baby". Who a baby is depends on who the people caring for it 
project it to be and the way they express this through their empathic care.

An unavoidable component of the largely unconscious projections parents make 
towards their children is gender. Depending on their own experience of siblings 
and their own parents, a newborn's parents will bring all kinds of hidden 
assumptions to bear if told "it's a boy" rather than "it's a girl", when it 
pops out of the womb. Since parents cannot avoid knowing their child's gender, 
these will strongly influence how they relate to each child, however much they 
may try to override them. And for better or worse, this will enable the infant 
to develop a sense of self.

It is true that the gender can be concealed from visitors and strangers, at 
least in the early years. But the cost of doing so, and of parents attempting 
to ignore their own projections, could be massive confusion for the child. 
Identity has to come from somewhere. Gender is one of the bulwarks of social 
identity.

It is a fantasy to suppose every individual can find their "true self" 
independent of their relationship with parents and society. Unless you want the 
rudderless blank of an institutionalised child, accepting gender as one of the 
signposts for who your child is seems not only inevitable, but also desirable. 
Far more important than rejecting gender altogether is that parents understand 
their own gender-related unconscious projections.

• Oliver James is the author of How Not To F*** Them Up
 