
A generation or two ago, many Australians aped the European way of celebrating 
Christmas. Tradition turned our kitchens into saunas, as we ignored seasonal 
and climate appropriate foods, tucking into roast meats and hot puddings. But 
since the nineties there’s been a shift a shift in our kitchens and shopping 
trollies. We’ve learnt to embrace the weather, eating al fresco with fresh, 
local ingredients. Our concerns are now more about how to start the barbie than 
flame the pud.
Now, increasingly the only thing in common between an Australian and European 
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> is the booze.

So what are the ingredients for an essential Australian Christmas?

Seafood

Christmas in Australia means prawns. Lots and lots of them. Some folk prefer 
Kings, others Tigers and brave souls will take on giant Banana prawns but the 
one thing they must be is fresh. If you’re just planning on shelling and eating 
them, look for cooked prawns that appear bright with their antennae intact and 
eyes shiny. They should never smell fishy, but have only a slight sea brine 
smell. Buy what you need, and take it home quickly. Like most shellfish, prawns 
don’t keep, so if you’re buying ahead of time keep your purchases tightly 
wrapped in their original packaging and eat them all within 36 hours, which 
means prawns are the last thing you should buy for your table.
 Yotam Ottolenghi’s barbecued curried prawns with grilled limes. Photograph: 
Colin Campbell for the Guardian. Food styling: Claire Ptak 
That’s part of the rationale behind traditions like the famed Sydney Fish 
Market Christmas seafood marathon, now in its 19th year. More than 120 tonnes 
of prawns and 70,000 dozen oysters are expected to be sold over the 36 hours, 
supplying not only the city but countless regional and country vendors. Now’s 
the time to look out for their distinctive handwritten signs on roadsides if 
you’re outside a city and save their mobile numbers. If you’re in doubt place 
your order now, or yours will be the table set with seafood sticks and fish 
fingers.

If you’ve had a flush year or you’re feeling generous, there’s nothing more 
festive than an Australian crayfish or marron, incorrectly referred to as a 
‘lobster’ which, lacking claws, it can’t be. But with demand for our crays 
vastly outstripping supply, prices these days hover around $150 a kilo, making 
even a serving for two worth around $80. Better value – not to mention more fun 
– are smaller freshwater crayfish, known as yabbies. They’ll be yours for 
around $35 per kilo. All you need now is cocktail sauce and some lime wedges. 
Don’t forget a bowl for the peelings, and freeze the scraps until bin day to 
avoid your wheelie going nuclear.

Mangoes

Darwin has its mango madness, Brisbane has its mango daiquiris and Christmas 
in Australia is just not the same without a tray of these beauties sitting on a 
table or cooling in the fridge. Where we used to only have one sort of mango – 
the delectable Kensington Pride or Bowen mango – there are now a plethora of 
varieties perfect for serving to guests or just savouring yourself. Choose 
firm, plump fruit with no wrinkles and ideally oozing just a little sweet 
nectar: this is the time to lift them to your nose and smell your way to 
perfection. The red-blushed Calypso variety is a stringless favourite and newer 
R2E2 – a giant, sought-after specimen perfect for keeping in fruit bowls due to 
its slow ripening nature. Around Christmas Eve they start coming down in price 
but be careful, too ripe and mangoes take on a whiff of kerosene as their 
enzymes break down and the flesh goes brown. And what to do with them? Smoosh 
them into cocktails, dice them for salsa to serve with prawns, crabs or even 
roast pork. Shave green mangoes for Thai-style salads. And whatever you do, 
don’t chuck out the seeds – there’s plenty of delicious flesh around them to 
warrant an over-the-sink eating session.
 Mangoes are an essential part of an Australian Christmas. Photograph: Colores 
Mari/flickr <https://www.flickr.com/photos/nachoeuropa/15527836052/> 
Cherries

They have the shortest season of all our stone fruits, so it’s fair to say 
it’s not an Australian Christmas without a bowl of cold cherries somewhere on 
hand. Sweet, plump and juicy, they make an ideal gift or party plate, and liven 
up just about any drink or dessert. Stacked up in fruit shops, roadside stalls 
and even servos, get yours early to get the best quality and keep them in the 
fridge so they stay pristine. We’re not so big on cherry varieties in Australia 
but Bing, Merchant and Stella are perhaps the most popular on offer with new 
varieties like Sir Tom, Sir Douglas and Dame Roma making inroads. Then there’s 
the rare and delectable white cherry, big on juice and crunch and always worth 
snapping up if you see it. Just be sure to offer them in a bowl, with or 
without ice, and a smaller something to pop the pips into. Then turn on the 
cricket.
 Cherries liven up drinks or dessert – or are great on their own. Photograph: 
Zoran Milovanovic/Alamy 
Booze

There’s no way you can miss out on booze when it comes to a Christmas, and our 
hot weather dictates something cold, crisp and sharable. Australians are 
warming up to what the Spanish do and for an increasing number of us nothing 
pairs better with a ham or turkey than a crisp, salt-air manzanilla sherry, 
enjoyed ice cold with the sand between your toes. Fresh same-year Riesling is 
another top choice and pairs brilliantly with seafood, while alternate 
varieties like Austria’s grüner veltliner or Sardinian vermentino are now being 
produced here, with delicious results. Whatever you choose, make sure you’ve 
got something nice to drink it out of – with a stem, if possible – and chill it 
overnight before the big day with a deep ice bucket to keep it cold by the pool 
or table. Then settle in, savour your surroundings and take a moment to relax. 
You’re in Australia – and Christmas here is like nowhere else on Earth.

What’s essential on your Christmas table?
 