 Katine budget expenditure 2007-2010 Photograph: Guardian 
Click on graphic for large-scale version of budget

Pie chart (1): How your money has been spent

The £2.3m total rounded up to the nearest £000 shows all expenditure on the 
Katine project up to August 31 2010. Expenditure in the remaining month of 
September will be shown in Amref's annual report 2010 due to be published later 
this year. Any surplus money left unspent from the £2.5m budget for the first 
three years of the project will be carried over into a fourth year. Amref has 
secured additional funding to enable it to continue working until October 2011 
to build on what has been achieved to date and to complete work still 
unfinished. (The extra budget needed for the fourth year is £650,000. This 
includes a £250,000 grant from Barclays, with the remainder to be raised from 
projected ongoing support from Guardian readers.)

Figures for each of the five components comprise the core salaries of Amref 
staff on the ground and all activities related to each component made up of 
training and tangible assets, such as books and desks (education); latrines, 
school rainwater tanks (water and sanitation); health facilities and equipment 
(health); bicycles, drama kits and computers (governance); farmers' produce 
store, money safe and groundnut seeds (livelihoods).

Core team salaries 
These cover staff costs in Katine. The project team consists of a project 
officer and an assistant each for the health, education, water & sanitation and 
livelihoods comnponents, plus a project officer for the governance (community 
empowerment) component which also takes up a large share of the communications 
officer's workload. The remainder – a project manager, two drivers, two 
security guards, a cook, an administrator, a project accountant and a 
monitoring and evaluation officer – serve all components equally.

Pie chart (2): Costs on the ground

KATINE PROJECT RUNNING COSTS
Operational costs 
These include fuel for cars, insurance and maintenance. 
Capital costs 
These include office equipment, internet installation and community resource 
centre.
Technical support (from Amref's Nairobi HQ) 
Technical support costs from the design of the Katine development programme to 
implementation issues over the three-year period (eg guidance on development of 
the 2008 baseline survey).
Admin support/running costs
These include internet charges, office supplies and phones.

PROJECT MANAGEMENT (KAMPALA) COSTS 
Technical support from Amref's Kampala office. This includes project audits, 
recruitment, managing the team in Katine, HR, finance and travel costs between 
Kampala and Katine.

MONITORING AND EVALUATION COSTS 
These include the 2008 baseline survey in Katine in 2008, s 2007 community 
survey, 2009 mid-term evaluation, etc.

UK PROJECT MANAGEMENT COSTS 
These include fundraising and donation processing, communications, managing 
the relationship with Guardian and Barclays, audit costs and advocacy.

CONTINGENCY AND AGENCY SUPPORT COSTS (split between Amref UK and Amref Kampala 
offices) 
These include advocacy and policy influencing, accounting and audits, admin 
support, innovation (developing and financing news ways of reducing poverty), 
IT support, staff training and a technical support tunction (eg expertise in 
HIV/Aids, malaria).
 