
"All my waking hours are spent running Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco>." So said Phil Clarke yesterday, 
the under-pressure chief executive of the UK's biggest retailer. And therein 
lies one of his biggest problems.

Clarke is now the only full-time, executive director of a business with 
530,000 staff operating in 12 countries. And, as yesterday's annual results 
showed, he has far more problems than one man could hope to handle.

Group profits are down for the second year in a row. The UK business – which 
hauls in 65% of total profits – is down for the third consecutive year. There 
have been some improvements in the performance of the international operations, 
but key countries such as Ireland and Thailand have lurched further into the 
doldrums. Tesco yesterday took a loss of £540m on the Chinese business it once 
had such lofty ambitions for. There was also an £800m hit on Europe, where 
profits were down 28%.

In the UK, the chain is being battered by the discounters. Tesco's share of 
the UK grocery market is at a 10-year low (pretty much the same as the share 
price). Like-for-like sales in the most recent weeks are down 3% – the worst 
decline in a generation.

Clarke has a plan to turn that around, comprised largely of sharper prices and 
revamped stores. Yesterday he boasted that sales in the stores refurbished so 
far were up 3%-5%. But that is hardly hitting the ball out of the park.

Clarke has a massive job on his hands to turn Tesco around and needs more 
boardroom strength. His predecessor, Terry Leahy, had a board of seven 
executive directors, but one by one they have either quit or been shown the 
checkout. The latest to announce his departure is finance director Laurie 
McIlwee, and there is no replacement in sight, even though rumours of his 
departure had been circulating for months. Making matters worse, some of 
Clarke's ex-colleagues are now, behind hands, talking out of school to question 
his credentials.

Investors will soon be demanding to know how Tesco's non-executive directors, 
especially the group's invisible chairman, Sir Richard Broadbent, have allowed 
the Tesco boardroom to become so stripped of talent.
 