
The HS2 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> high-speed rail project could 
nearly double in cost to £80bn and should be dropped, a report has warned.

The Institute for Economic Affairs (IEA), a free-market thinktank, said that 
the proposed north-south rail link defied economic logic, adding to growing 
doubts about the scheme's viability.

The credibility of HS2 was undermined in June when the government revealed 
that its price tag had risen by £10bn, or 30%, to £42.6bn.

The IEA said the final budget could spiral further because of several factors, 
including: changing routes and carrying out more tunnelling to placate 
opposition groups; compensation for towns and cities bypassed by the line; and 
regeneration grants awarded along the line.

The report's author, IEA director Dr Richard Welling, said: "The evidence is 
now overwhelming that this will be unbelievably costly to the taxpayer while 
delivering incredibly poor value for money.

"It's shameful that, at a time of such financial difficulty for many families, 
the government is caving in to lobbying from businesses, local councils and 
self-interested politicians more concerned with winning votes than governing in 
the national interest."

The first phase of HS2, due to open by 2026, will run 250mph trains from 
London to Birmingham, followed by a second development that would take it to 
Manchester and Leeds by 2033.

However, the revelation of a £10bn increase in HS2's budget has threatened the 
political consensus that HS2 will be positive for the UK economy.

Lord Mandelson, the former business secretary, described the project as an 
"expensive mistake."

His intervention prompted his former cabinet colleague and architect of HS2, 
Lord Adonis, to warn thatabandoning the scheme would "close Britain 
for business." 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/jul/03/lord-adonis-defends-hs2-mandelson-labour-costs>

In June a House of Commons vote saw 37 MPs vote against the HS2 bill, 21 of 
them from the Conservative party. Opposition to the proposal is particularly 
strong in the home counties, along the route of HS2's first phase.

A spokesman for the Department for Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> said: "HS2 is absolutely vital for 
this country, providing a huge economic boost which will generate a return on 
investment that will continue paying back for generations to come.

"Without it the key rail routes connecting London, the Midlands and the North 
will be overwhelmed. HS2 will provide the capacity needed in a way that will 
generate hundreds of thousands of jobs and billions of pounds worth of economic 
benefits.

"The government is committed to managing the cost within the budget we have 
set for the project."
 