
In April I sent two electronic payments – my life savings – totalling £95,000 
from my HSBC current account in the UK, direct into my ANZ bank personal 
account in New Zealand. I used the HSBC online banking service and understood 
each payment would incur a £4 bank charge. I was intending to send the payments 
in pounds sterling direct to my pounds sterling ANZ account. The money did not 
arrive and, after several days of worry, it emerged thatHSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> had made two payments back 
into my UK account, but rather than £95,000 there was only £91,000.

I subsequently discovered the outgoing payment had failed to reach my ANZ 
account as it had been sent in NZ dollars and the account was not compatible. 
The HSBC payments website, I have since learned, automatically defaults to the 
local currency when you try to make a payment. Despite this, at no stage did 
HSBC contact me to advise me of what had happened. During discussions with the 
HSBC customer advocate I was told: “This happens to lots of our customers – you 
are not the first.” The bank told me the mistake is mine and there was nothing 
they could do.

I have been banking with HSBC for more than 20 years and feel very badly 
treated.TC, London

You should feel badly treated as, in effect, you have been charged around a 2% 
currency conversion (twice) as your money was first changed into New Zealand 
dollars then back again, even though this was never your intention.

In total, over 4% of your money has disappeared into HSBC’s coffers – a very 
nice bit of business for the bank, and a huge loss for you. The reported 
comment that this happens a lot suggests there is an issue. Had HSBC contacted 
you after the money failed to arrive, it could have substantially mitigated 
your losses, but staff apparently chose not to.

Before you got in touch, you contacted the Financial Ombudsman Service, which 
is looking into the matter. Rather than help you now, HSBC has told us it will 
let the ombudsman make its decision. When this happens – it could take a year – 
we will report the outcome. In our experience, it is always better to use the 
third-party currency firms when moving sums abroad.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 