
Under the dynamic and attention-grabbing leadership of Arianna Huffington, the 
Huffington Post led the spectacular rise of native digital news, partly thanks 
to a legion of unpaid bloggers. By 2012 it had also snagged a Pulitzer, but in 
the fickle new media world the excitement and –according to reports 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/huffington-posts-us-traffic-tanks-2015-buzzfeed-vice-media-grow-2142607>
 – US traffic is now shifting towards sharp-elbowed, freshly financed upstarts 
like BuzzFeed, Vice or Vox.

Jared Grusd, the 40-year-old new chief executive poached from Spotify four 
months ago, may need some of the stamina of his ironman triathlon training to 
maintain HuffPo’s reputation as a pack leader while keeping up with the 
relentlessly energetic Huffington, who remains president and editor-in-chief. 
At his first sit-down interview since taking charge, Grusd explains that 
HuffPo’s future will be global and played out in a new, largely mobile era he 
has dubbed “post-social”.

Key to this is the changing role of social media sites like Facebook from 
places where people share news, to ones where they consume it. “Companies like
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> and Snapchat are 
saying: ‘We have already attracted one billion people in the world to our 
platform. Rather than refer them back to your site, we actually want to keep 
them’,” says Grusd, flanked by Huffington and 27-year-old operations supremo 
Koda Wang after announcing the next stage of its global expansion plan in 
Madrid. “So post-social is, in many respects, coming full circle to where we 
began in the old days when people would go to AOL and Yahoo and you would just 
consume all your content on their portals.”

While some fear online news will be monstered by Facebook, which will demand 
an ever larger slice of advertising revenue, Grusd insists the change is good 
for HuffPo, saying it “gives an opportunity to reach audiences on a scale we 
have never seen before”.

That may seem a bold statement at a time when the distributed content 
phenomenon – led by Facebook’s Instant andSnapchat’s Discover 
<http://fortune.com/2015/09/21/snapchat-discover-publishers/> – remains in its 
infancy, with uncertainty about just how much traffic will be diverted to, or 
created by, these new platforms.

However, Grusd is already excited about a content distributor that many in the 
west have still not heard of,China’s WeChat 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/wechat-why-it-dominates-china-2015-8?r=US&IR=T>, 
which delivers news to 600m mobile phones. “WeChat is one of the world’s 
biggest messaging apps and in China it is the biggest,” he says. HuffPost is 
providing it with lifestyle content, aware that reporting hard news in China is 
a minefield. One of Huffington’s big hires after Grusd’s arrival was executive 
editor Liz Heron, formerly head of Facebook’s news partnerships and before that 
social media editor at the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal. Heron, 
who joined a month ago and sits just behind Huffington in the editorial pecking 
order, is experimenting with everything from Facebook-friendly videosto virtual 
reality 
<http://testkitchen.huffingtonpost.com/duty-honor-country/the-recruitment-center/>
, where HuffPo expects to acquire a company this month.

Expanding into China and other countries is the other major change that Grusd 
will oversee as HuffPo rolls out an average of a new edition every seven or 
eight weeks to reach 50, up from the current 15, by 2020.And while many still 
think of HuffPo as an outlet for campaigners, politicians and obscure academics 
to post their thoughts, future growth will be led by journalists. Already only 
18% of HuffPo traffic goes to blogs, as most of the audience heads to 
home-produced content ranging from the inevitable cat videos (with this year’s 
UK-produced greatest hit,Cats Train their Humans 
<https://www.facebook.com/HuffingtonPost/videos/10152977032861130/>, getting 
90m views) to the new Highline long-form section that produced more than 1m 
hits for a report on the mothers of Isis recruits.

An accompanying ambition is to grow a global newsroom, with HuffPo dropping 
Associated Press at the end of this year and national editions pooling 
resources when events like the Paris attacks impact on the world. “One [aim] is 
to deliver at a local level. In Spain, for example, our content has to be 
highly engaging and relevant to the Spanish market or it is a waste of time,” 
Grusd says. “You can then zoom out and really cover the globe. Take something 
horrible and tragic like what took place in Paris. By having a global point of 
view on the world, we can talk about what is happening in Paris in a way that 
the story is different.” So HuffPo now awaits bids to partner up locally on 
multiple national editions, as it already has with Le Monde in France or El 
Pais publisher Prisa in Spain. “We have very carefully selected major players 
who are leaders in their markets,” Grusd says, adding that a new, 
out-of-the-box model – covering editorial style, technology and advertising – 
makes new editions easier to launch. “We feel like we have cracked the code.”

In the race to expand internationally – where BuzzFeed and others also compete 
– Grusd sees targeting 50 countries, rather than the whole world, as taking a 
steady approach - “we will do it in a measured way so we still learn from each 
roll-out”.

Older HuffPo editions in Canada and France are now making money. Spain and 
Italy are about to do the same and recent launches in Australia and India help 
explain the new strategy. In both cases, HuffPo sold the entire first year’s 
advertising inventory before launch, making them profitable from the start.

But does HuffPo make an overall profit? It was bought for $315m by AOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/richard-adams-blog/2011/feb/07/huffington-post-sale-aol-ariana>
 in 2011 and received two separate $1bn offers before AOL itself was bought by 
Verizon this June for $4.4bn. But AOL does not break out figures and Grusd
refuses to confirm reported revenues 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/05/magazine/arianna-huffingtons-improbable-insatiable-content-machine.html?_r=1>
 of $146m last year.

A significant drop in US traffic this year has levelled out since Grusd 
arrived, while competitors continue to grow, according to comScore, but he 
claims he does not want HuffPo to fret overly about metrics that do not reflect 
the new post-social, global market. It remains the biggest multiplatform news 
site in the US and the largest desktop site globally. “We still have a massive 
lead,” he says. “I believe you have to look at all of the metrics to get a 
snapshot of what is happening.”

Analyst Ken Doctor, of newsonomics, sees the international expansion as 
similar to that successfully pursued by lifestyle magazines decades ago, but he 
believes HuffPo’s problems lie elsewhere. “I get the sense that, in the 
international conversation, theHuffington Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post> has become one of the crowd 
rather than a leader,” he says, adding that the brand is beginning to look 
tired.

Grusd disagrees, pledging that HuffPo will continue to surprise. “All brands, 
all media properties have to constantly innovate, iterate, grow, refresh 
themselves and prove themselves to the audiences,” he says. “Huffington Post 
has always done that and is continuing to do that.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 40

Education University of Pennsylvania, University of Chicago Law School, 
Columbia Business School

Career 2000 associate, Skadden Arps 2004 assistant general counsel, Capgemini 
2005 managing counsel and executive management, Team for the Americas, Google 
2009 chief strategy and business development officer, AOL 2011 global head of 
corporate development and general counsel, Spotify2015 CEO, Huffington Post

• This article was amended on 7 December 2015 to clarify that Liz Heron was 
not hired by Grusd, but Arianna Huffington

 