
The Huffington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post> will 
launch in Australia in partnership with the local media company Fairfax, it 
announced on Monday, four years after first promising to set up an Australian 
edition.


The Huffington Post Media Group said it would hire Australian editors and 
reporters to work in Sydney independently of Fairfax, publishers of theSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> Morning Herald and the Age.

The president and editor-in-chief of the Huffington Post Media Group, Arianna 
Huffington <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington>, said it was a 
milestone in HuffPost’s global expansion, now in 14 countries.

“Fairfax’s independent values, proud journalistic heritage and digital 
expertise make them the perfect partner as we pursue our shared mission of 
telling Australia’s most important stories and providing a platform for 
Australians to tell their stories,” Huffington said in a joint statement with 
the chief executive officer and managing director ofFairfax Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/fairfax-media>, Greg Hywood.

Hywood, who has restructured the heritage newspaper company into a 
digital-first operation, said HuffPost Australia would be part of Fairfax’s 
expanding portfolio of digital assets. “We look forward to working closely with 
the Huffington Post to build the brand and bring its digital media innovation 
to Australia,” Hywood said.

It appears likely the support offered by the local company would be in the 
advertising sales and technical support departments.

Although no local editor has been announced, Huffington Post begun the 
recruitment process for an Australian editor-in-chief back in 2010, 
interviewing candidates from websites such as then market leader Ninemsn.

The process was put on hold as Huffington Post launched editions in other 
markets such as France, Canada, Germany and Italy.

In the intervening years, several other international news outfits have set up 
in Australia, including Daily Mail Australia, BuzzFeed Australia and Guardian 
Australia. Local start-up the New Daily, backed by a superannuation fund, has 
also joined the now-crowded marketplace of websites offering free access.

Fairfax and News Corp Australia both charge for access to their websites, with 
the exception of news.com.au, which challenges for No 1 spot in digital news 
site rankings.

Huffington told Fairfax’s Australian Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/p/business/marketing_media/fairfax_inks_partnership_with_huffington_sq2JYfLvUiFCmeEsqDFd4L>
 there was plenty of room for a new player in the Australian online market.

“We don’t think of any new market, region or country as a zero-sum game,” she 
said. “Even though there are challenges on the business side, we really are 
living in a sort of golden age for journalism.”

Editor-in-chief of ninemsn, Hal Crawford, welcomed the competition. 


“I love Huffington’s ‘Golden Age’ quote. We need more of that optimism. It 
will be interesting to see how the Huffpo mix flies in the already boisterous 
party of Australian digital news,” he said.


Huffington Post’s starting costs in Australia are expected to be well under 
$10m, according to the Financial Review.

Last year Huffington told media and marketing website Mumbrella 
<http://mumbrella.com.au/arianna-huffington-qa-250781> it was crucial all the 
editors of the local edition were from Australia.

“They would all be rooted here and that’s very, very important,” she said. 
“That’s why we would prefer to do it with a partner who is steeped in 
Australian culture, that’s really important. The content is all local but they 
have complete access to all our international content.”

It is understood the Huffington Post had talks with News Corp Australia too, 
before settling on Fairfax.

The launch will be handled by HuffPost’s executive editor of international, 
Nicholas Sabloff, and general manager of international, Koda Wang.

The chief executive of the Huffington Post, Jimmy Maymann, said Australia was 
chosen because it was a rare combination of a digitally advanced economy and a 
relatively young digital media market.

“Australia is the third-largest digital ad market in Asia, and has the 
third-highest rate of social media penetration in the world,” Maymann said in a 
statement.

“At the same time its shift to digital news consumption is still in relatively 
early stages, with digital media readership continuing to grow at 11% annually 
and still only 50% of all readers regularly consuming news online. The 
combination of these characteristics make Australia a very exciting destination 
for our latest Huffington Post edition.”

The Huffington Post, which had 117 million unique visitors in the US in 
December 2014, makes use of an extensive network of bloggers and has been 
dogged by criticism that it does not pay most of its writers.
 