
The Huffington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post> has 
entered a partnership with a former director general of al-Jazeera Network to 
launch an Arabic-language edition aimed at the growing number of young people 
in the Middle East with mobile devices.

The AOL-owned company will launch HuffPost Arabi after teaming up with Wadah 
Khanfar, who is currently chief executive of Integral Media Strategies.

Huffington Post claims the online news service will be the first of its kind 
in the Arab world, with its combination of “original reporting” by “independent 
journalists” and a blog platform for those across the region to air their 
thoughts, opinions and commentary.

However, the editorial team for the venture, expected to launch early next 
year, will be based in London.

The new site will be built on Huffington Post’s news platform. Integral Media 
Strategies’ journalists will provide editorial content from across the Arab 
world.

The launch is the latest move in its strategy to make the Huffington Post a 
truly international news service. This has seen it launch local language 
services in Brazil, South Korea and Germany. There will also be an Indian 
edition, which has been delayed from the original planned launch in May, but is 
thought to be still going ahead.

Arianna Huffington <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington>, 
president and editor-in-chief of the Huffington Post Media Group, said: 
“Bringing HuffPost to the Arab world has been a dream for us since we launched 
our first international edition a little more than three years ago.”

She added: “There’s such a great need, not only in the region, but all over 
the world, to bring more Arab voices into the conversation and deepen the 
world’s understanding of life in the Arab world, from its problems to its 
accomplishments to its untapped potential.”

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 