
Dancing light displays, pop-up art, packed streets, a sculpture marking the 
city’s whaling past and, this morning, a giant rotor blade in the central 
square. Hull is, unusually, the focus of national attention in its year asUK 
City of Culture <https://www.hull2017.co.uk/> and this weekend will unveil a 
massive installation in the city centre.

Late into the night a group of artists and engineers hidden in a row of 
Portakabins carried out the final tests in a secret plan to bring a 75-metre 
propeller blade designed for an offshore wind turbine into the middle of the 
city.

The object was due to be placed on its side – cutting across Queen Victoria 
Square – in the early hours, after slowly being transported from the new 
Siemens plant east of the city, where it was built by a team whose members were 
sworn to silence. If the wind blows too hard, they will try again next weekend.

“This will be a huge intervention in a public space, probably the biggest 
ever,” Nayan Kulkarni, the artist behind the project, told the Observer. “It is 
partly about what this new industry means forHull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull>, but the challenge of just showing 
it can be done is a big part of it, too.”

Yesterday afternoon many citizens of Hull said a sorrowful goodbye to the Made 
in Hull light and sound show, the public art display that launched the city’s 
new cultural dawn. An estimated 230,000 visitors came to watch the projected 
lights and see the art installations dotted around the streets. Most 
restaurants, from cafes to expensive bistros, were fully booked. Long queues 
coiled outside the best chip shops.

“This is fantastic. It’s already had an incredible impact. This is my fourth 
time round,” said Matt Jukes, the city council’s chief executive, when he 
spotted Made in Hull’s curator, the film-maker Sean McAllister, on Friday 
night. “You have set a very high bar.”

“So, where do we go from here?” joked McAllister.

If the engineers’ calculations paid off, Hull residents woke up today to 
something more astonishing. The fibreglass rotor blade, the biggest single 
manmade component in the world and one of the first produced at the Alexandra 
Dock factory, will have transformed the square where, hours earlier, thousands 
crowded to watch the last night ofanimated illuminations 
<http://www.hulldailymail.co.uk/made-in-hull-artist-zsolt-balogh-thrilled-by-laughing-crying-and-smiling-crowds/story-30028334-detail/story.html>
 by artist Zsolt Balogh.

Balogh’s dramatic displays were projected on to the walls of the Guildhall and 
surrounding buildings and his soundtrack featured, among others, the voice of 
Fine Young Cannibals lead singer Roland Gift, who lived in Hull as a teenager. 
Listening to the music nearby on Friday was his sister, artist Helga Gift, who 
created one of the pop-up installations – a replica of a well-known vintage 
shop their late mother, Pauline, once ran on the city’s Princes Avenue.

“She died exactly five years from the day we set up this installation about 
her,” she said. “It has been good to overhear people remembering the shop.”

Such local characters, rather than the city’s famous names, were the focus of 
Made in Hull, although the images of homegrown stars appeared in the light 
show; singer Tracey Thorn’s picture swam up in the vapour trail of the biplane 
of pioneer aviator Amy Johnson. The great men of Hull, from poet Philip Larkin, 
whose statue has him skipping through the station forecourt, to the 
abolitionist MP William Wilberforce, are also to be honoured, but there is also 
an effort to tell a wider cultural story.

“Hull has its own voice,” said Martin Green, artistic director of the culture 
year. “It is maritime, it is about music, about counterculture, and about the 
renaissance of the city.”

“Say what you like, this is our place,” said a spectator on Friday, defending 
Hull from the archetypal “crap town” label stuck on it in 2003 by the Idler 
magazine. Yet the slur has become the city’s best PR angle. Would it have been 
news if Bath or Harrogate were dubbed a city of culture? It is news, though, 
when the chosen city is notorious for having been blighted by the Blitz and 
then by post-industrial joblessness.

Two artists, Claire Morgan and Tania Kovats, will be making pieces that 
underline the city’s maritime history. In the 19th century, Hull’s whaling 
ships accounted for 40% of the British fleet. The trade died away and, after 
the cod wars of the 1970s and the containerisation of the docks, around 15,000 
fishing jobs disappeared. Morgan aims to build a a sculpture marking Hull’s 
whaling past to the interior of Princes Quay shopping centre, while Kovats will 
highlight the threat to the marine environment with a piece at the soon to open 
Humber Gallery.

Preparations for the year have meant upheaval, with widescale repaving and 
improvements to public spaces. The work has disguised the sly removal of 
lighting and street furniture to provide space for the delivery of the turbine 
blade. No one noticed.

Kulkarni has been involved with improving the look of Hull since 2013 and was 
in the city when Siemens, the German electronics and engineering conglomerate, 
signed up to develop Green Port Hull, investing £310m.

His idea to use a blade to emphasise the city’s geographical edge was inspired 
by Larkin, who wrote that Hull was “in the world, yet sufficiently on the edge 
of it to have a different resonance”.

To Kulkarni, the blade looks, from different angles, like a fish and a bone. 
He said he saw his artistic job as “to resist the push towards the empty icon”, 
instead creating art that stands for something. “In the square, it will break 
the natural ‘desire line’ for pedestrians and will be high enough at the tip 
for buses to pass underneath. It should be difficult to deal with.”

Andrew Knight, co-curating the project, called Look Up, worked on the 
logistics of bringing in this “abnormal load” and said that “holding it down is 
the issue”. The blade, said Kulkarni, “wants to fly”, so the wind factor is 
important.

For resident Lucy Marshall, 39, the arrival of the City of Culture is a long- 
overdue recognition of Hull’s art and culture scene. “It didn’t just start on 1 
January. We just haven’t been given a platform to show it before,” she said. 
“It is almost overwhelming. People are coming away quite emotional and 
inspired. There is a sense that this is what we do in Hull: we support each 
other. We are Hull and we are proud.”
 