 Restoring security to Iraq is the 'paramount' task of coalition forces in 
Iraq, Tony Blair's newly appointed special representative on human rights said 
today.
Ann Clwyd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-clwyd>, who has a long 
history of campaigning for human rights in Iraq, will travel to the country 
tomorrow to begin work on the ground.

Today the Labour MP for Cynon Valley said her role would combine reporting 
back to Mr Blair on the human rights violations of Saddam Hussein's regime with 
researching the practical postwar problems being experienced by Iraqis.

"My role is to look at the situation and report directly back to the prime 
minister," she told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.

"Obviously I have been raising some of these issues over the last few weeks 
since the war ended, particularly the protection of the mass graves which are 
now being found outside Baghdad and almost outside every town and city inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. In fact one Iraqi described it to me 
as one mass grave.

"I want to make sure that the sites are being properly protected so that we 
can collect the evidence against the people responsible."

On the practical problems being experienced by Iraqis, Ms Clwyd said: "I think 
things are getting better every day. But there are challenges, for instance 
more progress has got to be made in restoring water, power and health services 
in many areas, maintaining law and order. Security is of paramount importance."

Asked whether she agreed with claims by commentators in the US that it would 
take an additional 100,000 troops to restore stability to Iraq, Ms Clwyd said: 
"Obviously I do, yes. But the Office for Reconstruction and Humanitarian 
Assistance is increasing its numbers.

"It is due to rise from 500 to 1,000 ... and I think the fact that 19 Iraqi 
ministries are returning to work under ORHA, and the special representatives 
... is helping them focus their efforts more effectively and increasing 
capacity to ensure the smooth transition to the Iraqis themselves."

Ms Clwyd is chairwoman of Indict, a group campaigning for the prosecution of 
Iraqi leaders on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity.

She impressed many wavering MPs with her speech during the debate on military 
action against Iraq, in which she argued for intervention on humanitarian 
grounds.
 