
Between faux tears and stage-managed “discoveries”, Who Do You Think You Are? 
on BBC1 can strike gold. In 2010, Jeremy Irons, pursuing his Irish roots, 
discovered a poem calledLittle Kate <http://poetrynook.com/poem/little-kate>, 
written on Valentine’s Day in 1857 by his great-great-grandfather. It was about 
his young daughter, and it moved me enough to scribble it down on the back of a 
bottle of Bordeaux that I still cherish, albeit long since empty.

He looks towards her growing up, ending with:

“Content with loves that round her grow, / She seeks not yet a wider range: / 
But years will come, and years will go, / And with the changing years she’ll 
change: / Then, through the shifting scenes of Fate, / I’ll look in vain for 
little Kate!”

Extra poignancy lies in Kate being the sole survivor of his five children.

It’s clunky, but evokes the fleeting moments of childhood as lives expand and 
interests broaden. I’m moved by its prophecy of regret at the loss of childhood 
personas and the comfort of having one’s children safely around you at all 
times.

Helen and I embraced this. Even when we were right up against it in battling 
the logistics of busy lives and the physical exhaustion of young kids, we knew 
these were still great days, possibly the best of them. I’d yak on as we 
flopped on to the sofa, wine glasses brimming, “We’ll look back on this as the 
most carefree time because they go only where we know they go and are in bed 
before us every bleeding night.” Helen, used to my banging on about loving the 
life you have, not the one you had or want, simply raised her glass and smiled. 
I hope it meant that she loved our life. I think so. I need to think so.

We had the usual child-falling-down-stairs, broken arm on trampoline, scrapes 
and illnesses, punctuated by the dreadful moment when Matt ran into unlit 
barbed wire at night. He tore his mouth, needing stitches, but even this 
underlined the illusion that fortune favoured us – it could so easily have 
taken his eyes.

Of course we worried about the kids, but sheltered safely behind the belief 
that bad things only happen to other people. Well, they don’t, and since 
Helen’s death proved the fact, it has supersized every worry. These fears are 
unspoken, unshared but unrelenting, making insignificant all my navel gazing 
over job, nanny, friends, sex, love, logistics and even my own mortality.

I’ve just attended Life. Death. Whatever 
<http://www.lifedeathwhatever.com/about/>, a month-long series of events, 
installations and workshops with new and challenging thinking on death, grief 
and dying. Sounds depressing, but it wasn’t because it underscored that, since 
Helen died, I no longer fear my own death in any way other than as it might 
affect the kids. Instead, I have a new scale of numbing terror of bad things 
happening to Millie or Matt.

This screaming fear means I want to keep them at home all the time. I hate 
them walking to school. I hate Matt’s enthusiasm for rugby and fearless 
tackling. Millie has a black belt in karate and Matt is close to his, but I 
still want to stand in front of them and take any punches that may come their 
way today and for ever.

When I drop Millie at a teenage party, I stop myself waiting in the car for 
five hours, so being the least cool dad on earth. I find myself delighted they 
don’t ride despite living in a horsey county; my lovely colleague Jemma had a 
fall and broke her neck last year and is now tetraplegic. It still gives me 
night terrors.

I’m finally driven to share my fears with lay counsellor Ruth. “Your worries 
are no different from anyone’s, Adam; but your experience with Helen makes you
expect the worst, not just fear it. Maybe you need help if you’re ever going to 
be able to have a normal father’s relationship with his kids’ growing up. Get 
some proper counselling – not just me.”

I think there’s truth in what she says and I will. I remember reading 
CS Lewis’s A Grief Observed and not really understanding what he meant by, “No 
one ever told me that grief felt so like fear”. I do now.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly  <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 