
When I was growing up there were two types of lists. The first was the dull 
sort, cooked up by adults as a way to get unruly kids to pay attention to their 
immediate, grubby little world. This usually comprised of things that needed 
attending to around the house. Do the lawn mowing, clean the windows, wash the 
car. Kids would diligently cross the tasks off the list with a snazzy 
four-colour click pen as they completed them and would sometimes even get some 
pocket money in exchange.

Then there was the far more delightful inventory, the fantasy list, scrawled 
on the back of a school exercise book and hidden in the underwear drawer, to be 
pored over later. These lists were brimming with hope for what would never be. 
Mine included such intellectual pursuits as the top 10 boys I wanted to snog at 
the Blue Light disco I was never allowed to attend, or the top 10 teachers I 
didn’t want to teach me next year because they didn’t wear deodorant or had 
heinous coffee breath. Dense and complicated stuff, I know.

Since those days, I’ve developed an unnatural fear of the list. I can’t shake 
the feeling that compiling lists in the grown-up world seems a bit 13-years-old 
again. Telling others what they need to know or do for the better doesn’t sit 
well with me. If I get even a whiff of “Top 10 things you must read right now 
that will change your life”, I want to rebel: wag work and hang out at at the 
local shops with people I shouldn’t. And eat hot chips. This is the effect 
lists have on me.

A good list is seen as the way to conquering and understanding all things. 
Unfortunately, the older and uglier I get, the less I can carry off the bluster 
required to name and own a list. Frankly, I can’t decide what I’m having for 
lunch most days let alone my top five guests for a fantasy dinner party, or 
what songs I’d take to a desert island. My answers change every day, every 
second. Coming up with a definitive anything sends me into a whirlwind of 
existential confusion, sleepless as I worry into the night about what I left 
out.

This view does not sit well in my world. The music and print industries obsess 
over top 10s: top 10 albums of the year, top 10 gigs to see this month, top 10 
songs to eat pies to while surfing. My phobia sticks out around these parts.

Lists do have advantages. They can be a wonderful way to introduce people to 
things they might not know about. They are a great guide for the beginner. But 
why can’t we say that’s all they are? I’d much rather read something that says: 
here are some things you might like to listen to this year because I think you 
might just enjoy them, rather than THE TOP 10 ESSENTIAL ALBUMS YOU MUST HEAR 
BEFORE YOU DIE.

Lists seem to shout, like an officious dinner lady telling you that you don’t 
get a choice between lasagne and beef stroganoff for lunch, that you’ll get 
what you’re given because that’s just how things are.

So there it is. If I don’t see the top 10 things to do, read, see or eat each 
day I’ll live. And for the record, I don’t want to choose the top five songs I 
would take to a desert island because I don’t want to end up hating my 
favourite songs because they were all I had to play over and over again. What’s 
the point of that?

As for the top 10 songs to play at my funeral when I cark it? I’m hoping I can 
leave that list up to you. I’ll be out of here by then.
 