
The home phone rings and I grit my teeth. For so long the link to loved ones, 
with the rise of the mobile the landline has instead become the weapon of 
choice for scammers and “How are you today?” cold-callers.

“Hello, Adam. It’s Carrie,” says a too-friendly female voice. I do a quick 
mental Rolodex through the Carries I know, drawing a blank but feeling an 
inexplicably negative association to the name. Perhaps it is an echo of the 
Sissy Spacek horror flick? Assuming it’s a cold call, my voice hardens. “What 
do you want?”

Not noting my tone, hers remains unctuous: “I was wondering if you have 
decided what to do with Helen?”

Physics says you never hear the bullet that hits you, but I hear this one as 
it tears the breath from me in the shock of hearing Helen referred to in the 
present tense. “I’m sorry, but my wife died recently,” I stammer.

She takes a moment, computing my confusion. “It’s Carrie from the funeral 
directors. I wondered when you wanted to collect Helen?”

Her use of the present tense hits me again like a blow to my solar plexus. 
I fold on to the stairs by the phone. The negative vibes were not Sissy 
Spacek’s fault. This Carrie is the woman I sat opposite arranging Helen’s 
transition from loved wife, mother, daughter and sister to “her body”.

“Can I call you back when I’ve decided?” I put the phone down without waiting 
for an answer. I assume that their £5,000 bill included indefinite storage of a 
small urn. Carrie’s question should not have been a surprise, but I have buried 
its coming because of the shocking gap between the vital, ever optimistic and 
life-affirming force of nature that was Helen and her new status as an urn of 
ashes. Carrie wants an answer to another bastard question that I never in my 
life saw being asked.

I turn to the ever friendly folk at Way, the self-help group (Widowed 
and Young). There, I find every version of my angst and a cornucopia of 
inspiration. From sprinkling ashes at home, at sea, on a favourite walk, in a 
garden of remembrance or mounted on the mantelpiece, shot skywards in a 
firework or fashioned into jewellery. Every option is clearly the right one for 
those concerned and perhaps wrong for me.

Way’s input also makes me realise that I am not the only stakeholder. Helen’s 
parents, Barbara and Ray, her sister, Sarah, and the kids need to feel 
a “rightness” in what we do. The terrible truth is that, to me, the urn and its 
dark contents are not Helen. She lives in the vibrancy, laughter and love of 
Millie and Matt and the values she bequeathed them; not as something inert and 
spent. I don’t need or want her ashes in any way, but for others they may be a 
necessary lifelong anchor to her memory.

I investigate a memorial in the form of a more traditional grave. I had hoped 
this might be in the pretty town-centre churchyard where Helen’s funeral 
service was held, but discover that it is “closed, I’m afraid”. Churchyards 
close? You keep living and learning on this dark trip.

So I am in a cemetery close by, near a primary school and railway whose 
presence adds an appealing animation to the scene. Standing with the kind 
council officer, I’m struck that the next-in-line new grave plots are horrific, 
with body-shaped piles of earth on the recent burials. Too much for the kids 
(and me).

Walking into the older section, I see a plot closer to what I had in mind – 
end of a row, under a tree and by a bench surrounded by mature graves. I’m not 
hopeful, but ask about its availability. “It would be unusual and normally with 
tree roots wouldn’t be usable, but you’re putting ashes in so I’m sure it’ll be 
fine.”

I see again how kind people can be and also how awful every facet of having 
this conversation is. Nothing is fine. I leave it for now, maybe for months – 
or ideally for ever – but I also know that every time I walk to the station 
past the funeral directors where Helen’s remains remain, it chips away another 
piece of me so I will have to act eventually to stay sane. Just not yet.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 