
The impression seems to be that the autumn statement was notable for two 
reasons: announcements about raising the pension age, and the difficult time 
that shadow chancellorEd Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> 
had in reply.

The real significance is that – as the statistics in the statement itself and 
the report from the Office forBudget <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> 
Responsibility confirm – George Osborne's strategy has proved a lamentable 
failure, and that, not content with that, we are in for more of the same. 
Instead of attacking the economy's broader problems, not least its debilitated 
manufacturing sector and associated weak overseas trade position, this 
government continues to be obsessed with balancing the budget and not the 
economy.

Of course, it is taking a long time to do that, not least because its de facto 
anti-growth approach actually limits its ability to raise revenue and reduce 
the deficit – a deficit, incidentally, that the Debt Management Office has no 
difficulty in financing, with average debt maturity of 14 years or so.

I wondered, as I saw the ranks of backbenchers barracking the shadow 
chancellor, how many of them – mostly opponents of the euro – realised that if 
there is one person other than Gordon Brown who should be thanked for keeping 
the UK out of the structurally faulty eurozone, it is Ed Balls.

Anyway, Balls needs no help from me. He is tough and will bounce back, as he 
has done before. The story so far is thatGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> supported Labour's 
spending plans in the runup to the crisis in 2007-08, opposed the 2008-09 
economic stimulus that prevented the economy going into freefall, then withdrew 
his support as soon as he became chancellor.

His withdrawal was rationalised by the almost laughable argument that the 
state had to draw back in order not to "crowd out" a revival of private sector 
investment that, of course, never came. Somehow or other, monetary policy was 
going to support the economy, despite the fact that the banks had forgotten 
that their primary function is to lend money and give credit.

International Monetary Fund calculations show that in the period 2010-13 the 
fiscal contraction in the UK was far the biggest in the G7, at a massive 6.2% 
of GDP. The economist John Llewellyn, in common with others, was urging the 
government to stimulate growth and revenue-producing investment projects during 
those years. He now observes: "No wonder monetary policy has not done the 
trick: it did not stand a chance."

But the real significance of the autumn statement is not that Balls had an off 
day but that Osborne has dug in and set the seal on a policy of years of 
further contraction of the public sector, with all that means for the poorer 
sections of the population.

A leading Conservative summed up the true significance of Osborne's promise of 
yet more austerity in the second term – if, that is, this disturbing coalition 
is undeservedly returned to power. It was Andrew Tyrie, the MP for Chichester, 
whom I have long admired for his impartial chairmanship of the Treasury 
committee, but who came out in his true-blue colours with a fawning tribute to 
the chancellor and a plea for a small state and tax cuts.

You see the point? As far as the right is concerned, the austerity policy that 
held back growth for three years, and is particularly directed at the poor and 
vulnerable, is not really about the need to cut the deficit; it is about making 
the room for tax cuts.

Osborne, unlike his nominee Mark Carney, refuses to recognise that his 
austerity policy delayed the recovery. For Osborne, the culprit is the 
eurozone, which is our biggest export market by far and whose sluggishness has 
held back our exports. Our cavalier chancellor does not seem able to make the 
connection that, by preaching austerity around Europe, and making such a 
disastrously effective contribution to the G20's about-turn on expansionary 
policies in 2010, he has made a personal contribution to the climate in which 
our exports are held up by economic paralysis elsewhere.

Now, although most of the publicity about the OBR concentrates on its 
frequently revised forecasts for growth and its budgetary arithmetic, it is 
noteworthy that the OBR takes a pretty pessimistic view of our recent and 
prospective performance in overseas trade. As Roger Bootle of CapitalEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> has pithily observed, "exports 
are the price we have to pay for imports". We just love imports in this 
country, but our export performance is lamentable.

Now, some observers maintain that this disappointing trading performance means 
that devaluation no longer works. My own view is that, without the 2007-09 
devaluation, the position would have been even worse. Unfortunately, the pound 
has been "recovering" rather too much recently, with those inveterate 
miscalculators, the financial markets, apparently believing that this is 
justified by our return at last to growth.

However, as that tireless campaigner John Mills of the Exchange Rate Reform 
Group points out in his pamphletA Competitive Pound, the recovery in the pound 
"is exactly the opposite of what needs to happen".

Bootle would like the Treasury and Bank "to put a cap on the pound". One of 
the reasons our balance of payments position is so weak is that previous 
overvaluations of sterling have eroded our trading position. Here we go again…
 