
I spent the first 20 years of my life internalizing white beauty standards, 
intellectual values and cultural sensibilities. By the time I was a freshman in 
high school I had, like many of my white female peers, embarked upon an ongoing 
war with my body. I was never diagnosed as anorexic or bulimic, but I 
intermittently starved myself and took laxatives in an effort to be skinny and 
hipless without any sense whatsoever that my curves might be considered a thing 
of beauty in black culture.

I abandoned my 11-year-old crush on Michael Jackson (with whom I became almost 
preternaturally smitten after seeing him in The Wiz) in favor of the young 
white male stars that adorned the covers of Tiger Beat – Rick Springfield, Lief 
Garrett, Rob Lowe. I was guided by college counselors to consider New England 
state schools and maybe long-shot universities – historically black colleges 
and universities were not on anyone’s radar.

Most of the time in my white environment I felt a fierce and instinctive pull 
to find my place among black people. Even if I wasn’t always ready or prepared 
to embrace what that meant – interest from the son of a black dance teacher 
unsettled me, while another black adoptee who moved to town mid-high school 
didn’t seem legitimately “black” enough to me to pursue as an ally – I was 
dogged in my determination to evolve outside the narrow margins of the small 
white world of my beginning and into another more racially familiar one.

It took a long time to find my blackness, find my people and my relationship 
to black culture, despite my own (albeit limited) self-awareness regarding race 
at a very young age. “I am a black child” reads the first sentence of a short 
personal essay I wrote when I was eight or nine years old.

There were many times that I tried to ignore that girl, times that I would 
fantasize in great sweeping delusion what kind of white girl I might be – how I 
would wear my hair parted to the side with one silky swath hanging coyly over 
my eye and that I would occasionally run my fingers through to casually push it 
off my face. Sometimes I would even come to school with it wet absent of 
concern as to how it would look as it dried throughout the day. My crisp J Crew 
chinos would fit easy and right on my body, a straight shot from waist to ankle 
with no shapely hurdles to contend with. I would attend Dartmouth or 
Middlebury, and the boys would all want to date me.

There were years of straddling groups of white friends and black friends; some 
from the former openly derided me when I used “black” words or dialect, while 
some among the latter questioned my black authenticity, my loyalty to white 
friends and family. Dating and staying with black men who either treated me 
badly or were just plain wrong for me because I wanted to make a black family. 
Feeling like a fraud when I was held up in both cultures to represent or speak 
for all black people everywhere.

Still, no matter what I endured, I have always known that I am black. I 
concede to having perhaps romanticized the meaning of this certainty in the 
past in the same way an adult romanticizes a parent she lost as a young child. 
Intellectually I understand that “race” is a social construct – history bears 
this out – but I know, too, that I am a part of the blackness that Ta-Nehisi 
Coates describes in his book Between the World and Me: “bound by all the 
beautiful things, all the language and mannerisms, all the food and music, all 
the literature and philosophy, all the common language that they fashioned like 
diamonds under the weight of the Dream.”

I also understand that there is a difference between an affinity to blackness 
(see: Rachel Dolezal) and being black. Over a decade ago when I was working on 
my book Saving the Race, I read chapters in progress to a small group at a 
library in upstate New York.

After the reading, a white man raised his hand and asked me why, if I had been 
raised in a white family, didn’t I just call myself white. I shut him down 
rather hastily with the answer: “Because I live in contemporary American 
culture.” It is not the answer I would give today. Today I would simply say: 
“Because I was born black.”
 