
Millie and Matt are apprehensive but ready to face the day. Their pose through 
the lens looks perfect. As the camera clicks, Matt shouts “Harry!!!” and the 
tableau explodes into blurred movement as we three reach for our gargantuan 
Siberian Forest cat, who’s making a run through the open front door to the 
dangers of the road.

It’s 8.20am and I’m capturing Millie and Matt’s first day of the new school 
year. This is something I’ve always done but this is Matt’s first at secondary 
school and their first without Helen. He complained about the photo but I 
retort with, “It’s a big day you’ll not want to forget”.

Later, kids happily departed, I’m alone in the kitchen. What next? I’ve taken 
the day off to support them on what I’d thought, wrongly, might be a difficult 
morning for them. Instead it’s me who’s struggling with Helen’s absence, and as 
I idly pick up the camera my sadness nosedives into a whole crater of grief.

Thanks to smartphones, we use our camera rarely so the photos on it stay for 
ages. Flicking through these are pictures of a happy, healthy Helen from long 
ago but the further forward I scroll, the less well she looks. Her hair gets 
thinner during treatment and then thicker as it grows back. Her face gets 
fuller with the drugs then becomes drawn when she loses weight, her cancer 
killing her. In every photo she’s smiling, her ability to see the best of 
everything transfiguring every scene.

It’s the first time I’ve seen this sequence. Changes that were incremental 
over many months are all there like some appalling time-lapse film. It’s my 
lowest moment in months, which is saying something given just how subterranean 
loss can drive you.

The extra kick in the nuts lies in the photo of last year’s first school day. 
Millie and Matt smile with no sense of the heartache and tears that will land 
in their laps months later. It’s too much to take in and I do something I’ve 
not done outside of a stag weekend. It’s 9.20am as I pick up the first bottle 
of wine and start guzzling.

OK, I know that Annie, the nanny, will be in later and the kids cared and 
catered for. It’s not like I get immediately pissed – the benefits of drinking 
too much for some months means that it takes more than it used to for the same 
effect. What keeps me boozing is when I look at the kids’ faces in past and 
present photos and see how much they have grown up. I’m hit hard by the 
knowledge that Helen won’t see them move into adulthood. It seems obvious but I 
haven’t clocked it so painfully before.

These musings turn into mutterings and then ramblings as I drink my way 
through to lunchtime and, nicely warmed up, head to the pub where I sit among 
the retired, beige-clad bar-room stalwarts. There’s stage whispered, “drunk”, 
“disgrace”, “dickhead”, as I put myself on the wrong side of many drafts of 
beer. To be fair, I’m wearing my “are they clothes or pajamas?” tartan trews 
and T-shirt (they are pajamas).

There’s a buzzing. It’s the alarm on my phone, which I always set to remind me 
to take over from Annie at 7pm, but today of all days I should have done so 
earlier. I look around and am in the driver’s seat of the car, which thank 
Christ is in the garage where at some point I’ve retreated for a kip. I feel 
appalling and have been sick, largely down myself. Not my finest hour. 
Fortunately I can change because there are overalls hanging on a peg and so 
when I appear in the kitchen I’m looking and smelling like a very down-at-heel 
Kwik Fit fitter.

The kids have had a good day and are happy. Noting my odd outfit, Matt picks 
up the camera, which is still on the table and points to it saying, “Your turn, 
Dad.” I protest but with his usual fast wit he skewers me, “It’s a big day 
you’ll not want to forget.”

He’s right. I never want to forget or fall into this well of extreme grief 
again. A self-destructive dad is not what the kids need or Helen expected. A 
hard lesson on a sore head.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 