
Last weekend I moved into a share house. It will come as no surprise to anyone 
that I’m no longer a sprightly, young 20-something. According to my own rules, 
this is not how things were supposed to be at 40. I should be organising 
schedules for childcare and family holidays by now, not working out a roster 
allocating whose turn it is to clean the lav. But I am. And I’m OK with it.

I’m excited, in fact. It’s encouraged me to think it’s time I changed my own 
rules about how adults should live once they reach a certain age.

I moved to Sydney five months ago, sans partner (who will join me at a later 
date), and I immediately assumed I was too old to live in a share situation. 
Let’s be honest, most people over 35 don’t want to live like The Young Ones 
anymore. But these limitations are cruel because they put unnecessary pressure 
on people to tough it out, to go it alone, especially if they don’t have a 
partner and/or children or pets. These rules are expensive too.

The cruelest part is they insinuate that I might be a bit of a loser who 
hasn’t found my path in life, when in fact I’m a perfectly functional, happy 
person, contributing to society by working and paying taxes. I’m just not 
cookie cutter.

A recent article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/18/perils-moving-home-40-toast-police-toilet-reviews-enforced-sexual-abstinence-pete-cashmore>
 from another 40-something who moved back in with his folks after losing his 
job indicates how judgmental people can be. Comments suggested he should grow 
up and stop leaning on his parents for support. Even I had a brief moment 
thinking he should probably have his shit together by now. But who am I to 
judge? And what exactly is “having your shit together”? Why should a 
41-year-old have to battle it out on his own if he’s got options that might 
make him healthier and happier? When did we all get so down on people seeking 
help?

This made me rethink why I chose to be in a solitary situation in a new city. 
For all the phone calls and Skyping I do to keep in touch, being alone at home 
can be mentally challenging. So why then would I deny myself the option of 
having someone to talk to in the evening, to laugh with or to cook food for, 
simply because I think I’m too old for that kind of malarkey? Surely having 
some fun isn’t only a young person’s game?

Please don’t assume I have Peter Pan syndrome. I love being alone and 
acknowledge that I need quiet time in order to top up my reserves and be able 
to give my all each week at work. But while I’m busy at a new job, sometimes 
it’s difficult to maintain a sunny disposition when you head home alone with no 
one to ask how your day was or if you’d like some cake. Cake’s the most 
important bit, obviously.

Perhaps it’s not us single 40-somethings that need to grow up (as those who 
don’t follow the usual life pathways are so often told), but the judgmental 
views of others that need to be altered. Society is changing rapidly. Jobs 
aren’t for life, so we need to be more flexible, which means moving a lot more 
than ever before. Not everyone has kids these days and the whys and why nots 
around that are nobody’s business. Many people (especially singles) will never 
be able to afford their own home.

If we want a society of well-adjusted people, then the old rules can no longer 
apply. Share house if you want. Live with your folks if you need to. Live 
alone. Whatever. No one’s doing it “right”.

So I’ve taken the plunge. I’m a little nervous because I haven’t shared since 
my early-30s. My housemate is younger than me and probably dreading the thought 
of me lording over the couch and TV remote. But I’m hoping this sharing 
business will be good too, as only listening to my own opinions and getting set 
in my ways can be pretty dangerous too.

Sharing might be the way of the future as more people find out that life 
doesn’t always work out as planned. And rather than cast judgment, why not add 
it to the growing list of alternatives to the “house, two kids and a dog” 
nuclear family. Each to their own, and for now, this is what suits me.

Until someone drinks the last of the milk and doesn’t replace it, that is. 
 