
This year Americans celebrated 50 years of Star Trek – and network TV’s first 
interracial kiss: a smooch between William Shatner and Nichelle Nichols on Star 
Trek, screening on 22 November 1968.

The anniversary prompted NITV’s Sophie Verass 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/nitv/article/2016/09/27/who-had-first-interracial-kiss-australian-television>
 to investigate the Australian equivalent. In what year, she asked, did viewers 
first see an Indigenous and a non-Indigenous person kiss?

The answer’s profoundly depressing.

In 1976 the raunchy soap Number 96 allowed a romance between the Indigenous 
actor Rhonda Jackson and her white co-star Chard Hayward. But, Verass explains, 
“before audiences see Rhonda Jackson lock lips on-screen, we’re introduced to 
Indigenous Australians’ sexual agency on television with a close-up of Jackson 
screaming as a masked male figure aggressively forces himself on her.”

Yes, that’s right – the first sex scene involving an Indigenous person in 
Australian TV was a sexual assault.

Beyond 18C: six barriers to freedom of speech in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/beyond-18c-six-barriers-to-freedom-of-speech-in-australia>
Twenty years later, The Flying Doctors featured an interracial affair. Even 
then, viewers didn’t see any physical contact between a black and a white 
person: Verass suggests that a love scene was actually scripted but was “cut by 
Channel Nine for being too controversial and ‘offensive for the Australian 
public”.

It was not until 1994 that Australian TV boldly went where Star Trek had gone 
26 years earlier, with Ernie Dingo and Cate Blanchett puckering up during the 
ABC miniseries Heartland.

All that’s by way of illustrating a simple point: the Australian media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/australia-media> has an appalling record of 
representing Indigenous people.

That was why I, along with hundreds of other writers and journalists, was 
happy to endorse an open letter published byCroakey blog 
<https://croakey.org/calling-on-the-australian-to-apologise-for-leak-cartoon-open-letter-from-journalists-writers-artists-and-others/>
 in August this year in response to that notoriousBill Leak cartoon showing a 
drunken Indigenous man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/05/bill-leak-defends-racist-cartoon-amid-widespread-criticism>
 unable to recognise his son.

Yesterday, that months’ old intervention was rediscovered by Andrew Bolt 
(presumably during one of his periodic trawls of the blogosphere looking for 
something about which to be offended), and then injected into the Murdoch 
press’s crusade to repeal section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act.

It’s worth looking at how Bolt and co present the Croakey letter, as an 
illustration of how dishonest their campaign’s become.

Bolt heads his post “A list of the media’s enemies of free speech” and tells 
his audience “you can read the names of 173 people who actually want Bill 
Leak’s cartoon banned”. The Australian subsequently took the same line, 
tweeting, “These people want to silence Bill Leak.”

Except, of course, the letter doesn’t say that at all.

Here’s the full text.

 We condemn the Australian’s publication of Bill Leak’s racist cartoon. Racism 
damages the health and wellbeing of those it targets.

We acknowledge that the media industry has a long history of perpetuating 
harmful and racist stereotypes of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, 
and that it is well past time that this stops.

We urge the editorial leadership at the Australian to reflect on the hurt and 
distress they have caused, and to make a sincere and genuine apology.

Pretty innocuous stuff, you would think. Yet it provokes Bolt to go full 
Malcolm Roberts, with a bizarre rant about “the enemies of our freedom, a vast 
and largely faceless nomenklatura with far more power collectively than you 
could have imagined”.

If Bolt thinks the press should openly embrace old-school race baiting, well, 
he should come out and say so.

Of course, back here on planet earth, editors make judgments all the time as 
to what they publish and what they don’t. That’s what editing means. If Bolt 
thinks that such decisions amount to censorship (which is what he implies), he 
should hand over the password and login to his blog so we can all have a go at 
it.

Yes, the letter calls for editors not to publish racist content. Does Bolt 
disagree? Is he arguing that, say, the Herald Sun should adopt the slogan that 
the old Bulletin maintained until the 1960s: “Australia for the white man”? Was 
it censorship when Donald Horne removed those words from the masthead?

If Bolt thinks the press should openly embrace old-school race baiting, well, 
he should come out and say so.

One presumes that’s not his argument. Remember, back in 2014, Bolt repeatedly 
denounced Fairfax 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/blogs/andrew-bolt/how-media-watch-tried-to-save-mike-carlton-from-those-jews/news-story/817a6321b0de73922c2bfa483c0fc1ba>
 for publishing a Glen Le Lievre drawing about the Gaza war, an image widely 
criticised (in my view, correctly) for employing, wait for it, racial 
stereotypes. So was Bolt part of the anti-cartoon Illumanati only three years 
ago? If it was wrong to publish illustrations of hook-nosed, conspiratorial 
Jews back then (and it was), what makes Leak’s drawings of thick-lipped, 
low-browed Aboriginal men clutching cans of VB acceptable?

In any case, as Bolt grudgingly admits halfway through his fulmination, the 
Croakey letter makes no mention of section 18 at all, a minor detail that makes 
his whole screed utterly bizarre.

For what it’s worth, I don’t see the Racial Discrimination Act as a 
particularly great tool in the fight against racism, for all sorts of reasons – 
not least that it focuses attention away from deeper structural problems.

Let’s not forget the context for Leak’s nasty little cartoon.

In July this year, Four Corners aired the awful Abu Ghraib-style images of Don 
Dale youth detention centre. In response to footage of Indigenous youths being 
abused by white prison officers, Bill Leak drew his cartoon … blaming 
Indigenous people.

Second Bill Leak cartoon cleared by Australian Press Council
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/07/second-bill-leak-cartoon-cleared-by-australian-press-council>
It was a response entirely in keeping with the media’s long history of 
belittling and denigrating Indigenous people, and as such entirely deserving of 
all the outrage it generated.

Yet a reliance on section 18 for redress means that anti-racists look to the 
courts for solutions, instead of, say, taking to the streets or organising a 
picket. To put it another way, legalistic solutions are demobilising, 
counterposed to the sorts of social movements that have won real change in the 
past.

In the Northern Territory, an astonishing 97% of children 
<https://theconversation.com/why-are-so-many-indigenous-kids-in-detention-in-the-nt-in-the-first-place-63257>
 in juvenile detention centres are Indigenous. That’s an appalling statistic, 
symptomatic of something deeply wrong in Australian society. Redressing 
injustice on that scale requires activists, not lawyers.

By all means, we should be angry about racism in the press, no matter how much 
the Andrew Bolts howl in response. But we need to use that anger to mobilise 
for real change.

After all, that Star Trek kiss came at the high point of the 60s – an era of 
mass revolt on all kinds of fronts. There’s a lesson in that. If we transform 
the society, the media will follow.

 * This article was amended on 8 November 2016 to remove the reference to 
Crikey, which has no current connection to Croakey, and to correct a quote from 
Andrew Bolt, which had a missing word.
 