
When I was a little girl, I thought that I was gorgeous. Maybe I kind of was; 
maybe all little kids think they are, until they don’t. But growing up black in 
an all-white town, I was also a generally accepted kind of pretty: white adults 
saw my blackness as an addition to my cuteness; their white children stared at 
my brown skin and afro with genuine wonder as opposed to judgement and fear. I 
wasn’t ugly, so it was OK to stare.

It wasn’t until I was 10 that it occurred to me that I wasn’t pretty-pretty, 
after my fifth grade teacher told me that I was “pretty, for a black girl”. 
After that, I knew I was beautiful with a caveat; I was attractive with an 
asterisk. The precocious and outgoing girl that I had been, who loved to pose 
and perform and tell stories and make art, became emotionally fluent in the art 
of self-doubt.
 Maybe all little kids think they’re gorgeous – until they don’t. Photograph: 
Rebecca Carroll 
By the time I got to middle school, it very quickly became clear that my days 
of being gorgeous, let alone pretty, were over. Surrounded by girls with 
smooth, pale skin and shiny blond hair, who tried to tan but never to openly 
affect blackness, and who crimped their hair but found my coarse, kinky hair 
oddly remarkable, I realized that Barbie was real, and she was a nightmare.

Still, I clung to the vestiges of my self-esteem, and continued to believe on 
some very deep level that I was gorgeous. It took the intervention of my white 
birthmother, with whom I reunited when I was 11, to convince me that my 
perception of myself as exceptionally attractive was delusional. She told me 
that the idea that I was gorgeous was a fiction inflicted upon me in part by my 
adoptive parents, but more so by their adult friends and neighbors out of a 
sense of white liberal guilt, and that in actuality I was only “conventionally 
attractive, at best”.


She was trying to keep me grounded, she implied. Maybe, if I’m being generous, 
she didn’t want me to get hurt by the inevitable let down from the unwieldy 
expectations of what my beauty would award me; maybe, if I’m being ungenerous, 
she didn’t want anyone else to hurt me as much as she could.

I went to high school knowing as deeply as I’d once been sure I was gorgeous 
that I wasn’t really pretty: the part of me that refused to accept my ugliness 
was delusional, I thought, as I was at best somewhat attractive and, above all 
else, black, which took me out of the running for real beauty. My ugliness 
wasn’t a pimple or a bad haircut; it was intrinsic to the color of my skin, the 
permanence of my shape and curves, the undeniable texture of my hair.

Each moment that could have delivered me out of my crisis of self-confidence 
eventually served only to deepen it. A boy in my very white high school, very 
drunk at a party, told me: “You are seriously one of the prettiest girls I have 
ever seen.” He subsequently ignored me for the rest of the year. Another boy 
invited me to prom as “just a friend”, but his father forbid him to take me as 
all. “You don’t want to look back at pictures and see that you took a black 
girl,” he informed his son.

And when I came into contact with black boys – when I visited my birthmother – 
I was considered cute, but not cute enough to make up for the fact that I 
“talked like a white girl”. Before I became culturally bilingual and understood 
the power and impetus of code switching, I spoke like the white parents and 
family that raised me. I used “neat” instead of “fresh”, and “relax” instead of 
“chill”, and so on. My racial legitimacy was nascent, and it was revealed 
nowhere more clearly than in my spoken voice – a cross between Sarah Jessica 
Parker from Square Pegs and Julie McCoy from The Love Boat. Still, I always 
felt far more attractive in the company of black boys and girls; I might not 
have been gorgeous by their standards, but at least it wasn’t my skin that 
disqualified me from the competition.


By the time I got to college, I started trying to control my aesthetics: I 
struggled with my weight, and yo-yoed between very skinny (from occasional 
starving) or just shy of plump (from eating whatever I wanted all the time); my 
hair was a constant source of frustration and insecurity: keeping it long meant 
figuring out how to manage it (no one in my family had known), keeping it short 
meant an undeniable afro (pretty much the marker of blackness). I experimented 
with my (white) sister’s curling iron, straightening my hair and pulling it 
back. I obsessed about getting tan in the summer, because the more tan I was 
the more white-person tanned I looked, as opposed to just black. I kept trying 
on look after look, perfecting and discarding different versions of my 
blackness.

I'm protective of my blackness because I had to find it myself | Rebecca 
Carroll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/12/im-defensive-of-my-blackness-because-i-had-to-find-it-myself>
After college, when I’d had two serious white boyfriends and one serious black 
boyfriend, I moved to Boston to find my birthfather – my sole surviving black 
relative – largely so that I could try to start moving with ease inside my 
blackness as reflected through my progenitor. Or, in contemporary parlance, to 
get my receipts in order. When we met and I looked at him for the first time, 
he was round and dignified, angry and sad, his skin darker than black. I found 
myself in his eyes and felt loving toward my blackness in a way that I’d never 
felt before.

And then, when I had my son – and saw his slightly lighter than mine brown 
skin, his sweet chub and form almost identical to mine as seen in baby 
pictures, his crown of curls, the rush and remembrance of my birthfather, the 
reality of bringing a human into the world through my body who extracted my DNA 
to become whole – all the voices slowed down and fell silent. I didn’t question 
whether I was delusional or gorgeous; I wasn’t trying to be conventionally 
attractive or pretty for a black girl. I felt gorgeous. And most of the time, 
when I look at my son, I can’t think of a time when I didn’t.
 