
‘I would like a weekend off now, please,” tweets my work friend Jemma, who, 
after nearly dying in a riding accident, has spent months dealing so well with 
the challenges of tetraplegia. I have taken heart in her hitherto positive 
messages, but read in that tweet her sorrow and the momentary, and 
understandable, desertion of her coping.

I am not sure that I share her strength, so often I have wished that fucking 
cancer’s cup had passed us by. It didn’t, but I am learning to deal with it in 
a way that mines some positives from the seabed of grief. So I take inspiration 
where I can.

I am suspicious that Matt, in his delight of Christmas, has bought me a book 
about RAF hero Douglas Bader. I have always found him fascinating, a man 
defined but not constrained by the accident that resulted in the amputation of 
both legs. I still love the story David Niven recounted about Bader giving a 
talk to an upmarket girls’ school, and describing the German planes attacking 
him as “the fuckers”. This prompted the pale-faced schoolmistress to interrupt 
with, “Ladies, the Fokker was a type of German aircraft,” to which Bader 
replied: “That’s as may be, Madam, but these fuckers were in Messerschmitts.”

I would love the story to be true. Many years ago, I had dinner with Peter 
O’Toole and, for all his many stories, he hadn’t heard that one, and hooted 
with mirth before reaching for his next bottle. “Bader’s stumps made him 
mentally stronger than his enemies and gave him a physical advantage in the 
air. With legs, you’d probably never have heard of him. Tragedy can grant gifts 
– something to learn there,” he finished, blue eyes twinkling my way. 
Star-struck and young, I had had no idea what he meant, but I do now.

Bader’s accident had made him mentally robust and determined not to be cowed 
or constrained by anything, and physically he was helped by the fact that his 
heart had less body to pump blood around, so he could peform tighter turns in a 
dogfight without losing consciousness.

For me, knowing that loss is now my brother is tragic but emboldening. I have 
no fear of change, or the decisions that change demands. When friends ask, 
“Will you look for another job in the media?” I say no with some certainty 
simply because I now see work as renting out bits of precious, short life – no 
money is worth something you no longer love.Bereavement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/bereavement> is dreadful, but once 
you accept that the life you had is unrecoverable, you might just be able to 
create a new one that isn’t simply the old version but sadder.

So it was that when we briefed the brilliant stained-glass artist Tony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/19/opening-a-window-on-to-my-wifes-passions>
 with five of Helen’s passions for memorial windows in the Yorkshire house – a 
cathedral’s medieval knocker, an art deco light at the local cinema, her 
children’s story detective character, the battlements of the local historic 
house and the Hogwarts’ logo – I was reminded how much I loved stained glass 
and decided to go on a taster course in Scarborough.

There I met Dawn and her husband, Terry. We got on well, even going together 
to the theatre where Alan Ayckbourn is the director, with the great man sitting 
behind us critiquing the revival of one of his plays. Dawn seemed to be 
struggling. “It’s a shame,” she said, “but I’ve got cancer in my spine and 
won’t live very much longer.” I’m poleaxed, but also inspired. Just as Helen 
never stopped her piano lessons, Dawn is here on a course to learn a new skill 
because she enjoys it despite her illness. So many people spend their lives 
afraid of change, but I realise bereavement has gifted me a willingness to 
embrace it and not spend a moment of my life killing time or treading water.

So I approach Tony and will shortly be taking up a role as the oldest 
stained-glass-window trainee in the country. I know Helen would approve. 
Without her death, I would have had neither the courage nor the cash to take 
the plunge. She was the best part of me and in her loss I have gained an 
advantage over my risk-averse former self. It is another legacy of her love. 
I must not squander these new opportunities nor allow them to be shot down in 
flames out of fear.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 