
Some fruit and veg advertise themselves with colours and shapes too lovely to 
resist. And once in the kitchen, they become upmarket home decor. Squashes and 
pumpkins always do it for me, as does a bowl piled with at least two shades of 
plum. But if you held a contest for the raw ingredient that looks best casually 
displayed on a worktop, the capsicum family would probably win: glossy, plump 
and multicoloured, they are catwalk swanky. Just don't forget to eat them.

Especially now. Though imports are available year round, the home-grown crop 
starts to come good at the end of summer. And that's where the real flavour and 
excitement is to be found; it's all a far cry from the predictable, slightly 
watery crunch of a Dutch bell pepper.

I like a good sweet pepper raw from time to time, but they are so much tastier 
at room temperature than fridge-cold, and several times more delicious thinly 
sliced or chopped than in great chunks. Prepared this way, they are great in 
salads and slaws: dress with olive oil and lemon juice, and use garlic, capers, 
olives or parsley to point up the peppers' delicately bitter-sweet flavour.

But, for me, peppers are best cooked. Cut them into 1cm strips, then sweat in 
a little oil, garlic, salt and pepper for 20 minutes, until the flesh becomes 
silky and tender, and the flavour sweet and intense. Or roast until blackened 
and blistered on the outside, then strip off the skin to reveal the flesh at 
its rich and smoky best. Strips of roast pepper are superb with mild cheese 
such as ricotta or halloumi, and with the contrasting texture of toasted nuts 
such as pine or hazel; they love spices, too, particularly cumin and paprika.

As today's recipes show, peppers are very good when enhanced by their smaller, 
spikier brethren, the chillies. The generic red or green chillies available in 
supermarkets are usually of the Serenade variety, plump and glossy, and with a 
long shelf-life; it's a good all-round chilli. Most big retailers will also 
have a small, very hot variety such as bird's-eye or Thai, which pack a real 
punch; the fruity, aromatic, seriously hot Scotch bonnet (jabanero) are widely 
available, too.

But look beyond the supermarket and you'll find an amazing array, with colours 
ranging from pale apricot to fire engine-red, and heat levels from barely-there 
to blow-your-head-off. Try one of the UK's growing number of specialist chilli 
growers.Edible Ornamentals <http://www.edibleornamentals.co.uk> offer big, mild 
poblanos for stuffing, peppy serranos (good all-rounders, a little hotter than 
Serenade) and plump green padrons, ideal for frying whole.The South Devon 
Chilli Farm <http://www.southdevonchillifarm.co.uk> has an impressive range, 
too, including the almost tomatoey Aji red and the spherical cherry bomb. Or go 
to my friends Michael and Joy Michaud atPeppers By Post 
<http://www.peppersbypost.biz> for the unique Dorset Naga, which has one of the 
highest heat levels ever recorded in a chilli. This baby comes with a quite 
genuine safety warning, but if you can take the heat, you'll also be rewarded 
by a cracking, fruity, aromatic flavour.

Mind you, heat and flavour levels can vary even in fruits of the same variety. 
And the only way to know how hot a chilli is is to suck it and see (or, more 
cautiously, lick it and learn). Halve the chilli to expose the core and 
membranes – these parts contain most of the heat – and dab the cut surface on 
the tip of your tongue. You'll soon get a sense of its heat (have to hand some 
milk or yoghurt: they alleviate chilli-burn more effectively than water). Armed 
with this knowledge, you can then add the chilli to your dish in a quantity 
that suits you, and the results will be gently tongue-tingling, or totally 
eye-popping, just as you choose.

Stewed red peppers with chorizo

This intensely flavoured, tapas-style dish is perfect with some olives, a 
slice of toasted sourdough and a cold beer or chilled dry sherry. Serves four 
to six as a side dish.

2 tbsp olive oil
200g chorizo, cut into matchsticks
2 medium onions, peeled, halved and finely sliced
3 medium-hot red chillies, such as Serenade, deseeded and finely sliced
2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed
3 red peppers, deseeded and finely sliced
1 tsp hot smoked paprika
100ml dry white wine
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper 
1 handful coarsely chopped flat-leaf parsley, to serve
A little extra-virgin rapeseed or olive oil, to serve

Heat the oil in a large frying pan over medium heat. Add the chorizo and fry 
gently for a few minutes, to get the fat flowing. Add the onions, cover and 
sweat gently for 10 minutes, until soft. Stir in the chillies, garlic, peppers, 
paprika, wine and a little salt and pepper; when the wine is bubbling, cover 
and turn the heat to low. Cook gently for 30 minutes, stirring from time to 
time, until the peppers are soft. Season to taste and serve warm, scattered 
with parsley and trickled with extra-virgin oil.

Black-eye bean chilli with pepper cream

A meat-free chilli that's cooled with a smoky-sweet roast red pepper cream. 
Serves six to eight.

3 tbsp olive, sunflower or rapeseed oil
3 large onions, peeled and chopped
2 large carrots, chopped
2 stems celery, chopped
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
3-4 hottish green chillies, seeds and membrane removed, chopped
4 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped
1 tbsp ground cumin
½ tsp ground allspice
4 tbsp tomato puree
2 400g tins plum tomatoes, chopped
2 400g tins black-eye beans, drained and rinsed
600ml vegetable stock
2 tbsp finely chopped parsley or coriander, plus extra to finish

For the red pepper cream
2 large red peppers
150ml sour cream
About ¼ clove garlic, finely grated
Salt and pepper

To make the cream, char the peppers under a grill, turning often, until 
blackened all over. Leave until cool enough to handle, then peel off the burnt 
skins and remove the stalks, seeds and membranes. Tear the flesh into pieces 
and put into a food processor with the sour cream and garlic, and season. 
Process to a thin puree, then refrigerate.

Heat the oil in a large saucepan on a medium-low heat, add the onions, 
carrots, celery and a pinch of salt, then cover and sweat for 15 minutes, 
stirring occasionally. Add the chillies, garlic, cumin and allspice, and stir 
for a minute. Add the tomato puree, tinned tomatoes, beans, stock and parsley 
or coriander, stir and simmer for 30 minutes, uncovered, stirring from time to 
time, until thick and saucy. Season to taste and serve with rice, the chilled 
pepper cream and a little more coriander or parsley.

Chilli pepper jam
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's chilli pepper jam: 'Volcanic' with hot chillis. 
Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
For a volcanic result, use hot chillies and leave in the membranes and seeds; 
for a milder jam, use deseeded mild chillies or increase the ratio of sweet 
peppers. The jam is also very good if you stir in the finely chopped leaves 
from a washed 50g bunch of coriander before the standing time. Makes three 
smallish jars.

300g red peppers (2 large ones), deseeded and roughly chopped
150g red chillies, deseeded (or not) and roughly chopped
2 cloves garlic, peeled and roughly chopped
500g jam sugar with added pectin
Juice of 1 medium lemon 
200ml cider vinegar
½ tsp salt

Wash some jam jars in hot, soapy water, rinse, then put them in a low oven to 
dry out and warm up. Put a saucer in the fridge to chill.

Put the peppers, chillies and garlic in a food processor and blitz to chop 
finely. Put the sugar, lemon juice, vinegar and salt in a large pan or 
preserving pan (the mixture will rise up the sides when it boils). Heat gently, 
stirring, until the sugar dissolves. Add the chilli puree, bring to a rolling 
boil, boil hard for five minutes, then test for setting point. Drip a little 
jam on to the cold saucer, return it to the fridge for a couple of minutes, 
then push the jam with your finger: if it forms significant wrinkles, setting 
point has been reached; if not, boil for two more minutes and test again. Once 
setting point is reached, leave the jam to stand for 10 minutes: this helps to 
stop all the chilli floating to the top.

Pot the jam into the hot jars, seal straight away and label when cool. Eat 
within six months and refrigerate once opened.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 