
It is far too easy to impersonate someone at a polling station and claim their 
vote (Voters in local elections will be required to show ID in anti-fraud trials
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/27/voters-local-elections-required-show-id-anti-fraud-trials-eric-pickles>
, 28 December). But there is little evidence that the problem is widespread. 
The Electoral Commission found that there were 19 allegations made following 
the EU referendum relating to personation at a polling station (some of which 
resulted in no further action decisions), while a total of 33,577,342 votes 
were cast.

A far greater problem, according to the government’s own estimates, is that 
levels of electoral registration have declined from around 95% in the 1950s to 
around 82/83% in recent years. Most polling stations in the 2015 general 
election turned away people who may well have been entitled to vote. The 
government should therefore be taking steps to make sure that every person 
entitled to vote is actually included on the electoral registers. Much more 
could be done very easily and at minimal cost to include those people who will 
soon reach the age of 18 and those registering at colleges etc. People should 
also be able to check online whether or not they are currently registered.
Chris Rennard
Liberal Democrat, co-chair, all party group on democratic participation, House 
of Lords

• The government is correct to ignore some of Eric Pickles’ more retrograde 
recommendations such as banning selfies and non-English languages at polling 
stations. It is also correct to seek to address the current lack of voter 
verification we see throughout elections. However, the government risks 
isolating communities by ruling out the possibility of introducing a separate 
voter identity document for those without traditional forms of ID. A real pilot 
scheme would test all viable options, including a separate voter identity 
document.

Rather than tackling voter fraud, the minister responsible, Chris Skidmore, 
should be focusing on how to boost voter engagement. Estimates show that 95% of 
the UK’s 19,000 elected politicians were voted in on turnouts of less than 50%. 
In the EU referendum, 13 million people did not vote. On top of that, voters 
with vision impairments, voters with disabilities and voters abroad are 
virtually locked out of the voting system. Rather than tinkering with a broken 
system of the past, we should instead look to the future of elections and 
create a system fit for the 21st century.
Areeq Chowdhury
Chief executive, Institute for Digital Democracy, London

• Yet again we are being told Brits don’t need ID cards. So to show we are 
entitled to vote, open a bank account, get NHS access etc, we will still have 
to fiddle around with passports, driving licences, utility bills. Why? One 
piece of ID is all anyone needs. National insurance numbers are automatically 
issued at age 16. Why not start at birth or when naturalised or given right of 
residence? A simple way to prove who you are. Or am I the simple one?
Teresa Gautrey
Wokingham, Berkshire

• As important as the identity of the voter is the secrecy of the ballot (
Voter IDs could disenfranchise millions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/27/minister-disputes-livingstone-claim-that-voter-crackdown-will-hit-poorest>
, 28 December). The present system allows checking on how you voted by the 
simple method of the polling clerk issuing voting slips from a cheque-book-like 
arrangement, with the left-hand stub on which your polling number is recorded 
bearing an identifying number corresponding to the same number in the corner of 
the counterfoil which is torn off for you to vote on. So any voting slip deemed 
suspicious can be traced back to the relevant stub book.

It may be less contentious to issue a national identity card, as in the second 
world war; less contentious now that a majority has voted in a referendum for 
more “control”. It may yet be a small price to pay for a proper secret ballot.
DBC Reed
Northampton

• The crowd may want its money back judging by the analysis applied to arrive 
at the conclusion “the US presidential election outcome was correct”, after 
“a crowdfunded recount of key states”. One of the election result reviewers (
‘My students could hack the US election’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/election-recount-hacking-voting-machines>
, 29 December) claimed “… my undergraduate security class could have changed 
the outcome of the presidential election”. And previous research having 
“demonstrated security vulnerabilities in every model of voting machine”, 
allowing “an attacker to silently rewrite the electronic record of how many 
votes each candidate received”, surely undermines the reviewer’s claim that 
“the state can prove statistically that the vote has not been tampered with 
[by] counting a small but statistically significant, randomly selected sample 
of ballot papers”. No matter how significant or random the sample, rubbish in 
means rubbish out.

He also concludes that an “auditable paper-trail for electronic voting” is 
important but it is shocking “how unlikely states are to look at any of the 
paper”, opening the clear possibility that irregular electronic voting would 
not have been discovered, so might possibly have been part of a sample. Who can 
possibly imagine that, once Trump is president, such clearly flawed, “checks 
and balances” will improve?
David Murray
Wallington, Surrey

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 