
Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> to India has been in 
the news a lot recently. India is growing so fast that it will be the 
second-largest economy in the world (after China) in a few decades. It has a 
space programme, a nuclear programme, and even an aid programme. So why do rich 
countries still give India aid? Fair question. But rather than an anomaly, is 
aid to India actually a blueprint for aid programmes of the future?

Every year, almost 2 million Indian children can't get enough food or basic 
healthcare and die before their fifth birthday 
<http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/india_statistics.htm>. Around 10% of 
Indians (about 120 million people) drink dangerously dirty water, while 400 
million are without electricity. The international community needs to work to 
support poverty reduction and green growth in India, and there is a very long 
list of ways of doing that. Aid will play only a minor part in this support 
but, despite what some will tell you, it still has a role.

The main criticism of aid to India is that India doesn't need it. But that is 
exactly the reason why it can work well. The trouble with aid is that when it 
becomes too important to a country (too much, for too long), it stops 
supporting the process of development and starts to delay it. It can undermine 
the ability and accountability of the state, because the state gets its money, 
policy and legitimacy from elsewhere. This is most obvious in the pernicious 
practice of "policy conditionality", where countries have to do what donors say 
to get their money.

Because of this, it is often those countries that need aid least that can use 
it best. Aid has been irrelevant to India's GDP for many years, contributing 
well under 1%. But it can play a catalytic role to support change and progress 
when it is invested wisely, without undermining ownership and institutional 
development.

There are three ways that aid should be spent in India. Firstly, in support of 
big infrastructure projects. This will mostly be in the form of concessional 
loans from the World Bank and other regional development banks, which count as 
aid but will end in the next few years as India "graduates" from being a 
low-income country and so stops being eligible.

The second way is through the work of big international efforts to support 
development, particularly in the areas of health, water and resilience to 
climate change. One of the great things about being alive in this era is that 
noble international initiatives exist to help all human beings, regardless of 
which country they are in. These attempts, mostly led by the UN and supported 
by other funds such as theGAVI (Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisation 
<http://www.gavialliance.org/> and the Global Fund 
<http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/whoweare/>, are a work in progress, with 
failures to learn from as well as successes. But those successes have been 
fairly spectacular in some places, and need to be scaled up.

We also need to develop new ways for the international community to unite to 
fight poverty and promote clean development. We need to invest in health and 
climate change technology, and support knowledge-sharing between rich, 
middle-income and poor countries.

Thirdly, some rich countries should continue to contribute bilaterally. Donor 
government aid agencies have acted a little like NGOs in India, only with more 
money and more access to the top decision-makers. Their money is small fry even 
for Indian states, let alone for the central government, so lesson-learning and 
knowledge-sharing are at least as important as the financial investments 
themselves. The work they do on the ground, and the money they invest, allow 
innovative ideas to be applied, increasing the pool of knowledge and experience 
in breaking through difficult problems of extreme poverty.

NGOs and government aid agencies can connect various sectors of society, 
including civil society, thinktanks and the private sector. For all the 
important work it does, the UN can find it hard (for political reasons) to 
challenge host governments, meaning that bilateral donors and NGOs have an 
important role to play. Crucially, they work within clear policy guidelines set 
by the Indian government, rather than placing their own policy conditions, so 
they build rather than undermine national and regional government capacity and 
accountability.

There are far more important things than aid for poverty reduction in India, 
and I would not fight to keep it at today's levels. However, the majority of 
poor people now live in middle-income countries 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/datablog/2010/sep/14/bottom-billion-poverty>
. The world needs to find a new way to support those countries to tackle 
poverty quickly and effectively.

The way the international community provides aid to India is a hint towards a 
new global aid compact, in which the old top-down donor-recipient relationships 
are replaced by respectful collaboration between sovereign countries: a state 
strong enough to say no, but wise enough to accept advice, support and 
appropriate financing.
 