
Our chancellor could not resist it. Once again, while presenting the latest 
revisions to his “long-term plan”, he dragged up the Labour chief secretary 
Liam Byrne’s line in 2010 that “there’s no money left”. I say line, because it 
was not a spoken remark but a phrase contained in the customary written note 
from the outgoing chief secretary to the incoming one, who happened – for what 
turned out to be a very short time – to be the Liberal Democrat David Laws.

This was meant to be a joke, and Treasury officials thought it was bad form 
for Laws to publicise a private letter. But the joke rebounded on Byrne and 
Labour, and the Conservatives are still milking it all these years later. And 
last week shadow chancellor John McDonnell tried a deliberately more public 
joke with hisproduction of Chairman Mao’s little red book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/nov/25/the-chairman-mao-moment-mcdonnell-throws-the-little-red-book-at-osborne-video>
. This backfired too, and the Tories will milk it mercilessly as well.

The “no money left” remark was an obvious joke. There was plenty of money 
left, as investors all over the world almost fell over themselves to lend to 
the British government. They were doing this under the premiership of Gordon 
Brown and the concurrent chancellorship of Alistair Darling. They have been 
doing it ever since under the premiership of David Cameron and concurrent 
chancellorship ofGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>.

The position of the UK was in no way comparable to that of the benighted Greek 
economy, although that never stopped Osborne from misrepresenting the case. In 
the old days, confronted with the Osbornes of this world, people with a 
resemblance to the Major inFawlty Towers used to shake their heads and observe: 
“He is not quite 16 annas to the rupee.”

A similarly jovial comment to Byrne’s was made by outgoing Conservative 
chancellor Reginald Maudling to incoming chancellor James Callaghan in 1964. 
But it was kept for Callaghan’s memoirs in 1987. As Callaghan wrote of 
Maudling, who had taken some time to pack his bags: “On his way out, he put his 
head round the door carrying a pile of suits under his arm. His comment was 
typical: ‘Sorry, old cock, to leave it in this shape. I suggested to Alec 
[Douglas Home, the outgoing prime minister] that perhaps we should put up the 
Bank Rate but he thought he ought to leave it all to you. Good luck.’”

Now, it is a pity that McDonnell, having started so well in his response to 
the chancellor, should then have led with his chin. The point he was trying to 
make about Osborne’s dealings with communist China over contracts for nuclear 
power stations is a serious one. I find people are baffled as to how a 
political son of Thatcher, who gave privatisation to the world, should be 
relying on a combination of a communist state and a French nationalised 
industry to build nuclear power stations on dubious financial terms in 
circumstances that raise such serious questions about security – which is 
supposed to be an obsession of this government – that they worry the Americans 
too.

Ah, China! We come by a circuitous route to Osborne’s fourth budget in 
12 months, and what has been popularly greeted as a U-turn. This reminds me of 
the time I was invited to the Chinese embassy in London in the early 1970s. I 
was on theFinancial Times in those days. I thought the Chinese wanted my views 
on the economy, but what they were really after was an explanation of strange 
phrases in the press, and the frequent use of the expression U-turn.

As far as I recall, the expression first came into vogue politically in 1972, 
when the Conservative government of Edward Heath completely changed the 
direction of its economic policy. This, notwithstanding the various concessions 
made by the chancellor to his critics last week, is not what Osborne has done. 
There may have been U-turns over specific issues, such as the favourable 
revision of plans for expenditure on the health service and the police, and the 
timing of welfare cuts aimed at the poor, but there has emphaticallynot been a 
U-turn when it comes to Osborne’s overall strategy.

That strategy remains: to reduce the size of the state for ideological 
reasons; to aim at a budget surplus not only on current account – which makes 
sense when, to coin a phrase, “the sun is shining” – but also on capital 
account. The latter, as almost all economists know, does not make sense, and it 
is noteworthy that, for all his rhetoric about “infrastructure” and the 
“northern powerhouse”, Osborne is budgeting for an absurdly small proportion of 
GDP to be devoted to such expenditure.

The idea that the chancellor propagated in his post-statement interview on the 
Today programme – that welfare cuts are needed in order to make room for public 
sector capital investment – is patently absurd. Such investment should be 
financed by long-term borrowing at what are, historically and in practice, 
negligible interest rates. One does not, unless one is a Russian oligarch or 
Middle Eastern potentate, finance the purchase of a house with one year’s 
earnings.

The concessions made by Osborne in response to the OBR’s latest forecasts of 
the probable outturn of the balance between revenue and (previous) plans for 
expenditure are certainly welcome. But, as the OBR itself is only too aware, 
its forecasts – rather like Bank of England governor Mark Carney’s on the 
probable path of interest rates – tend to change markedly from quarter to 
quarter. And tax revenues could slow down if the Bank decides to clamp down on 
the rapid growth of the consumer credit that has been assisting the recovery.

Incidentally, it is characteristic of this slippery chancellor of ours to 
claim that his critics want to run permanent budget deficits. He ought to be 
aware that even dyed-in-the-wool Keynesians such as your correspondent know 
there is a time and a place for deficits, and the Great Recession and its 
aftermath made a sequence of deficits necessary.

Indeed, Osborne himself has, thank goodness, been overseeing a sequence of 
budget deficits. He would not have got where he is today without them. His 
ill-conceived austerity meant, of course, that the deficit was reduced too 
fast, thereby ensuring that we have experienced the slowest recovery on record.

Carney has several times pointed out that fiscal tightening has impeded the 
recovery. And the OBR notes,in its Economic and Fiscal Outlook 
<http://cdn.budgetresponsibility.independent.gov.uk/EFO_November__2015.pdf>, 
that its higher forecast for growth “mainly reflects the government’s decision 
to ease the pace of fiscal tightening”.

I rest my case.
 