
No one is buying the music of artists from TV talent shows any more. It’s 
over. Sales are so bad they’re clearly not even being considered as a 
last-minute purchase at the counter of a petrol station when listening to Katy 
Perry’s Roar on every single radio station is driving you positively barmy.

The sales numbers are dire but we’re still watching the shows. Why? There’s 
not much new that I can add about the merits, or lack of, of singing reality 
shows. It’s fairly obvious to most that these shows are an emotionally 
manipulative television sport and are often deemed to be bad for the artist.

I know all this, yet still watch. I know what I’m being fed and I’m not that 
bothered by the techniques employed because I’ve always loved to belt out a 
dodgy vocal along to an overwrought, overly emotional, ill-chosen song.

But I’m not the target market of the reality singing show. I would never buy 
an album from a winning contestant. These shows and releases are not aimed at 
me. So why then, does your not even your mum or your nan now think the albums 
the artists release are not even worthy of being a stocking filler for 
Christmas?

The problem lies with the format. These dreaded “journey” shows are so good at 
delivering everything they promise that the audience is forced to stop caring 
about the artist the minute it all ends.

Where we once travelled along the contestants’ bumpy road to fame and fortune, 
the viewer is now complicit, approaching these shows in the same way they might 
a fast-food joint: they know exactly what they’re going to get, what it looks 
like and what it tastes like. Once it’s over, they might feel a bit sick and 
silly about how much they’ve consumed, but they’re sated. Most wouldn’t think 
of taking a souvenir from the restaurant as a memento of their experience.

We know exactly what we’re going to get with these reality music shows so 
there’s simply no need to invest. The reason we watch them now is not about the 
artist but about ourselves. We know that watching a tragic back story that 
fills us with the sads on a Sunday night deflects from having to think about 
the horror of waking up and going to work on Monday.

Watching contestants triumphing over insurmountable obstacles makes pairing up 
the socks from the unfolded laundry basket more pleasurable. Sniffing failure a 
mile off while making spaghetti bolognese for dinner is what we’re good at now.

These shows make us experts in a field that frankly we know nothing about. And 
if we’re experts, what have we got to learn from the artist? This is why we 
don’t buy the recordings.

These shows have omitted exactly the bit that makes people give a toss about 
the talent in the first place. The bit where the artist gets to be an artist. 
The TV show is a publicity and marketing dream, linked to record labels, linked 
to tour schedules that were set in stone, linked to artists who want it so bad 
they’ll say yes to everything. It’s perfect on paper.

But it’s all sadly artless. Most viewers are completely aware of what they’re 
being fed. They like it, mostly, but they won’t take their interest any 
further. There is simply no need.

I feel that there’s now not much life left in the TV talent show beast. The 
fat lady, the old lady, the short lady, the skinny lady, every type of lady and 
every type of man, boy and girl have all now sung.
 