
Margaret Drabble says Ed Miliband has lost her vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/04/ed-miliband-vote-kowtow-private-education>
. Seeing her jump ship shocks me, as Drabble over many years has been one the 
great chroniclers of the condition of Britain, her novels filled with women’s 
struggles for fulfilment, wrestling to comprehend the social and political 
dysfunctions of our times. With fierce insight and intelligence, The Radiant 
Way captured the dismal spirit of 1980, as Margaret Thatcher tipped the scales 
against postwar welfare state optimism.

That’s why I am so saddened by her losing the plot, now, of all times, as we 
face a greater assault on the state than anything Thatcher dared try. A 
Conservative win would bring the brutish future laid out in George Osborne’s 
bone-chillingautumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/dec/03/autumn-statement-2015-general-election-george-osborne>
. Drabble’s particular complaint is entirely reasonable: I agree with her on 
the puniness now, as before, of Labour policy on private schools. I’m sure we’d 
agree a score of issues where Labour policies look pusillanimous, hesitant or 
downright cowardly.

Labour never was and may never be the radiant way. “The Labour party is a 
moral crusade or it is nothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/14/harold-wilson-moral-crusade-rally-labour>
,” said Harold Wilson, partly true but also disingenuous from a crafty 
political ducker and diver. Labour is an idea – but it’s also a party engaged 
in a desperate struggle for every vote to cross the line one seat ahead of the 
Tories, to stop the destruction David Cameron intends.

Everyone has their own view about how to win: I am torn from day to day 
between thinking radical boldness is the answer and looking at polling and 
focus groups that warn me to be wary of assuming my own predilections are 
shared by voters who need persuading. Neil Kinnock made some of the best 
political speeches, but he didn’t win.

Drabble was joined in the Guardian by former Camden Labour councillor and 
human rights lawyer Richard Stein, declaring that he is quitting Labour to back 
the Greens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/03/leaving-labour-green-party-social-change>
. I’m alarmed at how many essentially Labour people find reasons why they might 
not vote Labour in May because it’s not left enough. What’s going on? 
Ex-ministers from the New Labour era complain that Labour is further left than 
for many a long year. If only Labour had challenged swelling wealth at the top 
when it was in power: this time there will be a 50p top rate, a mansion tax and 
cuts to tax reliefs and benefits for well-off pensioners. The NHS will be 
rescued by abolishing compulsory competition. And most vital, despite dithering 
over how to present it, Labour has given itself at least a £30bn leeway in 
spending, a huge chunk out of Osborne’s savage £48bn cuts. This spending 
difference is “as significant as I can remember” says Paul Johnson of the 
Institute for Fiscal Studies. So let’s have no “they’re all the same”.

Look at what a Cameron win means. The full implications of Osborne’s plan 
struck home last week. His cuts would keep the state permanently at the size it 
was in the 1930s – 35% of GDP – with councils stripped bare of all but basic 
functions. Local elections would be empty: it won’t matter who runs rump 
services. An unthinkable £12bn is to be cut from benefits, all from working-age 
families, most in work, making food banks a fixture. The most common reason for 
needing food is benefit stoppages: “sanctions” against recipients shot up 
sevenfold under Iain Duncan Smith. The IFS expects government policy to create 
1 million more poor children – that’s the million childrenLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> lifted out of poverty.

The NHS, already seeing a third of contracts gone to the private sector since 
the Health and Social Care Act came in last April, would be barely 
recognisable. The BBC, whose charter renewal comes under daily threat from the
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, would be 
cut back to Rupert Murdoch’s preferred model of a small subscriber service. The 
arts can expect no mercy. Few of the 3,500 pre-school Sure Starts, many already 
stripped back or closed, would survive the next Osborne blitz. Tax cuts for the 
better-off have cost £11bn so far, disguised as helping the poor by raising the 
personal tax threshold. The Tories, tagging after Ukip in a referendum, would 
take us out of the EU.

I’ll stop there, but read the IFS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2014/dec/04/autumn-statement-2014-reaction-politics-live-blog#block-548072aae4b00ed204c0270b>
 andOBR 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/economic-fiscal-outlook-december-2014/> 
forecasts and shudder at what’s to come – not “austerity” but ideological 
shrink-the-state brutality.

If Britain had a civilised proportional voting system to let us choose a party 
closest to our views, allowing new parties to spring up, then voting Green or 
any other small group would be an option. If the people had voted yes for the 
alternative vote, at least we could put any fringe party first, with a 
least-worst backstop – such as Ukip first and Tory second or Green first and 
Labour second. But in their unwisdom, in a no campaign fuelled by Tory money,
the people voted against more choice 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-13297573>.

So we are stuck with a rotten electoral system which, despite growing 
alienation from the old parties, demands cynical tactical voting to keep out 
the worst. And the Cameron Tories are the worst since the war. Until a PR 
voting system is won, disobey the iron dictates of our electoral system at your 
peril. That means, incidentally, that Labour voters must don their nose pegs 
and keep voting Liberal Democrat in Tory areas: if Lib Dem seats fall to 
Cameron he may cross the line first. I am no tribal Labourite: freed of this 
electoral straitjacket, I might vote further left and hope to push a Labour 
coalition leftwards. But it’s not on offer – not in Scotland either. Losing 
Labour seats to the SNP also risks gifting power to Cameron.

Too close to call, Labour stands a good chance of winning by a whisker. This 
is no time to quit, but to come to the aid of the party with donations: no one 
ever agrees with all of any party’s policies. Labour’s disadvantage is holding 
power recently, lacking insurgent freshness. Recent experience of power makes 
Labour wary of the wild opposition promises and downright fakery of Cameron’s 
pre-election posturing.

I regard Miliband as a decent man who starts out with strong good instincts on 
inequality, predatory capitalism and the need to build housing and borrow for 
capital investment. He won the leadership partly because he rejected the Iraq 
war. Has he the grit and the nerve to be a good prime minister? You can never 
tell. But I am absolutely certain that simply by denying the Tories power, a 
Labour government would save Britain from irreparable harm. In the Manichean 
politics of these harsh times, there are only two choices: the rest is escapism.

• This article was amended on 9 December 2014 because an earlier version 
spelled straitjacket as straightjacket.

 