
Hopes of an end to the impasse between Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> and its creditors have appeared to 
evaporate after asurprise intervention from the International Monetary Fund.


Europe's liberal illusions shatter as Greek tragedy plays on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/01/europe-illusions-shatter-as-greek-tragedy-plays-on-austerity>
In a letter - leaked three days before eurozone finance ministers are 
scheduled to discuss how best to put the crisis-plagued country back on its 
feet – IMF chiefChristine Lagarde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christine-lagarde> issued her most explicit 
warning yet: either foreign lenders agree to restructure Greece’s runaway debt 
or the Washington-based organisation will pull out of rescue plans altogether.

“For us to support Greece with a new IMF arrangement, it is essential that the 
financing and debt relief from Greece’s European partners are based on fiscal 
targets that are realistic because they are supported by credible measures to 
reachthem,” she wrote, lamenting the lack of structural reforms underlying 
Athens’ abortive adjustment programme so far.

Six years have elapsed since Greece, revealing a deficit that was four times 
higher than previously thought, received its first loans from a bailout 
programme that has since exceeded more than €240bn (£190bn) in emergency 
funding. Since a third €86bn bailout last summer, talks have been largely 
deadlocked.

Laying bare the differences of view prevailing among those consigned to keep 
the insolvent nation afloat, Lagarde said it was imperative that a lower 
primary surplus goal was achieved.

“We do not believe it will be possible to reach a 3.5% of GDP primary surplus 
[in 2018] by relying on hiking already high taxes levied on a narrow base, 
cutting excessively discretionary spending and counting on one-off measures as 
has been proposed in recent weeks.”

The IMF managing director’s intervention came after the surprise decision of 
the leftist-led government in Athens to put unpopular pension and tax changes 
to a vote on Sunday.

The prospect of such controversial measures being passed so urgently unleashed 
a wave of civil unrest with a 48-hour general strike by private and public 
sector unions bringing Greece to a standstill. Unionists said the measures were 
a “barbaric” eradication of hard-won rights and would be “the last nail in the 
coffin” for workers whose salaries have already been savaged by relentless 
rounds of gruelling austerity.

“They are the worst so far,” said Odysseus Trivalas, president of the public 
sector union ADEDY. “At some point, Greeks won’t be able to take anymore and 
there will be a social explosion.”

Rallies are planned to protest against measures that include instituting a 
national pension of €384 a month, raising social security contributions and 
increasing income tax for high earners. The overhaul of the pension system is 
among the most contentious reforms to date.

In a repeat of the drama that dominated the eurozone last year, Athens faces 
the spectre of default if its fails to honour maturing European Central Bank 
bonds and IMF loans in July.

Long overdue rescue loans worth €5bn are at stake. Receipt of the funds 
depends on completion of a first progress report, or evaluation, of the economy 
that has been drawn out for the past nine months and has stalled over lender 
disagreement. With discord over Athens’ ability to achieve fiscal targets, 
creditors recently upped the ante, demanding an additional contingency package 
of €3.6bn, the equivalent of 2% of GDP.

 “While creditors fight this out, the political and social situation in Athens 
will deteriorate,” said Mujtaba Rahman, head of European analysis at risk 
consultancy Eurasia Group. “Time is running out for creditors to come to an 
agreement.”

The Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, unexpectedly called Sunday’s vote 
before the conclusion of the negotiations in order to placate creditors and 
increase his bargaining power at Monday’s meeting of eurozone finance ministers.

In a first, the ministers are to discuss Greece’s debt load – which at more 
than 180% of GDP by far the highest inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – in addition to fiscal 
adjustment measures that could amount to 5% of GDP if contingency reforms are 
taken. The extra policies, as yet unspecified, will only be enacted if targets 
are not reached but, with its narrow three-seat majority, the Greek government 
has argued they will never get through parliament.

“Tsipras is looking to demonstrate to Greek voters that he and his government 
have done their part, and that the ball, namely that of debt relief, now lies 
squarely with the Europeans,” said Rahman.

“The subliminal message to creditors [in Sunday’s ballot] is therefore this: 
if you insist on contingency measures, you will end up with the collapse of my 
government and early elections.”

Along with Britain’s 23 June referendum on EU membership, that could end up 
being a “big headache” for Europe, he added.
 