
The IMF’s handling of the financial crisis in the eurozone has been criticised 
by the organisation’s own independent watchdog in a report that says the fund 
failed to spot the scale of the problem, was guilty of over-optimistic 
forecasts and left the impression that it was treatingEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> differently.

While accepting that sorting out the problems of Greece, Ireland and Portugal 
“posed extraordinary challenges”, the IMF’sIndependent Evaluation Office 
<http://www.brettonwoodsproject.org/2015/02/guide-imfs-independent-evaluation-office/>
 (IEO) said the fund had missed the buildup of banking system risks in some 
countries and shared the widely held “Europe is different” mindset.

The report looked into how the IMF handled the eurozone crisis, which began 
with theMay 2010 bailout of Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/may/05/greece-debt-crisis-timeline>, 
but subsequently spread to Ireland, Portugal and Cyprus.

It found that the “IMF’s pre-crisis surveillance identified the right issues 
but did not foresee the magnitude of the risks that would later become 
paramount”.

The IEO added that by May 2010 the fund was worried about the risks of 
contagion and had to “modify” its own rules to allow exceptional financing for 
the government in Athens.

The terms of the bailouts for stricken eurozone countries were organised by 
the so-calledtroika <http://www.troikawatch.net/what-is-the-troika/> of the 
IMF, the European commission and the European Central Bank. According to the 
IEO this was an efficient mechanism for conducting discussions with governments 
but at the expense of the IMF’s “characteristic agility as a crisis manager”.


Greece has seen the size of its economy shrink by about 30% over the past six 
years, a much worse performance than the fund anticipated. The IEO concluded 
that “IMF-supported programmes inGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> and Portugal incorporated overly 
optimistic growth projections; lessons from past crises were not always 
applied”.

Noting that conducting the evaluation had been “challenging”, the IEO said 
there had been a lack of clarity about what it could or could not evaluate. 
“The IMF’s handling of the euro area crisis raised issues of accountability and 
transparency, which helped create the perception that the IMF treated Europe 
differently.”

The IEO made five specific recommendations, including that the fund’s 
management and executive board should develop procedures to limit political 
meddling in the organisation’s technical analysis; that processes should be 
strengthened to ensure agreed procedures are followed and only changed after 
careful deliberation; and that there should be a renewed commitment to 
accountability and transparency.

Christine Lagarde <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christine-lagarde>, the 
fund’s managing director, said: “Overall, the conclusion I draw is that the 
fund’s involvement in the euro area crisis has been a qualified success.”

Lagarde added that the crisis in the euro area was unprecedented and that 
fund-supported programmes had “succeeded in buying time to build firewalls, 
preventing the crisis from spreading, and restoring growth and market access in 
three out of four cases” (Ireland, Portugal and Cyprus).

The IMF managing director admitted that with the benefit of hindsight, 
assumptions about growth in Greece had proved much too optimistic.

“Greece, however, was unique: while initial economic targets proved overly 
ambitious, the programme was beset by recurrent political crises, pushback from 
vested interests, and severe implementation problems that led to a much deeper 
than expected output contraction.

“On the other hand, Greece undertook enormous adjustment with unprecedented 
assistance from its international partners. This enabled Greece to remain a 
member of the euro area – a key goal for Greece and the euro area members.”

Lagarde said she did not accept that there had been political interference in 
the fund’s technical analysis but gave the IEO recommendations either full or 
qualified backing.

“In summary, the crisis in the euro area was extraordinary,” Lagarde said. “It 
posed unprecedented challenges that, with the global financial crisis providing 
tinder, could have rapidly spread through Europe and beyond. The fund, in 
conjunction with our membership, our partners in Europe, and the wider global 
community, took steps that averted what could have been a much more severe 
European and even global crisis.”

 