
When financial regulators say the European banking system is safe from another 
major crash they are talking about the funds banks can use to offset their 
losses.

The 31 biggest banks hold an aggregate €1tn (£700bn) of shareholder funds, and 
account for about 75% of the European banking system by assets. Across all 
banks, it’s fair to say the total equity reaches €1.35tn.

IMF warns of fresh financial crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/imf-warns-fresh-financial-crisis-global-stability-report-eurozone-banks>
Total losses attributed to European banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/europeanbanks> in the last financial 
crash were around €1tn, so a repeat of the devastation caused in 2008 could be 
withstood by just calling on shareholders to sacrifice their equity.

If the crash cost more than €1tn, banks can call on the €8tn of debts to 
bondholders, which could be cancelled in part or in their entirety, freeing up 
cash from interest payments to safeguard depositors. This is a substantial 
extra buffer. No wonder officials in Brussels, European Central Bank head Mario 
Draghi and the UK’s regulator, the Bank of England, feel confident a taxpayer 
bailout will never again be required.

So it might seem odd that the International Monetary Fund has sounded a 
warning in its latest financial stability report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/imf-warns-fresh-financial-crisis-global-stability-report-eurozone-banks>
 about the parlous state of the European banking system.

It said more should be done to tackle the €900bn of non-performing loans on 
the books of eurozone banks. It also said there were too many banks chasing too 
little business and some should be wound up.

In Britain this warning might verge on the bizarre. The government wants more 
banks and has already pushed Lloyds, HSBC and RBS to take a tough line on bad 
loans. Looking back to 2009, we can see that the Labour government went further 
than almost all its European counterparts in separating banks from their bad 
loans to clean up the system.

But the IMF is not talking so much about the UK as Italy and other countries 
in the eurozone periphery. Italy has propped up a forlorn bunch of regional 
banks that have done little to tackle loans that will never be repaid. Zombie 
businesses that spend all their spare cash on interest payments, denying them 
the funds for investment, litter the Italian manufacturing sector, which 
remains vast.

A clearout of bad loans would precipitate mass insolvencies among business 
customers that depend on cheap funding. Panic would ensue.

Italian banks might have the funds to manage the transition if the ECB could 
boost interest rates and help their profitability. As it is, the ECB has 
introduced negative deposit rates, which Italian banks must pay to keep funds 
with the ECB. This increases their costs and should be passed to customers for 
holding their money. Milan, Turin and Siena’s finest institutions have so far 
refused, squeezing their profit margins and putting their solvency in doubt

It is estimated that bad loans in Italy account for more than a third of the 
€900bn total, which means that a €6bn rescue fund put forward by Rome is 
desperately inadequate.

So the IMF is less interested in the aggregate figures for European bank 
funding and more concerned about the weakest link, which experience tells us 
can set off a chain reaction, bringing good banks down with the bad. For that 
reason the IMF should be applauded. The difficulty is the trap set by eurozone 
politicians that have come to rely on cheap ECB funds to lubricate their 
economies and who ignore the damage this does to their banks.

Without a functioning banking system across the whole of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, business investment will 
remain flat and growth weak. And the danger of another crash will continue to 
lurk in the background.
 