
Our diversity programme has, over the past two years, had a particular focus 
on increasing the diversity of our UK audience, but more concentration is now 
going into improving diversity and inclusion within GNM itself.

One of the objectives of our diversity and inclusions strategy is to increase 
the diverse applicant pool for all new job vacancies by 10% during the current 
financial year.

A training programme on "unconscious bias" is being developed to assist 
managers interviewing for roles within GNM.

This is in response to the fact that the percentage of staff from diverse 
backgrounds has levelled off due, partly, to the numbers of staff, minority and 
mainstream, leaving the organisation as part of overall structural changes.

There was a marginal improvement around ethnicity to 9.6% in the last 
financial year, which is below the national average of 12%. However, our 
recruitment rate for members of ethnic groups improved to 15% between January 
2011 and January 2012.

GNM's head of diversity and inclusion, Yasir Mirza, has also been working to 
support the development of programmes in the commercial parts of the business.

A diversity content hub <http://careers.theguardian.com/diversity> has been 
created on the Guardian's business-to-business careers network that generates 
debate on a host of issues ranging from the challenges faced by minority ethnic 
and disabled graduates, to the problems faced by women when they return to work 
after having children.

Also, a marketing campaign has been created to target Asian "progressives" in 
an attempt to attract new readership from diverse backgrounds. This will be 
pegged to the film season in September 2012.

Mirza continues to work with senior editors on two interconnecting programmes 
to stimulate new readership from diverse sections of society in an attempt to 
increase our market share in this area.

The strategy is to help ensure that people from all minority backgrounds, 
covering the strands of ethnicity, gender, disability, sexual orientation, age, 
religion and belief, feel affiliated to the Guardian and Observer, and that 
they become their papers – and website – of choice.

The overall aim is to ensure our editorial coverage of these groups is more 
inclusive and representative and moves away from stereotypes and labelling. The 
initiatives also aim to increase the breadth and depth of minority voices 
within our papers and online.

Journalism can be a powerful tool in creating dialogue, understanding and 
cohesion, while promoting pluralism. If we open up our platform to draw in 
often unheard, marginalised voices, then this presents the opportunity to 
enrich our coverage, and fulfils our commitment to social justice and open 
journalism, which is underpinned by the Scott Trust values.

These initiatives aim to broaden our feature coverage, and to inform our 
commissioning editors of stories that we are not yet telling. For this reason, 
the editorial diversity initiatives have focused on the G2, features, culture, 
comment, Weekend, Society and sport sections.

The programmes are:

Minority writers' workshops

These workshops are designed to bring diverse voices into our freelance 
contributor base. We have run advertisements across the paper, website and a 
wide range of minority press outlets asking people from diverse backgrounds to 
send in story ideas to the G2, culture, comment, sport, Weekend and Society 
sections. We want to make this process as inclusive as possible, yet attract 
serious writers or those aspiring to be.

We ran three minority writers' workshops in the last financial year. These are 
designed to inject diverse voices into our freelance contributor base. 
Advertisements are run across our paper, website, and a wide range of minority 
press asking people from diverse backgrounds to send in three pitches.

The workshops resulted in 32 commissions in G2, culture, comment, CiF, news, 
and Society, with many writers being commissioned to write more than once 
piece. This is only marginally less than the 35 commissions in the previous 
year.

Diversity ambassador programme

The Guardian launched this programme two years ago, partnering with 70 
minority voluntary and charity organisations that have reach and leverage with 
minority communities. We created a relationship, whereby these organisations 
advocate on our behalf as an employer and paper of choice, consult on our 
inclusion of the groups in our coverage, and create a new channel for new 
stories by drawing in marginalised voices.

In May 2012, the members of the ambassador programme took part in a series of 
focus groups with the editorial comment desk on how we can better commission 
articles on race and Islam, as well as encouraging more responses in the 
comments section below articles.

The participants explored, with our editors, ways of tackling the large number 
of Islamaphobic and racist comments under particular comment articles, and how 
best to encourage their diverse networks to contribute to our comment threads.

Inclusive culture

A series of internal events in the fields of food, art, music and theatre were 
held during the last financial year with the aim of creating a more inclusive, 
interactive, fun and learning environment for staff during lunchtimes. The 
learning points from this initiative have been merged into our current 
"employer branding" project and employee engagement work.

A "buddy" scheme is also in the process of being developed as a result of this 
inclusion agenda.

Eight culture season events took place. Each of the monthly events attracted 
between 50-100 staff.
 