
In 15 years of practicing medicine, I have had one conversation about 
euthanasia and a handful about medical marijuana. Alternative therapy comes up 
most days but the vast majority of my conversations as an oncologist are about 
prolonging life. They are about doing the utmost to extract the last drops from 
a finite life, if not for their own sake then for the sake of a child’s 
graduation, a grandchild’s birth, a friend’s wedding.

The miracle my patients yearn for is not deliverance from their terrible 
disease but a little more time to cherish life, with all its shortcomings. They 
say that the drudgery of life beats the anonymity of death.

Philip Nitschke banned from promoting voluntary euthanasia as a doctor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/26/philip-nitschke-banned-from-promoting-voluntary-euthanasia>
Yet as I walked out of a parliamentary committee hearing on end of life 
choices, a woman confronted me and nearly spat at me with silent rage.

“How dare doctors tell me I am not allowed to die?” she said.

Although this had not been the essence of my submission, her anger was 
palpable as she held out photos of her emaciated sister.

“I’m sorry,” I replied. 

“Sorry isn’t good enough!” she scoffed. 

I saw that she viewed the medical profession as the last bastion against the 
dignified death her sister was owed.

The encounter was still on my mind when I met a favourite patient. He was 
gaunt and frail, living from one morphine dose to the next. A proud farmer who 
used to tame intemperate bulls, he couldn’t lift a glass of water now.

“I’ll die when I die,” he shrugged, “but I don’t want my doctor to kill me.” 

This man held a strong opinion that no doctor should perform the dual role of 
sustaining and extinguishing life.

These two accounts illustrate the real dilemma faced by many in the medical 
profession when it comes to doctor-assisted euthanasia. Our lived experience 
rarely matches the febrile and polarising debate occurring in the community.

When discussing euthanasia, heavy emphasis is put on the word “voluntary”. Yet 
we know that a host of everyday decisions taken by patients raise questions 
about their true voluntariness. Sure, patients will sign consent forms and nod 
at instructions but it’s easily and painfully evident how little they really 
understand about the consequences of their decisions. This is not to diminish 
their acumen but simply to observe that health literacy is woeful and thus its 
corollary is deep trust in a doctor’s word. Shared decision-making is laudable 
but one of the most frequent phrases in medicine remains, “You’re the doctor, 
you know best.”

Scant explanation and poor understanding of their options leads patients to 
give consent for unjustified procedures but also to forego necessary 
interventions. A geriatrician recently saved the life of an elderly patient who 
had been denied powerful antibiotics for her pneumonia because others did not 
deem her wheelchair-bound life worth living. The woman had simply accepted that 
she had an incurable condition and was ready to die.

An acutely confused octogenarian was shunted to a secluded nursing home by his 
self-appointed guardian who coveted his estate. A vigilant nephew realised that 
a mockery had been made of the informed consent process in a hospital that had 
been more interested in processing him than caring for him.

The experience in Oregon, the Netherlands and Switzerland, where euthanasia is 
legal, has shown that people seek a say over their end even if they don’t 
ultimately use the option. Australia’s euthanasia debate borrows heavily from 
the discourse about personal autonomy and informed consent that underpins 
euthanasia in these predominantly white, rich and homogenous societies. But we 
should be cautious about extrapolating this to the vastly different, 
multicultural Australian landscape.

The majority of my patients are dying, therefore conversations about how they 
will die are routine.

Take my hospital, for example, situated in the state’s most ethnically diverse 
community. 67% of the population was born overseas in one of an impressive list 
of 156 countries. A staggering 71% of people don’t speak English as a first 
language. 14% don’t speak it fluently or at all. New migrants continue to flock 
here, but with entrenched poverty and high unemployment, this is no Switzerland.

The majority of my patients are dying, therefore conversations about how they 
will die are routine. Since so many patients are poor, malnourished, illiterate 
and socially disadvantaged in every imaginable way, their end of life 
experience can be particularly fraught. But I am continually surprised by their 
tenacity and spirit and the will to live. They don’t deny their impending fate 
but derive comfort from simple acts of love and care. Even in their final days, 
they thrive on friendship and community. Despite wanting a miracle cure and 
hearing there isn’t one, my patients don’t want to hasten death. I daresay many 
would be perplexed by the notion of euthanasia.

I once treated a young father who decided to stop futile chemotherapy. 
Somewhat touchingly, he used to call me from his long drives to say that it was 
the smartest decision he ever made. In many ways, he was the ideal patient: 
gracious, fearless and meticulously organised, down to the eulogy. Which is why 
I was dumbfounded when he suddenly turned up at the hospital one evening in an 
ambulance, to ask me one final question.

“Doc, there is no chance of a liver transplant, I suppose?”

“No, I am afraid not,” I replied, heart in mouth.

“That’s OK, just thought I’d check.”

Most [patients] don’t seek euthanasia but ask to live their life with dignity.

Bundled back in the ambulance, he went home and died that very night. I 
chastised myself for somehow having misled him but then I realised that it 
wasn’t anyone’s fault; this was the triumph of hope over reality, a 
demonstration of man’s survival instinct even in the fading hours.

Hope is the reason why so many patients pursue barely effective treatment 
rather than do nothing. Patients routinely accept death as a side effect of 
treatment if it means clutching at a minuscule chance of life. Most don’t seek 
euthanasia but ask to live their life with dignity. For the sake of this 
overwhelming majority of patients, it’s critical that we elevate the importance 
of compassionate end of life care, which means improving communication and 
advocating for more practical supports for patients and carers.

Palliative care does not and cannot relieve everyone’s symptoms all the time. 
It’s also better at relieving physical symptoms than addressing existential 
anguish. And yet, it is this anguish that is universal, which pills and potions 
can’t banish. Why now, why me? What has my child done to deserve this fate? How 
can I survive war but get cancer? And just as existential anguish stems from 
being human, communion with fellow humans turns out to be the best antidote.

The terminally ill patients who suffer doubly are those who are ostracised by 
their relatives, estranged from their children, divorced by their spouse and 
left to shoulder their burden alone. There is no easy solution to this 
intractable problem, which is really a failure of modern society and its 
fraying relationships rather than a limitation of medicine. Downplaying the 
value of palliative care will confuse patients and do them a disservice.

It is difficult to witness suffering but deny the sufferer a say in ending it. 
It’s impossible to look a dying patient in the eye and invoke the merits of 
redemptive suffering. But there is no dishonour in recognising the clash of the 
intellectual case for euthanasia with its moral and spiritual implications. Nor 
is there shame in contemplating the thorny elements that will turn principle 
into practice.The Economist observes  
<http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21656122-campaigns-let-doctors-help-suffering-and-terminally-ill-die-are-gathering-momentum>
that even where there is support for euthanasia, some people fall away when 
asked to consider the details.

On assisted dying, California will be a test site for the world | Andrew Brown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/20/assisted-dying-california-test-site-religious-dogma>
It’s facile to cast doctors as heroes or villains in the pitched battle over 
euthanasia because the truth is they are neither. They are simply trying to 
figure out the right way of fulfilling their duty to society in a changing 
world. They might well ask how Aboriginal patients might view euthanasia or how 
they would explain the concept to a Muslim, Jewish, Hindu or Buddhist patient, 
all regular users of the Australian healthcare system. And how will they 
address the burgeoning numbers of dementia patients who are deemed to be 
suffering but whose voluntary capacity has long expired? “The only way is if 
they take their life when they are still well,” is how one specialist puts it 
blandly.

Unfortunately, the political rhetoric around euthanasia has made it a “wedge 
issue” and thus foreclosed the more nuanced considerations that euthanasia 
merits. If society legalises euthanasia, doctors will respect the law and be 
their patients’ best advocate here too. But in getting there, it’s nothing less 
than our duty to think freely, debate openly and interrogate the issue from 
every possible angle. There is a particularly good reason to tune in to the 
quieter voices and heed the needs of the traditionally marginalised.

As far as life and death decisions go, there couldn’t be a more consequential 
one for society. We will want to know that our conclusion on euthanasia was in 
the best interests of all Australians.
 