
Look around the country now and life seems sweet. The economy is booming, with 
inflation at its lowest level since the Beatles ruled the pop charts, and fewer 
people are without work than when we last wore tank tops.

It all seems a terrific bonus, considering that talk this time last year was 
of imminent recession. But, as prosperity is increasing, debt agencies are 
reporting disturbing new trends in the problems they are being asked to deal 
with.

Traditionally, the number one reason given by debt advice agencies for the 
difficulties their clients encountered with borrowing was a change in financial 
circumstances, such as unemployment, illness or marriage breakdown.

These all remain major triggers for debt problems. But the National 
Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux (Nacab), which runs the CAB counselling 
service (dealing with 18 per cent more cases of consumer debt last year than in 
1997), says that, in an increasing number of cases, the root cause is the 
amount people are able to borrow.

For many, the sheer level of debt is leaving too little margin against 
financial calamity. Sue Edwards, a money advice specialist with Nacab, says: 
'We are beginning to see people who have taken on more credit because it's 
there. It's not unusual to see people with £20,000 to £30,000 of consumer 
credit, whereas £10,000 was a lot in the Eighties.'

The Consumer Credit Counselling Service, a specialist debt counselling 
service, says its average client now has debt of £20,000 owed to nine 
companies. Six years ago the average debt was £15,000.

Earlier this year, Cash revealed the increasing difficulty many young people 
are experiencing with debt, and all debt advisers are now reporting sharp 
increases in problems in this age group. Edwards says that, where a CAB's 
typical client was traditionally someone on a low income, now they are just as 
likely to be a young person earning around the average wage of £20,000.

Bank of England statistics show that we now owe £109 billion on credit cards, 
personal loans and other forms of consumer debt. The figure is 14 per cent 
higher than a year ago. A credit card company, People's Bank of Connecticut, 
recently produced statistics showing that, of the adult population, 16.5 
million have some form of unsecured borrowing, so the average debt among 
borrowers is £6,362.

This study also showed an increasing tendency to use cards to supplement 
income.

'The biggest increase in the use of credit cards since 1994 has been in taking 
cash advances on credit cards, through either loans or ATMs [cash machines].' 
There has been a rise in such borrowing from £3.1bn to £7.4bn, said People's 
Bank. 'This now represents 10 per cent of total credit-card turnover and shows 
that consumers are beginning to use their cards as a form of borrowing rather 
than just a means of payment.'

People's Bank's statistics were produced to promote its own card; the 
conclusion from its research being that Britons could save £1.4bn by switching 
to one of its low-rate cards. The bank certainly does offer some of the lowest 
rates in the market, but interest is still interest and it is the proliferation 
of new cards, mainly from the US, that is thought to be contributing to our 
increased enthusiasm for credit. There are now more than 70 credit cards 
available in the UK, and that is before you count gold and platinum cards for 
higher earners, store cards for shoppers and 'affinity' cards for charities, 
unions and other special-interest groups.

No doubt falling unemployment has increased our financial confidence; memories 
of the recession of the early Nineties are fading and many of today's young 
credit-card holders are too young to remember that downturn.

But debt counsellors are concerned that credit is being handed out too freely. 
Figures in the credit card industry suggest that up to 30 per cent of 
applications are turned down; the market leader, Barclaycard, says its refusal 
rate is one in two at present. But lenders each have their own individual 
scoring methods, so where one may happily hand out a card, another will turn 
that applicant away. They all argue that they are scrupulously careful in 
vetting applicants, but the experience of individuals like Simon (see the Cash 
case study), and the average of nine individual debts clocked up by CCCS 
clients, suggests it is easy to obtain a string of cards and loans.

Before a lender decides whether to give credit, it will look at information 
held by the two credit reference agencies, Equifax and Experian. All lenders 
have access to 'black' information showing whether someone has county court 
judgments for bad debt, or is behind with payments on existing commitments. 
They can also see whether you have recently applied for several cards or loans. 
But the agencies maintain relatively little 'white' information, showing how 
well someone is doing with their credit and loans.

While it is possible to see whether someone has cards and loans, what their 
potential credit limit is and whether they are up to date with minimum 
payments, it is not possible to tell whether that person is a habitual borrower 
or repays in full each month. A further inadequacy of the system is that 
several major lenders, including some high-street banks, do not contribute such 
information. Steve Williams, a risk management director at Barclaycard, which 
does contribute 'white' data, says: 'From a risk director's point of view, that 
is information I would love to see.' Despite the inadequacies, the industry 
claims that it does not hand out cards willy-nilly.

Nick Cobban of the Credit Card Research Group, which represents the card 
industry, says: 'One factor is how many cards you have. It works in your favour 
if you have one or two, but against you if you have five or six.' Another 
feature of today's viciously competitive card market is the propensity of card 
issuers to regularly increase a borrower's credit limit if it looks as though 
they can handle their commitments. Williams is critical of some new card 
companies who, he says, are promoting credit limits of up to £25,000. Lenders 
are adamant they do not do so freely: Barclaycard, for example, says a steadily 
rising debt will militate against an increased limit.

But debt advisers regularly see clients whose experience contradicts lenders' 
assertions. Sue Edwards of Nacab questions the amount of credit people manage 
to clock up. 'You wonder how much the card companies credit people.' Nick 
Pearson, a former money adviser and now spokesman for the Federation of 
Independent Advice Centres, believes it is too easy to blame lenders. 'You 
could go out and run up £25,000 without any trouble. It's called fraud.'

In the US, individuals have, on average, four to five cards, against one to 
two in the UK, which is why US card companies are courting the 'potential' of 
the UK market. If we follow the US, we will sign up for more cards and more 
debt.

Andrew Dilnot, director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies, who recently 
looked at the UK's increasing love affair with credit for a radio documentary, 
believes there may be a case for better regulation of the methods used for 
granting credit although, he adds: 'The trade-off between privacy and sharing 
of information is tricky.' He questions whether it is reasonable to expect the 
debtor to repay borrowing if the lending was irresponsible. 'You have to ask 
questions about what kind of contract it was.'

Malcolm Hurlston, representing the Consumer Credit Counselling Service, says 
that improved education about handling money is vital to helping people control 
their debts. 'With sensible borrowing and a sensible industry, a higher level 
of borrowing is sustainable without the roof falling in.'

However, it is likely that the roof will collapse on more individuals before 
we reach a happy coexistence with credit. Unemployment may be at a 19-year low, 
but this does not mean that employment is stable. Indeed, for many people, 
incomes now fluctuate. Nacab's recently published annual report highlights the 
case of a 21-year-old who had debts of £9,500. Her problems began when she 
moved jobs and the new company did not pay her. Life got tougher when she 
became pregnant and could not work, although with Nacab help, she has now 
negotiated a low level of repayment.

The Government is toasting low levels of inflation in the economy, but for 
wage earners this also means low pay rises and, for older people, meagre 
increases in state pensions. The People's Bank survey noted a willingness among 
people aged over 65 to borrow, and suggested this could be a way of making ends 
meet on low incomes. And although low inflation should, in theory, mean small 
increases in the price of essential items, it does not tell the whole story 
about the state of the nation's personal finances.

Pensioners' incomes have been falling dramatically in real terms compared with 
the early Eighties because state pensions no longer increase in line with 
average earnings. And, for those still working, there is little job security in 
today's employment market.

So, while the economic statistics paint a rosy picture, the reality is that 
increasing numbers of people will come to view their credit cards as inflexible 
enemies.
 