
There are two things about the new chairman of the BBC’s top board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/sir-david-clementi-bbc-chair-unitary-board-trust-bank-of-england>
 that make eyebrows twitch. One is the fact that Sir David Clementi, former 
chair of the Pru as well as a former deputy governor of the Bank of England, 
has absolutely nil experience of broadcasting or its pulsating, competitive 
digital future.

He’s a 67-year-old City finance chap and chartered accountant of familiarly 
impeccable pedigree (Winchester, Oxford, Harvard Business School; his dad an 
air vice-marshal, his grandpa a governor of Hong Kong).

There’s diversity – not to mention social mobility – taking a cold bath. But 
look closely, too, at the wheels within wheels that made him the first leader 
of the latest government attempt at aBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>
 governance structure that keeps everyone – from No 10 to a snarling Fleet 
Street – tolerably happy.

Entire responsibility for BBC regulation will pass to Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> this spring. No more separate trusts 
or governors. One board will run everything, from making books balance to 
setting overarching strategies. The fate of the BBC will depend on its wisdom 
and innovatory zeal. It’s a far more normal assignment of responsibilities. 
This board is in charge. That’s why its leadership is so crucial, why it needs 
a dose of the vision thing, and why it surely needs an experienced media 
player. But see what the system has provided instead.

Clementi has regulatory form. His last but one report was on legal service 
provision. His report on BBC regulation is full of operating frameworks, 
service agreements, regional assessments and prevailing devices to keeping 
licence fee payers satisfied. All of that should go to Ofcom, he advised, fully 
anticipating HMG consent. His advice on top board pro-activity was more 
limited, though.

He had views about how Ofcom should organise its new responsibilities. Create 
a separate BBC monitoring board on the model (if you please) of the Bank of 
England advisory committee. (Advice disregarded.) And his idea for the division 
between outside appointees and BBC nominees on the unitary board was 
numerically adjusted, after Broadcasting House protests. But his future was all 
arrangement and no imagination.

That, to be fair, was the job he was asked to do. But it’s not quite the job 
he’s been appointed to now. Who chose Clementi to report on BBC governance in 
the first place? The Department of Culture. Who sat on the panel that put him 
forward for the chairman’s role? The permanent secretary at DCMS, not to 
mention the ex-head of Ofcom. Who approved his elevation? The culture secretary 
and then the PM.

There are arm’s-length elements, of course. That panel was chaired by an 
ex-head of defence procurement, along with a former private secretary to the 
Queen. But once Clementi had his first regulatory task (in 2015) there’s 
something seamless to what followed.

This is a BBC chief of the kind Whitehall thinks best. See how Dame Deirdre 
Hutton, “queen of the quangos”, was runner-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/22/queen-of-quangos-deirdre-hutton-emerges-as-bbc-chair-contender>
. This is the kind of non-exciting BBC board Whitehall wants: one where 
ministers have ways of taking control.

Of course no one will say anything like that in public. The director general 
and the head of the outgoing trust lead congratulations to Clementi. He’s a 
pleasant, intelligent, very numerate fellow. But the herald of some new dawn at 
a challenging time for public service broadcasting? Pass the old tin whistle …
 