
Father’s Day is on Sunday. “So what?” I hear some overstretched mothers out 
there muttering. For fathers can feel like something of an optional extra 
nowadays. Once, the place of fathers was at the apex of the familial pyramid. 
The justification was that they earned the money, often in dangerous, miserable 
or physically demanding jobs. If there was a war, they fought it. They made 
some sort of compensation for the fact that they did not give birth or look 
after children, by sometimes putting their life on the line – just as women did 
when they went into childbirth.

This world has mostly disappeared – in this country at least. Mothers, victims 
of centuries of sexism, are acknowledged as having the same abilities and 
potential as fathers in every arena. The majority of men still earn the main 
household wage in families but this is no longer enough to secure the status 
that used to come with the honorific of “breadwinner”. On the contrary, as 
often as not, the chance to get out of the house and away from the coalface of 
childrearing is now seen as a form of escape or privilege. So what is left to 
celebrate about fathers?

One or two things still spring to mind. They are most uncontroversially and 
empirically valuable when it comes to parenting boys. Survey after survey has 
shown that families with boys who lose the male role model after separation 
tend to have behavioural and educational difficulties. Fathers are crucial role 
models in teaching boys how to be good men.

Fathers have also had to adapt to one of the most rapid and singular shifts in 
social organisation ever – the just and overdue rise of feminism. There are a 
few men who complain that this has gone too far – that despite all the real and 
thankless privations of childrearing, the commonality and companionship some 
modern stay-at-home mothers enjoy at the playground, school gates or coffee 
shop is denied to most working fathers (who may be sweating it out a windowless 
office somewhere). Yet most haven’t chosen to sulk – they have got on with it 
without much fuss.

Single fathers: UK statistics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2013/jun/13/single-fathers-uk-statistics>
There are other matters that fathers have borne – not always lightly. Think of 
all those who suffer from the principle that parenting should be the sole 
exception to the rule of men and women being equal before the law. The courts 
continue to think of the mother as the “natural” parent. Thus, men are 
sometimes relegated after a separation to visitation rights every other weekend 
– or worse, if the mother moves elsewhere with the children or remarries.

The fact that more than half of single dads – and there are more than a 
million of them – don’t maintain regular contact with their children after 
divorce or separation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2013/nov/20/non-resident-dads-relationship-children>
 may as often as not be out of negotiating impossible hurdles rather than 
tardiness on their part. Let’s give a thought on Father’s Day, then, to those 
loving, stoic and determined fathers who won’t give up on their parental role, 
despite all the discouragements and disappointments.

More generally, fathers have become better parents than their own fathers. 
They are more emotionally intelligent. They have taken on many of the 
traditional functions of motherhood – cooking, cleaning, childcare – not to an 
equal extent and not to a sufficient extent, but most have tried hard. 
They have changed, and changed radically, riding the wind of social progress 
with equanimity.

So let’s hear it for fathers. They have been asked to learn a new way of being 
in the world and by and large most of them have risen to the challenge with 
some aplomb. For one day a year at least, a celebration is surely not too much 
to ask. In return, for the other 364 days of the year, we’ll shut up and carry 
on apologising. But every dog has its day – and Father’s Day is ours. I, for 
one, am damn sure I’m going make the most of it.

If it’s OK with my wife and kids, that is.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 