
The easy saver account at my bank pays a princely 0.25% interest. If I open up 
its cash Isa and take advantage of my tax-free allowance instead, the rate 
moves up to 0.8%. If I am prepared to move the money and put it in the very 
highest paying instant savings account in the market, the amount of interest 
crawls up to just 1.65% – and that from a bank even I have never heard of. On 
top of this, the Bank of England, at its latest monthly meeting this week, 
decided yet again to hold the base rate at 0.5%. With no sign of ever getting a 
decent return on my cash, I have finally capitulated.

For years we have written in Guardian Money about the tantalising rates on 
offer from “peer-to-peer” lenders. These are the internet-only operations which 
offer a sort of lonely hearts service for people who have money, matching them 
up with people who want to borrow it. By cutting out the banks they offer much 
higher rates of interest.

First out of the blocks in 2004 was Zopa <http://www.zopa.com/>, and it has 
since had £1bn come through its doors.RateSetter <https://www.ratesetter.com/> 
andFunding Circle <https://www.fundingcircle.com/uk/> are probably the best 
known names among the many P2P operators that have launched since, with varying 
success. Rates on offer vary from 3% to north of 8%, depending on the credit 
quality (or not) of the borrower. More recent arrivals such asFolk2Folk 
<https://www.folk2folk.com/> promise 6.5% interest, claiming that this is rock 
solid and secured against property.

With no sign of ever getting a decent return on my cash, I have finally 
capitulated

But like 99% of savers, I’ve thought, yes, interesting, but … too risky. No 
Financial Services Compensation Scheme protection; no branch where I can pop 
down and demand my money back. Instead, my cash temporarily sits on some server 
in Greenland, its return dependent on the fancy metrics used to discern if an 
applicant will pay me back or not. Worse, the P2P lenders generally want you to 
lock your money away for three to five years – terms often longer than the 
company has been in existence.

But last month I took the plunge. RateSetter has an account which locks your 
money away for just one month and pays interest of around 3%-3.5% (it dips up 
and down hour by hour as lenders and borrowers are matched up). It was 
shockingly easy to open – in little more than three minutes I had an account 
and transferred across £5,000. Matching it with borrowers took rather longer – 
another 24 hours – but I was told I would earn 3.1%.

A month later I received my first statement. And what a huge disappointment it 
was. My £5,000 had earned a miserable £4.51 – equivalent to just 1% interest 
rather than the £12.92 implied by the 3.1% rate I was promised. Fortunately, 
when I checked again two days later it was looking more realistic: my account 
showed interest paid of £12.42. Meanwhile, the money has been automatically 
reinvested for another month, this time achieving (I’m told) 3.3%.

I asked RateSetter to explain how I got £12.42 rather than £12.92. I got a 
comprehensive explanation, but in short, it’s complicated – to do with maturity 
dates on various loans taken by borrowers, one of which one finished a day 
earlier than another.

From next April savers will be able to put as much as £15,240 into a P2P Isa 
and shelter it tax-free

My conclusion? I’m rather keen on it. A colleague has been with Zopa for years 
and has lost just £7 in borrower defaults. On the plus side, the P2P sector, 
while unlikely to ever be covered by the FSCS, has had an endorsement from 
financial regulators, of sorts. From next April savers will be able to put as 
much as £15,240 into a P2P Isa and shelter it tax-free. The predictions are for 
a huge new influx of money, and a tiny part of it will probably be mine.

That said, if there is one thing we have learned from the financial crisis, 
it’s that as much as we may hate the big banks, we know they will always be 
rescued by the government. Lloyds is “systemically important” to the UK 
financial set up; Zopa and RateSetter are not. There will be no government 
lifeboat to rescue you if they sink.
 