
They almost became extinct in the wake of the credit crunch, and were once 
branded a “ticking timebomb” 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201012/cmselect/cmtreasy/uc1895-i/uc189501.htm>
 by the City regulator. However, interest-only mortgages have begun moving back 
into the mainstream.

This week an Essex-based building society announced that teachers, doctors and 
lawyers are among the professions being offered the chance to sign up for a 
mortgage on an interest-only basis.

Saffron building society is the latest in a line of lenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/12/interest-only-mortgages-house-prices-controversial-loans>
 to tentatively re-enter this market or relax their criteria. However, the 
hurdles a borrower must jump to qualify for one of these mortgages are often 
high. In many cases you have to earn a minimum amount and stump up a large 
deposit.

Interest-only mortgages arguably helped millions of people on to the housing 
ladder, some of whom wouldn’t otherwise have been able to afford to buy, and 
even now it’s not hard to see the appeal of these deals. Someone who takes out 
a £200,000 mortgage fixed at 3.27% for three years (one of the rates offered by 
the Saffron) with a 25-year term would initially have to pay £977 a month on a 
repayment basis, but only £545 a month on an interest-only basis.

However, they came to be seen as one of the worst examples of irresponsible 
lending in the years running up to the credit crunch, when their popularity 
soared. Many interest-only loans were taken out without any proof that 
borrowers could pay off their debt, and in 2009 the City regulatorofficially 
branded them as “high risk” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/oct/24/interest-only-mortgage-endangered>
.

Nevertheless, many experts maintained that these loans remained right for 
certain people, and rising house prices have helped to make banks and building 
societies more comfortable about this type of lending.

With an interest-only mortgage your monthly payments are lower because you 
don’t pay off any of the capital debt. Instead, you must produce evidence of a 
“repayment strategy” for paying back the capital at the end.

Saffron is offering interest-only mortgages via its Saffron for Intermediaries 
arm. This option applies to its occupational mortgage range, which includes 
loans for the self-employed, contractors and professionals. The full list of 
“acceptable professionals”, who must be fully qualified and practising, is: 
accountants, actuaries, architects, barristers, chartered surveyors, commercial 
pilots, dentists, medical doctors, optometrists, pharmacists, certain financial 
advisers, solicitors, teachers and vets. Bankers, mortgage brokers and certain 
other professions will also be considered.

Saffron’s interest-only mortgages are only available up to 70% loan-to-value 
(LTV) – ie, you must have a 30%-plus deposit or equity stake.

NatWest re-entered the interest-only market last year, but requires someone to 
earn £100,000 excluding bonuses, and will only lend up to 75% of the property’s 
value. By contrast, Santander’s minimum income is lower: £50,000 for single 
applications or a combined £70,000 for joint where any part of the mortgage is 
interest-only. It says this “may be a combination of primary and secondary 
incomes”. Santander’s maximum loan is 75%, though any lending over 50% up to 
75% LTV must be on a capital and interest basis.

Meanwhile, Barclays says sole applicants must earn at least £75,000, but for 
joint applications a combined income of at least £100,000 is OK. Barclays’s 
maximum loan is 75%, and for new interest-only borrowers it insists on a 
minimum loan of £300,000.

“If you’re a first-time buyer you’re going to struggle to meet a lot of the 
requirements for interest-only,” says David Hollingworth at mortgage broker 
London & Country. For example, in addition to the above, Santander states that 
for all interest-only applications it will assess affordability on a capital 
and interest basis – ie, you may have to show you could in theory afford a more 
costly repayment mortgage.

Hollingworth says you will always be asked what your repayment strategy is, 
though there will be differences between lenders as to what is and isn’t 
acceptable– for example, Santander appears a lot stricter than NatWest when it 
comes to what’s allowed. An acceptable strategy could include downsizing, 
selling a buy-to-let or holiday home, sale of investments, cashing in savings 
or an endowment policy payout.
 