
We all know what is meant these days by the word 'talent'. In anyone's 
terminology, and most especially in Hollywood's, we are likely to be talking 
good looks.Thora Birch, and one of her young co-stars in American Beauty, Mena 
Suvari, certainly have 'talent'. Attention has focused on the hyper-real 
performances of Annette Bening, Kevin Spacey and Chris Cooper, but it is the 
adolescent characters played by Birch and Suvari which drive the plot. In the 
welter of award nominations fired atAmerican Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-beauty> it is surprising then that 
neither actress has picked up a mention

As they enjoy their fame by association in the run-up to the Oscars next 
month, neither Birch nor Suvari should find it hard to show that their 'talent' 
comprises more than good looks. They may have spawned a thousand dodgy fan 
websites, but, first, they can both act, and, second, American Beauty tackles 
today's sexual obsession with youth in such a head-on way, taking it to the 
borders of paedophilia, that their roles as naive temptresses backfire on 
everyone around them, including the audience.

The girls are the products of a high school casting machine that's been in 
overdrive in recent years. With all the campus screenplays which followed the 
success of Clueless (Election, 10 Things I Hate About You, Never Been Kissed 
and more), it has been hard for cinema-goers to spot the difference between a 
shooting star and a flash in the pan. Should we still be waiting for Alicia 
Silverstone to make a comeback? What about those TV crossovers, Reese 
Witherspoon and Sarah Michelle Geller? Are they anything more than cute? And, 
while we are on the subject of cute, what exactly did happen to Molly Ringwald 
and her Breakfast Club?

The trouble is that young actors of either sex always suffer a little from the 
dog-on-its-hind-legs syndrome: children look clever if they can just say their 
lines in a sassy way but their precocity may not be so startling as they enter 
their mid-thirties.

Jodie Foster is usually offered as the exception. She remains big at the box 
office, although she no longer has the pulling power to 'open' a movie. Other 
teen stars sometimes earn a second stab at stardom. Rob Lowe, for instance, has 
eventually clawed his way back via Wayne's World, TV and a moody descent into 
mayhem.

 So far Birch has made her name by effortlessly combining the bolshiness of 
Darleen's character in Roseanne with the spooky allure of Christina Ricci. In 
America she has also benefited, strangely, from a first name which is 
considered exotic. (They are not familiar with Thora Hird over there). Now 17, 
she grew up on a ranch in California where her parents named her after the god 
of thunder - and called her brother Bolt. She is a natural to play all those 
wayward, tomboy daughters who form the moral centre of many a current Hollywood 
screenplay.

In this country we may not remember her early appearance as a blonde toddler 
in a Quaker Oats advertisement but many will have seen her as the beloved 
daughter of Harrison Ford and Anne Archer in Patriot Games and Clear and 
Present Danger in 1992 and 1994. Since then she has appeared with Ricci in Now 
And Then and won top billing in the adventure film Alaska in 1996.

Birch is soon to start filming a screen version of the fantasy board game 
Dungeons and Dragons, starring as a princess opposite Jeremy Irons. Perhaps 
inspired by Foster, she hopes to end up on the other side of the camera as a 
director.

While Birch gets to play all the bristling, wise-cracking children Suvari is 
definitely the baby doll type, the Lolita to end all Lolitas (let's hope). At 
20 she is older than Birch and starred recently in American Pie. A natural 
redhead, her first name comes from an Egyptian godmother. Her father is an 
Estonian psychiatrist and her mother a nurse.

Suvari has just finished making a black comedy, Sugar and Spice, where she 
will plays a cheerleader. Following the kitsch basketball 'ra-ra' scene in 
American Beauty, this means she is currently cornering the market in Aryan 
cheerleaders.

Much of the credit for the wonky perspective on teenage life in American 
Beauty must go to another youngster, Wes Bentley, as Ricky Fitts, the boy who 
does not 'fit'. He sell drugs and secretly films his neighbours - yet this is 
our all-American hero .

Bentley is 21 and comes from Arkansas. He is soon to be seen in Kingdom Come, 
an Americanised version of Hardy's The Mayor of Casterbridge , and he recently 
excelled in a small role in Jonathan Demme's Beloved. In American Beauty his 
distant blue eyes fetchingly match the stripe on his woolly hat and he is 
thoroughly unsettling. In fact Bentley inhabits the part of Ricky so completely 
that he is in danger of stopping his career. Casting directors may not spot how 
conventionally good looking he could be.

No danger of that with Birch, who has taken to the celebrity circuit like a 
natural - well, she has been at the game for a while. At 14 she appeared on 
Conan O'Brien's celebrity chat show with a very short skirt and a ready wit. 
Talking about one of her earlier movies, Monkey Trouble, she admitted that one 
of the monkeys used in the film had to be taken off the set.

'The trainer said that one had a crush on me. It was, well, a guy monkey.'
 