
A restricted internal Ministry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> report has strongly 
criticised an investigation into major security lapses at a secret nuclear 
weapons site.

The report was produced following an investigation into allegations that MoD 
police officers protecting the Atomic Weapons Establishment’s site at 
Burghfield, Berkshire, where the warheads for the UK’sTrident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident> nuclear deterrent are assembled and 
maintained, were failing to conduct routine patrols and sleeping on the job.

It suggests that junior staff were made scapegoats for the lapses while senior 
managers avoided sanction and remained in their posts.

After the authorities were alerted by a whistleblower in 2013, the MoD claimed 
that “at no point was the security of the site or its nuclear assets 
compromised”. It set up Operation Pease, conducted by the MoD police force’s 
professional standards department, to investigate the incident.

MoD police admits 170 officers are under investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/17/defence-police-under-investigation-probe-nuclear-weapons>
But a report on how the operation was conducted, released under the Freedom of 
Information Act and titled “Review of MoD police professional standards 
department handling of misconduct at Atomic Weapons Establishment Burghfield”, 
confirms that the security lapses were deemed a “critical” incident by the MoD 
police.

Police officers at the site who were being investigated were placed on duties 
away from Burghfield, which meant that large numbers of officers had to be 
drafted in to provide cover. A special “gold cell” at the Defence Equipment and 
Support headquarters at Abbey Wood, near Bristol, had to be set up to handle 
operational issues arising from the affair.

In total, 66 officers were investigated at Burghfield, a high-priority 
terrorist target that is permanently protected by armed security. Six were 
found to have committed gross misconduct and were dismissed. A further 25 
resigned and 19 more were required to attend misconduct meetings.

The review is highly critical of aspects of the investigation. Marked 
“Official sensitive – limited distribution” and written by Len Jackson, an 
independent member of the MoD police committee, it notes that Operation Pease 
took more than two years to conclude. It explains that poor communication and 
slow progress resulted in a “huge feeling of resentment” across the MoD police 
force.

It highlights concerns – expressed by many MoD police officers, and by the MoD 
police federation – that while scores of junior officers were sacked, no one 
above the rank of sergeant was disciplined over the matter.

Although the site management team at Burghfield had been “potentially under 
investigation”, the head of nuclear and physical security at AWE told Jackson 
that he felt Operation Pease had focused on “the low-hanging fruit” rather than 
addressing the root cause of the problems, and that there had been “a lack of 
supervision over a number of years”.

In his report, Jackson says that he agrees with this view and can see why 
targeting low-hanging fruit has created so much anger and frustration.

He notes that all the officers interviewed as part of the operation claimed to 
have been threatened with Special Case Procedures (SCP) “or as it is commonly 
known, a ‘fast-track’ [dismissal] process”. He adds: “They believe that this 
was designed to elicit mass resignations” – something that would have ensured 
the matter avoided potentially embarrassing tribunals.

The report details an incident, referred to as Black Tuesday, when officers 
were “gathered together in the parade room and made to wait for around 30 to 40 
minutes until everyone had arrived”. They were then forced to listen while a 
duty inspector read out a list of names who were then served with disciplinary 
papers. This episode, the report notes, “created an atmosphere of resentment 
which still remains at Burghfield”.

Anti-nuclear campaigners said the failings identified in the report raised 
serious questions about the security at Britain’s nuclear weapons bases. “The 
number of officers involved shows there was obviously a culture of lax 
attitudes to security at AWE Burghfield,” said David Cullen,research manager at 
the Nuclear Information Service <http://nuclearinfo.org>. “Instead of senior 
officers being held to account, there was a bungled investigation with no 
proper oversight. If the MoD police can’t even properly investigate wrongdoing 
in their own ranks, why should anyone trust them to guard nuclear weapons? They 
need to come clean about the failings of senior officers and give the public 
meaningful reassurance that this will not happen again.”
 