
After many years of writing about medicine and society I was recently invited 
by ABC television to host an episode of Catalyst on cancer and stress. It’s a 
compelling proposition, one that is taking roots inside mainstream medicine as 
oncologists begin to realise that cancer growth is explained by factors that, 
frankly, we had either never known or not been willing to acknowledge.

But suddenly major cancer organisations are paying heed to the notion that 
smoking, alcohol and bad genes aside, there is a relationship between stress 
and cancer that deserves to be untangled. And yet, I confess that my first 
instinct was to blurt to my very able producer, “Let’s be really clear about 
the message,” because never far from my mind are my own cancer patients and the 
thousands unseen who shouldn’t be left thinking that any stress they experience 
will inevitably dismantle all their good efforts to keep their illness at bay.

Here is what I might have used as a title for the show,

“Chronic stress may accelerate the spread of cancer but please don’t panic 
because the studies to date are in tiny, artificially stressed mice, who are 
nowhere near as complicated as humans, but because animal studies can 
eventually lead us to human understanding, it’s important to pursue the idea.”

Don't tell cancer patients what they could be doing to cure themselves | 
Steven W Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/26/do-not-tell-cancer-patients-cures-they-could-be-doing>
I guess that’s why I am not a television producer.

But I am an oncologist and my experience has taught me to be cautious about 
claims that might harm already vulnerable people who groan under the weight of 
unsolicited advice on everything from what juice to drink to which nostril to 
breathe through.

Stress, of course, develops from the moment one hears the very mention of 
cancer and it never fails to chill me how people can recite the date of their 
cancer diagnosis years later as if they were remembering their birthday.

For all the undeniable benefits of modern technology, cancer treatment still 
exerts an enormous physical, physiological and emotional toll that lingers for 
much longer than we believed possible. But then it’s no secret that medicine as 
a profession has been rather slow to recognise the relationship between health 
and a host of things including race, poverty, diet, education, and now, stress.

The socioeconomic and psychological determinants of health are poorly taught 
at medical school and are practically non-existent in hospital teaching 
although the effects are everywhere to see. This leaves doctors ill-equipped to 
tackle large swathes of patients’ concerns.

Stress is an example of an “invisible” problem – it takes acute physician 
awareness and sensitive probing to uncover the true role of stress in patients’ 
lives. An oncologist friend makes it a habit to put his pen down, make eye 
contact and ask each patient at the end of the consultation, “How are you doing 
emotionally?”

He reflects that this simple question has prompted frank confessions, furtive 
tears and enduring gratitude. In clinic, I try to remember his term for it – 
“intentional medicine”. But unfortunately, when we confuse this with “slow”, or 
worse, “unnecessary” medicine, we persist in our old ways and squander the 
opportunity to do better.

How does stress impact cancer? Here, acute stress needs to be distinguished 
from chronic stress. Acute stress is manifested in the so-called “fight or 
flight” response, which has beneficial properties. But chronic, unrelenting 
stress, such as that caused by an unresolved physical, emotional or 
socioeconomic burden is detrimental. We are discovering that stress influences 
numerous growth factors and cellular pathways, altering an already complex 
tumour microenvironment. It can also overwhelm the body’s capacity for immune 
surveillance of foreign molecules, thus allowing cancer cells to seed to 
distant parts.

Australian researchers, Dr Erica Sloan and Dr Caroline Le, have dedicated 
their career to studying the complex relationship between stress and cancer 
spread. Their work, published in the prestigious journal, Nature Communications,
showed that chronic stress in mice 
<http://www.nature.com/ncomms/2016/160301/ncomms10634/full/ncomms10634.html> 
remodels the lymphatic system, enlarging the calibre of the vessels as well as 
the rate of flow through them, therefore enhancing the spread of tumour cells 
from an existing tumour. It’s important to note that their research doesn’t 
suggest that stress causes a primary cancer to develop.

Clinicians, including those at the Peter McCallum Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Institute in Melbourne, are 
examining whether dampening preoperative stress with beta blockers, a familiar 
class of blood-pressure lowering drugs, alters the tumour environment. These 
are very early days but they aim to discover a pharmacological way of 
countering stress and improving cancer outcomes. However, drugs have unwanted 
effects and will only be one small aspect of managing stress. The rest will 
need to come through interventions that include lifestyle modifications and 
systems-wide change.

The cancer drugs in your bathroom cabinet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/12/anti-cancer-drugs-medicine-cabinet-repurposed-aspirin-thalidomide-beta-blockers>
There are some who will be sceptical of the very idea that in our fast-paced 
world, something as ubiquitous as stress is now being implicated in cancer. 
Tell me what doesn’t cause cancer, they will groan. And after all, isn’t stress 
somewhat similar to cancer? The flip side of living longer and allowing our 
circumstances, like our genes, many more chances to trip up and damage us. But 
invoking stress and cancer in the same breath is not the same as “blaming the 
victim”.

Our patients are eager to be heard fully and treated holistically. They tell 
us that cancer, even when it’s cured, never truly becomes a past experience. 
Their life, work and relationships are inalterably changed and not just because 
the spectre of cancer recurrence looms large. We owe them no stone unturned in 
the quest to provide evidence-based, well-rounded care. And if it achieves 
nothing else, reducing chronic stress to enhance quality of life is a fine goal 
in itself.

 When the ultimate prize lies in finding a novel cancer “moonshot”, it must 
seem like a Sisyphean task to get anyone to take notice of the role played by 
stress. But as Isaac Newton said, “If I have seen further than others it is by 
standing on the shoulders of giants.”

We have a long way to go but we should give praise to the scientists who work 
diligently behind the scenes to elucidate the toxin that is stress.

Ranjana Srivastava is a guest presenter of Stress and Cancer on Catalyst at 
8pm tonight on the ABC.
 