
There is rarely a dull moment when these two come together and here was 
another lively contest. Neither side had much more than a theoretical chance of 
progression inEDF Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglowelshcup>, a fact 
reflected in the teams they had selected, so the game lacked the bite to make 
it truly satisfying.

Nevertheless, Shane Geraghty played a full part, and that will have pleased 
one of his mentors, the watching England backs coach Brian Smith. Satisfaction 
all round, then, for theExiles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish>, 
who refused to panic when it had looked as ifHarlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> might run away with it. Mind 
you, it is easier not to panic when you do not really care.

Quins had started as sure winners of this battle of who could care less, 
carrying on pretty much where their seniors had left off the week before 
against 'Irish' opposition. When your stock is rising, it is rising, just as 
surely as the reverse seems to hold true these days.

There may not have been quite as many in the crowd here as there were for last 
week's sold-out romp against Ulster in the Heineken Cup, but the ground was 
fuller than it might have been for a game between what was more or less two 
second XVs. Harlequins' side bore less of a resemblance to its show team than 
London Irish's, but the try-scoring touch was with this lot from the off. They 
had notched two tries within the first quarter of an hour, and the joyous 
support settled down to enjoy what looked like another rout.

The Quins pack were giving their visitors a torrid time at the set piece, 
which was unseemly given that the Exiles' front row contained an All Black and 
a Springbok. Regardless,Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> had them on the rack at an 
attacking scrum, and from the subsequent penalty the Quins line-out did a 
number on their opponents, allowing George Robson to drive over for the opener.

Having showed off their set-piece prowess, Quins next ran in the kind of try 
more normally associated with them, when Charlie Amesbury was away in the 13th 
minute after a move that had started in their own 22. That made it 12-0 and 
everyone was buying the Quins.

The game lost its way, though, as so often with these second-team cup games. 
Irish turned down as many as four shots at goal, just to underline the 
training-ground nature of the contest. Off the third, Irish secured an 
attacking scrum, which turned in such a way that Richard Thorpe was able to 
burst from the base for the line and a 12-5 scoreline at the break.

Quins' stock reached its peak shortly after the break, when Neil McMillan was 
driven over from - glory be - a rolling maul. Admittedly the maul needed to go 
only five metres, but it was the first try from one we have seen since the ELVs.

That, though, was when Irish's set-piece pulled itself together and the Exiles 
thrived. Peter Hewat skinned the unfortunate Mark Lambert for one try, the 
excellent Adam Thompstone barged over for another and James Bailey streaked 
over for a third in nine minutes to earn Irish a very sudden 22-17 lead.

Now they were taking it seriously and Geraghty extended that lead with a 
penalty. He missed a sitter with five to go, but Hewat rounded off the exercise 
with a gift as Quins chanced their arm.

The Stoop 11,173

Game rating |||||||||| Referee Greg Garner

HarlequinsT Williams; Stegmann, Masson, Taione (Barry 56), Amesbury; Jewell 
(Malone 59), G Williams (Care 59); Croall, Brooker (Rodgers 72), Lambert (Elosu 
56), Percival, Robson, Davies, McMillan (capt), Guest

Tries Robson, Amesbury, McMillan Con Jewell

London IrishHewat; Bailey, Shabbo, Gower, Thompstone (Homer 63); Geraghty, 
Parker (Lalanne 46); Dermody (capt), Buckland (Paice ht), Rautenbach (Murphy 
70), Johnson (Casey 70), Hudson, Danaher, S Armitage, Fisher (Thorpe 34)

Tries Thorpe, Hewat 2, Thompstone, Bailey Cons Hewat, Hickey Pen Geraghty
 