
Business activity and jobs in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> are already under threat because of 
the fallout from Brexit, a key Dublin trade body has warned.

The sharp fall in the pound against the euro is already making Irish exports 
to the UK, including meat and dairy products, 15% less competitive, said the 
Irish Business and Employers Confederation (Ibec).

“The Brexit strain is manifest and intense. Without urgent action to address 
competitive pressures, hundreds of millions of euros worth of exports and 
thousands of jobs will be lost,” said Ibec’s director, Fergal O’Brien.

Britain is Ireland’s largest export partner, while Ireland is Britain’s fifth 
biggest trading partner, with €1.5bn (£1.26bn) in transactions each week.

A survey of 450 companies, commissioned by Ibec, showed that their main 
concern is the sharp fall in sterling, with cheaper UK imports to Ireland cited 
as another threat to domestic trade.

O’Brien said that “tight margins mean businesses feel that pain quite quickly” 
and many fear that things could get worse. “We’ve been here before with the 
crash in 2008 when there was almost parity between the currencies, exporters 
would have squeezed their businesses, cut costs, cut jobs, but there isn’t that 
flexibility any more,” he said.

He added that decisions by UK supermarket chains such as Morrisons to cut 
prices on more than 1,000 products would have a knock-on effect on food 
suppliers and there were fears among suppliers that big retailers would become 
more aggressive.

They may review their medium-term sourcing strategies and find suppliers 
outside the EU. For Irish beef suppliers, for instance, this could mean having 
to compete with lower prices of Argentina and Brazil.

His warning comes as Dublin stockbroker, Goodbody, downgraded its forecast for 
the Irish economy due to a “Brexit chill”. Its chief economist, Dermot O’Leary, 
said the possibility of Britain slipping into a recession will “take the gloss 
off a robust Irish economic performance”.

Ibec said that analysis of historical trade between UK and Ireland showed a 1% 
weakness in sterling results in a 0.7% drop in the value of Irish exports.


If the pound fell to £0.90 against the euro, that would cost Ireland £700m in 
food exports, said Ibec, and threaten 7,500 jobs in that sector alone.

The Irish central bank last month cut its economic growth forecast for the 
next two years, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jul/27/uk-gdp-economy-growth-brexit-referendum-pound-markets-live?page=with:block-579892bbe4b065cfc0a5bfe5#block-579892bbe4b065cfc0a5bfe5>
 saying Britain’s exit from the EU was likely to curtail investment, export and 
employment growth.

The central bank said it believed the Irish economy, which is the 
fastest-growing in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/irish-economic-growth-revised-figures-foreign-investment-aircraft>
, would continue to grow but that Brexit would have a negative impact.

It cut its projections for growth in 2016 from 5.1% to 4.9% GDP growth. It 
also slashed 0.6 of a percentage point off its 2017 growth forecast, down to 
3.6%.

In the firm’s latest report on the Irish economy, Goodbody reduced forecasts 
for domestic demand from 5% to 4.2% in 2016 and from 4.4% to 3.7% in 2017.

It said it was taking a more cautious view on net exports and business 
investment.

However, it said Ireland was in a good position to shield itself from a 
potential recession in Britain as it continues to recover from the financial 
crash and ensuing 2010 bailout by the IMF.

Asset values, including property, remain at pre-crash levels and there is 
continuing slack in the Irish labour market, whereas the UK’s unemployment rate 
is back down to pre-crisis levels. Household savings are at historic lows and 
asset prices are seen to be overvalued.
 