
Giles Fraser <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gilesfraser>: If I wanted to 
vote Tory, I’d vote Tory

When I go to the ballot box, I want the opportunity to vote for an 
alternative. An alternative to austerity. An alternative to the domination of 
the City banks and the worship of market forces. An alternative to Trident. An 
alternative to the politics of division in which some people are treated as 
terrorists because of the direction in which they say their prayers. I want 
politicians to return essential public services to public control. I want our 
MPs to wake up at nights worrying about both the forgotten estates of 
Sunderland and the bedraggled refugees of Calais. When I go to the ballot box, 
I want to vote for something more hopeful and exciting than the daily fortunes 
of the stock exchange.

While Corbyn and his rivals wrestle for the wheel, Labour is sinking | 
Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/13/corbyn-rivals-labour-sinking-leadership>
That’s why many people wanted – and still want – Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. I hold no particular 
candle for him personally. He’s not a particularly inspiring speaker. And I do 
worry that a vegetarian from Islington may have only so much traction in the 
working-class Brexit heartlands beyond the M25. But after all those years of 
Tony Blair’s silky tongue and nauseating PR sincerity, Corbyn’s unspun 
directness is precisely the appeal.

And, best of all, he doesn’t trim his politics to the prevailing political 
weather. Indeed, if the last few weeks has shown us anything, it is Corbyn’s 
stubborn determination to stick with what he believes, come hell or high water. 
Which means I know he won’t sell out my vote if the opinion polls move 
direction or his parliamentary colleagues become jittery.

Common wisdom insists that general elections are won from the centre ground. 
That’s why the difference between the left of the Tory party and the right of 
the Labour party is often indistinguishable. But the Labour party must not get 
puffed into a shift to the right. If I wanted to vote Tory, I’d vote Tory. No, 
the Labour party must present a proud socialist alternative. We must state our 
case, without fear or apology.Reinstate clause IV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/09/clause-iv-of-labour-party-constitution-what-is-all-the-fuss-about-reinstating-it>
. And if that means a period in the political wilderness, then so be it.

Rafael Behr <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rafaelbehr>: Corbyn has a 
tough job and he is doing it badly

The essential problem facing Jeremy Corbyn’s opponents is their reliance on 
charges of incompetence. This should be an easy argument to win. Every 
historical measure and dispassionate analysis indicates thatLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>, on its current trajectory, is 
heading for colossal defeat. Corbyn has barely begun to develop a coherent 
programme for electoral recovery, nor has he outlined anything close to 
resembling an agenda for government. It is a tough job and he is doing it badly.

Some former Corbyn supporters can see that and might, with heavy hearts, 
abandon him. But many will either deny that he is underperforming – Labour is 
winning safe seats with increased majorities – or blame problems on wreckers 
who tied the leader’s hands from the start (and on the media). They can also 
reject the whole premise of competence-based argument as a shallow 
“Westminster” expression of what politics is about. Perhaps Corbyn isn’t great 
at fulfilling the established role of leader of Her Majesty’s Opposition, but 
he shouldn’t have to be because, in fact, he is leading a social movement that 
is so much bigger – see how themembership ranks have swollen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/08/jeremy-corbyn-stands-defiant-after-labour-membership-surge>
.

So Angela Eagle, or Owen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/owen-smith-to-challenge-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership>
, will end up trying to persuade Corbynite members that their hero should be 
ditched because he is useless at something they either think he is good at, or 
something they don’t think he should be good at. On that front, the anti-Corbyn 
side has made little progress since last summer. They ceded ownership of the 
very idea of left principle, indulging an image of “JC” as the avuncular, 
beatific figure who articulated the deep yearnings of the true left. They 
criticised him mostly on grounds of practical implementation.

What they have failed to do is expose the hollowness of the Corbyn proposition 
in office, not just as poor political practice but as moral and intellectual 
vacuity: the failure to offer any realistic engagement with current or imminent 
political challenges except by reference to platitude, stump-speech exhortation 
and cynical mobilisation of old anti-Blairite grudges. Instead, the coup 
plotters have reinforced the impression that they are the bitter reactionaries 
and unprincipled assassins. They dare not challenge Corbyn on belief, only on 
capability. That creates a dynamic similar to last summer’s contest with 
probably – but not certainly – a similar result.

It is hard, then, to see how the two immiscible substances of Labour can 
remain in one compound party. But then again, it is a longstanding rule of 
Labour crises that when it looks as if things are in such a mess they cannot 
possibly carry on like this, they do.

Rachel Shabi <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rachelshabi>: These 
grassroots supporters are Labour’s backbone

When even his opponents berate as undemocratic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/labour-leadership-vote-without-jeremy-corbyn-would-be-sordid-fix>
 the attempts to take Jeremy Corbyn’s name off the Labour leadership ballot, 
you know you’ve got problems. In that light, the party NEC’s vote to keep the 
incumbent in the race was a sensible move: not doing so would have sent a 
terrible message about Britain’s main progressive party to its thousands of 
engaged, committed members.

Now, after failing to depose him via hostile media briefings, mass resignations
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/labour-shadow-cabinet-resignations-jeremy-corbyn-who-has-gone>
 and a secret vote of no confidence, Corbyn’s opponents have set a leadership 
race. And it’s one he is expected to win again – even assuming the NEC’s 
subsequent, shadowy ruling, todisenfranchise over 100,000 members 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-membership-nec-momentum-blairite-angela-eagle-a7133556.html>
 who have joined the party in recent weeks, does actually stand. Corbyn 
overwhelmingly won the last leadership election last summer – now he has even 
more support, predating the NEC cut-off, and a larger, better organised 
grassroots movement behind him, poised to canvass on his behalf.

This nationwide movement, inspired by Corbyn’s anti-austerity politics and 
embodying a left resurgence, seems also to be the bit rebel MPs are not 
getting. It’s not just that this surge of grassroots supporters represent much 
needed political hope; it is that they are, after all, Labour’s campaigning 
backbone: the bit that drives and mobilises; the bit that amplifies the party’s 
message, building support, galvanising communities, expanding a voter base.

Bluntly, Labour MPs ought to be delighted to have this extraordinarily large, 
energised network behind the party, not trying to ignore its democratic will.

These are ugly days for the party, but it still doesn’t have to end badly. If 
– or when – its membership re-elects Corbyn as leader, that’s the time for more 
MPs to unite around him. With their expertise and commitment on side, Labour 
can be the strong, principled and progressive opposition –with its sights on 
governance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/11/labour-fit-to-govern-leader-post-brexit>
 – that the country so desperately needs.

Anne Perkins <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/anneperkins>: Even talk of a 
split is dangerous

At least the NEC came up with the right answer about Jeremy Corbyn’s name 
being on the ballot. It’s a shame they also opened up a whole new can of worms 
by imposing contradictory and, on the face of it, legally unsustainable 
restrictions on the voting rights of new recruits.

Existential battles – and be in no doubt, that is what is underway – are 
unavoidably ugly and messy, but they should never be violent, nor even hint at 
violence.

So for a start, left and right, however beleaguered they feel, must recognise 
that the language they use and the way that they use it can all too easily 
legitimise much worse behaviour among supporters. If John McDonnell is first 
and foremost a potential chancellor he should avoidbeing recorded swearing 
about his opponents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/13/john-mcdonnell-labour-party-plotters-video>
, even at late-night stand-up routines with party supporters high on victory.

Next, the right need a single candidate. Existential battles aren’t nuanced 
affairs capable of multiple options. They are about survival. Owen Smith, the 
former shadow work and pensions secretary, hasthrown himself into battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/13/pmqs-cameron-may-reshuffle-labour-leadership-bid-as-mcdonnell-defends-claim-that-anti-corbyn-plotters-fucking-useless-politics-live>
 while simultaneously criticising Angela Eagle for not trying to work with 
Jeremy Corbyn. Have a hustings.

Then both sides need to be absolutely clear and unrepentant about what this 
fight is for. It seems obvious. Fundamentally, the right believes that MPs have 
a greater weight than ordinary party members in deciding who the leader should 
be.

I agree with them. MPs have a different kind of mandate: the support of 
thousands of people who are not party members. They are the people who have to 
sell the party to the wider electorate and hold government to account. But 
times are changing. Tribes form for a purpose and then dissolve again. People 
are actors on multiple stages. Politics needs to reflect that.

Labour’s sense of gravity has always see-sawed uneasily between hard 
pragmatism and the pursuit of some fantasy doctrinal purity, between the 
parliamentary party, the unions and the members. The left sometimes has the 
backing of key trade unions but it almost always takes most of its support from 
party activists.

That is what this fight has to decide, for the 21st century. It’s the same 
fight as the last one; what’s different now is the nature of politics itself. 
It may be that the time of the member has come. That it’s time for the party to 
re-imagine itself entirely, and try to build a mass membership that stretches 
across left and green, the trade unionist and the self-employed.

What Labour cannot possibly afford to do, if anyone is ever to believe that 
their first purpose is to form a government that can improve the lives of 
ordinary working people, is split. Even talk of it is dangerous. It makes it 
seems as if it is a viable option. For as long as the voting system is first 
past the post, only a single united party can contest power with the Tories. 
There is a desperate need for a party to do that. And there is no appetite at 
all for an opposition locked in alienating conflict.

Polly Toynbee <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee>: 
First-past-the-post kills upstarts

Vanishing into an irrelevant protest party, that’s one option. Labour can be a 
movement of ardent believers eyed by most voters as curiosities.

Labour is at the crossroads: is it serious about power? Are members willing to 
compromise with swing voters in marginals who don’t think like they do? That’s 
painful, but Labour is 14% behind in those vital seats. Earning voters’ trust 
needs a leader they can imagine as prime minister – and that’s notJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. Will his admirers block 
their ears?

Talk of curbing austerity, building houses, restoring the NHS and council 
services is empty without power. All Labour governments – Attlee, Wilson and 
Blair, delivered great social progress – now in reverse. Will we ever see 
another Labour era?

Labour MPs must choose one Corbyn challenger, as Owen Smith stands today. 
Angela Eagle <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, Smith and any 
other will lay out visions and strategies, but MPs must agree just one. Just as 
Neil Kinnock from the left pulled the party back from the Michael Foot 
disaster, so someone further left might bridge the Corbyn gap. A clean skin 
with no Iraq voting record would help: Smith makes that pitch. But a Labour 
woman against a second Tory female PM is important too – and others may step up.

If Corbyn goes, his admirers can take comfort in this: his short term will 
have changed the Labour party – and for the better. The party has moved left, 
ending the era of tongue-tied, third way triangulation. Labelling any who want 
Corbyn gone as red Tory, Blairite scum is outrageous. Most of those 172 MPs are 
of the left, but they’ve seen the chaotic incompetence of Corbyn-led opposition.

If he stays, Labour will writhe in perpetual warfare. Of course the party 
should split as the Tories should have long ago, but don’t even think about it: 
first-past-the-post kills upstarts. Proportional representation would allow new 
parties to gain seats and share power. But for now entryism – taking over one 
of the two main parties – is the only way to win. The romantic left has seized 
Labour, Brexit zealots the Tories.

In their constituencies, Labour MPs see the terrifying party crisis: 
working-class votes in “safe” seats slide to Ukip, far from their socially 
liberal university-educated representatives. Yet those MPs risk deselection by 
angry leftwingers even further from the real voters they don’t meet on 
doorsteps. Union leaders, once party stabilisers, ignore their members’ need 
for Labour in power. In the coming Brexit turmoil, recession and worse 
austerity, Labour risks ceasing to matter, denying a voice to those who need 
them most.

Aditya Chakrabortty <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/adityachakrabortty>: 
This is about who gets to define what leftwing politics is and how

Here is where I think we are. This week, the headbanger Theresa May made a 
speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/theresa-may-ambitious-agenda-contradicts-continuity-candidate-label>
 that put her to the left of most of the parliamentary Labour party.George 
Osborne has just ditched the austerity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/01/george-osborne-scraps-2020-budget-surplus-plan>
 that the likes of Stephen Kinnock claimed was essential for credibility. The 
“experts” supposedly running the Labour machine proved so inept that the man 
they were trying to depose now looks set to win his second thumping mandate.

Ever since the crash, the elites in Britain – whether in politics or business 
and finance – have held power without commanding the credibility to wield it. 
In the last month, that has begun to shift. With first the Brexit vote and now 
the Corbyn showdown, the political establishment are struggling even to hold 
power.

That, it strikes me, is the true significance of the Labour leadership battle. 
It’s not whether Angela is more electable than Owen is more electable than 
Jeremy. It’s not really about Jeremy Corbyn himself – who has always struck me 
as less interesting than the mass of voters who put him in charge 10 months 
ago. It’s about who gets to define what leftwing politics is and how. For most 
of my adult life that job has been taken up by a generation of men who talked 
about “narrative” because they couldn’t really handle discussions of policy and 
thought the political centre ground was a fixed address that you typed into 
Google Maps. Those old moves won’t work in this era. Not when economic 
inequality has produced such sharp political polarisation. Not when the Union 
is in slow-motion breakdown. Not against a whole backdrop of regional cleavages 
– and a middle class that is breaking up, too.

Such are the challenges that face the Labour party – and they are existential. 
I have written before that Corbyn and John McDonnell have not done a good job 
so far in addressing them. That’s not all their fault: it’s hard to make policy 
in the face of a hostile parliamentary party and a shadow cabinet ever ready to 
leak your strategy documents to the newspapers.

They were right to adopt an explicitly anti-austerity politics – and in doing 
so only reminded us of how much ground Labour MPs ceded to the Tories between 
2010 and 2015. But the left needs more than a hankering after statist 
investment. Blair and his followers spent the last 20 years taking as their 
biggest task the reform of the public sector. The left’s task in the years to 
come will be reforming the private sector: so that it’s no longer a machine for 
producing vast gaps in income, so that finance is the servant of business and 
so that businesses display more commitment to the localities they operate in.

Oh, and if Corbyn’s Labour and Momentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/08/momentum-corbyns-shock-troops-labour>
 want to be social movements, let’s see them get involved in civil society. How 
about getting more people registered to vote? Now that access to legal advice 
and other civil society organisations have been so badly stripped back, let’s 
see Labour organisations help renters in dispute with sharky landlords, or 
negotiating good collective deals with utility firms. If the future of left 
politics lies partly in becoming a social movement, that means actually doing 
stuff.

Frances Ryan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/frances-ryan>: Those crushed 
under the Conservatives need Labour in power

I doubt I’m the only member of the Labour party who’s had a sleepless night. 
There was no defeat in the early hours, yet the current situation somehow feels 
worse than the general election loss last year – more grave, more permanent. 
Perhaps because it could be.

Where now? Jeremy Corbyn is rightly on the ballot but – though likely – his 
victory is not guaranteed. Many who previously supported his leadership have 
lost patience; principle can soon turn into dogma, just as a democratic mandate 
can translate into a selfish refusal to listen.

Corbyn has the chance to run without hubris – to show he can communicate ideas 
beyond the already converted, that he understands that being the leader of a 
party requires earning the confidence of MPs (who, notably, have their own 
democratic mandate) – and would be wise to take it. Similarly, his rivals must 
learn from past shambles and field a candidate the membership can actually 
embrace. It is his critics’ failure to inspire that is as damning as Corbyn’s 
failure to lead.Owen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/owen-smith-to-challenge-jeremy-corbyn- 
labour-leadership> – openly anti-austerity – is surely a wiser choice than 
Angela Eagle.

But how the contest is conducted will be as defining as who is in it. The 
division and outright hate that we’ve seen from both sides must be abandoned. 
“Useless plotters”; “Corbynistas”; “Blairite careerists”; these words are as 
damaging as they are simplistic.

Valid grievances exist – and regrets are plenty – but there are bigger things 
at stake now. For anyone who wishes to avoid a stranglehold of centre-right 
power in this country, a split within the Labour party would be nothing short 
of a disaster. What follows in the coming weeks is not about Corbyn, rebels, or 
even the inner democracy of the membership. It is about the millions of people 
who are being crushed under the Conservatives and who need a Labour party in 
government. If the party cannot unite for that, it will be a lasting betrayal.
 