
Most of this week’s column, I promise, won’t be about Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. But the man’s such a walking 
psychology textbook I can’t resist using him as an example. In this case: his 
tendency to criticise in others precisely the faults he suffers from himself. 
“Something I saw early on with Trump,” his remorseful formerghostwriter Tony 
Schwartz 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/07/25/donald-trumps-ghostwriter-tells-all>
 tweeted, is that “most negative things he says about others are actually 
describing him.” It’s not merely that he’s an insecure man who lashes out when 
attacked; it’s that his specific ways of lashing out are advertisements for his 
greatest insecurities. He claims Hillary Clinton shouldn’t get classified 
security briefings, since she’s “a lose [sic] cannon with extraordinarily bad 
judgment”. He mocks her power naps and uses “low energy” as an insult, despite 
being obsessed with sleeping in his own bed, and often looking exhausted. And 
he slams Nato members for not paying their bills – when that’s precisely what 
he’s famous for in business.

This, of course, is “projection”, one of those Freudian terms we’re supposed 
to reject for lack of scientific evidence, but that keeps reasserting itself as 
an invaluable way of interpreting the world. When we’re troubled by a shameful 
emotion or half-acknowledged thought, this theory goes, we identify and condemn 
the failing in others, to avoid confronting it in ourselves. (It’s not just 
that wepretend to see it in others, which is how people sometimes interpret 
Trump’s sputterings; it’s that we really believe it.) A cheating husband 
accuses his wife of infidelity; a bigot sees prejudice everywhere she looks. It 
works with positive emotions, too: in the first flush of romance, Carl Jung 
argued, projection runs the show; we see in the other person some good part of 
ourselves we’ve yet to understand. That’s why so many relationships flounder 
after a few months, once you start to notice the discrepancies between the real 
person and the projection. “Projection,” Jung wrote, “changes the world into 
the replica of one’s unknown face.”

Maybe you don’t have as much choice as you think
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/05/you-dont-have-choice-oliver-burkeman>
The tricky part is that projection usually attaches itself to something real 
in the other person’s personality, making it hard to see what’s going on. For 
example, I get enraged by drivers in my neighbourhood honking their horns for 
no good reason. In a sense, I’m right: they’re breaking the law. But that can’t 
be the whole explanation, since I get nowhere near so emotional about other 
annoyances – frankly, I don’t get so emotional about most terrorist attacks. 
Could it be that I’m specially bothered by the drivers’ selfishness because I’m 
worried I live too selfishly myself? On that logic, it’s no surprise I’m less 
viscerally angered by terrorist atrocities, since I don’t secretly fear I might 
commit one.

It’s illuminating to examine your hostile feelings toward others, and theirs 
about you, through this lens. Plus, it lets you read Trump like a book – not 
one penned by a ghostwriter, but written, however inadvertently, from the heart.

 * oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 