
This was a budget for Generation Y, George Osborne would have us believe. The 
phrase “next generation” popped up an astonishing18 times in his speech 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/budget-2016-george-osbornes-speech>. 
The word “pensioner” was mentioned just once, and only in a passing reference.

And what’s on offer to the next generation? A lifetime Isa, boosted by a 
£1,000-a-year government giveaway, is squarely aimed at the left-behind 
generation of the under-40s.

Someone who is 20 years old next April and who puts away the maximum allowable 
£333 a month into the new Isa will build up a pot of money worth at least 
£75,000 (and probably a fair bit more if interest rates improve) by the time 
they are 35. If they take it out to buy a home, it will all be tax-free. If 
they keep stashing the money away until 60, the pot will be worth £190,000.

How many young adults will take this up? Cynics will say they can always find 
money for iPhones and Glastonbury tickets, but the truth is that far more is 
gobbled up by rent. Will most of the beneficiaries actually be the sons and 
daughters of the better off, with payments into the lifetime Isa coming from 
their parents?

On paper, it looks like a massive giveaway. If someone starts saving from the 
age of 18, they can pick up a maximum of £32,000 in government money. But 
evidently the government thinks take-up won’t be that great;figures released 
immediately after the budget 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/budget-2016-documents/budget-2016>
suggest it will cost the government £590m in 2020 and £850m the year after. 
That’s less than half the amount the government is saving by cutting the child 
element of tax credits in the same year.

Meanwhile, the core financial issue facing young adults – out-of-reach house 
prices – could be worsened by the lifetime Isa if it pumps the property market 
up further.

Teenagers, or some of them at least, may be underwhelmed by this budget. The 
few that watched the speech in full may be reaching for their phones and 
saying, “OMG! Compulsory maths lesson until 18!” Plus, there’s a raid on 
Coca-Cola (the new sugar tax, possibly adding around 5p to a can) and for the 
heel draggers at school sports, loads more money for outdoor sports. “Ugh! More 
cross-country!” Osborne wants to help Generation Y, but in a headmasterly 
manner.

Today’s budget also reveals what a chancellor can, and can’t, do under the 
five-year “tax lock” pledge by the Conservatives during the election campaign 
last year. He has a self-imposed ban on raising VAT, national insurance or 
income tax until 2020, although that hasn’t barred him from changing the income 
bands on which tax is paid.

Once again, Osborne was the master of policy theft from his rivals. The 
personal allowance was the Liberals’ flagship policy, but has skillfully become 
the hallmark of Osborne’s reign at the Treasury. It will rise to £11,500 in 
2017-18, at a £1.5bn cost to the public finances, but will mean that Osborne 
will take 1.3 million people out of income tax. He doesn’t mention national 
insurance, though, which remains resolutely independent of income tax and where 
the lower threshold is actually frozen next year, meaning more will pay.

But Osborne doesn’t just steal the Liberals’ clothes, he plunders Labour’s 
wardrobe too. Last year, he trumped Labour with his shock (and welcome) rises 
in the minimum wage.

This year, he heralded his new help-to-save programme to boost savings rates 
among the poorest. But flick back through budget history and you’ll find that 
in his June 2010 emergency budget,Osborne said that the country couldn’t afford 
Labour’s Saving Gateway accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/jun/24/budget-gateway-saving-scrapped> 
and axed them on the spot. Fast forward six years and he is introducing a 
near-carbon copy of Saving Gateway that is slightly more generous but 
applicable to fewer people.

The drip-feed of stealth tax rises continues, but not as much as feared. 
Insurance premium tax is up again, but only by 0.5%, to 10%. The insurance 
industry breathed a sigh of relief, fearing reports of a new 12% rate.

Fuel duty looked like the easy take for a chancellor short of a few bob. 
Strikingly, he froze the figure for the sixth year in a row.

Meanwhile, beer and whisky rates were frozen but wine increased. 

Osborne got a lot of the bad news out of the way in his post-election July 
2015 budget, as chancellors are now bound to do in the new era of fixed-term 
parliaments. But make no mistake, the biggest impact on the pockets of millions 
of people, starting from 6 April this year, will be the four-year freeze in a 
huge range of welfare benefits.

Osborne did not mention these cuts, but it’s worth underlining just how deep 
they are. Jobseeker’s allowance is currently £57.90 a week for the under-25s 
and £73.10 for those over that age. This bare minimum payment, a fraction of 
what is needed for most people to survive, will be frozen all the way through 
to 2020. Even if inflation stays in the 2% range (and the forecasters are 
always wrong) it suggests a real-time cut of up to 8.5% by 2020.

Still, it’s good to know that lobbying works. The last surviving middle class 
tax break – 40% relief on pension contributions – was spared the axe after 
fierce opposition by the well-off. The same lobbyists have raised barely a 
murmur about the freezing of child tax credit, child benefit, housing benefit 
and employment support allowance that all starts in April. This year, you can 
add the disabled to that list, where the cut in personal independence payments 
will be of the order of around £1.2bn a year. As the chancellor repeated, we’re 
all in this together.
 