
I feel uniquely well qualified to write an article about Karen Bradley, the 
new culture secretary, as I sat oppositeMaria Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/maria-miller>, a former holder of that 
post, on a train to Basingstoke on Thursday. Miller was culture secretary for 
about 18 months between September 2012 and April 2014, before resigning after a 
long-running row over expenses.


I felt a bit sorry for Miller, going home to her constituency mid-afternoon on 
a day of high political drama in which she was destined to play no part. Her 
time in cabinet had come and gone, so fast you might well have missed it. I 
noticed she was emailing the new home secretary, Amber Rudd, no doubt with 
congratulations. But surely it would only have been human to be thinking “that 
could have been me.”


As we were sitting quietly on the train, Bradley (previously the minister for 
preventing abuse, exploitation and crime, aka ‘minister for modern slavery’) 
was being unveiled as the new culture secretary. When Lord Derby’s cabinet was 
announced in 1852, with a set of politicians who had very little ministerial 
experience, the aged, rather deaf Duke of Wellington shouted “Who?” as each 
name was read out. The shortlived administration went down in history as the 
“Who? Who? Ministry”. The reaction to Bradley’s appointment has been rather 
similar. Who on earth is she?


Cultural commentator Norman Lebrecht quickly went on the offensive 
<http://slippedisc.com/2016/07/new-culture-secretary-lists-no-cultural-interests/>
: “Karen Bradley, who succeeds John Whittingdale as secretary for culture, 
media and sport, is a former tax manager who held a security brief in the home 
office. Representing a rural constituency, she has no track record on the arts 
and makes no mention of them in her website CV. Looks like she has visited 
Madam Tussauds.”


Lebrecht is not the only one to have had some fun with Bradley’s lack of any 
obvious interest in the arts. Some have rather cruelly pointed to the range of 
her interests, as identified byThey Work for You 
<https://www.theyworkforyou.com/mp/24725/karen_bradley/staffordshire_moorlands>
, which include “environment, food and rural affairs, justice, health, organ 
donor cards and tyres”. “Am I right in thinking that Karen Bradley will be our 
first culture secretary with a particular interest in tyres?,” asks Mark Berry, 
who judging byhis Twitter handle <https://twitter.com/@boulezian> has rather 
hifalutin ideas about what culture secretaries should be interested in.


Now, there is no evidence that Bradley, who has been MP for Staffordshire 
Moorlands since 2010, is a fan of Pierre Boulez. Indeed, as Lebrecht says, the 
arts don’t feature anywhere in her CV. In Who’s Who (nothing to do with the 
Duke of Wellington), she lists her interests as “travel, wine tasting, cooking 
and puzzles”. Sorting out theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> will 
certainly test the last of those. And on her website she cites “walking in the 
beautiful Staffordshire Peak District” and “experimenting with new recipes”. So 
definitely more cagoule-wearer than blue-stocking.


But she did air some of her literary leanings in her local paper, the Stoke 
Sentinel 
<http://www.stokesentinel.co.uk/big-read-staffordshire-moorlands-mp-karen-bradley/story-26688154-detail/story.html>
: “I don’t get as much time as I would like to enjoy reading nowadays, but when 
I do get the chance I usually turn to a crime thriller. I have read every 
Morse, Dalziel and Pascoe, Frost and Rebus that’s been printed, and have 
mourned the passing of far too many characters over the years – many of whom 
came to very sticky ends.”


Another of her choices was rather touching: “I could not get through Christmas 
without Charles Dickens’ A Christmas Carol, a hard copy edition of which was a 
much-treasured school prize. I read it every year, starting on 20 December with 
Marley’s Ghost, then a chapter every day until I finish on Christmas morning 
with the final chapter.” I do this myself, and it makes me warm to her.


In a way, it’s pointless complaining that our new culture secretary doesn’t go 
to the National Theatre every night and wouldn’t know her Arne from her Elgar. 
The arts “community” are already bleating about this, but it’s ridiculous and a 
bit snooty. Ministers take on a brief, and hers is a ludicrously wide one. She 
has civil servants to guide her, and what we are really looking for is sound 
judgment and the ability to learn on the job.


The deposed former culture secretary John Whittingdale was reckoned to have an 
interest in the arts –or at least in some of its more recherché corners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/18/john-whittingdale-culture-secretary-bbc-rupert-murdoch>
 – yet he was suspected of wanting to emasculate the BBC and news of his
departure was met with cheers in the Beeb’s newsroom 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3690012/Luvvies-delight-John-Whittingdale-SACKED-Culture-Secretary.html>
.

It seems that a lot of knowledge is a dangerous thing. Bradley, a Manchester 
City fan, does know something about football, so perhaps it is the “sports 
community” which should be running scared. She will surely want an inquest into 
the Euro 2016 debacle.


Bradley is the 14th holder of the post of culture secretary since it was 
created in 1992. How many can you name, and which have really made a mark? 
David Mellor, the “Minister of Fun”, was the first, but the fun didn’t last 
long. The Labour ones – Chris Smith, Tessa Jowell, James Purnell, Andy Burnham, 
Ben Bradshaw – have tended to be better than the Tories. What possessed John 
Major to give the job to Peter Brooke, a classic old Tory buffer, and the 
matronly Virginia Bottomley, heaven only knows.


The truth is the Tories don’t really do culture. Whereas Labour, in Blair’s 
early days, enlisted it into the Cool Britannia project, the Tories see it as a 
bit of a statist embarrassment. When they hear the word culture, they reach for 
the off switch, preferring whist to Whistler. The Tory culture secretaries have 
lasted noticeably less long than their Labour counterparts: Labour had five in 
13 years; the Tories have had nine in 11 years, a remarkable turnover. It’s an 
escalator – up for some, down for others, but always on the move.


Bradley, who is 46, is probably on the way up. She’s a mathematician and a tax 
expert, and maybe one day she will make her way to the Treasury. She’ll only 
have to suffer the culture, media and sport post for a year or so.Ars longa, 
politicus brevis, so no time to lose. First Night of the Proms tomorrow, Ms 
Bradley. See you there?

 