
In Singapore, in autumn 1967, hundreds of men and boys hurried to hospital 
emergency rooms, clutching their penises, convinced they were rapidly 
retracting into their bodies and that if they let go of them, they’d die. Such 
panics aren’t as rare as you might imagine. In the early 2000s, in Nigeria and 
Benin, several people were killed in retaliation for using magic to shrink 
their enemies’ genitals. The vanishing-penis phenomenon – known by its 
south-east Asian name, koro – is listed in the psychiatry bible, the DSM, and 
has cropped up worldwide for centuries.

A common response is to scoff at the ignorance of the uneducated. But in The 
Geography Of Madness 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/geography-of-madness.html>, journalist Frank 
Bures shows that what such “culture-bound syndromes” demonstrate is the 
astonishing power of culture and belief – on all of us. Whether you’re 
Beninese, Bolivian or British, the ways your life goes wrong will be heavily 
influenced by how you believe itcould go wrong.

Self-styled rationalists often seek to debunk the influence of mind over body: 
it seems too damned weird that, for example, women who believe they’re at risk 
from heart disease are 3.6 times more likely to die from heart attacks than 
those with identical risk factors, but who lack the belief. (That’sa 1992 
finding <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1585898> from the respected, 
long-term Framingham Heart Study.) But on second thoughts, wouldn’t it be 
weirder if the staggeringly complex organ between our ears didn’t exert strong 
effects on all the other, less complex organs it coordinates and controls? One 
effect that’s especially relevant here, Bures explains, is “bio-attentional 
looping”: you fear something, which causes you to monitor your body for 
symptoms, which – lo and behold! – you find. That heightens your fear, which 
increases your self-monitoring, and so on. It’s no coincidence that in almost 
every recorded case of koro, the victim already knew of the condition, so was 
primed to detect it.

I’ll leave it as an exercise for the reader to determine whether merely 
monitoring your body for signs of genital retraction (or nipple retraction, the 
female version) can induce the feeling it’s happening, but can anyone doubt 
that bio-attentional looping affects us in countless other ways? We keep 
reading about howwe’re all underslept and distracted these days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/01/uk-hours-sleep-night-report-average-royal-society-for-public-health>
, so we can’t help scanning the body for the signs, which obligingly present 
themselves. (Are you stressed? Feel carefully for traces of tension in the 
body. Keep going. OK – now are you stressed?)

Why thinking like a computer scientist can help with big decisions | Oliver 
Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/29/thinking-like-computer-scientist-oliver-burkeman>
It hardly matters that the belief starts off being false, since believing it 
makes it true. Those koro victims didn’t have vanishing penises, obviously. But 
once they believed it could happen, the sensations of shrinkage were real. And 
what’s the difference between believing you’re stressed and being stressed? 
There isn’t one. We relate to the world, even our own bodies, through a thick 
web of beliefs, of which we’re largely unaware. You might be tempted to respond 
thatyour beliefs are the reasonable ones to hold. Perhaps. But then of course 
that’s what you’d believe.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 