
“Kindness is a language which the deaf can hear and the blind can see.” – 
attributed to Mark Twain.

Well said, but Twain omits that kindness makes your head spin when it’s from a 
smart, single, sexy woman and you’re a grieving middle-aged bloke.

I’m sitting at my friend Jo’s kitchen table in her house in Scotland. I like 
her company. She didn’t know Helen or me previously, taking me as I now am – 
never looking over my shoulder or tap dancing around my bereavement. She offers 
advice based on many years of raising her children alone, having a son in 
Matt’s class. Indeed, she has a single-mindedness about not just coping but 
making their lives richer. This makes her easy kindness and friendship even 
more touching.

Jo is wildly beautiful, fun and confident. Could we ever be more than friends? 
My head starts spinning …

And friendship it is, offered with a naive and delightful lack of awareness 
that – as the town’s most eligible divorcee – her friendship with its most 
recent widower may lead some people to paint her scarlet if they believed she 
had amorous intent so soon after Helen’s death. She has no such plans, despite 
the fact that we’re alone in the middle of nowhere; her invitation and my 
acceptance of it known to no one.

Jo raises her head from the Aga, raven hair sticking to her flushed face, blue 
eyes sparkling with the enthusiasm that so characterises her, “Fancy some 
homemade apple crumble, Adam?”. She’s wildly beautiful, fun and confident. 
Could we ever be more than friends? Thinking this, my head starts spinning and 
not simply because of the Butty Bach beer she favours.

I’ve already shared my lack of guilt at my libido kickstarting itself in 
Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/17/when-is-the-right-time-for-a-widowers-libido-to-wake-up>
, but this is something far more treacherous. It wouldn’t be wrong to fall for 
someone, indeed Helen and I discussed it, but surely that timeline is measured 
in years, not months? What sort of impact would it have on Millie and Matt or 
would it have to be a secret for ages and therefore be something shabby, small 
and doomed?

Even though I know none of this is vaguely on Jo’s agenda, I really like her 
and did from the moment we met. The theory that patients fall in love with 
their doctors is well known and I wonder whether I’m responding that way to her 
kindness. Only time will tell. I am certain that had Helen not died I wouldn’t 
have noticed Jo, but then she would not have made contact – another bleak, 
virtuous circle.

Parking the ramblings of the emotionally stunted 12-year-old that I seem now 
to be, Jo has a stellar professional career yet is so successful in raising two 
fantastic boys. That in itself provides hope for successful single parenthood 
and hope is what I need.

There is a ridiculously heavy statue in my garden (a birthday present for 
Helen) of Pandora whose box, once the evils of the world were released, held 
only hope. It’s what’s left and what keeps me sane on bad days now I’ve almost 
banished the bottle. Seeing Jo’s living testimony to how well a single parent 
can inspire their children to thrive is psychotherapy without the couch. Albeit 
that her wild passion for life makes me wonder what she’d be like on it.

Enough. This is something I need to deal with. My connection to Jo was 
hard-forged in the extremity of my grief and will probably survive time and 
distance. I love my sister-in-law Sarah so why not love my sister-in-loss Jo? 
With her I’ve felt happy in a way I’d thought gone for good and not (entirely) 
because of her fantastic crumble. I don’t want to alienate her with the sort of 
unexpected and ill-delivered pass I’ve been on the receiving end of myself.

Even knowing all that, sitting on my surrogate sibling’s sofa drinking, 
chatting and laughing into the late evening, I wonder how I’d react if Jo 
leaned in to kiss me. Knowing the answer and looking over her shoulder into the 
deep darkness of the Highland night, I expect to see hooded figures carrying 
flaming torches and pitchforks as Helen’s friends, family and the more 
judgmental fellow travellers on grief’s journey get wind of my thoughts.

To be honest, though, given that it’s only a few months since Helen died, I 
may join them: “String him up.”

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/MrAdamGolightly>
 