
Going to the movies is a treat – a time to escape the horrors of the real 
world as we immerse ourselves in a pretend one. It’s even more pleasurable 
where a bog-standard blockbuster is involved. No thinking required. Going to 
the movies can be a miniature holiday for the mind.

But when Hollywood film-makers mess with the tried and tested formula, it 
makes me want to take that imaginary holiday cocktail I’m drinking and splash 
it in their faces.

I reached the end of my tether at a recent screening. It was the usual thing. 
There was the faffing at the ticket counter as my movie partner and I did the 
whole “I’ll pay”, “no, I’ll pay” dance with its regular finale – both of us 
thrusting our wallets into the face of the poor guy serving us and paying 
separately.

We each purchased an oversized bag of chocolates to go with our unnecessary 
bucket-sized drink of sugary cola. And once seated, 200 people tried and failed 
not to fiddle with their phones, unwittingly guiding any stragglers to their 
seats without the need for an usher.

But two hours into what was a reasonably pleasurable movie, bodies began 
swaying as if a gusty northerly had entered the cinema. Legs were scratched. 
Yawns stifled. The punters were getting restless. Yet we still had a full half 
hour to endure.

I don’t know about you, but unless a movie is a deep cinematic journey on 
which I’m learning grand lessons about life and humanity, I can switch off for 
approximately two hours max, at which point, like a hypnotherapy subject, I’m 
magically back in the room, wondering what the cat would like for dinner.

I’m happy to indulge a crappy film premise but I simply can’t pay attention to 
a crappy plotline for 150 minutes – let alone 180. Some stories deserve more 
time. If it’s worthy and has some intellectual weight, I don’t have to force 
myself to sit it out. I’m in the moment. But it’s time to call time on the 
bloated blockbuster.

If the role of Hollywood is to tell the same story over and over – reward, 
rinse and repeat. That story doesn’t need to get any longer. I’ve seen all 
generations of Planet Of The Apes (including the 60s versions) and I know out 
how that baby drives.

I assume that film-makers are spending more time on exposition and character 
development because of their current competition: the long-form TV series. Try 
telling that to the poor bloke who downed a beer before the movie started and 
another while it’s playing out. That extra battle scene hurts him on the 
inside. What works in our living room – with its close access to the bathroom – 
does not translate to the multiplex and its long toilet queues.

And that guff about it being our short attention spans to blame? Going to a 
big, dumb movie should not have to be an exercise in mental agility or physical 
endurance. Last time I checked, neither of those were on my holiday bucket list 
– just a litre of Coke Zero, thank you very much. Even on holiday, there’s only 
so much time we can spend being big and dumb before we want to go home.
 