
I absolutely bloody love Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. I really do. Presents, 
pantomimes, tinsel and trees, every ritual fills me with elf-like glee. So 
people moan about the commercialisation, blah blah blah, but it’s CHRISTMAS!!! 
Helen loved it even more. Having Millie and Matt allowed us to rekindle 
childhood delight that had never much dimmed.

Even with this backstory, I am shocked when two days before Halloween Matt 
chirps, “Look, Dad! It’s nearly Christmas,” pointing at a tree twinkling 
merrily in a window.

“It’s just a tree with lights on!” I reply, dismissing his thought too 
quickly, so challenging Matt’s youthful determination never to be wrong. On 
this occasion, this desire triumphs over his equal determination never to walk 
a step faster than needed. Bounding up the final steep steps of Whitby’s 
surprisingly named Khyber Pass, he reaches the tree pointing, “Look, Dad it’s 
got a bloody fairy on top.” So now “Christmas creep” has strayed into parts of 
the year where it doesn’t belong. In this case, it is made more ludicrous by 
the tree’s sparkly contrast with the “black with everything”Goth patina that 
covers Whitby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/nov/07/whitby-goth-weekend-in-pictures>
 especially at this time of year.

Reaching the car, I make a mental note to watch my swearing in front of Matt. 
The much bigger, darker note, though, is of a new weight on my shoulders as a 
dark cloud descends. Matt’s tree has highlighted the impending reality of 
spending our first Christmas without Helen as our festive cheerleader.

There is a myth that to offset the pain of injury, you can pinch yourself and 
focus your mind elsewhere. But how far do you go? As my friend Pete observes, 
“You don’t need a Nobel prize to know that if I cut my finger and you kick me 
in the balls, then I’ll forget all about the finger.” Even so, the premature 
Whitby tree did me a favour. The fear of team Golightly having a miserable 
Christmas without Helen has totally overshadowed the worry that, by Christmas, 
the words of Wham Rap!, “I’m a soul boy, I’m a dole boy”, could apply to me.

At work, my unwillingness to travel for the kids’ sake has come home to roost. 
“I’m afraid we’ve decided to move your role back to the US, Adam,” says my 
boss. I had hoped this would happen as a consequence of my no longer travelling 
but it is scary, even with the generous redundancy terms on offer. This may 
mean the end of my career, as I’m not sure that I’m prepared to work the long 
hours again while the children are children.

My employers have been great though. They behaved in a way that suggests they 
really are a “people business” irrespective of the less-committed version of me 
they experienced, pursued as I was by the demons of Helen’s cancer diagnosis 
shortly after I joined.

“Aren’t you worried you’ll run out of cash and have to sell the house?” 
tell-it-how-it-is colleague Roger asks, but beautifully the answer is, “No”. 
Perhaps selfishly, I subscribe to the thought attributed to Dostoevsky, 
“The soul is healed by being with children”, so I’m looking forward to it, and 
can park money troubles to a point in the future when my own soul is less 
frayed.

How much time should you spend with your children?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/28/do-you-spend-enough-time-with-your-children>
As for the kids, the idea of my income plummeting, with a reduction in what we 
can afford, is I hope offset by the fact that they will see more of me. A dad 
is for every day not just for Christmas, despite what thenew Sainsbury’s ad 
suggests <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bq5SGSCZe4E> (a good effort whose 
great observation is far removed from the judgment bypass it had with itsfirst 
world war ad <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NWF2JBb1bvM>in 2014).

I do believe that by putting myself out there workwise, something will turn 
up. More pertinently, Millie and Matt’s happiness at the first Christmas 
without their mum far outstrips any working-life worries.

So shoulders back once again and start planning the best Christmas possible. 
It is what Helen would want – indeed, expect – me to do. I’ll take my lead from 
George and Andrew on this one: “Make the most of every day. Don’t let hard 
times stand in your way.” Whamtastic!

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 