
The losing habit

They say the English are the only people who feel schadenfreude about 
themselves, and anyone who stuck with English cricket through the 1990s will 
know there is some truth in that. Back then you had to try to find some small 
measure of pleasure in their losses, which came around with ritual regularity. 
There was the rollercoaster thrill of their batting collapses, the dizzy lurch 
of a sudden but inevitable turn for the worse, and the meditative contemplation 
of their long and fruitless days in the field, watching the opposition’s score 
tick, the thought of taking the 10th wicket a kind of cricketing koan, as 
inconceivable as the sound of one hand clapping. Following England, you learned 
to be good at losing.

You had to, because England lost a lot of Tests, 43 in the 90s. Their win/loss 
ratio was worse than that of every other Test-playing nation apart from New 
Zealand, who still beat England in 1999, and Zimbabwe, who drew in the only 
series they played against England in the decade. Things are different now. 
Better. Since 2000, England sit third in the win/loss table, behind Australia 
and South Africa. Cut it down to this current decade, and they rise to second. 
In among the muddle‑headed fuzz of memories from the final day of the Ashes 
series at The Oval in 2005, I distinctly recall an embarrassing encounter with 
a 10‑year‑old attending his very first Test, and my tipsy insistence that he 
didn’t know how good he had it.

There were hints of all this during the first Test in Bangladesh, especially 
on the fourth and fifth days, when you could sense once again that a number of 
England’s supporters wouldn’t have begrudged the home side a well-earned 
victory. You could hear it on Sky, where Mike Atherton kept asking Athar Ali 
Khan to explain just how much a win against England would mean, and on Test 
Match Special, where Dan Norcross took genuine relish in the idea that he might 
witness a significant bit of cricket history. Which isn’t to say that they or 
anyone else wanted England to lose, only that they were able to find some 
consolation in the idea that they might.

Which you might describe as good sportsmanship. But it’s more than that. Some 
of England’s most significant contributions to cricket have been made by losing 
games. Test cricket started with an English defeat, at Melbourne in 1877, and 
progressed with a hastily arranged second Test at the same venue only because 
the first had proved such a success. “The game was watched with intense 
excitement by enthusiastic crowds,” reported the Times, “and those who could 
not get to the ground clustered round the newspaper offices to see the last 
despatches from the seat of war placarded on the door posts.”

England were without Grace, but took the defeat with more of it than WG ever 
mustered. Their skipper, James Lillywhite, described Australia’s victory as “a 
distinction that no Englishman will begrudge them”, his one cavil the worry 
that “the Australians will ‘blow’ about it for some time to come”. The 
Melbourne Age said the win was a “crushing reply to those unpatriotic theorists 
who would have us believe that the Australian race is deteriorating from the 
Imperial type”. Ever since, maiden victories against England have served as 
milestones in the development of Test teams, markers by which you can chart the 
growth of the sport through the 20th century.

The South Africans were next, at the Wanderers in 1906. They had to wait 17 
years, and got there, in the end, by inches, when Dave Nourse and Percy 
Sherwell put on 48 for the 10th wicket. Then the West Indians, quicker with it. 
It was in the sixth game, at Georgetown in 1930, when George Headley hit 114 in 
the first innings, and 112 in the second. This win the most resonant yet, 
coming so soon after Marcus Garvey had formed the People’s Political Party. In 
Headley, Michael Manley wrote, West Indian fans found “evidence to incorporate 
into their scheme of self-awareness”, he was “black excellence personified in a 
white world and in a white sport”.

These victories make men famous. India at the Madras Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Club in 1952, a match won by men 
whose names still ring with glory today, Pankaj Roy, Polly Umrigar, Vinoo 
Mankad. Pakistan soon after, at the Oval in 1954, Fazal Mahmood the hero. New 
Zealand at Wellington in 1978, after the longest wait of all, 48 years and 48 
Tests after their first, England skittled by Richard Hadlee. And then Sri Lanka 
in 1993, and a five-for for Muttiah Muralitharan. Zimbabwe haven’t done it yet 
and, since England have refused to play them these past 13 years, maybe never 
will. Which leaves Bangladesh.

There is history here. On the one hand, the very first Bangladesh national 
team fixtures were against a touring side sent out by the MCC in 1976-77. 
Bangladesh impressed, and were elected to Associate Membership of the ICC soon 
after. The MCC toured again in 1978-79 and 1980-81 – “thus,” Robin Marlar 
wrote, England was “indicating its care for cricket worldwide”. But on the 
other hand the English were the only country to abstain from the vote to elect 
Bangladesh to Test status in 1999, and have made a point of sending 
under‑strength sides on tour. There has been aid, and there has also been 
arrogance.

The eight Tests the two teams had played before this tour were one-sided, the 
closest of them the very first, England’s seven-wicket win at Dhaka. But the 
gap is tighter now, only 22 runs wide in Chittagong. And once that first win 
finally does come, English fans will feel angst, no doubt, but some 
satisfaction too, because it will mean that the game of Test cricket has grown 
stronger. Just so long as they don’t make a habit of it, as so many other 
countries seem to have done.

This is an extract taken from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, the Spin. 
To subscribejust visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>.
 