
In September 2009, the villagers of Katine joined Amref staff, the district 
chairman and his team of officials, local sub-county councillors and Guardian 
staff to discuss the project. It was a remarkable moment, to have 
representatives of all involved sitting down together to discuss what had 
worked and what still needed to be done. Villagers were making their voices 
heard and there were vigorous discussions with those who control government 
budgets for the entire Soroti district – Katine is just one of 17 sub-counties.

In many ways, that meeting in Soroti marked a major point in Amref's strategy, 
which had built governance into the project design from the start. The 
villagers' increased confidence was evident in their willingness to put forward 
their views on project priorities. It was the fruit of nearly two years of hard 
work building up the abilities of committees in every other area of the 
project: water source committees, village health teams (VHTs), parish 
committees, farmers' groups and parent-teacher associations. Amref believes it 
is this plethora of community groups which holds the key to the long-term 
sustainability of the project.

Amref has provided training in organisation, collaboration and budget planning 
to ensure the committees can lobby local government effectively to meet the 
needs of the community. This has been the hardest part of the project for 
journalists to describe, because it is about the building of relationships and 
the strengthening of the lowest levels of local government.

Key to Amref's original analysis when it arrived in Katine was that the 
decades of conflict in the area – and in particular the 2003 attack by the 
Lord's Resistance Army – had shattered the trust on which effective community 
co-operation depended. Amref saw one of its main tasks as rebuilding trust and 
collaboration so that the villagers themselves could run the schools and 
maintain the boreholes and village health teams once Amref had departed.

It was a strategy that necessitated working very closely with local government 
at both the sub-county and district levels so that the structures Amref was 
building would mesh into existing government policies. For example, the VHTs 
are modelled on a government scheme for voluntary village health workers. In 
due course, when Amref leaves, they should become part of the government scheme.

This approach has placed considerable constraints on the project, because 
Amref has insisted it must not create any structures that cannot be sustained 
by the government after it leaves. The issue came to a head when, in late 2009, 
Amref decided it had to withdraw the small food and travel allowances it had 
paid to those attending VHT training sessions. The government did not offer 
such allowances, argued Amref, so the system was unsustainable. But the VHTs 
responded by going on strike. The vital data collection work on disease and 
hygiene was disrupted for more than nine months.

Eventually, after lengthy negotiations with local government officials, a 
scaled-back version of allowances was reinstated in September 2010 and the VHTs 
went back to work. But the incident raises troubling questions about the 
long-term viability of the community structures developed by Amref. How will 
people remain motivated without Amref support?

Another aspect of the governance work has been Amref's efforts to ensure the 
centrality of women both in the governance of the project and in their 
community.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/katine/women> make up 50% of the 
water source committees, 39% of VHTs and 33% of the parish council 
representatives.

Traditionally, women have been very deferential towards men – the custom is 
that women go down on one knee when meeting a man, and domestic violence is 
rife – so Amref has been trying to challenge some deeply ingrained attitudes. 
Many of the new committees are still dominated by men.

Part of the problem is that many women of middle age – free of the immediate 
burdens of motherhood – have had very little education. They may have been 
married off or fallen pregnant very young, or simply had their schooling 
fragmented by the years of insecurity in the region. So when it comes to 
electing officials, women tend to lack the confidence to put themselves forward.

Susan Aima is an exception: unusually, she and her husband, Samuel, have 
decided to have only three children. She is the area councillor for her 
village, a parish councillor and vice-chairwoman of the sub-county.

"I try to help women who are in bad domestic situations," she says. "But women 
are often very reluctant to report their husbands unless they have been very 
badly beaten. It is the men whom we must sensitise."

On at least one occasion, Amref's work has prompted real conflict. In May 
2010, the Guardian reported the story of Mary (not her real name), a chairwoman 
of her village savings and loans association. She had received training in 
bookkeeping, and her position of responsibility had given her new status in the 
village. She also had access to loans and a share of the small profits along 
with the other members of the association.

Initially, her husband was pleased at her success. But this quickly turned to 
jealousy, and he complained that she was becoming too independent. When he 
heard a rumour she was having an affair, he beat her. Mary felt she had to 
resign, but Amref stepped in and managed to persuade the husband to accept his 
wife's new responsibilities. Meanwhile, the group found a way to resolve the 
issue by electing the husband as secretary to the association.

Janet Achung and Bena Alenyo were among a handful of women at one of the many 
planning and development training sessions organised by Amref. "We have been 
given a voice. We have a better health centre. We have clean water," they say. 
And they have more time. The installation of more boreholes and wells has cut 
down on the amount of time women have to spend collecting water. Giving women 
more control over their time, which seems such a small thing, has had a real 
impact on their lives.

Other aspects of the programme have shaken up previously entrenched attitudes. 
Take the distribution of mosquito bednets, an area in which Amref targeted 
women who were pregnant or had small children.

Alenyo says: "Men felt we were being unfair when we gave nets to mothers. It 
is very common that the men ended up with the nets. But they are slowly 
beginning to recognise the difference it makes to pregnant and feeding mothers 
if they are not suffering from fever."

Clearly, a three-year project is not long enough to transform the position of 
women, but some are hopeful that a vital process has started. James Obore, the 
council officer responsible for empowerment and planning, arrived in Katine 
only months before the project began, in 2007, and believes he has seen a real 
improvement.

"There were many issues," he remembers. "Domestic violence and divorce, child 
neglect and land disputes. A local court was convened and there were 40 cases. 
They were mainly about women who did not know their rights.

"In September, the court came again. There were two cases, both land disputes."

He attributes this shift to Amref's campaign to promote a greater 
understanding of rights and equip the people of Katine with the skills to 
handle domestic difficulties. There is still plenty of anecdotal evidence of 
domestic violence, as Mary would attest. Crucially, though, there has also been 
some encouraging progress.
 