
Italy's new prime minister has promised to put an extra €1,000 per year in the 
pockets of the country's low-paid workers as part of €10bn worth of tax cuts 
that he hopes will help jolt the eurozone's third-largest economy out of the 
doldrums.

In his first major pledges on economic policy since ousting his predecessor 
and party rival Enrico Letta last month, centre-left leaderMatteo Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi> targeted those Italians who 
earn less than €1,500 a month, as well as outlining measures to help businesses.

"We have never seen a project of reforms this substantial or significant," he 
said at a press conference on Wednesday at which he also confirmed his 
intention to clear the public administration's remaining €68bn arrears to the 
private sector by July, without explaining exactly how he would do it.

Other steps included a €500m fund for social entrepreneurs and €3.5bn for 
school maintenance.

Italy's youngest prime minister said the money for the measures would come 
from spending cuts, and insisted he would keep the country within the 3% budget 
deficit limit set by Brussels.

Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> has only just come up for air 
from a suffocating recession that saw the economy contract for nine straight 
quarters. Growth of 0.1% was recorded in the final three months of last year.

As well as the economy, Renzi, 39, is pursuing an ambitious series of 
constitutional changes which, if passed, would also see Italy's upper house of 
parliament transformed, and an entire layer of local government abolished.

On Wednesday his coalition government received a boost when the lower house of 
parliament approved a flagship electoral reform law aimed at giving Italy a new 
voting system that does not lead to political gridlock.

After a stormy passage through the chamber of deputies that exposed the deep 
divisions within his own centre-left Democratic party (PD), the bill was 
approved by 365 votes to 165, relying on a deal cut in January between Renzi 
and the centre-right leader,Silvio Berlusconi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/silvio-berlusconi>.

In a show of protest, MPs in Beppe Grillo's opposition Five Star movement 
(M5S) held up pictures of Renzi and Berlusconi united by a red heart alongside 
the words "condemned to love". The deal also caused outrage among many in the 
PD.

But Renzi was unrepentant. He welcomed the bill's approval on Twitter, 
declaring the move a 1-0 victory for politics over defeatism. "[Lower-chamber 
MPs] have shown that we really can change Italy," he wrote.

The champagne, however, will be kept on ice. Despite having been given the 
green light in one chamber, the bill now has to go to the senate for another 
lengthy, and probably even stormier, debate. That in itself is a clear 
indication, says Renzi, of the need for radical institutional reform.

He said the new electoral law would prevent the re-election of a grand 
coalition by providing for a runoff in the event of no party or formation 
winning more than 37% of the vote. It would also reduce the power of smaller 
parties, raising the thresholds below which a party will be unable to enter 
parliament.

The proposals are controversial, however, with some questioning their 
constitutionality. At the moment the law would still see Italians voting for 
candidates in blocked lists, a system many, particularly MPs in the M5S, 
criticise as anti-democratic. That – among several other issues – will 
resurface in the senate.

Implementing a new voting system that prevents the reoccurrence of last year's 
damaging post-electoral deadlock has been a priority for Renzi since before he 
wrested power from Letta.

Thanks to an election that left the centre-left bloc with a majority in one 
house but not in the other, Italy was left without a government for over two 
months. And when that government came, it was not destined to govern easily: 
the unwieldy big tent of centre-left, centre and centre-right was for months 
hamstrung by the legal affairs of Berlusconi, convicted last August of tax 
fraud.

As it stands, however, the law applies only to the lower house. That is a 
considerable obstacle, given that it was the upper house that posed the real 
challenge in terms of governability. It is, wrote the constitutional lawyer 
Michele Ainis in the Corriere della Sera on Wednesday, a "half-reform".

"A half-reform is not yet a reform," he warned, "especially not if this other 
half depends on the senate, the lions' den."

Renzi's answer to this conundrum is that there should be no senate, at least 
not in the form in which it now exists. He wants to ditch Italy's inefficient 
system of "perfect bicameralism", in which both houses of parliament have equal 
powers over the legislative process. Instead, the senate would be a chamber 
made up of local representatives with no power to pass or block legislation.

Although a concrete proposal is yet to come, it is expected to propose cutting 
the number of senators from more than 300 to around 160 – which brings the 
potential for protracted, incendiary debate.

Asked in an interview on the state broadcaster Rai on Sunday how he could be 
so sure current senators would effectively vote for their own dismissal, Renzi 
replied: "Because they are showing themselves to be people who are in line with 
the country; because they are showing themselves to be people who care more 
about Italy than they do about themselves.

"In politics there are also serious people, you know. We know that 1,000 
politicians [the total number of MPs across both houses] is too much."
 