
Bank bosses fighting proposals to force them to ringfence their high street 
operations from higher-risk investment banking businesses have been handed 
fresh ammunition today with a warning that the suggested split could wipe 0.3% 
off gross domestic product at a time when economic growth looks increasingly 
fragile.

A report by the highly regarded Item Club, the only independent economic 
forecasting group to use the Treasury model, says the ringfencing proposal 
would force up the cost of lending to large corporations by 1.5%. This would 
then hit the wider economy and "is likely to result in a loss of up to 0.3% of 
GDP".

The ringfencing proposal – designed to ensure that the government never again 
has to use taxpayers' cash to bail out the so-called "casino" operations of the 
major banks – is expected to be the cornerstone of the Independent Commission 
on Banking report, due to be published next Monday. TheICB, headed by Sir John 
Vickers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/apr/11/banks-breathe-sigh-of-relief-vickers-report>
, was set up by the government after the election last year to find ways of 
making the banks safer. Its interim report in April backed ringfencing together 
with a proposal to force the banks to increase their core tier 1 capital 
holdings to 10%.

The Item Club's predictions come amid mounting pressure for the Vickers 
proposals to be watered down. Reports over the weekend suggested that the prime 
minister has told senior officials that the ICB proposals must be reviewed if 
they are too harsh and that "light touch" regulation should be adopted if a 
tougher approach might put economic growth is at risk. He is also said to be 
worried that HSBC andBarclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> 
might relocate abroad rather than comply with ringfencing.

The banks have been lobbying hard to dilute the proposals or delay their 
adoption, arguing that stricter regulation could damage the wider economy. Last 
week, CBI boss John Cridland lent his support, saying it would be "barking mad" 
for the government to impose any changes on the banks that might impinge on 
their ability to provide the finance businesses need to grow. On Friday, 
Barclays boss Bob Diamond held talks withGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> to press the banks' case, 
and Ana Botín, the chief executive of Santander in the UK, will see the 
chancellor this week.

The business secretary, Vince Cable, who has long favoured a tough clampdown 
on the banks and supports the ringfencing proposal, last week accused the banks 
of being "disingenuous in the extreme" in their attempts to derail the reform.

When the proposals for ringfencing were first outlined in April they were 
viewed as relatively limp, and bank shares rose. Vickers was forced to deny 
that his commission had not gone far enough with its suggestions for reform.

According to the Item Club, ringfencing could push up the cost of wholesale 
funding to the investment banking divisions. At the same time, financial 
markets might demand that the investment banks – implicitly stripped of their 
government guarantees – hold tier 1 capital of 14%. "This could result in an 
increase in the cost of bank lending to large UK corporates of up to 150bp", 
says the report.

The big banks are also under attack from US authorities, which are attempting 
to recoup some of the £85bn poured into supporting Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, 
the guarantors for most US mortgages and leading investors in bonds backed by 
sub-prime mortgages.

The US Federal Housing Finance Agency filed lawsuits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/02/us-authorities-sue-banks-subprime>
 against 17 banks on Friday, including HSBC, Barclays and Royal Bank of 
Scotland, claiming they mis-sold the sub-prime investments. The claims could 
run into tens of billions of pounds.
 