
I first made choux pastry last summer. I did a few shifts in a restaurant to 
learn some new skills, and it was quite the baptism of fire. “Recipes” were 
scant lists of ingredients, half methods, several things on the go at once – 
fine for the practised chef, but brand new to me. I worked it out, researching 
methods surreptitiously online, studying for hours after my shift. Then along 
came choux and I panicked. “I can’t do this,” I wailed. “It’s easy,” the head 
chef soothed. “Of course you can.” And I did. Because, in fact, it is easy.

(Makes approximately 10)

You will need a piping bag and nozzle, or a heart-shaped cookie cutter.

150g plain flour

1 tsp sugar

1 tsp salt

250ml cold water

100g butter

4 eggs

For the topping:

100g dark chocolate, in chunks

A generous knob of butter

For the filling:

500ml double cream

Seeds from 1 vanilla pod (or a few drops vanilla essence)

2 tbsp icing sugar (or caster, at a push)

Put the flour, sugar and salt in a bowl and give them a quick stir.

Bring the water to the boil in a good-sized saucepan and add the butter. When 
it has melted, remove the pan from the heat. Add the flour mix and beat quickly 
to form a smooth paste that will come away from the sides of the pan. Set to 
one side for a few minutes to cool. Heat your oven to 180C/350F/gas mark four.

When the mixture has cooled slightly, add the eggs and mix well. The finished 
dough should be glossy and soft, dropping extremely slowly from a wooden spoon. 
Either spoon it into a piping bag to pipe into heart shapes, or press gently 
into a heart-shaped cookie cutter. Repeat until all the dough is used up. Bake 
in the centre of the oven for 20 minutes, until risen and golden – do not be 
tempted to open the door.

For the topping, heat a small saucepan of water and place a bowl on top. Add 
the chocolate and butter and stir as they melt.

For the filling, beat the double cream with the vanilla and icing sugar, until 
stiff and doubled in size.

Remove the pastries from the oven, allow to cool, then slice in half 
horizontally. (Don’t leave them whole – the steam that causes them to rise and 
puff will make them soft and soggy.)

Smear the cream filling generously on to the bottom halves of your hearts, and 
sandwich back together. Spoon your chocolate ganache on top, and pop the hearts 
into the fridge for a quick set. Stored in an airtight container, they’ll last 
for three days in the fridge. Mine didn’t.

 * For more recipe ideas, see agirlcalledjack.com <http://agirlcalledjack.com/>
 or follow@MsJackMonroe <http://twitter.com/MsJackMonroe> on Twitter.
 