
I discovered brown bread ice-cream in an old copy of Mrs Beeton’s Everyday 
Cookery, and as an avid maker of simple ice-cream and brown bread, decided to 
combine my recipes. You don’t need an ice-cream maker. If you have an electric 
whisk or cake mixer, it will come in handy, but you can make this without – you 
just need a little patience and a firm hand.

(Serves 4)

100g wholemeal or brown bread

200ml milk

3 egg yolks

90g fine sugar (caster or soft brown will do)

300ml double cream

A fistful of sultanas

For the topping:

2 tsp breadcrumbs

1 tsp brown sugar

Few pinches ground cinnamon

Soak your bread in a little milk and stand to one side for an hour or so.

Separate your eggs – I pour my whites into a jar and use them for meringues, 
egg-white omelettes and egg-fried rice – and beat the yolks in a large mixing 
bowl until pale and fluffy.

Add the sugar and beat well. Pour in the cream and whisk until the mixture has 
almost doubled in size. Run a finger through: it should feel airy, light and 
fluffy, and not fall off your finger. A common mistake is to beat too hard, 
knocking the air out of it as quickly as you beat it in – you want a firm and 
rhythmic hand, but not too much vigour. It should stand in soft peaks when you 
lift your whisk out. If you scrimp on this step, your ice-cream will set rock 
hard, and while it won’t be unpleasant, it will be that bit more difficult to 
eat.

Drain the milk from the brown bread, give it a gentle squeeze and tear it into 
small pieces. Fold it through the whipped cream mixture with the sultanas.

Pour it into a loaf tin or plastic container. Mix together the breadcrumbs, 
sugar and cinnamon and scatter over the top (if you forget this stage, you can 
do it just before serving).

Seal the container with a lid or clingfilm, and freeze for at least four hours.

Remove from the freezer five minutes before serving, to allow it to soften a 
little.

• For more recipe ideas, see agirlcalledjack.com <http://agirlcalledjack.com/> 
or follow@MsJackMonroe <http://twitter.com/MsJackMonroe> on Twitter.
 