
Mac’n’cheese is a favourite in our household, and conversations with other 
parents show it is popular among lots of people with young children for 
smuggling in vegetables, scraps and leftovers. This one was inspired by a 
smoked mackerel and cream cheese pâté I made one Christmas. I wondered if the 
fishy, creamy flavours would translate to a baked pasta dish – and they did. It 
is not a traditional mac’n’cheese recipe by any stretch of the imagination, but 
it has become a firm favourite at our table. To keep it low cost, I’ve used a 
mixture of mackerel and sardines.

(Serves 4)

350g macaroni or penne

2 tbsp sunflower or vegetable oil

2 spring onions, finely chopped

2 tbsp flour

400ml milk

150g cream cheese

200g smoked mackerel

1 small tin of sardines

A fistful of parsley, finely chopped

A slice of bread, grated into crumbs

A handful of hard, strong cheese, grated

Cook your pasta according to packet instructions (usually about 12 minutes) 
and heat your oven to 180C/350F/gas mark four.

In a large, separate pan, gently heat the oil, add the onion and cook on a low 
heat for a few minutes. Sprinkle in the flour and mix well to form a paste (if 
you prefer to use butter for a roux, please do, but the oil and flour combo 
hasn’t let me down yet).

Splash in some milk and mix well, then add the cream cheese and beat until it 
is smooth. Add the rest of the milk, a splash at a time. Crank the heat up to a 
medium-high, stirring occasionally as the mixture thickens.

Flake your mackerel and sardines into a bowl, removing any visible bones if 
you like (although they’re a good source of calcium and perfectly edible). Tip 
the fish into the sauce and stir.

Drain your pasta, add it to the sauce and stir again. Transfer it to a large, 
ovenproof dish. Top with parsley, breadcrumbs and cheese, and bake for 10 
minutes or until the cheese is melted and golden.

For more recipe ideas, see agirlcalledjack.com <http://agirlcalledjack.com/> 
or follow@MsJackMonroe <https://twitter.com/msjackmonroe> on Twitter.
 