
As Jackie McNamara spoke to journalists after York City’s 1-1 draw at 
Braintree Town on Saturday the visitors’ chairman, Jason McGill, could be seen 
leaning on a wall behind the Scot and staring at his phone. Watching on, the 
thought crossed the mind that he may well have been inspecting applications for 
the manager’s job just as the incumbent was suggesting he may yet stay in the 
post.

Jackie McNamara steps down as York City manager – but stays on as caretaker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/jackie-mcnamara-york-city> 
A crazy prospect but these are crazy times at York as they struggle near the 
bottom of the National League and only two people really know what will happen 
next: McNamara and McGill. The pair spoke about the former’s future on the 
coach journey home from Essex and it is now a case of waiting for an official 
statement. York supporters can only hope it is more definite than the one they 
read last Wednesday.

Delivered after the 6-1 defeat at bottom-placed Guiseley the previous evening, 
it stated McNamara would resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/07/york-city-jackie-mcnamara-braintree-town>
 as manager if the team failed “to gain a positive result at Braintree”. A 
highly unusual step, it led to more questions than answers: what constitutes a 
“positive result”? A win? Would a draw do? And what if York lost 5-1? After 
all, that’s more positive than 6-1.

Having confirmed it was his idea to issue the ultimatum, McNamara said the 
intention was to provoke a reaction from his players, and he certainly got 
that. The visitors delivered a hard-working display here against fellow 
National League strugglers and appeared on course for what would have been a 
first away win in 30 matches following Simon Heslop’s fifth-minute strike, only 
to be denied when Braintree were awarded an 89th-minute penalty. Lee Barnard 
converted it in resounding fashion.

McNamara looked on passively as the majority of the 728 spectators celebrated 
and afterwards came little sense that the preceding 90 minutes had been the 
positive result he had been hoping for. “I’ve got a lot of thinking to do. I 
need to speak to the chairman first, that’s the most important person to speak 
to,” said McNamara, as McGill lurked in earshot.

The manager went on to admit that “results on the pitch haven’t been good 
enough” which, quite frankly, is an understatement. McNamara arrived at York 
last November with the brief of keeping the club in League Two but they 
finished bottom, having won just five times. This campaign started with 
McNamara signing 20 players with the intention of galvanising his squad for 
life outside the Football League, only for York to lose eight of their opening 
14 fixtures before Saturday, with the hammering by Guiseley the undoubted low 
point, given the opposition began the game at the foot of the table.

Jackie McNamara gives own ultimatum at York City: ‘Will I stay or will I go?’ 
| Nick Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/07/york-city-jackie-mcnamara-braintree-town>
McNamara was also fined about £500 last month for not having a valid train 
ticket as he travelled from his family home in Edinburgh and has fallen out 
with the local newspaper, The Press, partly because of their reporting of the 
incident. Little wonder the majority of York supporters have had enough of the 
former Celtic and Scotland full-back. As the comedian and York fan Richard 
Herring put it: “Even Jeremy Corbyn can’t believe Jackie McNamara hasn’t quit.”

The 42-year-old did actually tender his resignation after the Guiseley game 
only to be persuaded by McGill to carry on. Partly this was because of the 
chairman’s admiration for McNamara but also so he could start gathering 
applications from potential successors without having to make an immediate 
appointment. To quote Mark Twain, truth is stranger than fiction.

So instead came the statement and a performance against Braintree that 
suggests the players at least want McNamara to stay. They weren’t great and 
were indebted to their goalkeeper, Kyle Letheren, for keeping them ahead for so 
long in what was a dreadful contest – the 28-year-old made two double saves and 
stopped Sim Akinola’s 11th-minute penalty before being beaten by Barnard – but 
their commitment to the cause was undeniable. The question now is whether 
McNamara will still be around come Saturday’s FA Cup fourth-round qualifying 
tie home to Curzon Ashton.

“A few people have probably seen this result today and decided to send their 
CVs in, I know a few have already,” McNamara said after a point that lifted 
York one place to 19th. “That’s part and parcel of this industry and being a 
manager can be tough. But I love football, it’s been a big part of my life, so 
we’ll see what happens.”

Talking points, by Nick Miller

• A momentous day for AFC Wimbledon. A little over 14 years since a group of 
disaffected fans established the club and 12 since a league game was first 
played in Milton Keynes, the soul of the old club is above the shell of it in 
the league.Sunday’s 3-1 win over Oxford United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/09/afc-wimbledon-above-mk-dons-league-one?CMP=twt_gu>
 put AFC one point and two places ahead of MK Dons in the League One table, 
causing much glee among their supporters. Not that manager Neil Ardley was 
going overboard, preferring to focus on surviving in the division. “I won’t 
look at the league,” said Ardley. “I’ll let our fans enjoy that. It’s about 
getting to 50 points and then taking stock.” The first ever league meeting 
between the two sides [they’ve already faced each other in the FA Cup] comes on 
December 10. Should be spicy.

AFC Wimbledon climb above MK Dons in the football pyramid for first time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/09/afc-wimbledon-above-mk-dons-league-one>
• Bradford City’s quietly excellent start to the season continues. The Bantams 
have been out of the top two divisions since being relegated from Division One 
(now the Championship) in 2004, and efforts to return there have ended in 
various forms of frustration and calamity. Now, with Phil Parkinson having left 
for Bolton in the summer and club hero Stuart McCall returning to have a second 
crack at managing the side, things are looking good. Saturday’s 2-0 win over 
Shrewsbury, sealed with a 96th minute Haris Vuckic penalty, extended their 
unbeaten start to the season, cemented their place in the automatic promotion 
places and put them one point behind leaders Scunthorpe. McCall’s first spell 
at Valley Parade was broadly a disappointment, but round two looks more 
promising.

• Hats off to Plymouth Argyle defender Sonny Bradley for keeping things 
interesting on Saturday. Bradley scored three goals on the Pilgrims’ 2-1 win 
over Stevenage: two at the right end, and one at the wrong, then completed his 
afternoon with a flourish by getting booked for dissent. “I didn’t even see it 
go in,” said Bradley of his first. Insouciant. Stevenage boss Darren Sarll 
wasn’t quite so pleased with life, though. “That’s why we’re in League Two, the 
players are in League Two and that’s why I’m the manager of a League Two side,” 
he said, complaints ranging from his side’s passing to their marking at 
set-pieces. “When people aren’t doing their job it makes it very difficult for 
me to come here and defend it,” he continued, “and sit here and be the big man 
that screens people who keep making mistakes week in, week out.” Ouch.

• There was no Championship action on the pitch over the weekend, but Derby 
chose the start of England’s game against Malta to try burying shambolic news. 
Manager Nigel Pearson has been away from the club for the best part of a 
fortnight after being suspended, following what we’ll call a ‘forthright 
disagreement’ with chairman Mel Morris. And Derby confirmed the inevitable on 
Saturday, Pearson’s short but rocky tenure officially brought to an end, 
winning just one of his nine games in charge. “The speculation in some areas of 
the media has not made the separation a smooth one,” said Pearson in a 
statement, making it two East Midlands clubs in a little over a year that he 
has left under a cloud. Derby said they will now concentrate on looking for a 
replacement, but caretaker Chris Powell will remain in charge for the 
foreseeable future.
 