
Jamie T 
 Panic Prevention 
 (Virgin) £11.99

Distinctly underwhelming live, bassist Jamie T has made a solid debut album. 
The Streets casts a long shadow over these mildly philosophical tales of 
inebriation and hanging out, but Jamie has other nuances to show off, such as 
protest folk and Jamaican sing-jaying. Weirdest of all is how this son of 
Wimbledon refracts his own cockney glottals through the Clash karaoke of 
Californian punks Rancid, his teenage heroes. His chief asset, however, is a 
killer sense of rhythm that makes everything here - the cheap technology, the 
magpie musical filching, the neologisms ('We got pistolah!') - roll along 
nicely.
Kitty Empire 

Field Music 
Tones of Town 
(Memphis Industries) £10.99

Field Music know there's no point in wearing your influences on your sleeve 
without customising them. The Beatles' Sgt Pepper is an undeniable template for 
their second album, yet the Sunderland trio possess the imagination to 
experiment with their source material, creating gorgeously eclectic pop in the 
process. The catchy vocal melodies and swooping strings that more than hint at 
the Fab Four are off set by beat-box solos, discordant synths and rapidly 
shifting time signatures, which stop things getting too reverential. One 
classic has spawned another.
Henry Barnes

Mira Calix 
Eyes Set Against The Sun 
(Warp) £11.99

To save you from any embarrassing faux-pas, be warned that the title of 
electronic artist Mira Calix's third album has a pause in the middle, after 
'Set'. That fits the music rather well, though whether because it's a load of 
pretentious ambient tosh or an imaginative exploration of the space between 
sounds will depend on your perspective. There are certainly elements of the 
former in the found sounds and children's choirs that are scattered across this 
record. But there are snatches of ghostly melody here too and, overall, it 
makes for a weirdly evocative concoction that charms and chills in equal 
measure.
Ally Carnwath

The Shins 
Wincing The Night Away 
(Sub Pop) £10.99

It's third time lucky for those sweet, melancholy indie boys, famously made 
famous by Natalie Portman's character's gushing recommendation in Garden State, 
and they've pulled it off. That shimmery Shins sound is intact - with Sixties 
surf drums and guitar jangle forming the backbone and frontman James Mercer's 
four years in Eighties Britain as a teenager still evident. Ever poppier 
laments recall Moz, the Cure and the spirit of new romanticism, and there are 
some fantastic tunes to sing and dance to - notably 'Australia' and 'Phantom 
Limb'. Although Wincing fails to push any musical frontiers, this is a pleasing 
collection.
Katie Toms

Brett Dennen 
So Much More 
 (Dualtone) £12.99

Getting singled out from the endless queue of singer-songwriters isn't easy. 
This 25-year-old Californian has pulled it off thanks first to a confident, 
engaging voice. That Dennen's a six-foot redhead who tours incessantly has also 
helped him get noticed. Though the songs on his second album sometimes wear 
their influences too openly - 'She's Mine' can be sung to Dylan's 'I Want You' 
- they're blessed with unusual phrasing and bold images. Quality backings that 
dip into world influences, Paul Simon-style, also help, and though he's 
sensitive and bruised, Brett never simpers. James Blunt fans looking for some 
backbone should investigate.
Neil Spencer

Alan Barnes & Alan Plater <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater> 
 Seven Ages of Jazz 
(Woodville) £13.99

This is essentially the curious history of jazz in Britain, wittily recounted 
in 12 (not the seven the title might imply) songs by modern swing's answer to 
Gilbert and Sullivan. Along with being a marvellous saxophonist, Barnes is a 
dab hand at composing spot-on pastiche that stands up as good jazz on its own 
account. Plater, who seems to spend as much time enjoying the local jazz scene 
as writing plays, spins lyrics with a cool wit that at times recalls the great 
Johnny Mercer. With the versatile Liz Fletcher to sing them and a terrific 
eight-piece band to play them, the results are hugely enjoyable.
Dave Gelly
 