
The culture secretary, Jeremy Hunt, is willing to hand over texts, phone 
records and private emails in an effort to prove he was unaware that his 
disgraced special adviser had acted without his authority by providing a stream 
of commercially confidential information toNews Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> during its bid to take 
full control of BSkyB.

Hunt's special adviser Adam Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith> fell on his sword on 
Wednesday an hour before prime minister's questions, admitting that he had 
allowed the perception to develop that the Murdochs' News Corp had "too close a 
relationship with the culture department".

Hunt refused to resign, saying he had personally acted with scrupulous 
impartiality, and insisted he had been unaware of "the volume and tone" of 
Smith's contacts with News Corp. He said his special adviser had "overstepped 
the mark unintentionally".

Hunt insisted he had acted in an impartial way, pointing out that on four 
separate occasions he taken the independent advice of his media regulators 
about the bid, even though these decisions ran counter to the commercial 
interests of News Corp.

Although Hunt survived a torrid day, he still suffered a series of blows, 
leaving his political career hanging in the balance, possibly for months:

• The stockmarket watchdog the Financial Services Authority is understood to 
be investigating whether Smith's emails to News Corp amounted to a breach of 
market abuse rules.

• Lord Justice Leveson rejected Hunt's request to bring forward his evidence 
to the inquiry, meaning he will not give evidence until mid-May at the 
earliest, leaving open the possibility that the minister will dangle for 
several weeks.

Leveson told the inquiry, that "although I have seen requests for other 
inquiries and other investigations" – a coded reference to the letter he had 
received from Hunt – "it seems to me that the better course is to allow this 
inquiry to proceed" on the timetable already intended. Politicians such as 
Hunt, but also David Cameron and Tony Blair, are scheduled to appear between 
mid-May and mid-June.

• Labour demanded that David Cameron instruct his independent adviser on the 
ministerial code to investigate at least three potential breaches of the code 
by Hunt. The code requires ministers to be responsible for the actions of their 
special advisers. The Labour leader, Ed Miliband, accused Cameron of putting 
cronies before the country, and revived an old Labour attack on John Major's 
government, saying a "shadow of sleaze" hung over the government.

• Downing Street said Hunt must be willing to hand over phone records, emails 
and phone texts if requested by Leveson, to prove he was entirely unaware that 
his special adviser was criticising Ofcom and co-operating with News Corp to 
find ways to wave the deal through. So far, Leveson has only seen the News Corp 
email records of the phone calls between Hunt's office and Fréd Michel, News 
Corp's former public affairs director for Europe.

It has emerged that some of Michel's accounts of his contacts with government 
officials, including Nick Clegg's chief of staff Jonny Oates, are inaccurate or 
portray brief email exchanges as meetings. Tory MPs noted that Michel had in 
his emails repeatedly misreported his contacts with Smith as conversations with 
Hunt himself.

Michel has conceded that he had no direct contact with the culture secretary 
after he assumed responsibility for ruling on the BSkyB bid in December 2010. 
He insists he believed Smith was representing the views of his minister.

Number 10 conceded that Cameron had himself not conducted an inquiry into 
whether Smith had been truly operating independently of Hunt, saying instead 
the prime minister believed his culture secretary had acted properly.

Cameron rejected an inquiry by his independent adviser into the ministerial 
code, claiming Leveson himself had asked for no further inquiries to be 
launched.

Labour MPs are expected to ask Jonathan Stephens, the permanent secretary at 
the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, to explain his role when he 
appears in front of the public accounts committee. Hunt said Stevens had 
nominated Smith to be point of contact for News Corp, and that this had never 
been seen as a secret back channel.

Smith, and potentially Hunt, could be in most trouble over one email dated 24 
January 2011, in which Michel told News Corp executive James Murdoch that he 
had managed to get some information on Hunt's upcoming statement to parliament, 
adding: "Although absolutely illegal!"

The next day Hunt announced his intention to refer the takeover bid to the 
Competition Commission, but only after giving News Corp more time to address 
concerns about "potential threats to media plurality". Murdoch said that the 
"illegal" reference had been a "joke" - but Labour said Murdoch got "the very 
words thatJeremy Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> was 
going to use" before his statement to parliament.

There is no allegation that any trading on information took place. But unlike 
the US's security and exchange commission rules on insider trading, the UK's 
FSA need not show beneficial trades have been made under the market abuse rules 
to press charges.

Hunt's supporters, including the education secretary, Michael Gove, took to 
the airwaves to defend him. Rob Wilson, Hunt's parliamentary aide, drew up 
questions for MPs to ask after his Commons statement. In private, Conservative 
MPs were less positive.

One MP said the growing consensus was that Hunt would struggle to keep his job.
 