
He was, said Jeremy Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, a 
man of "integrity and decency" and his departure was a matter of "huge" 
personal regret. The Conservative culture secretary nonetheless swiftly 
accepted the resignation of his special adviser Adam Smith on Wednesday, 
prompting the Labour benches to accuse him of using his aide as a "human 
shield" who was "thrown to the wolves" to deflect attention away from his own 
close relationship with Rupert Murdoch's News Corp.

Smith announced his decision to quit after conceding on Wednesday morning that 
his "activities at times went too far".

The young policy adviser, described by one of his contacts in the sporting 
world as "Jeremy Hunt's mini-me", fell on his sword after correspondence 
between himself and theNews Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> lobbyist Frédéric Michel 
was aired at the Leveson inquiry.

His departure appeared to undermine the government's defence of Hunt. This 
centres on the charge that Michel had exaggerated, even outright distorted, 
accounts of his contact with Hunt and his team.

After Hunt gave a statement to the Commons, the Tory MP Mark Reckless said: 
"Do you agree that what these emails show is the shocking extent to which 
lobbyists exaggerate, embellish and invent the actual degree of access and 
influence they have?" Reckless was "exactly right", said Hunt.

But the Labour frontbencher Michael Dugher said the government was trying to 
paint Hunt's key policy adviser as a "Lee Harvey Oswald lone gunman", adding: 
"They've thrown the little guy to the wolves in order to save his boss's job."

The Labour MP Dennis Skinner asked Hunt: "Now your adviser has lost his job, 
doesn't it prove the theory that when posh boys are in trouble, they sack the 
servants?"

Intense attention will now focus on the precise role taken by the special 
adviser – or "spad" – in the BSkyB process, and the extent to which Hunt was 
aware of, or sanctioned, Smith's activities. Special advisers are a key part of 
any secretary of state's team: political appointees who are employed as civil 
servants but are free from the civil service requirement to show impartiality 
and objectivity.

One senior figure in the sporting world who met Smith regularly during his 
time working with Hunt, in government and opposition, said: "Adam's taken the 
bullet for Jeremy. Everyone knows spads are proxies for their bosses. Whenever 
I spoke to Adam, I knew that I was getting Jeremy. It was like talking to 
Jeremy." The pair even looked alike: "Adam was like Jeremy's mini-me."

Smith admitted he had told Michel more than he should have: "While it was part 
of my role to keep News Corporation informed throughout the BSkyB bid process, 
the content and extent of my contact was done without authorisation from the 
secretary of state.

"I do not recognise all of what Fréd Michel said, but nonetheless I appreciate 
that my activities at times went too far and have, taken together, created the 
perception that News Corporation had too close a relationship with the 
department, contrary to the clear requirements set out by Jeremy Hunt and the 
permanent secretary that this needed to be a fair and scrupulous process.

"Whilst I firmly believe that the process was in fact conducted scrupulously 
fairly, as a result of my activities it is only right for me to step down as 
special adviser to Jeremy Hunt."

An analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/apr/25/adam-smith-frederic-michel-correspondence>
 of text messages and emails exchanged between Michel and Smith – and those 
sent from Michel to James Murdoch and other News Corp top brass relaying 
Smith's remarks – show Michel was largely passing on an accurate summary of the 
intelligence he was receiving from Hunt's camp.

As Michel himself admitted in his witness statement to Leveson, he frequently 
implied to Murdoch he had spoken to Hunt himself (JH), when in fact his contact 
was almost always Smith. But the fact remains the information Michel was 
relaying was usually a fair precis of what Smith told him by text or email, 
often just a few minutes previously.

On 2 February 2011, for example, Michel received a text from Smith informing 
him that the Office of Fair Trading was in charge of overseeing News Corp's bid 
for BSkyB. Smith wrote at 11.53am: "Oft leading but if they ask for ofcom help 
they will provide it." Less than half an hour later, Michel emailed Murdoch 
saying: "Just got news from JH. He confirmed that for him OFT was leading, but 
if they ask for Ofcom's help, they will provide it."

On 30 June 2011, Smith gave Michel a tip about that day's parliamentary 
questions, saying Labour MPs Tom Watson and Ivan Lewis had tabled urgent 
questions about the BSkyB bid. Smith then updates Michel with the times the 
questions will be asked – presumably so News Corp can tune into BBC Parliament.

Afterwards, Michel texted Smith to give his opinion on the parliamentary 
session, congratulating Hunt on a "solid performance!". He asks Smith whether a 
decision on the bid "can be made during recess". Smith replied within the hour, 
saying: "It can be made in recess. Jeremy keen to do it before if possible 
though." Ten minutes after receiving that text, Michel emailed Murdoch to say: 
"JH just told me that he was very keen to make the final decision before the 
18th July. If needed his clearance CAN be made during recess but he is very 
keen to make it before that."

Those who know Michel say he was highly regarded within News Corp for his 
contacts across the political divide. A peerless networker, he was so plugged 
into all sides of the political establishment that he played tennis with the 
Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg and chose the Labour peer Lord Adonis as 
godfather to one of his three children.

In December 2010, 18 months after he started working for Murdoch, Michel was 
apparently 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/eu/8211735/Cameron-Merkel-and-Sarkozy-promise-to-freeze-EU-spending-as-the-Eurocrats-expand-their-realm.html>
 approached to become the very highly paid spokesman for Lady Ashton, the much 
maligned "high representative" of the European Union. He didn't take the job.

He has been friends with Adonis since his time at the London School of 
Economics in the 1990s, and knows Clegg well – their children go to the same 
school in south London. Clegg's spokesman confirmed on Wednesday that the two 
used to be tennis partners until Clegg became deputy prime minister and had no 
time.

Michel was once close to the leading Labour party figure Peter Mandelson after 
both were involved in the founding of the centre-left thinktank Policy Network. 
However, the two fell out in 2003, causing Michel to leave the operation and 
move into lobbying for the reputation management firm ReputationInc. It was 
there, sanitising the images of important people, that he also got to know the 
Lib Dem foreign minister, Jeremy Browne, who worked at the firm until 2003.
 