
Jeremy Hunt, the embattled culture secretary, is to disclose all his private 
correspondence over the BSkyB takeover deal to theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>.

Hunt will disclose any "relevant" emails and text messages to News Corporation 
executives and his former special adviserAdam Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith> over the controversial 
takeover bid, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport has confirmed.

Earlier on Friday, Hunt said he would disclose messages sent to Smith as Lord 
Oakeshott, the senior Liberal Democrat peer, joined the call by his party 
colleague Simon Hughes for David Cameron to refer the culture secretary to the 
independent adviser on the ministerial code, Sir Alex Allan. The Labour leader, 
Ed Miliband, accused the prime minister of "organising a cover-up" over the 
affair.

Smith resigned on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/apr/25/jeremy-hunt-adviser-adam-smith-quits?INTCMP=SRCH>
 after admitting that his communications with a News Corp lobbyist while the 
company was trying to take full control of BSkyB "at times went too far".

Hunt said on Friday: "I will be handing over all my private texts and emails 
to my special adviser to the Leveson inquiry and I am confident they will 
vindicate that I handled the BSkyB merger process with total propriety."

The DCMS later confirmed that Hunt would pass "all relevant information" on 
the matter – not just messages to Smith – to the inquiry.

A department spokesman said: "The secretary of state gave a statement to 
parliament this week in which he made it clear that he would be co-operating 
fully with the inquiry and submitting evidence in due course. He feels strongly 
that the inquiry is the right forum for this to be discussed, and this is the 
clear wish of the judge himself too. This is the right process for addressing 
these issues."

The culture secretary has faced mounting pressure since Tuesday, when the 
Leveson inquiry publishedmore than 160 pages of emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/interactive/2012/apr/24/jeremy-hunt-news-corp-leveson>
 between News Corp's European public affairs director, Frédéric Michel, and his 
boss, James Murdoch, detailing apparently extensive contact between Hunt's 
office and the lobbyist at a time when Hunt was considering the company's £8bn 
bid for the 60.9% of BSkyB it did not already own.

Hughes, deputy leader of the Lib Dems, refused on Thursday night to back Hunt 
over the BSkyB affair. Appearing onBBC1's Question Time 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b01gxswv/Question_Time_26_04_2012/>, 
Hughes said he could not understand why the prime minister had not referred the 
case for examination under the ministerial code of conduct.

Oakeshott said on Thursday night that Hughes "speaks for all Lib Dems. We all 
agree with him."

But Liberal Democrat officials representing Nick Clegg were less emphatic, 
saying: "Nick shares Simon's desire to get to the truth. Whether through 
Leveson or another route is a question of process."

The Conservatives argue that Leveson may not be able to rule on whether there 
has been a breach of the ministerial code since that is beyond the inquiry's 
terms of reference, but it can look at the evidence with which a judgment could 
be made.

Miliband said on Friday: "Every day David Cameron looks more like a prime 
minister organising a cover-up rather than standing up for the public. First he 
refuses to sackJeremy Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> 
despite the weight of evidence against him. Now, despite all-party calls to do 
so, he refuses even to ask the independent adviser on ministerial interests to 
examine whether Mr Hunt broke the ministerial code."

The shadow culture secretary, Harriet Harman, said Hunt should release the 
texts and emails to parliament and not just the Leveson inquiry. Harman accused 
the government of using the inquiry as "a big carpet under which they can sweep 
everything".

She accused the prime minister of doing everything in his power to avoid an 
investigation: "Lord Leveson's inquiry is of huge importance, but it is not in 
its terms of reference to look into breaches of the ministerial code.

"That is the job of the independent adviser, and the prime minister will not 
allow him to look into this."

Cameron's spokesman has acknowledged that Leveson's terms of reference do not 
allow the inquiry to examine breaches of the ministerial code but says Cameron 
sees no reason to refer the issue to Allan.

On Thursday, Hunt's most senior civil servant, Jonathan Stephens, refused 10 
times before a parliamentary committee to either confirm or deny his alleged 
role in allowing Smith to speak to Michel. The DCMS issued a statement late on 
Thursday night saying Stephens was "content" with the role played by Smith.

Miliband has claimed it was not credible to say Smith acted as "a lone wolf" 
without the knowledge of Hunt in repeatedly briefing News Corp on how the 
culture secretary wanted to help the company in its bid for BSkyB.

Hunt has asked Leveson to allow him to give evidence to the inquiry earlier 
than scheduled in an attempt to head off the mounting controversy.

The former leader of the Conservative party Lord Howard defended Hunt on 
Friday, saying he should not resign and everyone should wait for the Leveson 
inquiry to get "to the bottom of what happened".

"The facts make it clear that Jeremy Hunt at every stage took independent 
advice and followed that independent advice," he told BBC Radio 4's Today 
programme. "We should wait to hear every side of the story before coming to 
conclusion."

Howard, a former home secretary, said there was a danger in arguing that 
politicians be kept out all quasi-judicial processes such as the BSkyB bid.

"Some people have suggested that these decisions should be taken from 
politicians and I wouldn't dismiss that suggestion out of hand, but you've 
always got to remember that when you take decisions from elected politicians 
and give them to other people, so called independent people, you're losing an 
important element of accountability, and accountability is at the heart of 
parliamentary democracy," he said.

Michael Fallon, the deputy chairman of the Conservative party, told the BBC 
Politics Show: "We already have an inquiry into the relationship between 
government and BSkyB under way, headed by a very senior judge and he himself 
has said the better course would be to allow that inquiry to proceed to see the 
evidence, to test Jeremy Hunt on the evidence, and for him to give his side of 
the story and later on if it transpires there has been some breach of the 
ministerial code, then of course that can be looked at".

Tom Watson, the deputy chairman of the Labour party, countered: "The only 
person that does not want an independent assessor to do an independent inquiry 
is the prime minister. The truth about this is that everyone is running 
absolutely terrified because they are going to be exposed as in hock to Rupert 
Murdoch".

He accused the Conservatives of running away from the procedure for policing 
ministerial code.
 