
Jeremy Hunt had indicated to News Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> by the end of 2010 that he 
was "probably in favour" of arguments for allowing its £8bn BSkyB takeover, the 
company's lobbyist responsible for contact with the culture secretary's 
department has told the Leveson inquiry.

Frédéric Michel <https://www.theguardian.com/media/frederic-michel> told the 
inquiry on Thursday that by December 2010, just before Hunt was given 
quasi-judicial responsibility for the bid, the Conservative cabinet minister 
and his Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) were supportive of News 
Corp's argument that the BSkyB deal would not be detrimental to UK media 
plurality.

Robert Jay QC, counsel to the inquiry, asked Michel whether News Corp 
considered the DCMS to be "onside" in terms of being in favour of the Sky bid 
by December 2010.

"I think they were probably in favour of, or in agreement with, the arguments 
we had put forward in terms of plurality, definitely," replied Michel, who at 
the time was News Corp's European head of public affairs.

Hunt was given responsibility for overseeing the News Corp bid for Sky on 21 
December 2010, after the business secretary, Vince Cable, told undercover 
reporters he was at war with Rupert Murdoch.

More details also emerged at the inquiry on Thursday about the extent of 
Michel's contact with Hunt's department during the bid process, between June 
2010 and July 2011, when News Corp dropped its Sky takeover at the height of 
the phone-hacking scandal.

Jay said the inquiry had seen evidence of 191 telephone calls, 158 emails and 
799 text messages between Michel and the DCMS, of which 90% were withAdam Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith>, Hunt's former special 
adviser. Between 28 November 2010 and 11 July 2011 Smith sent 257 text messages 
to Michel, Jay added.

Michel admitted he was a "compulsive texter" but denied a series of personal 
messages to Hunt amounted to "schmoozing".

The News Corp lobbyist exchanged a number of messages with Hunt during the 
course of News Corp's bid for BSkyB, variously praising his performance in the 
Commons and at a meeting with the company, and expressing support for Rafael 
Nadal after Michel spotted the cabinet minister at a tennis match on 
television. "I am a compulsive texter, I will accept," said Michel.

On 20 January 2011, the evening after Michel met the secretary of state, 
Michel texted Hunt: "Great to see you today," and suggested the pair should get 
their children together, who were "nearly born on the same day at the same 
place! Warm regards, Fred."

Michel told the inquiry that he "didn't expect this to become public as it has 
now. I was just making a personal private reference to our kids, nothing here 
that helps or is anything to do with my work."

Hunt replied: "Good to see u too. Hope u understand why we have to have the 
long process. Let's meet up when things are resolved."

The following day Michel texted back: "We do and will do our very best to be 
constructive and helpful throughout. You were very impressive yesterday and yes 
let's meet up when it's all done. Warmest regards, Fred."

On 3 March 2011, the day Sky's undertakings in lieu regarding Sky News and the 
BSkyB takeover were published, Michel texted Hunt again: "You were great at the 
Commons today. Hope all well, warm regards, Fred."

Hunt replied: "Merci. Large drink tonight!"

Michel, who said he did not drink, said the purpose of the exchanges was 
"friendly, no more than that. I thought it was a very tense day for him."

Michel texted Hunt again after he appeared on BBC1's Andrew Marr Show on 13 
March. "Very good on Marr as always!" wrote Michel. Hunt replied: "Merci 
hopefully when consultation over we can have coffee like old days!"

In another exchange in July, Michel texted Hunt in support of Nadal who was 
playing Andy Murray.

Jay asked Michel: "Is this an example, to use the vernacular, of a form of 
schmoozing Mr Michel?"

Michel replied: "No, it's a friendly text. I think … it's one text every three 
months. It refers to specific items. I think I spotted him on the TV watching 
the game when I was watching Nadal, that's all."

Jay joked that Michel's support for Nadal was "rather treacherous". Michel 
explained: "My wife is English and Spanish so … "

Jay suggested to Michel he understood "the value of human interaction, whether 
it's by jokey text message, warm text message, mobile conversation or 
face-to-face meeting. You understand that because you're very good at it, 
aren't you?"

Michel said: "I don't know if I'm good at it … People would rather have 
interaction and talk things through rather than just respond through letters."

He added: "I apologise if my texts are too jokey sometimes."

Jay said: "It's not a question of apology. These are private texts and it's 
for you to decide the appropriate tone. These texts were never designed to 
enter the public domain were they?"

"They were not," said Michel.

The inquiry also heard that Michel was in close contact with Adam Smith at key 
points during the bid approval process.

On 10 January 2011, the day the culture secretary met Ed Richards, the chief 
executive of Ofcom, to discuss the regulator's objections to the Sky bid, 
Michel spoke with Smith on the phone three times.

Jay said the records showed there "were three calls which lasted in all 27 and 
a half minutes that day".

Michel denied that Smith gave him a running commentary of the bid process. The 
News Corp adviser added that Smith instead provided "updates on timing, 
process, on the atmospherics of the day".

The lobbyist said that he would not describe his phone calls, texts and emails 
"as clandestine. I would qualify that as advocacy".

By contrast, the inquiry heard repeated evidence that Vince Cable refused to 
meet James Murdoch or News Corp representatives in the period in which the 
business secretary had responsibility for the Sky bid.

Michel said he thought the approach adopted by Hunt subsequently was "more 
normal" – and that the company should have the opportunity to make its case in 
person.

Michel admitted that on two or three occasions he may have been in indirect 
contact with Hunt about the deal, throughSmith, who was forced to resign  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/apr/25/jeremy-hunt-adviser-adam-smith-quits>
last month after the inquiry published evidence suggesting he had an 
inappropriate level of contact with the News Corp lobbyist.

Hunt is due to appear before the inquiry to defend his role in the BSkyB bid 
after Labour accused him of breaching the quasi-judicial rules which required 
him to assess the bid impartially.

Michel said references to "Hunt", "JH" or "Jeremy" in 163 pages of emails and 
texts between him and his News Corp boss, James Murdoch, released to the 
inquiry last month, were "in fact summaries of what was told by Adam Smith".

But Michel also admitted to the inquiry that on some occasions he had the 
impression that Smith had spoken to his boss first.

"I think there's two or three events when I probably had the sort of 
impression that some of the feedback I was being given had been discussed with 
the secretary of state before it was given to me," Michel said.

Michel said he knew it was "inappropriate" to have had any informal contact 
with Hunt and told the inquiry he did not have "any direct conversation" with 
the minister relating to the BSkyB proposal.

One text the inquiry was shown was sent by Hunt to Michel on 31 July 2011, 
after the BSkyB bid was abandoned because of the backlash against Murdoch's 
media empire following revelations that Milly Dowler's phone had been hacked by 
the News of the World.

Hunt's text read: "Dear Fred it has been the most challenging time for all of 
us. Thank goodness we have children to remind us what really matters. Would be 
great to catch up when the dust has settled, Jeremy."

In August 2010, three months after Murdoch launched his BSkyB bid, Michel sent 
Hunt a message criticising a speech by the BBC director general, Mark Thompson. 
"Because he trained his guns on you he failed to make his case to me," Hunt 
replied.
 