
For a man with an easy ability to slip into a room unnoticed, Adam Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith> has acquired quite a 
collection of nicknames. He was known within the Department of Culture Media 
and Sport as "Jeremy Hunt's brain" because, one civil servant says, Smith has a 
telepathic understanding of what his former boss wants and knows what to say to 
get it.

Some called him "the next director general of the BBC" because of his 
intricate understanding of media-related legislation, which, a former colleague 
joked, meant that he was a shoo-in for Britain's biggest broadcasting job.

But recently, some Tory MPs have sneered and referred to him as "the not so 
invisible hand of Adam Smith" in reference to his more famous economist 
namesake and the seemingly conspiratorial nature of his email exchanges with 
News Corporation's PR man Frédéric Michel.

The question many in Whitehall are asking is this: which of these three 
identities will emerge when Smith steps into theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> witness box on Thursday and 
is asked about Hunt's handling of News Corporation's planned £8bn bid to take 
over the whole of BSkyB? Will he loyally agree with Hunt's statement that the 
"volume and tone" of the special adviser's contact with Michel was 
inappropriate? Will he seek to distance himself from Michel's pally 
correspondence? Or confirm some senior Conservatives' worst fears and say Hunt 
should have, or must have, either known of, or approved of, his dealings with 
Michel?

Smith's testimony will be keenly scrutinised after 163 pages of emails from 
Michel to James Murdoch appeared to show that the company had obtained 
inappropriate briefings regarding its BSkyB bid. Hunt's political career is in 
the balance, and there may be repercussions for David Cameron and for the 
coalition government.

Details of Smith's background remain sketchy. In his early 30s with a "BBC 
accent", Smith is a cricket enthusiast, according to one acquaintance. His 
friends remain loyal and his circle has closed ranks since he has been thrust 
into the Leveson limelight.

One Tory acquaintance who is senior within the party says Smith has known Hunt 
for at least five years. They worked together in opposition, where Smith 
quickly became his closest political confidant.

"When the Tories were trying to get into government, Adam would brief 
journalists, but you could tell that he didn't like it. He wanted to be 
backroom man, wielding some real influence instead of spinning," said one 
reporter who has followed the minister's career.

During the formation of the coalition, Smith was one of Hunt's two special 
advisers. He became a key part of the secretary of state's team – a political 
appointee employed as a civil servant but free from the civil service 
requirement to show impartiality and objectivity.

Smith concentrated on policy, leaving communications to Hunt's other special 
adviser, Sue Beeby. He would attend key policy meetings at Conservative Central 
Office, ministerial briefings, and meet stakeholders such as Michel.

The Tory source said Smith was involved in meetings at the highest levels 
within the party and that Hunt went nowhere without him. "Adam was absolutely 
trusted and had access to everything. It does seem incredible to me that anyone 
would claim that he might do anything without Jeremy's prior approval."

Stakeholders who worked closely with Smith describe him as bright and 
thorough. "Adam is a policy natural, which is why, although he appears quite 
ordinary, he is actually outstanding in a Whitehall environment," said one 
public affairs insider. "He absorbs it, understands it, and can reflect it back 
at you within seconds. You would want him on your pub quiz team."

Smith adapted quickly to life as part of a coalition, with Liberal Democrats 
praising the way he included them in policy matters. "He was completely on top 
of his brief, and knew it all. He was jut as a special adviser should be – 
pretty anonymous, in the background, but fiercely loyal to his minister," said 
one. Another added: "He did like to be liked – and because I like him, I worry 
that that was the reason for his downfall."

After the emails between Smith and Michel emerged last month, and Hunt's job 
came under pressure, Smith fell on his sword, prompting Labour accusations that 
he was being used as a human shield.

A Guardian analysis of text messages and emails exchanged between Michel and 
Smith – and those sent from Michel to James Murdoch and other News Corp top 
brass relaying Smith's remarks – show Michel was largely passing on an accurate 
summary of the intelligence he was receiving from Hunt's camp.

As Michel himself admitted in his witness statement to Leveson, he frequently 
implied to Murdoch that he had spoken to Hunt, when his contact was almost 
always Smith. But the information that Michel was relaying was usually a fair 
precis of what Smith told him by text or email, often just a few minutes 
previously.

Smith, however, released a statement admitting that he had told Michel more 
than he should have.

He said: "I do not recognise all of what Michel said, but nonetheless I 
appreciate that my activities at times went too far and have, taken together, 
created the perception thatNews Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> had too close a 
relationship with the department … Whilst I firmly believe that the process was 
in fact conducted scrupulously fairly, as a result of my activities it is only 
right for me to step down as special adviser to Jeremy Hunt."

On Thursday, that version of events – from a very private policy wonk upon 
whom Hunt's ministerial career now rests – will face the Leveson test.
 