
Adam Smith, the special adviser to the culture secretary, Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, has resigned, saying he 
acted without the authority of his boss and that he had allowed the impression 
to be created of too close a relationship between News Corps and the Department 
for Culture, Media and Sport.

His resignation came an hour before Hunt was due to make a statement to MPs on 
Wednesday.

Emails published at the Leveson inquiry showed that News Corporation's public 
affairs director,Frédéric Michel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/frederic-michel>, had been given inside 
information on ministerial thinking over the company's bid for BSkyB, including 
handing over commercially confidential information and repeatedly suggesting 
that Hunt wanted the bid to succeed.

In a statement, Smith said: "While it was part of my role to keep News 
Corporation informed throughout the BSkyB bid process, the content and extent 
of my contact was done without authorisation from the secretary of state. I do 
not recognise all of what Fred Michel said, but nonetheless I appreciate that 
my activities at times went too far and have, taken together, created the 
perception thatNews Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> had too close a 
relationship with the department, contrary to the clear requirements set out by 
Jeremy Hunt and the permanent secretary that this needed to be a fair and 
scrupulous process.

"Whilst I firmly believe that the process was in fact conducted scrupulously 
fairly, as a result of my activities it is only right for me to step down as 
special adviser to Jeremy Hunt."

Labour is certain to ask whether Smith was really a lone operator and was, as 
he claims, acting without Hunt's permission.

It has already been established that Michel, in his emails, repeatedly refers 
to JH when in fact this wasAdam Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith>. However, on other occasions 
in the emails and texts it appears as though Michel's interlocutor is Hunt 
himself.

Michel also says in his witness statement that when he was speaking to Smith 
he was sure he was being given an account of the culture secretary's thinking. 
It is hard to think of a motive for Smith to give Michel an accurate account of 
Hunt's thinking that on the surface seems to be biased towards News Corp.

Under the ministerial code, the secretary of state is responsible for the 
actions of his special adviser.

The government offered the Commons statement after Labour requested that Hunt 
account for revelations at theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> about email exchanges with 
Rupert Murdoch's company and whether they were at odds with undertakings he 
gave to parliament.

Hunt had suggested he should be allowed to mount his defence at the Leveson 
inquiry, and that his hearing should be brought forward. He is not due to give 
evidence for four weeks, and in the modern political world, it seems 
implausible that he would be allowed to keep his job for that long without 
clear evidence that his actions were dramatically misrepresented by the emails 
released to the inquiry by Michel.

The culture secretary will be hoping he receives strong support from 
Conservative backbenchers, and has already insisted his contacts with the 
Murdoch organisation were formal and kept to a minimum. He has also indicated 
that the culture permanent secretary gave his special adviser permission to 
keep in touch with News Corp during the BSkyB bid process.

But senior former civil servants have said the permanent secretary would only 
have allowed formal contacts about process, and would not have granted 
permission to give insights into Hunt's thinking, or to work together to put 
forward a case likely to ensure the bid was waved through.

His supporters have insisted that he acted throughout on the advice of 
independent media regulators. However, Ofcom had recommended the bid should be 
referred to the Competition Commission. Hunt in discussion with Ofcom rejected 
that advice and said assurances granted by News Corp, including spinning off 
Sky News, made it possible for the bid to be waved through.
 