
One of the worst things for doctors must be that, after seven years of study 
and then another decade of continuing professional exams, patients come in 
telling them they’re wrong after spending 20 minutes on Google. So imagine how 
doctors must feel aboutJeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, who hasn’t even had the 
decency to go on the internet.

Consider how desperate these doctors are: so desperate that they want to talk 
to Jeremy Hunt. Surely even Hunt’s wife would rather spend a sleepless 72 hours 
gazing into a cracked open ribcage than talk to him. Hunt won’t speak to the 
doctors, even though doctors are the people who know how hospitals work. Hunt’s 
only other job wasfounding Hotcourses magazine 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/markets/article-3084543/Health-Secretary-Jeremy-Hunt-picks-960-000-windfall-educational-listings-firm-Hotcourses.html>
: his areas of expertise are how to bulletpoint a list and make dog grooming 
look like a viable career change.

Of course, the strikers are saying this is about safety, not pay, as expecting 
to be paid a decent wage for a difficult and highly skilled job is now 
considered selfish. Surely expecting someone to work for free while people all 
around them are dying of cancer is only appropriate for the early stages of The 
X Factor. Sadly, Tories don’t understand why someone would stay in a job for 
decency and love when their mother was never around long enough to find out 
what language the nanny spoke.

The fact that Hunt co-wrote a book about how to dismantle the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/aug/16/tory-mps-back-nhs-dismantling>
 makes him feel like a broad stroke in a heavy-handed satire. Even the name 
Jeremy Hunt is so redolent of upper-class brutality that it feels like he 
belongs in one of those Martin Amis books where working-class people are called 
things like Dave Rubbish and Billy Darts (No shade, Martin – I’m just a joke 
writer: I envy real writers, their metaphors and similes taking off into the 
imagination sky like big birds or something). Indeed, Jeremy Hunt is so overtly 
ridiculous that he might be best thought of as a sort of rodeo clown, put there 
simply there to distract the enraged public.

I sympathise a little with Hunt – he was born into military aristocracy, a 
cousin of the Queen, went to Charterhouse, then Oxford, then into PR: trying to 
get him to understand the life of an overworked student nurse is like trying to 
get an Amazonian tree frog to understand the plot of Blade Runner. Hunt doesn’t 
understand the need to pay doctors – he’s part of a ruling class that doesn’t 
understand that the desire to cut someone open and rearrange their internal 
organs can come from a desire to help others, and not just because of insanity 
caused by hereditary syphilis.

The government believes that death rates are going up because doctors are 
lazy, rather than because we’ve started making disabled people work on building 
sites. Indeed, death rates in the NHS are going up, albeit largely among 
doctors. From the steel mines where child slaves gather surgical steel, all the 
way up to senior doctors working 36 hours on no sleep, the most healthy people 
in theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> are actually the patients. 
This is before we get to plans for bursaries to be withdrawn from student 
nurses, so that we’re now essentially asking them to pay to work. Student 
nurses are essential; not only are they a vital part of staffing hospitals, 
they’re usually the only people there able to smile at a dying patient without 
screaming: “TAKE ME WITH YOU!”

The real reason more people die at weekends is that British people have to be 
really sick to stay in hospital at the weekend, as hospitals tend not to have a 
bar. We have a fairly low proportion of people who are doctors, don’t plan to 
invest in training any more, and are too racist to import them. So we’re 
shuffling around the doctors we do have to the weekend, when not a lot of 
people are admitted, from the week, when it’s busy. This is part of a conscious 
strategy to run the service down to a point where privatisation can be sold 
to the public as a way of improving things.

Naturally, things won’t actually be improved; they’ll be sold to something 
like VirginHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>. Virgin can’t 
get the toilets to work on a train from Glasgow to London, so it’s time we 
encouraged it to branch out into something less challenging like transplant 
surgery. With the rate the NHS is being privatised, it won’t be long before 
consultations will be done via Skype with a doctor in Bangalore. Thank God 
we’re raising a generation who are so comfortable getting naked online. “I’m 
afraid it looks like you’ve had a stroke. No, my mistake – you’re just 
buffering.”

When I was little, I was in hospital for a few days. The boy in the next bed 
was an officious little guy who took me on a tour of the ward. He’d sort of 
appointed himself as an auxiliary nurse and would help out around the place, 
tidying up the toys in the playroom, and giving all the nurses a very formal 
“Good Morning”, which always made me laugh. I got jelly and ice-cream one 
evening (I’d had my tonsils out) and they brought him some, too. Afterwards, he 
threw his spoon triumphantly into his plate and laughed till there were tears 
in his eyes. Then he tidied up and took our plates back to the trolley. What he 
meant by all this (we’d sit up at night talking and waiting for trains to go by 
in the distance) is that this was the first place he’d known any real kindness 
and he wished to return it. For most of us it will be the last place we know 
kindness. How sad that we have allowed it to fall into the hands of dreadful 
people who know no compassion at all, not even for themselves.
 