
Comedian Jo Brand <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jo-brand> was among the 
winners at the British Comedy Awards on Thursday night, receiving the accolade 
for best sitcom for Getting On, along with co-creators Vicki Pepperdine and 
Joanna Scanlan.

Jack Whitehall <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jack-whitehall> was 
voted the King of Comedy in a public poll for the second year running and Steve 
Coogan was handed the award for Outstanding Achievement.

Miranda Hart, Alan Carr and Lee Mack were also rewarded for their work at the 
ceremony hosted byJonathan Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jonathan-ross>. Carr won the Best 
Entertainment Personality award while Graham Norton took Best Entertainment 
Programme. Hart reclaimed the Best TV Comedy Actress title, which she last won 
in 2011. Mack was a double winner, taking home Best Male TV Comic for the 
second year running and seeing Would I Lie To You, on which he is a team 
captain along with David Mitchell, win Best Comedy Panel Show.

Paul Whitehouse also picked up two awards, winning the Writer's Guild of Great 
Britain Award, and – along with longtime collaborator Harry Enfield – he won 
the prize for Best Sketch Show for their Harry & Paul show.

Whitehouse said it was "a real surprise – a genuine surprise, thank you very 
much" before collapsing in laughter as one of his colleagues made random hand 
gestures and pretended to be doing sign language for the deaf, in a reference 
to the fake signer at the Mandela memorial.

The awards, in their 24th year, have gained a reputation for shocking onstage 
scenes. Last year, Sacha Baron Cohen – playing Ali G – joked about wearing a 
tracksuit belonging to disgraced former broadcaster Jimmy Savile. And, in 2008, 
the cast and crew of The Inbetweeners were pelted with objects thrown from the 
audience, including a bottle hurled at them by comedian Kevin Bishop.

There were, as ever, moments of controversy. Johnny Vegas drew shocked 
laughter by mocking the sponsor Foster's, while Whitehouse shouted out "Yid 
Army", a chant used regularly by fans of Tottenham Hotspur – which Whitehouse 
supports – but which has been banned from the terraces over claims it is racist.

In 1993, when asked by host Jonathan Ross "how it was hanging" on a set 
decorated with mock foliage, comedian Julian Clary joked: "Oh, very well, thank 
you. It's very nice of you to recreate Hampstead Heath for me here. As a matter 
of fact, I've just been fisting Norman Lamont."

Whitehall also won Best TV Comedy Actor, Nina Conti won the Best Female TV 
Comic award for her performance on Live At The Apollo, and The Last Leg's host 
Adam Hills won BestComedy <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comedy> 
Breakthrough Artist.

It was previously announced that Anchorman star Will Ferrell won the British 
Comedy International Award and Coogan was handed the Outstanding Achievement 
award, while ITV2's Plebs won best NewComedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Programme.

• This article was amended on 13 December 2013. The earlier version suggested 
that Jack Whitehall supports Tottenham Hotspur It was futher amended on 17 
December 2013 to correct the awards won by Graham Norton and Alan Carr; Lee 
Mack's role on Would I Lie to You; the number of years the awards have been 
running; and the date of Julian Clary's remark about Norman Lamont.
 