
My very first connection with the National Theatre began with a letter. It 
arrived whenLaurence Olivier <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/olivier> and I 
were living in New York in 1961, newly married and both acting on Broadway. It 
came from an optician in Chichester stating they were going to build an 
amphitheatre in the city and would Sir Laurence consider being its first 
artistic director. It was the perfect answer to his vexed question – "what can 
I do that is new and challenging?" – and he accepted immediately.

Chichester Festival Theatre opened in 1962 in a blaze of excitement and 
goodwill until the middle of the season when it was announced that Laurence 
Olivier had been appointed director of the National Theatre. The atmosphere at 
Chichester changed immediately. It was now regarded as a dress rehearsal for 
the newNational Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>. 
Suddenly Larry was on trial as were the theatre and the actors.

The first two CFT productions had pleased audiences but not the critics. One 
or two of them thought that Peter Hall had an equal claim to the job at the 
National. With the Sunday reviews came acritical and impertinent "open letter" 
to Sir Laurence from theObserver's Kenneth Tynan, 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/08/24/theater/excerpt-kenneth-tynan-a-life.html> 
who later had the audacity to write and ask for a job as dramaturge at the 
National Theatre. I could not help admiring his nerve. Larry was outraged at 
first though subsequently came round to admitting that Tynan would be the best 
man for the post.

Even Tynan had to acknowledge the achievement of the season's final production 
ofUncle Vanya, which saved everyone's reputation. I played Sonia and felt 
privileged to be part of that ensemble – and ensemble it was despite the star 
names of Olivier and Michael Redgrave.

In 1963 the National Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> 
opened officially at its temporary home at the Old Vic where Chichester'sUncle 
Vanyabecame the jewel in the crown of the opening season. It was joined by St 
Joan, directed by John Dexter, a friend from our earlier days at the Royal 
Court and one of the first two associate directors of the National along with 
Bill Gaskill.

Luckily there were also a few actors who had shared life with me at the Royal 
Court and so the change in my status could be ignored. John Dexter, however, 
could not resist the occasional jibe – "if her ladyship has finished her coffee 
perhaps we could get on with the rehearsal". There was also a probing remark 
from Ingmar Bergman, who had been invited to directHedda Gabler with Maggie 
Smith and who disliked his London hotel so much that he started throwing chairs 
at the wall. We rehoused him in our flat and within seconds of meeting he asked 
me how difficult it was to have come from a rebel outpost in Sloane Square into 
the arms of the establishment.

Another international guest director, Franco Zeffirelli, introduced us to 
Eduardo de Filippo's family dramaSaturday, Sunday, Monday, where I had to cook 
a ragout live on stage. The delicious smell sent people out at the interval 
looking happy but very hungry, the sale of sandwiches rocketed and restaurants 
around the Old Vic did great business on those nights. It was an ideal play for 
the company of actors who knew each other well and there was always an 
atmosphere of love and friendship whenever we performed it.

During those first years, directors and actors felt they were part of a family 
with Olivier as the illustrious father figure. There were, of course, rows, 
passionate disagreements and frayed tempers but ultimately they were all proud 
to be associated with him. It was a unique experience but necessarily of short 
duration and was an essential part of the early history of our renowned 
National Theatre on the South Bank.
 