
The adventures of Captain Jack Harkness, the alien-hunting hero of Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> spin-off Torchwood, are 
to be continued in comic form by the actor who played him, John Barrowman.

Co-written with his sister, Carole E Barrowman, the actor’s new comic series 
will see Captain Jack back in Cardiff and looking for the help of Welsh police 
officer Gwen Cooper in combating “a dark technology from a forgotten species 
[which] has been claimed by a conspiratorial power”, said publisher Titan 
Comics.

“In this collision between an ancient civilisation and an all-new evil, the 
Earth itself may be forfeit,” said Titan of the new series. “Only Jack, Gwen, 
and their allies from what remains of Torchwood hold the key to stopping a 
cataclysmic wave of destruction … On the road, on the run and under fire – can 
Jack and Gwen put aside their differences and rebuild the heart ofTorchwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/torchwood> … before its flame is 
stamped out forever?”

The Torchwood TV series, which aired from 2006 to 2011, was an adult spin-off 
from Doctor Who, with Captain Jack, a bisexual former intergalactic time agent 
from the future now heading up the Torchwood Institute, charged with protecting 
the Earth from extraterrestrial threats.

Jenny Colgan, the bestselling author who has also written a number of Doctor 
Who novel and short stories, welcomed the news. “I love John and his ongoing 
involvement with everything Torchwood. I miss him in the show; he brought so 
much lightness to it,” she said, adding that the universe of Doctor Who was “a 
pretty addictive world to be a part of, and very hard to let go ... You can see 
it with David Tennant and Catherine Tate coming back to Doctor Who this year.”

The Barrowmans’ new comic series will be an official continuation of the 
Torchwood saga, said Titan, and will be in continuity withBig Finish’s 
Torchwood audio dramas <https://www.bigfinish.com/ranges/v/torchwood>. Out on 6 
July, it will be illustrated by Antonio Fuso and Pasquale Qualano. Barrowman 
has previously co-written an Arrow comics series with Carole E Barrowman, 
published by DC Comics earlier this year, as well as a Torchwood novel, Exodus 
Code, also co-written with his sister.
 