
John Major dropped another cat among the Euro-pigeons last night when he 
advocated the introduction of a new currency (theecu 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Currency_Unit> or European currency 
unit) into circulation in all EC countries as a ‘gradualist’ alternative to 
going for the ‘Big Bang’ solution of full monetary union. The trouble with big 
bangs is that they are sometimes followed by other explosions; and the 
Chancellor is worried that the creation of a new, all-powerful European Central 
Bank, unaccountable to national parliaments and backed by a common monetary 
policy, will not secure the inflation free zone which everyone wants. He argues 
that countries need differing levels of interest rates in order to eliminate 
inflation before even thinking about anything as radical as full monetary union.

The trouble with this argument is that it sounds suspiciously like saying that 
Britain won’t join a monetary union until she doesn’t need one - ie when 
inflation has been brought down permanently by our own efforts. Meanwhile the 
Major scheme would sanction monetary permissiveness in any country that felt so 
inclined (for example in advance of an election). Moreover, would the new 
proposals have street credibility unless the ecu became common legal tender?


But that doesn’t alter the positive side of Mr Major’s gradualist approach. 
Most people would welcome and benefit from the first step: which is to 
encourage the use of the existing ecu (largely confined to bond issues by 
international banks) by issuing notes for general circulation. A new European 
Monetary Fund would provide ecus on demand in exchange for community currencies 
(thereby avoiding, it is claimed, the inflationary dangers of printing money). 
This would be an instant hit with business travellers and tourists who are 
perpetually worried about what currency they should change their money into.

The second stage would be to create a new ‘hard’ ecu which would not just be a 
fluctuating average of existing currencies (the existing ecu is revalued every 
day) but a genuine currency in its own right which, Mr Major says, would never 
devalue against other community currencies. This, as he readily acknowledges, 
is similar to a suggestion made recently by the British Invisible Exports 
Council.

The whole notion clearly needs considerable scrutiny and debate; but it does 
appear to be a positive improvement on the ‘competing currencies’ proposal of 
his predecessor Mr Lawson. In particular, the Bank of England and its sister 
institutions in other countries would be required to repurchase their own 
currencies from the Fund for hard currencies in order to eliminate the 
inflationary possibilities associated with the Fund’s money-making powers. 
Given time - and legal respectability - once the ecu is released from 
captivity, it could become the common currency which the Government has until 
now eschewed.

It remains to be seen whether Mr Major’s proposals are treated with the same 
European disdain as Mr Lawson’s earlier version. The first signs are of an idea 
still under-baked. But that is better than no baking at all. Germany and France 
have stirred up an almost unstoppable momentum towards full monetary union - 
with British authority sadly undermined by our absence from Exchange Rate 
Mechanism. It will do Mr Major’s bargaining (and political) power no harm at 
all if his further thoughts prove, as well they may, positive enough to attract 
still further thought amongst our partners.
 