
One of the most transformative and sustainable aspects of the Katine project 
has been the livelihoods element. The aim was to introduce new farming 
techniques and improved seed varieties to promote food sustainability in the 
short-term and, in time, increase access to markets. A further strand was to 
introduce a basic form of microfinance.

An initial survey by the NGO Farm-Africa, which provided technical support to 
Amref on the livelihoods component, showed the farmers of Katine knew little of 
what was happening 10 miles from their front doors, let alone in the cities 
where real money is made. And they had no place to store food they didn't need 
for their families, which meant surpluses had to be sold quickly, regardless of 
price.

Consequently, they rarely realised the true value of their excess produce. Nor 
did they have any motive to bring land into cultivation beyond what their 
family and the local market was likely to need.

Simon Egandat is the vice-chairman of the Katine Joint Farmers Association 
(Kajofa), a recently established licensed co-operative that already represents 
most of the 66 farmers' groups in the sub-county.

"However much we produced, we were manipulated by the middlemen," says 
Egandat. "We didn't get fair prices. So we have banded together. Now we have 
bargaining power."

The success of the livelihoods project in unleashing potential owes much to 
the ambition of the people themselves, a quality reflected in the huge, 
white-plastered grain store which now stands just off the new road that will 
eventually link Kenya and Sudan. Farmers from across the sub-county have 
contributed time and money to building the store. The decision to go all out 
for a large store was guided by Amref and the livelihoods team, but some 
farmers had already started to think it was the only answer, and the idea has 
caught on. To ensure it was truly a community project, Amref applied its 
community building approach to the construction process.

"We all contributed resources," Egandat explains. "We brought hardcore here, 
made of stones we picked off our fields. We mobilised 30 members to provide it, 
and then we dug foundations for three days. It was mostly the group leaders, so 
there was a core of 18. I felt this was our thing. The project was helping us, 
but we contributed our resources. There were as many women here as men, doing 
things like moving the sand and the spoil we dug up."

Amref has given training in how co-ops work and in group management skills 
like conflict resolution to Egandat, the Kajofa secretary Julius Okodu, and 
other members of the co-operative. They are excited by the possibilities. 
Already the experience has taken them to Lira, in northernUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>, to talk to another village that, 
under a World Food Programme initiative, is adopting a similar plan. "We are 
making Katine known," says Egandat. "It is the best place."

The grain store is a complex commercial proposition. Its success will be a 
good barometer of the sustainability of the entire project. But the store, well 
located on the main road - south to Kampala, north to south Sudan - is more 
than just a place to keep produce. With a capacity of 1,000 tonnes, it is also 
big enough to be rented on a commercial basis to the UN food programme. A 
commercial tenant would mean a reliable source of income.

On top of that, an animal health centre has an office in the same development. 
Francis Olado has a certificate in animal health and welfare from college, and 
has done further training, organised by Amref. The original plan in the Katine 
project was to train people from the villages in animal health, creating the 
possibility of small businesses based on supplying and administering basic 
drugs. But unintended consequences are daily occurrences in development 
projects. Six of the seven newly-trained animal health workers either went to 
work elsewhere, or went back to school.

Olado, 24, is the survivor. He works with the local vet, taking advice from 
him and sending him clients. He has a basic drugs tool kit in the store, and he 
will do farm visits on request. He is employed by Kajofa, so it is in the 
farmers' interests to listen to his advice. One of his main concerns is that 
because drugs are so expensive, farmers will be tempted to underdose, which 
would risk increasing resistance to treatment.

Wherever you go in Katine, you meet farmers who are excited at the prospect of 
having a market for their excess production. It reveals how much good 
agricultural land is currently lying fallow, testimony to a generation of 
central government policies which effectively destroyed Uganda's vast 
agricultural potential.

A complementary aspect of the farming developments is the even more widespread 
success of the village savings and loans associations (VSLAs), which Amref, 
backed by Barclays, has developed together with a local NGO, the Uganda Women's 
Efforts to Save Orphans (Uweso), and Care International. Farmers' groups and 
VSLAs, which introduce village-level microfinance, were introduced hand in hand 
across Katine.

By enabling small farmers (at least as many women as men) to save tiny amounts 
of cash each week and obtain short-term loans, the VSLAs have given families 
control over their own lives for the first time in a generation. Some 150 
groups have been established across Katine, with a starting membership fee of 
just 8p. Each has been trained in aspects of managing a VSLA, from bookkeeping 
to conflict resolution. Every year, the group is wound up, members have their 
stake returned with interest, and the group is reformed. In one year, £22,482 
was banked.

Charles Otto has one of the biggest stalls in Katine's weekly market. It is 
three units run together, and it is brightly adorned with new blouses, skirts 
and shirts, which hang around the walls. This is what capital accumulation 
means: being able to borrow enough to buy more stock, increase turnover, 
increase profit. He goes to two other markets each week. His local VSLA, which 
he chairs, has given his business the lift he dreamed of. "I want to open a 
shop one day," he says. "In Soroti [the nearest town to Katine], so my children 
can go to senior school."

The VSLAs make small differences too. Candidates applying to join an 
association at first regarded with suspicion are clear what they think they can 
gain. Each applicant is invited to explain why he or she wants to join.

"I've seen the difference between people who are in the group and the rest. 
They have saved money and bought goats, and beds, and mattresses," said the 
first applicant at a VSLA meeting. "I've seen people save and borrow to go and 
do business, and I want to do that," said the second. "In a group you can save 
and borrow," adds the third, "and do business and then buy household items like 
soap." "And," interrupts the first, "you can have your own money and make a 
decision as a person."

Improvements in farm techniques are another gain from the project, which 
contentiously opted against providing the community with the oxen they badly 
needed for effective cultivation and for the status they provide. In two short 
years, the benefits of the improved seed varieties distributed to villagers 
have already provided the kind of returns which mean some households are now 
able to buy cattle for themselves.

"I planted the new variety of groundnuts [earlier this year] and had a good 
yield," says Florence Anyodo. "I have also learned about timely planting – 
making sure the ground is ready for the beginning of the rains, especially in 
March and April when the growing season is shorter."

Richard Elaru, Anyodo's husband, says if Amref had not been there, it would 
have been disastrous. "We were already having to buy food from the trading 
store," he explains. "We would have had nothing to sow if we had not been given 
seed." Now, though, he is buoyant about the future. "I have enough food, and 
there's some still in the garden. By November there will be another 
distribution of money from the VSLA." The couple have different ideas about 
what to do with the proceeds of their savings. Anyodo is desperate to improve 
the brick house they built recently. "I want to plaster the walls. I want a 
good strong door instead of the curtain, a door that is as good as the house. I 
want a cement floor."

Ask them where they see themselves in five years' time, and Elaru talks of 
saving enough for a motorbike and being able to operate a boda-boda (taxi) 
service. Anyodo, who is already able to pay for one daughter to attend the 
girls' secondary school in Soroti, talks of paying school fees and seeing their 
six children well-educated and able to earn a living off the farm – and support 
their parents in the years to come. "Amref has rescued us from poverty," says 
Elaru.
 