
He created a character called Cupid Stunt and told a filthy joke about 
Margaret Thatcher on Radio 2. But now the lateKenny Everett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/kenny-everett> is in line for the 
latest in showbusiness establishment accolades – a BBC4 drama biopic.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is developing a 90-minute film 
called Number One in Heaven about Everett, who died of an Aids related illness 
in 1995 aged 50.

Written by playwright Tim Whitnall – best known as the author of hit stage 
play Morecambe, about comedian Eric Morecambe – the as-yet uncast biopic 
promises to focus on Everett's troubled childhood at his Catholic secondary 
school on Merseyside where he was picked on for his diminutive size and his 
effeminacy.

"He was so small it is hard to think of finding an actor who can play him," 
Whitnall told the Guardian. "It is possible he could be played by a woman in 
fact, which is something he may have appreciated. I knew him and I loved him – 
in fact the title refers to the moment I first saw him when he was dancing in 
Heaven nightclub."

Everett, born Maurice Cole in Seaforth, Lancashire, started his professional 
life as a pirate DJ for Radio London and Radio Luxemburg before joiningRadio 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1> in the mid 1960s. He befriended the 
Beatles and accompanied them on their 1966 tour of the US.

His TV work included stints for Thames TV from 1978 to 1980 and for the BBC 
between 1981 and 1988, where he is thought to have first coined the term "the 
Beeb" to refer to the corporation. Among his comic creations were the punk Sid 
Snot and the American chatshow host Cupid Stunt, whose catchphrase was: "It's 
all done in the best possible taste."

Regarded in the 1980s as a supporter of prime minister Thatcher, Everett once 
appeared at a Young Conservatives conference waving enormous foam hands and 
saying "Let's bomb Russia" and "Let's kick Michael Foot's stick away". However, 
friends of Everett now question whether he was in fact a supporter of the 
Conservatives.

The BBC confirmed that it is working on the film but declined to comment 
further. It is expected to be made by the BBC's in-house film department, where 
it will be overseen by BBC Films executive producer Jamie Laurenson.
 