
As erudite as he was rude, Kenneth Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kenneth-williams> is now remembered as the 
author of a bleak and illuminating diary and not just for his saucy anecdotes 
andCarry On films. But as a new authorised biography reveals, the outrageous 
performer and raconteur had melancholy secrets that are only now emerging.

With the publication of Born Brilliant this week, the hidden corners of 
Williams's life of public comedy and private pain are examined for the first 
time.

Biographer Christopher Stevens has uncovered the depth of the star's 
friendship with a young gay couple who have never spoken publicly before and 
who were witness to Williams's long and bitter struggle with his sexual 
identity.

"Tom Waine and Clive Dennis feature frequently in the published extracts, but 
they're never fully identified," Stevens said. "One was an Oxford graduate 
working in the media and the other a postman. Kenneth introduced them both to 
Swinging London and he enjoyed the frisson of arriving at debauched parties 
with two 21-year-old men, one of them fey and elegant, and the other raffish 
and working-class."

Stevens's interviews with the two men, who have never sought publicity, have 
been a key element of his research. The varied extremes of their shared social 
life, from glamorous parties with famous names such as Rudolf Nureyev and 
Williams's good friend, the playwrightJoe Orton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/orton>, to quiet evenings of Scrabble at 
their north London home, have answered many questions about the private life of 
this lonely star. While Williams was clearly attracted to Waine, the friendship 
remained platonic.

"Their relationship was so close that it was really Kenneth's only 
long-lasting love affair – he adored Tom, and admired his education, but they 
were never physically intimate," says Stevens. "But as a threesome they 
partied, dined, promenaded, and raved it up in Tangier."

Over the years Williams wrote to the couple, who still live together, on 
around 150 occasions, and all his notes and letters have been preserved.

One airmail letter sent to Italy by a depressed Williams after he dropped out 
of a holiday with them is typically revealing: "Living with someone always 
means a denial of self in SOME way and I suppose I have always known it was 
something I couldn't accomplish. So I've always stayed on the sidelines. 
Getting the pleasure vicariously. It's not wholly satisfactory, but then of 
course no lives are, and you know what I think about indiscriminate sex and 
promiscuous trade. I think it's the beginning of a long, long road to despair."

Known as the Babes in the Woods, Waine and Dennis became friends with Williams 
after Waine, an Oxford undergraduate, sent him an amusing fan letter. Together 
with Williams's beloved mother, Louie, the couple became a vital support 
system, attending all the star's theatre and television performances and now 
and then unsuccessfully tempting him with other potential boyfriends, including 
rough labourers and squaddies which provoked an angry response. On one of many 
evenings at Orton's home, Waine also recalls Williams's fury when the 
playwright revealed that he had spiked Williams's food with hashish.

By chance, Dennis was with Williams at his flat in August 1967 when news of 
Orton's murder at the hands of his lover, Kenneth Halliwell, broke. He tells 
Stevens that Williams was unable to take in what had happened. He refused to 
speak to the BBC and instead went out to the cinema, remaining in denial for 
several months.

Aside from offering fresh insight into Williams's closest relationships, 
Stevens's book benefits from exclusive access to the diaries themselves. The 43 
volumes found in Williams's flat on the day he died now belong to his friend 
and legatee Paul Richardson. In 1993 startling edited extracts were published 
in a book which has not been out of print since, but for the next 15 years the 
diaries were stored in the sealed vault of a London bank. Stevens was granted 
access to all the volumes to research his biography on the condition that he 
housed them securely inside a research library.

Waine and Dennis helped Stevens to unravel the background to many unexplored 
sections of the diaries, which Williams started keeping in 1942 and famously 
finished with a final dark entry on 14 April 1988, the night of his death, with 
the words "Oh – what's the bloody point?" But the content of the diaries is not 
the whole story. The appearance of Williams's daily entries turns out to be 
evidence of an unsuspected twist in his psyche, a bewildering array of 
handwriting styles and an extraordinary personal colour-coding system.

"The big shock, when I began to read Kenneth's journals, was the extraordinary 
and expressive variety of handwriting," Stevens said. "Millions of people know 
Williams kept a diary for more than 40 years, but almost no one realises they 
are such beautiful, diverse, fascinating collections of handwriting styles."

Williams, a trained engraver, worked as a map-maker during the war and listed 
calligraphy among his hobbies inWho's Who, but his astonishing skill has 
confounded even Nicolas Barker, a former handwriting expert at the British 
Museum, who has looked at the diaries.

"He is capable of beautiful copperplate script, but can produce very different 
kinds of writing with very little resemblance to each other," Barker said.

Piecing together the writing styles, Stevens realised that Williams appeared 
to be channelling different personalities as he wrote. The colour coding was 
easier to crack. Williams wrote in red pen when discussing his health and in 
blue when he had dramatic news, for example. Stevens now sees the fluctuating 
styles as the symbol of Williams's subtly distinct moods, moving as they did 
from disapproving, to intellectual, to schoolboyish or to outright furious.

Perhaps the most moving of Stevens's discoveries, however, are lines in one of 
the letters to his friends Tom and Clive that express his growing 
disenchantment with the notion that it was possible to be truly close to 
another person: "All problems have to be solved eventually by ONESELF, and 
that's where all your lovely John Donne stuff turns out to be a load of crap 
because, in the last analysis, A MAN IS AN ISLAND."

Born Brilliant (published by John Murray at £25) will be launched at the 
Cheltenham Literary Festival on Wednesdaywww.bornbrilliant.info <>
 