
Kevin Whately and Robson Green are to co-star in a new ITV1 single drama set 
in Newcastle at the outbreak of the second world war.

Joe Maddison's War has been scripted by the award-winning Alan Plater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater>, whose writing credits going 
back to the early 1960s include Z Cars, The Barchester Chronicles, The 
Beiderbecke Affair, Fortunes of War, A Very British Coup and The Last of the 
Blonde Bombshells.

Whately plays Joe, a Newcastle shipyard worker who is too old to serve at the 
outbreak of war in 1939 and whose wife leaves him for a younger naval officer. 
Green plays Joe's friend Harry, who reluctantly volunteers to join the Home 
Guard.

"My family background is strictly Tyneside – the earlier generations worked in 
and around the shipyards, my favourite uncle was in the Home Guard, and my head 
is still full of family anecdotes from the period," Plater said.

"Joe Maddison's War splices three elements: solid historical research (the 
Home Guard in the north-east was one of the few to engage in direct contact 
with the enemy, mainly anti-aircraft and rocket batteries); half-remembered 
family folklore and gossip; and a lot of simple old–fashioned invention.

"Add them together and it's a love letter to a remarkable generation of 
ordinary folk – the good, the bad and the gorblimey – who proved their amazing 
ability to be extraordinary and heroic. I owe them everything."

Joe Maddison's War is due to begin filming in the north-east in March next 
year. The drama was greenlit by ITV drama commissioners Laura Mackie and Sally 
Haynes and is being made by the independent production company Mammoth Screen.

Michele Buck and Damien Timmer will executive produce for Mammoth.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 