
Michelle Knight <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelle-knight> smacks a 
red punch bag that is almost as big as her. Biff. Biffbiff. Biffbiffbiff. Her 
punches are getting faster and harder. Does she ever think of him when she's 
punching, I ask. Yes, she says. Biffbiffbiffbiff. "When I got out and started 
seeing him on TV, I just wanted to put his face right here, and hit it. So I 
took the paper and you can tell – the dent's right there." She never uses his 
name, but "he" is Ariel Castro, the school bus driver who kidnapped her, held 
her hostage in his house in Cleveland, Ohio, for 11 years, made her pregnant 
five times and beat her into miscarrying five times.

Knight escaped one year ago this week, alongside two other young women, Amanda 
Berry and Gina DeJesus. Castro pleaded guilty to 937 charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/01/ariel-castro-kidnapped-diaries-abuse>
, including aggravated murder, kidnap, rape and assault, and last August was 
givena sentence of life plus 1,000 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/01/ohio-kidnap-victims-ariel-castro-imprisonment>
. As for Knight, she is starting to rebuild her life. And, boy, is there some 
rebuilding to do. Her sight is weak from years in darkness, her stomach 
permanently damaged from a combination of infections and Castro's beatings; she 
has psychological and trust issues, and has cut herself off from the family she 
says never bothered looking for her. Her existence these days is largely 
solitary. Perhaps the miracle is that she survived at all.

Before Castro's sentencing on 1 August, Knight stood in court and read a 
heart-wrenching statement that not only detailed what he had done to her but 
stretched out a hand of forgiveness. Tiny (she is 4ft 7in), bespectacled and 
tearful, she said: "Good afternoon. My name is Michelle Knight. And I would 
like to tell you what 11 years was like for me. I missed my son every day. 
Iwondered if I was ever going to see him again. He was only two-and-a-half 
years old when I was taken… Days turned into nights. Nights turned into days. 
The years turned into eternity."

Castro sat behind her in his orange prison uniform as she spoke about how he 
had tried to destroy his three victims. "I spent 11 years in hell, and now your 
hell is just beginning. I will overcome all this that happened, but you will 
face hell for eternity. From this moment on, I will not let you define me or 
affect who I am... I can forgive you, but I will never forget." Castro was 
found hanged in his cell a month later.


Back in her flat in Cleveland, Knight punches her bag. She boxed when she was 
a little girl – she would throw punches at a log wrapped in a pillow – and 
hopes to compete in the ring, but she no longer pictures Castro when she 
fights. "I took his picture down after I faced him in court. I felt relieved 
because then I didn't have to feel that monster's eyes beaming on me any more."

Her living room is lit up with the early spring sunshine. One wall is covered 
with messages of love and faith from local schoolchildren. Next to the punch 
bag, there is a basketball hoop and a micro-sized pool table – a mini indoor 
sports area. It is Knight's birthday today (she is 33), and there is a helium 
balloon hanging from the ceiling, and cake on the kitchen table. "It's the 
first time I've had a balloon that says Happy Birthday, or flowers, or cards. 
This is like my first birthday ever."

Knight has written a gruelling book, Finding Me 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781602862647>
, about her experience, in which she never once mentions Castro by name. He is 
always "the dude". (He doesn't deserve a name, she explains. "He hated the fact 
that I called him dude, because I didn't acknowledge him as a person.") Why did 
she write the book? "I wanted everyone to understand that when you go through 
hard times, you can actually make it through. You don't have to let the 
darkness swallow you." She has a lovely, slow, sing-song voice – not unlike 
Sissy Spacek's Holly in the filmBadlands <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0069762/>
. Did she ever think the darkness would swallow her? "No, I knew I would 
overcome it." But this is Knight at her most positive. Ask her another time, 
and she will admit there were plenty of moments when she wanted to die.
 Sheriff’s deputies guard Ariel Castro’s Cleveland, Ohio house last May. 
Photograph: Tony Dejak/AP 
On 22 August 2002, Knight had been due to attend a social services meeting to 
discuss custody of her young son, Joey. She was late, and in a panic. She went 
to a convenience store to ask for directions. Castro overheard her and said he 
could give her a lift. She recognised him as the father of a younger girl who 
had attended her school. "I looked at him, and said, 'I think I know you – your 
daughter's name is Emily, right?' And he was like, 'It's a small world after 
all.' He didn't strike me as a bad person at first. He struck me as a good 
person."

There was a note stuck on his car advertising puppies for sale. She told him 
Joey liked puppies. "He started the car, and the first thing he did was a huge 
spin in the car park. I'm like, 'Seriously? Really?' And he's like, 'Oh, my 
kids love it when I do that.' So I excused it, which I shouldn't have. Because 
that was one of the signs I look back on, and I think I should have got out of 
his car. The only thing is, if I'd tried, there was no door handle." Knight was 
21 at the time, but looked many years younger.
 Ariel Castro. Photograph: Cuyahoga County sheriff’s office/EPA 
She noticed he was driving the wrong way. When she asked why, he said he was 
popping into his house, and that he would give her a puppy for Joey. "So he 
pulls in. He came into the driveway and locked the gate to the yard. I'd never 
seen anybody lock their gate, and he said it's because it's a really bad 
neighbourhood. So I thought, OK. After we pull in, we go into the house and he 
turns around and he locks his door. Then he's like, 'The puppies are upstairs.' 
As I get close to the stairs, I notice I don't hear puppies. I asked him why – 
puppies are noisy. He said, 'They're taking a nap.' I get up to the second 
floor, and I think, I ain't ever getting out of here. I had a cracking feeling 
in my heart. As I got closer, I started to shake. He noticed, and said, 'You 
don't have to be worried', but my body was telling me something different. 
There's something wrong here, and it was already too late. Either I was going 
to die or he was going to do something to me, that's all I could think. Then, 
when he shut the door on me, I knew it was over. It was just over. I was not 
getting out of that house, ever."

The suburb of Tremont is now a trendy part of town, known for its restaurants 
and art galleries. But there is nothing desirable about Seymour Avenue. Last 
year,Cleveland was named one of America's 10 most dangerous cities,  
<http://247wallst.com/special-report/2013/06/13/the-most-dangerous-cities-in-america-3/2/>
and property here is still cheap: in 2012, Castro's white clapboard house with 
its boarded-up windows was valued at $36,100.

I make the journey from the house where Knight was living with her cousin in 
2002, to the store where she met Castro, and then on to his house: it takes a 
couple of minutes in traffic. For those 11 years, she was only a couple of 
blocks from home.

2207 Seymour Avenue was demolished on 7 August 2013, six days after Knight 
gave her statement to court. She was there to see it knocked down, giving out 
yellow balloons to neighbours as symbols of the world's missing children. 
(DeJesus and Berry stayed away, and did not attend court.) In its place there 
is a square of grass and a long bed of soil that will hopefully flower one day. 
The tree-lined avenue is quietly hostile; there are signs on the houses either 
side of Castro's wasteland, warning off trespassers. I lift up the soil and 
smell it. The sun is shining bright, it is silent but for birdsong, and I'm 
thinking that for all those years Knight, Berry and DeJesus were locked in 
Castro's cellar, underneath this soil.
 Knight with her friend Mitchell, recording a charity single. Photograph: 
Christopher Lane for the Guardian 
The next day we head to Cleveland's Magnetic North Studio, where Knight is 
recording a charity single with her 16-year-old friend, Mitchell. The taxi 
driver, Will, like every cabbie I meet in Cleveland, is keen to talk about 
Castro and his captives. He tells me that he was friends with the father of 
Gina DeJesus and would regularly go out looking for her. He passed Castro's 
house every day. "I didn't have a clue. Can you imagine? Every day I drove 
past." He is beating himself up about it. "You know, Castro was in a band. I 
actually went to see them play." It comes out like a confession. "They were 
pretty good. He played bass guitar." You sense the city shares a kind of 
collective guilt.

Knight has a cold but is doing her best in the studio. As she sings, I chat 
with Peggy Foley Jones, her lawyer. Jones is a former judge whose own sister 
was raped and murdered in her early 30s, decades ago. She thinks this is why 
she took on Knight's case. Since then, she has become much more than a lawyer 
to her. Jones says Knight has changed hugely in the past months – last summer, 
you could hardly get a smile out of her – but she can see problems ahead, and 
worries that Knight is getting involved with the wrong people. "Since Michelle 
came out of the house, it's been a whirlwind for her. I worry what her life 
will be like after this. She's pretty much a celebrity now, and when the book's 
over, she might well not be."

Jones tells me about the effect the kidnappings have had on Cleveland. It's 
not the city's only recent trauma. She tells me that between June 2007 and July 
2009, on the other side of town, a man calledAnthony Sowell 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthony_Sowell> raped and strangled 11 women, 
most of them recovering or current drug addicts. So the city is suffering a 
double guilt. Recently, Jones was out with Knight when a stranger approached 
them and addressed Knight. "I recognise you. You are Gina DeJesus," he said. 
Jones takes up the story. "Michelle said, 'No, I'm Michelle Knight. But I 
recognise you, too. Your picture was on the mantelpiece in his house.' He then 
burst out crying, said that he was the sound technician for Castro's band and 
had visited the house five times, and swore he knew nothing of what was going 
on." Another time, she and Knight were in a restaurant when the waitress told 
them the meal was on the house and presented her with a fluffy toy rabbit. "She 
was also in tears. She said she was friendly with Amanda's mother and went out 
looking for Amanda every Sunday." After Berry had been missing for three years, 
her mother died – from a broken heart, Jones says.

In the recording studio, Michelle and Mitchell make for an odd couple. He is 
tall, gangly and serious, with a face straight out of aNorman Rockwell  
<http://www.nrm.org/>painting; she is small, rounded and giggly. They met at a 
fundraiser, where he told her he had written a song that he thought she might 
like. He had read how much she loved music, how important it had been. Castro 
gave her a battered radio, and she did her best to keep it going. She adores 
hip-hop (Drake <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drake_%28rapper%29> is her idol) 
but Castro, who was mixed race, hated her playing "black" music. Did she ever 
ask him what difference it made? "There was a time. Then I got punched in the 
face, and I've still got the scar." She shows me – just under her lip.

When Knight came out of captivity, her jaw was so badly damaged that she 
slurred her speech. Now she speaks more clearly. For six months after her 
release, she lived in sheltered accommodation where most of the residents were 
elderly. Today she lives in a beautiful one-bedroom apartment in the smart bit 
of Tremont, where she can afford the rent because of her substantial book 
advance and various trusts that have been established for her.

There are birthday cards all over the kitchen table. How would she have 
celebrated last year? "In a room with Gina. We would have a candy bar and we'd 
sing Happy Birthday to each other, and we'd blow out a candle we were holding 
in our hand or that we actually tried to stuff on to the candy bar, which was 
incredibly hard. The same with Amanda, but she would sometimes get a cake. We 
would try to celebrate the best we could. We'd write each other cards."
 Knight and her lawyer Peggy Jones have become close. ‘She taught me how to 
dance,’ Jones says. Knight is laughing so much that she can barely get the 
words out. ‘She looked as if she was having a seizure.’ Photograph: Christopher 
Lane for the Guardian 
Castro kidnapped Berry a year after he took Knight, one day before Berry's 
17th birthday. A year later he kidnapped 14-year-old Gina DeJesus. (Knight is 
convinced she was kidnapped only because Castro thought she was far younger 
than 21.) Was there any comfort in knowing there were other girls in the house? 
Yes, she says, but her overwhelming feeling was pity. "I felt they didn't 
deserve to be here. I didn't deserve to be here. Everything that happened from 
that day was just going to be a big old mess. It's a tragedy because you know 
exactly what she's going to go through, and she ain't going to like it. And you 
don't know how she will react to it." All three girls had known Castro's 
children.

In their decade together, she and DeJesus built up a remarkable relationship, 
with Knight fulfilling a maternal role. For most of the time, the two girls 
were either shackled or locked in a dark room together. (Berry was given her 
own room, which she later shared with her daughter.) DeJesus and Knight 
listened to music together, read together, ate together, went to the bathroom 
together (a plastic toilet that was emptied infrequently). They had no choice. 
They looked out for each other when they were feeling ill, gave each other 
hope, talked about a future that they had to believe was possible.

Castro was born in Puerto Rico in 1960 and moved to America as a child. His 
partner Grimilda Figueroa and four children left him, and Cleveland, in 1996. 
Three years earlier, he had been arrested for assaulting Figueroa but not 
charged. She died in 2012, but her sister claimed he had broken his partner's 
nose, ribs and arms and thrown her down a set of stairs, cracking her skull. 
Castro's two brothers lived locally, and were initially thought to have been 
involved in the kidnaps. But Knight insists they were not. Yes, he would invite 
them back to Seymour Avenue, but the girls were locked upstairs or in the 
cellar. "The brothers never knew about it, and they were too drunk to know. 
They'd have a six-pack before they came over to the house, and they wouldn't 
recognise noise because the radio was on."

Knight says Castro blamed his behaviour on sexual abuse he had suffered as a 
child. "He said he couldn't control what he was doing because he was a sex 
addict; and the only way for him to get over it was to cut off his… [she 
doesn't say the word] and not be a guy." Did he really want to? "At times, 
yes." Would she have done it for him? "Yes, he asked me to do it for him. But 
he said, 'In return, I'll hurt you.' His addiction was like someone with a fast 
car. Got to go faster and faster."

In court, psychiatrist Dr Frank Ochberg provided a written evaluation in which 
he said Knight had suffered "the longest and most severely" of the three women. 
Knight agrees, and thinks this is because she wouldn't acknowledge the distress 
he caused her. "After a while he'd knock me on the floor and I just sat there 
and stared at him like he was retarded. I'd smile back. You really think that 
hurts? I became numb to the pain. I was like, is that all you can do? I knew 
that if I gave him the satisfaction, he'd feed off it. That's what fed his 
fire."

Even the food she received was worse than the others'. She talks about the 
time she first met DeJesus, who had been told by Castro to take her a meal. "It 
was Chinese chicken. I hate Chinese chicken, especially the way he got it. Yep. 
It wasn't tasty. He would wait at least a week or two till he handed it to me. 
It was whatever the others didn't finish. After a while I noticed they got more 
and better food than me, and most of the time it was fresh."

Did he ever show her kindness? She talks about the time he bought her a dog, 
and her eyes well up. "I loved the dog with all my heart. I cherished it. I 
named it Lobo. I thought, this is going to be amazing. I have somebody I can 
take care of."

A few weeks later, Castro attacked Knight in front of Lobo. "So my dog bit 
him, and he got hold of Lobo by his neck and then just… [She makes a snapping 
gesture with her hands]… right in front of me. Then he went downstairs and got 
a bag to put him in, and threw it in the garbage bin like it was trash."

I find myself confusing her captivity with prison. She doesn't notice. "Is it 
true you were made pregnant five times when you were in prison?"

She nods, barely able to speak. "Yes."

"And you wanted those babies?" "Yes. Not under any circumstances would I kill 
a child like that. No matter what I went through."

Did you always know when you were pregnant? "Yes, it would be that amazing 
feeling I felt when I had my son. It felt like heaven was in my stomach. You 
could feel this big tickle. It's just a feeling that overwhelms you with joy."

What is the longest you were pregnant?

"Three months." Silence.
 A wall in Knight’s flat with messages of love from local school children. 
Photograph: Christopher Lane for the Guardian 
The question I keep asking Knight is how she kept going. She says she tried 
not to wake up in the mornings. She wouldn't get up until Castro bullied her 
out of bed. "I felt that me living in that house, everything was frozen. The 
only thing moving was the outside world. There was no reason to wake up, no 
reason to talk." Often she'd pretend to be asleep. He constantly taunted her: 
about her looks, about the fact that nobody was looking for her.

She was convinced she would die in the house. Knight is allergic to mustard 
and, knowing this, Castro forced her to eat a hot dog coated in the stuff. Her 
face blew up and she couldn't breathe. "I'm just sitting there asking God, 'Is 
there a reason to go on living?' There was a point when I told Gina, 'Just kill 
me. Just put the pillow over my head and kill me. Let me go.' She said, 
'I would, but I can't because you're my friend and I can't let you do that.'" 
Another time, she says, she returned the favour. "Gina drank a little too much 
liquor and she wanted me to let her throw up and choke on it, and I couldn't do 
it. I told her, 'Either you're going to get up or I'm going to come up and pick 
you up and make you go to the toilet.' " Knight grins her way through this grim 
story. "She was a dead weight, and I just tried my best."

She admits her relationship with Berry was difficult: they had different 
backgrounds, different expectations of life. But even then, she helped deliver 
Berry's baby Jocelyn (Castro said he would kill her if the baby did not 
survive) and talks of her love for the girl. "The child did bring happiness 
into the house. Life was worth living and waking up in the morning just to see 
that little girl smile, to see her play." Castro would not allow Knight to call 
the baby by her name. "I called her Pretty, that's all I was allowed."

DeJesus and Berry used to tell her that she dealt with captivity unbelievably 
well. "They thought I didn't have as many problems coping." In the end, Knight 
says, her tough childhood helped her. She was brought up by a mother she says 
never cared about her, and who kept her away from school so she could claim 
welfare benefits. She was sexually abused from the age of five. When she did go 
to school, she was bullied. "There were times when kids would lock me in a 
locker," she tells me later. "When I was 10, one kid put my hand in a locker 
and smushed it and said, 'Now you'll never be able to play basketball again.' 
It broke my thumb and my wrist."

In her teens she ran away, and lived on wasteland under a bridge. She stole a 
wheelie bin and made it her home. "I had my own little room, I didn't need to 
share it with anybody. I didn't have to hear my mother yelling, I didn't have 
to hear glasses breaking, things being thrown at the wall. If I wanted to sing, 
I didn't have to listen to my mum saying, 'You're a horrible singer, shut up.' "

Has she ever thought what would have become of her if she hadn't been 
kidnapped? "I'd probably be living on a street or dead by now. It probably 
would have been drugs or drink." So the hell she lived through might have saved 
her? She smiles. "Yes. Because it gave me street smarts. It made me see the 
other side of the road that no one else gets to see. Even though it was painful 
and horrible, I survived it."

I ask whether she ever tried to make sense of what Castro was doing. Yes, she 
says, he considered the girls a surrogate family. If they were family, what was 
their relationship to him? "Wives," she says simply. He would tell them 
he wanted them to be happy. In court, he said: "I hope they can find it in 
their hearts to forgive me because we had a lot of harmony going on in that 
home."

For their final few years of captivity, Castro treated his captives more 
liberally. They were no longer chained up, but simply locked up. Knight and 
DeJesus were allowed time to see the baby. Does she think that in some way 
Castro might have loved them? "In his sick way, yeah. In his own demented mind, 
he loved all of us because he thought we were all family. That goes back to his 
fake world where he wanted a family and he didn't have it. He always complained 
about how his family had left him, abandoned him."

When Castro was discovered hanging by his bedsheet last September, it was 
assumed he had taken his own life. But the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation 
and Correction then released a report saying he might have died accidentally, 
from auto-erotic asphyxiation.Coroner Dr Jan Gorniak rejected this 
<http://www.cnn.com/2013/10/10/justice/ohio-ariel-castro-suicide-guards/>, 
standing by her original ruling of suicide. Knight agrees with the coroner: 
"All I believe is he took the coward's way out."

Does she wish he was still in prison? "Well, I kind of wish he didn't kill 
himself, but to each his own mind. He didn't want to be alive. He couldn't take 
what he did. And I understand that. If I was him, I'd have taken my own life, 
too."

We are playing pool on Knight's micro table, and she is laughing at my 
inability to manoeuvre the tiny cue. She loves sport: last night she went to 
basketball, today she is off to a baseball match. Peggy Jones says Knight's 
appetite for life never ceases to astonish her. She goes to the theatre, she 
goes to concerts, she is a night owl. "I can't keep up with her. When we travel 
and she wants to go clubbing, I just can't do it."

They go clubbing together? Suddenly, these two very different women are in 
hysterics.

"She taught me how to dance," Jones says.

Knight is laughing so much she can barely get the words out. "I was teaching 
her how to dance and she looked as if she was having a seizure."

I ask Jones what she hopes for most for Knight.
 Inside the house, she wrote a list for an imaginary camping trip: underwear, 
sleeveless T-shirt, long sleeves for when it’s cold, shorts, long johns, socks, 
compass, hiking boots, peanuts, chocolate-chip cookies, pegs.' Photograph: 
Christopher Lane for the Guardian 
"To heal. I'd like you to get your stomach sorted. I'd like you to be healthy, 
physically and mentally. I hope you can fulfil your dream. I don't know whether 
it will be running a restaurant or singing, but I know you've got the 
confidence and discipline to do it. But it will be a lot of hard work." Jones, 
tough, polished and immaculate, starts to wobble. She dabs her eyes.

I ask Knight what she can remember of the day she escaped. Berry had managed 
to attract the attention of neighbours, who called 911. Knight says she didn't 
believe it was the police battering down the door – she thought it was a 
break-in. "I was like, nah, anybody can just say, 'Police.' I didn't think she 
actually was, till I heard the walkie-talkie. Once I'd seen a police badge, and 
police lady, I just ran out of the door and jumped into her arms and grabbed 
hold of her and wouldn't let her go. I didn't think it was real. I turned round 
and saw Gina and my mind was spinning like heck, and I said, 'Hey, do you 
know what we're doing? We're going home, we're going home!' "

But while DeJesus and Berry had homes to go to, Knight didn't. Sure enough, 
her family turned up, but she wasn't interested; she moved into the sheltered 
accommodation. "My mother says she always loved me, when she never loved me at 
all. All the things she said on the news: we owned a farm, I had a horse. I 
never lived on a farm, I never had a horse. Just be real. That's all I want 
from her, to be real." Barbara Knight denies she was a bad mother and last 
autumn told an US TV show: "Her point of view has been altered by that monster 
and what he did to her. What I've heard that she said about me breaks my heart."

Knight has not seen Berry and DeJesus, either, but she is convinced that will 
happen in time. (The three girls were originally asked to write a book 
together, but Knight felt she had a different story to tell and chose to write 
her own; DeJesus and Berry's account will be published next year.) "Right now 
we're all going through our own separate problems. We need to take time for 
ourselves." As for Joey, he is now 14, and she has seen pictures of him and 
written letters. But she knows she can't rush anything, and that he will 
probably regard his adoptive parents as his true parents. "He is a beautiful, 
handsome man, and I love him to death. I'm glad he has all that he has got now; 
I'm sad I'm not there. I hope one day we'll get together, have a cup of coffee, 
whatever." She says that even more than DeJesus, it was the thought of Joey 
that kept her going.

You know you asked me how I got through those 11 years, she asks. She takes 
out a pile of paper – drawings, poems and writing she did in the house. Much of 
it is dedicated to Joey. She reads a letter to him, slowly, because of her 
eyes. "It says, 'Happy halloween, son. I love you and wish I was there at home. 
All I got at the moment is a memory of you." She shows me a card she made of a 
dog wearing a mortar board. "This was to celebrate his graduation from 
nursery." Amid the piles of writing, there are lists – of plans, of dreams, of 
needs, all made in the house. One list says, "Shampoo, towels, bath cloths, 
toothpaste". "Things we didn't have but we wanted," she explains. "We didn't 
usually have toothpaste. He'd give us a tiny bit and expect it to last six 
months. When he gave us peroxide or alcohol for cuts, I'd use it to brush my 
teeth." Another list she wrote names everything she would need for a camping 
trip. She reads it out, matter of factly. "It says, 'Underwear, sleeveless 
T-shirt, long sleeves for when it's cold, shorts for during the day, long 
johns, socks, sleepwear, shoes, compass, hiking boots, bathing suit, hats, 
gloves, raincoat, rain-pants, peanuts, raisins, chocolate-chip cookies, dried 
fruit, cereal, water, marshmallows, pegs.' "

Recently Knight changed her name by deed poll to Lily Rose Lee (Lee is Joey's 
middle name). "I just love the name, and the names that I already have I don't 
like too much. It's about making a brand new start. I didn't want people to 
know me asthat girl. I want people to know me as this girl."

She has also treated herself to a number of piercings and tattoos, which she 
guides me through. First her left arm. "This one is my protection dragon, turns 
everything that was dark into light." Then a Care Bear on her upper arm. "This 
one is for my son, he's my little huggy bear." There is a dramatic tattoo on 
her leg featuring two guns. It reads, "Know me as a victor not a victim." She 
lifts her right arm to show a tattoo of a baby with black hair. "This one 
represents the baby that passed away in the house. I call her my little angel." 
I'm unnerved as I realise I'm looking at both the face of Castro and her 
imagined baby in one tattoo. Does it not remind her of Castro? "No," she says 
decisively.

Finally, she uncovers an expansive tattoo on her back and shoulders: a pair of 
wings inscribed with "Freedom to fly".

The afternoon sun is dazzling. I ask if she always keeps the blinds open. 
"Yes, I do," Knight says. "It's to see the beautiful sky that I never saw for 
years." She is squinting into the sun. Do her eyes hurt? "I still have bits of 
problems. If the sun was beaming bright, I'd have to stay back from the 
window." Are her eyes improving? "Right now they're not, but hopefully they 
will. I still got hope."

• Finding Me: A Decade of Darkness, A Life Reclaimed by Michelle Knight, with 
Michelle Burford, is out now, published by Weinstein Books, at £12.99. To order 
a copy for £10.39, including UK mainland p&p, call 0330 333 6846, or go to
theguardian.com/bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781602862647>
.
 