
For many of us, Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
is a time when we’re forced to leave our cosseted liberal-elite filter bubble 
of identity politics and small-batch quinoa snackpots and plunge back into the 
dark heart of Brexit. Spending time with your family – especially when your 
family doesn’t share your progressive values – can be excruciating at the best 
of times. But it’s going to be far worse this year, because this year they won.

There are four ways that you can face this onslaught: with a) militant 
counter-arguments, b) gentle persuasion, c) desperate attempts to find common 
ground and d) outrageous personal insults. Here are the topics most likely to 
crop up this year, along with all your potential responses.

Argument: “Donald Trump is really going to shake things up.”


a) “Donald Trump has insulted women, Mexicans and the disabled, and all signs 
point to him being ruinous for western democracy.”
b) “Don’t forget that Hillary Clinton won the popular vote, so his mandate 
isn’t as great as you think.”
c) “I’ll admit that his victory is in keeping with a growing mistrust of the 
political status quo; I was rooting for Bernie.”
d) “Well, you would say that, you dimwitted oaf.”

Argument: “I never really understood why David Bowie was so popular.”


a) “He won four Brit Awards, two Grammys, an Ivor Novello award, sold 140m 
records and is widely regarded as one of the most influential recording artists 
of all time.”
b) “Oh, come on, I’ve been in the car with you while you were singing along to 
Jean Genie.”
c) “You know who I miss most? Paul Daniels. Now there was an entertainer with 
mainstream appeal.”
d) “Oh yeah? Well, I never really understood why Mum ever had sex with you.”


8 social media no-nos on Christmas Day | Stuart Heritage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/24/8-social-media-no-nos-christmas-day>
Argument: “I’m glad we’ve snatched this country back from out-of-touch 
elitists.”


a) “The leaders of the leave movement were a former Times columnist with 
strong links to Rupert Murdoch, a man who went to the same school as PG 
Wodehouse and someone called Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson. You would be 
hard pushed to find a more elitist crowd.”
b) “Please tell me one thing that’s genuinely changed for the better since the 
Brexit vote.”
c) “I’m not happy about the referendum result, but I guess that’s democracy 
for you.”
d) “You’re just upset because you think quinoa is a type of Nissan.”


Argument: “Nigel Farage seems like a decent bloke.”


a) “Does he? He has stood for election as an MP seven times, and lost seven 
times. He hijacked the leave campaign despite being officially sidelined, and 
all but ambushedDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
to further his own grimy career. The man is a rat.”
b) “Really? Remember that anti-migrant poster he unveiled during the 
referendum? That seemed especially unpleasant.”
c) “I’ll agree that the moustache he grew was quite funny.”
d) “I can’t wait for you to die.”


Argument: “We’ve seen a lot of immigrants around here lately.”


a) “The latest migration report from the Office for National Statistics shows 
that applications for asylum in the UK are almost half of what they were 14 
years ago. Your paranoia is the result of a decades-long fearmongering campaign 
by the rightwing press.”
b) “With the greatest respect, one Nepalese family moving into a house three 
streets down doesn’t constitute a lot of immigration.”
c) “Yes, but look at how much better the restaurants have got.”
d) “Pipe down, you racist tit.”


Argument: “Yes, but white lives matter, too.”


a) “Clearly, that isn’t the argument. This is a movement aimed singularly at a 
judicial system that’s statistically weighted against black people. What you’re 
doing is the equivalent of pulling up outside a food bank in a Lexus and 
whining because nobody is giving you any free baked beans.”
b) “Surely, you can understand the outrage that many felt after George 
Zimmerman’s acquittal?”
c) “You know what else matters? Stuffing. What a delicious meal this is.”
d) “Yours doesn’t, you absolute spanner.”


Argument: “All this fuss about a dead monkey. It doesn’t make any sense.”


a) “One, Harambe was an ape and not a monkey. Two, his shooting raises a 
number of important questions about the nature of keeping animals in captivity 
that we would be stupid to ignore at this juncture.”
b) “Of course it makes sense. Zookeepers had to decide between killing a 
gorilla or potentially allowing it to harm a child. That’s a huge choice.”
c) “People should concentrate on the bigger issues, such as Trump and Farage 
and ... actually, never mind.”
d) “I wish you would go to Cincinnati so someone could shoot you, you 
obnoxious tool.”


Argument: “Of course there’s no such thing as climate change.”


a) “Really? According to Nasa, the six-month period from January to June 2016 
was the warmest half-year on record. Plus, the Arctic sea-ice extent is now 40% 
smaller than it was 40 years ago. The Earth is undeniably getting warmer.”
b) “That simply isn’t true. You know that outbreak of fungus on your pear 
tree? The Royal Horticultural Society believes the upsurge of the disease could 
be linked to climate change.”
c) “Hey, I’m all for anything that lets me wear shorts more often.”
d) “Then this must all be down to the hot air you spout, you flatulent gasbag.”


Argument: “You lost. Deal with it.”

a) “Did we lose? As well as Hillary Clinton gaining more than 2m more votes 
than Donald Trump, 62.5% of the British electorate did not vote to leave the 
EU. Your victories are products of imperfect systems and nothing more.”
b) “The right to freedom of expression is a core foundation of every 
democratic society. If the results had been reversed, you would want to 
complain about it, too.”
c) “Win or lose, aren’t we all just people? Aren’t the relationships we have 
with one another more important than the broad and temporary sweep of 
international politics? Surely what matters more than anything is our ability 
to accept each other’s superficial differences.”
d) “I hate you, I hate Christmas and I’m pleased that Auntie June left you for 
her watercolour tutor.”
 