
You recently called being the presenter of Desert Island Discs "officially the 
best job in radio". Can you explain why that is true?

There's nothing more fascinating than the human experience, so the opportunity 
to meet people whose lives have somehow been beyond normal human experience is 
a gift for me. If you are talking to the guy who discovered DNA sequencing or 
to AC Grayling about philosophy and you balls that up then you must be really 
bad at your job. I don't have to interview a soap star about a fitness video; 
I'm talking to people who have had these extraordinary experiences. I have been 
given all the best possible tools to work with.

The two most popular non-classical records chosen by castaways are the rather 
self-justificatory "Non, je ne regrette rien" and "My Way". Do you think people 
view the show as a definitive interview?

Some people do, but I very much hope they don't. In a way, that's the joy of 
the format; it elastically stretches around what people – I don't flatter 
myself too much – are prepared to talk about their lives.

I remember George Michael <https://www.theguardian.com/music/georgemichael> 
saying: "I'm ready to be totally honest" and he did answer every single 
question and there was no flinching. Some people certainly see it as inscribing 
their life on a grey stone tablet and I would say those are the less good 
programmes.

If you could only do TV or radio for the rest of your life, which would 
you choose?

Radio. Television is a lot of fuss; there's a lot of cushioning between what 
you do and what reaches the people who are watching it. With radio, it's much 
more immediate and I much more directly feel what I can put out as a programme 
and that's quite satisfying in its own ravingly egotistical way. Also, you 
don't have all the make-up cobblers; as a woman, that's a big and very boring 
part of the job.

Wasn't there a point in 2007, when you were still doing Five News, where you 
had to make that call?

I had taken too much on. I was working more than five days a week doing the 
news andDesert Island Discs and I had just had my second baby and my husband 
started travelling a lot and I thought: "Well, something's going to give and 
it's probably going to be me." Of course, it was not a bread-line struggle. I 
was fortunate in that my husband [Soho House members club founder Nick Jones] 
has a very good job and I was giving up one good job and keeping one good job, 
so how would you describe it? It was a penthouse problem, but it was a real 
problem because I had two young kids and I was overloaded.

As a result of your television documentaries – The British at Work and The 
British Family – you seem to have become the voice for women in modern Britain. 
Are you happy with that responsibility?

Oh God, I don't know how that's happened. As somebody who interviews for a 
living, I feel that when somebody asks me a question I don't want to give a 
bland answer. So when people ask me: "What do you think about tutoring after 
school?" or: "What do you think about a working woman's lot?" then I will 
absolutely endeavour to give them a truthful answer. But I'm only a jobbing 
broadcaster, not a self-appointed spokesperson; that idea fills me with horror.

Most people would imagine that you have a very glamorous life…

Tell me what you imagine and I'll tell you if you've got it right.

Well, do you spend much time in the Soho House empire?

My life is an odd combination of flying to Cannes to be Mrs Jones for their 
very glamorous party at a villa in Antibes and cleaning the dogshit out of my 
daughter's trainers. I do both of those things. Because of Nick and his 
business, there are moments when you think: "This is ridiculously glamorous", 
"What a laugh", "Isn't this odd?" but that's not most of my life. Most of my 
life is preparing for my work and making sure my kids have taken their allergy 
tablets.

The results of Your Desert Island Discs  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/features/desert-island-discs>– where members of 
the public nominated their eight records – are revealed next Saturday. Do you 
expect the nation to have good taste?

Yes, I do. I don't expect "The Birdy Song" to be in there for example. I would 
be very, very surprised if there was any Peters and Lee, but we shall see and 
that's going to be the joy of it. It's not a vote because it's entirely 
self-selecting, but it will be an interesting little tranche of the listening 
habits of the day and I'm kind of fascinated by that.

Returning to Edith Piaf "regretting nothing", do you have any mistakes that 
you would care to admit to?

Oh God, how many do you want me to talk about? I think one of the greatest 
learning curves in my life has been being a step-parent – I have two of my own 
kids and two very lovely stepkids and I thought I knew how to do that and I 
found out that I didn't and I had to learn how to do it. That's a big one for 
me, probably the biggest one.

Can you pass on any advice about step-parenting?

Well, it's lose-lose, and you have to think about it in an intelligent way and 
not be formulaic about it. It takes a lot of time and it can be emotionally 
straining, but in the long term I think it's a very interesting relationship to 
have. I made well-intentioned but none the less mistakes in the first few years 
and I didn't expect that, but there you go and I learned a lot from that. But 
that's a whole other interview.
 