
Lúcio Lara, who has died aged 86, was one of the leading figures in the 
Angolan war of independence against Portugal and a key member of the Popular 
Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) which took power in 1975. He 
remained prominent during the ensuing period of undeclared war across the 
region waged bySouth Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> in 
the 1970s and 80s, when much of southern Angola was occupied.

Alongside his colleague Agostinho Neto 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Agostinho-Neto>, who became the first 
president of Angola, and withAmílcar Cabral 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Amilcar-Lopes-Cabral> of Guinea-Bissau, 
Julius Nyerere <https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/oct/15/guardianobituaries>
 of Tanzania,Samora Machel <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Samora-Machel> 
of Mozambique, andOliver Tambo 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-oliver-tambo-1457543.html> 
andNelson Mandela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/05/nelson-mandela-obituary> in 
South Africa, Lara played a vital part in the liberation movements of southern 
Africa during the cold war years. After Cabral’s assassination in 1973, Lara 
and Neto embodied the idealism and moral tone of the Portuguese-speaking 
African colonies’ fight. Even when he was ousted from political power in the 
late 80s, Lara remained an honoured reference for many.

He was the son of a Portuguese father, Lúcio Gouveia Barreto de Lara, who 
worked as a farm manager and then shopkeeper, and an Angolan mother, 
Clementina. He was brought up and went to school in the central highlands town 
of Huambo and then went to university in Coimbra, in central Portugal. He 
started his political life there in the late 40s, and, as a member of the 
African Studies Centre in Lisbon, soon met some of the other men who would 
become historic names in the African wars of independence fromPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal> – Cabral, Mário de Andrade and 
Marcelino dos Santos.

By 1957, Lara was active in underground independence politics and represented 
the Anti-Colonial Movement (MAC) – which included all the Portuguese colonies, 
including Goa – at the fifth congress of the Portuguese Communist party (PCP), 
in Lisbon. He was smuggled into the meeting lying on the floor of a large 
wedding taxi, which was driven into a garage, and from there he was taken in 
through a tunnel that had been dug to the house. At that gathering, the PCP 
took a position, for the first time, in favour of independence for the 
colonies. However, the party’s attempts to get the Angolan nationalists to work 
for it were never accepted, mainly because of Lara and Neto’s vision that the 
independence struggle belonged to its own people.

Two years later, Lara’s presence at the PCP congress was betrayed to the 
Portuguese secret police, and he fled just before any arrest could be made. He 
spent some time in Germany and then returned with his family toAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and to overt liberation politics, 
via Tunis, Rabat, a period working in Conakry in Guinea and then Leopoldville 
(now Kinshasa), before finally settling in Congo-Brazzaville. His wife, Ruth 
Pflüger, was also a veteran of underground politics in Portugal, and she worked 
as a maths teacher in Conakry and Brazzaville. Lara also worked as a teacher, 
of maths and physics, in parallel with his political activities.

In 1960 he became a founder member of the first external direction committee 
of the MPLA, and from 1962 organising secretary of the movement. He was linked 
with the key African revolutionaries of the time, including Mehdi Ben Barka, 
Sékou Touré, Kwame Nkrumah, Félix Moumié and Frantz Fanon, the psychiatrist 
from Martinique who worked in Algeria. The anti-colonial movement had allies in 
Britain as well. In 1961, in a meeting in the House of Commons organised by the 
Labour MP Fenner Brockway and the historianBasil Davidson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/09/basil-davidson-obituary>, the 
Portuguese colonies, still presenting themselves in a group as MAC, announced 
the beginning of “direct action” – having been warned by their hosts not to say 
the words “armed struggle” in London. In fact, by then, the various 
independence movements had formed their own distinct organisations, and in 
Angola the armed struggle had begun.

But the shadow of racial politics, which was to be so damaging to Angola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> over the years, surfaced in 1963 
with challenges to Lara’s position, and that of others in the leadership, 
because they were “mestiços” (of mixed race). One of the founder members of the 
MPLA, Viriato da Cruz, himself a mestiço, left the organisation and joined the 
rival, black-led party the FNLA. A simplistic interpretation of Fanon’s work 
brought him and others to believe that mestiço intellectuals were too far from 
the people, and should accept black African leadership. But Neto stood firm 
against the pressures to oust mestiços from the movement’s senior ranks.

By 1964 the MPLA’s operational headquarters was based in Dolisie, in southern 
Congo-Brazzavile. Brazzaville and Dolisie became the heart of the MPLA, and a 
sophisticated education programme, with support from Scandinavia, was built up 
by Lara to prepare for independence. Dolisie, and after 1966 Lusaka in Zambia, 
became the bases for the armed struggle inside Angola that would last until 
independence in 1975.

In 1965, Che Guevara <https://www.theguardian.com/world/che-guevara> made the 
first high-level Cuban contact with the Angolans, meeting Lara and Neto in 
Brazzaville. The MPLA leaders asked him for Cuban military instructors, and 
nine arrived within four months. The guerrilla war moved up the scale in 
professionalism and daring with attacks in northern Angola’s Cabinda province. 
Lara, the consummate intellectual, had become a fighter before the Cubans 
arrived, and he forged personal bonds that lasted all his life with that 
handful of men.

The 10 years of guerrilla war against the power of Portugal’s Nato-supplied 
army were extremely testing times, and Lara carried heavy political 
responsibilities in the forging of the MPLA’s policies within a political 
bureau often divided by power struggles. Besides the fighting, the young 
movement had to deal with betrayals of ambitious men, includingJonas Savimbi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/25/guardianobituaries.victoriabrittain>
, who had pretended to join the MPLA in 1961, but then joined the rival FNLA 
before forming his own movement, Unita.

External players, including the Chinese and the CIA, all had large roles in 
the power struggle against the MPLA. Angola became the focus of cold war 
politics for western governments that still hoped to hold off majority rule in 
South Africa. But on 8 November 1974, with Portugal ready to give up its 
colonies, Lara led the first official delegation of the MPLA to the capital 
city of Luanda. It was the last phase of the independence struggle after a 
ceasefire was signed in June 1974.

In 1975, apartheid South Africa invaded Angola from the south, and some months 
later Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo), aided by British and 
American mercenaries, invaded from the north. On the brink of independence, it 
could have been the breaking point for the MPLA. The arrival of Cuban troops, 
however, stopped the South African invasion and prevented forces reaching 
Luanda. On 11 November 1975, Neto was declared president, and Lara, as 
organising secretary of the MPLA, was to be the key figure in the shaping of 
the new political order.

The early years of independence were marked by a violent ultra-left coup 
attempt against Neto, and a harsh military response to it, which left deep 
divisions, and then by the death of Neto in 1979. Lara’s history and authority 
made him a natural successor, but he did not want to play the role of leader, 
even for a steadying transition, andJosé Eduardo dos Santos 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-19414963> came to power.

Political in-fighting continued in the subsequent period while the country was 
under extreme pressure from the apartheid regime in South Africa and the US. 
There were direct invasions of the south, massive sabotage of infrastructure, 
and the buildup of Savimbi’s Unita by Pretoria and the CIA. Angola was broken, 
and meanwhile a campaign of US political destabilisation targeted Lara, among 
others, as a man whose political influence had to be neutralised. His politics 
and analysis were too clear, “this is a war of imperialism ... they want us to 
work with their yes men ...” he used to tell popular meetings.

He was dropped from the political bureau in 1985, but left the central 
committee only some years later, for health reasons.

By then Angola’s socialism belonged to the past, broken by the war launched by 
the apartheid regime and supported by the Americans, and by the lack of social 
forces capable of building what Lara, Neto and so many of their generation had 
dreamed of.

Lara valued and loved history, and he made an incredible effort to preserve 
the historical archive of the Angolan struggle that had been his life’s work. 
Ruth organised and published three volumes of MPLA history, and their daughter, 
Wanda, continues their work.

But Lara was much more than a brilliant analyst and dedicated political leader 
for Angola. Behind the austerity was a man who loved life and beauty. I have 
seen him laugh and talk to his pet monkeys as he fed them; waltz beautifully 
with a fiery Cuban schoolteacher in a provincial town under siege by Unita for 
months; appreciate classical and modern ballet; walk for miles in parks in 
London, or on beaches in Angola with his dog; sit peacefully for hours over a 
coffee, reading Le Monde from cover to cover on a rare break in Europe.

At the centre of his life was his family, and his connection of trust to 
Angola’s powerless. At home, there were always humble people waiting to see him 
with their troubles. In rural areas, peasants would not hesitate to tell him 
everything on their minds. I have seen policemen at a roadblock, look into the 
car, recognise him, and shake his hand with reverence, or airport officials 
wave a friend through without a check, because Lara was there.

The great political disappointments in the region saddened him deeply, but he 
never became a cynic. He wrote a careful letter to South Africa’s 
post-apartheid leaders, reminding them of the sacrifice Angolans had made for 
them, and warning them of what he feared for the future of the region, but he 
did not expect his ideals to be upheld in the new world.

Ruth predeceased him. He is survived by his children, Paulo, Bruno and Wanda, 
his adopted son Jean-Michel Mabeko Tali, and many grandchildren.

• Lúcio Lara (Lúcio Rodrigo Leite Barreto), teacher and political activist, 
born 9 April 1929; died 27 February 2016
 