
Dawn Butler, the shadow minister for diverse communities, has said Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> could do more to halt falling 
support among black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) voters, as a Fabian 
Society report reveals they are more likely to feel excluded and disadvantaged 
as party members.

The report, based on a survey of 3,000 Labour members, found those from BAME 
backgrounds were significantly more likely to report feeling unfairly treated 
in the party at all levels.

It found two-thirds of responding BAME candidates in parliamentary or devolved 
assembly selection contests said their selection process was not fair, compared 
with just one in five of the white candidates.

They were also 15 percentage points less likely than white members to agree 
that there are “people like me” in their constituency Labour party, and 10 
points less likely to agree people are “treated fairly” by their local party.

Butler, a former Cabinet Office minister, wrote in the report’s foreword that 
Labour holds itself to a higher standard than other parties when it comes to 
equality but more action needed to be taken within the party to address the 
disadvantage felt by BAME members.

“As an African-Caribbean woman there is a lot in this report that I recognise 
and have in fact suffered from 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/apr/13/race.houseofcommons>,” she said. 
“So even if we acknowledge that aspects of this report do not apply everywhere, 
and recognise that some parts of the Labour party have made real progress, 
there is no doubt it is a report we must take seriously and act on with 
determination.”

She also warned that Labour was at risk of losing more support among BAME 
voters, despite being seen as the natural political home for many people from 
such backgrounds.

“Although I am very sceptical about whether Theresa May and her government 
will deliver meaningful change in this area I understand that she is reaching 
out to communities whose natural home is in the Labour party,” she wrote.

“We have lost support in recent elections among BAME communities and unless we 
see and act on the warning signs we may continue to do so.”

The report <http://www.fabians.org.uk/publications/outsiders/>, by Adebusuyi 
Adeyemi and Olivia Bailey, calls on Labour to wipe out any disadvantage to BAME 
members by reforming candidate selection procedures and setting public targets 
for the number of BAME Labour MPs at the next election.

“The Labour party has led the way on race equality but the Conservative party 
has done more to improve BAME representation in the last two electoral cycles 
than Labour has done in more than two decades. Labour must take urgent action 
to eradicate any discrimination in its ranks, and work with BAME members to 
improve support structures and networks, reform the selection process and set 
public targets for BAME representation,” its authors said.

Butler was the UK’s first black female minister to speak at the despatch box 
in the House of Commons and only the third black female MP to be elected after 
Diane Abbott and Oona King. She lost her seat in 2010 after boundary changes 
but was re-elected in Brent Central in 2015, andbecame Jeremy Corbyn’s shadow 
minister for diverse communities in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/labour-reshuffle-jonathan-ashworth-shadow-health-secretary-nec-national-executive-committee>
.
 