 Ann Clwyd today faces the axe as chair of the parliamentary Labour party when 
backbenchers attempt to oust her for being a "government patsy".
MPs say they need a vocal shop steward to ensure the leadership listens to 
them in a difficult year which will include the transition of power as the 
prime minister stands down, and tough decisions on issues such as Trident and 
nuclear power.

A growing number of backbenchers believe Ms Clwyd has failed to speak out on 
their behalf, and are backing her opponent, Tony Lloyd, in the neck and neck 
race. Mr Lloyd, a former Foreign Office minister, has rebelled on Iraq, tuition 
fees and foundation hospitals. The result of the election will be announced 
late tonight.

Ms Clwyd beat him by 11 votes last year, helped by the "payroll vote" of 
ministers and whips, but colleagues say party officials are not lobbying so 
hard on her behalf this time. They hope that Mr Lloyd, who is within theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> mainstream, would encourage more 
debate at the weekly PLP meetings. MPs say it has become harder to voice 
dissent in recent years. "The view is that Ann is a bit of a government patsy," 
said one backbencher. "Bearing in mind how important the next year is, with 
elections and the transition, it's important to have someone who will not have 
allegations about being in one camp made."

Another added: "I don't think we would have had the nonsense about the 
leadership over the summer if we had had a stronger voice."

Even one backbencher who praised Ms Clwyd predicted that Mr Lloyd would be "a 
little better at more forcefully representing the views of the independent 
backbenchers in difficult meetings with the prime minister and other senior 
ministers."

But many female MPs are supporting Ms Clwyd, pointing out that she is an 
experienced parliamentarian who has defied the government in the past.

One said: "I don't get a sense that most people are at all unhappy with how 
Ann has handled things, but there are a group who are and who think Tony will 
steer things down a different route. I'm not convinced we need a change."

Ms Clwyd, an MP since 1984, earned her reputation as a loyalist largely 
through her vocal support for the overthrow of Saddam Hussein's regime, due to 
her longstanding campaigning against his treatment of the Kurds. No 10 
appointed her as its human rights envoy to Baghdad.

Yesterday Ms Clwyd said she believed she had accurately portrayed the view of 
the parliamentary party. "People don't know what goes on [when I speak to the 
leadership] and that's the point.

"To give one example, I disagreed with the line we were taking on Lebanon in 
the summer and made that very clear, and I think I was representing the 
majority view of the parliamentary party. There are a lot of other occasions 
where I put the point of view of the party [privately]."

Mr Lloyd, MP for Manchester Central since 1983, declined to comment because 
the election is an internal party matter.
 