
Councils should offer cheap, local-authority backed mortgages to help 
first-time buyers and bring in rent regulations, according to the shadow 
chancellor,John McDonnell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>.

In a speech at Labour’s state of the economy conference on Saturday, he will 
say the party wants to address the “freefall decline in home ownership among 
young people”, pointing to a number ofLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> councils that are underwriting 
mortgages or lending money directly.

The idea of councils offering loans for property goes further than George 
Osborne’s Help to Buy scheme, which guarantees part of a mortgage to enable 
people to buy with smaller deposits.

McDonnell will say: “We’ll give local authorities the powers to impose local 
rent regulations where these are needed … but we have to also meet the 
aspirations of people to own their own home.”

McDonnell said he wanted to see councils following the example of Manchester, 
Sandwell in the West Midlands and Warrington in Cheshire byoffering cheap, 
local authority-backed mortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/apr/16/local-councils-mortgages-revive-housing>
 to first-time buyers in particular.

“With too many first-time buyers excluded from the housing market by high 
street banks, we’ll be looking at ways to securely expand local authority 
mortgage lending,” he will say.

During the conference, Jon Trickett, the shadow communities secretary, will 
announce that Labour is convening an economic forum of mayors with the aim of 
“solving the housing crisis”.


Jeremy Corbyn will give a speech about moving towards “new economics”, 
including greater public investment in modern industry.

“We want to see the reindustrialisation of Britain for the digital age,” the 
Labour leader will say. “That means putting public investment front and centre 
stage, driven by a national investment bank as a motor of economic 
modernisation, based on investment in infrastructure, transport, housing and 
the technologies of the future.”
 