
So Labour passed the welfare bill with the passive silence of a married 
orgasm. It has lost touch so badly that it is now gettinglectures on empathy 
from someone from Paisley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/14/mhairi-black-first-commons-speech-snp>
. Harriet Harman might as well stand down and leave the party to be managed by 
an out-of-office email. It’s as if their MPs know they lost the election but 
don’t realise they actually still have jobs in parliament. Like when a nursery 
kid finishes their one line in the nativity play then carries on picking their 
nose in front of the school … LABOUR WE CAN STILL SEE YOU.

Some explanation for the abstention is vote pairing, which means if a Tory MP 
isn’t there to vote yes because they’re busy abroad, or at a function, or 
laying eggs into the mouth of Prince Philip, aLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP will abstain in return, to 
make the decision about whether people who didn’t go to uni are allowed more 
than two children, by two parties run by people with three children, fairer. 
How to explain vote pairing? It’s like when someone is too ashamed/ill to go to 
their food bank, but most people living in that area are too self-obsessed to 
donate anything – it kind of evens out.

It is somewhat rich to see Labour being berated for abstention by an 
electorate who largely didn’t vote because Thursday is “pizza night”. I suppose 
the Labour party are like people who’ll watch a man beating his wife in the 
street but don’t want to get involved. “Really this is a private matter between 
the Tory party and the starving, distracted masses who decided to stay with 
them. I mean – if she really didn’t enjoy living in poverty – why didn’t she 
just leave in May?”

Why smart Tories should not be smug about Labour’s Corbyn-mania | Matthew 
d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/26/smart-tories-labour-jeremy-corbyn-mania-david-cameron>
At least we know why Ed Miliband ruled out any deals between Labour and the 
SNP: he knew that realistically he’d have been doing deals with the Tories. We 
now have a Labour party so passive they make Anastasia Steele look like 
Boudica. Is there anything they will oppose? The destruction of the BBC? 
Leaving a Murdoch-dominated media landscape with shows where, each week, 
shrieking irradiated cannibals sing power ballads as they compete for the right 
to die?

An antsy liberal press pushes the idea of one of the leadership candidacy 
androids being able to court Tory voters, despite seeming completely unable to 
convince their own, and frets thatJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> will lead Labour to the 
left and alienate public opinion. From where they are at the moment John Major 
could lead them to the left, and Corbyn’s policies are actually fairly popular 
with the public. It’s worth remembering that in the press, public opinion is 
often used interchangeably with media opinion, as if the public was somehow 
much the same as a group of radically rightwing billionaire sociopaths. To be 
fair, much of the negative commentary on Corbyn explicitly focuses on how badly 
he will play in the media, without asking why that should be when he is the 
only candidate with any obvious personality or charm. In lieu of any charisma 
from the preferred candidates, Tony Blair appeared like a prize-winning Iraqi 
Halloween costume and was cheered for spewing out some meaningless rhetorical 
algorithm by a political class that somehow still uses the phrase “big beast” 
in the middle of a paedophile scandal.

Corbyn has given young people like me new hope in politics. Labour must listen 
| Matt Monk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/24/jeremy-corbyn-young-people-hope-politics-labour-values-conservative-lite>
I suspect that what all the Corbyn-bashing really means is that our media 
thinks the only people who are fit for anything in this society are those who 
have internalised the assumptions of its propaganda. That banks are too big to 
fail but countries aren’t. That unbelievable foreign villains have made movies 
ridiculous, but not history or the news. I honestly don’t think that Corbyn 
would make a good leader but only because he would quickly take his own life in 
a highly unconvincing manner on a long country walk, an inquiry taking 15 years 
to report that he had kicked himself to death.

The reason for Labour’s abstention is that polls indicate a lot of public 
support for the welfare bill. I guess for anyone who’s read Descartes, the 
logical conclusion of deciding your policy through polls is eventual 
non-existence.

Work and the ‘glass floor’ should top Labour’s agenda | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/27/work-and-the-glass-floor-should-top-labours-agenda>
One thing the welfare bill accomplishes is to put people who have failed a 
fitness to work test on to the same payment as people who have passed it, like 
some tent-revivalist preacher tipping sinners out of wheelchairs and screaming 
“Walk!” Who would have thought that electing people who hate the welfare state 
to run our welfare state could go so badly? In practical terms this change 
means people with things such as MS and Parkinson’s will lose £30 a week. That 
extra £30 a week was there because, sometimes, chronically ill people’s bodies 
don’t work so well and they might have to get a bus or a cab or pay the 
babysitter to stay for an extra hour so they can get to and from the latest 
humiliation from the Department for Work and Pensions. If you, as a candidate 
for leading a political party, can’t make your electorate see that is wrong – 
or, worse, won’t try – then you have stated that you don’t want to fight 
injustice but are simply looking for your own role in serving it.
 