
The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party is facing a 
defining moment in its history, the leader of the UK's biggest trade union has 
warned, as Ed Miliband grapples with conflicting advice about how radical the 
party's manifesto should be ahead of the next election.

Len McCluskey <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/len-mccluskey>, whose 
Unite union is Labour's biggest financial backer, said the organisation was 
involved in a "fight for the future of the party", and repeated his warning 
that his members may force a split from Labour and urge support for a new 
workers' party if Miliband fails to set out a radical vision to inspire people 
before the next election.

He added that if Labour failed to set out a radical alternative to the Tories' 
austerity programme, but won the general election, there could still be 
disquiet among his members about what the party wanted to do with power.

"I see this as a watershed for the Labour party … certainly the most important 
moment since I [became] a member in 1970," he said.

Commenting on the internal debate within the Labour party about its election 
stance, he said: "It is in the balance … all I can do is to urge Ed and the 
Labour leadership to be bolder because it is my view and the view of my union … 
that people desperately need an alternative."

McCluskey said that before Labour's critical policy forum in July the mood at 
the top of the party was "fluid", as rival factions competed to persuade 
Miliband to adopt either a cautious "austerity-lite" programme or set out a 
more radical political vision that he said would inspire voters.

"The opinion polls narrowed to 1% and within a week or so the Tories had 
dropped another five points … and when something is that fluid there are always 
concerns … that is why the quicker Ed emerges with this vision, this cohesion, 
then that will steady everybody's nerves and we can go forward united into the 
election."

McCluskey warned that if Labour chose the more cautious route it would lose, 
andUnite <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite> may consider supporting a 
separate party representing the interests of ordinary working people.

"I see this as a watershed for the Labour party… certainly the most important 
moment since I have been a member in 1970."In the past Labour had been 
embroiled in "bloodletting exercises, recriminations" and then the party had 
carried on, said McCluskey. But he warned the current situation was different.

"I believe that this is like no other time I have ever experienced, that is 
why I am saying people shouldn't assume things will carry on as normal and that 
is why we are fighting for the future of the Labour party."

Unite, which has more than 1.4 million members, backed Miliband's leadership 
bid in 2010 and has since donated £9m to the party through membership fees. 
Earlier this year McCluskey announced it would cut its funding by £1.5m a year 
by halving to 500,000 the number of its members affiliated to Labour.
 Unite backed Miliband’s leadership bid and has since donated £9m to Labour 
coffers. Photograph: PA 
The union has put forward detailed alternatives to the government's austerity 
measures, including the creation of a British investment bank, a housebuilding 
programme and a rise in the minimum wage. McCluskey said Miliband had already 
made positive proposals on zero-hours contracts and housebuilding, and called 
on him to flesh out his vision so that he could communicate "with compassion 
and conviction".

"The vision that Ed has … this vision of One Nation that he articulates 
sometimes, it is very good, some of the speeches he makes have me on the edge 
of my seat."

He added that he was optimistic that the Labour leader would in the end come 
down in favour of a clear alternative to the Tories' programme of cuts and 
austerity.

"I get optimistic and then I get frustrated, it is a kind of rollercoaster 
ride that we are on at the moment."

McCluskey warned that the stakes were high not just for the future of the 
Labour Party or its relationship with Unite but for country as a whole. If 
Labour failed to set out a radical alternative and the Tories were returned to 
power it would be hugely divisive, creating "a powder keg that threatens the 
very nature of democracy within our society," he said.

"As more and more people become marginalised and ignored then you run the risk 
of social cohesion going out the window … what happens then is that there is a 
breakdown in the belief that authority has anything to do with them, a vacuum 
is created and is filled by other forces - very often criminal forces."

He said Labour had to tackle this "democratic deficit" by showing the growing 
numbers of working people who felt disconnected from the political process that 
it is on their side.

"You can have a debate about the ideology and you can dissect the economic 
arguments, but it cuts down to the basic issue that people have to look and say 
he is on our side, he is having a go for us, he is giving us a better society, 
a better vision, a better way of life than we have currently got."

The Unite general secretary said that Miliband's fortunes would also have a 
direct impact on the Scottish referendum. If Labour outlined a clear 
alternative to the Tories and was ahead in the polls when Scotland votes in 
September, the no campaign would be in a strong position, he said, adding: "If 
that is not the case, I think that will have a big impact in Scotland."

McCluskey joined the Labour party in 1970 and he said he feared today's 
increasingly insecure economic climate, with growing numbers of people on 
short-term or zero-hours contracts, was a return to conditions he first 
witnessed as a young dock worker in Liverpool.

"It seems pretty clear to me that we are being taken back to what it was like 
on the docks, when men would gather first thing in the morning and the bosses 
would walk round and tap people on the shoulder and hand them a brass tally, 
meaning they had a day's work.

"When the bosses got bored they would throw the brass tallies in the air and I 
have seen men literally fight each other to get them because it meant the 
difference between putting food in their kids' bellies or them going hungry. We 
are heading back there again under this government with zero-hours contracts 
and it is no way to treat people or to give them a sense of dignity, a sense of 
belonging to a decent, respectful society."
 