
Late last year I went to a conference session on sexism in the workplace. 
About 25 of us, mostly young professional women, swapped demoralising anecdotes 
about how the pay gap, motherhood, sexual harassment and oppressive gender 
expectations had impacted our careers.

We were all on pretty much the same page. There was furious agreement that 
women are subjected to sexism in the public sphere, and that this is harmful to 
individuals and to society as a whole. Fantastic, I thought. We’re switched on, 
we know what’s what, and we’re here together to talk about what we can do to 
fix things.

But as the focus shifted from describing the problem to proposing solutions, 
it was like watching a train derail in slow motion. What about mentoring, 
somebody said. What if we teach women to negotiate for higher pay? What if 
companies are encouraged to set targets for women in executive roles? What if 
we build a culture of open negotiation in our own workplaces, where women are 
empowered to ask for more flexible hours?

I shifted in my seat, waiting for someone to bring up public daycare, or 
government-funded parental leave, or the proliferation of underpaid pink-collar 
jobs, or the economic devaluation of women’s reproductive labour, or any of the 
issues that have historically been sites of feminist struggle.

Nobody did, so I raised my hand to mention my sister, who is a part-time 
childcare worker. How would training women to ask for higher pay help her, as 
someone who earns a set award wage and has very little power to negotiate 
anything? How would professional mentoring empower her? How would her life be 
improved by quotas for women on boards?

A mildly uncomfortable pause followed. I ploughed on, motivated half by an 
immediate anxiety about filling the conversational gap and half by raw 
indignation. Shouldn’t our demands be for universal changes to the structure of 
society that will help all women, I asked. There was a subdued murmur of 
assent, and a couple of women voiced agreement. But the matter was soon 
forgotten, and I spent the rest of the session in a state of tense 
disappointment.

•••

Liberal feminism is broadly characterised by its naturalisation of 
Enlightenment values: individual choice, meritocracy, autonomy, progress, the 
emancipatory power of technology and an acceptance of the basic structures of 
capitalist social organisation.


This manifests as a self-help philosophy typified by Facebook chief operating 
officer Sheryl Sandberg’s 2013 book Lean In, which attributes women’s 
difficulty achieving career advancement to their docile, people-pleasing 
socialisation.

Sandberg’s utopia is one in which women inspire themselves out of the effects 
of sexism by becoming more assertive in the corporate sphere. On this account 
women’s belief in their own competence takes on a quasi-magical power, and 
their individual striving in the current order is the key to ending oppression.

This mythology is only available to women who share most of Sandberg’s own 
social positions: middle- or upper-class, white, educated, heterosexual, able, 
employed. It doesn’t really attempt to engage in analysis of material or 
structural factors that circumscribe women’s freedom. The concepts it excludes 
from its analysis – solidarity, collective action, bottom-up democracy – are 
the ones most essential to the project of emancipating women as a class.

Liberal feminism’s theoretical poverty and ignorance of structural factors 
explain the gap between its omnipresence in public discourse and seeming lack 
of ability to achieve material gains for women. Even at the height of this new 
feminism’s cultural ascendancy, its victories have been few and far between.

In December, prominent American women’s website Jezebel published an essay by 
one of its editors, Jia Tolentino, titledNo Offense 
<http://jezebel.com/no-offense-1749221642>. She writes:

The offense model has failed, and dramatically. Women have a prominent voice 
in online media; feminism is a broad and verbally defended platform, and what 
has it all amounted to except a nightmarish discursive juxtaposition between 
what feminism says and what it is able to do? Pop stars preach female 
solidarity while reproductive rights roll back all over the country; we have 
politicized and vindicated every possible manifestation of female narcissism 
without getting any legislative movement towards mandatory paid parental leave.
Feminism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/feminism> is proliferating 
essentially as merchandise; we can buy anything that suits us and nothing that 
we really need.

The avowal of something does not instantiate it. Is that as obvious as I 
think? Fervent support for a political position does not automatically 
translate into any meaningful gains. The failure of the feminist offense 
factory to result in much else other than better TV and extremely woke 
12-year-olds should be sufficient proof of that.

Tolentino and I are both in our mid-20s, and the sense of fatigue that 
permeates her essay is familiar to me; the edifice of popular feminism is a 
carnival of hot takes and gifs and Twitter wars and celebrities and language 
policing, so much language policing. It’s entertaining and enraging but leaves 
very little trace of itself the next day, like a dropped ice-cream washed away 
by the rain.

•••

At the pay gap panel session I mentioned earlier, the women present seemed 
unperturbed by the idea that swapping corporate career tips was feminism. When 
I brought up collective possibilities, it was an act of rudeness: I was 
literally changing the subject, moving the conversation away from its agreed-on 
parameters for apparently unclear reasons. Yet almost all of them had earlier 
offered a story of workplace sexism from their own experience, and some even 
spoke of being subjected to near-daily harassment.

Clearly their occupation of positions in the upper socioeconomic echelons of 
society had not protected them against manifestations of structural sexism. Yet 
this was still the accepted approach, as it is in modern feminism.

What to do, then? How to fill the gap created by the irrelevance of 
second-wave organising principles, the neoliberal destruction of institutions 
such as unions, mass political parties, churches, community groups, movements 
that might once have been sources of collective practice?

We can’t eliminate all conflict, and the rejection of naive liberalism will 
not resolve itself automatically into a political movement. But we do have some 
things going for us: contrary to what a lot of older commentators believe, 
young women care just as much about change as every other generation. Given 
that we have skin in the game, especially in terms of our diminishing access to 
the “goods of life” (housing, stable employment, a non-fucked climate, avenues 
for exercising civic power and so on), we’re in a prime position to organise.

In the US, Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders has tapped into 
this vein of enthusiasm to produce a burgeoning movement based heavily on 
volunteer organising among youth populations. It remains to be seen how 
successful this effort will be, but it does prove that such action is indeed 
possible. The Black Lives Matter movement continues to operate, protesting 
against the extrajudicial killing and mass incarceration of America’s black 
population. #BlackLivesMatter has already been courted extensively by Sanders 
and his rival, Hillary Clinton; it has put racial justice squarely back on the 
public agenda and drawn a mass of attention to the ongoing harm caused by US 
racism.

Closer to my home, an increasing awareness of Australia’s harrowing domestic 
violence epidemic has led to the formation of new coalitions based on the 
rejection of male domination in the private sphere.

What these initiatives have in common is a new focus on building something 
better, envisaging what the world might look like if being poor, being black, 
and being a woman didn’t mean being ground into the dirt by arbitrary power.

In this scenario, instead of leaning in, we would dig up. 


The full version of this essay was first published in the autumn 2016 issue of 
Meanjin 
<https://meanjin.com.au/essays/get-mad-and-get-even-liberal-feminism-and-the-second-wave-undertow/>
 