
What is it? Friday Night Lights meets Educating Yorkshire.

Why you’ll love it: It’s important that I put Last Chance U into context here. 
I do not like American football. I do not understand American football. The 
college football system is the most bafflingly arcane thing of all time. And 
yet Last Chance U might be the best sports documentary series I have ever seen.


The East Mississippi Community College Lions are a force of nature. National 
junior college champions for three consecutive years with a 24-game winning 
streak, the Lions rose to prominence thanks to their policy of recruiting 
gifted athletes who have been rejected by the system elsewhere. This nothingy 
school in the middle of nowhere (Scooba, Mississippi: pop 732) is the last 
place these misfits and screw-ups want to be, but it’s the best chance they 
have of reaching the NFL.

However, their winning streak means nothing if they don’t pass their classes. 
And, as interesting as the players – with their assorted ambitions and 
desperate backstories – are, the true stars of the show are the two figures 
tasked with maintaining the ridiculous highwire act between sport and academia.

Buddy Stephens is the team’s coach, and the architect of all its success. 
Aside from a few discombobulating home scenes, his entire life is the Lions. 
This is not a man of shades of grey; every emotion he feels is felt 
volcanically. When his team is winning, he’s a force of inspiring optimism. 
When it isn’t, his fury is galvanising. By the third episode, when the Lions 
hit the first of many lows, his anger and disgust at everything around him is 
so vehemently pronounced that even I started to want to win his approval.

Arguably, though, Stephens has it easy. Brittany Wagner is the EMCC’s academic 
adviser, and she’s the one with her work cut out. Wagner’s job is to corral the 
players’ enthusiasm for football back to their schoolwork. If they fail a 
subject, or miss a deadline, or don’t show up to class, they are dropped from 
the team. The Lions do many of these things frequently, and Wagner’s good 
cop/bad cop routine is fascinating. The players often hang out in her office, 
lying on the floor, shooting the breeze, right up until the moment they do 
badly. Then they vanish from sight, much to her frustration. The grace with 
which she copes with these highs and lows is breathtaking.

You do not need a working knowledge of American football to enjoy this. The 
sum total of my American football experience before Last Chance U consisted of 
a half-watched Super Bowl and a miserable summer spent failing to work out a
Megadrive John Madden <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f_H5UqkNcZQ> game. And 
yet I was absolutely gripped. Especially during the match-day sequences, 
director Greg Whiteley knows exactly when to slow the action down, when to cut 
away to a furious coach or a fretting spectator, when the music should swell 
with expectation and when it should dissolve away to nothing. It’s handled so 
expertly that even a non-fan like me can understand the stakes. Each win is 
giddying. Each loss hurts. The end of the series is nothing less than 
Shakespearean. This is a show about obsession, and it is very, very easy to get 
swept up in.

Where: Netflix.

Length: Six hour-long episodes.

Stand-out episode: The finale, which opens in a state of pandemonium, screams 
itself raw, and then ends on a moment of heartbreaking sweetness.

If you liked Last Chance U, watch: Friday Night Lights (Netflix), All Or 
Nothing (Amazon), The Battered Bastards of Baseball (Netflix).
 