
She was a nice Jewish girl brought up right by mother in two rooms on the 
wrong side of the tracks in Manhattan, her father long fled from their lives. 
She was so nervous in her first film role, at all of 19 years old, that her 
head shook; so she tilted her chin down to steady herself, and had to look up 
from under at the camera. She stood at the bedroom door of "a hotel in 
Martinique in the French West Indies" – the Warner Bros lot in Hollywood – 
looked up, and askedHumphrey Bogart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/humphreybogart> for a match. And defined her 
life.

At that incendiary moment in 1944 when she made her screen debut in To Have 
and Have Not,Lauren Bacall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lauren-bacall>, 
who has died aged 89, was still Betty Bacall, and had been recently Betty 
Perske, a stagestruck teenager whose poor family finances bought her a bare 
year at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts (fellow pupil and first crush, 
Kirk Douglas), and whose fought-for early parts were in flops. She had to pay 
her way as an usherette and model, an unglam garment trade live dummy, until 
her photogenic potential was spotted by Diana Vreeland, fashion editor of 
Harper's Bazaar. Vreeland had an instinct for the face of the times, for a 
movie in a single still; and the shot that begat Bacall was a Bazaar cover, 
Betty besuited before a Red Cross office door. It's lit noirishly, and she is 
acting independent – a frank, clever gal caught up in the war effort.

It was seen in Hollywood by David O Selznick, and Columbia pictures; both 
inquired after her. But the real connection was made by Nancy "Slim" Hawks, 
wife of the director Howard Hawks, who seems to have recognised in Betty's 
stance a style much like her own, plus the physical substance of her husband's 
dreams. She alerted Hawks, and Bacall was invited to travel by train across 
America on the 20th Century Limited to be screen-tested; Hawks offered her a 
personal contract. Bacall treated him as a surrogate father, and understood 
only later that he always wanted to be Svengali, making over a kid from nowhere 
into his desirable girl. His fantasy woman was sexually experienced and 
insolent; Hawks had hung out with Ernest Hemingway and company, who (as Slim 
complained after the marriage was over) wanted females who did not wimp out or 
whinge about the big game hunting, the hard drinking and harder bullshitting – 
but who were young enough not to be equals, so that they were never a threat.
 With Bogart as private eye Philip Marlowe in The Big Sleep, 1946. Photograph: 
Rex Features 
 Bacall sweated out months in Hollywood, showing off on demand as a protege at 
parties or sitting in her first car up a canyon bawling The Robe aloud by the 
hour to lower her voice – Hawks disliked women screeching; she bottomed out 
close in tone to a trombone. Two packs of cigarettes a day helped the baritone. 
At last Hawks developed a character for her, a near-tramp named "Slim", in an 
approximate adaptation of Hemingway's To Have and Have Not, starring Jack 
Warner's alpha male, Bogart. The film was a wittier riff on Bogart's previous 
smasheroo, Casablanca, and it was a hell of a way for a girl to sashay into 
movies.

Hawks's creation became the fantasy of a generation when she growled at Bogart 
that he need do nothing but whistle – "You know how to whistle, don't you? ... 
You just put your lips together and blow." If the lines had been delivered by a 
savvy contemporary of Bogart (say his Maltese Falcon co-star Mary Astor), and 
not a naive girl acting worldly, most men in the audience would have hid under 
the seat for a week. The critic James Agee thought Bacall provocative and 
preposterous, both a wolfwhistle and a belly laugh. He was wrong about her 
"stonecrushing confidence" (she had none and acquired little), but he did 
understand that she was a construct.

What had not been invented, though, what made the film hot, was the reactive 
chemistry between Bacall (renamed "Lauren", a Hawks attempt at swank) and 
Bogart, then 44 and on his third marriage, to the drunk, slugging actor Mayo 
Methot. B & B called each other by their characters' names, Steve and Slim, 
they joshed, they lit each other's cigarettes in instinctive rapport, they fell 
in love, although whether with the reality of each other or with the parts they 
were playing no one will ever know. Long after, even she couldn't say.

Hawks was jealous. He warned Bacall not to risk ending her career just as it 
began: the film was a big pop success. Since in Hollywood no therm of sexual 
heat can be wasted, he then cast Bacall and Bogart in Raymond Chandler's The 
Big Sleep (1946). The edgy ruefulness of that movie probably derived from their 
relationship during the shooting; Bogart wanted to marry his fresh start and 
also to behave like a gent towards Mayo; Bacall was obsessed with her adoring 
hero. They shared a private humour in their scripted exchanges – Bacall's part 
bumped up on the suggestion of the sharp talent agent, Charlie Feldman – and 
their innuendo was wicked; no onscreen shag could show what Bacall suggested 
just by scratching her stockinged thigh. Yet you sense that nothing is sure 
between them. Bogart missed days on set, drunk, depressed: then he made up his 
mind. As his divorce crawled through, he sent her a wire: "Please fence me in 
Baby – the world's too big out here and I don't like it without you." They 
married in 1945. Bacall walked willingly into his world – the pals of his 
generation, his continuing affair with his toupee-maker, his liquor consumption 
(high, but controlled), his refuge of a yacht, the Santana – as if her wedding 
vows had been those of the biblical Ruth: "Thy people shall be my people, and 
thy land" – well-staffed houses in the Hollywood Hills above Sunset Strip – "my 
land."
 Lauren Bacall wrote: 'Film is not a woman's medium. If you weren't the 
hottest kid in town, men stayed away from you.' From the end of the 1950s she 
gained greater satisfaction from her long-delayed Broadway career. Photograph: 
Cine Text/Allstar 
 Hawks had been spot on about her career, as was the playwright Moss Hart, who 
told her: "You realise from here you have nowhere to go but down." Those two 
films were the best she did. Without Bogart, in The Confidential Agent (1945), 
she seemed cold not cool, minus the zap of her Hawksian dames. She was cast 
with Bogart again in Dark Passage, and in John Huston's Key Largo (1948), but 
in both she was sombre and self-effacing, having by degrees dwindled into 
wifely respectability. Bogart did not want her to be actor first and wife 
second – his own King Kong-like fantasy of a woman was that she should fit into 
a man's pocket, to be displayed on the palm of his hand, expanded to full-size 
when desired, and contracted back on command.

She wanted to make him happy, to be Bogart's Baby and to have Bogart's babies. 
In 1947, she went to Washington with a well-intentioned but politically 
innocent group, including Bogart and John Huston, to protest against the 
anti-leftwing bullying of the House Un-American Activities Committee; five 
years later she campaigned for the unsuccessful Democratic presidential 
candidate, Adlai Stevenson, another father mentor. She bore Bogart's children, 
Steve and Leslie, supplied antibiotics to sick location crews on The Treasure 
of the Sierra Madre and The African Queen, learned to sip Jack Daniel's through 
a long evening. When the Hollywood rat pack (qualifications: nonconformity, 
drinking, laughing) was first formed in a private room at Romanoff's, she was 
voted Den Mother, never out of humour.

Bacall was playing for real a high-grade version of the postwar homemaker 
bride, but she was not in many movies. Hawks sold her contract to Jack Warner, 
who suspended her 12 times for refusing poor roles; 50s models of women were 
rolling off a new production line. Class now meant the aloofness of Grace 
Kelly; sass meant the vulnerable trashiness of Marilyn Monroe. None of them 
were sensual as Bacall had been, or as direct, straight-talking and brave. What 
happened to the image of women after 1945 is summed up in the difference 
between Bacall unfazed by Bogart's drunk sidekick in To Have and Have Not (who 
grudgingly admits "Lady, you're all right") and Bacall unamused as the 
mink-pursuer in How to Marry a Millionaire (1953). And that was considered a 
good part. She bought out her contract, but all that expensive gesture 
purchased was a soapy role in Douglas Sirk's Written on the Wind (1956) through 
which, you hope hopelessly, she will take tormented Robert Stack out for a belt 
of bourbon; and another refrigerated career girl in Designing Woman (1957).

Warner Bros was planning in 1956 to team Bogart and Bacall again, in the love 
story of a military man and a journalist. Just perfect, only it never got made, 
because that was the year Bacall watched Bogart die from cancer of the 
oesophagus at the age of 57. In her 1978 autobiography, By Myself, she 
described his dissolution with the unflinching candour he would have expected 
of her: the odour of decay on his kiss, the old robe from Dark Passage she wore 
the night he died in the bed they had long shared, the sack in which his body 
was taken away to Forest Lawn crematorium.

She displayed a model of the Santana at the funeral – a spirit ship indeed – 
and sold the real boat. The role of the Widow Bogart, relict of a myth, was not 
the lifetime part she wanted, although the relative honour of his Hollywood 
meant more to her as decades passed. His death was the beginning of the bad 
times. Her comforting but uncomfortable affair with Frank Sinatra froze over: 
her second marriage, to the actorJason Robards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/dec/28/guardianobituaries.filmnews>, 
produced her third child, Sam, but foundered because of his drinking, and maybe 
because she was growing into the maturity she had always implied.

The heroine she could have been onscreen was seen for the last time in an 
unpretentious British adventure, North West Frontier (1959): her governess, 
boarding a trainload of corpses to retrieve a live baby, has a warmth and 
strength still not often allowed women in the movies. And certainly not Bacall 
thereafter. "Film is not a woman's medium," she wrote: "If you weren't the 
hottest kid in town, men stayed away from you." She was a mere 42 when she took 
a cameo as a jaded California invalid in the noir-lite Harper (1966), and most 
of her subsequent film turns exhibited her as a matron – sometimes amiable 
(James Caan's literary agent in Misery, 1990, John Wayne's landlady in The 
Shootist, 1976), more often monstrous – a tragedienne disguised as a parvenu in 
Murder on the Orient Express (1974), Barbra Streisand's mother – less of a 
dinosaur than the daughter – in The Mirror Has Two Faces (1996), for which she 
won a Golden Globe as best supporting actress. She needed the money; Bogart had 
bequeathed her custodianship of the legend but not megabucks, as the studio 
system never generated millions for its stars.
 Lauren Bacall with her honorary Oscar. Photograph: Fred Prouser/Reuters 
 Real work satisfaction came more from her long-delayed Broadway career. 
George Axelrod constructed his 1959 comedy Goodbye Charlie around her; then she 
starred in Cactus Flower (1965), in the theatre where she had once ushered in 
white cuffs – although Ingrid Bergman stole her part in the movie. In 1970, she 
grabbed the Bette Davis role as an ageing diva of the Martini in Applause, a 
musical adaptation of All About Eve. It wasn't much of a musical, but who gave 
a damn; she got the chance to be the Bacall she had always wanted to be – as 
Alistair Cooke wrote, as "fragile as a moose". Her leading man, Len Cariou, was 
her lover for a while; she picked up a Tony award; a Life magazine cover showed 
a sexy woman laughing, arm flung up in triumph. The earned success was 
transient, although she won another Tony in an update ofKatharine Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jul/01/guardianobituaries.film>'s 
journalist role in a musical of the film Woman of the Year (1981).

Bacall kept on working, admitting that every job, especially on stage, 
reverted her to youthful nervousness.Harold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
 directed her in the first London production of Tennessee Williams's Sweet Bird 
of Youth (1985), and Terry Hands less successfully in Friedrich Dürrenmatt's 
The Visit at Chichester in 1995. As age broadened that 24-inch waist and 
chiselled face, she decisively restyled herself, with help from a trainer and 
the make-up artistKevyn Aucoin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/may/11/guardianobituaries.veronicahorwell>
, as a lioness in winter, her wavy mane tamed, the better to emphasis the 
graphic eyebrows, always her most distinctive feature, and gruff voice. A late 
magnificence was visible in Robert Altman's Prêt-à-Porter (1995), and in her 
awesome matriarchs in Lars von Trier's Dogville (2003) and Manderlay (2005), 
and Jonathan Glaser's Birth (2004).

That worked-on voice retained its power to the last, especially for witches 
(voiceovers in Howl's Moving Castle, 2004, and Scooby-Doo and the Goblin King, 
2008), and for aged dames who were still trouble (The Forger, 2012). The most 
accurate casting was her turn as a Washington social grandee in Paul Schrader's 
neo-noir The Walker (2007), demolishing Woody Harrelson's gay escort with the 
line: "Memory is a very unreliable organ: it's right up there with the penis."

She herself went unescorted in age, unbothered about it, and was proprietorial 
about the definition of a movie "legend" after over 60 years in gainful 
employment: less than a couple of decades of stardom, she said, and you were 
just a beginner. In 2009 she received an honorary Oscar.

Lunching with her was an audience with the last empress of Byzantium, 
imperiousness interspersed with a really dirty laugh, perhaps the sound of her 
true self. Every online search sends you back to a picture of her at 19 giving 
The Look: "You know, Steve, you don't have to say anything. You don't have to 
do anything. You just have to whistle."

She is survived by Steve, Leslie and Sam.

• Lauren Bacall (Betty Joan Perske), actor, born 16 September 1924; died 12 
August 2014
 