
The key programmes in the history of television drama tend to list themselves: 
The Singing Detective, Edge of Darkness, Boys from the Blackstuff and the plays 
of Jack Rosenthal. But as the years drift by, too many of the early pioneers 
are forgotten. The late John Hopkins, who bestrode our world in the 1960s and 
early 70s, was such a pathfinder and it's right that his work is being 
celebrated with a season at the National Film Theatre in May.

From 1963 until 1966, Hopkins was lead writer and script editor for Z Cars, 
the programme that turned cop shows inside out. From the first episode the 
series - largely inspired by Troy Kennedy Martin and John McGrath - won huge 
audiences and most of the awards then available. Set in Newtown, a fictional 
version of Kirkby, near Liverpool - chosen because it had the highest crime 
rate in the land - it showed the police as fallible and flawed; they often 
didn't get their man. Failure to close the case was, in television terms, 
revolutionary; in Z Cars it was almost compulsory.

It was thanks to Z Cars that Hopkins and I became friends. He called my agent, 
Peggy Ramsey, to see if I would write for the show. We met in a bar in St 
Martin's Lane. I was in awe, a northern boy down in the big city. Hopkins was a 
home counties chap who'd been to Oxford, as had many of the key people in the 
business, which puzzled me then, and still does. He talked quietly, with great 
precision. It was the start of a beautiful friendship.

Over the next couple of years I wrote 18 episodes of Z Cars. I was no slouch 
at the keyboard but amazingly, over the same period, Hopkins wrote 57 episodes, 
plus a couple of plays and his quartet, Talking to a Stranger, hailed at the 
time by George Melly as "the first authentic masterpiece written directly for 
television". Shown on the fledgling BBC2 in 1966, starring Margery Mason, 
Maurice Denham, Michael Bryant and Judi Dench, and directed by Christopher 
Morahan, Talking to a Stranger describes a Sunday in the life of a suburban 
family. The seismic event at the centre of the drama is the suicide of the 
mother, with each of the four plays examining the same events from the point of 
view of one of the protagonists.

It was strictly of its time. Studio-based, the scenes are long, shot 
multi-camera and give the audience something totally unique to that tradition: 
the sight of actors of the highest quality giving a continuous performance at a 
range of 6ft. The plays are long. The first three run 96 minutes each and the 
final one is 102 minutes, irregularly shaped drama being regarded as part of 
the public service tradition.

It was also part of the tradition to treat television writers like artists. 
Hopkins told me that when he was commissioned, all he had in his head was the 
last line of the final play: Mother's "Somebody hold me." He also confessed 
that he was seven months late delivering the scripts.

Hopkins was way ahead of the game in writing about dysfunctional families; 
about racism, in both Z Cars and his 1965 play Fable; about sexuality, in 
Horror of Darkness, also in 1965, starring Nicol Williamson and Glenda Jackson; 
and about police brutality, in his stage play, This Story of Yours. Despite the 
breadth of his work, he insisted it all began with Z Cars and he would head to 
the north-west regularly for a fix of life on the Kirkby streets. "I heard 
something wonderful there last week," he would tell me. "I heard someone say, 
'You wouldn't know it if you met it in your soup.'" The line duly turned up in 
an episode some weeks later.

His work was dark, at a time when that was a rare quality; but there was 
always the possibility of light. He was also a master of three-dot dialogue, 
the kind that, done badly, looks like this:

"All I'm trying to say is ..."

"... What?"

"Well, you know ... like ... oh, I don't know ..."

You can cobble this stuff by the yard; but Hopkins used it with precision to 
define characters struggling with painful emotions slightly out of reach.

A kind, gentle, intense and driven man, Hopkins took his work very seriously. 
We would talk long into the night about writing, but then he would go off at 
unpredictable tangents, enthusing one moment about the great Italian director 
Ermanno Olmi, the next about a group called the Honeycombs who had a number one 
hit in 1964.

He moved to the US in the early 1970s with his second wife, Shirley Knight 
(who will be attending some of the NFT screenings), and his work largely 
disappeared from our screens after he co-adapted Smiley's People with John Le 
Carré in 1982. He continued to work with distinction in America, writing 
Hiroshima, an award-winning television film from 1995, never shown in this 
country.

But he was never forgotten. In 1994, BBC2 celebrated its 40th anniversary. The 
then controller telephoned Alan Bleasdale to say they planned to repeat Boys 
from the Blackstuff because it was the most important piece of drama ever seen 
on the channel. "No it wasn't," Bleasdale replied. "Talking to a Stranger was." 
In the event, the BBC repeated both, the Hopkins quartet preceded by a short 
introduction from Bleasdale, in which he confessed these were the plays that 
inspired him to come out of the closet with his typewriter.

Hopkins died in 1998. We had last met a year or two earlier when I was in Los 
Angeles working on an abandoned project. We had supper on a terrace overlooked 
by the facade of the Hotel Mondrian. We talked about the old days, had a couple 
of cheerful moans and I mentioned I'd recently seen Troy Kennedy Martin. 
Hopkins smiled.

"He still owes me two Z Cars scripts" · © Alan Plater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater>.

· The John Hopkins season is in rep at the National Film Theatre, London SE1, 
from today. Box office: 020-7928 3232.
 