
Since it was founded 100 years ago as an antidote to French government 
propaganda during the first world war,Le Canard enchaîné has remained a thorn 
in the side of France’s great but not-so-good.

Bad hair days for François Hollande over €10,000 coiffeur bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/13/bad-hair-days-for-francois-hollande-over-10000-coiffeur-bill>
For a century, the satirical newspaper has provoked the wrath of presidents, 
politicians, tycoons and other public figures, to the point that in the 1970s 
even mentioning its name in cabinet meetings was reportedly a sackable offence.

Another Canard legend recounts how local politicians, who found their 
peccadillos and dubious dealings exposed in the weekly, would rush to their 
town’s press kiosk and buy up every copy in an attempt to salvage their 
reputations. Such is the paper’s influence that even today government ministers 
and rival newspapers pick up copies ofLe Canard hot off the press on Tuesdays 
to see what scoops it has published before it hits the news stands.

With a new book out celebrating its 100 years of investigative reporting, 
cartoons and general mischief-making,Le Canard’s editor, Érik Emptaz, admits 
the year has been one long centenary party. “The first everCanard enchaîné was 
published in one of the most bloodiest years of the first world war. It ran for 
five weeks, then stopped and started again the following year. It means we’ve 
been celebrating for the whole year,” Emptaz told theObserver.

Like its younger, more cartoon-based sibling, Charlie Hebdo, Le Canard enchaîné
 is a French media symbol: a weekly newspaper with no advertising, no 
promotion, and no owners except the writers and cartoonists who produce it. It 
has a website – almost grudgingly – on which little is published, and relies on 
paper sales. At a relatively modest €1.20 (£1) per copy, it still makes money 
in an increasingly depressed media market.

The eight-page weekly, published on Wednesdays in black and white with the 
occasional headline in tomato-red print, currently sells around 400,000 copies 
a week and made a €2.4m (£2m) profit last year, which went into a “reserve” 
fund – now €123m – a substantial insurance policy against lean times.

“Nobody can put pressure on us because the only pressure that can be put is 
economic – a threat to remove advertising or publicity or from shareholders, 
and we don’t have either. That makes us independent and immune to pressure,” 
Emptaz said. “We cannot be influenced and that’s our strength. Nobody and 
nothing is off-limits, except people’s private lives. We don’t go there.”

Emptaz believes Le Canard’s role is to hold everyone to account. It leans to 
the left, but is “neither right nor left but in opposition”, he said. Its 
weapons are irony, humour and a contrarian defence of an opposing view with the 
explicit intention of revealing its cracks and weaknesses.

The Canard is proud of its network of contacts and informants, said Emptaz – 
some of them in very high places. He said its investigative journalists “check 
the facts, check again and triple check and then add the humour”.

In 1993, after Le Canard revealed that Pierre Bérégovoy, prime minister under 
Socialist president François Mitterrand, had accepted an interest-free loan 
from a businessman, Bérégovoy committed suicide. TheCanard sold out that week, 
but declined requests to reprint because it refused to profit from the tragedy.

The weekly’s journalists are famously barred from accepting any kind of 
official award, such as the Légion d’honneur, in line with the paper’s 
independence.

The first Canard enchaîné appeared on 10 September 1915 promising to publish 
only “rigorously verified inexact news”. The paper’s founder, Maurice Maréchal, 
a former weather reporter, explained his motives for publishing a satirical 
paper. “When I hear something scandalous, my first response is outrage, my 
second is to laugh. It’s harder to laugh, but more efficient.”

The French word canard (duck) is slang for newspaper, and the name is a 
reference to Socialist Georges Clemenceau’s newspaperL’Homme libre (The Free 
Man), which was forced to close by government censors and changed its name to
L’Homme enchaîné (The Chained-up Man).

Refusing to submit to censorship during the second world war, the paper 
closed, reopening in 1944. Resistance hero Pierre Brossolette, who later 
committed suicide after being tortured by the Nazis, told a friend: “The French 
will know when the war is over, when they can read theCanard enchaîné again.”

Emptaz says the paper regularly receives threats of violence, and since the 
attack onCharlie Hebdo in January 2015 – when terrorists gunned down 12, 
including cartoonist Cabu, who also worked forLe Canard – its offices have been 
under police protection.

But the greatest threat, says Emptaz, is more prosaic: sales are being hit by 
the closure of Paris’s newspaper kiosks, making it harder to buy any 
publication in its physical form.

So will Le Canard enchaîné become a digital duck? Emptaz looks pained. “If we 
do, we won’t be giving it away online for free. Without advertising, that would 
be suicidal,” he said.Le Canard enchaîné – 100 Ans is published by Seuil 
 