
A BBC advertisement inviting the public to be in the studio audience of Are 
You Being Served? has confirmed it: the sex-obsessed 70s department store 
comedy is coming back in a season of revived classic comedies.

Whatever Grace Bros theoretically sold, its true speciality was innuendo. The 
writers, Jeremy Lloyd and David Croft, always claimed to have straight-facedly 
convinced BBC bosses that Mrs Slocombe’s frequent references to her “pussy” – 
which sometimes got so wet it had to be dried out in the oven – were purely a 
reference to her pet cat.

The remake will struggle to be so unknowingly filthy – and will have to decide 
how knowing its double-entendres should be. And although re-runs of AYBS? have 
been embraced by audiences of gay men, especially on the American west coast, 
it will be fascinating to see how a modern version handles the original 
representation of stereotypical homosexuality of John Inman’s Mr Humphries – a 
keen measurer of gentlemen’s inside legs – that would now be seen by some as 
homophobic.

 It all depends on whether the show is a remake or a contemporary rewrite – 
information that the BBC has declined to release, along with any casting 
announcements.

 We can tell from the advert that the remake will, like the original, have a 
studio audience. And an accompanying press release states: “Picking up where 
Jeremy Lloyd and David Croft’s much loved comedy left off, the show will bring 
Grace Brothers and some of the nation’s all-time favourite sitcom characters, 
including Mrs Slocombe, Captain Peacock, Miss Brahms, and Mr Humphries back to 
life with an all-star cast.”

 The suggestion that the show will pick up where it “left off” is already 
problematic because, while Are You Being Served? ran from 1972-1985, the main 
characters returned in Grace & Favour (1992-1993), living in a country house 
that became theirs in a pension fund settlement after the shop’s closure. 
Veteran viewers will hope this plot-twist is firmly ignored and that the remake 
puts them back in the shop.

 The fact that the announcement includes four of the best-known characters – 
originally played by Mollie Sugden, Frank Thornton, Wendy Richard and John 
Inman, all now dead – seems to indicate that the original personnel will be 
kept, played by new actors. If the cast is to be literally “all star”, as the 
BBC promises, I would dream of Julie Walters as Mrs Slocombe with Hugh 
Bonneville as haughty floor-walker Capt Peacock, supported by Sheridan Smith as 
the seductively dim Miss Brahms and Daniel Mays as spivvy suit salesman Mr 
Lucas. As Inman’s successor surely has to be an openly gay and knowingly camp 
performer, it’ll be hard to look beyond Julian Clary as Mr Humphries. I’d also 
like to see the veteran sitcom actor Geoffrey Palmer, 89 this summer, as Young 
Mr Grace, the store’s doddery but libidinous owner.

 Logically, Grace Bros, if it existed at all, would by now be a niche website 
specialising in heritage lines. But the show was never about logic, it was 
about smuggling smut past Mrs Whitehouse. As the morality campaigner is as long 
gone as most of the cast, it will be fascinating to see quite how Are You Being 
Served? sells itself to the next generation of punters.
 