
Saracens' narrow victory on a bitterly cold afternoon was not enough to secure 
passage past the group stages of the EDF Energy Cup. Northampton's bonus-point 
win over the Scarlets put them through to the semi-finals in Coventry in March.

'Certainly we were architects of our own poor effort in the first half and we 
were lucky to be in the game,' saidSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> director of rugby, Eddie Jones.

'The good thing is that we are developing some consistency. In the second half 
we were methodical - we played how we needed to play and I was pleased with our 
second half. We have now played 10 games and we are pretty consistent.'

The visitors were forced to make a change just before the kick-off when 
right-wing Rodd Penney injured himself in the pre-match warm-up. Edd Thrower 
was promoted from the bench as a result.

Bristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> took an early lead 
with a 25-metre kick from Adrian Jarvis after the fly-half had missed a longer 
effort after two minutes. They kept applying the pressure and were rewarded 
with a try as full-back Vunga Lilo gave the scoring pass to wing David Lemi.

Jarvis was again off-target with his conversion kick from out wide and Sarries 
fly-half Glen Jackson slotted a 25-metre penalty. Bristol suffered a setback 
midway through the half when lock Nathan Budgett was taken off on a stretcher 
and replaced by Robert Sidoli. Jackson reduced the arrears to two points on the 
half-hour with his second penalty. Jarvis found his range five minutes before 
the break, with a 15-metre kick from in front of the posts.

Bristol led 16-6 at the interval after Lemi scored his second try of the game 
in the left corner.

Bristol replacement centre Chris Ashwin added a penalty only for Jackson to 
pull back three points, and the home side were reduced to 14 men when 
replacement wing Mat Turner was shown a yellow card midway through the half 
when he stood his ground as wing Noah Cato came in to take a high ball.

Saracens took advantage as Cato scored in the left corner, with Jackson adding 
the extras to reduce the scoreline to 19-16 going in to the final quarter. 
Saracens' second try soon followed as captain Andy Farrell fed back Alex Goode, 
again in the left corner, to put the visitors into the lead for the first time. 
Ashwin and Jackson then exchanged penalties to complete the scoring.

'We didn't play well,' said Bristol head coach Richard Hill. 'There were lots 
of errors and we didn't get anywhere near what was expected of the team, but we 
did go into the break 16-6 in front.

'The second half was again error-strewn and we didn't look after the ball. We 
lost hooker Mark Regan, who runs our scrum, lock Nathan Budgett, who runs our 
line-out and centre Neil Brew, who runs our defence. This has been a very 
costly game for us.'

Memorial Stadium: 5,025

 Referee: G Wilson (Scotland)

Bristol: Lilo; T Arscott (Turner 54), Brew (Ashwin 32), Eves, Lemi; Jarvis, 
Beveridge; Clarke, Regan (Linklater 50), Hobson (Crompton 71), Winters, Budgett 
(Sidoli 30), Salter (Pennycook 54), El Abd, Ward-Smith

Tries: Lemi 2 
Pens: Jarvis 2, Ashwin 2

Saracens:Goode; Thrower, Powell (Sorrell 72), 
A Farrell, Cato; Jackson, Rauluni; Lloyd, Cairns, Visagie, Ryder (Chesney 57), 
Vyvyan, Skirving (Barrell 56), Saull, Owen

Tries: Cato, Goode 
Con: Jackson 
Pens: Jackson 4
 