
Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> hosts Tess 
Daly and Claudia Winkleman have said that head judge Len Goodman will be a big 
miss now that he has retired from the show, calling him the king of the 
programme.

Goodman, 72, bowed out of the BBC1 dance contest with the series finale on 
Saturday night and his co-stars have paid tribute to his time on the show in a 
documentary about him due to air next week.

In the programme, Strictly Len Goodman, Winkleman said: “Len is the king of 
all things ballroom and he’s basically the king of Strictly. I know we’re 
supposed to be saying goodbye but I won’t allow it, I don’t know whether I 
should say that but no, he’s not allowed to go.”

Goodman has appeared in the show since it began in 2004. Winkleman said: “He 
is a master, so everyone totally respects him, both on front of camera but also 
backstage.

“So if Len wanders down and goes, ‘Yeah, it was a good lift’, everyone goes, 
‘Oh, Len liked it’, because he is unfailingly honest but also incredibly 
knowledgeable.”

Daly said: “One of the great things about working on Strictly is that it 
genuinely is like a family atmosphere. People are happy to be there and it’s a 
good vibe. Everywhere you turn there’s goodwill and I think, as far as Strictly 
is concerned, Len is the daddy.

“There’s so many favourite Len moments, just working with him every week is 
such a treat; you know that little sparkle in his eye, that cheeky little glint 
he has.

“I love watching him dance when he comes on to the show at the beginning when 
we introduce him and he interacts with the audience, he’s high-fiving them, 
he’s gliding past them, jiving up a storm.”

Strictly Come Dancing: farewell Len Goodman, the king of pickled walnuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/16/strictly-come-dancing-farewell-len-goodman-grand-final>
She said that only he could pull off some of his jokes: “I love all his 
Len-isms, what was the one that he said to [Countryfile presenter] Anita Rani 
after her Argentine Tango?

“‘That was like a cow pat on Countryfile, hot and steamy.’ Only Len could get 
away with that.”

Strictly Len Goodman airs on Friday 23 December at 7pm on BBC1.
 