
Eyebrows, hopes and ceremonially lit bongs were all raised earlier this year 
with the news thatAlejandro Jodorowsky 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2007/apr/05/1> was finally making another 
movie. The high priest of head-trip cinema, Jodorowsky blew the collective mind 
of the counter-culture with a handful of supremely odd movies in the 1970s, 
such asEl Topo <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2007/apr/06/drama2> and The Holy 
Mountain <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-rLZmik6wAk>, but despite continual 
promises and rumours, Jodorowsky's long-awaited return never seemed to 
materialise. In the meantime, his work has been seized upon by a new generation 
of hipsters desperately seeking out-there inspiration, as we shall see. This 
year, though, at the Cannes film festival, Jodorowsky announced he had raised 
the cash for his next movie. It would be called King Shot, and it would be a 
metaphysical western set in a desert casino, featuring a man the size of King 
Kong and Marilyn Manson as a 300-year-old pope.

So with some excitement, here's Jodorowsky on the line to tell us about it: 
"It's not happening. They didn't find the money," he says in his thick South 
American accent.

Oh. "But, I am making another movie instead! I have signed the contract 
already with some Russian producers. I will do Son Of El Topo – a sequel. It's 
a conflict between two brothers who need to come to a solution. I am about to 
start four months of preparation. I can tell you nothing today."

If you've never seen one of his movies, they're difficult to explain. You 
could start by throwing together Sergio Leone, Luis Buñuel, Hieronymus Bosch, 
and Buddha, and perhaps spiking their Kool-Aid for good measure. They're filled 
with wild beasts, cosmic symbolism, freaks, naked women and spiritual masters. 
Where else, for example, could you find a re-enactment of the conquest of Latin 
America with costumedfrogs and chameleons 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ce-UAmIESd4>? Or a geriatric hermaphrodite 
squirting milk from breasts that appear to be the heads of ocelots?

You could get away with that sort of thing back then. The original El Topo, 
made in 1970, was Jodorowsky's breakthrough, a wild mix of spaghetti western 
and eastern spiritualism. It became a favourite on the American midnight-movie 
circuit, and among its many fans were John Lennon and Yoko Ono, who persuaded
Allen Klein <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/jul/06/obituary-allen-klein>, 
then the manager of Apple, to buy the rights to it. Lennon also put up $1m for 
Jodorowsky's next movie, The Holy Mountain, an extravagant psychedelic odyssey 
about a thief's quest for immortality. But Jodorowsky and Klein later fell out 
when he refused to make The Story Of O, an erotic movie. In revenge, Klein 
refused to show Jodorowsky's movies anywhere. The director had a brief 
resurgence with 1989'sSanta Sangre 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/94259/santa-sangre>, but otherwise 
Jodorowsky has languished in obscurity.

'These days a picture only has value if it makes a lot of money. I want to 
make a picture to lose money'
 Painting from Alejandro Jodorowsky's latest exhibition 
"Movies are a commercial industry," he says. "Today a picture has value if it 
makes a lot of money. Myself, I declare I want to make a picture to lose money. 
Really! I want to lose money."

Why's that? "Because it is not the finality of art to make money. Today you 
make conceptual art. You try to astonish the people, but you are saying nothing 
deeper for the human soul. Nothing! I always think that art is a form of 
sacrifice." By now, it should be becoming clear why Jodorowsky has had such a 
hard time making another movie: as well as being unorthodox, he's utterly 
uncompromising. "You can search in order to find the way, or you can just wait 
for it to come to you. For example, Bodhidharma came to China from India and 
the only thing he did was to sit in front of a wall meditating and waiting for 
his disciples. And they came after eight years."

Jodorowsky has never been one to sit still. He seems to have led a life as 
incident-filled and incredible as one of his movies. A Russian Jew who grew up 
in Chile and Paris, his career spans the Surrealist movement, mime, 
experimental theatre happenings, psychedelia, comic books and mystical therapy, 
and takes in figures such as Marcel Marceau, Dennis Hopper, Salvador Dalí, and 
Marilyn Manson, to name but a few. He's now 80 years old, although he seems a 
good deal younger, which he puts down to his lifelong abstinence from alcohol, 
tobacco, coffee or any other drug. Not to mention his 37-year-old girlfriend, 
an artist named Pascale Montandon. Writing comic books is still his principal 
way of making a living.

'Marilyn Manson is a very delicate, intelligent person. I see him a lot but 
he's always in disguise'
 Scene from Jodorowsky's El Topo (1971). Photograph: Alamy 
Like Bodhidharma (who was a fifth-century Buddhist monk, by the way), 
Jodorowsky has also collected disciples along the way. LikeMarilyn Manson 
<http://www.marilynmanson.com/#/enter>, who called up him up out of the blue 
one day a couple of years ago. "He proposed me to work with him, and to marry 
him," he says. So Jodorowsky duly conducted the ceremony for Manson's wedding 
to Dita Von Teese. "It was in Ireland, in a castle," he recalls. "He took my 
measurements and made me a costume like the alchemist I play in The Holy 
Mountain. His wife changed costume five times. Three months later they split 
up!"

Manson was also trying to make a film expanding on his Holy Wood concept 
album, modelled on The Holy Mountain. "I said to him, you will never do it 
because you need $20m from Hollywood, and you want to destroy Hollywood!" 
They're still friends, though. "He's a very delicate, intelligent person. I see 
him a lot of times but he's always in makeup. He's always disguised as Marilyn 
Manson. I don't know who the real person is."

Another unlikely admirer was Erykah Badu, who invited him to her Paris gig 
last year and paid public homage to him. "She said she admired only two 
persons. I remember only me! Who was the other one? Oh yes, Elvis Presley." 
That's just the start: Jodorowsky has legions of disciples he doesn't even know 
about. He's become a well-spring of weirdness for anyone looking to 
out-alternative the competition. Now his name is being dropped and his movies 
referenced everywhere you look. That bit in MGMT's wonderfully psychedelicTime 
To Pretend video <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XVnRzEjpUmE> where they push 
all their money into a fire in the middle of the table? That's from The Holy 
Mountain. As is the premise of Santigold'sLES Artistes video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kCeZzW54a2o>, the one with people gushing 
coloured fake blood when they're shot. The list goes on: the Mars Volta,Late Of 
The Pier <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wKdbuNlQhtk>, Empire Of The Sun, even 
Kasabian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/may/29/kasabian-empire-asylum-petridis>. 
Next thing you know, Susan Boyle will be warbling on GMTV in a bikini made of 
ocelots' heads.

Jodorowsky hasn't heard of any of these acts, and asks for links to some of 
their work. Last time I checked, he hadn't looked at them, though. He's been 
busy. He's been in Moscow, Florence, Barcelona, and last week he was in London 
opening an exhibition of his paintings with Pascale Montandon, as part of a 
month-long Jodorowsky celebration.

He even made his peace with his nemesis, Allen Klein, shortly before his death 
in July this year. "We were fighting for 30 years," he says, "then his son 
arranged a meeting in London. When I was walking to the hotel to knock on his 
door I was thinking, 'I will kill him! He will kill me! What will he do?' And 
then the door opened. He was an old man. White hair, like me. He say to me, 
'But you are beautiful!' I say to him, 'You are like a spiritual master.' And 
we take each other in the arms. In a second the fight was finished. My father 
was a monster. And all the hate I had for my father I put into Allen Klein. 
Allen Klein hated his father also. For him I was his father and for me he was 
my father. This is the story of Son Of El Topo: two brothers who hate each 
other but in the end they become one."

Should we expect his next film to be as crazy as the original El Topo? "Of 
course! I am the same," he says. "I am still radical!"
 