
It is unusual to enter my teenage daughter’s room without some degree of 
hazard. There are teetering piles of detritus. There are mugs with green liquid 
in them. There are sometimes surprising odours, not all of them pleasant. So 
why don’t I tell her to clean it up? Well, I do, occasionally, but not with 
much determination or hope of compliance, partly because I find the traditional 
objection to this kind of parental instruction hard to argue against – “It’s my 
room, what’s your problem?”

One can make the conventional response – “Actually, if you check the legal 
documents, you’ll find that, technically, it’s my room” – but this doesn’t get 
you very far, and can take you down one of those logical rabbit burrows at the 
end of which inevitably lies, “Well, you didn’t have to have me in the first 
place did you?” The point is, their room is indeed, in spirit if not legally, 
their space. Maybe we should just leave them to wallow in it.

I suspect my wife thinks I’m lax for entertaining such views and I was tempted 
to agree, until my lack of resolve was stiffened by a recent article in the New 
York Times headlined “Should I Make My Daughter Clean Her Room? 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/12/opinion/sunday/should-i-make-my-daughter-clean-her-room.html?_r=0>
”. The self-confessed control-freak mother answers the question with a rather 
reluctant, but finally resounding no.

She suggests that the “Jackson Pollock-inspired crash scene” that is her 
15-year-old daughter’s room needs to be kept under control, but that the 
mother’s “impulse to tidy can be compulsive, a way to maintain control in the 
face of anxiety”.

It’s a sound insight. Part of the reason we want our children to clean their 
rooms is the same reason we want them to eat their greens. It is symbolic 
rather than logical. We worry about it because we have a low emotional 
tolerance of chaos, even other people’s chaos confined within four walls.

If you want to be less philosophical, you could argue that your 
children should maintain a tidy space because untidy spaces are inefficient and 
look ugly. But again, it’s not your space, so why worry? You can plead hygiene, 
but the number of teenagers suffering serious infections as a result of poor 
room-hygiene, so far as I am aware, remains remarkably low.

You could say that tidying is teaching them how to survive in the outside 
world, but I think that’s a rationalisation. Some children are tidy and some 
are not, and there’s nothing much you can do about it. Untidy people muddle 
through somehow – I know, because I’m one of them.

There are other good reasons to refrain from endlessly nagging teenagers about 
cleaning up their room. If my daughter is anything to go by, they work 
extremely hard at school and have little enough agency when they get home. 
Giving them some control and a space to call their own is psychologically 
important.

But there are limits. Once you discover rodent droppings or, for that matter, 
rodents, under the bedside table, some action needs to be taken. But more 
often than not, our response should be – let it go. As a psychologist quoted in 
the NYT article observed, “The more you make it an issue, the more you’ll 
prolong the problem.” Another psychologist made a different, but equally 
pertinent point. “What’s important for children is structure,” she said, “which 
is not necessarily the same thing as a clean room.”

If you need further convincing, read Anne Tyler’s wonderful book Tumble Tower. 
It’s about the beauty, or at least the necessity, of mess. The trouble it’s a 
children’s’ book – and it’s not children who need to read it. It’s us.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 