
Aaah, Kyle Sandilands. Undoubtedly one of Sydney’s most reviled public 
figures, the radio shock jock is rarely happier than when he’s debasing women 
live on air. Hismost recent target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/20/nine-reporter-erin-molan-quits-kyle-and-jackie-o-after-boob-job-segment>
, sports journalist and Footy Show presenter Erin Molan, quit what was supposed 
to be a regular segment after King Kyle accused her siblings of being cocaine 
users, and the show’s producers allowed a call through asking Molan whether 
she’d had breast augmentation surgery.

This is typical Sandilands fare, shocking only in the sense that his organs 
haven’t dissolved under the strain of producing so much bile. But thesegment 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aTUE8GwvZKM> is nonetheless worth listening to 
because of its brazenness. Unencumbered by politeness or decency, Sandilands’ 
oozing swamp of hostility is expressed using discursive tactics that have, in 
recent times, been deployed in ways that give the speaker some claim to 
plausible deniability.

At one point in the segment, Molan wonders aloud if the questioner who 
inquired after her breasts actually listens to what she says about rugby on The 
Footy Show. Without missing a beat, Kyle replies: “Oh, no one’s listening. No 
one is listening.” The effect of this, together with inappropriate questions 
about Molan’s body, is to discredit her as a professional, de-value her speech, 
and defensively police the borders of masculine identity that she encroaches 
upon simply by doing her job as a sport journalist.

Her job is critical in understanding why and how Sandilands was able to 
degrade her like this. She occupies a role that has traditionally been the 
exclusive preserve of men, and that role involves commentating on a sport that 
is also treated as the exclusive preserve of men (did you know the Australian 
women’s rugby league teamwon the World Cup last year 
<http://www.nrl.com/jillaroos-win-womens-world-cup/tabid/10874/newsid/73467/default.aspx>
? I didn’t).

This sets her up as a prime target. To work in such a male dominated 
environment is often to be perceived as an invader and an underminer. Molan’s 
mere presence is a form of audacity and provocation. Manly-men sports like NRL 
aren’t just something women “don’t do”: they’re a critical component of 
mainstream masculinity. Fear of men’s looming obsolescence has been a source of 
anxiety for decades, visible in the way female politicians are subjected to 
continual gender-based harassment.

The move serves to deny Molan the terms of recognition on which she appears in 
public: she’s not a sports journalist, she’s a woman. A potential or imagined 
sex partner, a collection of body parts, whose voice and opinions are 
discredited before they have a chance to be assessed on their own terms.

It’s easy to dismiss this with an eye-roll: well, what did you expect, it’s 
Kyle Sandilands. But his actions shouldn’t be individualised as the rantings of 
one boorish outlier. Locating Sandliands as one representative within an 
age-old tradition of suppressing women’s speech enables us to pick out other 
instances of the same dynamic, and name it when we see it occurring.

This isn’t about one man. Whether or not an apology is issued after these 
instances occur is almost irrelevant, although I do hope Molan receives the 
grovelling contrition she’s personally owed.

The standard response to women’s complaints of being reduced to their gender 
is a displacement of responsibility onto their inability to handle a joke, 
which also serves to redirect the conversation away from an analysis of how 
this pattern affects women in public life. The reasonable expectation that your 
utterances are at risk of being dismissed, and the fear it creates, is 
experienced by many women as a psychological hindrance to participation in 
politics, the media, academia, and any role that involves speaking up in mixed 
company.

Sandliands’ treatment of Molan has been widely called out for the sexist 
nonsense that it is, but it wouldn’t have been possible in a society where 
these norms weren’t already circulating.

Testament to this effect is the industry that exists around teaching women how 
to be taken seriously when they talk.Voice coaching 
<http://www.sounds-right.com/women%27s-voice.aspx>, designed to cultivate more 
male-sounding speech patterns, is available for women whose careers depend on 
their ability to circumvent this institutional bias. Whether or not it works is 
an open question, but the point is that words uttered by women are subject to a 
set of gender-based filters that have powerful effects on how they’re received.

Rather than training to minimise the negative effects of being female in 
public, perhaps we should consider educating men in how to properly listen to 
women. Investors are cordially invited to fund the opening of a new school 
dedicated to this mission, to be named the Kyle Sandilands Reform Academy for 
Persistently Misogynist Blokes.
 