
Lord Justice Leveson has said culture secretary Jeremy Hunt, his former 
special adviser Adam Smith and News Corp lobbyistFrédéric Michel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/frederic-michel> would all give evidence to 
the inquiry into press ethics in the next fortnight.

The judge's announcement came as he called on parliament not to demand 
publication of written evidence submitted to him relating to the controversial 
emails written by Michel, which prompted calls for Hunt to resign.

Making a special address to his own inquiry this afternoon, Leveson asked that 
MPs wait for the three to give evidence "by the end of May". He asked that 
Commons Speaker John Bercow did not insist on the publication of fresh 
documentation before the cabinet minster appears.

Although Bercow can use a Speaker's order to force disclosure, Leveson said he 
hoped that there would be "sufficient respect" for theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> to prevent "disruption" of 
its work.

Leveson made his statement in response to a declaration on Monday by the 
Speaker who said parliament should be pre-eminent and that any "written 
documents" supplied by the minister to the inquiry should be shared with the 
Commons as "a courtesy to the house".

He warned MPs that if the Speaker or the Commons insisted on publishing 
evidence sent by the culture secretary before it he had appeared at the Leveson 
inquiry, he might be forced to abandon the questioning of Hunt, Michel and 
Smith on their roles in News Corp's £8bn bid for BSkyB.

The Labour party has already called for Hunt to resign, branding Michel's 
emails written to his boss James Murdoch as evidence that the culture secretary 
was biassed toward Rupert Murdoch in relation to the proposed takeover.

Hunt denied that he was party to any improper briefing of News Corp, but his 
special adviserAdam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith> 
resigned last month. Michel said most of his actual communication was with the 
special adviser, and Hunt concluded that the "volume and tone" of those 
contacts were inappropriate.

Leveson has already refused any attempt by No 10 to get Hunt's testimony 
brought forward and on Tuesday he said he will approach the inquiry from a 
"non-partisan judicial perspective". He reiterated his determination not to be 
drawn into a political debate about the emails released by James Murdoch as 
part of his testimony into the inquiry.

The judge said he was approaching the subject in a "neutral" fashion and 
although his investigations may look at the ministerial code and its efficacy, 
he would not be making any judgment on the issue. "I do not intend to consider, 
let alone adjudicate, on the issue of whether the house has been mislead," said 
Leveson.

Leveson says he it is appropriate to look at the BSkyB bid including the 
emails from Michel but said that "it is a matter for parliament to decide how 
far either the secretary of state or anyone else should go," in terms of 
disclosure.

But he said it was important that evidence was released to the inquiry first 
as this would mean no core witnesses would testify to the backdrop of a 
politically partisan debate. "The inquiry permits the public examination of 
this material in an independent impartial manner, visible to all as it 
happens," says Leveson.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 