
They are the middle men whose hundreds of texts and emails go to the heart of 
the government's handling of Rupert Murdoch's aborted £8bn takeover of BSkyB.

News Corporation lobbyist Frédéric Michel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/frederic-michel> and Adam Smith, former 
special adviser to the culture secretary, Jeremy Hunt, finally emerged from the 
shadows to take centre stage at the Leveson inquiry.

French-born Michel, stepping down after giving four and a half hours of 
evidence at the Royal Courts of Justice, flashed a smile towards Smith as he 
passed him on the way to the witness stand.

The gesture may not have been reciprocated; Smith fell on his sword last month 
after Michel's boss, James Murdoch, released 164 pages of emails to the inquiry 
that showed a remarkably close relationship between the two men.

Except that Michel may not have been quite as close to the culture secretary 
as the emails at first appeared to suggest.

The lobbyist began his evidence on an ignominious note when he admitted that 
he had written hundreds of emails to James Murdoch claiming to have had 
briefings, feedback, "strong" and "long conversations" with Hunt throughout the 
13-month passage of the bid.

"I provide below a full and detailed explanation of the references to 'Hunt', 
'JH', 'He', 'Jeremy' in these emails are in fact summaries of what I was told by
Adam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith>," read Michel's 
opening in his written witness statement.

The admission was overshadowed by the revelation immediately afterwards that 
the culture secretary's department had exchanged as many as 799 text messages 
between June 2010, when Murdoch announced his bid, to July 2011, when it was 
abandoned after the phone-hacking scandal. In addition, there were 191 
telephone calls and 158 emails between Michel and Hunt's department – and 90% 
of these communications were with Smith. There were also phone calls with Hunt 
and texts from Michel praising the minster's performance in the House of 
Commons and on BBC1's Andrew Marr Show.

Michel even texted Hunt his support for Rafael Nadal after he spotted the 
minister at a tennis match on television. Michel admitted he was a compulsive 
texter but denied the messages amounted to "schmoozing". There were no such 
daily updates and "jokey texts" with other interested parties, including an 
alliance of newspapers and broadcasters including the Guardian, the Mail, 
Telegraph and Channel 4 opposed to the News Corp-BSkyB deal, the inquiry heard.

"If I were to ask you where is evidence of equivalent contact, any equivalent 
contact with another interested party, namely the anti-bid coalition, is there 
any or not?" asked Robert Jay QC, counsel to the inquiry, of Smith.

"There wouldn't be, because from my memory, I don't remember them getting in 
touch with me, no," replied Smith.

The inquiry heard how Smith had responsibility for managing the relationship 
with interested parties during the bidding process but that as far as he was 
concerned this meant News Corp only. He was asked whether this did not raise 
alarm bells in terms of what "arguably is a lack of balance here". Again Smith 
saw nothing inappropriate in this apparent favouritism shown to one side.

"No, not really," he replied, explaining to a rather sceptical Jay that the 
contact he had with Michel was because "often things needed to be sorted out, 
like redactions to documents or process points".

By the time Lord Justice Leveson intervened, saying "you didn't have to be a 
lawyer" to know "a judge hearing a case can't speak to the parties outside the 
case", it was clear Smith had not been briefed on whether the contact with 
Michel was appropriate in the quasi-judicial process.

At the end of the hearing, it appeared that Michel had an open door to the 
culture department, whether to Hunt or not, and the opposition did not.

Over four and half hours, the News Corp lobbyist was questioned about emails 
purporting to show he had a daily inside track on how its bid was faring 
against mounting opposition from the media regulator Ofcom and an anti-bid 
coalition of media organisations.

Jay tried to establish whether the welter of emails sent by Michel to James 
Murdoch claiming they were "in a good place" or that "there shouldn't be a 
media plurality issue" and "the UK government would be supportive throughout 
the process" were based in fact.

"Isn't the truth here, Mr Michel, that this [reference to government support] 
is an example of exaggeration by you to … whether it's to boost morale or to 
frankly puff yourself up, it's not what happened?" Michel batted straight back. 
"No, I don't need to puff myself up."

What Jay was trying to establish was whether the emails from Michel to Murdoch 
were accurate reflections of conversations he had had with Smith and whether 
Smith had been sanctioned to have this communication by Hunt. If they were, and 
Michel proved to be a credible witness, then Hunt would be in trouble when it 
came to his turn at the inquiry.

While he often appeared to get the better of Michel, Jay had difficulty 
nailing the lobbyist. "You don't appear very willing to tell us, Mr Michel, 
whether Mr Hunt was supportive or not … or are you frankly not assisting us? 
Can we be clear, Mr Michel?"

He replied: "My view is that Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> was probably supportive of 
some of the arguments."

Hunt's career is hanging on the credibility of these two witnesses. Had he 
sanctioned Smith to have this back channel of communication with Michel or did 
the special adviser exceed his brief?

Smith described himself as a "buffer" and a "channel of communications" 
between Hunt and News Corp. "Mr Hunt never gave me precise instructions as to 
what he perceived my role as special adviser to be," he said. "It was generally 
understood between us as a result of the way our working relationship had 
evolved." There was no doubting the high regard within which he was held in 
government, however. Hunt described him in an appraisal as "my eyes and ears at 
meetings … brilliant at handling difficult situations".

Even with the most significant developments in the BSkyB bid, Smith said he 
would only have meetings with Hunt "if they were leading up to him saying 
something". But Michel believed that on two or three occasions the "feedback I 
had had been discussed with the secretary of state before it was given to me".

Smith, who continues his evidence , has yet to be challenged about Michel's 
claim. But he conceded his view was "very broadly" the same as Hunt. "I didn't 
particularly mind either way whether it happened or not. In a funny sort of 
way, I couldn't see why everyone was getting quite so worked up about it." He 
does now.
 