
The two men at the centre of the row over Jeremy Hunt's handling of the News 
Corporation/BSkyB deal – his former special adviser Adam Smith and lobbyist
Frédéric Michel <https://www.theguardian.com/media/frederic-michel> – are to 
give evidence to the Leveson inquiry next week.

Both will appear on Thursday in testimony that will be keenly scrutinised as 
the culture secretary fights for his job after 164 pages of emails written by 
News Corp's Michel toJames Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesmurdoch> appeared to show that the 
company had obtained inappropriate briefings regarding the approval process for 
its £8bn takeover bid.

They will cap a week in which Lord Justice Leveson is scheduled to hear former 
Labour cabinet ministers Tessa Jowell, Alan Johnson, Lord Mandelson, Lord Reid 
and Lord Smith, broadcasters Andrew Marr and Jeremy Paxman, and phone-hacking 
campaigner Tom Watson MP.

Hunt himself is not listed to appear, although he is due shortly, having 
repeatedly argued that he needs to give an account of his conduct before the 
judge. He has denied passing on inside information, but Smith was forced to 
resign after Hunt said that the "volume and tone" of the special adviser's 
contact with Michel was deemed to be in appropriate.

Fred Michel has not been seen in his office at Wapping for a month, according 
to colleagues, although the lobbyist remains employed by the media group. 
Company insiders say that there was surprise in some quarters about the content 
of the emails and the closeness of Michel and Smith. But Michel retains the 
strong support of James Murdoch, who defended him publicly at theLeveson inquiry
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>.

The News Corp adviser will have the task of explaining that he did not 
exaggerate his contact with or influence over the culture secretary, while he 
repeatedly told his boss James Murdoch that he had obtained information from 
Hunt or "JH" in his emails, when in fact he argued in a written statement to 
the Leveson Inquiry that the information came from Smith.

Michel and Smith were in close contact from the moment Hunt came to office, 
dining together in May 2010, the evening in which James Murdoch gave a speech 
about the future of copyright, shortly after the general election, and about a 
month before the Sky bid was announced. Hunt also attended a separate dinner 
that evening with James Murdoch, although those present said that News Corp 
executives tried to ask journalists to leave a pre-dinner reception early so 
Hunt would not be seen with him.

James Murdoch gave Michel the task of trying to see the News Corp bid through 
the regulatory process, although his efforts were complicated by what was seen 
as interference from Rebekah Brooks and other News International 
representatives, who discussed the bid with George Osborne in December 2010. 
The company's policy was to keep News Corp and News International separate, in 
an effort to insulate the growing allegations about phone hacking at the News 
of the World - owned by News International - away from News Corp's bid for 
BSkyB.

Separately, it also emerged that Rupert Murdoch's London operation has spent 
more than £53.2m on the company's management and standards committee so far, 
taking the total bill for costs associated with the closure of News of the 
World and dealing with the fallout of the phone-hacking scandal to in excess of 
£300m.

Ryan Giggs is the latest person to settle his phone-hacking civil action 
against News of the World publisher, News International. The amount the 
Manchester United star received in damages was not disclosed at a phone-hacking 
case management conference at the high court on Friday, but is likely to run to 
tens of thousands of pounds.
 