
A life-cycle assessment commissioned by Levi Strauss & Co in 2007 into two of 
its core products uncovered some unexpected results – one of the largest 
environmental impacts of its products was the use of water.

Having learned this, the company set about looking for ways to decrease its 
water usage and improve water quality.

Levi's has taken a "profits through principles" approach in the way it does 
business. It was the first global clothing company to implement strict water 
quality guidelines for all its contract laundry and finishing facilities. These 
days it works to build sustainability into everything it does.

The company commissioned the assessments because it wanted to better 
understand the real impact of its products "from cradle to grave", in order to 
create a sustainability programme that was more comprehensive and based on a 
scientific evaluation.

Working with independent organisations, Levi's looked at every impact its 
jeans could have, from the fields where the cotton is grown to its suppliers' 
laundries and what happens when consumers take a pair of jeans home.

Without the assessment, identifying water consumption as a problem area would 
have been difficult, because the company doesn't create water-based products. 
As a clothing company its main focus had always been on water quality.

The company found that the life-cycle of a single pair of Levi® 501 jeans used 
more than 3,000 litres of water. Of that, 49% was used during the 
cotton-growing stage, 46% when customers washed their jeans and 6% during the 
manufacturing process.

"When you look at the Levi's example it begs the question: 'Why aren't others 
doing this already?'" – The Guardian's judging panel

The judges were impressed that Levi's has created a roadmap that looks across 
the whole of their supply chain, a strategy they felt other companies could 
easily replicate.

For Levi's the assessment provided an opportunity to rethink the amount of 
water it used during the production stage and to look for innovative ways to 
reduce it.

Same style and finish, a lot less water

Anyone can create a jean using less water. The real challenge facing product 
designers was to find innovative techniques to create the same styles and 
finishes the Levi's ® brand is known and loved for while using a lot less water.

By making simple changes to the finishing process the company was able to come 
up with Water<Less™ jeans, reducing water consumption by an average of 28% and 
up to 96%.

Typically, a pair of jeans is finished in large washing machines and dryers to 
create a unique look and feel and the average pair uses 42 litres of water in 
the finishing process. Using traditional methods the average pair of jeans also 
goes through between three and 10 washing cycles.

A new finishing process uses the same materials and techniques but finds new 
ways to apply them. Changes include using dry stones in place of wet ones to 
create certain finishes and reducing the number of wash cycles by combining 
multiple wet-process cycles into a single one. The company found the results to 
be just as effective but far more efficient.

"Sometimes innovation isn't creating something new but rethinking a 
traditional process to make it as effective, if not better" – Morven Mackinnon, 
Levi Strauss & Co

The company's Water<Less™ jeans were launched in the United States in January 
2011 and will be released in Europe over the coming months. With more than 1.5m 
pairs in its spring collection, Levi's is saving roughly 16m litres of water.

Reducing cradle-to-grave consumption

In addressing water use at the production stage, the judges felt Levi's had 
achieved real measurable change.

Beyond that, the company's overall aim is to protect clean water as a natural 
resource and reduce its overall water consumption, from watering cotton in the 
ground to disposing of jeans.

The life-cycle analysis showed that manufacturing accounts for a relatively 
small percentage of the water consumed during the life of a pair of jeans. 
Almost half of the water used during the life-cycle of its jeans is used during 
cotton production and 95% of Levi's products use cotton.

In 2008 the company joined forces with other brands and retailers to form the 
better cotton initiative, in a bid to see more sustainable cotton grown around 
the world and to make global cotton production better for the people who 
produce it.

The initiative seeks to reduce the use of pesticides, address water use and 
soil health and improve labour standards and profits for farmers.

As far as water usage is concerned, the initiative works with farmers to 
identify the critical growth stages of cotton and their water requirements.

It then provides training on everything from irrigation to the use of mulches 
and other water conservation techniques. In 2010, farms taking part in a pilot 
in Pakistan reduced water consumption by around 30% or 11.71bn cubic metres.

At the other end of the product life-cycle, the company's assessment showed 
that 45% of water usage happens after consumers have taken a pair of jeans home.

So Levi's is educating customers about the part they can play in reducing the 
impact of their jeans, launching a global initiative to get people thinking 
about how caring for their clothes affects the environment.

It includes new care tags encouraging consumers to wash their jeans less, and 
to wash in cold water and line dry. A contest to find a better way to line dry 
jeans was also launched.

Levi's is proud of what it has achieved so far and believes this kind of 
innovative thinking across its business will make a true difference.

Its next aim is to make an even bigger impact by rethinking other aspects of 
the production process and sharing its learning with colleagues across the 
industry in order to accelerate change.

Lorna Thorpe is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 