
English clubs may not cherish the EDF Energy Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglowelshcup> in manner of the Welsh, but 
the Guinness Premiership's wobbling champions just about avoided another bout 
of blushing yesterday thanks to two scrappy tries in 10 minutes.

Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonwasps>, near the wrong end of 
the league and suffering in the Heineken Cup, went into this game with a chance 
of making the semi-finals. With 11 minutes left, after tons of possession and a 
lifetime on attack, they were a point behind the have-nots of Wales and looking 
slightly panicky. Then a replacement prop, Damien Varley, lumbered over in the 
corner to put them back on track. A minute from time Josh Lewsey, still 
wondering whether he might be playing for England next Saturday, jumped on a 
fumble under the posts and the escape was complete, even if Wasps did not make 
the last four, thanks to Gloucester's win at Newcastle.

The Dragons <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newportdragons> were heading 
back down the M4 having troubled another English side without beating them. "We 
blew it," said their head coach, Paul Turner. "I'm impressed with Wasps' power 
but I felt we had the beating of them behind the scrum." Quite so.

It was much the same in the two earlier rounds when the Dragons had singed the 
beards of Bath and Gloucester only to be outmuscled. Yesterday their pack, 
complete with the new lock Hoani MacDonald, was under the cosh from the off. 
The 30-year-old Highlander and Junior All Black can rarely have spent so long 
going backwards.

The first scrum ended with Rhys Thomas, a Wales squad tighthead prop, 
exchanging sympathies with Tim Payne, who was recently released from the 
England camp. The second went backwards at a rate of knots and ended with Dave 
Walder landing his first penalty. It was not long before Chris White took the 
Dragons' hooker and captain, Tom Willis, to one side before awarding a second 
penalty kick. Walder collected the points.

Their superiority established, the Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> pack spent the last 10 minutes 
of the half underlining it, without adding to their team's score. They camped 
on the Dragons line, winning a hatful of penalties - three of which they opted 
to scrummage - and twice they got over the line. However, White ruled that John 
Hart and Rob Webber had been held up and the Dragons left for the break a 
little wobbly in the legs but only three points down, because their fly-half, 
Shaun Connor, had been successful with his only kick.

In the second half, Connor failed with a wobbly attempt at a drop goal and 
then opened the Wasps midfield with a short ball to Marc Stcherbina, the 
replacement getting to within 10 metres before offloading the scoring pass to 
his fellow centre, Ashley Smith.

The lead was stretched to four by Connor's conversion and Wasps suffered the 
jitters until Eoin Reddan replaced Mark Robinson at scrum-half, calming nerves 
and giving much-needed direction. A prod into the corner and a lineout was 
followed by six attempts at burrowing towards the Dragons line before the Wasps 
forwards finally heaved Varley, a 17st replacement for Pat Barnard, over the 
line.

London Wasps Van Gisbergen; Lewsey, Hoadley (Lawlor, 74), Staunton (Mitchell, 
59), Voyce; Walder, Robinson (Reddan, 59); Payne (French, 72), Webber (Lindsay, 
79), Barnard (Varley, 67), Leo (Ellis, 63), Birkett, Hart, Betsen, Worsley 
(capt).

Tries Varley, Lewsey. Con Walder. Pens Walder 3.

Newport Gwent Dragons Dollman; Selley, Gomer-Davies (Stcherbina, ht), Smith, 
Fussell; Connor, Isaacs; Black (Murphy, 65; Lydiate 66) Willis (capt; S Jones, 
57) Thomas, MacDonald, Hall (Brown, 76), Bearman, Ringer, Evans.

Try Smith. Con Connor. Pen Connor.

Referee C White (Gloucestershire). Attendance 7,980.
 