
An anecdote to brighten this gloomy morning. Before we get to that, the 
context. Last evening, BBC1's The One Show ran an item about the 1950s libel 
action against the Daily Mirror byLiberace 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liberace> (think Elton John crossed with Alan 
Carr… only camper).

The item was pegged to the release of Stephen Soderbergh's movie, Behind the 
Candelabra <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behind_the_Candelabra>, in which 
Michael Douglas gives a sterling performance as Liberace. It centres on his 
affair with a young man.

Throughout his life, Liberace <https://www.theguardian.com/music/liberace> 
publicly denied he was gay. In Britain at the time, where he was popular enough 
to enjoy sell-out tours and be mobbed wherever he went, homosexuality was 
illegal.

For some reason, despite Liberace's popularity, or more likely because of it, 
the Mirror's acerbic if generally liberal columnist, Cassandra (William 
Connor), decided in 1956 to take the hatchet to the entertainer's image.

He wrote of Liberace as "…the summit of sex — the pinnacle of masculine, 
feminine, and neuter. Everything that he, she, and it can ever want… a deadly, 
winking, sniggering, snuggling, chromium-plated, scent-impregnated, luminous, 
quivering, giggling, fruit-flavoured, mincing, ice-covered heap of mother love".

Liberace sued for libel and the case went to trial in 1959. It was a fiasco. 
Liberace perjured himself by denying that he was homosexual. As for the Mirror, 
both Cassandra and the paper's editorial director, Hugh Cudlipp, both stretched 
credulity beyond breaking point by saying in evidence that the column was not 
meant to imply Liberace was homosexual.

The jury found for Liberace, who was awarded damages of £8,000 (according to 
The One Show, in today's money that would be £500,000).

It's no wonder that when he was appearing at the London Palladium some years 
later, Liberace told the Mirror's then show business editor, Bill Hagerty, he 
"owed a great deal to theDaily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror>."

The trial was an early example of the syndrome that national newspaper 
publishers and editors gradually came to recognise as jury bias against "the 
press."

Anyway, in re-researching the case a couple of weeks ago, I noted that the 
Mirror man who covered the trial was one Howard Johnson, then the paper's chief 
reporter. I asked the Mirror diaspora if anyone knew whether he was still with 
us.

It transpired that "Johnny" Johnson, as he was known, passed away years ago, 
but it stimulated many memories of the man. By far the best anecdote came from 
photographer Eddy Rawlinson:

"I was in Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
photographing the funeral of two police officers shot by the IRA. In the 
background to my pictures were the Mountains of Mourne.

Back at the office, once Howard saw the pictures, his intro went something 
like… 'They buried two Ulster policemen here today and the Mountains of Mourne 
wept down to the sea…'"

I was prepared to accept this as an apocryphal tale until another Mirror 
snapper, Bill Kennedy, said he remembered the incident too, recollecting that 
the headline read: "The Mountains of Mourning."

I'm still not sure though...
 