
The lifetime Isa announced in last week’s budget has split opinion among 
pension experts, with some warning it could force young people to work until 
they drop, but others hailing it as a “no-brainer” for younger workers.

The accounts are designed to help young people save for their first home or 
for retirement. Anyone aged between 18 and 40 when the lifetime Isa – or “Lisa” 
as it has been dubbed – launches in April 2017 can open one, and any savings 
you put into it before your 50th birthday will receive a 25% bonus from the 
government. You can save up to £4,000 a year and get a yearly bonus of up to 
£1,000. The cash can be used towards a deposit on a first home worth up to 
£450,000, or to save for old age: after your 60th birthday you can access all 
the savings tax-free.

“Everyone under 40, particularly high earners and ‘high flyers’, should open a 
Lisa even if they don’t invest in it straight away,” says Chris Noon from 
pensions consultancy Hymans Robertson. But he says that with the different 
choices on offer, people will need guidance to make the right decisions. 
Generally, for basic rate taxpayers, investing in a workplace pension with 
matched employer contributions is best, followed by a Lisa, a personal pension 
plan or similar, and then a normal Isa, Noon says.

Former pensions minister Steve Webb says the scheme has several drawbacks. 
With the average age of a first-time buyer now 31 and rising, millions of young 
people who use their Isa funds for a deposit will be in at least their 30s 
before they start saving for retirement, he adds. Meanwhile, with a lifetime 
Isa, government contributions stop at age 50, but for those saving for 
retirement the money can’t be accessed without penalty until age 60, apart from 
in exceptional circumstances. With a workplace pension tax relief continues 
throughout, and the money can be accessed at age 55.

Insurer Standard Life says: “There’s a danger that the headlines may influence 
some young savers to opt out of their employer’s workplace pension and miss out 
on free money from their employer.”
 