
Anna Odrich, Bonnington Square, London

The first squatters came to Bonnington Square in the early 1980s. At the time, 
it was owned by the Inner London Education Authority, and had been condemned. 
As the original tenants moved out, the council gutted the houses, bricked up 
the windows and put up metal gates. After a few years we formed co-operatives 
and housing associations and lobbied the council to buy the houses. From my 
co-operative alone I have seven big boxes of paperwork … Now a 10th of the 
properties are privately owned while the rest are organised in housing 
associations with affordable rent.

When I arrived, there were only two houses left, which no one wanted. This 
house was full of rubbish. All the floorboards, bannisters and doors were 
missing, the electricity, gas and water pipes were all gone, the ceilings had 
collapsed and there were two gaping holes in the roof. Those first years were 
very, very difficult. We salvaged everything. These are standard Victorian 
houses, so if I found a window in a skip, I knew it would fit somewhere. The 
window frames were still there, so I just had to figure out how to install the 
sashes and have the panes replaced.

The walls and ceilings were made of timber with laths – thin flat strips of 
wood – nailed to the joists and covered in lime plaster. This plaster has a 
life span – it's like a sponge, it sucks up everything in the air, and gets 
really dirty. To have it replaced, I stripped down the whole house to the bare 
laths and washed them – they were filthy with grime and soot. On the third 
floor, where I have my kitchen and living room, there is wonderful light coming 
in from both sides, so I decided not to replaster the wall between the two 
rooms: I think of it as the muscles and sinew of the house.

At the beginning I didn't think fixing up this house would take as long as it 
has. I moved in 28 years ago and I finally got central heating in 2005. I think 
of it as a personal odyssey, but I never know if I'm Penelope or Odysseus.
 