
The chancellor’s budget included the announcement of a lifetime Isa to help 
young people save for their first home or retirement.

What is a lifetime Isa?

It’s a savings account that allows you to save for a property or retirement 
without paying tax on the interest you earn. It also offers a government bonus 
to boost your savings - equal to 25% of everything you save. The bonus will be 
added each year, so you can earn interest on it. It will be yours to keep 
either when you buy a property or when you reach the age of 60.

The Isa will be available from April 2017.

How much can I get?

The maximum amount you can save into the Isa each year is £4,000 a year – the 
government will give you a £1,000 bonus on that amount. You can open the 
account any time between the ages of 18 and 40 and earn a bonus each year until 
you reach 50. Someone who opened an account at 18 and kept saving until 50 
could in theory earn £32,000 worth of bonuses and will end up with £160,000 in 
their account.

The Treasury gives the example of someone who saves £200 a month. At the end 
of the year, they will have saved £2,400 and receive a £600 government bonus. 
If they carry on doing this for five years and earn an interest rate of 4% (the 
top help-to-buy Isa rate), their savings – including the bonus – will come to 
around £16,000.

What can I do with it?

By a property or use it to fund your retirement – or both. You can withdraw 
the money at any point to do something else, but under the initial plans, 
unless you have a terminal illness, you will not get the government bonus and 
will have to pay a 5% charge.

The Treasury says it will consider whether money saved into a lifetime Isa and 
the government bonus can be withdrawn in full for other specific life events.

How do I use it to buy a house?

Once you have been saving for 12 months you can use the savings for a deposit 
on any property costing up to £450,000, as long as it is your first home. The 
money will be paid when you complete your purchase, just as with the existing
help-to-buy Isa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/28/help-to-buy-isa-housing-market>. 
As with the help-to-buy Isa, you will be able to buy a property with someone 
else who is saving and benefit from two lots of government bonuses.

Once you have bought a property you can continue to save and get the 
government bonus on your savings.

This sounds like great news – what’s the catch?

The Office for Budget <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility 
says that the Isa could mean that you will end up paying more for your home.

“We think this is more likely than not to lead to higher demand for the 
relatively fixed supply of housing in the UK, and so to higher prices,” it says.

“We have added 0.3% to the level of house prices by the end of the forecast, 
but the effect could easily be larger (if more house deposit saving is 
channelled through lifetimeIsas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> than 
we have assumed) or smaller – perhaps if parents supporting their first-time 
buyer children’s deposit saving reduce that support in light of the amount that 
will be provided by the government.”

What if I already have a help-to-buy Isa?

You can keep your existing account and open a lifetime Isa, but you will only 
be able to get the bonus from one to buy a property. The potential bonus on the 
lifetime Isa is more generous, and if you are saving for more than three years 
to buy a house, you will get more if you can afford to save the maximum £4,000 
a year.

Can I have a pension too?

Yes. The Treasury is keen to stress that this account is not a pension and can 
run alongside other long-term savings. You can still pay into a pension and get 
tax relief on your contributions and benefit from the lifetime Isa bonus at the 
same time.

Who will offer lifetime Isas?

This is still being worked out. Isas are usually offered by banks, building 
societies and fund management companies. They may all get involved with 
lifetime Isas.

What will the Isa invest in?

The Treasury says that like normal Isas it can contain a mixture of stocks and 
shares and cash. When you withdraw the money your returns will be free of tax.

How much will this cost the government?

The main Isa allowance is being raised at the same time, to £20,000 a year. 
The budget documents show the cost of both measures as being £170m in 2017-18, 
rising to £850m in 2020-21, when more people have saved enough to make use of 
it.
 