
Driving into Goldthorpe, at first glance the Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/barnsley> village looks typical of any English 
community: a small high street runs through the centre, with rows of red-brick 
terrace houses leading off. But the dilapidation quickly becomes apparent: the 
Co-operative supermarket has shut down and lies empty; no banks remain; 
boarded-up houses and shops disfigure every street, like missing teeth.

The surroundings give a clue as to why Goldthorpe’s economy has been so 
decimated: the expansive green hills of the Dearne Valley ringing the village 
are former coalfields. When mining ceased, no jobs returned and many men never 
found work again. One electrical box on a street corner still bears some 
graffiti criticising Margaret Thatcher, and in April 2013, around 2,000 people 
crowded Goldthorpe’s streets to hold a mock funeral for the former prime 
minister, to coincide with the official ceremony in London.

But on two Goldthorpe streets, residents have decided to take matters into 
their own hands and try to combat the blight of empty properties. A board of 
local residents who live in the village and neighbouring Bolton-on-Dearne have 
purchased homes and are refurbishing them with local apprentices, with funds 
from Big Local, a scheme created by theBig Lottery Fund  
<https://www.biglotteryfund.org.uk/global-content/press-releases/england/101212_bl_eng_forgotten-communities>
in partnership with UK charity,Local Trust <http://localtrust.org.uk/about-us>.

Powers to bring empty houses into use 'ignored'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/11/powers-empty-houses-ignored-empty-dwelling-management>
Goldthorpe’s housing crisis differs from the overheated house price bubble of 
London and the south of England: the issue is of tenure and of private 
landlords leaving properties empty. Two decades ago, many landlords bought up 
multiple properties throughout Barnsley and after initially renting them out, 
left them to fall into disrepair. “They’re basically treating them as 
pensions,” says Mark Fisher, 50, chair ofGoldthorpe and Bolton-on-Dearne Big 
Local <http://localtrust.org.uk/news/blogs/creating-affordable-homes>and a 
veteran of community projects.

In their survey of 600 residents in and around Goldthorpe, the problem of 
absent landlords came up again and again. The group decided to purchase several 
homes, train apprentices to refurbish them, then let them via a contract with a 
local housing association. The aim was to provide, first, jobs and training for 
young people, then socially let family homes. “These properties will be there 
as assets for the community,” says April Fisher, a director of Goldthorpe and 
Bolton on Dearne Big Local, and Mark’s wife.

Finding the owners was difficult until Mark heard that a man had bought 57 
properties across Barnsley, including Goldthorpe, at auction for £1m. After 
some negotiation and chasing, they persuaded him to sell them four properties.

Inside one of the homes there is a hub of activity. Young apprentices are 
coating the dark bricks with PVA glue and water, which will help plaster adhere 
to the walls. The end of terrace had lain empty for 14 years and was in such a 
state of disrepair that only the walls remained: doors, windows, stairs, floors 
and even the roof needed replacement. The next-door neighbour had put her house 
on the market because the rat problem caused by the vacant property was 
unbearable; on hearing the house was to be renovated, she decided to stay.

The idea behind Big Local’s approach is that giving money directly to 
communities will allow local people to find better solutions to local problems 
than top-down, one-size-fits-all national policymaking allows. It was launched 
just over three years ago as theLottery’s largest ever community-led investment 
with 150 “forgotten pockets” of England each given at least £1m 
<https://www.biglotteryfund.org.uk/global-content/press-releases/england/101212_bl_eng_forgotten-communities>
 to turn ideas that directly benefit their local community into reality, after 
residents submitted plans. Goldthorpe and Bolton-on-Dearne’s plans got the 
go-ahead last summer. “It’s about deciding what local people, not agencies, 
want,” says April. “We saw the potential for doing bigger things.” Alongside 
Alister Shaw, a Local Trust employee who works as a Big Local rep, she works 
part-time as a support worker, having left her previous job to support the 
scheme.

It’s giving jobs to lads who would otherwise have nothing, and be on the 
streets
Steve Palmer, at Barnsley ­Community Build 
“The community has had no future and nothing to look forward to,” Lily 
Dorritt, 68, another Goldthorpe Big Local director, says. “Everything’s 
closing. We’re determined to make this work.” The 68-year-old points out that 
the community has come together since the financial crash, with a community 
cinema now popular, and the village’s first ever Christmas market taking place 
last year.

The approach may not be translatable to every area, but the impact on 
Goldthorpe’s economy isn’t negligible: the skills the apprentices gain are key 
to reviving job hopes for young people, and working with a local construction 
company, Barnsley Community Build, means the investments stay in the community. 
Of the 48 apprentices, who work on rotations before completing their NVQ at a 
nearby training centre, several were excluded from school and had little hope 
of formal education. Working on projects in their own community and having 
their work visible in their local area has changed their behaviour and 
attitudes, says Steve Palmer, operations manager at BCB. “Every day they go 
home filthy but they’re made up. It’s giving jobs to lads who’d otherwise have 
nothing, and be on the streets.”

The residents’ board hopes to do more once this project has finished, and help 
other similar communities replicate the scheme. “It’s just giving people a nice 
home,” says April. “It should be a basic right.”
 