
The mayor of London, Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>
, has dismissed the £250,000-a-year he earns from a controversial second job as 
"chicken feed".

Johnson also insisted it was "wholly reasonable" for him to write newspaper 
columns on the side because he did them "very fast".

The comments risk infuriating millions of Londoners struggling to make ends 
meet amid the economic downturn.

They are also unlikely to please David Cameron, who has ordered his shadow 
cabinet to give up extra work in the run-up to the general election to show 
their "commitment".

Johnson, who is paid nearly £140,000 for his day job, was questioned over his 
lucrative contract with theDaily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> during an interview for the 
BBC's HARDTalk programme.

He responded "It's chicken feed."

Pressed on whether voters would agree with that description, the mayor said he 
was being "frivolous".

But he went on: "I happen to write extremely fast. I don't see why on a Sunday 
morning I shouldn't knock off an article, if someone wants to pay me for that 
article then that's their lookout and of course I make a substantial donation 
to charity.

"Maybe that money shouldn't go to charity, maybe you'd rather I didn't make 
those contributions to charity. It seems to me to be a wholly reasonable thing 
to do."

Johnson said: "I think that frankly there's absolutely no reason at all why I 
should not, on a Sunday morning before I do whatever else I need to do on a 
Sunday morning, should not knock off an article as a way of relaxation."

Johnson decided to continue with his columns for the Telegraph after being 
elected last year, but donates £50,000 from his annual fee to charities.

Liberal Democrat frontbencher Norman Baker said: "There is nothing wrong with 
people writing newspaper columns but this is an enormous amount of money and 
for Boris Johnson to dismiss it as 'chicken feed' shows just how out of touch 
he and the Conservative party are from the reality of life for millions of 
Londoners struggling to make ends meet in the depths of a recession."
 