
Drugs used for lethal injections in the US were supplied by a small 
pharmaceutical company run from the back of a driving school in westLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, it was revealed today.

Dream Pharma, run by businessman Mehdi Alavi from the Elgone Driving Academy 
in Acton, exported drugs toArizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona>
 State prison at a total cost of £4,528.

An invoice dated 28 September last year revealed that the company supplied the 
prison with 150 vials of sodium thiopental, 180 vials of potassium chloride and 
450 vials of pancuronium bromide.

The legal charity Reprieve said this was enough to kill at least 10 prisoners, 
and called for urgent action to ban the export of drugs used in executions.

The chemicals, shipped by the courier company Fedex, are thought to have been 
used in October to execute the convicted murderer Jeffrey Landrigan.

Speaking from his business premises today, 50-year-old Alavi, who describes 
his company as an independent pharmaceutical wholesaler, said: "I've no 
comment."

Asked about the use of drugs in lethal injections, he said: "I'm not as 
articulate as many people. I refrain to make any comments."

Earlier, Alavi told the BBC he had "no idea" why the prison had ordered the 
drugs.

Reprieve's director, Clive Stafford Smith, said: "Dream Pharma asserts that 
selling these drugs was no different from selling a hammer in a hardware shop.

"The analogy is apposite only if we include one fact – the customer told the 
salesman that he planned to bludgeon someone to death with it outside the store.

"Dream Pharma's tentative assertion to the media that they did not know the 
drugs were to be used for executions is simply false.

"The three drugs they sold to the Arizona State prison are the three drugs 
used for lethal injection, and the emails back and forth make it clear that 
they knew precisely what they were doing.

"Indeed, Mr Alavi made it clear to Reprieve that he favoured capital 
punishment. Sadly, the profit was blood money, pure and simple."

According to the BBC, on the same date as the Dream Pharma invoice, the deputy 
director of corrections for Arizona, Charles Flanagan, wrote to John McAuliffe, 
of the Californian department of corrections and rehabilitation, to say the 
drugs had been purchased from a company in London.

He said there was "no possibility" of getting the sodium thiopental from a US 
source, and continued: "We were able to purchase enough of the drug in our 
protocol for each of the forthcoming executions."

Vince Cable banned the export of sodium thiopental in late November, but 
Stafford Smith accused the business secretary of "sitting on his hands on this 
issue" and called for an immediate ban on the other two drugs.

Reprieve said that, on 16 December, it informed the Department for Business 
Innovation and Skills that a UK company had exported the drugs.

The charity has also called on pharmaceutical companies to help prevent their 
drugs from being used to kill people.

A spokeswoman said: "Reprieve condemns the irresponsible attitude taken by 
most companies and calls upon them voluntarily to establish a Hippocratic code 
for pharmaceutical companies asserting that their drugs should be used only for 
the benefit of patients, not for executions."
 