
Prison officers know that the control of a prison depends largely on the 
consent of the prisoners. What can happen when that consent is withdrawn was 
never demonstrated more powerfully than on this day 25 years ago when the 
prisoners inManchester’s Strangeways prison rebelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/mar/31/strangeways-riot-20-years-on>. 
The riot that followed left two people dead and turned into the longest prison 
siege in British penal history. To mark the anniversary, former master of the 
rolls and lord chief justice Lord (Harry) Woolf will on Wednesday givea Prison 
Reform Trust-sponsored lecture 
<http://www.innertemple.org.uk/33-news-events/569-prison-reform-trust-lecture-1-april-2015>
.

The theme is about achieving fairness and justice in our prisons. So, does he 
think it was fair for the government to ban legal aid for prisoners? “That was 
wrong, absolutely wrong, “ says Woolf. “We’re in the year of the Magna Carta. 
One of the fundamental requirements of the Magna Carta was that everybody 
should have access to justice. You can’t get access to justice if you can’t get 
the right assistance. Our justice system depends on people being appropriately 
represented.”

I wouldn’t want another Strangeways, but awful conditions have consequences | 
Alan Lord
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/01/strangeways-prison-riots-caused-by-atrocious-conditions>
Despite the lessons learned from Woolf’s seminal report into the riot, with a 
prisoner population today of around 85,000 (twice what it was 25 years ago), and
reoffending rates as high as ever 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/proven-reoffending-statistics>, 
Woolf last weekcalled for a new inquiry into prisons and warned that Britain is 
again “heading for a crisis within prisons” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-manchester-31737055>.

Last year, 84 prisoners took their own lives 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-custody-quarterly-update-to-september-2014>
, the highest number for seven years. There were close to 25,000 reported 
incidences of self-harm – an increase of more than 1,500. An upsurge in 
violence saw nearly 3,500 attacks on prison staff and almost 16,000 
prisoner-on-prisoner assaults. And this month the Commons justice select 
committee published adamning report 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmjust/309/30902.htm>
 into prisons, noting that “incidences of concerted indiscipline” were up 100%.

So where has it all gone wrong? Woolf says his 1991 recommendations were based 
on the most comprehensive analysis of the prison system for over 100 years and 
that they were initially embraced by politicians. “Things were changing very 
much for the better,” he recalls. “But then there was a competition between 
different politicians to see who could sound the toughest on crime – and for 
that read prisoners. They concentrated on sounding tough and as a result forced 
themselves into a dead end where they couldn’t do the reforms they might 
otherwise have wanted to do. The resources were all being used to send more 
people to prison for longer.”

My advice is to get prison sentences back into proportion and try and relieve 
the pressure on the system

Is he disappointed that many of the recommendations, such as prisoners being 
held close to home and increased delegation of responsibility to individual 
prison governors, have all but been abandoned. “Naturally, I’m disappointed, 
but I think it’s much better to look forward than to look back,” he says.

So, what does he think of this government’s transforming rehabilitation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/reducing-reoffending-and-improving-rehabilitation/supporting-pages/transforming-rehabilitation>
 agenda, of privatising rehabilitative provision in prisons? “Although I’m 
worried by the way it’s being introduced and the speed with which it’s being 
introduced, I think the emphasis on rehabilitation is a new departure and that 
is so important,” he replies. But isn’t it the case that the government is 
talking rehabilitation but not doing it? “You’re quite right; they are talking 
it, and I agree they may be going down the wrong path,” he says. “When I did my 
report into the riots, I deliberately did not lay down rigid programmes, I gave 
what I called signposts, directions in which to go, because I thought there was 
then a real possibility for those who really knew what it was about to take 
things forward. For a time they did. If politics had not intervened we might be 
in a better place now” .

“What has gone wrong, I think, with the government is that they have been in 
too great a hurry. They feel that they knew what was needed. But I think they 
are very much in danger of going about it the wrong way.”

Remember Strangeways, 1990? The bad old days of inhumane prisons are back | 
Eric Allison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/strangeways-1990-prison-riot-inhumane-conditions>
One of the Woolf recommendations was that prisons should be small – no more 
than 400 places. Or if the prisons were big, they should be divided into small 
units within the perimeter walls. How does he feel about the2,200-place prison 
under construction in Wrexham <http://www.wrexhamprison.com/>? “I’m 
instinctively againstTitan prisons <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/7129277.stm>
,” he says, “but that is the path they are going down. I’ll try and encourage 
them to follow my signs on prison size.”

He is also concerned about staff shortages. Over the past four years prison 
officer numbers have been cut by a third. Now, the government is trying to 
entice many of the thousands of officers made redundant to come back. On any 
given day, hundreds of officers are being bussed around the country. Hotel 
bills of hundreds of pounds a week are being racked up for officers recruited 
in the north to work in prisons in the south.

“It’s just bad management,” says Woolf. “They underestimated what they needed.”

If the public knew the truth about the state of the prison system, does he 
think they would they be ashamed? “Ashamed is probably too much of an emotive 
word,” he says. “I would hope they’d be worried. These are Her Majesty’s 
prisons, prisoners have been sent their by the Queen’s courts. This is 
something that is right at the heart of our society.”

“Remember,” he says paraphrasing Winston Churchill, “the way we treat our 
prisoners reflects the standards of our society.”

Asked if he believes that the justice secretary should be involved in 
directing the minutiae of prison life, dictating lights out time for young 
offenders for example, and interfering with the earned privileges system, he 
replies: “One of the main elements in my 1991 report was that there should be a 
relationship between the Prison Service and the minister where he lets his 
senior managers know what he wants and he lets them get on with it and doesn’t 
interfere. He’s unwise if he does because he just does not have the hands-on 
experience.”

Woolf has some advice for the next government. “Well, we’ve had a long period 
of sentence inflation. My advice is to get sentences back into proportion and 
try and relieve the pressure on the system. Then, use the prison system only 
for those who need to be there. Recognise that if you are going to achieve 
anything, you’ve got to have a system which provides a seamless provision of 
support to those who need it when they are in prison and when they come out so 
that those who want to make it will have a chance of doing so.

“Show the public it works, not by making ginormous changes all at the one 
time, as we are at present, but by doing it in stages. Take advice from so many 
of the wise people who have studied the system, who know the system, who work 
in the system.”

And the future? “We have an opportunity now for someone younger than me, with 
more energy to do a completely new review of the system,” he says. “You’ve got 
to be hopeful,” he adds.“What’s the point of being otherwise. We are where we 
are. We’ve got to get to a better place.

Curriculum vitae

Age: 82.

Lives: London. 

Marital status: Married, three sons.

Education: Fettes College, Edinburgh; University College London, law degree.

Career 1996-present: president, supreme judicial courts, EU mediation and 
financial markets law committee; 2006-12: first president, Qatar Financial 
Centre Civil and Commercial Court; 2004-13: chancellor, Open University of 
Israel; 2003-12: non-permanent judge, Hong Kong court of final appeal; 2006-9: 
chair, Bank of England financial markets law committee; 2005-7: chair, UCL 
council; 2000-5: Lord chief justice, England and Wales; 1996-2000: master of 
the rolls; 1992-96: lord of appeal in ordinary; 1986-92: lord justice of 
appeal; 1981-84: presiding judge, south-eastern circuit; 1979-86: high court 
judge; 1973-4: junior counsel, Inland Revenue; 1972-79: recorder; 1976: 
bencher; 1955: called to the bar.

Public life: Chair, Prison Reform Trust; patron, the Butler Trust; fellow of 
the British Academy; 1992, life peerage. 

Interests: Travel and the arts.
 