
Losing access to European police and justice databases after Brexit could 
undermine public safety and harm the government’s ability to protect national 
security, a cross-party parliamentary committee has said.


Close cooperation with EU institutions such as Europol, Eurojust and the 
European Criminal Records Information System is “mission-critical for the UK’s 
law enforcement agencies” in fighting terrorism and serious crime, according to 
the House of Lords EU home affairs sub-committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/eu-home-affairs-subcommittee/inquiries/parliament-2015/eu-uk-security-and-police-co-operation/>
.

There is a risk that any new scheme the government and the EUmember states put 
in place when the UK leaves will be “sub-optimal” compared with present 
arrangements, the peers say, “possibly leaving the people of the UK and their 
European neighbours less safe”.


The committee took evidence from ministers from the Home Office and the 
Department for Exiting the EU, senior officers from the Metropolitan police and 
the National Crime Agency, lawyers and the director of public prosecutions, 
Alison Saunders.


“Protecting the lives of its citizens is the first duty of government and 
should be the overriding consideration during Brexit negotiations,” said the 
committee chair, Usha Prashar. “Without access to these vital EU tools or 
credible substitutes, we would be seriously harming the capability of our law 
enforcement agencies to fight crime and keep the public safe.


 “The report agrees with the government on the need to pursue an ambitious and 
effective agreement with the EU in this area, but cautions that ministers may 
encounter a tension between two of their four overarching objectives in the 
negotiation: bringing back control of laws to Westminster and maintaining 
strong security cooperation with the EU. In trying to resolve these tensions, 
the government must ensure that there is no diminution in the level of safety 
and security afforded to the public.”

The report says the UK will lose the platform from which it has been able to 
exert influence within the EU. There will be “an attendant risk to the UK’s 
ability to protect its security interests in future”, it says.

The peers welcome the government’s decision to opt in to the new Europol 
regulation. There is “considerable consensus” among UK law enforcement agencies 
on the EU tools and capabilities they would like to see retained or adequately 
replaced, the report states.

“Europol, Eurojust, the second-generation Schengen Information System (SIS 
II), the European arrest warrant (EAW), the European Criminal Records 
Information System, the Prüm decisions and passenger name records were 
consistently listed as top priorities by witnesses,” it says.

The report says the effectiveness of the Crown Prosecution Service relies on 
its ability to work with partners in the EU through membership of Eurojust.


Databases such as SIS II are directly accessible by police officers on the 
street, allowing them to check whether somebody is wanted in another country. 


Any operational agreement with Europol such as those that other countries 
outside the EU have negotiated would not be sufficient to meet the UK’s needs, 
the committee says. Many data-sharing tools are accessible only to Schengen or 
EU members.

The report says the European arrest warrant is a “critical component” of the 
UK’s law enforcement capabilities. “The most promising avenue for the 
government to pursue may be to follow the precedent set by Norway and Iceland 
and seek a bilateral extradition agreement with the EU that mirrors the EAW’s 
provisions as far as possible. An operational gap between the EAW ceasing to 
apply and a suitable replacement coming into force would pose an unacceptable 
risk.”

 As recently as last year, the UK government and parliament judged that it 
would be in the country’s national interest to participate in EU data-sharing 
platforms such SIS II. “We see no reason to change that assessment, not least 
as the threat from terrorism in particular has escalated further and the EU has 
responded, for example by adopting the passenger name record directive earlier 
this year,” the peers say.
 