
For many journalists there is no greater irony than Arianna Huffington, the 
eponymous publisher of the Huffington Post,giving up her role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/11/arianna-huffington-to-leave-huffington-post-thrive>
 in the company she founded 11 years ago to spend more time with a “wellness” 
start-up focused on telling us all to get more sleep. “HuffPo” built its 
success on being part of speeding up the 24-hour news cycle, filling pages with 
unpaid contributions, and generally adding to an environment which fellow 
publishers found not even slightly relaxing. Even with a special pillow.

When the Huffington Post launched on 9 May 2005, it caught the news industry 
in the middle of a giant collective snooze. Hard as it might be to imagine now, 
it was a year when mainstream new organisations had reason to believe there 
would be a future for advertising-funded news websites. The future seemed 
brighter than at any point in the past five years. Out of nowhere, it seemed, 
theHuffington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post> emerged, 
bringing with it an approach which pushed digital practice far further than 
most of the even forward-looking news organisations were prepared to go at the 
time.

At the Guardian we set up our opinion site “Comment is Free” in response to 
the obvious and immediate success of the Huffington Post in breaking the mold 
for “live” commentary. We even had a picture ofArianna Huffington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington> pinned to the wall to 
ask, only partially satirically, “what would Arianna do?”

Huffington opting to spend more time with her earplugs was not the only 
nostalgic farewell for New York media this week, as the staff of Gawkerthrew a 
party 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/08/11/nick-denton-s-end-of-an-era-party-for-gawker-before-it-s-sold.html>
 last night ahead of next Tuesday’s auction which puts the publisher on the 
block following the well-publicised loss of a libel suit brought by wrestler 
Hulk Hogan and financed by Silicon Valley billionaire, Peter Thiel.

Nick Denton, Gawker’s British founder, is, like Huffington, a key figure in 
the transformation of modern American journalism. Gawker, founded in 2002, 
brought an alien sensibility to a New York publishing world that took itself 
very seriously.

There are plenty of those even working in the digital realm who saw both 
companies pushing the boundaries of publishing in undesirable directions, not 
least Thiel, whose personal vendetta against Gawker grew from the publication 
discussing his sexuality. Those critical of Gawker tend to be those most likely 
to be skewered by its journalism. For the Huffington Post, the critics tended 
to be those that were skewered by its business model.

The founding partners of the Huffington Post, which included Jonah Peretti and 
Ken Lerer (who also set up BuzzFeed) and, briefly, the deceased rightwing 
blogger Andrew Breitbart, knew that to reach adequate scale on the web they 
needed to publish far more, but for a fraction of the cost. As a result, 
Huffington Post became famous for being the platform which made it OK not to 
pay writers for their work. Conversely, it highlighted the fact that there were 
many more people willing to write for little or nothing for “exposure” of a 
global publisher than there were people who demanded payment.

To think of Gawker and Huffington Post as taking wrecking balls to a noble 
industry which would otherwise have (eventually) found a righteous path of 
prosperity and good practice through the digital swamp is completely wrong. Had 
Gawker or Huffington Post not come along when they did, then something else 
would have. And many arguably better things have emerged subsequently. Energy 
and investment needed to find its way into digital journalism in the mid-2000s 
and venerable institutions needed to be pushed further into understanding how 
to make journalism work in a changed environment.

A more testing issue for journalism now is thinking how to sustain a market 
where the next Dentons or Huffingtons will come from. Thiel has all but closed 
Gawker, AOL has taken over the Huffington Post; every news business, new and 
old, is rethinking whether it can exist as a free service in a market where 
advertising has collapsed. Facebook and Snapchat have more attention from both 
readers and advertisers than publishers. We are being urged to pay for 
journalism, rather in the way we are being urged to stop using fossil fuel: the 
moral case is strong, but the solutions for “how” are sparse and economically 
unpromising.

At least Arianna Huffington need no longer lose sleep over such problems.
 