
Several banks and building societies are facing disciplinary action for paying 
their existing customers measly rates on savings accounts. This comes as 
savings rates head for some of their lowest levels ever following last week's 
cut in the base rate to 5.5 per cent.

The Banking Code Standards Board is considering disciplinary action against 
the banks and building societies for apparently breaching the code's rule on 
superseded accounts - those no longer open or promoted to new customers.

The institutions, which cannot be named until the investigation is complete, 
face compensation bills and even expulsion for paying long-standing customers 
less than new ones. The BCSB had been investigating all superseded accounts 
paying less than 3 per cent interest on balances of more than £5,000.

Interest rates on traditional instant-access accounts are at an all-time low, 
according to analysts at financial magazine Moneyfacts. They currently average 
just 1.27 per cent before tax, even on balances as high as £5,000. For 
higher-rate taxpayers that means after-tax rates of below 1 per cent.

Some accounts, particularly those operated by phone or over the internet, are 
paying much higher rates, but many savers with old-style passbook accounts will 
be receiving the paltry returns calculated by Moneyfacts.

Banks and building societies were keen to emphasise how the Bank of England's 
latest 0.25 per cent reduction was good news for borrowers, with Halifax 
trumpeting the fact that mortgage rates are now at their lowest for 36 years. 
But the flipside is lower savings rates as lenders attempt to balance their 
books.

Many banks and building societies have yet to announce the savings rate cuts. 
But when they come, they will impact on many more people than the mortgage 
rates do - savers outnumber borrowers by seven to one.Some accounts may come 
down by as much as 0.5 per cent. And with City experts expecting base rates to 
fall further, even as early as next month, the outlook is not rosy for savers.

But what can they do? Change their expectations, advises the Financial 
Services Authority. Last week the City's watchdog warned that consumers need to 
adjust their financial expectations to Britain's new low-inflation era. The 
days of double-digit returns are gone.

Headline inflation during the Nineties fell to rates last seen in the Sixties 
and is expected to remain at around the Government's target rate of 2.5 per 
cent for the foreseeable future. The FSA says consumers should be wary of any 
product offering the kind of returns seen during the Eighties and Nineties.

Another solution is being offered by Which?, the Consumers' Association 
magazine. It advises investors stuck in low-paying savings accounts to move 
their money elsewhere.

Its researchers recently found that banks and building societies were paying 
loyal savers a pittance while offering new customers better rates on savings 
accounts. It named Abbey National, Bristol & West and Woolwich as the worst 
offenders. All have 'live' easy-access accounts that pay 1 per cent or less on 
balances of £2,500. Which? compares this with Nationwide's Invest Direct 
account, which pays 5.20 per cent on balances of just £500.

Some notice accounts also offer meagre returns, although restricted access is 
generally rewarded. Abbey National, NatWest and Woolwich offer accounts that 
pay savers less than 2.5 per cent on balances of £5,000. By contrast, Yorkshire 
Building Society's notice account now pays 5.4 per cent.

 Moneyfacts compiles charts of savings accounts rates on the personal finance 
sections of Ceefax or Skytext or on theMoneyfacts website 
<http://www.moneyfacts.co.uk>. Which? also publishes the rates in its monthly 
savings monitor.

The savings rate will depend on how much you have to invest and the type of 
access you choose, Moneyfacts says.

Branch-based accounts tend to pay lower rates than those with postal, phone or 
internet access. Those with notice accounts may have to wait until the notice 
period is up before they can switch accounts.

Remember that just because an account offers a competitive rate today, it 
doesn't mean it always will. Unless you keep a close eye on it you could find 
the rate has tumbled, and that other savers are getting better rates on newer 
accounts.
 