
After years of dispensing careers advice to readers of the Financial Times, 
the award-winning columnist Lucy Kellawayis quitting journalism for teaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/20/lucy-kellaway-to-leave-the-financial-times-to-become-a-teacher>
 – and wants her readers to follow her.

Kellaway wants to do more than retrain as a maths teacher. Her ambitious plan 
is to start an organisation calledNow Teach <http://nowteach.org.uk/> and 
convince others to join her, including some of the many thousands of readers 
she has accrued through writing heracerbic weekly column 
<https://www.ft.com/content/ed9bc938-acb7-11e6-9cb3-bb8207902122> in the FT for 
more than 30 years.

“I think there is an untapped pool of people who might become brilliant 
teachers but who aren’t thinking about it at the moment,” said Kellaway.

“I’m not creating something that enables people to do something that they 
would be otherwise unable to do. I’m trying to encourage them to do something 
that realistically, at the moment, they are probably not going to do.”

Lucy Kellaway to leave the Financial Times to become a teacher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/20/lucy-kellaway-to-leave-the-financial-times-to-become-a-teacher>
From September next year Kellaway will give up journalism and start training 
full-time as a teacher. In the meantime, she plans to promote Now Teach as a 
pilot scheme aiming to attract late career professionals to teach subjects such 
as maths, science and languages in challenging secondary schools in London.

“My target audience is somebody who has been in the workforce for a couple of 
decades, maybe more, and who has had a successful career but who are feeling 
that their best years are already behind them, they are fed up with it and 
wondering what to do with the rest of their lives.

“I think from my years of writing about careers at the FT, there are loads of 
them, loads and loads of people in that position.”

Kellaway agrees that it won’t be an option for those who can’t afford the 
smaller pay packet of a teacher’s starting salary. But she thinks there is a 
“demographic sweet spot” of those whose children have left home and who avoided 
the worst of the housing market.

The new startup comes as schools increasingly cite teacher shortages, 
especially in subjects such as maths, sciences and modern foreign languages, 
and teaching unions argue that workload and stress are forcing teachers out of 
the profession.

But Kellaway is ready for criticism that she is talking up teaching for a 
section of the middle classes who might think it is on par with opening an 
artisanal cheese shop in Shoreditch.

“We want to discourage the Dead Poets Society side of things. We’re absolutely 
emphasising that teaching is the hardest thing you’ve ever done,” Kellaway said.

“The disaster would be if we got a lot of people on this programme and they 
dropped out. Will most of the people be middle class? Probably, yes. Will they 
be feeling ennui? Quite possibly. But if that’s all it is we won’t take them 
because they’ve got to have nerves of steel as well.”

Kellaway holds no illusions about the demands of teaching: her mother was a 
teacher in a London state school, as is one of her daughters, after entering 
through the Teach First graduate training route.

“I do think it’s going to be really difficult, there’s no question. So I do 
need to make it work. I hope I’ve got in my favour that I’m quite good with 
pressure and managing my time – I’ve possibly got that to my advantage,” said 
Kellaway, who spent more than a year researching the move, visiting schools and 
talking to school heads.

But Kellaway says she believes that changing careers leads to richer lives, 
and that at the age of 57 she is excited by the challenge.

“What could be more rejuvenating than starting all over again at my age? The 
thought that I will be training with people who are my children’s age is 
absolutely brilliant, it really is.”

Now Teach is already up and running, and taking enquiries through its website 
for the first cohort of career-switchers it plans to recruit, who would start 
next year and be put through the Ark academy chain’s teaching training 
programme.

The first group is likely to be small, as Now Teach figures out how its 
programme will work – and Kellaway says the measure of its success won’t be in 
the numbers applying at first.

“For the pilot, even if we get hundreds and hundreds of applications – and 
people are already applying – we need to be very selective, and only take the 
ones who stick with it. We need to learn exactly who the right people are to 
hire and who to avoid.

“We need at least 10 to do a cohort for the first year but I hope there will 
be lots more than that. But it’s not going to be huge. And then we will ramp it 
up afterwards, and expand it to cities and places where the need is greatest.”

 * Anyone interested in Now Teach can apply via its website 
<http://nowteach.org.uk/>
 