
Spoiler alert: This blog is for those who are watching season seven of Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>. Don't read on if 
you haven't seen the mid-season finale, episode seven.

Zoe Williams is away this week. You can catch up with her episode six recap 
here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/may/21/mad-men-recap-season-seven-episode-six-the-strategy>

'He was in his living room on the couch'

Burt Cooper went quietly in the night, dancing his way out in Don's 
technicolour hallucination; an all-singing, all-dancing farewell, with the 
softest of soft shoe shuffles. Burt's final wave goodbye – topped with the 
simplest of illusions, a door magically closing by itself –a cheeky, 
unexpected, old school Hollywood moment. But there's been so much darkness 
surrounding this season (and this show) that I couldn't trust it at first. The 
stunned "has Roger slipped me some acid?" look on Don's face was enough to have 
me wondering whether he was having an out of body experience, and we'd see him 
waking from a heart attack at any moment.

There was a delicious irony in staging an elaborate song and dance number to 
remind Don that's there's more to life than money: "the Moon belongs to 
everyone – the best things in life are free". And yet, the Moon landing, the 
magical moment bringing everyone together to watch the "same thing at the same 
time", still cost $25bn as the teenage beefcake flopped on the Francis 
household carpet sulkily points out – and it's the prospect of a million-dollar 
payday that cheers up the rest of the partners as they mourn Burt.

Don's alone – about to get divorced again, watching the Apollo 11 Moon landing 
by himself in a hotel, calling his kids on the phone, and now sitting, stunned, 
on a desk as the rest of the office listen to Roger's eulogy upstairs. In an 
episode filled with classy performances, Jon Hamm delivered the quiet, empty 
sadness of a man facing the reality of mortality.

'There's been a change of plans'

Like the astronauts landing on the Moon and taking the glory, Don has always 
been the star of the show. But he can't do it on his own. He can't do it via 
proxy no matter how good Freddy Rumsen is at selling Don's ideas. And maybe 
SC&P could hack their way through adland with a hired gun like Lou for a bit 
longer, but even Jim Cutler knows it's not the same as having the real thing. 
Has this been the year when Don has learned the importance of teamwork, 
realising that he's only as good as the rest of SC&P? (Wait, should we make 
that Sterling Cooper again?)

Don passed the baton with pride to Peggy for the Burger Chef pitch, and she 
stepped up. But when Roger pointed out how selfish he'd been, and that the team 
needed him, Don was ready to use his full powers of persuasion to talk Ted into 
staying – drawing on himself, his feelings, his life experience to really sell 
the idea; the same method that got him sent to ad purgatory. The idea of just 
selling stuff or the prospect of making money, wasn't going to be enough to 
persuade someone like Ted – how could you kid a kidder? But Don recognised the 
burnout he'd felt, and the same possibility for rebirth. Ted is convinced by 
the idea of work, the love of the process, of being good at something, and the 
idea of doing that with people who are as good as him: Roger's all-star Chevy 
team.

'I have to talk to people who just touched the face of God about hamburgers'

The slow motion introduction to Peggy's pitch for Burger Chef worked well. It 
allowed us to sit with her anxiety for a moment, but also let us see Pete work 
the room; warming it up for her, doing the things with which she is less 
comfortable. The role reversal was such a simple thing, but it was so 
satisfying to see Don introduce Peggy and watch her work from the template he'd 
taught her ("more general flattery, research, research, without further ado …").

She more than delivered on Don's faith in her. This was Peggy's Kodak carousel 
moment – drawing on the energy of the Moon landings, but then also building her 
pitch on diligent hours of research, as she conjured a vision of a crowded 
house filled with the chaos of the world – Vietnam on the news, kids listening 
to the Stones, Dad playing Sinatra (borrowed from her dance with Don last 
week?) – before offering the alternative. A place where there's "no laundry, no 
telephone, no TV": the "family supper at Burger Chef".

Peggy has never had it easy. She has worked and worked, and it's still the 
Pete Campbells of the office who rack up the zeros in their bank balances and 
damn her with faint praise (last week's "as good as any woman"). So I loved the 
way she won the pitch by playing the final Draper card – the ad hoc, personal 
touch about the "10-year-old boy parked in front of my TV eating dinner". 
Partly for the flash of panic on Pete's face (had she drunk too much of the 
Draper Kool Aid?) but also because it was true. Even if it wasn't the truth 
that she knew everyone would hear.

'I'm a woman, I'm the voice of moms, remember?'

In a parting shot to Roger, Burt counselled: "No man has ever come back from 
leave – even Napoleon." Maybe, but plenty of women have – and Peggy's one of 
them. The slow burn of her story has allowed us to see the long reach of 
moments like the one-night stand with Pete and the child she gave up, and what 
it means to be speaking as the "voice of moms" at work. "She don't care about 
me," complained Julio about his own mother's decision to move to Newark. "Yes 
she does, that's why she's moving," Peggy told him, wiping a tear as she hugged 
the pesky kid who's made himself a home in her empty nest. Surprising herself 
with maternal insight, or perhaps just allowing herself to remember that she 
was strong enough to make a choice.

'I think you should buy the whole company. Because I have a vision'

Roger also reminded everyone – and himself – of what he does best, showing how 
all those quick drinks, long breakfasts, longer lunches, casual saunas, endless 
dinners and after-dinner drinks form part of a finely honed game of knowing 
when to fold, when to capitalise on some insider info (good tip Joan) – and 
when to take advice from a real master. Burt liked the way Jim has a vision for 
the future? That's what it takes to be a leader? OK, Roger can get a plan: he 
pulls off a deal with McCann Erickson. It's enough to give us what passes for a 
happy ending in Mad Men: a funeral and a million dollar payout (sorry, Harry, 
looks like your partnership is never going to happen). But will Roger's plan 
work? It's going to be a long wait until spring 2015 to see the end of this era.

Notes and stray observations

• The Best Things in Life Are Free. In the meta-world of Mad Men casting, it's 
kind of fun to imagine that actor Robert Morse was channeling a little of the 
lessons that J Pierpont Finch learned inHow To Succeed In Business Without 
Really Trying <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NftdqRWxuh8&feature=kp>.

• There's a great interview with Morse in Vanity Fair 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/vf-hollywood/robert-morse-mad-men-dance> where he 
explains how Matthew Weiner sold the idea to him: "I trust Matt implicitly, but 
I have to admit I was a little worried about singing as Bertram Cooper. I was 
worried it would be hokey, and people would think, Why is Robert Morse, musical 
comedian, singing?"

• For a show that has spent a long time musing over the mystery of "the real 
Don Draper" there's still a lot of mileage in some character assassination. We 
had Betty at a kind of peace: "I'm starting to think of him as a bad boyfriend 
– someone a teenage anthropologist would marry"; Jim being dismissive "a bully 
and a drunk"; Joan worn out, "I'm tired of him costing me money"; and Burt 
honest to the end – "he's a pain in the ass". Only Pete had anything sort of 
nice to say about Don behind his back: "That's a sensitive piece of horseflesh 
– he shouldn't be rattled!"

• Mad Men has always used the impact of events outside the office to its 
advantage, showing an America that watched JFK, Martin Luther King, Vietnam 
together on TV. Is it too glib to wonder if, in showing us the Moon landings, 
there's also a sense in which Mad Men's writers are wondering we'll ever get 
that warm "all together" moment from TV again?

• "That's one small step for man … I didn't get the second phrase?" Nice 
detail from the lunar landing as it was broadcast on TV,as news anchor Walter 
Cronkite 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x8rtj4_cbs-news-apollo-11-moon-landing-jul_shortfilms>
 misses the second half of Neil Armstrong's iconic line; a tag that Don – or 
Peggy – would have been happy to have written.

• Three of Mad Men's women presented their game faces this week. Sally, doing 
her best grown-up serious look for the guests (that hand-on-hip, 
cigarette-in-mouth pose outside was pure Betty); Peggy reminding herself to not 
get ripped off in her own living room by the handy hunk in dungarees ("You got 
a lot of books") and then smiling when she gets his number; Joan pretending she 
knew about Jim Cutler's cutthroat coup memo just to get one over on Don. (I 
have to admit, I had lost track of exactly why she was so angry with Don this 
season until she mentioned the money she'd lost).

• "You don't owe me anything." Another marriage hits the rocks for Don, as 
Megan calls time on their bi-coastal romance, leaving him to his ownWild Bunch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aIwH96iZI7E> back in NYC.

• It somehow felt right for Burt to live long enough to see the Moon landings. 
A little callback to the last "astronaut" to feature on the show, Queen of 
Perversion, Mrs Blankenship?

• "I've got 10%!" Just in case you're wondering how much the partners stand to 
make if Sterling's gold rush deal with goes through (it will, won't it?), 
diligent Reddit contributor I_Am_Intoxicatedhas crunched the numbers 
<http://uproxx.com/up/2014/05/heres-your-breakdown-of-what-the-mad-men-payouts-would-be-worth-today-for-sterling-cooper-partners/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=twitter&utm_campaign=Feed:+uproxx/features+(Uproxx)>
. Will Don's question about Burt's sister being alive be a factor in how the 
company's power play unfolds when we return?

• After last week's episode closed with what many read as a combination of 
homage toEdward Hopper's Nighthawks 
<http://www.artic.edu/aic/collections/artwork/111628> and the diner where we 
left The Sopranos, it's hard not to wonder if Matthew Weiner is playing with 
the whole idea of how to say goodbye. There's a certain luxury that comes with 
the knowledge that it's time to wrap it all up – this episode felt like he's 
using the decision to split the final season to his advantage; like Burt, I 
suspect Mad Men will get more than one goodbye.

• If Weiner ever considers writing some Mad Men spin-offs, I wouldn't mind 
catching a few episodes of either the Don Draper Dinner Theatre that Lou 
mentioned, Harry and the Computer, or The Marriage Racket with your host, Peter 
Campbell.
 