
Magistrates are resigning in “considerable” numbers, the head of their 
national body has said, after scores of court closures and swingeing government 
cuts.

Forty-seven magistrates courts have shut this year, one-tenth of courts in 
England and Wales, with significant numbers of judges resigning early from the 
unpaid position.

Malcolm Richardson, the chairman of the Magistrates Association, said: 
“Magistrates deal with more than 90% of the criminal cases that come to court 
and they cost 1% of the HM Courts and Tribunal Service budget. But we’re 
getting a bit tired of being treated like the 1% and not the 90%.”


The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) would not disclose the number of magistrates who 
had resigned this year, but the association said the figure was considerable.

It comes after at least 75 magistrates resigned last year over the 
controversial criminal courts charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/jul/31/magistrates-resign-court-charges-encourage-innocent-plead-guilty>
, which caused outrage among law groups before it wasscrapped by Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/03/michael-gove-scraps-criminal-courts-charge>
.

The mass resignations and court closures have left the magistracy stretched, 
Richardson said, adding that “nobody [in government] seems to have a plan” for 
the future of the volunteer judges.

Magistrates resign over court charges that encourage innocent to plead guilty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/jul/31/magistrates-resign-court-charges-encourage-innocent-plead-guilty>
“There is no evidence of a strategy for the use of magistrates. What are we 
for the in 21st century? What are we for in the brave new world, which is 
starting to be revealed under the courts reform programme?” he said.

“Magistrates feel they are not, and have not been, engaged with in the 
determination of what that future looks like … The consequences of that for 
some magistrates, particularly those who are getting towards retirement, is to 
say ‘why am I carrying on?’ It’s a difficult question to answer.”

Three magistrates who have resigned or retired since September told the 
Guardian morale was at rock bottom among the judges, who are only paid expenses.

They said magistrates felt ignored and unappreciated as a result of cost 
cutting, ranging from court closures to buildings falling into disrepair. More 
trivial money-saving measures, such as cutting back on coffee and newspapers in 
the judges’ quarters, and using cheaper, thinner paper, had also irritated the 
magistracy, they said.

Janet Alcock, a Conservative councillor in Clitheroe, Lancashire, said she 
“resigned in despair” in September after 20 years as a magistrate. The role has 
been reduced to a “soul-destroying production line” of speeding fines and 
licence fee evasions, Alcock said, adding that she gave up encouraging people 
to become magistrates a long time ago.

Alcock said she had become “extremely frustrated” at having to issue fines to 
defendants who would never be able to pay, and the victim surcharge, which 
“just seems to be another way of dressing up that they’re taking more money off 
them”.

“You know, realistically, from the point of view of collecting the fines, 
you’re not going to get it, which makes it extremely frustrating,” she said. 
“Everybody’s always calling me ‘the hanging judge’ because I’m saying things 
like instead of fining people who can’t afford it, send them out working … 
Political correctness wouldn’t allow you to do anything like that.

“But that would be far more satisfying to the public, I think, than for people 
to appear six months later owing even more than they did at the beginning. It’s 
just frustrating for everybody.”

Myra Robinson, who retired last month as a bench chairman of Newcastle 
magistrates, said fining those who could not afford to pay was morally wrong, 
but there was little that magistrates could do about it. “It’s just ticking 
boxes and following down – if someone did this then that’s the punishment. 
There’s no flexibility,” she said.

“I’d worked all my career with young offenders and kids with problems. I felt 
I knew a lot of the families with problems in Newcastle, and I could see behind 
what they’d just done and think what would be an appropriate way of dealing 
with it. My hands have been tied for many years now. People can’t afford fines.”

A third recently resigned magistrate, who did not want to be named, said the 
court closures meant “losing local justice for local people”. In some cases, 
proposed closures meant it would be impossible for defendants or witnesses 
travelling by public transport to get to a court for 10am.

“I was constantly getting emails or texts or phone calls to say that we 
urgently need magistrates to sit in places like Scarborough. That would imply 
there is a shortage,” said the magistrate, who was based nearly 90 miles 
(145km) away in Halifax, west Yorkshire.

Forty-seven magistrates courts closed their doors between March and September 
under government proposals to reduce the £500m annual cost of the courts 
estate. A further 45 are due to shut by September 2017, meaning one-fifth of 
all courts in England and Wales will have disappeared in 19 months.

An MoJ spokeswoman said: “The magistracy remains at the heart of our justice 
system. We are investing £1bn to reform and digitise our courts to deliver 
swifter justice, and we are working closely with the judiciary to encourage the 
recruitment of underrepresented groups.

“Closing underused and dilapidated court buildings will allow us to reinvest 
in the justice system and make the best use of technology, improving the 
experience for all court users, in particular vulnerable victims and witnesses.”
 