
Large majorities of people diagnosed with some of the most common cancers can 
now expect to live for at least 10 years, according to the latest estimates 
drawn up by government statisticians.


Those who develop skin cancer are the most likely to still be alive a decade 
after their diagnosis, with 89.4% of sufferers able to expect this lifespan, 
according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS).

New drug 'wakes up' immune system to fight one of deadliest cancers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/06/new-drug-wakes-up-immune-system-to-fight-one-of-deadliest-cancers>
More than four in five (80.6%) women diagnosed with breast cancer, the most 
common form of cancer in females, should also survive for 10 years, given the 
gradual upward trend in survival, the ONS said.

Anticipated 10-year survival is almost as high for those with prostate cancer, 
the most common cancer among men. As many as 79.9% of those diagnosed with it 
can expect to still be alive after such a period.

Only 5.7% of those diagnosed with pancreatic cancer will live that long, as 
will only 9.8% of people who develop lung cancer and 11.9% of those with brain 
cancer.

The figures are part of calculations the ONS made for the first time that 
project how many people diagnosed with certain forms of cancer in 2015 are 
expected to survive for a decade. They estimate future survival rather than 
capturing the number of years cancer patients have already lived since 
diagnosis. They are based on all those diagnosed with the disease regardless of 
at what stage their cancer was identified.

The figures come as evidence continues to suggest that new drugs, better 
treatments and earlier diagnosis of the disease are helping to sustain the 
gradual increase in survival of some, but not other, cancer types. For example, 
96.4% of women diagnosed with breast cancer in 2009-13 lived for at least a 
year, while 86.7% survived for five years – the largest numbers on record.

For men, survival rates at one year and five years are highest for those with 
testicular cancer. Women diagnosed with melanoma of the skin have the best 
chance of the same highest one-year and five-year outcomes.

“Cancer survival is improving and has doubled over the last 40 years. For a 
number of cancers, including breast and skin cancer, more than eight out of 10 
people will survive their disease,” said Rebecca Smittenaar,Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Research UK’s statistics manager. 
“Research has led to better treatments, new drugs, more accurate tests, earlier 
diagnosis and screening programmes, giving patients a better chance of 
survival,” she added.

For example, one-year survival for breast cancer has crept up from 95% for 
those diagnosed in 2007-11 to 96.4% of those who developed it in 2009-13, while 
five-year survival rose over the same period from 85% to 86.7%.

Cancer patients not given painkillers soon enough, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/15/cancer-patients-terminal-denied-powerful-painkillers-opiods-morphine-gps-study>
But Cancer Research UK is concerned that survival remains stubbornly low for 
some cancers, including lung, pancreatic and oesophageal forms of the disease 
and brain tumours. That is mainly because they are often diagnosed too late for 
treatment to be effective, experts say.

Lynda Thomas, chief executive of Macmillan Cancer Support, said: “Surviving is 
not necessarily the same as living well, and too many people with cancer miss 
out on the support they badly need once treatment has finished.

“While today’s figures are to be celebrated, they should also act as a warning 
that as the number of long-term survivors increases, we will need a health 
service that is able to cope with this increasingly complex situation.”

David Crosby, director of services and engagement at Breast Cancer Care, said: 
“These extra years of life mean more precious time with loved ones, as well as 
the ability to continue to work and contribute to society.

“However, readjusting to life after the rollercoaster of breast cancer 
treatment can be the most traumatic time, for some even harder than the 
diagnosis itself. They may be struggling with body image or learning to cope 
with long-term effects of treatment, such as fatigue or painful joints, and 
living every day with the fear of the cancer returning or spreading.”


 