


The past few Christmases had been all over the place for my little family, and 
2013 was the first year I felt able to establish my own small traditions, which 
will hopefully carry on over the next few years. The first thing that sprang to 
mind was tree biscuits – although I didn’t have a tree to hang them on! I hope 
that in the years to come, I can mark the start of the season with a batch of 
these simply spiced biscuits.

Makes 24, in assorted sizes

You will need

100g unsalted butter, plus a little extra for greasing 

300g flour, plus a little extra for dusting 

2 eggs 

100g caster sugar 

1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

Icing sugar (optional), to dust 

Method

First, preheat the oven to 180°C/350°F/gas 4. Now, the butter: because I make 
these with my son, I cube it and melt it in the microwave for 60 seconds to 
make it easier to stir in. Traditionally, you would rub it into the flour with 
your fingertips, but once I started melting my butter in the microwave, I’ve 
never looked back. So, whichever method you choose, combine the butter with the 
flour to form a breadcrumb consistency.

Beat the eggs. Tip the sugar and cinnamon into the flour mixture, then whisk 
in the eggs to form a dough.

Flour your work surface and hands, tip out the dough, and work it briefly. 
Wrap the dough in clingfilm and allow to chill in the fridge for 30 minutes or 
until firm enough to roll out.

Once firm, roll it out on a floured surface – I don’t own a rolling pin, so I 
use a clean, empty bottle, floured – to around 0.5cm thick for optimum biscuit 
thickness.

Cut out, using a cookie-cutter (I use a 7cm round one) or, if you’re feeling 
radical, a blunt knife to make whatever shaped biscuits you like. (Not one to 
promote brands too much, but I picked up most of my novelty cookie-cutters from 
Poundland and Ikea.) Reroll the dough trimmings until all of it is used up. If 
you want to hang the biscuits on the tree, make a small hole, using a skewer or 
the tip of a sharp knife – the hole will need to be larger than you think, as 
it smooshes back together in the oven a little!

Lightly grease a baking sheet, and place your biscuits on top, leaving a few 
millimetres around each one so they don’t stick together.

Bake in the centre of the oven for 12 minutes, until just golden and crisp. 
Take them out, and allow them to cool on the baking sheet.

I dredge mine very lightly with icing sugar while warm, for an extra sweet 
kick. Thread string or ribbon through, and hang them on the tree ... if you 
think they’ll last that long!

To order Jack Monroe’s new book, A Year in 120 Recipes, for £13.99 (RRP 
£18.99), go totheguardian.com/bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/year-in-120-recipes.html> or call 0330 333 
6846.
 