
“Just because I have cancer they think I am dumb.”

These were the last words a patient said to me and her lament has stayed with 
me ever since.

Our conversation that morning had started ordinarily enough. She was in 
hospital with an infection that was proving more resolute than I’d thought. 
Every day I made a show of applying my stethoscope to her chest but I knew that 
she was slipping away. Her numbers looked worse and the once 
intermittently-used oxygen now stayed permanently by her side, the tubing 
plastered to her sweaty forehead.

That day, I couldn’t bear to have the exchange that typically went, “What do 
you think, doctor?”

War on prescription drugs: what if you depend on opioids to live a decent life?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/prescription-drugs-what-if-you-depend-on-opioids-chronic-pain>
“I’m afraid the infection is taking its time.”

“I’d love to be home.”

“I’d love to get you home.”

“But I’m just too breathless to consider it.”

“I know.”

So that morning I said, “Tell me a little about yourself.”

“You mean my cancer?”

I cringed at the implication.

“No, about the rest of you.”

She smiled. She was the mother of five grown children and her husband’s 
successful business partner. She dabbled in art but her true love was cooking 
elaborate meals from which she would always save a little for the elderly 
neighbour who was doing it tough. Seeing him happy gave her a lift, she said.

“It’s amazing, what you have accomplished,” I said, struck by how hard she had 
worked through many years of being unwell. Her reaction was even more striking. 
Tears streamed down her face, catching momentarily on the oxygen tubing. “You 
really mean that? Thank you.”

Who thinks you are dumb? Why do they think that? How dare they? Maybe her 
children or husband were insensitive. Or maybe a friend or relative couldn’t be 
bothered anymore. Those who are viewed through the prism of their illness 
commonly encounter upsetting behaviour. These thoughts sped through my mind as 
I stood frozen at the very sight of her distress. Beside me, my resident 
shifted uncomfortably.

I stared mutely at my patient. Any number of things could cause her anguish: 
the fact that she was gravely ill, that getting home was a dimming prospect, 
that the children would be motherless or the business might fall flat. But no, 
she seemed reconciled with all that. What she couldn’t get over was being 
thought of as dumb.

The silence wasn’t long but the embarrassment threatened to swallow us. Taking 
our continued presence for interest, she wiped her tears, apologised and 
continued, “It’s the little things. They ask me questions but don’t wait for an 
answer. They think that when I speak slowly they can talk for me and over me. 
It’s like I am invisible. My brain is slower but I am not dumb.”

No words were adequate. No apology, no explanation, certainly no disavowal. Up 
to then, I was hoping the culprit was a lone, outside offender but I should 
have known better. In the long history of her illness she had spent a lot of 
time in a lot of hospitals until, we, her doctors and nurses had become the 
insiders and those who loved her the outsiders. Her plain observations were an 
indictment of us, not them.

I yearned to argue then that her assessment was wrong, every single bit of it. 
That doctors existed to help patients, that no doctor actually thought a 
patient “dumb”. And what an anachronistic, offensive term that was anyway. But 
all I could honestly say is that no doctor or nurse had eversaid the word 
within my earshot. I couldn’t truthfully assert that the ruthless emphasis on 
absurd metrics hadn’t just about overtaken notions of genuine and meaningful 
care.

A 2013 American College of Physician Executives study of 840 doctors found 
that two out of three doctors had witnessed doctors behaving badly towards 
patients or colleagues. Discrimination, inappropriate jokes and profanity all 
found a mention. 

A 2012 study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association 
stated that most US medical licensing authorities reported incidents of online 
professional violations by physicians, many of which resulted in serious 
disciplinary actions. With the rise of social media, doctors are facing 
constant reminders to not post disparaging remarks about patients online. The 
whole issue was catapulted into ignominy when the Annals of Internal Medicine 
last year published two accounts of specialists making lewd remarks about 
patients who were under anaesthetic.

As a doctor, I am surely guilty of my fair share of rolled eyes, exasperated 
glances and impatient sighs. Just recently, my ire spilled over when an anaemic 
patient insisted that the story began 50 years ago when her obstetrician 
ignored her post-partum bleeding.

“I never made that blood back, it’s all his fault.”

“Your anaemia isn’t related to that,” I cut her off.

“But I am still upset.”

I should have understood that the real story wasn’t about the loss of blood 
but lack of validation. I should have listened a little more patiently.

If I have doled out poor behaviour I have also received it. After surgery, my 
mother kept reporting more pain that her nurses deemed appropriate. A senior 
nurse announced that her basic problem was laziness: “She needs to help herself 
instead of depending on us all the time.” 

Pregnant women wasting money on vitamin supplements, study says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/11/pregnant-women-waste-money-vitamin-supplements-study-says>
I was astounded by her ignorant conclusion that had filtered down to the other 
staff. Their attitude sapped my mother’s confidence and biased the doctors 
until an infection emerged as the cause of her pain. Had I not witnessed the 
exchange myself I would have found it hard to believe.

In spite of the finest medical care, my patient died thinking the worst of 
herself. We couldn’t save her from her fate but we could certainly have 
combated the sense of shame and disempowerment illness engendered. We could 
have eased her suffering – if we had known what was causing it.

My patient taught me that we don’t have to actually insult our patients by 
calling them dumb or lazy to make them feel bad. Where a power differential 
already exists, there are a hundred silent gestures, unintended slights and 
erroneous assumptions that can do the job and in this, each one of us is 
complicit. 

Good medicine means understanding the power of not just what we say to our 
patients but how we behave towards them. Ralph Waldo Emerson once said that 
life is short but there is always time for courtesy. It’s a message that may 
well have been scripted for the modern healthcare professional. 
 