
The governing party of the Maldives has threatened to use controversial 
defamation laws against anyone involved in producing or broadcasting what it 
says are false allegations of corruption due to be aired in an al-Jazeera 
documentary on Wednesday.

Al-Jazeera had already pulled out a number of journalists from the country due 
to concerns about repercussions they could face and what it claimed was 
intimidation, but said the message last week from MP Ahmed Nihan Hussain Manik 
had left a “large number of citizens concerned”.

A month ago, the Maldives introduced strict defamation laws making it a 
criminal as well as a civil offence, meaning those found guilty could be jailed 
for up to six months.

The move was criticised by David Kaye, the UN special rapporteur on freedom of 
expression, as a “direct attack on the exercise of the right to freedom of 
expression in the Maldives” that “will have a strong chilling effect on media 
and civil society, making reporting and criticism truly risky”.

Manik, the majority leader from the governing party in the Maldives 
parliament, said on state TV on 30 August: “Protecting your reputation is a 
religious and human right. I repeat that if there are falsities, and if these 
people cannot prove in court what they have claimed is true, then they will 
have to bear responsibility for it.

“Those who also assist in publicising such false information, those who 
produce it, broadcast and rebroadcast it – the Defamation and Freedom of 
Expression Act as well as other such laws provide measures to take legal action 
against them.”

It is not disputed that the statement related to the documentary, or that it 
could also serve as an indirect warning to Maldives citizens that they could be 
prosecuted for working with the documentary team.

The Maldives government believes it is proper to warn its citizens they will 
face action if they contribute to a broadcast it says contains a number of 
untrue and highly defamatory allegations about the government.

Manik’s statement was followed the the next day by a report on state media 
saying a screening of the documentary had been cancelled.

The article also attacked the al-Jazeera producer leading the documentary, 
Will Jordan, who is a former editor of the Maldives Independent, an 
English-language publication accused of being friendly with the country’s 
opposition movements.

The article read: “Even before producing this documentary, which was produced 
to defame this Maldives, non-Muslim Will Jordan and his team had conducted 
special campaigns to starve Maldivian citizens, by preventing tourists and 
investors from coming to the Maldives.”

A death threat against Jordan has also been reported to the Metropolitan 
police though there is no evidence that the person making the threat is linked 
to the government.


Jordan received a tweet on 3 August reading: “U will die soon. We have hired 
some gunmens to shot u. & we r not afraid of fucking anyone or any country. See 
the bullet”, followed by a gun emoji.

Al-Jazeera has also cancelled a screening of the documentary at the Royal 
Society of Arts in London. It is understood the RSA was contacted by lawyers 
acting on behalf of the Maldives government concerning the documentary, however 
the decision to cancel the screening was made by the broadcaster.



 Al-Jazeera investigative journalism director, Clayton Swisher, said the 
network would not back down from airing the documentary.

“We are aware of the majority leader of the Maldives ruling party appearing on 
state TV just days ago to warn the island nation that anyone who contributed or 
helped with al-Jazeera’s investigation would face a serious crackdown,” he 
said. “Our local contacts there indicate these remarks have left a large number 
of citizens concerned.”

 He also claimed that two journalists from Italy and Poland had been detained 
on suspicion of working with the documentary makers, though al-Jazeera had 
assured the government that they were not working with the pair.

 Swisher added: “That’s more than enough evidence for us that fixers and 
journalists – including ones who assist al-Jazeera – face risk in the Maldives 
for doing their jobs. And it is our duty to support those who share these risks 
in the common cause of investigative journalism.”

The Maldives government said that the journalists concerned were working 
illegally on a tourist visa which fell foul of Maldivian immigration law.

In a statement it added: “The government of the Maldives is shocked and 
disappointed to learn that journalists involved in the production of the 
al-Jazeera documentary ‘Stealing Paradise’ have allegedly been subjected to 
intimidation. The government takes this allegation extremely seriously and 
under no circumstances condones such behaviour. The government is, and will 
continue to be, committed to a free and independent press.”
 