
Jim Mallinder, Northampton's head coach, said his team were "not the finished 
article" after their 33-20 win against theScarlets at Franklin's Gardens won 
Group D of the EDF Energy Cup and put them into the semi-finals. He could 
equally have been talking about the wing Chris Ashton, the former Wigan league 
player who scored two tries against the Welsh region but also struggled in 
defence.

Ashton, 21, who scored 39 tries in 25 matches last season - when Saints ran 
away with the National League One title - missed theScarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> centre Regan King badly for the 
visitors' first try. "He is growing and scoring tries but he's still got things 
to work on in his game and he knows that," said Mallinder. "But he knows where 
the tryline is and he's always dangerous."

Stephen Myler, who comes from a famous Widnes dynasty, was the man of the 
matchafter a confident display at fly-half. The 24-year-old kicked 13 points 
and made a try-saving tackle on the Scarlets' former Australia No8 David Lyons 
when the match was still in the balance.

Asked about his two young converts, Mallinder said: "I don't really want to 
pick those two out because there were some outstanding contributions from 
everyone. We've come up from the first division and know we have a lot of work 
to do as a team but to qualify against a very strong Scarlets side is good. It 
puts us through to a semi-final, which will be a big game, a big atmosphere, 
and this is what a club like this deserves. It's a big club and it should be 
moving places."

Given the weakened teams often fielded by Guinness Premiership clubs, some 
might argue that the EDF is a de facto under-23 tournament already. But after 
Saracens had won 24-22 at Bristol, missing out on a semi-final place because of 
Northampton's try-scoring bonus point, their head coach, Eddie Jones, 
reiterated his call for the event to be run primarily for the benefit of young 
players.

"If the EDF have any money left over during this credit crunch then I think 
they should invest it in an under-23 competition, with perhaps five over-age 
players in the match-day squad," said Jones. "It would be so important not just 
for us but also for England rugby and I'm sure the Welsh clubs would like it 
too. You need regular competitions for these young guys. Perhaps they could be 
played midweek."

Yesterday Harlequins beat Worcester 27-14 at Sixways. Chris Robshaw, Seb 
Stegmann and Tosh Masson scored tries for Quins and Chris Malone kicked two 
conversions and two penalties. The former All Black fly-half Nick Evans, back 
from a knee injury suffered on the opening day of the season, also kicked a 
conversion. Worcester's flankers, Jake Abbott and Pat Sanderson, scored tries 
which were converted by Matthew Jones. The match was a dead rubber because of 
previous results in Group C.
 