
A man with joint British and Australian citizenship could spend a year in jail 
inDubai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/dubai> after posting a link on his 
Facebook page to a US charity raising funds for blankets and socks for refugee 
children in Afghanistan.

Scott Richards, an economic development adviser from Adelaide, was arrested on 
28 July and held for 22 days at Al Muraqqabat police station before being 
charged on Friday under a new law banning “fundraising without permission”.

The post he shared was a link to a campaign by the Zwan Family Charity 
<https://www.gofundme.com/qxf9frx8> to raise funds for new tarpaulins, 
blankets, warm clothes and socks and sleeping bags for children at the Charahi 
Qambar refugee camp on the outskirts of Kabul. More than 100 children froze to 
death at the camp four years ago.

Richards, who grew up in Australia, was living with his wife and two sons in 
Dubai when he fell foul of a strict new law prohibiting the operation of any 
charity not registered in the United Arab Emirates.

The 42-year-old could now be sentenced to a prison term of between two months 
and one year, and a fine of up to 100,000 dirhams (£20,000).

The law, which was created last year, prohibits donations or advertising 
fundraising campaigns without prior written approval from the Islamic affairs 
and charitable activities department in Dubai.

Richards’s mother, Penelope Haberfield, told the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-37114401> that her son had only 
been able to change his clothes once every seven days while detained and had to 
pay for water.


“His wife is under extreme stress,” she said. “She can only take the clothes 
to him once a week. She takes him money so that he can buy water and extra food.

“She’s worried for him, she’s worried for herself because if she runs out of 
money, will she have to leave the country? She’s frightened for her children.”

Radha Stirling from the group Detained in Dubai told the Australian 
broadcaster ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-08-18/adelaide-man-arrested-in-dubai/7764532>: 
“There are constantly expats falling foul of the law [in the United Arab 
Emirates] and also being victims of other people because it’s so easy in the 
UAE for an individual to take out a police complaint against someone.

 “There are so many laws, it’s so different, yet so many expats, but UAE 
doesn’t make any effort to inform expats.

 “In a case like this where it’s so obviously unjust we are hoping for 
diplomatic intervention which the Australian government has done in the past.”.

• This article was amended on 22 August 2016. The name of the refugee camp in 
Kabul is Charahi Qambar, not Chahari Qambar as an earlier version said.

 