
Peter Mandelson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/peter-mandelson> has 
warned Labour’s shadow cabinet to be more honest with the public and spell out 
the scale of cuts that would have to be imposed if the party wins the general 
election in May.

As a poll suggested that Labour has opened up a seven-point lead over the 
Tories, the former business secretary said that George Osborne’s “sharp step to 
the right” in the autumn statement has created an opportunity forLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>.

But Mandelson said that Labour would only be able to exploit the opportunity 
in the final five months before the election if shadow cabinet members followed 
the example ofEd Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> and 
Ed Balls who have made clear that deficit reduction would be one of their main 
objectives in government.

Speaking on the Andrew Marr Show on BBC1, Mandelson said: “There is no point 
just leaving it to the two Eds to make these statements. The shadow cabinet, as 
a whole, have got to play as a team in this. Yes, in the last few weeks Labour 
has scored. It has put that deficit ball [in the] back of the net.

“To keep it there each member of the shadow cabinet has got to be honest with 
the public, they have got to set out what this means for their own departmental 
budgets and demonstrate to the public that they mean it, that they share the 
same sort of discipline that Ed Miliband and Ed Balls have shown.”

The former European commissioner was speaking after an Opinium / Observer poll 
showed a two-point increase in support for Labour to put the party on 36% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/20/labour-takes-seven-point-lead-farage-opinium-poll>
. The Tories remained unchanged on 29% while Ukip fell by three points to 16%. 
The Liberal Democrats were also unchanged on 6%, one point ahead of the Greens 
on 5%.

Mandelson praised Miliband and Balls for a skilful response to the autumn 
statement in which Osborne outlined spending cuts deemed by the Office for 
Budget Responsibility to herald a return to 1930s levels of state spending.

“When people look back at the last few weeks in politics they’ll see it as a 
defining [period]. To be honest I was slightly surprised that the Conservatives 
chose to take such a sharp step to the right. But they created an opportunity 
for the Labour party, which they swiftly took and moved on to the centre ground 
with their own deficit reduction proposals. The Labour party therefore has put 
itself in a very good position for the coming election.”

Mandelson’s remarks show that supporters of Tony Blair believe that Miliband 
and Balls have taken great strides in recent weeks.

Osborne had hoped to set a trap for Labour by outlining painful spending cuts 
in the next parliament.

Miliband responded by saying in one of his main pre-election speeches after 
the autumn statement that the next Labour government would make deficit 
reduction one of its main priorities, forcing it to embark on day-to-day 
departmental spending cuts while protecting the NHS and spending on 
infrastructure. But the Labour leader met the chancellor’s central challenge – 
that he has failed to acknowledge the deficit – by saying that he would cut the 
deficit, though he would do so on a more benign timescale than the coalition 
government.

The former cabinet minister, who made clear during the 2010 Labour leadership 
contest that David Miliband was his preferred candidate, playfully suggested 
that the former foreign secretary may have a future role in British politics.

“David … has a lot to contribute wherever he is,” he said. Winking, he added: 
“Of course I’d like to see him back in British politics.”

Marr said: “You were just winking at me.”

But the Labour leadership suffered a blow with the publication of critical 
remarks from a meeting run by the LabourList website. Nancy Platts, the party’s 
candidate in Brighton Kemptown and Peacehaven, told the meeting at the House of 
Commons on Monday that she was furious over a leaked internal Labour document 
which appeared to suggest that candidates should discuss other areas of policy 
if voters mention immigration. Platts told the meeting, in remarksreported in 
the Sunday Times 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/Politics/article1498743.ece>: “When I 
heard that come out … it made me want to discuss it even more. Because we 
shouldn’t have any subjects that we say to people in our communities ‘are not 
up for discussion’.”
 