
What does the European Central Bank’s own research on incomes and younger 
generations say?
During the great recession, the young [aged 16-34] lost about 5% of household 
income in real terms. That was of course substantial and had a big impact on 
the personal plans of many young people. But the magnitude was not so different 
from the losses suffered by other generations, although of course the young do 
not have the same assets and savings to fall back on in tough economic times. 
Even more worrying was the sharp increase in youth unemployment inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

European job market is rigged against younger workers, says Draghi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/11/european-job-market-is-rigged-against-younger-workers-says-draghi>
Are you worried about the position of young adults in Europe and is this an 
increasingly urgent issue?
Youth unemployment is a tragedy and prevents people from playing a full and 
meaningful part in society. If every second young person is out of work – as is 
still the case in some countries in Europe – it seriously harms the economy, 
because people willing to work cannot work and skills are not developed. And it 
threatens social harmony.Unemployment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/unemployment> can lead in the long run to 
increased social problems and ill health.

Are you worried about future consumption levels of young adults, as this group 
– who have been especially “scarred” by the global recession – move into middle 
age?
Consumption within a society is determined partly by wealth distribution, but 
even more important is that the young generation can participate in the labour 
market in a fair way. In many countries the labour market is set up to protect 
older “insiders” – people with permanent, high-paid contracts and shielded by 
strong labour laws. The side-effect is that young people are stuck with 
lower-paid, temporary contracts and get fired first in crisis times. That also 
means that employers are reluctant to invest in young people, so the incomes of 
this generation stay lower over their lifetime.

What might be the forces at work here – demographics, changing workplaces, 
fiscal and monetary policy – that mean young adults appear to be receiving 
little of the rewards from two-and-a-half decades of average economic growth?
Nobody stays young forever. The crucial question is whether a person can 
participate fully in the economy over his or her lifetime – get a good 
education, find a job, buy a home for the family. Income and wealth follow. 
What makes me worry is that increasing inequality might prevent people from 
doing that. This is an issue all our societies need to look at carefully. The 
ECB’s role in that is to maintain price stability, which prevents unfair 
redistribution. For example, our research shows that in the euro area too low 
inflation results in redistribution from younger, more indebted households to 
older households that are typically net creditors.

What matters is that young people, as they move through life, have the 
opportunities to build up wealth, too

Current retirees are wealthier than ever. What opportunities does this bring 
to Europe?
In an ageing society, the fact that retirees are getting wealthier isn’t 
necessarily abnormal – older people need to accumulate more wealth to finance 
living longer. As they spend their wealth during retirement, it passes back to 
the younger generations. So wealth creation isn’t a zero-sum game. What matters 
is that young people, as they move through life, have the opportunities to 
build up wealth, too.

Do you think younger adults today will have as good a standard of living as 
pensioners today when they retire?
That’s our common choice. Our standard of living depends on the strength of 
our economy. We need a more open, flexible, innovative and business-friendly 
society. Much focus is put on the central bank to raise growth, and it can 
contribute through price stability and a stable financial system. But in the 
long run real growth is driven by what the economy can produce. That is much 
more about ideas, technology, flexibility, motivation, skills. It is up to 
elected governments to set a growth-friendly environment.

You often talk about the need for structural reform in employment. What do you 
mean by this?
There are lots of forms this can take. Just to give one example, the kurzarbeit
scheme in Germany allowed employers to adjust working time during the crisis 
without firing people. But there’s no one-size-fits-all model. Every society 
has its challenges and preferences. The idea generally is to create a fair and 
flexible labour market where companies do not fear taking on staff when they 
need them and specific groups of people are not structurally disadvantaged at 
times when employers need to cut wage bills.

What can central banks and governments do to ease or resolve these issues?
Everyone has a vital interest in a prospering economy. So bringing down high 
levels of youth unemployment is a priority for everyone. As I said, the best 
contribution central banks can make here is to live up to their mandates. We 
can only encourage elected governments to take the necessary steps to create 
jobs and make their societies fairer. Over the longer term, by far the most 
important thing for young people is investing in education and skills. Skills 
are a person’s passport through life, and in a fast-changing digital economy, 
the premium paid for skills is only likely to rise. Equipping people for 
tomorrow’s world is the best way to raise incomes and reduce inequality.
 