
Blink and you missed last week’s turmoil on the financial markets. On 
Wednesday,billions were wiped off share prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/20/ftse-100-heads-closer-to-bear-market-amid-sharp-global-falls>
; on Thursday and Friday they werewiped back on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/22/world-stock-markets-bounce-back-nikkei-ecb-draghi>
. The FTSE 100 index ended the week higher than it started. Just a bout of new 
year jitters? Can investors now settle back and enjoy a period of calm?

Probably not. It is easy to laugh, or groan, at markets’ ability to swing from 
gloom to optimism, but volatility tends not to appear out of thin air. Take a 
step back from this week’s excitement and remember that London’s blue-chip 
index has lost about 1200 points since its closing peak of7104 in April last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/apr/27/ftse-100-hits-new-peak-on-greek-hopes-and-despite-election-uncertainty>
. The factors driving that 17% decline are unlikely to disappear quickly. Last 
week’s brief panic suggests investors fear it wouldn’t take much to intensify 
the pressure.

The first ingredient is the oil price. In theory, low prices – transferring 
wealth from oil exporting countries to oil importers – are good for global 
growth because consuming economies tend to spend their gains more readily. But 
the process is neither mechanical nor instantaneous.

The immediate effect of lower oil prices is cuts in investments by oil 
companies. Some $400bn (£280bn) of projects are reckoned to have been cancelled 
or delayed in the past year. Further down the economic chain, airlines can 
afford to delay investment in more efficient planes when fuel is cheap. That 
all represents activity removed from the global economy. Corporate earnings, 
taken as a whole, could fall before cheap oil relubricates the engine.

Second, there is China, where 2015 saw the slowest rate of economic growth for 
a quarter of a century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/china-economy-grows-at-slowest-pace-in-25-years-latest-gdp-figures-show>
. A rate of 6.9% (if one trusts the official data) still looks slick when 
viewed from the west; what’s more, it’s what the Chinese authorities had 
modelled as they attempted to encourage consumption to replace an unsustainable 
level of spending on infrastructure.

But how is that Chinese growth being generated? If the explanation is merely 
larger helpings of debt – in an economy assumed to be riddled with bad loans 
and loss-making steel makers, shipbuilders and other state-backed enterprises – 
that is not sustainable either. In the meantime, confidence has been dented in 
Beijing’s ability to keep all the balls in the air. The handling of the upsets 
in China’s own stock market has veered from naive to farcical.

A third factor – less obvious, but critical to big investors’ mood – may be 
the US Federal Reserve’s quarter-point increase in interest rates at the end of 
last year. Central banks – especially the Fed – were the handmaidens to the 
post-2009 recovery in stock markets as their quantitative easing and cheap 
money forced down bond yields and drove investors into riskier investments. A 
first increase in US rates since 2006 was meant to signal the moment when theUS 
economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy>, at least, was strong 
enough to leave the hospital ward.

The problem is that the rest of the world may not be. There may be $1 trillion 
of dollar-denominated loans inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, 
for example. That limits China’s ability to devalue the yuan – but a 
devaluation may yet be seen in Beijing as the lesser evil, if growth slows 
further. A serious devaluation, as opposed to the baby steps taken so far, 
would re-set the terms of global trade, probably with grim consequences in the 
rest of Asia.

There are, of course, many reasons to think calamity will not happen. The 
International Monetary Fund cut its global growth forecasts this week but still 
expects 2016 to be stronger than 2015. The Fed could ease pressure caused by a 
stronger dollar by delaying further rate rises; already Mario Draghi at the 
European Central Bank is dropping hints that he could step up quantitative 
easing in the eurozone. Cheaper oil should, eventually, raise spirits among the 
winners. The muddle-through thesis, then, is definitely alive.

But the alternative – a serious global slowdown – no longer looks such an 
outside bet. Expect more wild days for share prices.

Shell’s white elephant?

Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> workers in Aberdeen will be 
watching events in the Hague this coming Wednesday as closely as anyone.

They will be hoping that some miracle occurs so that Dutch and other 
international investors in Shell suddenly swing against the £35bn merger with 
rival BG that is coming up for a final vote.

Ben van Beurden, the Shell chief executive, will almost certainly win the day 
and that could result in many Scottish oil workers being sacrificed in a blitz 
of job cuts needed to justify the tie-up.

Europe’s biggest oil company only needs 51% of the votes and, while the City 
has generally grumbled about it, only one well-known shareholder, Standard 
Life, has pledged to vote “no”.

The agreed takeover was hatched when the price of Brent blend was sailing 
along at over $60. Now that it is down to half that level, the deal does not 
really make sense.

Shell argues the cost of crude will bounce back soon enough. Even if that is 
not the case, then a package of measures to cut combined costs will ensure that 
the deal is “value-enhancing”, as the corporates like to say.

Shell has already slashed 500 jobs in the North Sea, an area that is the 
highest-cost oil province in the world and will be an easy target for further 
savings. The oil giant has promised to cut 10,000 jobs this year worldwide and 
sell off £20bn of assets from a combined entity.

Most investors in Shell have decided to believe Van Beurden. Why? Few want a 
public row with such an illustrious name as Shell and some will have an 
investment banking arm making a fortune out of the fees for arranging this 
buyout. They may also own BG shares and therefore the deal balances out for 
them.

But a lot of it is just inertia. It is the corporate equivalent of a white 
elephant, like the HS2 rail line or Hinkley Point power station. Who wants to 
create a fuss, properly crunch the numbers and stand in its way?

Sterling slide


While everyone watches the equity markets, the pound is quietly falling out of 
bed.Sterling <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sterling> has dropped 7% in 
trade-weighted terms in just two months. That’s a fall only surpassed once 
since the monetary policy committee took control of UK interest rates in 1997, 
say economists at investment bank UBS. So what is going on? The economic 
signals, from weak retail sales to falling factory output, point to an economic 
slowdown. But nothing dramatic enough to justify such a sell-off in the pound.

The Bank of England has hinted at interest rates staying on hold for the time 
being, just as its US counterpart starts to raise borrowing costs. But again, 
this only goes part way to explaining sterling’s slide. It leaves one obvious 
culprit: Britain’s looming EU referendum. With polls tight, expect more 
pressure on the pound as the Brexit vote approaches. It’s good news for 
embattled exporters, but not so nice for holidaymakers.
 