
Next year promises a return to low growth, rising inflation and painful 
decisions about what to buy in the weekly shop as disposable incomes are 
squeezed. Not since 2012 will the British have felt the strictures that come 
with a faltering economy – should the forecasts come to pass.

In previous decades the public might reasonably have asked the government how 
it planned to rectify the situation. Not now. And not since 2010, when George 
Osborne effectively handed over the job of managing the economy and keeping 
growth healthy to theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>.

So it should come as no surprise to Mark Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney>, the Bank’s governor, that 
he faces some stiff questions about the success of his policies and what he 
plans to do next.

On Tuesday, members of the Lords economic affairs committee will be the latest 
to demand that he explain when the extraordinary measures adopted at the time 
of the 2008 financial crash – and since – will be scaled back and normal 
service resumed. Eight years after the City’s finest were put back on their 
feet, and three years into a solid recovery, the economy must be able to thrive 
without Threadneedle Street’s helping hand.

Until the past few weeks, any criticism of the Bank’s formula for recovery – 
printing vast amounts of electronic money and cutting interest rates to a 
record low – was met with the united backing of ministers, opposition parties 
and all but a handful of Tory backbenchers.

Everyone in government knows the Bank’s cut in the base rate to 0.5% in the 
aftermath of the crash and injection of £375bn into the financial system to 
reduce borrowing costs is what allowed Osborne to apply a tourniquet to public 
spending. Without access to artificially low mortgage and loan rates from high 
street banks, middle-income families would almost certainly have revolted 
against austerity.

The Brexit vote and the prospect of economic hardship next year have wrecked 
that consensus. Tories are concerned that a public backlash could wreck any 
prospect of a coherent plan for leaving the EU (a plan that remains as devoid 
of structure as the blank canvases offered up as art in the 1960s by the 
American Robert Rauschenberg). If they needed a sign of the public’s rumbling 
unease, the Witney byelection, where the Tory majority was cut by four-fifths, 
offered a constellation of warning lights.

Michael Gove, who compared Carney to an unimpeachable, god-like Chinese 
emperor from the Ming dynasty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/21/mark-carney-michael-gove-criticism-thought-crime-bank-england>
, joined a list of senior Tory politicians questioning the Bank’s elevated 
status. The list includes former foreign secretary William Hague, Brexit 
ministers David Davis and Liam Fox and, famously in her first conference speech 
as leader, Theresa May.

In many ways the Bank of England presents an easy target after more than five 
years of missed forecasts for inflation, wages and interest rates. Each year 
since the financial crash, the Bank has predicted that wages are about to 
rocket, pushing inflation higher and bringing forward the need for higher 
interest rates. Each year, there have been reasons to downgrade all three.

Carney followed this saga with dire warnings in the summer of a “technical 
recession” following a vote to quit the EU. He made good on his warnings after 
the Leavers secured their victory by tearing up the Bank’s forecasts yet again, 
pushing interest rates down to 0.25%, and injecting another £60bn to the total 
stimulus package.

Hague was especially scathing about Carney’s tactics in an article for the 
Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/17/central-bankers-have-collectively-lost-the-plot-they-must-raise/>
, emphasising that pension funds were being crushed by low interest rates. 
Meanwhile, he argued, the stimulus programme had increased inequality by 
pushing up property and stock market prices, which benefited the better off.

Anyone in Threadneedle Street could be forgiven for choking on the irony of a 
senior politician from the last government standing up for the young and the 
poor.

It’s true that on the official measures, people in the bottom 10% income group 
were protected from the worst of the financial crash by index-linked benefits. 
Yet this statistic ignores the machete ministers wielded as they cut services 
relied on by the poorest.

More importantly in terms of the Bank of England’s broader remit to maintain 
growth and low unemployment along with low inflation, Osborne’s restrictions on 
public investment limited the impact of the state in pushing growth above its 
long-term trend for more than a year before it petered out.

Carney has made plain his opposition to the monetary policy committee being 
the only institution to care whether the economy flourishes. Ministers’ only 
objective is to keep taxes low. The consequences are something for the Bank to 
deal with.

In a post-referendum period, when the Bank is obviously finding it hard to do 
much more than keep the economy from slipping backwards, should the government 
allow its supporters to turn their fire on the Bank – or would a more honest 
approach be to conclude that austerity was misguided and needs to be reversed?

The public finances are not as strong as Philip Hammond would like ahead of 
his first budget. Still, he would be doing us all, and the Bank, a favour if he 
tore up Osborne’s penny-pinching legacy and joined team Carney.
 