
Alan Plater <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater>, who has died of 
cancer, was a notably versatile writer. Frequently employed on police series, 
his career spanned pioneering episodes of Z Cars and Softly Softly to an 
episode of ITV's Lewis screened in the final months of his life.

This was appropriate because, as well as being one of British TV's key 
dramatists, he also operated for five decades as a sort of drama cop.

As president of the Writers' Guild and a willing media pundit, Plater policed 
the schedules and statements of broadcasting executives, as well as the 
opportunities and conditions for fellow scriptwriters.

He kept the tone and behaviour of the industry higher than it might otherwise 
have been. Plater refused to accept that multi-channel television and the 
popularity of Simon Cowell's dancing dogs made it necessary to abandon the 
values of the days in which he made his name - when television was inventing 
itself and strands such as The Wednesday Play were a public event.

Z Cars was credited with introducing contemporary speech and themes to TV 
drama, and topicality was one part of Plater's talent. But his favourite 
register as a writer was a tough-edged nostalgia, reflecting his lifelong 
obsession with traditional jazz.

Many TV dramas – including The Last of the Blonde Bombshells, starring Judi 
Dench – were set in the past or had protagonists who spiritually belonged 
there, such as the hero of The Beiderbecke Affair and The Beiderbecke Tapes, 
his very successful comedy crime romps for Yorkshire TV.

He wrote as he spoke: bright, funny, kind, socialist, proudly northern. 
Yorkshire and Durham were his home counties as a writer – he had been born in 
Jarrow but grew up in Hull – and he created scripts for stage and screen about 
many of their major industries: coal mining, Philip Larkin, Geoffrey Boycott.

In common with other northern writers of his generation – Jack Rosenthal and 
Alan Bennett – Plater had an ear for the musicality, spikiness and euphemism of 
talk in the upper regions of England.

His TV series Trinity Tales (1975) was a brilliant northern modernisation of 
The Canterbury Tales, which clearly influenced later present-day adaptations of 
Chaucer and Shakespeare on television.

Structurally, though, his writing was notable for the variety of territory it 
covered: from sitcoms (Oh No, It's Selwyn Froggitt!), through adaptations of 
novels – classic (Fortunes of War) and modern (A Very British Coup) – to stage 
plays. Peggy for You, a bio-drama about his eccentric agent Margaret Ramsay, 
gave Maureen Lipman a West End hit.

In an industry vulnerable to fashion, he remained in demand until the very 
end, with various outstanding commitments which, like the dedicated freelance 
professional he had always been, he determined to try to meet despite medical 
inconvenience. Joe Maddison's War, a second world war drama based on his 
grandfather's life, will be screened later this year.

In common with much of his work, it can be expected to look with wry and 
intelligent nostalgia at the past. Plater's fear would have been that we will 
soon stare with historical incredulity at the kind of TV drama-writing career 
he was able to have.
 