
Hometown: New York.

The lineup: Matteah Baim (vocals, instruments).

The background: Matteah Baim is our guest editor Antony Hegarty's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/series/antony-and-the-johnsons-takeover>
 penultimate New Band Of The Day choice for the week, and his fourth to make 
our brains hurt as we struggle to get to grips with exactly what she is and 
what she does. She has been one half, with CocoRosie's Sierra Casady, of a duo 
called Metallic Falcons whose stunning 2006 album Desert Doughnuts was 
described as everything from soft metal to prog folk but which really veered 
more between freak folk and noir atmospherica. And her two subsequent solo 
albums – 2007's Death Of The Sun and 2009's Laughing Boy – offered a dark take 
on American roots music, to the extent that there's a version on the former of 
Michael Row The Boat Ashore that sounds like a nightmare you might have of an 
old woman sitting on a rocking chair singing you a lullaby who turns out to be 
Norman Bates's mum in Psycho.

Call us fanciful if you like, but as soon as we heard Baim's unsettlingly 
calm, contemplative music, we immediately thought of it as not so much quiet as 
lacking-in-noise. As with yesterday's new artist, Daniel Lopatin, alias 
Oneohtrix Point Never, who has a history of playing in hardcore bands, there is 
a sense with Matteah of someone who would be making loud rock'n'roll, but she 
chooses to express whatever feelings she might have that would inform such 
aggressive music in a gentle way. This is different from a musician going into 
a studio with the direct purpose of making a soft record. It is about an 
absence that speaks – literally – volume(s). "New age grunge," someone called 
Matteah's most recent album, taking the words right out of our mouth.

To confirm our suspicions, we called Matteah up at home in New York to discuss 
noise and silence, and how her music – featuring low sonic rumbles and abstract 
effects, her plaintive vocals and guests such as Devendra Banhart – was 
suggestive either of residual pain after a squall of emotion, or of impending 
thunder. The balm before and after the storm. Was her solo work a response to 
or retreat from the "noise" she created with Metallic Falcons? Was it a 
"statement" as such? "My work after the Falcons has been a progression more 
than a response," she told us. "I continued on from that record to the next. 
Silence has a colour, too. It has as much colour as a sound does. The nature of 
a sound piled on another sound or a silence is inherently altered by the 
combination."

She explained that her music career began when she bought a guitar from a pawn 
shop in Milwaukee as a teen. She learned how to play classical guitar from a 
book at her local library. She went to art school, "painted a lot – much of it 
about music and sound" – and landed in NYC, where "suddenly and for no apparent 
reason people began to ask me to perform with them on large and small stages".

And now here she is, with her dark and dolorous music, which has been called 
many things. We wondered – plucking several descriptions out of thin air 
charged with electric ions – whether we should proceed by labelling it folk 
noir, avant-acoustica, ballad oscuro, Nico in trip-hop hell, or susurrating 
21st century shadowplay? "Susurrating 21st century shadow play!?" she replied 
instantly. "That is incredible. Let's go with that one."

The buzz: "Matteah Baim's sound world is monumental" – Mojo 
<http://www.mojo4music.com/blog/.>

The truth: For "Baim" read "balm"

Most likely to: Make Milwaukee famous

Least likely to: Become an effigy in a motel

What to buy: You can sample Death Of The Sun and The Laughing Boy on Spotify

File next to: CocoRosie, Metallic Falcons, Joanna Newsom, Devendra Banhart

Links: www.myspace.com/matteahbaim <http://www.myspace.com/matteahbaim>

Friday's new band: Voluptuous Horror of Karen Black.
 