
Seventeen months without a win, virtually eliminated from the European 
Championship after only three qualifiers, and seven long games without a goal: 
you could say Northern Ireland's manager Sammy McIlroy is up against it.

The defeat here in the Republican Stadium on Saturday marked a new low point 
in the troubled run. The manager can point to a couple of missed first-half 
chances from his strikers David Healy and James Quinn, but it is still hard to 
explain away defeat at the hands of an extremely limited Armenian side who have 
managed only one other victory in 22 competitive games, and that against 
Andorra.

Inevitably McIlroy's own future is coming under growing scrutiny and the 
manager himself raised the possibility after last month's friendly defeat at 
the hands of Finland that he might not be around much longer if results did not 
improve. Certainly he needs a break to end the process of decline and, most 
significantly, alleviate the chronic inability to hit the back of the net.

"It's one of those where it's going to hit someone's ear or something and go 
in," said Aaron Hughes, only 23 and already a senior member of the squad. "It's 
not a problem, in the sense that we know we have got the players in the team 
who can score goals for us and I am sure it is going to change soon.

"We played some decent football on a difficult pitch and created some good 
chances. Their keeper pulled off some magnificent saves and we hit the bar. 
It's things like that that make the difference and then we just fell to a 
sucker punch."

Unfortunately with the Group Six heavyweights Greece and Spain next up, things 
are likely to get worse before they get much better, particularly because 
McIlroy has been forced to fast-track some of the younger members of his squad 
after the decision of the old heads Neil Lennon, Kevin Horlock and Jim Magilton 
to hang up their international boots.

Armenia's victory was secured by the game's outstanding player, Artur 
Petrosyan, four minutes from time and the sight of McIlroy's players sinking to 
their knees after the midfielder's run and finish spoke volumes about the 
current state of theNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> team. Simply they are 
down and out.

 Man of the match: Artur Petrosyan (Armenia) 

 Armenia (5-3-2):  Berezovski (Dynamo Moscow);  Melikyan (Metalurg),  Dokhoyan 
(Krylya Samara), Hovsepyan (Zenit St Petersburg),  Vardanyan (Young Boys Berne),
 Bilibio (Pyunik Yerevan);  Sargsyan (Torpedo Moscow),  Petrosyan (Young Boys 
Berne; Artur Mkrtchyan , Pyunik Yerevan, 89),  Voskanyan (Dhigenis Morphou;  
Partsikyan , Pyunik Yerevan, 88);  Artavaza Karamyan (Panachaiki;  Aghvan 
Mkrtchyan , Pyunik Yerevan, 88),  Arman Karamyan  (Panachaiki). 

 Northern Ireland (4-4-2):  Taylor (Fulham);  Hughes (Newcastle),  Craigan 
(Partick Thistle), Williams (Stoke),  McCann (Cheltenham);  Gillespie 
(Blackburn), Lomas (West Ham),  Johnson (Birmingham),  McVeigh (Norwich);  Healy
 (Preston), Quinn (Willem II) ( Elliott , Hull, 71). 

 Referee: R Beck (Liechtenstein).
 