 American Beauty, the first film by British director Sam Mendes, won 14 
nominations for the British Academy film awards yesterday, to add to the eight 
Oscar nominations it was given three weeks ago.
Mendes, a London theatre director who has made the transition to Hollywood 
golden boy, is just short of last year's record 16 nominations for Shakespeare 
in Love, but his film is in contention for best film, best director and best 
cinematography, as well as acting, design and music awards.

There was consolation for the wounded pride of director Neil Jordan and his 
team on The End of the Affair. His adaptation of Graham Greene's novel has 10 
Bafta nominations, after being hotly tipped for but then left off the Oscar 
list.

Whatever the Bafta judges' verdicts, the awards will be dominated this year by 
British directors and actors: only one of the five nominations for film of 1999 
is American, the science fiction The Sixth Sense.

Anthony Minghella's film of Patricia Highsmith's thriller, The Talented Mr 
Ripley, has four nominations, and the three British directors have also been 
nominated for the David Lean director award.

The fourth British contender for best film title is the surprise British box 
office hit East is East, a comparatively low budget comedy .

Ralph Fiennes is nominated for best actor in The End of the Affair, against 
Jim Broadbent, who played WS Gilbert in Mike Leigh's Topsy-Turvy, and Om Puri 
for East is East. American actors Kevin Spacey, inAmerican Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-beauty>, and Russell Crowe, in The 
Insider, have also been nominated.

The same films dominate the best actress list: Linda Bassett for East is East; 
Julianne Moore for The End of the Affair; Annette Bening for American Beauty; 
and Emily Watson for Angela's Ashes - which had been eagerly anticipated but 
was not well received by the critics, and has done poorly in both Oscar and 
Bafta nominations.

Actor Rhys Ifans continues the inexorable rise to stardom based on his 
revolting underpants in Notting Hill, which have won him a best supporting 
actor nomination. He is in competition with Wes Bentley, for American Beauty, 
Michael Caine, for Cider House Rules, Jude Law, for the Talented Mr Ripley, and 
Timothy Spall, for Topsy-Turvy.

Nominees for most promising newcomer in a British film are Justin Kerrigan, 
writer and director of Human Traffic, Ayub Khan Bin, writer of East is East, 
Kirk Jones, writer and director of Waking Ned, and Lynne Ramsay, writer and 
director of Ratcatcher.

The awards will be presented at the Odeon cinema in Leicester Square, London, 
on April 9, and covered live on Sky TV, co-sponsors of the awards with Orange. 
However Bafta said there would also be a later broadcast on ITV.

Audiences will have the last word on one award, and can vote for their choice 
from the top 10 box office hits - which range from A Bug's Life to The Spy Who 
Shagged Me - through coupons in newspapers and in the Radio Times, in person at 
Blockbuster video and Orange shops, or online throughwww.orange.co.uk.  
<http://www.orange.co.uk.>

 Best film 

American Beauty, East is East, The End of the Affair, The Sixth Sense, The 
Talented Mr Ripley

 Best direction 

All About My Mother (Pedro Almodovar), American Beauty (Sam Mendes), The End 
of the Affair (Neil Jordan), The Sixth Sense (M Night Shyamalan), The Talented 
Mr Ripley (Anthony Minghella)

 Best British film 

East is East, Notting Hill, Onegin, Ratcatcher, Topsy-Turvey, Wonderland 

 Best actress 

Linda Bassett (East is East), Annette Bening (American Beauty), Julianne Moore 
(The End of the Affair), Emily Watson (Angela's Ashes)

 Best actor 

Jim Broadbent (Topsy-Turvy), Russell Crowe (The Insider), Ralph Fiennes (The 
End of the Affair), Om Puri (East is East), Kevin Spacey (American Beauty)

 Best supporting actress 

Thora Birch (American Beauty), Cate Blanchett (The Talented Mr Ripley), 
Cameron Diaz (Being John Malkovitch), Maggie Smith (Tea With Mussolini), Mena 
Suvari (American Beauty)

 Best supporting actor 

Wes Bentley (American Beauty), Michael Caine (Cider House Rules), Rhys Ifans 
(Notting Hill), Jude Law (The Talented Mr Ripley), Timothy Spall (Topsy-Turvy)
 