
As weeks go, three straight wins, a flurry of 12 goals and the confidence 
booster of enjoying lifetop of their Champions League group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/basel-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 and the Premier League (even if only temporarily), brings the sort of cheer 
Arsène Wenger must wish he could bottle. In recent seasons Arsenal have had 
their encouraging moments, but sustaining them into the sharp end of the season 
has been the tougher trick to pull off. The challenge to maintain this rich 
form is on.

Watford and Stefano Okaka rally to hold off Everton and Romelu Lukaku
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/watford-everton-premier-league-match-report>
Arsenal went a goal behind but surged up a gear to see off Stoke with goals 
from Theo Walcott, Mesut Özil and Alex Iwobi. While conscious Chelsea can 
leapfrog them before the weekend is out, it is worth noting thatArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have made a habit of playing 
with inhibitions when the chance to enjoy the summit has presented itself. This 
time, they relished it. “We are in the fight,” Wenger said.

He was pleased to point out a game like this epitomised one of the areas of 
improvement he wanted from his team. “I felt last year at home we did very well 
against the top five and dropped points against the teams in mid-table, between 
positions 5-12. That’s our challenge, to continue to do well in this type of 
game.”

Stoke played their part in a competitive tussle. An ambitious start culminated 
in two chances in the first five minutes, with Marc Muniesa walloping a 
dangerous long-range volley and a swift break requiring some clever defending 
to send Xherdan Shaqiri away from a clear sight of goal.

Erik Pieters and Joe Allen shanked shooting opportunities and it was clear the 
home defence were on the back foot.

Arsenal’s fortunes took a turn for the worse with two blows in quick 
succession: first an injury to Shkodran Mustafi, who will be out for three 
weeks with a hamstring problem. Then Stoke were awarded a penalty. It was a 
debatable enough decision to leave Wenger seething at the fourth official. 
Granit Xhaka tangled with Allen as they contested a 50-50 ball and Xhaka caught 
Allen with a brush of an elbow.

“No foul,” Wenger said. “Joe spilled blood as a consequence of the coming 
together,” Mark Hughes responded.

Charlie Adam merely got on with the task and, on his 31st birthday, steered 
calmly and accurately past Petr Cech.

Arsenal were not playing with the kind of verve they had been enjoying 
recently and needed to dig some inspiration from somewhere. It came from a move 
built on speed – the determination of Alexis Sánchez to instigate a move, quick 
thought to pick a brilliant pass, the enterprise of Héctor Bellerín to zip in a 
cross and the sharpness of Walcott to nip ahead of his marker to turn in the 
ball at Lee Grant’s near post.

It was Walcott’s 100th goal in his club career and a 10th this season, which 
triggers a gift from Mrs Walcott of a new coffee machine. Proof that even though
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> footballers 
would appear to want for nothing there is still, reassuringly, something on 
their Christmas lists.

It did not take long for Arsenal to edge in front after the restart. Alex 
Oxlade-Chamberlain’s beautifully crafted pass found Özil, who had drifted past 
Stoke’s rearguard. The German arced a deft header over Grant.

Hughes was disappointed to see a blip in his team’s defensive organisation as 
they were readjusting, with Pieters back on the pitch after receiving treatment 
just as Özil made his decisive run.

Stoke did summon a second wind. They had opportunities to test Cech but Marko 
Arnautovic and Mame Biram Diouf were imprecise with their finishing. As time 
ticked down Hughes decided to bring on Peter Crouch to ask different questions 
of Arsenal’s defence. He almost scored with his first touch – a downward header 
that required an important reflex save from Cech.

As it turned out, it was an Arsenal substitute who made a key impact. With the 
game still in the balance, Iwobi cantered into the box after Sánchez had been 
cluttered on the edge and carefully picked his spot.

Hughes tried to be realistic. “I’ve brought teams here in the past and 
struggled to get out of our own half. There are few times we have created as 
many chances as we did today,” he said. “We have big away games coming up 
against Chelsea and Liverpool, so we take away the positives.”

Wenger reflected on a perfect week, and the challenge to carry on their good 
work. Arsenal turn their attention to games at Goodison Park and the Etihad 
Stadium in positive spirits. “I believe we have improved,” Wenger said. “Let’s 
keep it in the longer term. We have created confidence, we are ambitious, we 
have to keep the urgency level very high.”
 