
Simon is a university lecturer in his mid-fifties, not the stereotypical 
client of a debt advice agency. He is not unemployed, he is not poor and he has 
not been the victim of a backstreet loan shark. But his story is typical of the 
new type of client seeking advice from debt agencies. Simon (not his real name) 
is struggling to clear credit card and personal loan debts of more than £50,000 
which, with hindsight, were a trap waiting to spring.

'I had been a freelance lecturer at the university, but it was on a permanent 
basis and the courses I ran were ones for which my skills were needed. The 
policy was not to put people on contract. Because I wasn't on contract, I 
attracted a much higher salary than colleagues who were on contract.

'Last year, after a six-week holiday in the United States, I came back to find 
the policy had been reversed and I had been put on contract. When I got my 
first salary, it was approximately half what I had been earning.

'I realised that because of my credit card obligations, and store cards - I 
also had a loan - I simply would not have enough money to make ends meet. Like 
a lot of people in these circumstances, no matter how intelligent or able you 
may be, you panic.

'I exhausted my savings and sold items of jewellery to keep up payments, all 
the while pressuring my head of school to increase my hours of work.'

A further blow was that he was unable to use the payment protection insurance 
on his cards because he was not unemployed.

'Just before Christmas, after six months of really terrible desperation in 
trying to maintain payments, I realised the game was up and I would have to 
write to the credit card companies.'

Simon contacted the National Debtline, a telephone counselling service, and 
eventually found his way to the Consumer Credit Counselling Service, the debt 
advice service that operates by arranging to collect money from debtors and 
distribute negotiated monthly payments to creditors.

Simon is paying £600 a month to his creditors. He owed £52,000 at one point, 
and has reduced that to £49,000. At his present rate of repayment it will take 
nearly seven years to clear his debts.

He had a personal loan of £20,000 in addition to an American Express card and 
credit cards with American banks MBNA and People's Bank. He also had cards from 
Bank of Scotland and Abbey National. He had store cards with Marks & Spencer, 
Allders and Harrods.

Several of his cards were taken out in the past three years and Simon says he 
was never refused a card. He regularly received unsolicited increases in his 
credit limits. The People's Bank card, a gold card, started at £3,000 and went 
up to £5,500, while MBNA gave him a credit limit of £5,000 on a platinum card, 
rising to £7,000. His Abbey National card started at £2,500 and ended up at 
£3,000, and his Bank of Scotland card started at £2,500, rising to £3,500.

Card companies often claim that it is difficult to run up multiple debts 
without being dishonest about your circumstances, but Simon is adamant that 
this was not so in his case. 'I lied about nothing and I didn't embroider 
anything. I had no problems getting the credit.' He believes it was his 
standing as a professional, and his income, that beguiled the card companies.

Before he was put on to a contract last year he was earning more than £30,000. 
This has been cut to £16,000 and he makes ends meet now by doing part-time work 
at weekends. He used his cards, he says, for pleasure. 'I had a six-week trip 
to the US and went there and back on the QEII and stayed at the Waldorf.

'When you look at it baldly, you owe £50,000, but when you get your statement 
that says pay "this much" and you pay the minimum or a few pounds more, you 
don't think about the total debt.'

Simon says he has learnt his lesson and will never have another credit card. 
He says the American credit card companies were less than sympathetic when he 
owned up to his problems. Others, such as M&S, have been 'very helpful'. But, 
overall, his experience of debt plunged him into a 'nightmare world', and he 
has changed his telephone number to escape calls from debt collection agencies.

He also believes it was too easy to get into debt. 'I think they make it too 
easy for people like myself in professions earning good salaries, to get that 
credit.'
 