
Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> has rejected 
David Cameron's proposal to link further devolution to the Scottish parliament 
to a ban on MPs from north of the border voting on English-only matters at 
Westminster as a "back-of-the-envelope, fag-packet" calculation.

As Alistair Darling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling> 
warned that the prime minister was in danger of breaking his solemn vow to the 
Scottish people, the Labour leader suggested he was open to the more modest 
idea of giving English MPs greater scrutiny of legislation south of the border.

Miliband also indicated that the prime minister gave him no indication in 
their discussions during the Scottish referendum that he would table plans to 
limit the voting rights of Scottish MPs. Their discussions led to a "vow" in 
last Tuesday's Daily Record in which the leaders of the UK's three main 
political parties agreed to "deliver change for Scotland".

The row over the constitutional future of Scottish MPs threatened to 
overshadow the opening of theLabour conference in Manchester, which is meant to 
focus on the party's plans to help low-paid workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/20/miliband-pledges-rise-poorest-workers-labour-uk>
.

Alex Salmond, the outgoing Scottish first minister, accused the prime minister 
of tricking the voters of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/21/alex-salmond-uk-party-leaders-tricking-scotland>
 by reneging on his commitment delivered during the referendum campaign amid 
fears that the pro-UK side would lose. Darling warned that anyone who reneged 
on the deal would pay a "very heavy price for years to come".

But the prime minister, who said on Friday morning that further powers to the 
Scottish parliament must be introduced in tandem with blocking Scottish MPs 
from voting on English-only matters, intensified the pressure onLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> to support his plan.

Cameron, who will discuss his plans to agree the changes by the time of next 
year's general election with rightwing critics at Chequers, the prime 
minister's country house, on Monday, warned that if Miliband blocked his 
proposal the Labour leader would have to "explain to the people of the rest of 
the UK why they shouldn't have the same powers as we are rightly devolving to 
the people of Scotland".

Miliband insisted that such major constitutional changes should be introduced 
with care as he reiterated his call for a constitutional convention to consider 
the matter next autumn. He suggested he would limit the changes to giving 
English MPs greater scrutiny of legislation relating solely to England. Labour 
would struggle to govern without the support of its 41 Scottish MPs.

The Labour leader told the Andrew Marr Show on BBC1: "I am open to the idea of 
greater scrutiny of legislation by English MPs. But we can't do it in a 
back-of-the-envelope, fag-packet way.

"We have spent two years trying to keep our country together. Let's have a 
proper constitutional convention. Let's look at these issues. But let's not 
drive our country apart becauseDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> thinks it is an opportunity 
for him to do it."

Miliband insisted that the "West Lothian question" – which asks how Scottish 
MPs can be allowed to vote on English-only matters when English MPs have no say 
over devolved matters north of the border – needs careful consideration. He 
said: "There isn't a simple answer to this question. We have been wrestling 
with this issue for 120 years, ever since we were talking about Irish Home Rule 
around a century ago. When you devolve power to some parts of the country in 
different ways to others it throws up these questions. So London MPs vote on 
transport issues outside London but English MPs outside London don't vote on 
transport issues in London because they are devolved."

There was further pressure on the prime minister as Darling insisted that 
there could be no link between further powers for Holyrood and limiting the 
voting rights of Scottish MPs at Westminster. The leader of the Better Together 
campaign told the Andrew Marr Show: "The agreement reached by the three 
parties, as far as I am concerned, is non-negotiable. It was promised, it has 
got to be delivered. Anyone who welches on that will pay a very heavy price for 
years to come. It is simply non-negotiable.

"There is a separate issue about what further constitutional change comes to 
the UK. But, just be very clear about this, you cannot hold up or delay in any 
way at all what was promised. The three leaders gave an absolute commitment and 
I am confident they will deliver on it."

Salmond said that no voters in the referendum would feel they had been 
"misled", "gulled" and "tricked". The first minister told the Sunday Politics 
on BBC1: "I am actually not surprised they are cavilling and reneging on 
commitments; I am only surprised by the speed at which they are doing it. They 
seem to be totally shameless in these matters. The prime minister wants to link 
change inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to change in 
England. He wants to do that because he has difficulty in carrying his 
backbenchers on this and they are under pressure from Ukip.

"The Labour leadership of course are frightened of any changes in England 
which leave them without a majority in theHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> on English matters. I 
think the vow was something cooked up in desperation for the last few days of 
the campaign and I think everyone in Scotland now realises that."

But the cabinet pressure on the prime minister was highlighted when Chris 
Grayling, the justice secretary, warned of a backlash if English-only votes 
were not implemented. In anarticle for the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/scottish-independence/11111435/Justice-Secretary-Grayling-tells-Scots-MPs-Get-off-my-lawn.html>
 he wrote: "That would be a travesty of democracy, and would be regarded with 
fury by the English. In Scotland justice is wholly devolved. As secretary of 
state and lord chancellor, I have virtually no role there. But Scottish MPs 
today can still vote on my proposals to toughen the justice system in England 
and Wales. That clearly cannot continue."

Responding to Miliband's interview, the Conservative party chairman, Grant 
Shapps, said: "Ed Miliband failed to answer a very simple question of fairness 
– does he believe only English MPs should vote on laws that only affect 
England?"
 