
Two months ago, the Deutsche Bank analyst Geof Collyer just about summed it 
all up: "The problem with Mitchells & Butlers [M&B] remains: who is actually 
running the company?"

The remark followed years of deteriorating relations between a gang of 
billionaire shareholders – who together speak for 43% of the pub company behind 
high street names such as Harvester, All Bar One and O'Neill's – and 
independent directors on the board who had been seeking to ensure the firm was 
run in the interests of all shareholders, not just a select handful.

A ridiculous number of directors have come and gone, many blaming those 
troublesome major investors for making their role close to impossible. Then, 
last week, billionaire currency trader Joe Lewis, who already holds 23% of the 
company,intimated he was considering a nil-premium tender offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/15/mitchell-butlers-chief-executive-former-contact-of-joe-lewis>
 for the group. His move came at a time when the number of "independent" M&B 
directors is down to just three (I am excluding two boardroom representatives 
of billionaire investor Joe Lewis).

The Lewis offer is deeply unappealing, said those independent members of the 
board. But Lewis, who has parked his 220ft yacht outside All Bar One on Butlers 
Wharf, has not gone away. So, who are these remaining "independent directors" 
charged with protecting shareholder interests in the face of further takeover 
activity? Of the three, it emerged this week that one – Jeremy Blood, M&B's 
caretaker chief executive – having found himself no longer working for Heineken 
two years ago,approached Lewis about funding for a putative new pub venture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/15/mitchell-butlers-chief-executive-former-contact-of-joe-lewis>
.

The approach went nowhere but within a few months Blood – at the instigation 
of Lewis – was appointed a director of M&B. "I'm no stooge," he said at the 
time, and we must take him at his word. But it doesn't look good that he has 
since sought to deny his past dealings with the Lewis empire, admitting them 
only latterly.

Also among the three declared independent directors is Bob Ivell, M&B's 
interim chairman, who spent two years as deputy chairman of Next Generation 
racquet clubs, a private business owned for two years by investors including JP 
McManus and John Magnier. These two Irish tycoons, card-playing pals of Lewis, 
hold 20% of M&B stock.

Last of the three musketeers charged with defending M&B's honour is new-boy 
finance director Tim Jones. He, at least, has no past connections to major 
shareholders, though he has only been at the company for 12 months. One early 
indication of the trio's independence – or lack of it – may be the 
extraordinary free rein they have given in recent weeks to Ron Robson, one of 
Lewis's appointees to the board.

As other independent directors have left the company, Robson has hoovered up 
powerful board roles and is now deputy chairman, and on the nomination, 
remuneration and audit committees. As if that were not concerning enough, he 
has also been almost permanently installed at M&B's head office in Birmingham, 
supposedly advising Blood and other senior executives on how best to run the 
group.

This board is just not well enough equipped to deal with a predatory offer 
from Lewis and it is all too easy to see institutional shareholders being 
scared into selling out to him on the cheap. That would be nothing short of a 
scandal – and, barring a disagreement between the big investors, there looks no 
way to stop it.
 