
What’s so great about Shakespeare? There, I’ve said it. I don’t understand it. 
Can’t even stay awake. And I think that’s completely normal – it’s just that 
people still think it’s clever to pretend they love it, daahling, when everyone 
knows they’d rather be at home watchingMidsomer Murders 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0118401/>. Have you ever not understood Midsomer 
Murders? There you are. Shakespeare language is all well and good for the olden 
days, but who wants to watch hours of sexist Ukip propagandists droning on 
about dead white kings in words nobody even uses? Like “hawk from a handsaw”. 
What’s that all about? I’ve changed it to “sausage from a selfie stick”, and 
you know what, children love it, that’s my litmus test. I’d love to think 
Shakespeare knew more about accessibility than me, but I think I can be really 
rigorous in saying, I don’t think so!

You have to wonder what sort of country literally worships a 
privately-educated property speculator who never bothered writing decent parts 
for women, and don’t get me started on the way he deals with mental health 
issues that we all ignore because he’s the oh so marvellous “Bard of Swanage”. 
Whatever. That gives him this total get-out-of-jail card for writing a totally 
irresponsible play about suicide? Well, not in my adaptation, he doesn’t.

Modern tribes: the men’s club president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/04/the-men-only-membership-secretary-modern-tribes-catherine-bennett>
So I’ve cut everything about self-slaughter, which loses a lot of fat, and 
turned Ophelia into Phil, this fabulous, whip-smart drag queen – it’s done with 
a lot of respect – then reclaimed the ghost scene for Hamlette’s mother, 
Gertrude. I’ve renamed her Linda, less lah-di-dah, to correct the gender 
imbalance. So I had to replace Gertrude with Hamlette’s father, Eddie, but 
that’s fine, because he’s now in a same-sex relationship with Uncle Claudius, 
which finally makes sense of Hamlette’s struggle, especially now I’ve written 
in this magical new ending, where Hamlette’s like, whatever, and she and 
Laertes – Rob, in my version – decide to open a farm shop. Because wouldn’t it 
be great if Shakespeare was, just sometimes, as good as the Archers?
 