
Let’s sit in the hoogykrog – there, with the new cushions and throws, where 
I’ve lit the candles? I know it’s a window seat, but it’s so perfect for 
hoggerkroggering, well nook-sitting is almost right, but that’s the thing about 
hoggydy, sorry hogaah, it’s untranslatable, a bit like cosy, but in this calm, 
Danish, soothing way the British just don’t get. Yes, spelled hygge but you say 
it HOO-gaahr, I checked the instructions, it’s what makes Danish people so 
happy, just doing simple, hoogerish things.

Watch those candles! I know it’s still light outside, but they’re the most 
important thing, all the books say so. Now, hot drinks, hot chocolate with 
whipped cream or coffee with whipped cream? Relax, we won’t get the full 
wellbeing effect if you worry about calories. OK, throws, check, hooliggly hot 
drinks, check, organic candles, check. No, something’s wrong, let me look in 
the hoogah – the emphasis is definitely on thegah – book. Damn, I forgot our 
woollen socks, and the cream cake, no, we have to, he’s this amazing happiness 
expert so I think he knows what he’s doing, you know the Danish are the 
happiest people in the world?

Modern tribes: the men’s rights activist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/27/modern-tribes-mens-rights-activist-catherine-bennett>
No, I don’t want to hear about the suicide rate. No, I don’t want to pay 
hoogery Danish taxes. Look, we mustn’t argue, that’s why the Brits are so 
miserable, always getting controversial, or making cocoa under strong lights, 
being hoogerliggity, yes, it’s definitely a Danish word, is all about creating 
bonds, enjoying simple hoggilyboggin, that’s another one, pleasures. How about 
a nice board game, the book says Monopoly’s great for socialising. Don’t talk 
about work! So shall we chat, what’s your favourite jam? Have a sweet. There we 
are – when was the last time you snuggled up with a friend and bonded by 
candlelight?

What, going already? Promise you’ll come and hoogle again when I’ve replaced 
the lights with iconic Danish designs (no, British ones just aren’t hoogylig), 
and had a solid fuel stove put in to intensify our feeling of togetherness. 
Hang on, is it just me, or can you smell burning?
 