
Here’s to Philip Davies for telling it like it is, it’s women should be locked 
up not us men, you seen what happened to him since? And they say women are the 
victims, but that’s what happens when you take on the old monstrous regiment, 
it’s fair to say rational argument isn’t your feminist girly’s strong point, 
and that’s being kind to the poor little snowflakes, that’s why we’ve got to 
take them on at their own game, start our own party, refuse to surrender to the 
march of political correctness. Do you know how many people from MGTOW have 
been on Question Time recently? Men Going Their Own Way – AKA proof the ladies 
finally lost the argument. Well let me tell you, nada, zero, none, not since 
the feminazis closed down free speech. When was the last time you heard anyone 
ask what was wrong with men running everything? If it was so terrible how come 
nobody even complained until the suffragettes, now there’s a bunch of whiny old 
hags, Emmeline Pankhurst, state of her.

Modern tribes: the Pokémon Go aficionado
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/13/modern-tribes-pokemon-go-aficionado-catherine-bennett>
What I say is, stick to the facts, show us the evidence women would have done 
a better job of history, you’ll find there isn’t any, but it’s more than any of 
the media gynocentrists’ jobs are worth to tell the truth about what’s really 
going on which is the organised persecution of innocent men by women who can’t 
even park their own cars. That’s why I started my blog, it’s called Ron’s (100% 
feminist free!) I dedicated it to my ex-wife, Naomi, she took me for everything 
the bloody witch, well, everything that was left after the first two got 
everything not nailed down, the irony is they were all feminazis, oh yes, try 
asking them to iron your shirts, but tell them to stuff their alimony claims 
where the sun don’t shine, suddenly equal rights go out of the window.

Well never again, it’s all in my blog, you might enjoy my latest post, about 
the terrifying parallels between Britain under women’s liberation and North 
Korea, it’s called Don’t Talk To Me About Martyrdom Naomi You Cow.
 