
One of my daughters put out the recycling while the eldest, a vegetarian, 
regaled me with her passionate cheerleading for the socialist utopia of Jeremy 
Corbyn. Another vegetarian daughter asked if it was OK to ask if someone who 
had gone crazy with a knife in New Zealand was a terrorist. It was suggested by 
her mother that merely asking the question was making unfair assumptions.

Should we take refugees into our house? Should we buy coffee in Starbucks? Is 
it OK to have a bath rather than a shower? Was that T-shirt the product of 
child labour? It’s a limitless morass.

I miss my parents’ limited, practical live-and-let-live philosophy. Our moral 
universe was very simple – don’t do anything to anyone else that you wouldn’t 
wish to be done to you. They, and my other relatives, were kind and decent 
people, who never spoke cruelly of others and did all they could to help when 
help was needed.

As a working-class family, however, morals were confined entirely to domestic 
life, not global dilemmas. My parents had no views on Vietnam, or the Nixon 
presidency or theBiafran tragedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/sep/08/biafranlessons> – one of 
those things that were sad but which you could do nothing about except give a 
couple of bob if you had it to spare. And in those more collectivist years, 
private charity was frowned upon, as it appeared to be letting the state off 
the hook of its collective responsibilities. Charity was a Victorian relic.

It was all my family could do to survive, pay the bills and go on holiday for 
a couple of weeks a year. The rest of the world was someone else’s problem – 
the powerful, those with a voice and enough social capital for the great 
middle-class hobby of virtue signalling and do-gooding (my parents intensely 
disliked “do-gooders”).

I have a lurking and possibly shameful suspicion that a lot of what passes for 
modern morality – buying eco washing powder, signing endless and usually 
pointless online petitions and doing charity marathons/mountain 
climbs/moustache cultivation – is a kind of exhibitionism that convinces 
ourselves, and our children, that we are good people, while actually achieving 
relatively little (and, not incidentally, letting the government off the hook).

We hear about microaggressions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/08/black-woman-in-berlin> 
(unconscious, apparently innocent acts of aggression usually against minority 
groups) but these micro-moralities such as whether to go to Starbucks – the 
other side of the coin to microaggressions – seem to cause as much disharmony. 
I was ticked off by my children recently because I decided not to eat a 
restaurant meal because it was crap. This was that greatest of all crimes – 
wastefulness. You would think that instead of living in a time of relative 
prosperity, we were in 1950s austerity Britain, where my grandmother always 
kept tiny scraps of soap to press together into new blocks.

I have mixed feelings about the application of this moral mission creep to 
(and from) our children. Not all apparently moral activity is virtue signalling 
by any means. Yet to tell them to hurt no one, to be kind and honest, seems to 
me moral injunction enough – at least until they are grown up enough to make 
their own judgments. Perhaps the rising level of depression and anxiety among 
children is not unconnected with the sense that they must work harder and 
harder to qualify as good people.

Most of us are helpless to redress most evils. Perhaps we go through the 
theatre of morality to help us feel more powerful. Which is fine – so long as 
it doesn’t produce neurotic children and, later, judgmental adults, all in the 
cause of moral ends that are rarely, and sometimes never, achieved.

After a lifetime I have only come up with one ethical trope – be good, but 
don’t try to be better than you are. It just leads to hypocrisy. Which is not 
an argument against virtue. It’s a plea for honesty – and an injunction against 
the unstinting tiresomeness of middle-class guilt.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 