
Welcome! Here’s your room, afraid it’s on the main road, the rest of us are 
such light sleepers, you can’t see the sea from your side, but it’s handy for 
the loo, just don’t put anything down it, no, including paper, it’s all in the 
instructions, we’re taking it in turns to empty the bin. Don’t drink the water, 
we looked in the visitor’s book, someone had to be flown home last year.

House rules, breakfast at eight, so it’s still cool for sightseeing, lunch at 
one, drinks at seven, that leaves plenty of time for bridge after dinner, not 
to worry, you’ll soon learn. We’re taking it in turns to cook, here’s the rota, 
oh look you’re doing tonight, so you’d better get cracking, you’ll want time 
for the fish market and the bakery, don’t worry, I’ll draw a map, shouldn’t 
take you more than two hours for the round trip.

So money, four rooms, seven adults, we’re dividing by four with half rates for 
me, I’m on the 5:2, and counting a child as a person who doesn’t drink, if you 
want to put €100 in the kitty that should be good for a day or so, you wouldn’t 
believe the price of fish. Plus would you mind getting some stuff from the 
pharmacist for jellyfish stings, and a mezzaluna, the knives here are awful.

Modern tribes: the bride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/30/modern-tribes-bride-> 
Just anything simple would be lovely, yesterday Robert did a few quails’ eggs 
with the drinks, that Nigella cauliflower thing to start, then fish stew and a 
basic fruit salad, I’ve no idea how it took him all afternoon, could you bear 
to drop off the rubbish on the way? No, somebody already did roast chicken. 
We’ll be poolside, so don’t try ringing – the only signal is in your room, if 
you don’t mind people popping in now and again, and don’t be surprised, we’ve 
agreed no swimsuits by the pool and it’s hardly worth dressing to go indoors.

I don’t want to nag, but the supermarket closes at two, here’s the list, did I 
mention you’ll need a vegan option and I’m gluten intolerant?
 