
Hi, welcome to Cathy’s Crafts, where today I’m going to show you how to make a 
decorative, retro-style toilet-roll concealer in less than a weekend!

If you’re anything like me, you’ve probably got cupboards full of old dolls – 
well, now’s the chance to upcycle themand sort out next year’s Christmas 
presents! Imagine your friends’ and family’s reaction when you present them 
with one of these lovingly handcrafted pieces! All you’ll need is a doll, with 
legs narrow enough to fit inside the loo-roll hole, and some scraps for the 
beautifully cross-stitched crinoline you’re going to drape over an old sunhat 
and decorate with whatever trimmings take your fancy.

See, I’ve used rickrack and thrift-shop lace here, on red gingham, along with 
a scattering of sequins, for a Scarlett-O’Hara-cum-shepherdess look, with a 
wide-brimmed hat made from a reclaimed Nespresso pod crown and takeout cup lid, 
and decorated with feathers and handcrafted flowers using date-expired lentils 
spray-painted and arranged as petals around a bead centre. I’ve gone for 
orange, to pick up on her sash, but it’s up to you. Just express yourself!

All you’ll need from your craft station is a glue gun, pliers, a craft knife 
to customise the hat, a rotary cutter and blades, plus a sewing machine and 
your embroidery kit and a magnifying glass and tweezers.

Modern tribes: the polite television interviewer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/14/the-polite-television-interviewer-modern-tribes-catherine-bennett>
So, let’s get creative! Make the frame, then sew this there, put that on that, 
hem, cross-stitch all over, stick this to this, carefully make 50 of those, 
spray, leave to dry, repeat, dye the feathers, glue this on that, weave the 
wicker basket. All you need for a finishing touch is a miniature crocheted 
muff, or one of the decorative crooks we made from a coffee stirrer, with 
ribbons to complement the bathroom. Et voilà!

I can promise you, there isn’t a single person who wouldn’t be delighted with 
one of these. Next time, I’ll show you how to make a matching bidet cover and 
towel-tidy, using just a discarded tyre, a shower curtain and some preloved 
asbestos. Happy crafting!
 