
Thanks – wait, what make are these, bleah, yeurgh, sorry to spit, but you know 
Walkers advertise in the Fail, I can’t eat them on principle. Course I’ve never 
bought it, since when do you have to buy something to boycott it, but I’ve 
deleted the app, I’m totally not clicking on links and anyone who advertises 
there, forget it, that’s why everyone’s getting Lego for Christmas. Well, if 
Mum doesn’t want Lego, maybe she should ask herself why she reads a racist, 
hate-filled rag that supported Hitler, did you seewhat it said about those 
judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/04/labour-condemns-newspaper-attacks-on-judges-after-brexit-ruling>
? I had to click, for research purposes, no, of course I’m not worried about 
being turned into a nationalistic homophobic misogynist philistine hater, what 
do you think I am, stupid?

Modern tribes: the box set bore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/26/box-set-addict-modern-tribes>
I’m not saying it’s easy, there was a copy in the hairdresser’s recommending 
this eyeliner, then I thought, wait, am I seriously putting that on my face? 
What kind of person wears an eyeliner that might be bought by people who like
Richard Littlejohn <https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-littlejohn>? And 
no way am I shopping in Boots again, they’re advertising, and practically all 
the supermarkets. I wish Lego did shampoo, groceries and broadband, BT’s still 
in there, I checked. The odd glance won’t hurt, mind it was easier boycotting 
South Africa, you didn’t find apartheid lying around in the hairdresser’s with 
Kardashians on the front, I can’t think she’ll stay with him, can you. And 
don’t forget the Sun, I know I’m not their target reader, that’s not the point, 
because actually, it’s me who’ll pay for it, because I like watching Strictly, 
so I’ve cut myself off from two major sources of information purely on 
principle, plus there’s the potential damage to my own career. What if 
I directed a Hollywood movie and had to ban them from seeing it?

There’s all kinds of sacrifices. I couldn’t live with myself if I agreed to go 
out with someone who read the Sun or the Fail or the Express or the Telegraph 
or the Spectator, exactly, or the Times, now Gove writes for them, so, with 
their combined readership, it’s me who’ll suffer, but you have to draw a line 
somewhere, don’t you, no matter what it costs?
 