
One of the toughest decisions I’ve ever had to make: I was awake at eight, 
would you believe, couldn’t get back to sleep, agonising between loyalty to my 
best friend or loyalty to the country – sorry, I’m still quite cut up.

So I realised there was no contest, even though I’d just told him I was 100% 
on board, not after the utterly dishonourable and shambolic way his lot had 
behaved, though I suppose we’ll still go to Umbria, like normal, no, I can’t 
pull out, I’m a godparent. No, I haven’t told him, I’ll wait until tomorrow, 
you know what he’s like after lunch. Tremendous fun, of course, even if he is a 
complete psychopath, that’s why we’ve all been so close all these years, and 
Jane’s the same, I mean obviously she’d sell her own grandmother to get her 
name in the papers, but an absolute hoot, that’s why she’s godmother to our 
youngest, which is fine, because he’s a little shit as well. No, we’ll all 
have lunch when the dust has settled, one day we can spare a lost afternoon. 
Quite admire the way those two knock it back, even if it does make him unfit 
for high office, huge pity, but if it falls to me to warn people.

Modern tribes: the allotment owner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/02/modern-tribes-allotment-owner-catherine-bennett>
So I changed sides, had no choice, yes, of course she’s frightful, that’s why 
I called her a raddled technocrat in that article, though that’s days ago now, 
and you know her entire department mutinied, but that’s me all over – where my 
country’s involved, it’s principle first. He had his chance, I waited up until 
midnight for a text about the job, but nada, so, with a heavy heart, end of.

In difficult times, the country needs someone trustworthy. OK, she’s a 
completely zap-free zone, my lot hate her, but that’s what makes her the 
unifying candidate. Actually, I still haven’t heard from the ghastly woman, I 
bet she’s nursing some pathetic grudge. I’ll give it three hours before I put 
my heart and soul behind someone with the vision to offer me a job.
 