
So what I’m aiming for is a completely new kind of interviewing, the polar 
opposite of that tired, cynical, stale, disdainful, exhausted, dated and, above 
all, futile “lying bastard” routine. My hope is that on Sunday Salon we’ll 
create a uniquely fresh, nuanced, more civilised atmosphere, where I use the 
warmth of my personality – and relative youth, of course, my looks are for 
others to judge! – to do what the old has-beens are too cynical to do, and 
generate more light, less heat.

No – I see what you did there! – no, I’m not naming names: your readers know 
who they are anyway, of course. Brilliant interviewers, all of them, no 
question, for all their weird flaws, but it would be unfair to single out 
people when so many journalists are still stuck in that horrible, contemptuous, 
inquisitorial thing. It’s so vicious and tricksy, who can blame politicians for 
being evasive when they know their interviewer just wants to catch them out? 
It’s my theory – we’ll see if it works! – that if I softly massage their 
shoulders, check their makeup, pour them a hot beverage, be it tea or a hot 
chocolate, we can create, if you will, a safe space, where politicians can 
genuinely think out loud without fear of interruption, hopefully without me 
having even to ask a question. In my experience, you get much more out of 
people with a fascinating counter-factual, or just a quizzically raised eyebrow.

Modern tribes: the young royal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/16/modern-tribes-young-royal-queen-at-90>
See? Thanks, that’s how I got David Cameron to admit what his favourite colour 
was. Exactly, yellow. Up to that moment, everyone thought it was mauve. But 
David Frost already proved that charm works better than interrogation: his 
interviewees relaxed, they trusted him and, before you knew it, he had another 
scoop – sorry, no, I can’t think of an example. But remember when George 
Osborne opened up to me about his 5:2 diet? That was right after I complimented 
him on his great body, though he said mine was even better! Quite, brilliant 
television. The public love to see the human side of power, and George came out 
of it pretty well, too.
 