
Hello you ladies out there, as a decorated army officer (SAS) my early career 
is classified info suffice to say I am a successful, cultured true gentleman, 
sophisticated yet with a boyish energy, who’s missing just one thing – a 
beautiful soulmate to share my chateau in the south of France, the one behind 
me in the picture. The sunglasses are for ex-military reasons. People say I 
look great for my age, which I am forbidden to disclose ditto height due to 
security protocols, but I have often been compared to the guy from 50 Shades Of 
Grey ;-). I am Olympic standard in the 400m sprint and despite a hip 
replacement do not worry ladies, regular riding keeps me in great shape, no 
complaints so far!

Carpay Diem, as the saying goes.

After the forces I travelled the world as a trusted financier and made 
fortunes for some household names, picking up a PhD in continental philosophy 
and experience as a TV presenter along the way. But the past is a different 
planet as they say and now I’m working on my novel, think the Marquis de Sade 
meets Jack Reacher, and writing music. My songs have featured in top West End 
musicals, usually credited to others but that is showbiz and I do not bear a 
grudge.

Modern tribes: the bad mother
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/10/modern-tribes-bad-mother-catherine-bennett>
Personality: I am a spontaneous, caring, glass-full kind of person, though 
with a dark side, always up for another challenge, be it learning erotic 
massage or how to hypnotise young ladies, only joking, friends say I have a 
great sense of humour haha :-)

You will be: aged between 18 and 34, a solvent, slim, blue-eyed, feminine, 
classy, tender, stylish, bright, modest, feisty, quiet, fun-loving, humble, 
confident and tactile head-turner with natural blond hair and GSOH, keen to 
explore the wilder shores of sensuality with an experienced older partner. Must 
like snakes and be between 5ft 1in and 5ft 3in. Home owners go to the front of 
the queue. Good teeth. No pessimists or time-wasters. Own car essential. If you 
tick those boxes and your picture is genuine – no hats/sunglasses – congrats, 
you could be the lucky lady!
 