
Right, quick round before we start – four more pints and a G&T? Ha, look, the 
Binge Thinkers have brought a ringer, the geeky little guy – keep an eye and 
talk behind your hands – you heard he was thrown out of the Prince Albert? 
Learned to lip-read, didn’t he? Pathetic – remember when quizzes were about 
having a laugh? Throw him out, landlord! No worries, the rest of them are 
useless – see – they’re putting their joker on trivia. Always a giveaway. Just 
watch their phones, OK?

Oh no. Just coming in. The Rude Mechanicals. Three librarians, two teachers 
and a taxi driver for the sports round. Plus he’s got a classics degree. One of 
them’s a physics teacher. Woman in specs – she was on Brain Of Britain. 
Photographic memory. Oh God, they’ve brought one of their kids, for youth 
culture, that is so bloody unfair. Must have paid him. Means they’re after the 
jackpot, like last time – they wait till it’s reached £1,000, then come in and 
ruin it for the people who keep the whole thing going. It’s meant to be a bit 
of fun you idiots, yeah, stuff your PhDs. No need for that language. Bastards.

OK, we ready? I’ll write. What colour is Mr Tickle, what the – shh, keep your 
voices down! No, definitely purple, no I’m sure, haha, look at The 
Gravediggers’ faces, total panic, mind you, that young Rude Mechanical, he was 
probably reading it last year, shh, what’s he saying – red? – change it. OK, 
current affairs. Leader of the opposition? Anyone? No, me neither, just put 
something down. Brexit? Anyone?

Modern tribes: the Shakespeare hater
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/11/the-shakespeare-hater-modern-tribes-catherine-bennett>
Next, what century was Shakespeare born? Quick Robert, phone a friend, say 
you’ve got to go to the toilet. What do you mean he can’t? It’s meant to be a 
bit of fun, people, not University Challenge, who wrote these questions anyway? 
Hey wait, we’ve not finished, did we get Brexit, oh forget it. Listen, anyone 
else think the barmaid might be in on it, with the Mechanicals, 10% cut? 
Pathetic. The prizes are rubbish anyway. But seriously, for next week, do we 
know any librarians?
 