
What’s going on here? Seriously, if you’re a long-time Savile-fan with a 
brain like a piece of used chewing gum that got spat out and stuck to the 
pavement, because that’s what you are if you’re still supporting Trump, I need 
you to explain why you want the next leader of the free world to be a sick sex 
pest with a personality disorder.

No, don’t. I literally haven’t got the energy for people who won’t accept 
they’re just like Hitler. Except more stupid. No, close your eyes, stick your 
fingers in your ears, shout la la la when people who are cleverer than you try 
to explain how thick you are. Too bad you can’t get Stalin for US 
president, well maybe you could get the Yorkshire Ripper out of jail, ask him 
if he’d like to do it because you might as well be saying that if you’re a 
Trump supporter, that you’d be much happier if Chairman Mao was still alive 
telling you what to think.

Modern tribes: the manspreader
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/01/modern-tribes-manspreader-catherine-bennett>
I’ll tell you this once: that’s the person you want as US president. That’s 
the person you want as US president. This is someone who’d molest your 
daughter. Or if you haven’t got a daughter, your mother. Your aunt. Seriously, 
if you’re yelling at the radio that it’s all a lefty media conspiracy, blah 
blah, I’m not going to say the third blah, you’re not worth it, I’d like to 
know, what will you say to your son after Trump’s started world war three: Dad, 
why did you support a sex pest for president? I don’t know son. But Dad, didn’t 
anybody warn you? They did son – actually there was this brilliant guy, he saw 
what was happening – but I was just too thick to listen.

Is that what you’re going to say, you morons? I pity you. Same with Brexit, 
fingers in ears, you don’t care if they’ll soon be eating babies in Sunderland, 
not if it keeps the migrants out, kill the migrants, kill, kill, kill. Are 
you happy you turned into that person who goes around shouting random abuse at 
complete strangers?
 