
Now, now, wait, you display remarkable ignorance about the historic purpose of 
all-male clubs. It is nothing to do with discrimination, whatever the PC 
brigade says, indeed many of our members voluntarily keep wives, no, the aim is 
to protect ladies from club traditions they might not find congenial. You’ll 
find very little nagging here, for instance, or idle gossip, and the lunches 
generally go on for a good 10 hours, that’s my concern, and if the gents’ is 
anything to go by, I’m not sure that the sanitary arrangements are up to par. 
Well the whole place is listed, don’t you see, so if it’s going to come down to 
endless building work, the fees would soar – just for a ladies’ boudoir?

So with complete respect, one has to ask why you ladies are so keen to go 
where, well I won’t say you’re not wanted, you’re more than welcome on Black 
Friday – the first week in January, between three and five, every alternate 
year. Held in the cellar, yes, purely for traditional reasons – everyone knows 
females are apt to become shrill after a few sherries, and our unique nature 
is, “a club where no women’s voices are heard”. And if you insist on full 
membership after that, get a thoroughgoing sex change, put on a tie, and our 
chaps will welcome you with open arms.

Modern tribes: the Airbnb host
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/21/modern-tribes-airbnb-host>
So for heaven’s sake, start your own club, or join one, like normal wives. 
We’re all frightfully jealous of your women’s refuges and whatnot, marvellous, 
but can we join, of course not, same with the WI and that dreadful wireless 
programme, only the female of the species allowed, quite terrifying, some of 
them. Don’t criticise us until you’ve got men presenting Women’s Chittychat, 
not that we want to, do you see? Look at the facts: for the price of a 
membership, each of you ladies could have a brand new kitchen. So the lady’s 
happy, her husband’s happy and if the feminazis don’t like it – well, they’d 
never get in anyway.
 