
John Simpson: 50 Years on the Frontline – Panorama 
7.30pm, BBC1


Punched by Harold Wilson on his first day at the BBC, Simpson has made a 
career by getting close to the action. A fearless foreign correspondent, he has 
been wounded in war zones and put the hard questions to the likes of Vladimir 
Putin. It’s been a remarkable life, and he is a practised speaker about it, 
which suggests this will be a compendium of lessons learned and conclusions 
painfully arrived at.John Robinson

Last Tango in Halifax 
9pm, BBC1


This seasonal two-parter takes place two years after Kate’s death, with Sarah 
Lancashire’s Caroline taking up a job at an underperforming school 
in Huddersfield, much to the chagrin of her family. Meanwhile, a nasty accident 
involving Robbie triggers haunting memories for Gillian, and ever-exasperating 
Celia (Anne Reid) ropes Alan into amateur dramatics, prompting a memorable 
protest from Derek Jacobi of “I can’t act!”David Stubbs

Sir Lenny Henry: A Life On Screen
9pm, BBC2


With a showbiz career spanning some five decades, there is a lot of life to 
be celebrated in this retrospective of Dudley’s most famous son. Despite some 
early misfires – notably accepting a Black and White Minstrel Show guest slot 
as a teen – his career would later take off, eventually leading to a knighthood 
for his acting and charity work. Although his shows are rarely repeated, this 
overview proves how timeless a lot of Len’s output remains.Mark Gibbings-Jones

Prince Harry 
9pm, ITV


ITV’s right royal run-up to Christmas has already included a pleasant chat 
with Prince Philip and the Royal Variety Performance, and now it continues with 
a film on Prince Harry’s humanitarian work. The charity he co-founded 10 years 
ago,Sentebale <http://sentebale.org/?gclid=CPXrtb-4-NACFcyw7QodZb0JsA>, helps 
young people in Lesotho and Botswana affected by HIV and Aids. Here, he’s out 
and about helping with the daily groundwork, and reuniting with Mutsu, a 
teenager he met on his first visit. Jack Seale

The Affair 
9pm, Sky Atlantic


The Emmy-nominated, Golden Globe-winning drama continues, as the lives of Noah 
(Dominic West), Alison (Ruth Wilson) and Helen (Maura Tierney) continue to 
unravel horribly following the events of the trial. Alison decides that she 
wants to spend a memorable day with Noah on Block Island, though her motives 
for doing so are somewhat unusual. But the problems Noah was hoping to leave 
behind return with a shocking and powerful vengeance.Ben Arnold

Celebrity Advice Bureau 
9pm, W


In which celebrities including Richard Madeley, Fay Ripley, David Baddiel, 
Steph and Dom from Gogglebox, Louis Walsh, Ricky Tomlinson and Jessica Hynes 
turn agony aunt/uncle for punters writing in with personal problems. Some are 
funny, some are touching, some are weird, and others rather more serious in 
nature. It’s all set at a nice pace, and the celebrity folk seem to be enjoying 
themselves enormously. There’s really not a great deal to dislike here.BA

Timeshift: Booze, Beans & Bhajis – The Story of the Corner Shop
10pm, BBC4


It has survived Sunday trading, mini-marts, racism, and will surely weather 
Brexit, too. Yes, that open-all-hours icon of British life – once the hub of 
gossip and penny chews – has been nigh-on unassailable since Victorian times. 
In this wonderful, fascinating little film, newsreader Babita Sharma, herself 
the daughter of corner shop owners, explores their rich social, economic and 
multicultural history.Ali Catterall

Film choice


The Woman in Black (James Watkins, 2012) 12.40am, Channel 4

Daniel Radcliffe starts laying his Harry Potter persona to rest with Susan 
Hill’s ghost story. After 20 years in the West End, it makes for a chilling 
Edwardian-set horror film. Radcliffe’s young solicitor, Arthur Kipps, is 
dispatched to a gothic mansion where the curse of a mysterious woman in black 
is doing away with the local children.Paul Howlett

Film of the day The Secret Life of Walter Mitty 6.45pm, Film4 

A man who drifts through life by disappearing into daydreams is forced to 
embark on an adventure in real life. Comedy drama, with Ben Stiller and Kristen 
Wiig.PH

Sport


Premier League Football: Everton v Liverpool 7pm, Sky Sports 1 Coverage of the 
Merseyside derby from Goodison Park.

NFL: Washington Redskins v Carolina Panthers 1.15am, Sky Sports 1 Coverage of 
the match between the respective NFC East and NFC South sides.

Test Cricket: India v England 3.45am, Sky Sports 2 The series comes to an end 
with the final day of the fifth Test.
 