
The Health Detectives 
8pm, Channel 4


Apparently, more than 160m health-related internet searches are made worldwide 
each day. The internet being what it is, this often results in us being offered 
up quackery, dense scientific articles, scaremongering and sponsored content. 
This new series, presented by Cherry Healey, Dr Pixie McKenna and health 
journalist Dara Mohammadi, aims to help, as they work out how to cut through to 
genuinely useful information.Jonathan Wright

MasterChef Junior USA 
8pm, W


Gordon Ramsay holds the F-bombs at bay as he joins chef Graham Elliot and 
restaurateur Joe Bastianich to judge the skills of budding cooks aged eight to 
13. In this new series, the first step for the contestants is to run squealing 
into a huge pantry to find their MasterChef aprons, a move that surely needs to 
be introduced into the adult version. Then it’s on to a mystery box challenge, 
before they make pasta from scratch. Impressive.Hannah Verdier

Terror on the Beach: Why Did It Happen? – Panorama 
8.30pm, BBC1


In June 2015, the Tunisian resort of Sousse was targeted by a gunman who 
opened fire on tourists, taking the lives of 38 people including 30 Britons. 
With similar incidents still occurring throughout Tunisia, reporter Jane Corbin 
travels to the scene of the attack to examine whether security concerns were 
ignored, and whether more could have been done to save lives on the day.Mark 
Gibbings-Jones

The Halcyon 
9pm, ITV 


The period trappings are deployed lavishly, but this wartime hotel drama shows 
signs of being more than just a Downton-style potboiler. The fine cast – headed 
by Olivia Williams as icy, but brittle Lady Hamilton and Steven Mackintosh as 
put-upon hotel manager Mr Garland – make the most of some generic but meaty 
material. Tonight, Garland’s future is in jeopardy, but might the new Lord 
Hamilton be persuaded to intervene on his behalf?Phil Harrison

The Best of Tommy Cooper
9.50pm, Yesterday


Maybe you would expect a programme like this to be on at Christmas, not after 
it – but the timeless nature of Cooper’s act and art makes a fine clip show, 
whenever it’s broadcast. A lugubrious physical comedian, Cooper was never “off” 
– he died on stage – and resisted efforts made by interviewers to get into his 
psyche. To that end, this includes his appearance on Parkinson, during which he 
makes the perspicacious interviewer simply another prop in his act.John Robinson

Insert Name Here 
10pm, BBC2


The conceit with which this Sue Perkins-hosted panel show hopes to distinguish 
itself from all the other panel shows is that every episode is dedicated to 
riffs on a designated name. Tonight: Alex. The ambition is clearly of landing 
somewhere between QI and Have I Got News For You – and it features people you 
have seen on either/both, or would expect to. Not disagreeable, but this 
edition would have been much improved by just letting guest Danny Baker tell 
some stories.Andrew Mueller

The Week We Went Wild 
10pm, Channel 5


This new series seems to have been created by putting The Jeremy Kyle Show and 
I’m A Celebrity in a blender and seeing what comes out. It consists of warring 
families seeking to resolve their differences in the middle of the perilous 
Panamanian jungle. This opener sees a brood headed by an anti-matriarch with 
eight kids, whom she neglects in order to go out on dates. Can they both bond 
and avoid being chewed by crocodiles?David Stubbs

Film choice


The Stepford Wives (Bryan Forbes, 1975) 6.40pm, TCM

Forbes is fine on the suburban facade, not so good on the chilling elements of 
Ira Levin’s sexual politics/sci-fi thriller. New arrivals in town Katharine 
Ross and Paula Prentiss are suspicious of the queasy perfection of Stepford’s 
women, realising that the chaps have turned them into obedient robots.Paul 
Howlett

Live sport


Darts: BDO World Championship, 6.45pm, BT Sport 1 Action from the evening 
session on day three at the Lakeside.

FA Cup Football: Cambridge United v Leeds United, 7pm, BT Sport 2 This 
third-round match is the clubs’ first meeting since a Division Two game in 1984.

Tennis: Sydney International, 1am, BT Sport 1 Day three of the WTA event, 
featuring second-round matches.
 