
Trump: The Kremlin Candidate? – Panorama
8.30pm, BBC1

In the week the world crosses itself and hopes for the best, John Sweeney 
travels to Russia, Ukraine and the US to investigate the most laughably open 
secret of recent times – the Kremlin’s marionette-like manipulation of American 
politics – and ponders that the only thing scarier than Trump and Putin’s 
friendship will be their falling out. Over on Channel 4, Dispatches casts a 
sceptical eye over the president-elect’s corporate cabal.Ali Catterall

Silent Witness 
9pm, BBC1

The body of a woman is recovered from the river Lea, with mystery surrounding 
her final hours. The case rekindles memories for a divorced couple whose own 
daughter vanished three years earlier. Seeking answers over the earlier 
disappearance, the mother of the missing woman takes matters into her own 
hands. One name looms large in both victims’ lives, but could he really provide 
some resolution? First of a two-part story, which concludes on Wednesday.Mark 
Gibbings-Jones

The Undateables 
9pm, Channel 4

Jamie, 22, has never had a girlfriend. His Asperger syndrome means he 
struggles when things get illogical, and there’s nothing much more illogical 
than courtship. Cameras follow Jamie, a military history fan, as he brings 
strategic planning to the world of dating. We also meet Luke, 26, who is 
autistic and hopes to impress his date with his talent for languages, and 
Lizzie, 29, whose learning disability means she struggles with reading, writing 
and coping with cash.Jonathan Wright

Zero Day: Nuclear Cyber Sabotage – Storyville 
9pm, BBC4

Oscar-winning documentarian Alex Gibney zeroes in on the computer virus that 
became known as Stuxnet, which, it is alleged, the US and Israeli intelligence 
agencies co-created in order to sabotage the creation of nuclear weapons at the 
Natanz enrichment plant in Iran in 2009 and 2010. Gibney’s exploration of this 
insanely risky act of cyber warfare is fascinating and terrifying in equal 
measure. Best watched in the foetal position.Ben Arnold

Britain’s Ancient Capital: Secrets of Orkney 
9pm, BBC2

The last episode of Neil Oliver’s investigation into Orkney’s heritage offers 
up sweeping scenery and plenty of intrigue. Chris Packham joins Oliver to spend 
a night on the small island of Swona, which was inhabited until 1974. There, 
they find cattle that have returned to their wild state. Meanwhile, Oliver’s 
theory that the Ness of Brodgar pre-dates Stonehenge gains ground with an 
exciting new discovery.Hannah Verdier

The Real Saddam Hussein 
9pm, National Geographic

The late and unlamented Iraqi tyrant is one of those figures about whom it has 
to be wondered if there’s much still to learn – but whose story nevertheless 
retains the power to compel and appal. This is a solid-enough chronicling of 
the rise and demise of a preposterous but dreadful character whose career would 
read like a subplot in an overcooked thriller by some sub-Tom Clancy hack – 
except that it all happened.Andrew Mueller

The Great Indoors 
9.30pm, ITV2

This creaky sitcom stars Community graduate Joel McHale as formerly 
globetrotting writer and alpha-male blowhard Jack Gordon. While forced to lead 
the youthful online team of an ailing outdoors magazine, he loudly berates the 
wishy-washy ways of his millennial workmates while they help him navigate the 
new digital frontier (tonight’s episode sees Jack wrestling with dating app 
etiquette). Despite the contemporary premise, it all feels very old hat.Graeme 
Virtue

Film choice

Pompeii (Paul WS Anderson, 2014) 10.05pm, 5Star

Who would have thought watching a city being engulfed by lava could be such 
fun? But with Game of Thrones’s Kit Harington as gladiator Milo and Emily 
Browning’s Lady Cassia conceiving a hot passion for each other just as Vesuvius 
is about to erupt on AD79 Pompeii, so it proves. A frisky mix of slave’n’lady 
love, Russell Crowe-lite arena swordplay, Kiefer Sutherland as a 
scenery-chewing Roman senator and an appropriately explosive finale.Paul Howlett

Live sport

Live Snooker: The Masters John Higgins versus Mark Allen for a place in the 
quarter-finals. 1pm, BBC2

Africa Cup Of Nations Football: Ivory Coast v Togo Reigning champs Ivory 
Coast, now minus Yaya Touré, take on Togo. 3.45pm Eurosport 1

Australian Open Tennis Day two of the grand slam event, held at Melbourne 
Park. 12midnight, Eurosport 1
 