
When the great Russian film director Andrei Tarkovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky> arrived in London in 1983, 
he had only three years left to live. He had just completed a film in Italy, 
called Nostalgia, about an artist abroad, smitten by homesickness and unable to 
live in his own country or to flourish away from it.

Those last wandering years, in which Tarkovsky was unemployable in his beloved 
homeland and unsettled in the west, might make one think that Nostalgia was 
prophetic. "I am lost!" he wrote in his diary while in Italy after the film's 
release. "I cannot live in Russia, nor can I live here."

Tarkovsky had come from Rome to London at the invitation of Claudio Abbado, 
then director of the Royal Opera House, to direct a production of that most 
Russian of operas, Mussorgsky's Boris Godunov. This was an offer it was hard to 
refuse - at least for Tarkovsky, who was obsessed by his motherland's history 
and steeped in Pushkin, who wrote the play on which Mussorgsky based his opera.

But, as soon as he got to work at Covent Garden, Tarkovsky made things 
difficult for himself. "I reject opera in the psychological and dramatic 
sense," he told a baffled audience at London's Riverside Studios that autumn, 
"and yet I do everything in my production [of Boris] to develop these aspects. 
In short, I am caught in a trap."

Tarkovsky had never directed the opera before, but had been engaged to work on 
a four-and-a-half hour monster sometimes derided as one of the most undramatic 
and gloomy in the canon. Worse yet, the chorus was almost unmanageably vast, 
and the leading soloists of his cast could not speak Russian but were required 
to sing in it fluently, nor could the director speak much English.

Exhausted, sometimes ill and preoccupied by the plight of his 13-year-old son 
who was not then permitted to leave Moscow to join him in the west, Tarkovsky 
could have failed disastrously. Whether he did or not is something you can 
judge for yourself from Tuesday, when Tarkovsky's production of Boris Godunov 
is revived at Covent Garden for the first time in 12 years.

It's hard to resist the thought that Godunov - with its child-murdering tsar 
whose life is tragically undone by guilt and its theme of a Russian people 
rising up against a hated ruler - must have had allegorical resonance for 
Tarkovsky. Perhaps it spoke topically to him of the corruption of Russia's 
current rulers, prophesied the fall of communism and the country's subsequent 
difficult history.

"I don't know about any of that," says Irina Brown, who worked as Tarkovsky's 
assistant in 1983 and is now directing the revival. "Andrei was not a director 
who created allegories or symbols. He talked in images."

And there's confirmation for this view in Tarkovsky's diaries, in which he 
argues that symbolism is a sign of decadence, but defends the use of strong 
images in art. "The image is like a clot of life," he said, "and even the 
author may not be able to work out what it means, let alone the audience. 
Pushkin's 'My sadness is radiant' is an image, not a symbol."

This is no small matter in Russian operatic history. For instance, Prokofiev's 
boringly patriotic 1945 opera adaptation of Tolstoy's War and Peace was taken 
as using the dramatic defeat of Napoleon in 1812 as an allegory for the Red 
Army's recent repulsion of the Nazis. Tarkovsky would have found it hard to 
stage Prokofiev's opera, given his aesthetics, never mind his growing contempt 
for Stalin and his legacy.

But he had no such problem bringing his distinctive vision to Mussorgsky's 
opera. Tarkovsky's production, like his films, abounds with striking and 
sometimes baffling images. Contemporary critics were struck by the map of 
Russia upon which Boris falls asleep at one point, an image that might lend 
itself to a symbolical interpretation.

But there was one image that Tarkovsky never got to use. He wanted the opera 
to end with the dead Boris lifted to heaven by angels. Many in the production 
resisted this, including the great bass singer Robert Lloyd, who played Boris. 
He regarded the image as too kitsch.

What else did Tarkovsky bring to this opera production? "One thing is the film 
lighting, which makes ordinary opera acting look crude," says Brown. "You could 
see the actors' eyes, which meant that they had to act more subtly than before."

The 1983 production was well received, not least because of Abbado's thrilling 
conducting. Some critics, however, thought Tarkovsky had made only a rather 
conventional production, perhaps because he was awed by the material. The Times 
Literary Supplement reviewer noted that, at the Riverside, Tarkovsky had said 
that he disliked opera and alarmingly urged opera-goers to close their eyes and 
listen to the music.

"That's not true," says Brown. "And I should know: I was the interpreter 
during that interview. What he said was that he thought opera was unnatural, 
not that he disliked it. He was thinking aloud, trying to work out what he 
thought about this medium he had never worked in before."

How did Tarkovsky like being in London? "He loved it," says Brown. "But it was 
a very difficult time for him. At the end of each rehearsal he would call his 
son and mother-in-law in Russia. Each night, little Andrei, who was only 13, 
would put down the phone and cry."

A year after directing Godunov, Tarkovsky renounced his Soviet citizenship. He 
took this dire step because Soviet authorities refused to grant him a passport 
enabling him to spend three years working abroad, a passport he said he needed 
to flourish creatively. In fact, he only made one more film, The Sacrifice, in 
Sweden, before dying of lung cancer in Paris in 1986.

But why did Tarkovsky leave the Soviet Union in the early 1980s? "This was the 
Soviet Union of Brezhnev, Andropov and Chernenko," says Brown. "He made only 
five films in nearly 20 years, not because he was lazy, but because he was 
stymied. He didn't make the films they wanted. He once agreed to make a film 
about Lenin, but they hated his script - not surprisingly."

Many projects that Tarkovsky contemplated - a film about Tolstoy, another 
about Dostoevsky - were refused by Goskino, the Soviet cinema organisation. 
State-run newspapers campaigned against his films and claimed that his pictures 
were unpopular in the Soviet Union.

"That was even though they only released his films for a couple of days in 
Moscow, not because they were unpopular but because the authorities didn't want 
them to be seen," says Brown. "His is a magical name for any Russian because he 
never lied. He was revered for no superficial reason. He was the one person who 
brought truth into the kingdom of lies."

For Brown, growing up in the stultifying cultural atmosphere of the 1970s 
Soviet Union, Tarkovsky's films were like oxygen. "I used to see his films 
again and again, long before I met him, and long before I left the Soviet 
Union. I left in 1978, and then in 1979 Stalker came out in London and I 
remember dragging all my British friends to see it."

In Britain she developed her theatre directing skills and worked for opera 
companies. And then, in 1983, she received a call from the ROH. Would she like 
to work with Andrei Tarkovsky on Boris Godunov? "It was the greatest moment of 
my life! He was my hero, and I don't mean that in a celebrity way. His art was 
always not about the neurotic expression of the ego, but transcending the ego 
for the glory of something bigger. I loved that."

During our interview before rehearsal at Covent Garden last week, Brown sheds 
a tear. "It is such a privilege to work on it again," she says. "In 1983, I was 
just a little girl brought up in the Brezhnev era. The joy and the glory of 
doing it now is because I can serve it better. I'm not a little girl now."

She rummages in her bag. "These are the scores for Godunov, which I've been 
virtually sleeping with. But there's something else I want to show you." She 
produces her snapshots of Tarkovsky. There she is with Andrei and his wife at a 
cottage in Wiltshire. There again, Tarkovsky sitting at the kitchen table of 
her London flat. And, most poignantly of all, the photograph that Brown took of 
the gaunt director in his Paris flat shortly before his death. In his hand he 
is holding a little bird that he was caring for after it broke its wing.

She puts the photos away and tells me of the work she has been doing for the 
revival. "I've been studying the history of of Boris. I felt like I was home in 
Brezhnev's Soviet Union. The familiarity was devastating. It was Ivan the 
Terrible, Boris's predecessor, who set up spies, and they thrived during 
Boris's rule. Russia was plagued by corruption and bribery during Boris's 
reign, just as it was when I was a girl in the Soviet Union. It's as though we 
have not moved in 400 years."

That said, the story of Boris Godunov that will unfold on the Covent Garden 
stage is a poignant lie rather than historical truth. As Orlando Figes points 
out in Natasha's Dance: A Cultural History of Russia, the raw material from 
which Pushkin took his story is a fiction propagated by the Romanovs to cement 
their claims to the Russian throne in the wake of Boris Godunov's death.

Boris was no child murderer, as they claimed, though Nikolai Karamzin, whose 
early 19th century history of Russia was Pushkin's chief source, must have felt 
the story was too good to resist retelling. "It underpinned his tragic concept 
of Boris Godunov - a progressive ruler who was haunted by his crime and in the 
end undone by his own legitimacy as a Tsar."

It's this historical fiction that proved utterly seductive to both Pushkin and 
Mussorgsky. According to Karamzin, Boris died of the "inner agitation of the 
soul which is inescapable for a criminal".

What artist worth their salt would refuse the chance to intimately explore 
that Shakespearean tragic flaw and delve into what seemed like Russia's epic, 
tragic past? Certainly not Tarkovsky.

½ Boris Godunov is in rep at the Royal Opera House from Tuesday until October 
9. Box office: 020-7304 4000
 