
Growing numbers of people with maturing interest-only mortgages are raiding 
the equity in their homes to pay off the debt, figures reveal.

One of the leading firms specialising in retirement planning said it had seen 
a “surge” in sales of lump-sum equity release plans over the past 12 months as 
people try to find the money to repay what they owe their mortgage lender.


Key Retirement said it believed this increase was largely being driven by 
customers who needed the maximum cash available now as they were intending to 
use the lump sum to pay off shortfalls in interest-only mortgages.


There have been a series of warnings about this type of home loan in recent 
years. In September 2015Citizens Advice warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/04/million-interest-only-mortgage-repossession-citizens-advice>
 that almost a million people had no strategy in place for repaying their 
interest-only mortgage and could face repossession as a result. And in 2013the 
Financial Conduct Authority published research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/may/02/interest-only-mortgages-storing-up-trouble>
 showing that up to 2.6m interest-only mortgages were due to mature by 2041, of 
which almost half of the homeowners may be unable to repay the loan at the end 
of the term.


Key retirement said its data for the period 1 January to 31 March 2016 showed 
that 40% of customers were taking a single lump sum advance to reduce their 
debts, up from 30% for the same period in 2015. The average amount being 
released is £76,000, though in London it is a lot higher: £134,000.


Dean Mirfin, the firm’s technical director, said: “The record high number of 
equity release plans being taken out underlines how property wealth is an 
important part of retirement planning.”


He added: “It’s long been predicted that as the first large wave of 
interest-only mortgage maturities begins, more customers will turn to equity 
release to plug this gap.”

Citizens Advice had warned that “time is running out” for some homeowners, who 
would either have to sell their home or find the money from somewhere to pay 
off the debt, or risk having the property repossessed. Meanwhile, the FCA had 
put the average shortfall at more than £71,000.
 