
Britain’s banks lent more money through mortgages in October than at any point 
since the summer of 2008, figures show, as low interest rates and rising 
incomes tempted more people into the market.

Gross mortgage lending hit £12.9bn during the month, 26% higher than in 
October 2014 and the highest figure since August 2008, according to the latest 
data from the British Bankers’ Association (BBA).

Mortgage lending for house purchases slowed in the latter half of 2014, but 
has been growing again this year, and in October there were 45,437 approvals – 
21% more than in the same month last year.

Remortgaging was up by 34% year on year, at 24,275 approvals.

The BBA said the average value of mortgages approved for house purchases was 
£175,600, while remortgagers typically borrowed £172,800.

Recent months have seen a price war among mortgage lenders, which has led to 
some of the cheapest deals on record. Borrowers looking to fix their mortgage 
for five years can pay as little as 2.14%, while those fixing for two years can 
get a rate as low as 1.15%.

Richard Woolhouse, chief economist at the BBA, said: “These statistics show 
that housing market activity remained strong in October, with gross mortgage 
borrowing 26% higher than a year ago and at its highest level for seven years.

“Consumers remain confident and their incomes are growing. Mortgage rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/mortgage-rates> are at multi-year lows and 
people are snapping up the competitive deals being offered by banks.”

Personal loan rates have also been plummeting, leading to a rise in borrowing, 
which theBank of England warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/24/consumer-spending-troubling-bank-of-england>
 on Tuesday “ultimately might be an issue that the financial policy committee 
might want to look at fairly carefully”.


The BBA said that over the past year, net borrowing through personal loans had 
been rising at an annual rate of about 5%, with increased demand reflecting 
better credit availability, lower interest rates and stronger household 
finances.

During October, £228m was borrowed through personal loans and overdrafts – 
more than double the £109m figure for September, but less than half the £494m 
worth of debt taken on in March.

Annual growth in high street banks’ credit card borrowing was 5% in October, 
the BBA said, exceeding the 3.9% growth in the wider credit card market.

Across the whole market, card use continued to rise, with 223m purchases in 
October, worth a total of £12.4bn. The BBA said 51m credit card accounts were 
open, and about two-thirds of these carried a balance.

While personal loan rates are usually fixed for the term of borrowing, credit 
card rates are subject to change. Recently Barclaycard told its 10.5 million 
customers it waslinking its interest rates to the Bank of England base rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/18/barclaycard-raise-interest-rates-bank-of-england-base-rate>
, meaning any increase by the Bank will lead to higher costs.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said consumer credit 
had increased but “not raced ahead”.

However, he added: “In considering borrowing, consumers need to allow for the 
fact that interest rates will likely start to rise during 2016, even if the 
increases are likely to be gradual and limited compared to past norms.”
 