
There is not enough research to reach conclusive judgments on whether 
marijuana can effectively treat most of the symptoms and diseases it is 
advertised as helping, according to a wide-ranging US government study.

The same is also true of many of the risks said to be associated with using 
cannabis, the study finds.

More than 100 conclusions about the health effects of marijuana, including 
claims of both helpful and harmful effects, were evaluated by the National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine in a study released on Thursday.

There was only enough evidence to support treatment for three therapeutic 
uses, the study found: to reduce nausea and vomiting from chemotherapy, to 
treat chronic pain and to reduce spasms from multiple sclerosis.

“Really, most of the therapeutic reasons people use medical marijuana aren’t 
substantiated beneficial effects of the plant,” said Sean Hennessy, a professor 
of epidemiology at the University of Pennsylvania, and a member of the 
16-scientist committee that carried out the review.

Uses for which there was either “limited evidence or insufficient evidence”, 
according to Hennessy, included increasing appetite and weight gain for 
patients with HIV/Aids, calming attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
in children, and treating epilepsy.

“There’s been an explosion of literature since 1999 … We reviewed thousands of 
abstracts,” said Robert Wallace, a professor of epidemiology at the University 
of Iowa College of PublicHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, 
and another member of the committee tasked with reviewing more than 10,000 
studies to reach conclusions about the current state of research on marijuana. 
“A lot of the report is really where the state of the evidence is.”

For example, the report found “conclusive” evidence that cannabis can 
alleviate some nausea and vomiting associated with cancer treatment, but that 
case was long ago considered settled. For many indications in the report, 
science has not reached a definitive answer.

The report’s key findings fell into a few broad categories:

 * Injury and death: evidence suggests that driving while high increases the 
risk of a car accident. In states where marijuana has been legalized, evidence 
suggests that children are at more risk of ingesting marijuana. Cannabis use 
could also harm adolescents’ educational and social development. 
 * Mental health: cannabis use is likely to increase the risk of developing 
schizophrenia, social anxiety disorders and, to a lesser extent, depression. 
Heavy marijuana users are more likely to report suicidal thoughts that 
non-users, and people with bipolar disorder who use marijuana almost daily show 
more symptoms than non-users. 
 * Cancer: evidence does not support a link between smoking marijuana and 
cancers typically associated with tobacco, such as head, neck and lung cancer. 
Evidence suggests that smoking marijuana on a regular basis is associated with 
chronic bronchitis and phlegm production. 
 * Addiction: evidence suggests that people who use more cannabis are more 
likely to be addicted, and that the younger people start, the more likely they 
are to develop problematic use. 
 * Nausea: there is conclusive evidence that cannabinoids, compounds derived 
from marijuana, are useful to treat nausea and vomiting associated with 
chemotherapy. 
 * Chronic pain: there is evidence to support use of cannabis in treatment of 
chronic pain, in particular in spasms associated with multiple sclerosis, the 
disabling central nervous system disease. 
The report comes as the pace of marijuana reforms has quickened across the US. 
Medicinal marijuana is now legal in 29 states, and recreational marijuana is 
legal in eight states and in Washington DC. Marijuana is the most widely used 
illicit drug in the US, with an estimated 22.2 million people using the drug in 
the past month, according to a2014 government survey 
<https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana/what-scope-marijuana-use-in-united-states>
.

Drug policy reform has also became a topic of international debate, as 
high-profile medical organizations and some countries call for 
decriminalization of illicit drugs. The academies’ report is the first in 18 
years to address such a breadth of physical effects from marijuana, and is 
likely to fuel arguments on both sides of the marijuana debate.


While the paper is broad and wide-ranging, it is unlikely to end debate on any 
number of treatments. One researcher studying the therapeutic impacts of the 
cannabis compound cannabidiol on children with epilepsy said researchers’ 
conclusions were broadly “conservative”, and on epilepsy “wrong”.


“For science to do what it does, I think when they do a scientific review they 
should incorporate all the evidence that is out there for that disorder, and I 
don’t think they did that for epilepsy,” said Orrin Devinsky, director of New 
York University Langone Medical Center’s comprehensive epilepsy center. Still, 
he called the report “very valuable”.


The report comes at a significant time for marijuana policy worldwide, as drug 
policy reform has picked up both in the US and internationally. Less than one 
year ago, aninternational commission published a report in The Lancet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/24/medical-experts-call-for-global-drug-decriminalisation>
 calling for decriminalization of all drugs, finding that prohibition did not 
effectively combat drug use, addiction or organized crime. At the same time, 
the United Nations held a special session to discuss global drug policy, the
first in almost 20 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/un-summit-global-war-drugs-agreement-approved>
. Additionally,mental health concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/15/cannabis-scientists-call-for-action-amid-mental-health-concerns>
 about “skunk” marijuana have also increased.

The study represents the broadest review by the National Academies of Sciences 
since 1999, after California and Arizona passed the first medical marijuana 
laws, and the public debated whether physicians should prescribe marijuana.

Controversially, the 1999 report found that marijuana could indeed reduce 
nausea, but that it could also help treat pain. While the report found some 
negative effects from smoking marijuana, it also contradicted the then US “drug 
czar” Barry R McCaffrey’s position that “not a shred of scientific evidence 
<http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1999-03-18/news/9903180126_1_medical-marijuana-medical-purposes-barry-mccaffrey>
” existed for the medicinal use of marijuana.

Almost two decades later, legal marijuana has spawned an untold number of 
shops hawking marijuana for people to enjoylike beer or wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/cannabis-food-marijuana-herbal-chef>
, but also products thatmore closely resemble 
<http://extract.suntimes.com/news/10/153/15944/fda-issues-warning-letters-to-cannabis-cbd-companies>
 cure-alls on the untested supplement market.

“There is a great fear that I continue to have, that the cannabis industry 
medically will be like the vitamin and nutritional supplement market,” Devinsky 
said. “People advertise on TV that we isolated a compound from jellyfish and it 
improves memory.”

He added: “It’s become a religion for people, and my personal view is if you 
want to pray to whatever gods you pray to, and you want to advocate for 
whatever political candidate, it’s a free country. But when it comes to medical 
therapy, we have a higher standard.”

In the US, the push for marijuana legalization comes at a time of increasing 
dismay over the state of the criminal justice system, as sentencing laws passed 
during the “war on drugs” are being reexamined in light of their 
disproportionate impact on people of color.

“This growing acceptance, accessibility and use of cannabis and its 
derivatives has raised important public health concerns,” said Marie McCormick, 
a pediatrician at Harvard University’s TH Chan School of Public Health, who 
chaired the committee. “Moreover, the lack of any aggregated knowledge of 
cannabis-related health effects has led to uncertainty about what, if any, are 
the harms or benefits from its use.

“We conducted an in-depth and broad review of the most recent research to 
establish firmly what the science says, and to highlight areas that still need 
further examination. As laws and policies continue to change, research must 
also.”

The report also took the unusual step of calling for private funding sources 
to advance marijuana research. Researchers found it “difficult to gain access 
to the quantity, quality, and type of cannabis product necessary”, the report 
said. “A diverse network of funders is needed to support cannabis and 
cannabinoid research.”

One of those hurdles is the limited supply of research-grade marijuana, which 
is grown only at the University of Mississippi.

“Any federal study has challenges,” said Nolan Kane, a geneticist at the 
University of Colorado at Boulder studying the evolution of plants such as 
sunflowers and hemp. He described government-approved marijuana as having “a 
fraction” of the psychoactive ingredients of privately grown marijuana, and 
said research subjects described the marijuana as “old” and “low quality”.

“Getting people to even accept money to smoke their marijuana – you’d think 
college campuses, it would be easy to get people to smoke marijuana,” Kane 
said. “It doesn’t at all reflect the marketplace ... It’s always going to be 
comparing apples and oranges until they’re able to make the products more 
similar.”

The report is the product of 16 experts in their fields, including 
neurologists, oncologists, epidemiologists and child psychiatrists. Among the 
review’s most fervent calls were for more investigation.

The study was sponsored by a group of state health departments, federal 
agencies and nonprofits, such as the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, the Robert W 
Woodruff Foundation and the Arizona department of health services.
 