




The overwhelming majority of people arrested for alleged terrorism offences 
over the past 15 years have been freed without charge or conviction, official 
figures show.

 Fewer than two in 10 people detained by police since September 2001 were 
convicted directly of terrorism or a terrorism-related offence.

The figures released by the Home Office showed that 3,349 people in England 
and Wales were arrested under terrorism laws since the9/11 attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/from-the-archive-blog/2011/sep/06/9-11-attacks-guardian-archive>
 on the US.


Of those arrested for terrorism and related offences, 17.8% were convicted in 
relation to involvement in violent jihad, for instance plotting attacks, 
funding or facilitating.

Another 10% arrested on suspicion of terrorism were convicted of offences 
unrelated to the terrorism charges they were originally arrested for, taking 
the total to 27.6%.

The majority of those arrested were from British Muslim communities.

The figures sparked debate about why most of those arrested on suspicion of 
involvement in terrorism end up not being charged or convicted of any criminal 
offence.




Lord Paddick, the Lib Dem spokesman on home affairs in the House of Lords, and 
a former deputy assistant commissioner at Scotland Yard, said: “The police need 
to account for these figures. It is extremely worrying that there is such a 
high attrition rate between those arrested and those convicted of terrorism 
offences.


 “The most important thing with terrorism is community intelligence and 
building trust and confidence with those communities from where terrorists 
come. This sort of statistic will tend to undermine that trust and confidence.”

 A spokesman for the National Police Chiefs’ Council 
<http://www.npcc.police.uk/> said: “No one is arrested without sufficient 
grounds for suspicion but the legal bar for offences is rightly set very high, 
meaning many will not go on to be charged or convicted.

 “These powers are applied appropriately and proportionately to keep the 
public safe and we do not target a specific community. We take all forms of 
terrorism and extremism seriously – including from the extreme right wing – and 
will work hard with all communities to tackle it.”

 In Britain’s counter-terrorism system, intelligence is developed by the 
security service MI5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/01/andrew-parker-mi5-director-general-there-will-be-terrorist-attacks-in-britain-exclusive>
, and then passed to police to take enforcement action and build a case that 
can convict someone to the criminal standard of beyond a reasonable doubt.

 David Videcette, who served as a detective with Scotland Yard’s 
counter-terrorism command for a decade, said: “A lot of the information comes 
from the security services. A lot of what they give cannot be used as evidence; 
it is difficult to convert the intelligence into something that can be used in 
the criminal justice system.

 “No one would thank the police if, because the intelligence cannot be 
converted, they did nothing.”

 The Home Office said decisions to arrest were a matter for the police and 
decisions to prosecute a matter for the Crown Prosecution Service.

 The latest terrorism figures showed arrests were down from their peak a year 
ago. Counter-terrorism officials say they are working flat out to thwart plots 
to attack the UK.

 In 2001, the biggest threat was from al-Qaida, which was inspired by Osama 
bin Laden. Since 2014 the Islamic State ideology has been linked to most terror 
threats on British soil.

 The security minister, Ben Wallace, said: “We are determined to detect, 
disrupt and where possible prosecute all those who pose a threat to the UK. The 
figures released today once again highlight the hard work carried out by the 
police, security service and Crown Prosecution Service day in and day out to 
keep the people of this country safe.”


 