
Pensions could become the next mis-selling scandal if stronger support is not 
offered to consumers taking up the newretirement freedoms 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pension-freedoms-to-be-extended-to-people-with-annuities>
, MPs have warned.

The Commons work and pensions committee said the freedom introduced in April 
was “not yet operating entirely as it should” – and a lack of clarity was 
“endangering pension savers”.

It said: “To not provide the basis for a well-informed choice could lead to 
the next major pensions mis-selling scandal.”

Improvements to guidance and advice are crucial to the success of the policy, 
the committee said. It urged the government to do more to highlight the dangers 
of pension scams to consumers.

The new freedoms give people aged 55 and over greater choice on how they use 
their pension pots. Generally, the first 25% of the pot is tax-free and the 
remainder is subject to tax.

A free guidance service – Pension Wise – was introduced alongside the reforms. 
The service offers a one-off 45-minute guidance session in person or over the 
telephone, as well as offering information online.

The committee said Pension Wise was created to fill a potentially dangerous 
gap in support for consumers, including many people who are unable or unwilling 
to pay for independent financial advice.

But it described the Pension Wise website <https://www.pensionwise.gov.uk/> as 
“not fit for purpose”, adding: “It is static, offering no opportunities for 
personalisation, and lags well behind many private services.” It said this was 
particularly concerning given that the website is the main guidance channel for 
many consumers.

As a “matter of urgency”, the government should ensure the website provided a 
calculator so people could work out what their income might be, as well as 
examples tailored to people’s individual circumstances, it said. Consideration 
should also be given to the possibility of offering customers two or more 
Pension Wise guidance sessions rather than just one, MPs said.

The committee also raised concerns about “the near-complete lack of data about 
Pension Wise”. It said: “The government’s reticence in publishing statistics on 
the effects of its pension freedom policy, a full six months after the reforms, 
is unacceptable.”

Frank Field <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>, chairman of 
the committee, said: “These reforms have been in operation for six months now: 
it is evident that that has been long enough for the scammers to get going, 
working on defrauding people out of their life savings – it should be long 
enough for government to have published some data about how the reforms and the 
attendant guidance and advice are working.”

He continued: “We have seen all too clearly, too many times, what happens when 
financial information is not properly provided and regulated. We literally 
cannot afford another financial mis-selling scandal.”

The committee recommended that statistics on Pension Wise and the advice and 
pensions markets should be published every three months. It said this would 
also help to “provide some assurance that another mis-selling scandal is not on 
the horizon”.

The committee said that while the government and the Financial Conduct 
Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> 
(FCA) were taking the right approach over scams, more could be done to 
highlight the dangers.

While there had been “mixed evidence” on whether incidences of fraud had 
increased in practice, it could be years before someone realised they had been 
the victim of a scam, the report said, adding that it appeared so far that 
consumers had largely taken sensible decisions with their savings.

The report is also calling for a reduction in the use of jargon and complex 
pricing structures for savers trying to withdraw funds, and better signposting 
to the Pension Wise service by pension providers.

Richard Graham, member of the committee and chairman of the all-party pensions 
group, said: “People may be happy now with their decisions – and express 
satisfaction with Pension Wise services – but how they feel many years down the 
line is arguably more important.

“In this brave new world of pension freedom, information is key to ensuring 
the reforms are successfully implemented,” he said.

Richard Lloyd, executive director of the consumer group Which?, said access to 
advice was fundamental to the success of the new pension freedoms.

He said: “It’s good to see the committee recommending the government moves 
quickly to improve Pension Wise so it provides the easily accessible, impartial 
and personalised guidance people need.

“Consumers should also have the full picture on their savings, so we welcome 
the committee recognising the importance of a pensions dashboard.”

Huw Evans, director general of the Association of British Insurers (ABI), 
said: “We agree with the committee that savers need much greater access to 
information, guidance and advice and look to the new Treasury/FCA review to 
achieve this.

“The introduction of a pensions dashboard to give people easy access to 
information on all their pension saving is also something the industry is keen 
to support developing.”

A Treasury spokesman said: “The government has been absolutely clear that any 
attempt to exploit people who have worked hard and saved for their retirement 
is unacceptable, which is why we are working with police, regulators and other 
bodies to raise awareness and take action to protect consumers.

“We have also legislated to place a duty on the Financial Conduct Authority to 
require pension providers to signpost individuals to our guidance service 
Pension Wise and encourage people to use it.”

“Six months since its launch, Pension Wise has been a real success story, with 
1.5m visits to the website and over 20,000 guidance appointments – we’ve 
already committed to making this data available on a regular basis. We’re 
continuing to build on this success, promoting the service through a national 
marketing campaign and our local guiders, and considering ways to make Pension 
Wise even more useful for consumers.

The spokesman added: “We will respond further to the committee’s report in due 
course.”
 