
Yes

Hazel Blears, MP for Salford and Eccles and former Labour communities 
secretary, who lives near the family of Isis hostage Alan Henning

Alan went out to Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> on a 
humanitarian mission to give aid to the men, women, children and babies who 
were being slaughtered. He was there as an ambassador from our country and 
today I make a personal plea to the people of Isis – whether it falls on stony 
ground or not – to release him. He should come home to be with his wife and 
family and the people who love him.

I think that most of us who have been involved in these issues for some years 
have sometimes seen the unintended consequences of action we have taken. That 
is why a far-sighted strategy about what we do, what the impact will be and how 
we build resilience and coalitions will be essential.

I thank the prime minister for the work he has done in building the alliances 
and the coalition, because it means we are in a significantly different place 
today than we have been in years past. I think that the idea of the west on its 
own – America and Britain – taking a war to the middle east is completely 
wrong, and that the idea that the states on the ground, which have a personal 
responsibility for the safety of their own region, should take this action, 
with our support and backing, is absolutely right. I know how difficult it is 
to build those alliances, so I am thankful for that.

Kenneth Clarke, former Conservative chancellor

The world would be a better place if Isis was destroyed, and Britain would be 
a safer country without doubt. The legal case for intervention inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> is clear with its government inviting 
us, and I think it is pretty clear in Syria because of the genocide and the 
humanitarian disasters being inflicted on that country. I do agree that it is 
artificial to divide the two problems: the Sykes-Picot line is a theoretical 
line on the map now, and there is absolutely no doubt that Isis has to be 
defeated in both countries.

Our participation in these military attacks is almost symbolic. Six aircraft 
and our intelligence are no doubt valuable to our allies, but we are 
symbolically joining them. My main hope is that it gives us a positive 
influence on the diplomacy and the unfolding politics that have to take place 
to try to get together – again, all sides seem to agree that this is necessary 
– the widest possible participation and settlement between the great powers of 
the region, to get what we all want: lasting stability and security in what at 
the moment is a very dangerous region of the world.

Ann Clwyd, Labour MP for Cynon Valley who served as Tony Blair’s human rights 
envoy to Iraq

I fully support the resolution, but I do not think it goes far enough. I have 
listened with interest to what the Americans have been saying in the past few 
days. General Martin Dempsey, chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff, and 
other senior US military figures have said that air power alone cannot defeat 
Isis.

Air strikes have obviously not been able to recapture Mosul. Four months on, 
Mosul is still in the hands of Isis. Some two million people live in Mosul, 
although many have fled. Another problem, of course, is the number of refugees 
who have gone across borders – into Iraqi Kurdistan and Turkey.

Of course there is a problem; nobody would dispute that. The Iraqi army, 
apparently, are not ready or properly trained for such action. We cannot depend 
on the Peshmerga – a small group of soldiers who have been defending their own 
homeland and cannot possibly be responsible for defending the whole of Iraq. 
That is just pie in the sky. The question of what we will do if the air strikes 
are not successful will continue to challenge us … [but] I fully support the 
resolution, which is a good step in the right direction.

Qualified yes

Peter Hain, former Labour Northern Ireland secretary

In the cabinet in 2003, I backed Tony Blair over Iraq because I honestly 
believed that Saddam had weapons of mass destruction. I was wrong. He did not. 
We went to a war on a lie, and the aftermath was disastrous. That has made me 
deeply allergic to anything similar in the region and certainly anything 
remotely hinting at cowboy western intervention.

The elephant in the room, for me, remains Syria. Isis will never be defeated 
if it is constantly allowed to regroup from its Syrian bases. Without either UN 
or Syrian government authorisation, air strikes in Syria may be illegal, 
although there could well be justification under international law for such 
strikes, even without UN agreement … handled sensitively this could be an 
opportunity – and I urge the prime minister to take it – to kick-start a proper 
Syrian peace process and to defuse the long-standing, deep and inflammatory 
divisions among Muslims in the Middle East.

Frank Dobson, former Labour health secretary

If we look at the track record of the interventions of the French, British and 
Americans in the Middle East since the collapse of the Ottoman empire, we see 
that the odds look as though we will not succeed, because everything else has 
gone wrong. And yet I find that I am probably going to vote for the motion 
tonight.

The situation that we face is different from previous ones. Clearly, what has 
happened is a threat to international peace and security, and therefore 
entitles the world powers and the government of Iraq to invite support to try 
to protect them against their invaders. It may not be an invading army, but it 
is certainly an invasion that Iraq has suffered, and Iraq is entitled to call 
upon the rest of us. And it is faced with a genocidal outfit. Genocide consists 
of killing people because of who they are, and that is exactly what Isis is 
doing.

No

George Galloway, Respect MP for Bradford West

Isis itself is an imaginary army. A former defence secretary said we must bomb 
their bases. They don’t have any bases. The territory they control is the size 
of Britain and yet there are only between 10,000 and 20,000 of them. Do the 
maths. They don’t concentrate as an army. They don’t live in bases. The only 
way a force of that size could successfully hold the territory that they hold 
is if they have a population which is acting as the water in which they are 
swimming. And that population is quiescent because of western policies and 
western invasion and occupation. That’s the truth of the matter. Isis could not 
survive for five minutes if the tribes in the west of Iraq rose up against them.

Isis is a death cult, it is a gang of terrorist murderers. It is not an army 
and it is certainly not an army that is going to be destroyed by aerial 
bombardment. Isis is able to rule the parts of Iraq that it does because nobody 
in those parts has any confidence in the government in Baghdad, a sectarian 
government.

Diane Abbott, former Labour shadow public health minister

Some people have said that this is not 2003. Sadly, this reminds me too much 
of 2003. Yes, it is legal, but there is the same rhetoric: national interest, 
surgical strikes and populations begging to be liberated. I think that it was 
Walpole who said of another war that the population are ringing the bells 
today, but they will be wringing their hands tomorrow. We know that the public 
want something to be done, but as this war wears on and as it drains us of 
millions and billions of pounds, the public will ask: ‘What are we doing there? 
How are we going to get out?’ I cannot support this military intervention. I do 
not see the strategy, and I do not see the endgame.

Adam Holloway, Conservative MP for Gravesham

I believe that when [MPs] think of Isis they think of a foreign fighter, 
dressed in black, holding before him a terrified offering dressed in orange – a 
kind of spectre or ghost, screaming at us out of cyberspace. Last week I was in 
Iraq and an Iraqi said to me: ‘You’ve got to see Isis in Iraq like this: it’s 
the good, the bad and the ugly.’ The good are the Sunni tribesmen, rising up 
against the sectarian Government in Baghdad, the bad are the foreign jihadis, 
and the ugly are people from the former Ba’athist regime whom my regiment 
fought in the first gulf war. Who will kick out the bad, the jihadis? The only 
people on the ground who will be able to do that are the good and the ugly – 
the tribes and the Ba’athists.

Time and time again, we see that the only way to remove people like Isis is 
without the consent of the local people. It is overwhelmingly a political 
problem, even if it is a security headache. It is not a first-order clash 
between the west and the Muslim world but one between neighbours.

Those against

Labour rebels Diane Abbott (Hackney North & Stoke Newington), Graham Allen 
(Nottingham North), Dame Anne Begg (Aberdeen South), Ronnie Campbell (Blyth 
Valley), Martin Caton (Gower), Katy Clark (Ayrshire North & Arran), Ian 
Davidson (Glasgow South West), Paul Flynn (Newport West), Stephen Hepburn 
(Jarrow), Kate Hoey (Vauxhall), Kelvin Hopkins (Luton North), Sian James 
(Swansea East), Mark Lazarowicz (Edinburgh North & Leith), John McDonnell 
(Hayes & Harlington), Iain McKenzie (Inverclyde), Austin Mitchell (Great 
Grimsby), Grahame Morris (Easington), George Mudie (Leeds East), Linda Riordan 
(Halifax), Barry Sheerman (Huddersfield), Dennis Skinner (Bolsover), Graham 
Stringer (Blackley & Broughton) and Mike Wood (Batley & Spen).

Rushanara Ali (Bethnal Green and Bow) voted in both divisions, marking a 
“registered abstention”

Conservative rebels Richard Bacon (Norfolk South), John Baron (Basildon & 
Billericay), Gordon Henderson (Sittingbourne & Sheppey), Adam Holloway 
(Gravesham), Nigel Mills (Amber Valley), Mark Reckless (Rochester & Strood)

Liberal Democrat rebel Julian Huppert (Cambridge)

SNP Stewart Hosie (Dundee East), Angus MacNeil (Na h-Eileanan an Iar), Angus 
Robertson (Moray), Mike Weir (Angus) and Eilidh Whiteford (Banff & Buchan)

SDLP Mark Durkan (Foyle), Dr Alasdair McDonnell (Belfast South) and Margaret 
Ritchie (Down South)

Plaid Cymru Jonathan Edwards (Carmarthen East & Dinefwr) and Hywel Williams 
(Arfon)

Respect George Galloway (Bradford West)

Green Caroline Lucas (Brighton Pavilion)

Tellers:

Jeremy Corbyn (Islington North) from Labour and the SNP’s Pete Wishart (Perth 
and North Perthshire)
 