
Visiting the doctor isn’t fun at the best of times. Waiting around in a 
loveless room heavy with the stench of illness, watching dishevelled sick folk 
shuffle past, everyone grasping for a squeeze of the free antibacterial gel in 
a vain attempt not to catch whatever deathly illness is on the menu that day.

The best part of the whole experience is rifling through old trashy mags from 
2002. I’m sure Paris Hilton would be pleased to know that in doctor’s 
surgeries, she’s still front cover material.


In my quest to find a doctor I like, in a new city, I’ve visited a few of 
late. Each initial visit begins with filling out the patient form. And with 
each I am required to reveal information of a personal nature that has nothing 
to do with my medical condition.

If you do identify as female, on all forms (whether it be at the doctor’s, the 
bank, pretty much any place requiring you fill out a form to sign up) you must 
state if you are a Mrs, Ms or Miss. The same is not asked of our gentlemen 
friends. They get a plain and simple one-size-fits-all Mr. No form requires 
them to state if they are young, unmarried, old unmarried, or simply married.


I earn my own money, pay my own rent and have supported myself my entire adult 
life – whether I have a man about the house or not (and I do, though we’re not 
married) isn’t relevant. Male counterparts don’t ever have to explain whether a 
lovely lady hangs around the house on any forms. Let’s not even start on how 
annoying this must be for gay women and trans folk.

And don’t tell me Ms is an option for those women who don’t want to reveal 
their status. We all know that Ms is for older women who aren’t married. Being 
forced to choose it due to lack of a better option, is yet another statement by 
default.

Should such questions about relationships pertain to a diagnosis at the 
doctor’s, they could easily be asked in a consultation. If not, let’s make the 
blokes state the same when they fill in forms. Give them some options too. 
Perhaps Mr, Mstr, Missr, Lad and Old Mate.

Is it time for a one-size-fits-all title? The Swedes recently introduced a 
gender neutral title, but they’re evolved like that. Perhaps there’s room for 
discussion about such a thing within the English language?

Personally, I think it’s time to ditch the archaic titles. In the same way 
that old mags in doctors’ surgeries full of pics of Ashton Kutcher and Demi 
Moore taking cringeworthy selfies have had their day. And though that Hollywood 
relationship served a purpose once, we’re all glad it’s over now.
 