
Kenza Drider stood defiantly outside Notre Dame, adjusting her niqab to reveal 
only a glimpse of her eyes. Scores of police with a riot van and several 
lorries stood by as she and another woman in a niqab staged a peaceful protest 
for the right "to dress as they please". On the first day of France's ban on 
full Islamic face-coverings, this was the first test.

"I'm not here to provoke, but to defend my civil liberties as a French 
citizen," said Drider, a 32-year-old mother-of-four from Avignon, accompanied 
by around 10 supporters. Japanese tourists and Spanish schoolchildren fought 
their way through TV crews to get a picture of the spectacle. Then police 
swooped.

Drider had not been stopped on her train journey into Paris. But as she spoke 
to journalists at Notre Dame, she was led off by plainclothes police and driven 
away along with two protest organisers. Next a woman in a niqab in her 40s from 
a Paris suburb was grabbed by a plainclothes officer, who gripped her tightly 
and frog-marched her to another police bus. Officers said the women were not 
detained for their niqabs but because their protest had not been authorised.

Under the law promoted by Nicolas Sarkozy, any Muslim woman wearing a face 
veil is now banned from all public places inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, including when walking down the 
street, taking a train, going to hospital or collecting her children from 
school. Women in niqabs will be effectively under house arrest, allowed only 
inside a place of worship or a private car, although they risk being stopped by 
traffic police if they drive.

But several French police unions yesterday warned that the law was almost 
impossible to enforce and that they would not make it a priority to stop women 
in full veils walking down the street.

Halima, a 53-year-old mother from Villeneuve-Saint-Georges, who wears a 
headscarf, was detained by police for standing silently with the niqab-wearers 
at Notre Dame. She said: "This is the first time I've ever protested over 
anything. I'm not in favour of the niqab, I don't wear it myself. But it's 
wrong for the government to ban women from dressing how they want. Islamophobia 
is on the rise in France. First it's the niqab, then they'll ban the jilbab, 
then it will be plain headscarves outlawed."

Rachid Nekkaz, a property developer and rights campaigner from the Paris 
suburbs, was detained outside the Elysée palace with a woman in a niqab. 
Nekkaz, who organised the Notre Dame protest, had offered to pay niqab wearers' 
fines for breaking the law. He said police had not wanted to formally caution 
the woman for wearing a niqab.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in face veils risk a 
€150 (£132) fine or citizenship lessons. Police cannot forcibly remove face 
coverings in the street but can order women to a police station to check their 
identity. The government estimates between 350 and 2,000 women cover their 
faces in France, out of a total Muslim population between four and six million.

Some niqab-wearers – many of them French converts – vowed to continue going 
out and to take their cases to the European court of human rights if stopped by 
police. Others have moved abroad, while just one woman told French papers she 
had permanently removed her face covering.

Another niqab wearer said women she knew would wear bird-flu-style medical 
face masks and say they were ill in order to get round the law against covering 
your face.

Shop-owners said luxury fashion boutiques near the Champs Elysées were 
unlikely to call the police to detain female tourists in niqabs from the Gulf. 
This would create a two-tier system between rich tourists and poor French 
people, one trader complained. Emmanuel Roux from the police union, Syndicat 
des Commissaires de la Police Nationale, said the law would be "infinitely 
difficult to apply" and "infinitely little applied".

Sarkozy, whose polls are at record lows with next year's presidential election 
looming, has been accused of stigmatising Muslims to boost his support among 
far-right voters. Since he declared in 2009 that the burqa was "not welcome in 
France", women in all forms of veils and head coverings said verbal abuse 
against them had increased. Recently the interior minister, Claude Gueant, 
suggested the growing number of Muslims in France was a problem. Religious 
groups have likened current Islamophobia in France to anti-Jewish feeling 
before the second world war.

France has a strict separation of church and state and banned headscarves and 
all religious symbols in schools in 2004.

Samy Debah, head of the French Collective against Islamophobia, said: "The 
niqab law is a pretext to reduce the visibility of Muslims in public spaces. It 
exposes an old French colonial reflex, that 'Arabs and blacks' only understand 
force and you can't talk to them."

• This article was amended on 12 April 2011 to remove the phrase 'normal 
headscarf' in the sixth paragraph
 