
A critical report calling for greater oversight of the Muslim Brotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muslim-brotherhood> is expected to be 
subject to a legal challenge by the Islamist movement after it is published on 
Thursday by the government.

The long-awaited inquiry, ordered by David Cameron, into the Brotherhood’s 
operation in the UK is expected to include new curbs on the group and its 
associates in a move that will be presented by ministers as a crackdown on 
Islamism.

Lawyers for the Muslim Brotherhood said that any “undue” criticism of the 
group will be challenged in the courts. Tayab Ali of ITN solicitors, who is 
acting for the Brotherhood, said: “We await the report’s publication but in the 
event of unwarranted or excessive negative criticism we will challenge it in 
legal proceedings.”

Ali said that there was already a case that the report has been “unduly 
influenced by foreign powers hostile to the rise of democracy in the Middle 
East” and that he had been given assurances by government lawyers that the 
Brotherhood would be given “notice of the report and right of reply to 
criticism”.


“This was particularly important as any unsubstantiated criticism would 
unfairly damage the reputation of the Middle East’s largest democratic 
organisation,” he said.

Last month the Guardian revealed that the United Arab Emirates, dominated by 
the oil-rich emirate of Abu Dhabi,threatened to block billion-pound arms deals 
with the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/06/uae-told-uk-crack-down-on-muslim-brotherhood-or-lose-arms-deals>
, stop inward investment and cut intelligence cooperation if Britain did not 
act against the Muslim Brotherhood, which it regards as a terrorist outfit.

The review was conducted by Sir John Jenkins, Britain’s former ambassador to 
Saudi Arabia, and it is understood to call for closer monitoring of the 
Brotherhood and its affiliates. The review’s findings were due to be published 
in July 2014 but has been long delayed, with no explanation from Downing Street.


 It is understood the government will now publish the findings as a motion in 
parliament – effectively denying the Brotherhood a chance to judicially review 
the way in which it was published.

A trio of the UK’s closest allies in the Arab world – Egypt, Saudi Arabia and 
the UAE – have all complained that London is a base for the Muslim Brotherhood, 
which began and was developed inEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>.

 These Arab nations have all outlawed the Brotherhood and accused it of links 
to terrorism. The Muslim Brotherhood denies this, saying it is a peaceful 
political movement.

Ali said that Crispin Blunt, the chair of the foreign affairs select 
committee, had considered his complaint about how the government had been 
apparently influenced and had said he “intends to run an inquiry into the 
government’s position towards political Islam which will cover many of the 
issues raised”.

 The revelations in the Guardian exposed the UAE’s widescale lobbying of prime 
minister and key diplomats as well asWhitehall’s machinery being put at the 
service of Gulf sheikhs. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/09/uk-secret-group-of-top-officials-enable-uae-investment-united-arab-emirates>

 In documents seen by the Guardian the UAE offered Cameron lucrative arms and 
oil deals for British business which would have generated billions of pounds 
for BAE Systems and allowed BP to bid to drill for hydrocarbons in the Gulf.

Jenkins, on a visit to Abu Dhabi in 2014, had been told that the trust between 
Britain and the Gulf state “has been challenged due to the UK position towards 
the Muslim Brotherhood” because “our ally is not seeing it as we do: an 
existential threat not just to the UAE but to the region”.

The UAE, which is dominated by the oil-rich emirate of Abu Dhabi, had begun 
raising the stakes with Cameron a day after the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed 
Morsi was declared Egypt’s first democratically elected president in June 2012.

Abu Dhabi’s crown prince, Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, met the prime 
minister at No 10 and was briefed to express the UAE’s concern over the 
implications of Morsi’s victory.

The plans appeared to be for the UAE to offer a series of carrots for UK 
business and the country’s military in return for action against the 
Brotherhood.

Other senior politicians have long wondered why the government is so bothered 
by the Brotherhood.Last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/24/pm-should-order-inquiry-funding-jihadism-isis-paddy-ashdown>
 Paddy Ashdown said the prime minister had ordered an inquiry into the Muslim 
Brotherhood which ended up concluding the group were not extremists – and that 
was “unhelpful to the Saudis”.

 Downing St said that House of Commons business is posted on the parliamentary 
website: “We do not comment on anything in advance of its publication.”
 