
Recently, I decided to move the £18,000 I had in a three-year Halifax cash 
Isa, which had reached maturity, to a cash Isa with the Post Office. However, 
when I received confirmation from thePost Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> I discovered it had reduced 
the interest rate, so I cancelled the Isa and asked it to transfer the money 
back to Halifax, which it agreed to do.

That was six weeks ago. Many phone calls and much heartache later, the money 
has still not been returned. Both parties blame the other for the situation 
while I am left not knowing where my money is. What can I do to get it back?RB, 
Herefordshire

Isa transfers should be completed within 15 working days following rules 
introduced in January 2011. Although your original transfer from Halifax to the 
Post Office did complete in this time, the problem was the transfer back to 
Halifax when you realised the Post Office interest rate had fallen.

By this time your original Halifax Isa account had been closed so there was 
nowhere for your £18,000 to go. A further complication was that the Post Office 
uses cheques for Isa transfers, while banks such as tHalifax use an electronic 
system. Then, alarmingly, Halifax told you your funds had been misplaced and 
that the Post Office’s “administration errors” meant they were unaccounted for. 
No wonder you were worried.

While both firms were trying to unscramble the mess, you weren’t being paid 
any interest. Industry safeguards mean interest must be paid by the new 
provider from the first day that interest is no longer paid by an old provider.

Both firms have now apologised and offered compensation. A Post Office 
spokesperson said: “As a goodwill gesture, we have offered to refund the 
interest owed on the Post Office Isa account at the rate originally applied 
for.” Halifax has paid you £150 and a further £42 to cover your costs in 
recognition of the “distress and inconvenience caused”.

Your money is now in a new Isa with Halifax and you are better off than you 
would have been if everything had gone smoothly.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 