
Monday 24 October 


My 11th dose of high-energy radiation, which, to be honest, I’m finding a bit 
more punishing than the seven cycles of chemotherapy I’ve just finished. I’ve 
lost my appetite, I’m more tired at the end of the day, and pain when I eat and 
drink around the main tumour where my oesophagus joins my stomach is definitely 
worse. In fairness to the radiotherapy staff at the Royal Marsden – who’ve been 
brilliant – they did say my symptoms would most likely get worse before they 
got better. Too true!

But details aside, this is a big week for me and my cancer. Since the first 
line of chemotherapy – which initially worked so brilliantly, reducing the 
cancer and the liver and lymph node metastases – was shown to have failed 
completely, the key question has been what to do next. And aside from the 
high-dose radiotherapy aimed at controlling the main tumour – hopefully 
preventing it from further restricting the oesophagus – that’s really about 
whether to start second-line chemotherapy immediately or wait for some 
promising clinical trials due to open up in the next couple of months.

That’s a conundrum because the rules of eligibility for many clinical trials 
stipulate, first, that any previous treatment must have ended some time before 
the trial starts – for the reason, I guess, that if they’re not careful the 
trial will inadvertently reflect the results of the previous treatment rather 
than the drug or drugs it’s aimed at testing. Second, in the case of the trials 
that might be relevant to me, it is a requirement that any previous line of 
systematic chemotherapy treatment has failed. And when you think about it from 
an ethical point of view, you can see why taking a patient off a treatment with 
a scientifically underpinned, known set of costs and benefits before it has 
failed, to put them on to a new unproven treatment – no matter how promising – 
would be questionable. And these questions of eligibility – potentially so 
critical to me because of the huge promise offered by some of the new 
treatments being trialled – all boil down to timing. So there you go – isn’t 
cancer just like the rest of life!

So the question for me and my consultant now is whether my cancer – especially 
the metastases in my liver – are stable enough to allow us to wait for the 
trials to open or whether we need to get on with second line chemo immediately 
which, unless it fails really quickly – and let’s hope that doesn’t happen — 
will probably rule out access to this next batch of trials. Which is why I’m 
due for another CT scan this afternoon.

Tuesday 25 October 


Back at the Royal Marsden for the last of 12 daily sessions of high-dose 
radiotherapy – thank goodness! But critically also to see my consultant – the 
amazing Dr Starling – about the results of yesterday’s CT Scan. And 
unfortunately, although the cancer hasn’t spread anywhere else, and it looks as 
if the radiotherapy is working on the main tumour (although I can tell you it 
most certainly doesn’t feel like that!) – the news on my liver is not good. The 
cancer is “on the march”, says Dr Starling, so we need to get on and treat it 
asap. And that means a second-line chemotherapy drug called paclitaxel – 
delivered as an intravenous infusion every week for three weeks out of four – 
and most likely no clinical trials at this stage. Of course, there are new ones 
coming up all the time, but whether they’ll be relevant to me and my cancer, 
and whether I’ll meet the eligibility criteria, are for now all unknown…

As a fellow cancer combatant, Nick Robinson has been a real source of support 
and invaluable advice

But here’s the next twist in the story. There is another drug – called 
ramucirumab – which has been shown to produce significantly better results when 
combined with paclitaxel in some patients. As much as a 10 per cent improvement 
in response rates, says Dr Starling. But here’s the rub. Ramucirumab has been 
fully clinically trialled and licenced for use in the US, Europe, Asia and 
beyond and is now almost part of standard second-line treatment for my cancer. 
But on account of the way they measure its cost effectiveness,Nice do not 
recommend it in England 
<http://www.pmlive.com/pharma_news/lillys_cyramza_not_backed_in_draft_by_nice_guidance_821563>
, and so the NHS does not fund it.

So what to do? “If money were no object or I was sitting here with 
full-service private health insurance (which by the way I don’t have…), what 
would you say?” I ask Dr Starling. She says “I’d say take it…” without 
hesitation. Which raised the question of what it would cost if I chose to pay 
for it from my savings – as that would be the only way I could get it. First 
estimate from the Marsden’s private patient unit, when you include “day-case” 
fees for the treatment to be given along with the cost of the drug, was – stand 
by — £15,624 per monthly cycle! Cue very sharp intake of breath from yours 
truly.

Friday 28 October 


Filming this morning for a BBC Breakfast special on cancer with my very good 
friend Nick Robinson. We first worked together onBrass Tacks in the mid-1980s, 
and then again 10 years later atPanorama when I was editor. As a fellow cancer 
combatant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/30/bbc-nick-robinson-successful-op-lung-tumour>
, he’s been a real source of support and invaluable advice, and is one of the 
reasons I decided togo public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/15/hewlett-cancer-radio> with my 
diagnosis as he has done. Realising how much I didn’t know, and sensing how 
perplexing that can be, might explain the huge public reaction there’s been to 
myinterviews with Eddie Mair on Radio 4’s PM 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p048f63h> programme.

Anyhow, back to the cost of improving my chances with my second-line chemo due 
to start this coming Thursday. On further investigation – where would I be 
without Google! – it transpires that I don’t need as much of the drug as the 
private patient unit calculated, and that the stark difference between what the 
drug company sells it for (and I should say that manufacturer Eli Lilly were 
most helpful here) and the price proposed to me by the Marsden included a 20% 
mark-up.

I understand and accept that if I choose to add an NHS-unfunded element to my 
treatment, then I should pay for it, and that theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> should be insulated from any of the 
costs involved, but a 20% mark-up on the drugs, and over £1,000 of day-case 
fees for a procedure that shouldn’t take much more than two hours? Not things 
insurance companies or visiting multimillionaires might question but a very big 
issue for a potential self-funding individual like me. Anyhow, to their credit, 
the Marsden have taken my questions about costs in good faith, and so I’ll let 
you know how we get on.

Here’s the real paradox. I’m lucky in that I can probably afford this drug 
provided it’s not for too long. In other words, the sooner the treatment fails 
the happier my bank manager will be!

And then of course the facts are that, in the end, only 50%or so of people 
treated with paclitaxel – even when you add ramucirumab – will get any benefit 
at all from it. And that is the eternal unknown. I’m an individual and so is my 
cancer – part of me, but also with its own DNA . So which 50% do I fit into – 
will it work or won’t it?

Absolutely no idea! Which I guess is what living with uncertainty is all about.
 