
I have written before in this column – or I think I have, but I can’t quite 
remember – that one of my greatest shortcomings as a husband is thatI am 
extremely forgetful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/18/is-my-memory-failing-or-are-my-family-just-out-to-get-me>
. I fail to remember birthdays, the addresses of neighbours, the location of 
roads and, occasionally, the names of my children. It is a grievous fault, I 
cannot deny, and one I have been apologising for since I was about six.

Is my memory failing or are my family just out to get me?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/18/is-my-memory-failing-or-are-my-family-just-out-to-get-me>
There will be those who believe that this is not some failed circuitry in my 
brain, but a kind of wilful neglectfulness – that I won’t make the effort to 
remember such things because I am lazy or because they are unimportant to me. 
And given my lack of self-knowledge – another fault – I cannot say whether this 
is true.

I would attempt only one defence of my habitual forgetfulness, which is that 
forgetting is not always such a bad trait. If you count memory as important, 
then perhaps it is also true that forgettory is crucial. For what we forget and 
what we remember are a key part of who we become. What we remember of our lives 
is like the evening sky where we see a few night stars in the foreground, while 
the multitudes are hidden from our view.

The fact that I forget things, either by choice or chance, that are good and 
useful must at least be balanced with the fact that I also forget things that 
are painful and harmful. In this sense, forgetfulness can be a good thing. One 
often hears the phrase, when some past slight is examined, “I’ve forgiven but I 
haven’t forgotten.” Translation: “I haven’t forgiven.” Whereas I may not have 
forgiven, but usualIy I have forgotten, and it amounts to much the same thing.

I used to think that absent-mindedness was vaguely charming, at least as 
displayed in myself – my mother may have found it endearing that I “lived in a 
little world of my own” (a phrase that appears with regularity on my primary 
school reports). As an adult and a married man, I now realise that it is deeply 
frustrating and infuriating for others, so I have come to feel ashamed of it, 
as well as being frustrated by it myself. After all, it is not as if I wanted 
to leave my new laptop in Starbucks (as I did a few months ago).

But as I accept my guilt, or my flaw, I must also take credit for my virtue in 
not caring too much about the past. This is, I confess, something of a 
conscious decision (or possibly a rationalisation) as I am fond of Zen 
philosophy, which emphasises the importance of the present over the past or 
future.

In any case, I think that, in the context of a relationship, it is some 
compensation for all those missed appointments and forgotten school 
performances. Ignorance, some people say, is bliss, and although I wouldn’t go 
that far, I would say that ignorance of the past is useful. It may be true, of 
course, that those who do not remember the past are condemned to repeat it.

On the other hand, those who forget the past are relieved of its burden; a 
burden that will unfortunately be a shared one. You can always be determined to 
remember to remember – or you can forgive and forget, or you can simply forget. 
For to recover from anything traumatic or painful, you have to be always wiping 
the slate clean. Such is the power of forgettory.

Lethe, the river of forgetfulness in Greek mythology, was a place of healing. 
As Seneca wrote: “Within the abyss, Lethe, measureless in sweep, glides 
smoothly on with placid stream, and takes away our cares.” Lethe was the 
passage to the underworld, but we could in modern terms see it as the passage 
to the unconscious, where our memories are mercifully wiped clean.

Or that’s my excuse, anyway.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 