
My husband and I live abroad without our families with our two-year-old child. 
Our marriage has not been on solid ground for a while because of his love of 
alcohol, though things have improved a bit on that front.

During our child’s first year, my husband travelled a lot for work and also 
had mini-breaks such as going shooting with friends. Our child was not able to 
get a passport during this time, so I felt very stuck, while he went off 
everywhere.

For the past two years, I have not been on holiday on my own, understanding 
that we don’t have family help so I have to choose my battles carefully. This 
doesn’t stop my husband going back to the UK for shooting trips, even though he 
knows that I am not at all pleased. Now he is going away on a friend’s five-day 
stag trip.

I don’t think he has his priorities in order. I am trying to make him 
understand that having a young child means that he can’t go on any trips he 
wants – that he needs to choose his battles, like I do.

The last shoot he went on he had to cut short and come back because our child 
was ill and I was getting ill myself. But he said that we looked like a picture 
of calm when he got back, after spending money changing flights, etc.

My husband seems to think that I am unreasonable and crazy, and I think that 
he is being terribly selfish and a bully. He even invited his mother to stay 
with us (she needs a lot of attention) when our baby was only a few months old 
– and then he went back to the UK, leaving me to look after a very young baby 
and his mother. He said it was for work, but I found out later that he was on a 
shoot.

I blew up of course. However, he accused me of making his mother 
feel unwelcome and said that I was pathetic and unreasonable for not being able 
to cope on my own. I should have left him then.

Yet now he wants a second child; I don’t, if this persists. I feel like 
telling him that if this happens again, we won’t be here when he gets back.

He is very good at making me feel like it is all in my head, and that mothers 
all over the world cope better than I do. He is taking me for granted. Am I 
being unreasonable?

I can’t tell you to stay or leave. I can say that bringing another child into 
this sort of environment is perhaps not the greatest idea right now, and your 
instincts seem to support this.

You’re not being unreasonable. When children are born it can really trap 
mothers, but I do think you need to look at how you may be trapping yourself. 
This is in no way to blame you for his behaviour; he has to take responsibility 
for that. But you have to own your behaviour, too.

Why don’t you go away a bit too, on your own, with friends? If you don’t want 
to leave your child for too long, I understand that, but a day or two can be 
amazingly restorative. This is, of course, unless you don’t trust him with your 
child (nothing in your longer letter suggested you didn’t) – and if that’s the 
case, you may have to question why you’re with him at all.

I contacted Anjula Mutanda (bacp.co.uk <http://www.bacp.co.uk/>), a 
psychologist specialising in relationships, whose first thought on your letter 
was that “without realising it, you’ve organised your life around a very 
selfish man. It’s a double bind – you hate what’s happening, but feel you have 
no choice but to put up with it. This enables him to continue his emotionally 
controlling behaviour.”

Mutanda explains that, “all the focus was towards him – he needs this, he does 
that. There was very little ‘I’ in your letter. Your coping mechanism seems to 
be to support him. If all your focus is on another person, there’s very little 
space to look after yourself.”

She feels that you might be masking a lot of how you feel – presenting a calm, 
coping mechanism in front of him most of the time. She notes you said that when 
he came back you were a “picture of calm”.

What to do? Mutanda feels you “aren’t going to change his behaviour, so start 
by being more selfish. Build your own life – do you have other friends and 
family? If you’re isolated, could you try to build your own support network?”

You mentioned alcohol in passing. I’ve put a (UK) link at the bottom for you, 
as I wasn’t sure how much of a problem this was. I know that you don’t live in 
the UK, but you didn’t say where you are; I hope you will consider talking to 
your GP. “You may find,” says Mutanda, “talking to a GP quite useful. It’s 
important to take care of yourself.”

I wanted to leave you with some advice from Mutanda that crystalises what you 
need to do: “Your husband won’t notice what you say as much as what you do. Get 
out [of the house] and invest in yourself.”

What wasn’t clear, even from your longer letter, was if this relationship was 
abusive, or “just” one half behaving very selfishly and thoughtlessly. Nothing 
in your letter made me feel you were afraid or felt controlled; nevertheless, 
you may find it useful to read this column:tinyurl.com/gm6duuz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/09/i-think-im-in-an-abusive-marriage-but-dont-know-what-to-do>
.

Al-anonuk.org.uk <http://www.al-anonuk.org.uk/>

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU, or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
 