
Hello, my name is Adam and I think I’m guilty of being a self-serving 
arsehole. Truth can hide in full view. Bad things then happen because no one 
saw them in time. Some don’t matter, but some, such as my selfishness, really 
do.

Roll back to the weeks after Helen’s funeral. I’m packing for a trip to the US 
and Millie isn’t happy. “Do you have to go, Dad? Matt and I miss you so much.” 
It’s a scene that had played out many times when Helen was alive and was almost 
comfortingly familiar. So I went, as I always went, with family caring for the 
kids now that Helen couldn’t.

I'm still using the excuse of the facile crap of business imperatives to take 
time out from my responsibilities

Always a nervous flyer, I would sit in business class quaffing champagne, 
fine(ish) dining and keep an eye on the engines. In the US, I would stay in 
swanky-wanky hotels, indulging myself as self-justified compensation for not 
being at home (a $25 bottle of bejewelled mineral water in one of Donald 
Buffoon’s tasteless towers comes to mind).

I am painting this vile picture because, after Helen was diagnosed but was 
still well, I think I was treating these trips like a mini-holiday from her 
illness. This nearly cost me the chance to say goodbye. I arrived home on 
a Friday to hear from her consultant. “We worried that Helen could have died on 
Wednesday …” This from nowhere, and more hit and miss news than it should have 
been. I’d nearly failed to be with Millie and Matt on the dreadful journey of 
understanding and acceptance around their mum’s deathbed.

Now, months after Helen’s peaceful passing with my holding her hand and 
talking of our love, I am still using the excuse of the facile crap of business 
imperatives to take time out from my grief and responsibilities. Why I see it 
now I don’t know, but it is screamingly obvious and I hate myself. Before any 
kind, sympathetic soul thinks I’ve done nothing really wrong, this is not even 
the bad bit.

Far worse is the travelling’s effect on the kids now that Helen has gone. When 
Millie says, “We miss you, Dad”, she is sparing me the full truth of, “We miss 
you, Dad, but we absolutely hate someone else having to come to look after us 
because it re-sharpens the pain of losing Mum.”

So every time I make a yellow-bellied retreat under the guise of work, am I 
dragging the kids backwards to the grief of their mum’s death?

So complete is my sense of self-loathing that it makes the next bit a piece of 
cake. I’ll never fly anywhere again for work or spend more than a couple of 
nights away from the children for anyone.

I talk this through with a friend who works in HR, but not for my employer. 
“You realise you’ll have no job?” she says. “Clients won’t make allowances, and 
your performance will drop off if you can’t make the meetings.”

She is right, of course. My employers have been so supportive since Helen’s 
death, but clients will reject a global bloke who fails to fly and doesn’t 
deliver.

The harsh but brilliant truth is that I really don’t fucking care. Yet more 
bravado, but I really mean it. Cancer’s masterclass in life’s fragility, my 
insight into my own selfishness and the kids’ upset, means it feels right 
because it is right.

Counsellor Ruth looks at me wide-eyed when I tell her. “Adam, your wife’s 
died, and you’ve bought a house, you are sweating it about your health and are 
choosing to endanger your job. Just how much more stress do you need?” She 
sounds calm, but her eyes flash nutty-professor scale. “Are you mad?”

I’m not. The die is cast. Awareness and self-loathing are powerful drivers and 
a new sense of purpose surges through me. I’ll focus on nurturing the kids to 
be the people Helen hoped for – no less, in truth, than I promised her as she 
lay dying.

I wonder what else I may be qualified to do. Maybe I will feel less gung-ho 
when money is tight, but now I’m happy – this is the next step to our new life. 
One where grief lives with us, but we as a family will be tight enough to not 
just endure but thrive. You can’t put that in a PowerPoint.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 