
I’m having a curry with Pete, who’s definitely not enduring a dry January. A 
near-nude Christmas tree sulks in the corner; its evolution almost over from 
“Ah, lovely tree!” to its 12th night last hurrah, “What the hell is that tree 
doing in here?”

“So, Adam, what resolutions this year?” inquires Pete. I ponder – this year no 
one’s asked. Why? Possibly because it’s too raw a question for someone whose 
last two years have been burned by the death of their mother, then wife, and 
who is facing the next one without paid employment.

Lose weight, drink less, be kind to people, get home earlier, etc, are 
resolutions I’ve spent a lifetime avoiding. They fade to grey quickly and 
become tributes to the resolver’s lack of willpower rather than what lifestyle 
magazines describe as “New Year, New You” achievements.

But this year I resolved to embrace a new life; an intent tested only by the 
passage of a week, but so deep has been my grief over recent months that even 
seven days of unthinking positivity is beautiful.

Journeying through our lives together, I relied on Helen’s effortless guidance 
for the tricky bits. Since my guide died, I’ve been scrabbling around for the 
map. I’ve read voraciously looking for clues on living beyond bereavement. So 
when I hear the word “death”, my ears prick up like Harry the cat  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/23/harry-the-cat-brings-us-comfort-and-joy>
when you open his treat jar.

So it was when, just before Christmas, I caught Mona Siddiqui’s Thought for 
the Day <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04l7khx> on Radio 4. Siddiqui’s piece 
was beautifully written and presented, being about life, death andAA Gill’s 
early passing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/10/aa-gill-dies-weeks-after-revealing-he-had-cancer-in-restaurant-review-sunday-times>
 in particular: “Death, like love, gives weight to our lives, it helps us 
appreciate what is important and makes us grateful for simple and ordinary 
days.”

The thought of death giving weight to our lives speaks little but says 
everything to a bereaved person, who will measure it against their own story. 
For me, this weight has an imperative – an overwhelming recognition that we 
should never postpone happiness, love, good deeds or anything that matters, to 
the future. If we do so, it is unlikely to happen as planned, or, if unlucky, 
at all.

I put the weight thought to Pete as we chomp through poppadums before the main 
course. He ruminates for a while. “As I see it,” he says, “it’s amazing that we 
sit here eating the equivalent of two bags of crisps before our dinner and 
think it’s normal.” This wasn’t the insight I’d been expecting, but I don’t 
underestimate his instinct for an offbeat prologue followed by a diamond-tipped 
drilling into an issue.

“You’ve been recalibrating normality – not just to a future in which you’re 
only OK without Helen but to the thought that you might have a new life as 
fantastic as the old one. The weight for you, mate, is not that the future 
could be bright but that you’ll feel guilty if it is.”

I stop chewing and stare at him, questioning but calm. To those unused to 
Pete’s caring nature, this link between Indian appetisers and my beautiful late 
wife might seem crass – but it’s the man, and doesn’t offend.

He munches on. “Also, your survivor’s guilt has been getting worse, not at 
being left alive but that you might waste that privilege. What’s happening now 
is these two forces are meeting with the fear of failing to create a brilliant 
new life for you all being greater than the fear of the guilt if you succeed.”

Pete winces, for dramatic effect or because he’s accidentally gone for the 
lime pickle. “People hate change but it can take you to great new places, and 
your change was one of the biggest possible. Helen wouldn’t object to that new 
place being brilliant for you and the kids – that’s what love is. Live it large 
this year, swing that weight and always choose the jalfrezi not the korma.”

I’m not sure if my lay life coach’s curry-based counselling makes total sense. 
But his permissive and upbeat call to spice things up strokes and stokes my new 
year’s positivity. There are 51 weeks to go, but at last I dare to dream and do.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 