
If you want to know what matters to people most, you need look no further than 
surveys of New Year resolutions. These are the top five according to the most 
recent YouGov poll: 1. Lose weight. 2. Get fitter 3. Eat more healthily. 4. 
Take more care of my appearance. 5. See more of friends and family.

So I think that puts us straight on where friends and family sit in our 
collective priorities. Also notably non-prioritised are resolutions to be 
kinder, to try to help the poor, read more and better books or stop watching 
junk TV. What we truly resolved to care about, it turns out, is quite simple – 
ourselves.

To move away from these purely individualistic and somewhat narcissistic 
determinations, what kind of resolutions can one make within the rather wider 
context of the home and family? I am not an idealist, so am somewhat allergic 
to grand declarations of intent. All the same, there are one or two things I 
would like to incline myself towards – in a gentle, non-gritted-teeth kind of 
way – during the new year.

The first would not constitute a behaviour, but the preservation and 
cultivation of an attitude. I would like to resolve to value all that I have – 
my four children, my wife, my home, my siblings and other relatives. It is all 
too easy to start seeing your family as a burden or an irrelevance obstructing 
larger goals within the thick of daily and professional life – a giant pile of 
noise and mess-making machinery, existing in an arena of conflict and thwarted 
desire.

Families can, it is true, be burdensome and irritating. But for the majority 
of people, even if they are not aware of it, familial routines and even 
arguments give meaning to life. The intellectual and the artist may be able to 
sustain themselves on brilliant ideas and creations, but for most of us, those 
daily annoyances are what constitute a bearable lived reality.

So we should try to remember this, and recognise that the fantasy that we 
would be better on our own, perhaps painting or writing poetry on a desert 
island, is just that – a fantasy. Instead, we should just get on with bitching 
about who does the washing-up, and embrace it as a kind of precious and 
achievable closeness.

Second, I would resolve not to spend any more money on our house unless it was 
absolutely necessary, ie if the roof fell in and the foundations gave way 
simultaneously. Over the past 15 years, most of the money I have earned has 
somehow found its way into cooking ranges, bathroom suites, loft extensions and 
designer chaises longues.

I am not sure I am notably happier for any of these things, and they have 
caused a good deal of stress in the planning, purchase and execution. However, 
a house is the ultimate consumer product, and the temptation to impart your 
life with some spurious significance by ceaselessly gussying up your 
surroundings is hard to resist despite the disappointing nature of the 
enterprise.

Better to spend the money instead on buying your way out of conflict and worry 
– for instance, paying for house help (if you can afford it) or for holidays 
and days out for you and your family. Or do what the Europeans and the 
millennials do, and rent a home. If you want a good investment, a better choice 
is probably hypnagogic drugs.

Last, I think I would stop trying too hard to be a better parent or spouse. 
Family <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> life, like life in 
general, is all about the limitations of reality. Unless you’re a drunk, an 
abuser or a sociopath, you’re probably doing all right. Leave it at that, and 
leave yourself – and your partner, and your children – alone. Don’t resolve to 
do better. Resolve to do what you can. That way lies not perfection, but sanity.

And on that deliberately uninspiring but, I hope, realistic note – I wish you 
all an achievably happy-ish new year.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 