
My doppelganger is no more. If not dead he has at least vanished. My namesake 
Adam, barman of the pub in my northern home town, has always been my benchmark 
of wellbeing – but not in a good way. Apart from sharing a name, we have the 
same build and, most importantly, were born in the same year when the 60s still 
swung. But, with schadenfreude maxed out, I’m pleased to remark that the last 
time I travelled north, he looked like crap.

Called to the bar at a young age, my “brother” had spent a lifetime earning 
the means serving behind it to drink endlessly at it. In many ways it was a 
perfect “Just in time” supply model. His appearance was consistent with 40 
years dedicated to a life seen and lived through the bottom of a glass. This 
had given him the complexion of a hill farmer whose protection against the 
elements ended long ago when his bothy blew down.

In many ways, the most unsettling of his traits for the unwary was that his 
rolling, unfocused eyes were perfect accompaniments to a husky drinker’s croak 
that interspersed his still relatively effective bar tendering with the 
mutterings of his bitter subconscious.

He’d shout, “What can I get you?”, but mutter, “A good kicking” or “Pint of 
Landlord, Sir …”, with the audible rider “… right up your arse”.

It was unclear whether he knew that his conscious mind’s words came with a 
chaser from his inner monologue but one suspected not.

All this was more than fine. I didn’t need Adam to provide an action standard 
for sobriety, health and sanity but rather his role had been broadly to look 
bad enough for me to always look good and therefore feel good. This isn’t 
something I was proud of, but 20 years of quaffing too much beer served by my 
gaunt, mad-eyed namesake provided contextual comfort that I was in good shape 
by any comparison.

“It’s the Fonz factor,” says Pete, close childhood friend and alehouse 
familiar. “The Fonz looked cool because he hung out in Al’s diner with Potsie 
and Ralph. If he turned up with James Dean and Marlon Brando, he’d have looked 
like a short-arsed prick. The fact that your bar-room brother looks like your 
dad is great.”

I still feel a bit guilty, though. “Would you prefer he looked in better nick 
than you?” challenges Pete, looking pointedly at the bit of weight that 
“comfort and kindness” food has added in the weeks since Helen died.

But today when I pilgrimage north to visit relatives, Adam is very publicly 
not behind the bar. His well-worn path, weaving across the busy road from the 
bar where he worked and drank to the one in which he drank even more, has 
caught him out, and with complications caused by years of bottle-led abuse it’s 
not looking good for his return.

Hearing this has brought to me more powerfully than Pete’s cheeky glance at my 
muffin top (maybe should be pie crust), that since Helen died I have not been 
looking after myself. I have yet to go to bed before 2am or entirely sober. The 
half bottle a day of red wine I’ve been slurping (“half” spelled W-H-O-L-E), 
plus whisky and the assortment of carbs delivered by well-wishers has seen my 
head spin and weight climb.

And so I start running. I used to love running and as a means to clear my head 
and tone my tum I would put in enough distance to give me a “get out of jail 
card” to eat what I liked. I ran marathons but stopped when Helen, Millie, Matt 
and I started karate (or at least the kids did and we joined them in support).

I’ll see how I get on, but putting on the running shoes feels like coming home 
and the first few runs remind me what I’ve been missing but also just how unfit 
I now am as I pant like Ivor the Engine facing a Welsh viaduct.

But should I really be reaching 180bpm? I book in to see our local GP and get 
a check-up as I can’t risk ending up face down in a puddle. Going into the 
surgery, however, brings back at a rush so many visits with an ever more ill 
Helen and a very dark cloud descends over me. It’s simply too soon to be doing 
this, so I cancel the appointment and scuttle off.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym
 