
“What do I owe you for this?”

“Nothing.”

“What do you mean? You’ve just spent 45 minutes with me explaining all this 
stuff I never understood. Does the bill come later?”

“You’re in a public hospital, you don’t pay us for your care,” I say, with a 
familiar surge of pride.

He has not entered a public hospital in his life. His eyes widen.

At 50, he is a successful engineer who likes to keep fit, having only a knee 
arthroscopy to his medical history. About to run a marathon, he goes to his GP 
with a niggling ache in his Achilles tendon and casually mentions blood in his 
stools. The GP “freaks out”, and sends him to a surgeon the next day. That 
week, he is admitted to a private hospital, where his bowel cancer is 
successfully removed.

The surgeon refers him to an oncologist he works with, who recommends 
chemotherapy. But since the patient’s insurance doesn’t cover chemotherapy in a 
private setting, he comes to a public hospital to receive the infusions.

Market failure: private health insurance only worth it for 'the pregnant, the 
rich and the sick'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/market-failure-private-health-insurance-only-worth-it-for-the-pregnant-the-rich-and-the-sick>
When he becomes septic, he goes to the private hospital where his oncologist 
works. The hefty bill at the end of his week-long stay floors him. No longer 
working and having just paid off the fees of the surgeon and anaesthetist, he 
is stung by the ongoing cost of each oncology visit and each blood test, which 
he mentions to his chemo nurse. She also gleans that he isn’t able to talk 
openly with his oncologist who is always rushed, and suggests he try the public 
hospital team with whom she works. He agrees reluctantly, afraid to switch 
doctors but unhappy with the current, costly arrangement.

“I’d like to come here but I don’t want to offend my surgeon or oncologist. 
What if I fall sick again?” he worries.

I sense this novice to the public hospital system still has his doubts so I 
reassure him that there is no rush to decide but if he changes his mind, our 
doors are always open. Two weeks later, he walks back through those doors.

“After 20 years of paying for private insurance, I thought I was a lifter but 
I am turning into a leaner,” he laughs, self-consciously.

I reassure him but I can’t help think that his experience encompasses the 
problems many of my patients report with the Australian private healthcare 
system as it stands today. Like half of all Australians, he purchased what he 
thought was a private health policy for good reasons – peace of mind, choice of 
doctors and perceived superior care.

When the government imposed two types of tax penalties on the uninsured, the 
incentive to stick with private health insurance seemed even more compelling. 
For a professional with a steady income, it also seemed right to relieve the 
storied burden of the public health system.

But his beliefs turned out to be illusions. His peace of mind was destroyed, 
first by a cancer diagnosis and then the realisation that the exclusions of his 
mid-range policy kept raining down on him. Post-operative rehab was out, so was 
physiotherapy. He couldn’t see a psychologist and when the steroid component of 
chemotherapy tipped him into diabetes, there was a two-month wait to see a 
private endocrinologist, whose prohibitively high fee was a powerful deterrent 
to someone who was already financially stressed. (He chose to forgo the 
appointment and was picked up within a week by the public hospital diabetes 
clinic.)

He discovered that his choice of specialists was in fact his doctor’s choice. 
Numbed by the diagnosis and eager for treatment, he neither had the time nor 
the knowledge to explore his options. For an episodic event like surgery, the 
choice of surgeon may not have mattered as much as the sticker shock, but the 
relationship between an oncologist and patient is critical because it’s long 
term and “therapy” lies as much in chemotherapy as understanding and empathy.

Finally, when the patient was admitted to hospital again, this time to a 
public hospital, he had a chance to reflect on the quality of care. He hated 
the food and pined for a hot cup of tea. The bathroom needed attention and the 
curtains could be thicker. But the attention to a sick chemotherapy patient had 
been swift in emergency and meticulous on the ward.

Should you get private health insurance? Try our interactive calculator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/datablog/ng-interactive/2016/nov/17/should-you-get-private-health-insurance-try-our-interactive-calculator>
The doctors had been caring, the consultations longer and more detailed than 
in the private setting. Tellingly, he had appreciated the sense of community 
that comes inevitably with being admitted to a public hospital, where one has 
to queue for the bathroom, tolerate the screaming alcoholic, and watch over the 
demented lady while the nurse ducks out for a towel.

His chemotherapy eventually finished, the patient says he has a confession to 
make. “You hear all this stuff about drunken idiots and endless waiting lists 
but really, our public hospitals are gold.” I know, I think proudly and 
protectively. I regularly hear this from people who have only ever used a 
public hospital and those whose private health insurance is inadequate and who 
opt to use the public system.

Make no mistake, Australia’s universal healthcare system, stretching from 
community health centres and general practice to public hospitals, research 
institutes and rehabilitation centres is envied by the rest of the world for 
good reason. It is generous, exceptional and filled with talented people who 
choose to work there.

Yes, it’s also flawed, clumsy and frustrating and like all dynamic systems, 
it’s a constant work in progress. But on key health outcomes like vaccination 
coverage, infant mortality and life expectancy, it delivers. Most importantly, 
if you are poor, disadvantaged, illiterate, non-English speaking, a refugee or 
asylum seeker, disabled or have simply fallen on hard times, your public 
hospital is at your service day and night. You don’t need your wallet to step 
inside.

Some months later, my patient returns for review. I commend him on how well he 
looks and he observes that cancer has changed his entire outlook on life. He 
has just made a generous donation to the cancer unit.

“Last question,” he says, grinning. “Is renewing my private health insurance 
worth it? Or are you the wrong person to ask?”

Pleased by the return of his spirits, I tell him that I am a believer in 
private enterprise and innovation. Indeed, private health cover can offer 
individual and societal benefits – but it’s all in the fine print.

This year the private health insurance ombudsman reported the most complaints 
in its 20-year history. The language contained in insurance policies is complex 
and ambiguous, making it impossible for the average person to figure out what’s 
covered and what isn’t.

People’s first realisation of an outright junk, or otherwise inadequate, 
policy often comes when they fall ill. When coverage is reduced without 
warning, patients feel caught. The definition of pre-existing conditions is 
another source of stress. For all but the top-cover policies, deciphering the 
true cost of private health insurance has become so difficult that it’s no 
wonder that even insurance holders default to the public system.

In a democratic country that values autonomy, the notion of choice in 
healthcare shouldn’t be anathema but it’s important to question the value for 
money, especially when our taxes are used to subsidise private health insurance 
to the tune of nearly $6bn a year. It’s important to ask if this money could be 
better spent bolstering the public health system to provide more equitable care.

An ageing population faced with chronic, complex and multiple co-morbidities 
needs better preventive health, robust primary health care, comprehensive 
aged-care, considerate end-of-life care and an infrastructure to help them come 
together. Neither system earns plaudits for this now but these issues will 
press on us more and more so for all our sakes, the noise about health care 
must be replaced with considered, pragmatic and independent advice.

My patient sighs in jest that he shouldn’t have expected a verdict from me but 
I reply that I can promise him one thing. He looks at me with interest. I tell 
him that no matter which way he decides, the doors to his local public hospital 
will always be open and this, in fact, is his most powerful insurance.

• Should you get private health insurance? Try our interactive calculator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/datablog/ng-interactive/2016/nov/17/should-you-get-private-health-insurance-try-our-interactive-calculator>
• Market failure: private health insurance only worth it for ‘the pregnant, 
the rich and the sick’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/market-failure-private-health-insurance-only-worth-it-for-the-pregnant-the-rich-and-the-sick>


• Help us continue to cover the stories that matter. Support Guardian 
Australia with amonthly 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_article2sicksystem_footer>
 orone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/au?INTCMP=co_au_editorial_article2sicksystem_footer>
 contribution
 