
I was going to die in Antarctica, that much was certain. An image of my 
frost-covered body, blanched and lifeless, filled my mind as I glanced around 
at the scene of my inevitable death. In all directions the empty wilderness of 
Antarctica stretched away from me, the only feature on the landscape being the 
division between snow and sky.

I gazed mournfully at my team, who were rapidly disappearing over the horizon. 
It was 2009 and I was part of an expedition attempting to reach the south pole. 
The team was made up of ordinary women from all around the world – from 
Jamaica, India, Singapore and Cyprus – many of whom had never seen snow, or 
spent a night in a tent, before we set off. Our aim was to be the most 
international all-female team to reach the south pole.

As I watched, the six individuals skiing in single file ahead of me became a 
single indistinguishable mass with numerous flailing limbs, like an oversized 
millipede.

Several minutes earlier the sledge I was towing, bulging with my share of the 
food and fuel for our 40-day expedition across Antarctica, had jammed on a lump 
of ice and stopped me in my tracks. I always skied at the back, so the rest of 
the team had marched on, unaware that I was not with them.

By the time I realised that my sledge was firmly stuck, the team were already 
a long way ahead of me. I called out to Era, my teammate from Brunei, who was 
next in line. "Era! Stop!"

Getting no response I called again – pulling down my balaclava so that my 
mouth was clear of material, my shoulders heaving with the effort – but my 
shouts were carried away in the opposite direction by the wind.

I had stood and watched the line for a while as it marched away from me, 
confident that at any moment one of my teammates would look behind her.

Seconds passed.

Nothing.

I was gradually being left alone. Without my team and the vital equipment they 
were pulling along in their sledges I was completely defenceless against the 
fatally low temperatures of Antarctica.

I heaved again at my sledge, my strength boosted by visions of a cold, lonely 
death. This time the sledge moved a little. I hacked at the ice with my 
ski-pole and boot, desperately trying to break the sledge free – and heaved 
again. The sledge shot forward, knocking me off balance. I scrambled to my feet 
and set off after the team.

I caught up just as they realised I wasn't there. I watched as Reena, my 
teammate from India, who was at the front of the line, looked behind her and 
did a double take as she noticed there was one person missing. Era swung around 
on her skis in shock to find that I wasn't behind her, then looked up to spot 
me in the near distance.

Pulling up behind them some minutes later I was panting with effort. "You 
could have left me behind," I gasped, still in shock. The girls all looked 
sheepish, shuffling around on their skis.

As we continued, my panic slowly faded. I found myself laughing to myself as I 
noticed Reena checking behind her after every few paces. In fact for the whole 
of the rest of the day the team looked as if they'd developed a serious twitch, 
each glancing over her shoulder every few minutes. They were not going to risk 
losing me again.
 