
Has anyone seen my social life? It’s gone and almost forgotten. It was large 
and last seen a few weeks before Helen died. I now see that my wife and I 
socialised a lot right up until the end. Helen loved her friends so much and 
worked hard to see them even as her health failed. Now her socialising is over 
as finally and appallingly as anything can be. For me, my social life may never 
recover, as beyond former school friends, ex-colleagues and work dos, so much 
of it had been orchestrated by my more naturally gregarious and lovely wife.

Will there be a trigger point at the table that sees me dissolve in my own 
tears like the mythical squonk?

Before any friends come running, this is not a moan or criticism of anyone – 
there’s no way I’ve wanted to go out. Given how I’ve felt, I can’t imagine 
caring if I’m camped permanently in the social wilderness. Helen’s death 
anchors me home in my grief and I have a visceral need for Millie and Matt’s 
company. So I make no plans and have been glad that people have recognised that 
it’s still early days.

But that may now change with a dinner invitation from my close friends Luca 
and Charlotte. I wonder whether I’m up to it. Will there be a trigger point at 
the table that sees me dissolve in my own tears like the mythical squonk? It 
would certainly be a downer on the other guests’ evening. That said, if I am 
ever to get back on the social horse perhaps Luca and Charlotte have timed it 
well.

The back-on-horse metaphor is fitting as I discuss the invitation with a close 
confidante at work. Patience – despite never being widowed, indeed never 
married and seemingly happier on horseback than with people – has a powerful 
instinct for human nature and social intercourse. “Look, Adam,” she breaks off 
from looking at the price of horse nuts, “you’ll be fine and among friends but 
do find out who the other guests are. Ideally, you’d barely know them, which 
will make it easier to avoid going places in the conversation that you’d find 
hard.”

It’s longhand logic but good advice and I discover that I barely know the 
other guests, which may suggest that Luca and Charlotte are in league with 
Patience or at least have the same good instincts.

The day before the dinner, I’m jittery and find myself talking to Millie. “Are 
you sure you’ll be OK if I go out tomorrow?” I say. “It’s no issue for me to 
cancel – Luca and Charlotte will understand.” She spots immediately that I’m 
trying to back out of going. Unimpressed and with an expression that makes it 
no doubt whose daughter she is (somewhere between compassion and exasperation 
with the latter winning), Millie lets fly. “Daaaaaaad – go! You’ve spent weeks 
making Matt and me get back to school, music, karate, ballet and everything 
else because ‘you’ll feel better for it’, so don’t back down yourself – Mum 
wouldn’t want you to never go out again.”

She grins knowing that it’s a knockout blow and I’ve lost – but she is right. 
Of course the kids don’t want their dad to be a hermit.

Matt walks past, once more demonstrating that he has acute hearing and a mind 
that is always looking for the deal: “Yeah, Dad, go out but if you’re enjoying 
yourself can we have a pizza delivered so we do too?” Not for the first time 
it’s apparent that I am living a smaller scale and sadder version of the TV 
comedy show Outnumbered.

So I go to dinner and … have a great evening. The only wobble comes when I 
walk through into the kitchen and see that there are only five places set for 
dinner – my first odd-number event. Life is going to be full of these 
unexpected emotional ambushes so I tell myself to “frigging get on with it” in 
a piece of poor DIY life coaching.

In this case, the “it” is fab food, stimulating company and Luca’s outstanding 
home-mixed Limoncello that blunts any emotional edge. So, reluctantly but more 
happily and gently than I could have imagined, I am nudged back into the social 
saddle.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 