
“Dad, why’s the Ooh Ah bird called the Ooh Ah bird?” asks Millie, her 
beautiful face glowing with Christmassy enthusiasm. “I don’t know,” I lie. 
“Because it lays square eggs,” she squeals.

She, Matt and I laugh uproariously at the well-worn joke from the 1977 Good 
Life Christmas Special 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2009/dec/22/christmas-good-life>
. We love watching Jerry, Margo, Tom and oh-so-sexy Barbara (pre-pubescent 
crush lingering on) in this episode, Silly, But It’s Fun. It has been part of 
our festive ritual for many years. Margo’s Christmas order is not delivered – 
“Jerry, Christmas is cancelled” – before they have a simple but super day with 
their lovely self-sufficient friends next door.

This year is the first time we have watched it without Helen, but we are OK. 
Better than OK. In Yorkshire at the new cottage by the sea, we are playing out 
my vision of a place of sanctuary with family. If you half close your eyes, you 
might think Helen is still here, spreading her festive warmth and endless 
enthusiasm, love and laughter.

So far, it is working. Coming to the village that Helen knew and loved risked 
emotional seasonal meltdown, but the cottage is new to us and we are laying 
down memories of a new life without Helen as a physical presence, but with us 
in memory and spirit.

Amid the carols, Matt’s newly purchased dancing Father Christmas sings 
continuously and accurately – “Can’t touch Christmas.” It skims the surface of 
being bleeding annoying only because it does so in the style ofMC Hammer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/aug/01/mc-hammer-interview>, whose 
baggy-trousered performance I still have a soft spot for. Not so soft, though, 
that it won’t have a Boxing Day accident, knocked off the pier, weighed down 
with a Christmas pudding.

Getting up north was tricky. “You look buggered already,” said Pete over a 
festive dads’ beer before we left. I was a little jaded because I had drunk too 
much the night before after a melancholy ambush. I’d seen a fantastic art deco 
lamp and thought, “That’ll make a great present for Helen,” before catching 
myself in my mistake.

It has also been physically exhausting sorting every present, food order, 
playmate, invitation and the thousand other things Helen and I, but mainly 
Helen, had previously organised. I have now given up work, but that worry is 
lost in the mayhem and anticipation of the big day and a background fear of it 
being the first Christmas in 26 years without a gift from Helen. The only gift 
I want I can’t have – sad proof in a way that team Good Life would approve:
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> doesn’t come by 
van or in a box.

Millie and Matt have been brilliant and raise my spirits; writing Christmas 
lists as usual and embracing the magic, I suspect as much for my sake as 
theirs. But it works. We have been out on the rocks collecting driftwood to 
fashion an alternative festive twigs tree and Matt is delighted to have found a 
very big piece of wood shaped like Rudolf’s antlers, on which he is hanging 
baubles.

Helen’s family are with us and this gives us more than enough critical mass 
for games and a general busyness that holds upset at bay.

Last year, a few days after Helen’s last Christmas, we visited Dennis Severs’s 
House <http://www.dennissevershouse.co.uk/> in London. It is extraordinary, set 
up as though there is a family of Huguenot silk-weavers living there who leave 
the room just as you enter. The dining room has dinner set mid-meal, candles 
lit, with all the appropriate smells. You go around in silence, which helps the 
effect. With the kids so excited there is little silence here but enough room 
and general shenanigans to believe Helen is with us and has just popped on 
ahead. Far from being upsetting, I find it quietly reassuring, so powerful is 
her presence. A good place in every way. There’s laughter, optimism and joy.

This is the easy Christmas. I suspect we are all in shock and next year will 
be the acid test. Helen’s Aunt Lillian sent me a framedEmily Dickinson poem, 
Hope Is the Thing 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/42889>, which I 
had railed at because hope was defeated by death. Now I get it, and and, in a 
Dickensian inversion, we are all loving Christmas Present, comforted, not 
haunted, by Christmas Past. Christmas Future? We’ll be OK. Merry Christmas.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 