
Downton Abbey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey> has won 
best drama at the National Television Awards, beating shows including Doctor 
Who, Casualty and Broadchurch.

The recently concluded ITV show’s creator, Julian Fellowes, called the win a 
“happy ending” at the ceremony at London’s O2 arena on Wednesday. He said: “I 
love happy endings and this is a very happy ending, thank you.”

BBC series Doctor Foster won two awards: best new drama category and best 
drama performance for Suranne Jones.

The National Television Awards 2016: who should win?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/20/national-television-awards-2016-who-should-win>
Meanwhile, EastEnders beat rival Coronation Street to land the prize fore best 
serial drama.

Poldark star Aidan Turner said he was “slightly confused” as he accepted his 
award for TV moment of the year. Referring to the scenes of him scything 
topless in Poldark that caused a stir, he said: “I guess the scything scenes 
kind of speak for themselves, there’s little to say there, but the rest of the 
cast, it’s such a delight to be in this show, we have such talented people.”

In the talent show category, Strictly Come Dancing reclaimed its crown as it 
beat The X Factor. Strictly presenter Tess Daly said the win felt amazing, and 
thanked fans saying it “means the world to us”.

The BBC’s The Great British Bake Off took home the best challenge award, 
beating shows such as Bear Grylls: Mission Survive and The Apprentice.

Ant and Dec took home the most popular TV presenter award for the 15th year in 
a row. Declan Donnelly described their win as amazing, adding: “On the way in, 
people said to us does it get boring … of course it doesn’t, if anything our 
gratitude has only grown over the years because you never know when you’re 
going to get it again.”

His co-host, Anthony McPartlin, said: “15 years in a row … it’s getting a bit 
mental now, but we thank you very much from the bottom of our hearts … let’s 
get drunk tonight.”

American actor Dustin Hoffman flew in from the US to present comedian Billy 
Connolly with his special recognition award.

Hoffman paid a touching tribute to Connolly, known affectionately in Scotland 
as the Big Yin. “I’m delighted to be here to pay tribute to a man whose work 
I’ve always admired and whose company I always enjoy,” Hoffman said. He said 
the essence of Connolly was “the unique capacity to reflect human behaviour and 
stand it on his head”.

Father Sid of the Siddiqui family was ushered off stage by his family as he 
offered a rambling thank you for Gogglebox’s factual entertainment award. He 
was joined by sons Baasit and Umar to accept the show’s win for the second year 
in a row.

In his long speech, Sid added: “Thank you to all the Gogglebox families and 
each and every member of them because they bring a unique and quirky sense of 
humour to entertain everyone. We are humble folk and it is an honour to be here 
among the cream of the British television. You can tell I’m speechless.”

National Television awards: full list of winners

Comedy: Peter Kay’s Car Share 
Drama: Downton Abbey 
New drama: Doctor Foster 
Entertainment programme: I’m a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here! 
Talent show: Strictly Come Dancing 
Daytime: The Chase 
Challenge show: The Great British Bake Off 
Live magazine show: This Morning 
Serial drama: EastEnders 
Serial drama performance: Danny Dyer 
Factual entertainment: Gogglebox 
Newcomer: Shayne Ward 
TV presenter: Ant and Dec 
Drama performance: Suranne Jones 
International: The Big Bang Theory 
Special recognition: Billy Connolly 
TV moment of the year: Aidan Turner 
 