
One of the perennial questions of parenthood is, “Why are teenagers such 
a massive pain in the arse.” But there is no mystery about it: the only mystery 
is why parents are so vexed by the question. When my two eldest daughters were 
adolescents, they were sensitive about being classified as such. They felt that 
teenagers were stereotyped as rude, lazy, self-centred, withdrawn, rebellious 
and disrespectful of their parents – Kevin as portrayed by Harry Enfield at 
best, Joffrey from Game of Thrones at worst.

Stereotype or not, teenagers do suffer behavioural difficulties. However, my 
experience as a father – having helped to raise three teenage girls so far – is 
that the problem is not as bad as they say. I have witnessed little fundamental 
personality change in any of my daughters during their teenage years. So I need 
to look elsewhere for answers about the source of adolescent discontent. 
And I find that I have a handy case study – myself.

At 15, I was a whining, self-pitying, arrogant, selfish, slothful, priapic, 
surly little sod. I was a street vandal, who drank too much and took too many 
risks with drugs. And this, indeed, did represent a clear break with my 
childhood – for, until adolescence, I was a quiet, thoughtful, bookish child 
who was not much trouble to anyone.

So what happened to turn me into this monster? At pubescence, several great 
thresholds are reached. One is sexual desire and its ugly sister, sexual 
frustration. Another is simply the experience of bumping your head against 
brute reality.

The truths your parents brought you up with turn out to be lies. You realise 
that, just as there is no Santa Claus, there is little justice in the world, 
that grownups don’t know anything whereas once you thought they knew 
everything. Betrayed, I branded adults as liars and hypocrites.

There is a third threshold – the awareness of death. Teenagers are usually 
visited with a sudden, acute realisation of their own mortality. As we grow 
into adults, most of us manage to compartmentalise this knowledge so it doesn’t 
get in the way of the everyday running of affairs. But teenagers are stuck with 
the raw truth until they have developed the tools to bury it.

The simple response to this mixture of helplessness, disillusionment, fear and 
sexual frustration was drinking, drug-taking, and a free-floating, irrational 
anger that clouded everything, including my relations with adults. I had to 
blame someone because the human spirit cannot always bear too much very 
patiently. Striking out at the world was pointless and self-destructive. But at 
least it was doing something, however futile.

I was an extreme case, because my essential adolescent has never quite left 
me. Like an adolescent, I still think that, once you scratch the surface, you 
find that most people spend most of their lives in a state of denial. Just as I 
intuited as a teenager, they are largely driven by subconscious and cultural 
forces of which they are barely aware. As an adolescent I thought that made 
them liars and hypocrites. Now I understand that they live in the same trap of 
helplessness as teenagers do. As we all do. They’ve just stopped noticing.

I have grown up in some ways. I have learned how to be polite. I am old. I 
have found meaning in my life, through my work and my children. I have been 
unchained from the idiot of perpetual sexual desire.

As for death – now I’m closer to it, it doesn’t bother me half as much. But 
the fundamental teenage perception – that most people have their heads wilfully 
in the sand because they find the sensation comforting – has never left me. It 
just doesn’t make me angry any more. It simply makes me astonished.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 