
A neo-Nazi group that celebrated the murder of the Labour MP Jo Cox is to 
become the first far-right group to be proscribed as a terrorist organisation 
by the home secretary.

Support or membership of National Action, an antisemitic white supremacist 
group, will become a criminal offence under the Terrorism Act 2000, pending 
approval from parliament.

National Action has held demonstrations in UK cities with banners that say 
“Hitler was right”, and speakers have been filmed telling a small group of 
supporters about “the disease of international Jewry” and that “when the time 
comes they’ll be in the chambers”.

The group has also been filmed training supporters in hand-to-hand combat, and 
putting up posters across Liverpool and Newbury declaring them “white zones”. 
The slogan on its website is “Death to traitors, freedom for Britain,” which 
was the only statement given in court by Cox’s murderer, Thomas Mair.

After the order comes into force, arranging meetings or wearing branded 
clothing from the group will also be illegal, with breaches of the order 
carrying a possible maximum sentence of 10 years in prison or an unlimited fine.

The home secretary, Amber Rudd, said the group had no place in British 
society. “I am clear that the safety and security of our families, communities 
and country comes first,” she said. “So today I am taking action to proscribe 
the neo-Nazi group National Action. This will mean that being a member of, or 
inviting support for, this organisation will be a criminal offence.

“National Action is a racist, antisemitic and homophobic organisation which 
stirs up hatred, glorifies violence and promotes a vile ideology, and I will 
not stand for it. It has absolutely no place in a Britain that works for 
everyone.”

The order is expected to come into force on Friday after debates in parliament 
on Wednesday and Thursday.

Britain's far right in 2016: fractured, unpredictable, dispirited … and violent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/britains-far-right-in-2016-fractured-unpredictable-dispirited-and-violent>
The Home Office said the decision had been taken by Rudd prior to the trial of 
Mair, a far-right extremist who wasconvicted and sentenced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-found-guilty-of-jo-cox-murder>
 for the murder of Cox outside her constituency surgery shortly before the EU 
referendum.

However, the debate could not be put before the House of Commons until after 
the trial had concluded in order not to affect the outcome.

A spokesman for the Community Security Trust, an antisemitism monitoring 
charity, said: “National Action is a viciously antisemitic neo-Nazi group that 
repeatedly incites hatred and violence and whose supporters have been involved 
in hate crimes. We have raised our concerns about them with the government and 
the police on many occasions over the past two years and we welcome the news 
that they are to be proscribed.”

Gideon Falter, the chairman of Campaign Against Antisemitism, said: “In common 
with other terrorist groups, National Action radicalises and indoctrinates the 
young, teaches them violence, attacks the police and the public and demands the 
annihilation of Jews.

“This decision by the home secretary is something we have long called for and 
sends a strong message that the far right is in the government’s sights and 
will not be permitted to continue its incitement and violence.”

Rudd said last month that far-right groups were becoming increasingly 
sophisticated, and about a quarter of the cases being handled by the 
government’s counter-extremism programme, Channel, concerned rightwing 
radicalisation.
 