
BBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> viewers keen on a bit of wanton 
four-wheel destruction at the hands of a bunch of whooping middle-aged men need 
no longer mourn the passing of Jeremy Clarkson’s Top Gear.

The return of Robot Wars, back on Sunday night, is perfectly timed to fill the 
void of the Top Gear slot, not least after the travails of the motoring show’s
short-lived Chris Evans incarnation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/chris-evans-quits-bbc-top-gear-after-one-series>
.

It is also yet more evidence of television’s burgeoning nostalgia rush, from 
TFI Friday (Evans again) on Channel 4 to BBC1’s “classic” sitcom season 
(Goodnight Sweetheart, anyone?) and endless children’s TV remakes, from 
Thunderbirds to Teletubbies.

But there is more to it than that. Eighteen years after it first appeared on 
BBC2, the current fad for homemade tech, from hacking a circuit board to 
hovering a drone over your neighbour’s garden, helps give the show, made by 
independent producer Mentorn Scotland, a contemporary feel.

“There has been so much in the air about drones, robot deliveries, artificial 
intelligence, all that has moved so much that it actually gives us a reason for 
doing the show again, it makes it feel relevant again,” says executive producer 
Chris Brogden.

The robots are still radio-controlled but the biggest change has been in 
battery technology, meaning they can be much more powerful. Viewers might also 
notice that the new series puts more emphasis on the back story of the 
contestants taking part.

If its first incarnation was a largely blokey preserve, despite the presence 
of Philippa Forrester in the “pit lane”, its comeback is aimed at a family 
audience.

Angela Scanlon is one half of a new presenting team, alongside Dara O Briain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/dara-o-briain>, who replace former 
presenter Craig Charles (the first series was fronted by Clarkson – him again – 
in an unfortunate leather jacket).

“Philippa Forrester was there in her leathers but Dara and I feel more like 
equals, I suppose,” says Scanlon, a reporter on BBC1’s The One Show. “There are 
women on the show but there’s no denying that it tends to be male-skewed. I am 
hoping we can change that.

“People have been overwhelmingly positive about it coming back, which is 
mildly terrifying, I am not going to lie,” adds Scanlon.

“It’s a nostalgia thing, but it also feels like a nice time to go back and 
revisit something that feels in a way quite innocent. People feel quite cynical 
about a lot of TV and what is happening in the world.

“Robot Wars is very destructive but on the other hand it is good clean 
innocent fun.”

There’s innocent – and then there’s innocent. The new rebooted version 
features bigger, heavier, more destructive house robots, including Dead Metal, 
which weighs 343kg (three times its original weight) with a 450mm circular saw 
rotating at 4000rpm.

Like some of Top Gear’s most memorable comedy stunts, the real joy of Robot 
Wars is its gratuitous destruction. “I think people love the show simply 
because everything just smashes into everything else and it is sparks and 
explosions and metal being torn up. It’s carnage, who doesn’t enjoy that?” says 
O Briain of the new series.

“The House Robots grip harder than they used to, they smash further, they move 
quicker, they are terrifyingly bigger and heavier than the first time round. 
But then, aren’t we all?”

The original Robot Wars peaked with 6 million viewers on BBC2, making it the 
channel’s most popular programme a decade before The Great British Bake Off and 
when Top Gear was still being reinvented by Clarkson.

It might be too much to suggest lightning will strike twice, but it could very 
well beat the last episode of Evans’s Top Gear, which had an overnight audience 
of just 1.9 million. Certainly BBC2 would be delighted with anything more than 
2 million when the ratings are published on Monday morning.

The BBC has another homemade tech show ripe for reinvention — The Great Egg 
Race, fronted by Professor Heinz Wolff, which ran from 1979 to 1986 and was 
briefly resurrected byBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Choice, the 
forerunner to BBC3, a decade and a half ago.

Just so long as there is no repeat of these teething problems 18 years ago.: 
“A BBC technician was attacked on a film set by a robot,” reported the Times. 
“The man was trying to pick up the android during the making of Robot Wars when 
it short-circuited, lashing out with a blade, cutting the technician’s foot.” 
Bad robot.
 