
Solicitors who failed to warn of soaring ground rents on leasehold properties 
face a wave of claims for professional negligence, following Guardian Money 
revelations on a scandal that has engulfed thousands of unwitting homebuyers.

Many have been unaware that the ground rent on new-build leasehold properties 
they have bought can escalate dramatically in future years following the 
introduction of new clauses in which it doubles every decade. Although most 
housebuilders have switched to a new formula of increases based on RPI, some 
people are finding that the new-build home they bought as recently as 2010 is 
virtually unsaleable.

The ground rent scandal that is engulfing new home buyers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/05/ground-rent-scandal-engulfing-new-home-buyers-leasehold>
But a lifeline has emerged for distressed buyers in the form of the Council of 
Mortgage Lenders handbook, which is meant to guide the process of conveyancing. 
Graham Balchin of solicitors Carter Lemon Camerons says: “It is a requirement 
of most lenders [see the CML Handbooksection 5.14.9 
<https://www.cml.org.uk/lenders-handbook/englandandwales/#C8777>] that the 
lender is informed of any increase in the ground rent that may materially 
affect the value of the property. If the conveyancing solicitor fails to warn 
the purchaser, and any lender providing a mortgage secured on the property, 
that the lease terms may adversely affect the value of the leasehold property, 
they may be liable in negligence.

“I have acted – and am currently acting – for a number of flat owners who have 
suffered substantial loss as a result of purchasing leasehold property with 
onerous ground rent clauses. In those claims we have been able to recover 
compensation from the solicitor.”

Balchin adds that the insurers for solicitors, who cover the cost of 
professional negligence claims, have accepted that a doubling of the ground 
rent every 10 years is an “onerous term”.

Money has also been contacted by Myles Hickey of solicitors Dowse & Co, who 
also suggests householders claim for professional negligence. In one case 
Hickey handled the client was on the hook for an increase in the initial £400 
annual ground rent to an extraordinary £409,600. “It is scandalous that the 
solicitors acting for the leaseholders failed to pick up this glaring problem 
before contracts were exchanged. I would suggest that failure to alert a buyer 
to the risks they face from periodic doubling of ground rent is obvious 
professional negligence,” he says.

It is scandalous that the solicitors failed to pick up this glaring problem 
before contracts were exchanged

Some of the cases seen by Balchin are remarkable. “I was approached by someone 
who had bought a home in south-east London 20 years ago for £150,000. Since 
then the ground rent has gone up to £32,000 a year. A clause in his lease said 
the ground rent would increase to a percentage of the rentable value of the 
property. It’s something you see in some commercial leases, but not normally in 
residential. It was very well hidden and no one paid attention. It started at 
£50 a year, or 1% of the sale price, or 60% of the rentable value, whichever is 
higher. An experienced conveyancer would have understood it and advised the 
buyer. But most conveyancing is done by pretty junior people who don’t realise 
just how onerous these terms are.”

Many young buyers are encouraged by developers to use solicitors for 
conveyancing recommended by them, who then fail to warn the buyer of the 
onerous ground rent clauses.

Balchin says: “Estate agents are also to blame. They will recommend solicitors 
who will make the sale happen because the agent wants to get their commission. 
The agent, of course, is acting for the seller and can try to conceal just how 
high the ground rent is. In one case I was told of the agent saying the ground 
rent was just £27 per month, rather than £350 a year. That makes a very high 
figure for a flat in Nelson, Lancashire, sound quite reasonable. They don’t 
mention that the ground rent doubles every 10 years.”

The new-builds catching house buyers in a leasehold property trap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/29/new-builds-house-buyers-leasehold-property-trap>
Balchin points out that leasehold house buyers find themselves in a worse 
position than flat buyers. If a developer such as Taylor Wimpey sells the 
freehold of a block of flats, it has to offer the leasees a right of first 
refusal. But owners of leasehold homes have no such right. This explains why 
buyers of new-build houses have contacted Money after discovering that only a 
couple of years later the freehold on their home has been sold to another 
company without their approval. Buying the freehold can then become very 
expensive.

Balchin says he seeks compensation from the leaseholder’s conveyancing 
solicitor based on a surveyor’s valuation of what the property would be worth 
with and without the onerous ground rent clauses. But he warns that 
leaseholders need to begin legal action sooner rather than later: “A claim must 
be brought within six years of exchange of contracts.” Unfortunately, many 
people don’t realise until they come to sell, which can be too late. Ground 
rent clauses which rise linked to RPI are less likely to succeed as a claim 
than ones that double every 10 years, he adds.

Meanwhile, Conservative MP Peter Bottomley, joint-chairman of the all-party 
parliamentary group on leasehold reform, this week challenged Peter Redfern, 
chief executive of Taylor Wimpey, to explain his company’s policy. “Is there 
any reason to sell a new house leasehold except to put the new owner at a 
disadvantage? This may have been legal; it is clearly undesirable. A 
respectable company, I believe, should rule out this arrangement as corporate 
irresponsibility.”

Is there any reason to sell a new house leasehold except to put the new owner 
at a disadvantage?

In a statement, Taylor Wimpey indicated that it is prepared to look again at 
its ground rent clauses. It said: “We reviewed the mechanism for ground rent 
increases in 2011 and decided that the RPI was a more appropriate measure going 
forward. All Taylor Wimpey homes on developments commenced after 2011 have been 
sold with ground rent increases linked to the RPI. All purchasers have 
independent legal advice.

“Until recently, we hadn’t been aware of the concern of some customers and 
homeowners regarding these pre-RPI clauses and the difficulties that they are 
currently experiencing in selling or mortgaging their homes. Having heard the 
cases described and in order to establish the facts, we are undertaking a 
review.”

• The solicitors featured above are offering a free evaluation for 
leaseholders seeking to claim professional negligence. AtCarter Lemon Camerons  
<http://www.cartercamerons.com/>contact GrahamBalchin@cartercamerons.com 
<mailto:GrahamBalchin@cartercamerons.com> or 020 7406 1040. At Dowse & Co 
<http://www.dowse.co.uk/> contact mh@dowse.co.uk <mailto:mh@dowse.co.uk> or 020 
7254 6205.

A country-wide problem

Nearly £2bn-worth of new-build leasehold houses were sold in England and Wales 
last year, according to a detailed analysis of Land Registry data.

Beware the small print that could hike one-bed flat’s ground rent to £8m-a-year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/22/small-print-ground-rent-property-millions-leasehold-flat>
Builders traditionally sold houses as freehold, but they’ve switched to 
leasehold on some estates, saddling buyers with spiralling ground rents. In 
some cases highlighted by Money, buyers later say their homes are unsaleable.

Research by the Leasehold <https://www.theguardian.com/money/leasehold> 
Knowledge Partnership reveals there were £1.9bn of new-build leasehold homes 
sold in 2015. So far this year the total is £775m. “As the Land Registry can 
take several months to record a new transaction, the 2016 data is incomplete. 
It should not be assumed the 2016 figure will be lower than 2015,” says 
Sebastian O’Kelly of LKP.

Clauses in the lease allow the freeholder to double the ground rent every 
decade, with it rising to £9,000 or more in some cases. Leaseholders wanting to 
buy the freehold find the builder has sold it on to another firm, which then 
seeks huge sums even though the lease may only be a few years into a 999-year 
term.

“The new-build leasehold houses stretch right across the country, from Penrith 
down to the Isle of Wight,” says O’Kelly. “Several areas of Wales are affected, 
with a reintroduction of leasehold houses on a scale not seen since mine owners 
began building tied accommodation in the Valleys. A disproportionate amount 
seems to be in the north-west and in poorer areas.” However, there are also 
smatterings of new leasehold house sales in the south-east and south-west, with 
heavy concentrations in Thurrock and Peterborough. So far, the most expensive 
new-build leasehold house sold this year was in Hammersmith for £3.3m.
 