
For Andy Farrell life has turned full circle. When he was 16 he joined a 
dressing room at Wigan's Central Park that included some of the great players 
in rugby league's modern era. Ellery Hanley, Martin Offiah, Shaun Edwards and 
Dean Bell were part of a legendary club side and they were not going to 
mollycoddle a self-confessed "cocky" teenager.

Farrell, who had already played in the Wigan second team as a schoolboy, 
remembers: "They were a ruthless group who were prepared to help the youngsters 
but they weren't soft on them. It was a real eye-opener for me. And that's what 
we want to build at this club."

The new joint captain of Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> 
with the England skipper, Steve Borthwick, looks around the canteen at the 
University of Hertfordshire where his team-mates are packing away the protein 
in preparation for tomorrow afternoon's EDF Energy Cup encounter with 
Northampton at Watford. Having recovered from a dislocated thumb Farrell will 
be leading the side at Vicarage Road alongside the prodigiously talented young 
centre Adam Powell. But at some stage this season the 33-year-old Farrell is 
destined to play alongside another young player and make a little bit of rugby 
history.

Never mind that thumb, though. Fingers should be crossed. In August the 
16-year-oldOwen Farrell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/owen-farrell>, also 
a centre, was named on the bench for a pre-season game in St Albans against the 
touring Western Storm. The schoolboy making waves in Hertfordshire was at some 
stage to play alongside his dad. Except it did not happen that way. "The match 
was a couple of minutes old when I did this," says Farrell Sr with a grin, 
pointing to his dodgy digit. "I had to leave the field and Owen was still in 
the toilet when he was called on to replace me. We didn't even cross on the 
field so I could wish him luck."

Owen Farrell has since made his debut for the first team. At Vicarage Road 
three weekends ago he came on as a second-half substitute against a Scarlets 
team packed with internationals in Saracens' first EDF game. Dad and mum 
Colleen were proud spectators with Andy quickly bringing his son down to earth. 
"He's still got to do his homework tonight and go to school in the morning," 
was his father's blunt assessment after Owen, at 17 years and 11 days, had 
become the youngest player to play professional rugby for an English club.

"Owen always says I am too hard on him," said Farrell. "But there was nothing 
better for me as a cocky youngster than to be given advice by the older 
players. We have eight or nine players here now who are the future of the club 
and Eddie Jones and the senior players drive them on. The likes of Adam Powell, 
Alex Goode and Noah Cato are very talented and behind them there is another 
crop coming through. It's no good having stars at the club if they are out of 
reach and I and the senior players are helping the youngsters. Perhaps that has 
not happened enough in the past but we can't just work as a group of 
individuals and Eddie has helped change the culture of this place in just a few 
months.

"It's hard for these young players. They have gone from being the top in their 
peer group to a really harsh environment and playing professional rugby is not 
easy. It is a test of character. Owen is really serious about his rugby and, 
yes, it was magnificent to see him play in the first team. But I can't say I 
enjoyed that 20 minutes. I was like any other parent, just willing him not to 
make a mistake."

If Owen Farrell seems to have been genetically programmed to play rugby union 
for England, Andy Farrell's path to pulling on the red-rose jersey had not 
exactly been a primrose one. Farrell famously followed his stellar rise to the 
Wigan first team at 16 by playing for Great Britain at 18 and captaining his 
country three years later. His decision in March 2005 to move south to play for 
Saracens in a deal underwritten by Twickenham was a controversial one. Less 
than two years later he made his England debut at inside-centre alongside Jonny 
Wilkinson at Twickenham and Scotland had no answer to that muscular midfield 
combination. But a foot injury and back injury and an early row between club 
and country over what position he should play has helped make the switch of 
codes fraught.

Andy Farrell, who watched Owen play for the England 18 Group last night, will 
switch on his television at home in Harpenden this morning and watch England's 
first game of the rugby league World Cup with interest. His England rugby union 
days may be over but he has no regrets about his move south. "I don't regret 
the change at all. It's been fantastic and we want to win at least one trophy 
this season. We can because standards here have gone through the roof."

This week there was some shocking news from the north for Farrell to absorb. 
David Myers, killed in a car accident on the M6 in Cheshire on Monday night, 
was an early team-mate at Wigan. "I still can't believe it. David was a 
big-money signing from Widnes. He was mischievous and had a great sense of fun. 
In his heyday he was one of the great wingers and was scoring tries for fun. It 
was a real shock to hear the news." If nothing else it put coping with a 
painful thumb into perspective.
 