
The final weekend of the NFL’s regular season is upon us. And so too, 
therefore, is the final week of our Pick Six contest. We’ll be following up 
with Pick The Playoffs, of course, from next week, but this is your final 
chance to call a full slate of six games correctly - just likeaalipour, 
carloscontrole, denothemeno, Fraser Hartley, Gruagain, Robert Rudolph, 
Switchskier, TheBandit79 and xartec did last time out. Do join me in giving 
them each a virtual pat on the back.

I’ll have the overall standings up in the comments section shortly, but can 
confirm thatcastigers remains our overall leader going into the final round of 
games. And here are those games:

Houston Texans @ Tennessee Titans (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

This could have been a division title decider. Instead, the Titans’ season 
came crashing down around them when Marcus Mariota broke his leg during a heavy 
defeat in Jacksonville. And yet, Tennessee might still be the more motivated 
team in this matchup. One more win would seal their first winning season since 
2011, whilst Mariota’s replacement, Matt Cassel, is out to prove he still 
belongs in this league as he approaches the end of a one-year deal. By 
contrast, the Texans are locked into the AFC’s fourth seed, and may think twice 
about gambling on the health of ailing starters. It would be a surprise to see 
Lamar Miller get on the field after the tailback missed last week’s game 
against Cincinnati, and other high profile names on the injury report this week 
include quarterback Tom Savage, linebacker John Simon and Pro Bowl defensive 
end Jadeveon Clowney.Titans to win

Baltimore Ravens @ Cincinnati Bengals (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

Eliminated from playoff contention following a fourth-quarter collapse in 
Pittsburgh, the Ravens might find some small consolation in the opportunity to 
take their frustrations out on a different division rival. They have struggled 
against Cincinnati in recent years - losing five straight against these 
opponents prior to a 19-14 triumph in week 12. Joe Flacco has thrown just a 
single touchdown, and five interceptions, in his last three visits to Paul 
Brown Stadium. But the Bengals are at a low ebb, missing half an offense 
through injury and potentially the competitive rage of Vontaze Burfict on 
defense, too, as he works his way through the concussion protocol. If nothing 
else, you know that Steve Smith Sr will do everything in his power to make what 
will probably be his final game in theNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> a special one. Ravens to win

Dallas Cowboys @ Philadelphia Eagles (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

Which version of the Dallas Cowboys do we see this weekend? Jason Garrett kept 
his starters on the field throughout Monday’s 42-21 win over Detroit, despite 
having already secured top seeding in the NFC. He is playing his cards close to 
his chest for this weekend, but the expectation is that he will at least begin 
this game with a similar mindset. With a first-round bye yet to come, there may 
be a danger in taking this game too easily and allowing rust to set in. The 
Eagles showed they still have some fight left in them with an upset win over 
the Giants in week 16, but New York is still the only team to beat the Cowboys 
all season.Cowboys to win 


Oakland Raiders @ Denver Broncos (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT)

Did Oakland’s season end with the breaking of Derek Carr’s right fibula on 
Christmas Eve? Despite having already won 12 games, the Raiders do not even 
have the luxury of a meaningless game this weekend. Defeat in Denver would put 
them at risk of losing their division title, and first-round bye, to Kansas 
City. Carr’s replacement, Matt McGloin, is something of an unknown quantity. He 
has not started a game since 2013, his rookie year, and even head coach Jack 
Del Rio seemed uncertain as to whether he would be able to run the full 
offensive scheme seen throughout this season so far, telling reporters: “We’re 
getting ready to find out”. Mile High Stadium is hardly a welcoming spot for a 
quarterback trying to find his feet, but the Broncos were awful against Kansas 
City in week 16 and it was the Raiders’ running game, rather than Carr, that 
undid them in Oakland earlier this year.Raiders to win

New York Giants @ Washington (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT)

Ben McAdoo has been clear 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/football-insider/wp/2016/12/28/giants-coach-ben-mcadoo-intends-to-play-starters-against-redskins-on-sunday/?utm_term=.cacd35abc521>
 in stating that the Giants will use their regular starters this Sunday. 
Although they are guaranteed to finish as the NFC’s fifth seed, the coach might 
frame this matchup to his players as a test of character following last 
weekend’s loss to Philadelphia. Washington’s motivation is more obvious, since 
a win would almost certainly send them into the postseason (only a tie between 
Green Bay and Detroit could eliminate them at that stage) but they have 
mustered only two of those in their last five games. I don’t believe for one 
moment that the Giants will make their life easy. But I do think that New York 
might struggle to contain that vertical attack with both cornerback Janoris 
Jenkins and defensive end Jason Pierre-Paul sidelined by injury.Washington to 
win

Green Bay Packers @ Detroit Lions (Sunday 8.25pm ET/Monday 1.25am GMT)

Two years after making R-E-L-A-X the slogan of an MVP season, Aaron Rodgers is 
once again making a mockery of the critics who chided him for a slow start. At 
4-6, Green Bay looked to be in danger of missing out on the playoffs but 
Rodgers remained adamant that his team could run the table and get in. Five 
wins, 12 touchdowns (one of those a rushing score) and zero interceptions 
later, he stands just a single game away from making good on that prediction; 
whoever triumphs here will be crowned as NFC North champions. Winning at Ford 
Field is no small task – the Lions are 6-1 at home, and have rallied from 
fourth-quarter deficits in every one of those victories. But Detroit’s Matthew 
Stafford has struggled since dislocating the tip of his middle finger during a 
win over Chicago, and his team has had two fewer days to prepare for this game. 
Plus, as he demonstrated with that famous Hail Mary play on his last visit 
here, Rodgers himself is not a man to know when he’s beaten.Packers to win 
 