
As Tony Romo reminded us this week, there can be a certain nobility in knowing 
when to accept defeat. But you know what’s better than being a good loser? 
Being an excellent winner - just likeambushinthenight, Martin Miller and 
SaintJames - the only three people who called every game correctly in Week 10 
of our Pick Six contest.

The latter member of that trio leapt up to within two points of first place in 
the overall standings, too, but for nowBesd1, GlennyTheElder and ITLaw23 
continue to lead the way. I’ll have the full list up in the comments section 
shortly, but for now here are this week’s games.

'An upper-class picnic': the Mexican elite's curious love affair with NFL
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/nfl-mexico-upper-class-elite-soccer>
Tennessee Titans @ Indianapolis Colts (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

Dismiss Mike Mularkey at your peril. Many of us mocked the Titans head coach 
back in February, when he defined his offensive philosophy as “exotic 
smashmouth”. Few are laughing now (and even fewer in Wisconsin) after Tennessee 
put 47 points on the Packers. Mularkey’s team has scored at least 35 in each of 
its last three games and – with DeMarco Murray alternately trampling over 
defenders, then deceiving them with trick-play passing – that offense is more 
than living up to its billing. This next hurdle, though, is a big one: the 
Titans have not beaten Indianapolis in their last 10 attempts. The Colts also 
arrive at this matchup refreshed from a bye week, and looking healthier than 
they have done all year. They were missing Donte Moncrief, Dwayne Allen and 
guard Jack Mewhort when they beat the Titans in Tennessee last month. All of 
those players are now back in the lineup.Colts to win

Arizona Cardinals @ Minnesota Vikings (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

The Vikings, as you might have spotted, are imploding. A brilliant 5-0 start 
has been succeeded by four consecutive defeats and an eyebrow-raising change at 
offensive coordinator. Injuries have decimated the offense, and the run game 
has ground to a halt – with Minnesota averaging a pathetic 2.7 yards per carry. 
Arizona, though, hardly look all that much better. At a surface level, you 
might infer that they are trending in the opposite direction – recovering from 
a 1-3 start to claw their way back to 4-4-1 – and yet their only wins since the 
start of October were against the 49ers (twice) and Jets. And, oh boy, didn’t 
they make hard work of beating San Francisco at home last weekend. They have 
injuries of their own to contend with, from Larry Fitzgerald through to safety 
Tyrann Mathieu and linebacker Deonne Bucannon, and have also struggled up front 
on offense – with Carson Palmer sacked more times already this season than he 
was in all of 2015. I don’t believe either of these teams makes the playoffs. 
But in a pinch, this Sunday, I’ll back the one that does at least still boast a 
viable ground game.Cardinals to win

Buffalo Bills @ Cincinnati Bengals (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

The schedule-makers have been cruel on the Bengals, pitching them on a short 
week against opponents who are coming off a bye. Buffalo would have needed a 
lot more than a week, though, to recover from the blow of losing Eric Wood to a 
broken leg. LeSean McCoy described the center as “probably the most important 
player on our offense”, noting how he was responsible for communicating 
blocking scheme adjustments at the line. Neutralizing the likes of Geno Atkins 
and Carlos Dunlap will certainly be trickier without him. Even so, I lean 
towards Buffalo. The gulf between six days’ rest and 14 at this stage of the 
season is simply too big to ignore.Bills to win

Miami Dolphins @ Los Angeles Rams (Sunday 4.05pm ET/9.05pm GMT)

Here begins the Jared Goff era. But what can we expect of the Rams’ No1 pick? 
He certainly has a stronger arm than Case Keenum, and there is a best-case 
scenario here in which Goff not only upgrades Los Angeles’ aerial attack but 
also creates running room for Todd Gurley in the process. Conversely, even in a 
worst-case scenario, would the rookie really damage his team all that much? The 
Rams were already averaging the fewest points per game (15.4) of any team in 
the league. Most weeks, the pertinent question is simply whether they can do 
enough on defense to give themselves a shot. I can well imagine Aaron Donald 
dominating against a reshuffled Miami offensive line, with Laremy Tunsil moving 
out from guard to replace the injured Brandon Albert at left tackle. And yet, 
I’m still not sure I can imagine the Rams ending the Dolphins’ four-game 
winning streak.Dolphins to win

Green Bay Packers @ Washington (Sunday 8.30pm ET/Monday 1.30am GMT)

Nobody in Washington is about to take the Packers lightly. Memories of last 
season’s wild card defeat are still too raw. But Green Bay’s rough patch has 
dragged on long enough now that the rest of us might want to start downgrading 
our expectations. Since the start of November 2015, the Packers’ 
(playoff-inclusive) record is a mediocre 9-12. Aaron Rodgers owns worse passer 
rating and yards-per-attempt numbers this season than Brian Hoyer, Cody 
Kessler, and, indeed, Washington’s own Kirk Cousins. Perhaps the return of Clay 
Matthews this week will help to offset his struggles by shoring up a defense 
that has fallen even further short of expectations. But as of right now, 
Washington simply look the better team.Washington to win

Houston Texans @ Oakland Raiders (Monday 8.30pm ET/Tuesday 1.30am GMT)

There will be no home-field advantage for Oakland on Monday Night Football, 
with this game taking place at Mexico’s Estadio Azteca. For a team chasing its 
first playoff berth in 14 years, that feels like a significant sacrifice to 
make. On the other hand, the Raiders are 5-0 on the road this season, so we 
should not doubt their ability to cope without home comforts. I also think they 
match up pretty well with Houston – who can be read as a slightly worse version 
of the Denver team that Oakland steamrollered earlier this month. The Texans’ 
greatest strength lies on defense – and yet, much like the Broncos, they are 
not actually that strong against the run. If Jack Del Rio can show the same 
faith once again in his stable of just-about-good-enough backs, then he might 
well get the same result.Raiders to win
 