
A revolution in the handling of NHS complaints has been proposed in a report 
co-authored by the MP Ann Clwyd,who has told how her own husband was treated 
with "coldness, resentment, indifference and contempt" on his hospital deathbed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/dec/04/ann-clwyd-husband-died-hen>.

David Cameron commissioned the review into the issue, which has dogged the NHS 
for decades, following theFrancis report into failings at Mid Staffordshire NHS 
Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/feb/06/mid-staffs-hospital-francis-report>
. Robert Francis QC said problems could have been spotted earlier if staff had 
listened to the concerns of patients and relatives, who were often neglected 
and ignored.

Sitting beside Clwyd and co-author Professor Tricia Hart – a nurse turned NHS 
chief executive who was on the Francis inquiry – the health secretary,Jeremy 
Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, said that he supported 
their call for change.

Hunt said that while it was clear from the Francis report that the first 
priority was to prevent poor care, when accidents do happen, "it is incredibly 
important to make sure we have a structure where people learn from mistakes and 
hospitals and care providers have a culture where there is openness and 
transparency".

Previous inquiries into how complaints by patients and relatives have been 
handled in the NHS have gathered dust, but after "a decade of failure" Clwyd 
and Hart want urgent action and have commitments from key NHS organisations in 
England, including the Royal College ofNursing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nursing> and the General Medical Council – 
which regulates doctors and oversees their training – as well as the Care 
Quality Commission and Monitor.

The review said complaints must be taken seriously at the very top of the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, with chief executives responsible 
for signing them off and trust boards scrutinising and evaluating them. Staff 
must be better trained to listen to patients. Hart called for "better, safer, 
kinder care so that fewer patients feel like they want to complain".

But it must be made easier for patients and families to raise their concerns 
if they have any, the report said. Hospitals should consider putting a pen and 
paper by every bed and must ensure each patient knows who they can talk to.

Clwyd's husband, former BBC journalist Owen Roberts, died in the University 
Hospital of Wales, which is not covered by the review of complaints in England. 
Clwyd said she has been in discussions with the hospital, however.

In an interview on BBC radio last December, Clwyd wept as she described her 
husband's last hours, shivering under flimsy sheets, with an ill-fitting oxygen 
mask cutting into his face, wedged up against the bars of the hospital bed. He 
died, she said, "like a battery hen".

At the report's launch she told of her astonishment at the number of calls and 
letters she had received from people who had also suffered. "I had no idea it 
would open the floodgates in the way it did," she said. "I wouldn't have 
imagined some of the things people had to go through because they had lost a 
relative or friend and the difficulty they had when they felt they had to make 
a complaint."

The review looked at 2,500 accounts of poor care and lack of compassion, in 
which staff were described as offhand, rude, impatient and callous.

One read: "No bathing, toileting, ensuring patients are hydrated and nourished 
and little sympathy and empathy."

Describing the treatment of his mother, who had two broken wrists, one man 
said: "No one would feed her when meals were delivered, despite the fact that 
she had two arms strapped up in the air! My aunt had to travel over two hours 
every day just to ensure she was fed."

Another wrote: "When visiting my wife … after an operation to mend her broken 
hip, I asked a nurse for help as she was being very, very sick. She announced, 
'I am a graduate. I don't do sick' and left me to deal with the situation."

The shadow health secretary, Andy Burnham, said the NHS had "an unfortunate 
tendency to push complainants away and pull down the shutters. That has to 
change … NHS organisations should use complaints positively as part the drive 
to improve care."

Burnham supported calls for a statutory "duty of candour" on individual staff 
who know they have made mistakes, as recommended by the Francis inquiry. Clwyd 
and Hart support this in their review. Hunt said he was also in favour of a 
duty of candour, but for hospital trusts rather than a legal obligation on 
individual doctors and nurses.

But the patients' charity Action against Medical Accidents, which has 
campaigned for this, said it feared the government would water down this 
commitment and bring it in only for the most severe cases. This would, said 
chief executive Peter Walsh, "in effect, legitimise cover-ups of the vast 
majority of incidents which cause serious harm. It would kindle a culture of 
cover up and denial. Any complaints system worth its salt relies on honesty. It 
is also the bedrock of a patient safety culture".

National Voices, the umbrella group for health and social care charities, 
agreed. Don Redding, its director of policy, said: "The new proposals would 
water down the good intentions formed since the appalling failures in Mid 
Staffordshire. Under the current plan, if you are caused 'moderate' harm, there 
will be no legal need to tell you, your family or your carer: this is not 
ethical, it is not person-centred and it is not the way to a transparent NHS."

The learning disability charity Mencap, which has worked since 2007 with 
nearly 100 families who believe there are questions to answer over the death of 
a loved one, welcomed the review.

"Families have found the complaints process slow, bureaucratic and defensive," 
said chief executive Janine Tregelles. "Many have been bereaved in traumatic 
circumstances, yet have waited years to reach some form of justice for their 
loved one.

"This culture of delay and defensiveness means the NHS has been failing to 
learn lessons and take the steps needed to prevent further avoidable deaths and 
serious incidents."
 