
Nick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> believes next 
week’s autumn statement will contain a pledge to spend an extra £1.5bn on the 
NHS, not only to meet the demands of the winter of 2015-16, but also to signal 
a wider longer-term “step-change” in the funding of the National Health Service.

The deputy prime minister said at a Westminster press conference he believed 
there would be agreement on the extra spending for 2015-16 with the Lib Dems’ 
coalition partners, as his aides said it had already been discussed with the 
chancellor and the prime minister, adding it was very much on the agenda of the 
autumn statement.

He said: “I do not anticipate a great political standoff about this. If you 
look at what Jeremy Hunt [the Conservative health secretary] has said about the 
report by Simon Stevens, the NHS chief executive. It’s a compelling analysis 
about the needs the NHS now face. I cannot believe any political party is going 
to stick its head in the sand that does not require a step-change in the 
resources that you provide to theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.”

He said making the commitment in the autumn statement would “ensure the NHS 
was handed over so that doctors and nurses would be confident that they had the 
backing of government not only to deal with this winter’s pressures, but next 
winter’s pressures as well.”

Such extra funding, amounting broadly to an additional £8bn spending on the 
NHS over the five years of the next parliament, politically might undercut 
Labour, which is hoping to make its commitment to the health service a central 
feature of the election campaign.

At the weekend, the shadow chancellor, Ed Balls, said he would have given the 
£1bn of fines imposed for foreign exchange banking scandals to the NHS, as well 
as unveiling a plan for an extra £2.5bn annually in NHS funding. Clegg gave no 
details of how he expected the extra spending to be funded, at a time when 
independent forecasters are predicting that borrowing is likely to be £13bn 
higher this financial year due to tax receipts being lower than the Office of
Budget <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> Responsibility (OBR) expected in 
the spring.

Clegg appeared to confirm the receipts would be scored lower for 2014-15 in 
the OBR’s latest forecasts. which will be published at the time of the autumn 
statement, but he said this would not deter his party from sticking to its 
pledge to eradicate the current structural deficit by 2017-8, its central 
economic pledge for the next parliament.

The £1.5bn extra spending for health for 2015-16 would be on top of the £700m 
set aside for this winter and is broadly in line with the call for an extra 
£8bn funding for the five years of the next parliament proposed by the NHS 
chief last month.

Clegg argued the health service needed to know before the election that the 
extra spending would be available next year, adding: “We need now to agree a 
step-change in the amount of financial support we give to the health service in 
the years to come.”

He said this change was necessary due to pressures placed in the NHS including 
1.3 million more people visiting accident and emergency than in the last Labour 
government, the pressures of an ageing population including an expected 15 
million extra elderly people in 20 years’ time, and finally the compelling 
analysis provided by Stevens.

He said he “did not know anyone had demurred from the basic analysis given by 
Stevens”, saying the extra £1.5bn annual extra funding was enough for the NHS 
if accompanied by 3% efficiency savings and integration of health and social 
care services.

The Liberal Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> 
have already said they would like to see £1.5bn increase in annual spending in 
the next parliament, but this is the first time Clegg has said an announcement 
should be made by the coalition government in the autumn statement.

He said he wanted to protect the mental health budget within the NHS by moving 
to a patient per person output formula for mental health patients, something he 
described as the biggest change in funding for mental health.

He described Tory promises to eradicate the current and capital deficit by 
2017-18 as a fantasy especially since the Tories had also made promises on tax 
cuts.
 