
Nick Clegg has revealed he urged David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to change the remain 
campaign strategy in the final weeks before the EU referendum, saying the 
economic-focused Stronger In campaign was “bloodless” and failing against the 
emotional pull of the leave campaign.

In an interview with the Guardian’s Owen Jones, the former deputy prime 
minister said he believed voters in Sheffield, where he has his constituency, 
had wanted to send a message not just to Brussels but to southern England and 
London for leaving the north of the country behind.

“For a lot of people it was a vote against London, ‘them down there’,” the 
former Liberal Democrat leader said. “I got in touch with David Cameron by 
email and I said, ‘I think the emotional case for remain is being lost’. And my 
suggestion for the last week of the campaign was to do proper battle with the 
very emotionally pungent Brexit slogan, ‘Take Back Control’.

“I said why not, ‘Vote remain to keep us safe’, so safe from recession, keep 
our kids safe etc? I just thought it was more emotionally powerful. He politely 
replied he wanted to stick to the economic strategy.”

Clegg said he did not blame Cameron for the loss of the Brexit vote, but said 
the campaign was “very bloodless and allowed a more emotionally impactful 
argument in favour of dollops of money for the NHS, and economic utopia, the 
traffic would flow, the sun would shine, it allowed the other side to make 
these ludicrous claims … in a relatively unchallenged way”.

The MP, who worked at the European commission before entering frontline 
politics, has drawn up a proposal for an interim deal for the UK after it 
formally exits the EU, which would involve re-entering the European Free Trade 
Area (Efta), which the UK spearheaded almost 60 years ago.

Now comprising only four members – Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein and 
Switzerland – it would mean the UK remained inside the single market but 
outside the customs union and other schemes such as the common agricultural or 
common fisheries policies.

The prime minister, Theresa May, is due to confirm the UK will be leaving the 
single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/theresa-may-to-confirm-uk-exit-from-eu-single-market-speech>
, with 12 key priorities for negotiations including control over immigration 
and removing Britain from the jurisdiction of the European court of justice.

Clegg said he believed it was a dereliction for the prime minister to pursue a 
hard Brexit strategy. “If you are the prime minister of such a deeply divided 
country, you have a duty to find a compromise, it means maybe some changes to 
how immigration works, trying to preserve our place in the single market,” he 
said.

“It doesn’t mean unilaterally getting rid of everything and delegitimising the 
aims and hopes and dreams of 48% of the voting public. Since when does a prime 
minister basically say that the needs and aspirations and interests of 16.1 
million fellow citizens counts for nothing?”
 