
A video clip has been released into the ether that has left many confused and 
some embarrassed. Or both if, like me, you stumbled on it at work and Eunice 
from four desks down caught a glimpse of what you were watching on screen and 
mentally uninvited you to the charity cupcake fundraiser on Thursday morning.

Nicki Minaj’s Anaconda video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LDZX4ooRsWs> is 
not for the faint-hearted.

There’s not much to it on paper. It’s basically a remake of Sir Mix-a-Lot’s 
relatively harmless early 90s ditty,Baby Got Back 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_JphDdGV2TU>, a musical romp celebrating women 
who carry what Mix-a-lot referred to as “healthy butts”. Back then, the track 
was mildly controversial. These days, it’s practically geriatric, most often to 
be found on So Fresh 90s CD compilations gathering dust under the front 
passenger seat next to some petrified Twisties and Happy Meal figurines.

Until Nicki reimagined the song, it was arsenal for DJs who needed to cater 
for the over-35s begrudgingly attending a relative’s 21st. It’s a guaranteed 
floor filler with the handbag dance set. Nicki’s brought it to a new generation 
by adding her questionable charm and debatable rapping, imploring all the 
ladies with the big bums to get their said big bums out in the club. Or words 
to that effect.

Reading on mobile? Click here  
<http://www.muzu.tv/nicki-minaj/anaconda-music-video/2287201/>

Visually, it’s about the rear with the video a confirmation that backside 
wobbling as a lifestyle choice has gone to the next level. Twerking looked as 
though it was on its last breath when Miley Cyrus adopted it. On this evidence, 
it’s now usurping regular activities, like moving, for example.

Aside from some efforts of the backing dancers, the video demands that figures 
remain stationary while bits of their butt move in isolation. The whole thing 
looks like a plate of Nan’s jellied meats in aspic, the outer reaches wobbling 
about gleefully while the insides remain solid. And who on earth invited Drake 
to turn up in cargo shorts for a lap dance on a chair that looks as though it 
was dragged in from the communal lunch area at work? His demeanour is one of 
somebody who has spent the worst Sunday of his life shopping at Ikea.

Further proof of twerk takeover has emerged since the video’s release. When 
the American rapper Wiz Khalifa’s album went No 1 in the US, his wife, Amber 
Rose, responded by releasing a short video of herself with back to the camera, 
her rear bubbling away like a simmering pot of pasta sauce. Whatever happened 
to opening a bottle of champagne in the privacy of your own home?

Clearly, I’m out of the loop. But if popping glute muscles not corks is de 
rigueur right now, I suggest we all get on board. If you win employee of the 
week at work, feel free to turn around and give a good old wobble at the next 
team meeting. You’ve just received a hefty tax rebate? Show your appreciation 
with a gentle wiggle at the post office when you open your mail. You’ll feel 
better for it, I promise. Even if you leave everyone else feeling confused and 
embarrassed.
 