
Most Alpha courses focus on a residential weekend, where you are whisked off 
to a nice country retreat, and over two days are encouraged to experience the 
Holy Spirit. For some people, this involvesglossalalia 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NZbQBajYnEc>, or talking in tongues. At St 
Mary's, where we do not adhere very strongly to Alpha's prescription, the 
weekend is reduced to a few hours, and the atmosphere that eggs on speaking in 
tongues is downplayed. Alas, I was unable to attend this day, and thus did not 
get to hang with God's ghostly third.

As penance, I sought out someone far more central to the Alpha phenomenon than 
the Holy Spirit. The Rev Nicky Gumbel is Alpha's chief architect, and far more 
tangible. Alpha is arguably the most successful tool of evangelical 
Christianity in recent years, and Gumbel is the man who has designed and driven 
it. It now has a presence in 169 countries, in 100 languages and (they claim) 
13 million participants worldwide. He is a prolific writer, and appears in the 
myriad DVDs that accompany the course. For many people, Nicky Gumbel is Alpha, 
and that makes him one of the most influential men in modernChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity>.

You wouldn't think it to meet him though. He's the epitome of an English 
village vicar, very charming, smiley, chatty, and utterly disarming. When I met 
him at his home, the Holy Trinity Brompton vicarage, he answered the door with 
a big dollop of jam on his trousers, which his very charming wife helped him 
with.

We spoke for 90 minutes and covered a lot of ground. When I ask him how the 
Anglican communion perceives Alpha, his response was unequivocally positive. I 
hear it differently. My opinion is that many senior members of the General 
Synod tolerate Alpha because in an age of dwindling church attendance, Alpha 
bucks that trend and appeals to and galvanises an important demographic that 
will soon vanish.

We talk about talking in tongues, and he displays a supremely liberal attitude 
that it works for some, but it's not for everyone. He seems unaware of 
scientific research on the subject, and asserts that it is supernatural in 
origin. Naturally, I disagree. He claims ignorance when I suggest that 
sometimes it looks just like parishioners being whipped into rapturous 
Pentecostal frenzy. For him, it's a form of prayer: peaceful, personal and 
beautiful.

Alpha is evangelical, charismatic and conservative. These are all reasons why 
some Christians find it problematic. But Gumbel takes issue with the labels. 
Our course leader, Toby, also does this: when I describe him as a liberal, he 
shudders in mock horror. Gumbel insists he's a Christian first, then if pushed, 
an Anglican. It's a tactic which betrays the cataclysmic schisms of which the 
Anglican Communion is in the midst.

And no bigger wedge is driving that schism than the "gay issue". I have come 
across many people accusing Alpha (and evangelical Christianity in general) of 
being homophobic. In "Searching Issues", one of Gumbel's myriad 
Alpha-supporting books, he downplays the possibility that being gay is not a 
choice. Whether it is or not is difficult to ascertain, but I believe that if 
people feel and believe that they are born gay, then it is not acceptable to 
automatically assume that they are sinful for being so. Alpha does just that, 
no matter how gently they couch it.

Nicky Gumbel: I think it's nonsense. We welcome everybody regardless of age, 
sex, race or sexual orientation. We believe that sex is for marriage, and 
that's regardless of whether it's homo- or heterosexual.

AR: But because marriage is the exclusive preserve of hetero couples, 
homosexual sex is therefore a sin. Can homosexuality be healed?

NG: Everybody needs healing. My understanding of human beings is that we were 
created in the image of God, but we are all fallen, and Jesus died for us so 
that we can be redeemed. We're not as we're meant to be. God's original 
creation was good, and in some ways fallen away from that. And in every area of 
our life we need to be healed and restored and to become more Christ-like. Our 
position on homosexuality is exactly the same as the rest of the church.

AR: I'm not asking the rest of the church, I'm asking you.

NG: All I'm saying is that ours is the same as that. If you want to say 
something about this issue, you have to say it about the whole of the Christian 
church's attitude towards homosexuality. You cannot isolate and say, this is 
Alpha's attitude.

AR: But I'm asking you: Nicky Gumbel?

NG: My attitude is the same as the church's. But don't make out that Alpha's 
is different form the church cos it isn't. Our views are exactly the same as 
the views that I am, in a sense, under authority to have. These are the views 
of the Anglican church.

This whole dialogue was a politician's answer. Gumbel is very aware of how the 
evangelical stance that homosexuality can be healed is homophobic to many 
people's ears, mine included, and thus plays his cards carefully. It's 
frustrating, because no matter how offensive I find this sentiment, I just 
can't work out whether he is naive or sinister. Certainly, the proclaimed 
welcome of gay people into Alpha, coupled with their insistence that gay sex is 
a sin, leads me to think that celibacy is what Alpha wants. Gumbel left the 
interview to play squash with a gay friend.

I see Alpha as a political movement, one whose aim is to subtly spread 
evangelical conservative Christianity across denominations and cultures, just 
like 19th century missionaries. If the attendance figures are even half true, 
it is enormously powerful. Its boss told me that he was not at all committed to 
Alpha, just to Christ. That humility is typical for Nicky Gumbel. But it's also 
just what you'd expect to hear from an extremely astute political mover. It 
seems unlikely that a man who was not an adept player could rise to such an 
important position. But then again, would Machiavelli have jam on his trousers?

Read the full transcript of the interview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/aug/28/religion-christianity-alpha-gumbel-transcript>
 