
The Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/walesrugbyunionteam> head coach 
Warren Gatland has endured his most uncomfortable month since taking charge 
last December with an outbreak of politicking so manipulative and cynical that 
even the announcement of his squad for the autumn internationals was upstaged 
last week, but he at least had the reassuring sight yesterday of Gavin Henson 
showing he was ready for the might of the southern hemisphere after recovering 
from injury.

Henson more than came through only his second start since an operation on his 
right ankle last April. His first appearance, earlier this month, saw him 
stumble through against Harlequins and then receive a two-match suspension by 
the region when he skipped a training session, but there will be no rebuke when 
he returns from a three-day Wales camp later this month.

Henson scored his side's second try just before half-time, ghosting through a 
gap following a lineout and wrong-footing Chris Latham, but, more crucially, he 
gave his side a dose of individualism amid some wretchedly formulaic displays. 
TheOspreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> had gone more than three 
hours without scoring a try when the Scotland wing Nikki Walker finished off a 
multi-phase move, but Henson and Shane Williams had already shown flashes of 
the inspiration lacking in previous weeks.

Just before Henson's try, Williams had almost scored one out of nothing. 
Playing at first receiver near halfway, he jinked his way in and out of three 
tackles before accelerating to the line only to be hauled down by theWorcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> flanker Jake Abbott, one of 
10 academy players, past and present, in the Warriors' line-up. Abbott had 
earlier denied Williams in a race for a chip to the line, while the 20-year old 
forward had announced himself with a fierce tackle on James Hook that relieved 
the Wales outside-half of the ball.

Hook had a mixed afternoon. He kicked 17 points and it was his subtly delayed 
pass that created the space for Henson to exploit and score, but there was also 
worrying inaccuracy coupled with indecision. He should have made the game safe 
with 20 minutes to go after Worcester, again, had lost the ball at the 
breakdown.

Hook was freed by Tommy Bowe and had a 30-yard run to the line down the right 
flank. As he prepared for a dive he was tackled into touch by the 21-year old 
loose-head prop, Matt Mullan, a player who would not have been expected to 
overhaul him. The challenge summed up Worcester's combativeness and 
competitiveness, but they were nowhere near resourceful enough with ball in 
hand.

Four tries to one accurately reflected the difference between the sides. 
Worcester's try, after they had trailed 16-6 at the break, came when Sam 
Tuitupou broke through the midfield after a scrum, but the Warriors rarely 
created space and lacked craft, too often hurried into making final passes and 
losing the ball. It suited them that there was little flow to the game: another 
breakdown, another penalty was the theme as the referee David Rose, despite 
showing a yellow card to a player from each side, failed to sort out the tackle 
area.

A fifth penalty from Matthew Jones, the former Ospreys outside-half, brought 
the Warriors into bonus point territory with seven minutes of normal time 
remaining after Williams' try had given his side a 14-point lead. A three-point 
game would have left them with a chance of making the semi-finals, but they 
immediately threw away what they had.

Hook landed his fifth penalty and Rose awarded the last of his 32 penalties 
six minutes into stoppage time. Hook stepped up to kick the ball into touch 
but, when told that the Ospreys would have time to take the lineout, he opted 
for a scrum, even though it was on his side's 10-yard line.

The Ospreys, wanting more than to deny Worcester a bonus point, were rewarded 
for their ambition when, after Henson and Hook had teased and cajoled, Bowe 
broke the defence with an angled run and Worcester, who had lost Latham with 
cramp, had no one tracking the Irishman. The Welsh have taken a firm grip on 
the tournament, are likely to provide three of the semi-finalists, and they 
will be able to field their Wales squad players in next weekend's final round 
of group matches.

Ospreys: Byrne; Walker, Bowe, Henson, Williams; Hook, Webb (Nutbrown, 46); D 
Jones (capt), Hibbard (Shirvington, 73), Millward (A Jones, 54), Gough, Bateman 
(AW Jones, 58), Smith (R Jones, 65), Tandy, Tiatia.

Tries: Walker, Henson, Williams, Bowe. Con: Hook. Pens: Hook 5.

Sin-bin: Smith, 52.

Worcester: Latham (Wheatcroft, 72); Pennell, Grove, Tuitupou, Fellows; Jones, 
R Powell (M Powell, 66); Mullan (Morris, 72), Lutui, Taumoepeau (Ruwers, 72), 
Rawlinson (capt), Gillies, Cox, Abbott, Talei.

Try: Tuitupou. Con: Jones. Pens: Jones 5.

Sin-bin: Jones, 20.

Referee: D Rose (Warwickshire).

Team of the weekend

15 Ben Blair Cardiff Blues

14 Leigh Halfpenny Cardiff Blues

13 Regan King Scarlets

12 Gavin Henson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gavin-henson> Ospreys

11 Richard Fussell Dragons

10 Shaun Connor Dragons

9 Harry Ellis Leicester

1 Matt Mullan Worcester

2 Aleki Lutui Worcester

3 Rhys Thomas Dragons

4 Ian Gough Ospreys

5 George Robson Harlequins

6 Declan Danaher London Irish

7 Jake Abbott Worcester

8 Filo Tiatia Ospreys

Quote of the weekend

"Let's have it all in one go so you can build momentum up with whatever team 
you decide to put in it"

Toby Booth, the London Irish coach, throws his weight behind plans to 
restructure the EDF Energy Cup and play it in one block
 