
If someone offered you a “nitro cold brew” you might be forgiven for thinking 
it was the latest hipster craft beer. But it’s not, it’s potentially the 
hottest – or rather coldest – thing to be served up in UK coffee shops since 
their high street invasion.

With macchiatos, americanos and lattes old hat, the drink du jour is cold-brew 
coffee infused with nitrogen gas. This caffeine hit is served straight from the 
tap like a beer and even looks like a pint of Guinness with a velvety texture 
and foamy top.

“This is one of the most exciting products to come on to the market since the 
flat white,” says Jeffrey Young, chief executive of consultancy Allegra 
Strategies. “Every once in a while you have a wave that changes the industry.”

US drinkers set the pace last year by swapping their lattes for “cold-brew” – 
created by steeping coffee grounds for up to 24 hours to produce a concentrated 
essence. But the sexed-up “nitro” version, which is available in some artisan 
coffee bars, is predicted to have broader appeal in the UK and market leaders 
Costa andStarbucks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks> are 
planning trials in the new year.
 High street chains seek to attract more customers as the price of coffee 
beans, wages and rents rise.
 Photograph: Inga Spence/Getty 
Over the past 20 years Britons have become addicted to coffee, creating a 
market that last year was worth close to £8bn. According to Allegra there are 
now more than 20,000 coffee shops in the UK, a figure it predicts will be more 
than 30,000 in a decade’s time.

Last week Alison Brittain, chief executive of Whitbread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/03/costa-whitbread-mild-weather-high-street-growth-weak>
, which owns Costa, said innovation was key to its continued success and that 
“taking a leaf from the US market is one way of doing this”. It is 
experimenting with two late-night branches in London aimed at an upmarket 
clientele who can choose from three “slow drip” single-origin blends on a menu 
that includes macarons and antipasti rather than muffins and toasted sandwiches.

Costa owner says wages will need to rise if Brexit shrinks worker pool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/costa-coffee-owner-whitbread-wages-need-rise-brexit-shrinks-worker-pool>
The market’s growth is fuelled by an interest in “artisan” coffee as small and 
medium-size chains such as Taylor St Baristas and Coffee#1 expand and consumers 
buy expensive coffee machines and filters for their homes. Earlier this year 
30,000 people attended theLondon coffee festival 
<https://www.londoncoffeefestival.com/>, devoting their weekend to learning 
latte art, supping espresso martinis and listening to coffee-inspired music.

“There’s a whole artisan food movement and coffee is part of that,” said 
Young, pointing to similar trends in chocolate, wine and bread. “A growing 
number of consumers want to be connoisseurs.”

Big chains like Costa are always looking for new ways to attract customers as 
the number of people visiting high streets declines at a time when business 
costs are rising due to the higher minimum wage and a jump in the price of 
coffee. The price of arabica beans has risen 27% since the end of May.
 