
Downing Street has issued an unequivocal "no ifs, no buts" declaration that 
David Cameron will deliver on his pledge to devolve further powers to the 
Scottish parliament after theprime minister was accused of reneging on his 
promise to the people of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/21/alex-salmond-uk-party-leaders-tricking-scotland>
.

No 10 moved to clarify its thinking after Alex Salmond and Alistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling> challenged the prime 
minister over his decision to link further devolution to Edinburgh to new 
restrictions on the voting rights of Scottish MPs.

As the outgoing Scottish first minister accused the prime minister of tricking 
the voters ofScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, No 10 said the 
prime minister was committed to the timetable agreed by the three main UK party 
leaders to hand greater powers over tax and welfare to Holyrood.

A government source said: "There was an unambiguous commitment by the party 
leaders to deliver more devolution to Scotland on a clear timetable. That is 
not conditional on anything else. No ifs, not buts – that will occur."

A Downing Street spokesperson said Lord Smith of Kelvin would oversee a 
process that would see the publication of draft legislation in January. The 
spokesman added: "This government has delivered on devolution and we will do so 
again in the next parliament."

Downing Street moved to clarify its stance after the Scottish-born Tory chief 
whip, Michael Gove, said on Saturday that it would be "impossible" to devolve 
further powers to Scotland without addressing the position of Scottish MPs at 
Westminster. This could include banning them from voting on English-only 
matters. Gove's remarks followed the declaration by the prime minister in 
Downing Street on Friday morning, shortly after the pro-UK side won the 
referendum, thatfurther devolution to Scotland must "take place in tandem with, 
and at the same pace, as" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/19/david-cameron-devolution-revolution-uk-scotland-vote>
 the changes to the status of Scottish MPs.

Government sources stressed that the two proposals – further devolution to 
Scotland and changing the status of Scottish MPs at Westminster – should be 
considered in parallel and at the same time. But the sources said that progress 
in one area would not be dependent on the other.

The proposal to devolve further powers to Holyrood would be overseen by Smith, 
a crossbench peer. The plans to address the West Lothian question, the anomaly 
whereby Scottish MPs can vote on English-only matters while English MPs have no 
say on devolved matters in Scotland, would be addressed by a cabinet committee. 
This will be chaired by William Hague, the leader of the Commons.

The clarification from Downing Street came after Labour and the SNP, bitter 
foes in the referendum campaign, questioned the prime minister's integrity. The 
prime minister joined forces with Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg during the 
referendum campaign to issue a "vow" of further devolution to Holyrood which 
made no mention of limiting the voting power of Scottish MPs.

Miliband insisted that such major constitutional changes should be introduced 
with care as he reiterated his call for a constitutional convention to consider 
the matter next autumn. He suggested he would limit the changes to giving 
English MPs greater scrutiny of legislation relating solely to England. Labour 
would struggle to govern without the support of its 41 Scottish MPs.

The Labour leader told the Andrew Marr Show on BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/21/miliband-scottish-devolution-english-reforms>
: "I am open to the idea of greater scrutiny of legislation by English MPs. But 
we can't do it in a back of the envelope, fag packet way. We have spent two 
years trying to keep our country together. Let's have a proper constitutional 
convention. Let's look at these issues. But let's not drive our country apart 
because David Cameron thinks it is an opportunity for him to do it."

Salmond said that No voters in the referendum would feel they had been 
"misled", "gulled" and "tricked". The first minister told the Sunday Politics 
on BBC1: "I am actually not surprised they are cavilling and reneging on 
commitments, I am only surprised by the speed at which they are doing it. They 
seem to be totally shameless in these matters. The prime minister wants to link 
change in Scotland to change in England. He wants to do that because he has 
difficulty in carrying his backbenchers on this and they are under pressure 
from Ukip.

Darling insisted that there could be no link between further powers for 
Holyrood and limiting the voting rights of Scottish MPs at Westminster. The 
leader of the Better Together campaign told the Andrew Marr Show: "The 
agreement reached by the three parties, as far as I am concerned, is 
non-negotiable. It was promised, it has got to be delivered. Anyone who welches 
on that will pay a very heavy price for years to come. It is simply 
non-negotiable.

"There is a separate issue about what further constitutional change comes to 
the UK. But, just be very clear about this, you cannot hold up or delay in any 
way at all what was promised. The three leaders gave an absolute commitment and 
I am confident they will deliver on it."

The intervention by Downing Street suggests that No 10 is planning for a 
pre-election scenario in which the plans for further devolution to Scotland 
would be agreed and published. But there would be no agreement on changing the 
status of Scottish MPs, allowing the Tories to accuse Labour of failing to 
stand up for English voters. Labour has 41 Scottish MPs. The Tories have one, 
David Mundell.

Downing Street received a boost when Sir William McKay, the former clerk of 
the House of Commons who considered modest limits to the role of Scottish MPs 
in an official report, said his reforms might have to be changed in light of 
the outcome of the referendum. McKay proposed that only English MPs should sit 
on the committee stage of a parliamentary bill that related just to England. It 
could then only be passed through a double majority voting system, achieving 
support of the majority of English MPs and the majority of the Commons as a 
whole.

But McKay told The World This Weekend on BBC Radio 4: "You can't lower any of 
our solutions, immediately and without amendment, into the present situation. 
They will have to be tweaked – a fairly hefty tweak, more a kick than a tweak."
 