
Let’s be honest: mobile phones are horrid, germy little hand pirates, encased 
in plastic and the lure of connectivity, when actually all they do is steal our 
private lives and personal time. In social situations, they cleverly masquerade 
as helpful best friends allowing us to prod them during a lull in conversation, 
allowing us to hide our deeper social anxieties. All in all, they’re not great 
for us, I suspect.

But to think that we could return to a life without phones is ludicrous. That 
GPS satellite sailed long ago. It’s fair to say phones are as much a part of 
daily life as not wanting to go to work or cursing our overflowing inboxes when 
we get there.

With that in mind, it’s rather quaint that the American band the Eagles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/eagles> are asking fans not to switch their 
phones on – at all – at their concerts. Signs at gigs warn that guests caught 
texting, taking photos or filming will be asked to leave. The band were no 
doubt forced into this after yet another poignant moment in Hotel California 
went belly up after the addition of the bleep bleep of Beryl in Row 44’s 
Motorola flip.

Musicians asking audiences not to use their phones at gigs is nothing new. 
However, some venues and festivals in Australia have taken an allergy to people 
dicking around with them one step further by banning the holy selfie stick. 
That’s right. The cultural phenomenon so ubiquitous it was runner-up for
Australian word of the year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-books-blog/2015/feb/05/mansplain-is-australian-word-of-the-year>
 Never mind that it’s two words.

Organisers of the Soundwave festival have said selfie sticks are the height of 
self-obsession andwill be strict no-nos 
<http://www.smh.com.au/digital-life/digital-life-news/australian-venues-ban-narcissistic-selfie-sticks-20150224-13ma46.html>
 – the suggestion being that people can’t possibly focus on the music, man, if 
they’re busy getting their best angle with a broom handle.

Firstly, aren’t there riskier things to frisk for at a festival? Secondly, 
what if – dare I say it? – people can still enjoy the music and focus even as 
they are taking happy snaps or Vines? We view most things through a screen 
these days – and cope. Our lives are not some sort of simulacrum simply because 
they sometimes come pixellated.

Steve Albini: the internet has solved the problem with music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/17/steve-albini-at-face-the-music-how-the-internet-solved-problem-with-music>
Telling gig goers what they can and can’t do at a live music event also 
implies a romantic notion that the pre-mobile, pre-social media era was better, 
purer – that audiences drained every single perfect drop out of every single 
moment and were somehow blessed with a far more divine musical experience.

Possibly, but not always. As far as I remember, there have always been 
distracted sods at gigs. Let’s not forget the smoking and drinking and dancing 
and talking and flirting and toilet trips (for whatever purpose) at gigs of 
yore. That happened.

Banning phones and selfie sticks seems a touch righteous. Do we really need 
even more rules at what’s supposed to be a fun night out? Surely life already 
has too many of the former and not enough of the latter. While I’m the first 
person to think someone holding up a camera for an entire gig is a dill, it’s 
their choice to be a dill. As we all know and have known since the dawn of 
YouTube, unless Kanye West is around and making a major boo-boo, no one ever 
watches those videos again anyway. So really, why all the fuss?
 