
On Thursday Jeremy Hunt appears before the Leveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/may/25/jeremy-hunt-leveson-inquiry-thursday>
. The culture secretary will seek to rebut the serious allegations that have 
been made against him about his closeness to Rupert Murdoch's media empire.

In December 2010 Hunt was put in charge of the decision as to whether the News 
Corp bid for the 61% of BSkyB it did not already own – abandoned last July 
after the phone-hacking revelations – should be referred to the Competition 
Commission for final approval. He declared that his role was "quasi-judicial", 
a term now rarely used by lawyers. But its broad meaning is clear: the minister 
should act, as far as possible, like a judge.

A judge, while he may keep interested parties informed of the timing and 
progress of an inquiry, is well advised to have no other contact with them. In 
addition, he must treat all interested parties equally rather than appearing to 
favour just one of them. Hunt appeared to conform to this standard by refusing 
to hold face-to-face meetings with representatives of News Corp. But there was, 
however, much private liaison between Fred Michel, director of public affairs 
for News Corp, andAdam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith>, 
Hunt's special adviser.

There were, apparently, no fewer than 191 telephone calls, 158 emails and 799 
texts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/24/frederic-michel-adam-smith-texts>
 between Michel and the culture department, over 90% of which were with Smith, 
in addition to what Michel has called "chatty conversations". As both Hunt and 
his permanent secretary have accepted, this was inappropriate for two reasons. 
First, it created an obvious impression of bias. Second, some of the 
communications were not properly monitored or minuted.

Smith indeed confesses that he "made no notes of my telephone calls with Mr 
Michel". There is, therefore, some dispute as to precisely what was said. Such 
uncertainty is hardly conducive either to good government or to the appearance 
of fairness. Moreover, although on 3 March last year Hunt told the Commons that 
"all the exchanges between my department and News Corporation" were being 
published, details of these private communications were not revealed, and so 
parliament was misled. Hunt is accountable not to Leveson – which was set up to 
report on the implications of the phone-hacking scandal for press ethics and 
regulation – but to parliament. It is not difficult to imagine the reaction of 
MPs had they been aware of these communications.

Smith was required to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/apr/25/jeremy-hunt-adviser-adam-smith-quits>
. Hunt, however, insists that Smith acted without authority, and that he was 
unaware of the nature and intensity of Smith's contacts with News Corp. But 
that is no defence.Paragraph 3.3 of the ministerial code 
<http://www.tom-watson.co.uk/2012/04/extract-from-ministerial-code-on-special-advisers>
 is unequivocal. It declares: "The responsibility for the management and 
conduct of special advisers, including discipline, rests with the minister who 
made the appointment. Individual ministers will be accountable to the prime 
minister, parliament and the public for their actions and decisions in respect 
of their special advisers".

Special advisers have no constitutional personality separate from that of 
their minister. Their actions are those of the minister. Indeed, whenever I 
have in the past spoken to a special adviser, I have assumed I was speaking to 
the minister's alter ego.

Because they are political appointments, special advisers are far closer to 
the minister, far more aware of his attitudes, than any career civil servant 
can be. Indeed, in Smith's performance appraisal in December 2011, Hunt said 
that he acted as his "eyes and ears at meetings I cannot attend and knows 
exactly what I would want to happen". On the News Corp bid, departmental 
meetings were held at least once a week, most attended by Smith. He saw Hunt 
"almost every working day and we spoke frequently on the telephone".

In his written evidence to Leveson, Smith insisted that Hunt "was generally 
aware of my activities from a combination of the discussions at our meetings 
and our more informal contact", and in consequence of emails sent to the 
department by Michel. It is, therefore, implausible that Hunt was unaware of 
what his special adviser was doing.

But, even if he was unaware, that does not make him innocent. It makes him 
guilty of gross incompetence, since he should have instructed his special 
adviser to have nothing to do with a paid lobbyist for an interested party. If 
Hunt lacked the sense to tell Smith to keep well away from contacts with News 
Corp, he seems ill qualified for his primary administrative task of running his 
department. What confidence can parliament and the public have in a minister 
who has acted so negligently towards his special adviser?

The Labour opposition pressed for Hunt's conduct to be referred to Sir Alex 
Allan, the independent adviser on the ministerial code. David Cameron said he 
would consider referring it to Sir Alex after Hunt had given his defence to 
Leveson. Both sides are wrong. There is no need to bother Sir Alex. If Hunt did 
not authorise Smith to maintain contacts with News Corp, he displayed a degree 
of negligence that should disqualify him from ministerial office. Either way, 
his resignation cannot come a moment too soon.

• For legal reasons this article has been launched with comments off
 