
Call me puerile, but I struggle to say the word "melons" without smirking. It 
brings out my innerSid James <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Aj7D65SFOhM>. 
That's ironic, really, because though they're a gift to the adolescent 
humourist, and are certainly sexy, put them in a kitchen and melons reveal 
themselves as among the most sultry, sophisticated fruits you can get your 
hands on.

The taste and scent of ripe melons is a complex delight. They contain a 
plethora of flavour compounds that make them fragrant and floral to the point 
of intoxicating. There's a lot of honeyed sweetness, a delicate, almost 
alcoholic edge and a slightly musky, sulphurous note, too. All this, delivered 
in that silky, slippery flesh, makes melons glorious on their own, and fabulous 
partners to other fruits: try them with pineapple, mango or orange, say. And 
you'd be missing a trick if you didn't also use them to bring out the sensuous 
best in savoury foods such as salty ham or nutty cheese.

The melons I get really excited about are the small summer varieties that tend 
to be very fragrant even before being cut, and that usually feature a rough, 
"netted" rind. For full flavour and complex aromatics, I like cantaloupes, of 
which the orange-fleshed charentais is my favourite. The green-tinged, 
pearly-fleshed galia is a delicious relative. Smoother-skinned varieties, such 
as the yellow honeydew and the green piel de sapo, can also be good, but lack 
that really heady aroma, and are generally less in-your-face luscious.

To avoid disappointment, inspect before you buy. Melons don't ripen further 
once picked, so if you get an immature one, you're stuck with it. Press the 
melon gently at the flower end: it should give a little. Smell it, too: summer 
melons should have plenty of bouquet. Ideally, there should be no remnant of 
stalk; if fully ripened on the vine, they come away cleanly, without having to 
be cut. If a melon doesn't fulfil these criteria, it is not right. And study 
the netting on the skin of cantaloupes: generally, the more pronounced the 
netting, the riper the melon.

Once you've got a ripe melon, scrub it under cold water, because the skin can 
harbour bacteria, cut in half and scoop out the seeds and fibres with a 
teaspoon, then slice or scoop the flesh off the skin.

The flesh of ripe melons makes beautiful sorbets and granitas, particularly 
when seasoned with lemon or lime juice; their sweetness means you shouldn't 
need much sugar. Simple fruit assemblies suit them, too. Try thin slivers of 
charentais trickled with crushed, lightly sugared raspberries, or cubes of 
galia with pineapple and a ginger-spiked orange dressing.

And then there are those sexy savoury combinations. Melon with ham may have 
become a bit of a cliche since its 1970s heyday, but you will not be 
disappointed if you marinate slim peeled slices of the fruit with rosemary, 
a little red chilli, lemon juice and olive oil, and serve it with really good 
air-dried ham, with a peppery green salad or on top of a garlicky bruschetta.

Ripe summer melons should be stored in a very cool larder or the salad drawer 
of your fridge, and they won't keep for more than seven to 10 days. So grab a 
couple of these gorgeous globes and get going.

Melon, cucumber and courgette salad with olives and red onion

Here, I've partnered melons with their cucurbit relatives, cucumbers 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/lifeandstyle/2013/aug/02/cucumber-recipes-hugh-fearnley-whittingstall>
 andcourgettes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/19/courgette-recipes-hugh-fearnley-whittingstall>
. All that delicate, juicy flesh is pointed up beautifully by the assertive 
flavours of olives and onion. Serves four as a side dish.

½ large cucumber (about 200g)
1 medium courgette (about 200g)
¼ small charentais or galia melon (about 200g)
50g pitted black olives, such as kalamata
½ medium red onion, peeled and finely chopped
Juice of ½ small lemon
2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Quarter the cucumber lengthways, scoop out the seeds with a teaspoon and slice 
into thin quarter-moons about 2mm thick. Put the slices in a large bowl. Top 
and tail the courgette, quarter it lengthways and cut into pieces the same 
thickness as the cucumber. Add to the bowl.

Scoop the seeds out of the melon. Carefully slice the melon off its skin, then 
cut it first lengthways into two to three slender wedges, then crosswise, as 
with the cucumber and courgette, and add to the bowl.

Roughly chop the olives and add to the salad with the onion. Squeeze over the 
lemon juice, trickle over the oil, give it a good seasoning and stir together 
gently. Taste, add more salt, pepper or lemon juice if needed, and serve 
straight away.

Melon smoothie with orange, ginger and honey
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's refreshing melon smoothie with orange, ginger 
and honey. Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
Puréed ripe melon has a lovely, velvety, almost creamy texture. 
This refreshing smoothie tastes best when really cold, so chill the melon 
first. If your blender isn't up to processing ice cubes, just drop a couple 
into each glass before you serve the smoothie. Serves two.

1 small to medium ripe charentais or galia melon, chilled (about 1kg)
150ml freshly squeezed orange juice
1 thumb-sized chunk ginger, peeled
3-4 ice cubes
1-2 tsp honey 

Scoop out the melon seeds, then scoop the flesh off the skin in 
chunks, dropping them into a blender as you go. Add the orange juice.

Finely grate the ginger into a sieve over a small bowl. Press the grated 
ginger with the back of a spoon, to squeeze out its juice, measure out 
a teaspoon and add to the blender. Add the ice and whizz the lot until smooth. 
Add a little honey to taste, just to enhance the fruity flavours, and a touch 
more ginger juice, if you fancy more kick. Drink immediately.

Melon granita

This glorious, fragrant iced pud couldn't be prettier, or easier. Serves four 
to six.

2 very ripe fragrant melons such as charentais or galia (1.5-1.75kg in all)
1 lemon 
Icing sugar
A little rose water or orange flower water (optional)
Double cream, to serve (optional)

Halve the melons, scoop out the seeds with a teaspoon, then scoop the flesh 
out of the skin into a food processor. Add the juice of half the lemon. Make 
sure no melon or lemon seeds get into the mix. Process to a smooth, thin purée 
and add icing sugar to taste: you'll probably need about two tablespoons 
(remember, the mix will seem a little less sweet once it's frozen). Add more 
lemon juice if you feel the melon flavour needs a touch more definition. For a 
lovely scented result, add a little rosewater or orange flower water: stir in 
just a few drops at a time, until you get the depth of flavour you're happy 
with.

Pour into a shallow freezer container and freeze until solid: give it at least 
12 hours. Take it out of the freezer about 20 minutes before serving, and test 
the consistency. You should be able to scratch it into crystals with a fork 
straight away, in which case put it back in the freezer until you're ready to 
serve; if, however, it's very hard, leave it in the fridge a little longer, 
to soften slightly.

Either way, when you're ready to serve, use a fork to scratch the frozen purée 
into a heap of icy crystals: the finished granita should have a texture rather 
like a coarse sorbet. Pile this into serving glasses, top each with a generous 
snowy cap of cream, if you fancy (and I often do), and serve straight away.

Melon in coconut milk

This simple, cooling dessert is based on a south Indian recipe, rasayana. It's 
very easy to put together, and amazingly delicious, fragrant and refreshing. 
Serves four.

200g can coconut milk
2 tsp caster sugar
1 lime
1 very ripe, fragrant melon such as a charentais or galia (around 800g), 
chilled

Tip the coconut milk into a pan, add the sugar and heat gently, stirring all 
the time, until the sugar has dissolved and the coconut milk is smooth. You 
don't want it to cook, just to warm through until amalgamated. Take off the 
heat, leave to cool, then chill.

Once nicely chilled, if the coconut milk has separated, whisk it back 
together, then finely grate in the zest of half the lime and add lime juice to 
taste.

Cut the melon into wedges, remove the seeds, then slice the flesh off the skin 
and cut into bite-sized pieces. Put into chilled dishes and spoon over the 
coconut milk. Top with more lime zest and serve.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 