
Money is unreal to those who have it and absolutely real to those who don’t. 
The unreality of it was highlighted after the vote for Brexit. Graphs, even for 
people who don’t do graphs, showed the pound plummeting. I got it. When my 
youngest came back from Ireland with a load of euros, she asked me to explain 
the exchange rates to her. I did my best. “Who makes this stuff up?” she asked. 
It seems only recently that I was having these conversations with small 
children, not ones who travel and ask about exchange rates. “Where does money 
come from?” I would answer, stupidly, “banks” or “my so-called job”. Now, I try 
to explain that, in a way, money is a kind of agreement, but by the time you 
understand this, it’s usually too late. Even north London has yet to develop a 
barter economy.

My own economic illiteracy means that it took me a long time to see that it is 
really only those with lots of money who can afford to see it in the abstract, 
and therefore make more of it. Those who live hand-to-mouth never ever can. 
They may gamble or do the lotto but these are not, on the whole, the same folk 
who squirrel it away to avoid inheritance tax. A scratch card is a large price 
for a small dream – but tread softly on everyday dreams.

No wonder many gamble, as they no longer save. Can’t save/won’t save. New 
figures 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/spendthrift-britons-stop-saving-q5w2n7hb6> 
show that Britain’s “saving habits” are collapsing. This can be put down to the 
record low in interest rates and the attempt to boost consumer spending. Surely 
this is also to do with stagnating wages and a culture where saving for many is 
just impossible. Whenever I watchLocation, Location, Location 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/15/location-location-location-tv-review>
, I am amazed at the young couples who have got together a house deposit by 
using apps to help budget. This world of discipline and own-brand beans feels 
as far away as putting sixpences in a piggy bank.

I remember being poor. That £500 sum that emerged recently – the amount a 
third of families wouldhave trouble finding for an emergency 
<https://www.moneyadviceservice.org.uk/en/corporate/four-out-of-10-adults-are-not-in-control-of-their-finances-new-strategy-launched-to-improve-uks-financial-capability>
 – chilled me. The banality of inequality, that make-or-break 500 quid. I know 
that precarious feeling, where a broken boiler or an unexpected bill is a 
darkness that hangs in the air, that stops anyone being able to think about a 
future beyond the next week. In my childhood, that crippling figure was about 
£150.

Another big difference is the acceptance of debt as a way of life. Indeed, 
such contradictory messages about debt and spending are pumped out that I am 
not surprised there is little interest in saving. It’s still disappointing to 
take cash out of a machine that has “free withdrawals” emblazoned over the top, 
to find that they’re not. It is cheering to be notified every time I spend 
online that I have in fact “saved” some other amount. Or, on eBay, actually 
“won”.

All of us, whatever our social class, have our own bling. From superyachts to 
the little place in France, to the extraordinary nails. The less you can change 
about your life, the more the small rewards matter. In poor areas, the bookies 
move in, and so do the “salons”. Nails, spray tans and lash extensions are 
treats – mini-breaks from reality. Someone else waits on you. Everyone else can 
see what you have spent.

Likewise, the important consumer product is the phone, a status symbol when 
you may not have a car or a home of your own. The familiar whine – that people 
are not actually poor because they possess a smartphone – is put into 
perspective by how near the edge many are. People are poor when they have no 
savings, nothing to fall back on. This has to be spelt out. Both government and 
opposition rhetoric confuses a conversation about debt and saving by limiting 
debate to a series of false binaries: austerity/anti-austerity, good debt/bad 
debt, spending/cutting.May fired Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/philip-hammond-appointed-chancellor-as-george-osborne-exits>
, fiscal stimulus is being applied: there has to be another way of talking now 
that is more than being “against the cuts”.

Related: More than 8m UK adults have ‘problem debt’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/12/8m-uk-adults-problem-debt-money-advice-service>

In reality, saving may be as boring as hell, but we are facing a looming 
crisis around pensions because many have not saved enough to live on. Or to pay 
for their own care. Immigrants are stepping in here to provide the care that 
the state will not. All that was done in the name of theprivate finance 
initiative <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pfi>: a short-term saving that 
is actually a vast overspending. The debts that graduates pile up may not be 
justified in terms of earning, if this is what we deem education to be for. So 
what is going on when so many in a rich country cannot save money? Is it simply 
profligacy?

There is a general agreement among those who can afford to do it that saving 
is a habit that all must learn.

“Do banks just make money?” my child asked. “Well, yes and no. I will get you 
an account.” Children’s accounts still pay a bit of interest, apparently. Maybe 
she will find out how it all works. The crisis in consumer confidence that the 
experts are talking of, though, is surely less serious than this crisis in 
saving. If one must save to have a secure future and that is beyond our means, 
the future looks poor.
 