
A campaigner for the victims of paramilitary violence in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> has won the right to challenge 
Brexit in the supreme court.

Three judges in a Belfast court ruled on Friday that Raymond McCord should be 
allowed a hearing in the highest court in the UK to oppose the triggering of 
article 50 that would lead to an exit from the EU.

McCord had argued that because Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> voted 56% in favour of remaining 
within the EU, Brexit would be against the consent of the people in the region.

The Belfast man has worked for the victims of terror groups, both republican 
and loyalist, ever since the Ulster Volunteer Force murdered his son, Raymond 
McCord Jr, in 1997.

Speaking outside the court, McCord said: “This is a major step forward for our 
people and for victims.

“The three judges believe I have a right to an opinion, unlike political 
people who have criticised me.”

He had come under sustained criticism from unionist politicians for taking 
part in a legal challenge to block Brexit.

“The people of Northern Ireland should be deciding whether we stay in the EU 
or leave – 56% of the people here voted to remain,” McCord added.

His lawyer, Ciaran O’Hare, said: “Essentially the question posed is whether or 
not there can be any Brexit for Northern Ireland, based on the fact we have our 
own constitution consisting of the Northern Ireland Act and the Good Friday 
Agreement.

“We say the people of Northern Ireland are sovereign on constitutional change.”

McCord had joined pro-EU political parties and community groups in a legal 
case during which they argued that Brexit would undermine the Good Friday 
Agreement. The 1998 peace accord was endorsed by people in both states on the 
island of Ireland but, most crucially, would only be ratified if a majority in 
Northern Ireland backed it.

The supreme court will now consider whether withdrawal from the EU without the 
consent of the Northern Ireland population fundamentally negates that agreement.

Meanwhile, Irish prime minister Enda Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> said his meeting with Northern 
Ireland’s first and deputy first ministers on the implications of Brexit for 
the island were the best he had so far.

The taoiseach attended the north-south ministerial council in Armagh alongside 
first minister Arlene Foster and deputy first ministerMartin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness>.

Kenny announced the appointment of a high-level group of civil servants and 
officials from both sides of the Irish border who will draw up practical plans 
to cope with Brexit’s impact.

Ahead of the meeting, Martin McGuinness said the re-imposition of a “hard 
border” would “be totally and absolutely unacceptable”. But theSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> deputy first minister said 
there was now a realisation among the political parties in Northern Ireland 
that “we need to be together to go forward” in dealing with Brexit’s 
implications.

However, one of Northern Ireland’s leading economists warned on Friday that if 
the UK leaves the European customs union then a hard border between the region 
and the Irish Republic was inevitable.

Ulster Bank’s chief economist in the province, Richard Ramsey, also told a 
Dublin Business School conference on Brexit on Friday that the Northern Ireland 
government’s policy of a low corporation tax – 12.5%, as in the Irish Republic 
– has “fallen far down the agenda” due to the UK voting to leave theEuropean 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

Speaking in the Mac arts theatre in Belfast’s Cathedral Quarter, Ramsey said: 
“The customs union is looking at the trade in goods and common tariffs coming 
into that area. If you leave that you then have to have some sort of hard 
border on how you can check up things like, for example, Argentinian beef.

“Say that beef was infected by some bacteria and if you didn’t have border 
checks then that meat could come into Northern Ireland, go across the border 
into the south and that would mean it was now inside the EU. Some people talk 
about using electronic tagging to track goods including that meat but I just 
cannot see how that would work. If we were to leave the customs union then a 
hard border even for those practical reasons would be inevitable,” he said.
 