
No matter how you slice them (or roll or grind them), oats aren't glamorous. 
They don't look like much, and they have a decidedly chequered PR history – 
Samuel Johnson described them as "a grain, which in England is generally given 
to horses, but in Scotland supports the people". They are still valued at least 
as much by livestock farmers as by cooks. Lucky animals, I say. But they're not 
having mine.

I love oats. They are just so full of oomph: in taste, texture and the sense 
that they are an unalloyed force for good (regular helpings are proven to lower 
cholesterol). And they are a very useful ingredient. Or set of ingredients, 
because they come in a range of shapes and sizes that behave in subtly but 
importantly different ways. All start with the whole oat "groat", which is the 
seed of the ripe oat grass with its inedible outer husk removed. Most porridge 
oats are made by chopping up the groat, then steaming and rolling the pieces to 
make fine flakes that cook very quickly. Chunkier "jumbo" oats, rolled from the 
whole groat, also make good porridge, and are great for flapjacks and crumble 
toppings.

Oatmeal, which is made by milling the groats, comes in granules. It has 
various grades: fine (essentially oat flour), medium and pinhead (the 
coarsest), which makes an excellent, thick porridge. To prepare it (for four), 
soak 250g pinhead oats in 900ml cold water overnight. Next morning, heat 
gently, stirring all the time, and add a splash of hot water as it bubbles and 
thickens. Serve with cold milk and soft brown sugar, runny honey or golden 
syrup. I know of no better start to the day.

But breakfast should be just the beginning of your oat experience. There are 
so many more things you can do with this mighty grain. I love a thickie: a 
fruit smoothie bulked up and made creamy by a handful of oats. And I've been 
experimenting with oat milk, made by soaking 200g medium oatmeal in 600ml 
cold water for 30 minutes, blitzing in a blender, then passing through 
a muslin-lined sieve. Use the oat milk plain, sweeten it with honey or add a 
pinch of salt. It's a refreshing drink, or you can add it to smoothies or use 
in baking. And it's brilliant on your breakfast cereal instead of milk.

I also enjoy turning porridge into something unexpected by cooking it as a 
savoury dish (as in Heston Blumenthal's snail porridge). Rolled jumbo oats or 
pinhead oatmeal can be simmered gently in stock to produce a uniquely warming, 
creamy-textured dish. Add something fresh, such as greens, and something 
piquant, such as crisp bacon or salty cheese, and you have a supper that will 
satisfy, sate and soothe.

Medium oatmeal is a deliciously crunchy coating for fillets of oily fish such 
as mackerel. And when it comes to cookies and biscuits, oats are total winners, 
offering their lovely, nubbly texture and gentle earthy flavour.

Whichever oats you choose, and whichever recipe, it's great to know you're 
eating a whole grain that releases energy in the best possible way: slowly. To 
mangle another Dr Johnson aphorism, only a fool wouldn't swallow them.

Savoury porridge with kale and bacon 

Pinhead cooks to a lovely texture not unlike risotto rice. Serves two.

4 rashers streaky bacon
75g pinhead oatmeal
100g kale or cavolo nero, leaves torn from the stalks and shredded
450ml chicken, vegetable or ham stock
20g butter
3 shallots, peeled and diced
1 garlic clove, peeled and chopped
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Heat the grill. Put the bacon on a small baking tray and grill for four to 
five minutes, until crisp. Keep warm.

Put the oatmeal in a sieve and give it a good shake to remove smaller grains. 
Rinse the sieved pinheads under the cold tap and set aside.

Bring the stock to a boil in a medium pan, add the kale and cook for three to 
four minutes, until just tender. Strain, reserving the stock, and squeeze any 
excess stock from the kale back into the pan.

Put a small saucepan over a gentle heat. Add the butter and, when foaming, add 
the shallot and garlic, and sweat for two to three minutes, without colouring. 
Add the oatmeal to the pan, cook for a minute, pour in the stock and bring to a 
simmer. Cook gently for 15–20 minutes, stirring from time to time, until the 
oats are tender and the stock has been absorbed. You want a loose consistency 
like that of traditional breakfast porridge, so if it seems too dry, add a 
splash more stock.

Roughly chop the squeezed-out kale and stir through the porridge. Season 
generously, then spoon into warmed plates or bowls, top with the crisp bacon 
and serve.

Gingery, chocolatey oat biscuits
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's gingery, chocolatey oat biscuits: 'A winning 
combination.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
These are based on the classic River Cottage digestive, but made extra-special 
with the addition of that winning combination, ginger and dark chocolate. Makes 
20-25.

125g wholemeal spelt flour (or plain wholemeal flour), plus extra to dust
125g medium oatmeal
75g soft brown sugar
½ tsp ground ginger
¼ tsp fine sea salt
1 tsp baking powder
125g cold unsalted butter, cut into small cubes 
3 balls stem ginger, finely chopped
A little milk
200g dark chocolate (or good milk chocolate), broken into small pieces

Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4 and line two baking trays with nonstick 
parchment. Put the flour, oatmeal, sugar, ginger, salt and baking powder 
in a food processor and pulse. Add the butter and pulse again until the mixture 
resembles fine breadcrumbs. (Alternatively, combine the dry ingredients in a 
bowl, then rub in the butter with your fingertips.)

Add the stem ginger and, with the processor running, trickle in just enough 
milk (about 30ml) to bring the mix together into clumps. (Alternatively, mix 
the ginger into the dry ingredients, then trickle in the milk, mix with a 
spoon, then bring together with your hands.)

Lightly dust a work surface with flour, tip out the dough and knead gently 
into a ball. Press into a fat disc, wrap in clingfilm and chill for 30 minutes.

Cut the dough in half. Dust one half with flour and roll it out to 3-4mm 
thick, dusting regularly with flour to stop it sticking. The dough is slightly 
sticky and crumbly, so don't worry if it breaks up a bit; just squash it back 
together and re-roll. (You may find it easier to roll between two sheets of 
greaseproof paper or clingfilm, also dusted with flour.) Use a 7.5cm cutter, or 
similar, to stamp out biscuits, and transfer these to the baking sheets with a 
palette knife; re-roll the offcuts to make more. Repeat with the second piece 
of dough, then bake for 10 minutes, until golden brown at the edges and lightly 
coloured on top.

Remove from the oven and leave the biscuits to cool and firm up on the baking 
sheets, then transfer them to a wire rack to cool completely.

To finish, melt the chocolate in a basin over a pan of simmering water. Dip in 
one half of each biscuit, and leave to set on a silicone mat or a sheet of 
nonstick baking parchment, before serving.

Alice's fruity fridge flapjacks

This unbaked, dairy-free flapjack is from Alice Meller, wife of Gill, head 
chef at River Cottage. It's now a firm favourite in our house. Makes 15-18.

100g dates, stoned 
100g prunes
2 ripe or slightly over-ripe medium bananas, peeled
150g honey
2 tbsp coconut oil
325g porridge oats or jumbo oats
100g raisins, currants or dried cranberries 
100g dried apricots, finely chopped
25g each of shelled hemp seeds, linseeds, sesame seeds and sunflower seeds (or 
100g of whichever seedy mix you like)

Put the dates, prunes, bananas, honey and coconut oil in the bowl of a food 
processor. Add two tablespoons of water and blitz the lot until you have 
a thick, fruit-flecked purée.

In a large bowl, combine the oats with the raisins, apricots and all the 
seeds. Stir in the puréed fruit mix and combine well.

Line a shallow baking tray, about 20cm x 30cm, with baking parchment or 
clingfilm. Tip in the fruity, oaty mixture and gently press it out as even and 
level as you can.

Transfer to the fridge for two to three hours, to set, then turn out and slice 
into bars. Keep the flapjacks in in a sealed Tupperware box in the fridge.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 