


Barack Obama’s administration is rushing through conservation safeguards for 
large areas of public land ahead of Donald Trump’s arrival in the White House, 
presenting a conundrum for the new president’s goal of opening up more places 
for oil and gas drilling.

On Monday, the US Department of the Interior banned gold mining on 30,000 
acres of land near the northern entrance of Yellowstone national park. This 
follows announcements last week that barred drilling in the Arctic Ocean off 
Alaska and a brokered settlement that cancelled 32,000 acres of mining leases 
on Montana land considered by the Blackfeet tribe as “like a church, a divine 
sanctuary”.

Donald Trump presidency a 'disaster for the planet', warn climate scientists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/11/trump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change>
Obama’s administration has also cancelled 25 oil and gas leases in Colorado 
since Trump’s election win and further executive action is expected before the 
real estate magnate takes office in January.

Environmentalists expect some level of protection to be placed upon the Bears 
Ears landscape in Utah, Gold Butte in Nevada and the greater Grand Canyon area, 
in order to bar uranium mining in the region. A permanent ban on drilling in 
the Arctic is also on the wish list, but is considered less likely.

Trump has said that more public land should be opened up for fossil fuel 
extraction, although he has also said the government should be “great stewards” 
of the land. In a YouTube address outlining his first 100 days in office, Trump 
said he would “cancel job-killing restrictions on the production of American 
energy, including shale energy and clean coal, creating many millions of 
high-paying jobs”..

Obama has protected more land and water – more than 265m acres – via executive 
action than any other president. Green groups are quietly confident that they 
would be able to sway moderate Republicans to oppose any dismantling of the 
reserves Obama set up, citing strong public support for them, but Trump is 
expected to follow an aggressively pro-fossil fuels approach once in power.

Global green movement prepares to fight Trump on climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/18/global-green-movement-prepares-to-fight-trump-on-climate-change>
The president-elect has promised to approve the controversial Keystone 
pipeline and has reportedly shortlisted former vice-presidential candidate 
Sarah Palin and Mary Fallin, the governor of Oklahoma who he met on Monday, as
secretary of the interior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/climate-change-trump-administration-environmental-protection>
. Both are strongly in favor of expanded oil and gas drilling, with Fallin 
recently declaring 13 October as a day of prayer for the oil industry in her 
state.

“I would love the current administration to go further and protect places in 
California, Utah, Texas and the Grand Canyon,” said Margie Alt, executive 
director of Environment America.

“One of the vulnerabilities of executive action is that the next executive can 
act. But no one can work so fast that they can reverse all the action we’ve had 
over the past eight years. I’m worried, yes, but the public is with us, the 
science is with us and we will mobilize support for this.”
 