
It's impossible to write about the role of readers' editors in the past year 
without touching on the extraordinary drama that has been unfolding at the 
Royal Courts of Justice.The Leveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> has lifted the lid on the 
culture, ethics and practices of the British press in a way that has never been 
seen before. Self-regulation has been found wanting, and it will be up to the 
inquiry to recommend a fresh approach.

As a board member of the Organization of News Ombudsmen (and now president for 
a second term), I wrote a witness statement for the inquiry, outlining the job 
that readers' editors do all around the world and repeating editor-in-chief 
Alan Rusbridger's call for the inquiry to recommend more appointments in other 
major newspapers in Britain. The Guardian's Chris Elliott appeared in person, 
answering questions about his role and how his independence is guaranteed.

We must wait to see whether Lord Justice Leveson agrees that newspapers could 
become more accountable if they appointed independent figures to listen and 
respond to readers' concerns, but a look at my workload and that of my Guardian 
colleagues would suggest that this is a fertile and positive way to show that a 
newspaper cares about ethical behaviour, accuracy and transparency.

Here's just one example of an ethical dilemma. If a newspaper sets out to 
expose blatant exploitation, will it risk colluding in the very exploitation it 
is determined to reveal?

The Observer ran a double-page spread on the plight of the reclusive Jarawa 
people of the Andaman Islands. The tribe, just 403-strong, lives in a jungle 
reserve that is supposedly protected. A trunk road runs through the reserve, 
and while photography and human interaction are forbidden, police were accused 
of accepting bribes to encourage half-naked young women to dance for convoys of 
tourists and their video cameras.

An undercover Observer reporter joined a "tour" and saw people throwing 
biscuits and bananas at the Jarawa "as they would to animals in a safari park".

To illustrate his story, he obtained a video of the forced dancing from a tour 
operator. After the girls' faces had been obscured by our web team and the 
policeman's instructions translated and subtitled, it ran on the paper's 
website and quickly attracted more than 500,000 hits, making it the second most 
viewed item that week. But some readers considered that to use the illicit 
video was to join in the very exploitation that the story set out to condemn.

The paper came under sustained attack for apparently endorsing a questionable 
treatment for cancer. It ran a first-person piece by a relative of a 
four-year-old girl whose family had chosen the treatment in a Texas clinic 
after her condition was considered inoperable in Britain.

While the piece acknowledged that the procedure was unproven, regrettably it 
did not include any of the concern for the treatment shown by the medical 
profession. This was a mistake, but the article did not set out to be a 
discussion of the treatment or an endorsement. Its focus was on the huge public 
campaign to raise money to support the family's desperate desire to find a way 
to extend their daughter's life.

Another piece that certainly strayed into the area of unquestioning 
endorsement appeared on the science pages. An inventor was allowed to make 
astonishing claims about the effectiveness of his adhesive tape which 
supposedly helps athletes recover from injury. Unchallenged, he claimed it 
would ease pain in fish and flamingos, mend chihuahuas and prop up sagging 
dachshunds.

The piece, which appeared under the label "Sports medicine", dispensed with 
all vestige of scientific inquiry at the outset with a headline that trumpeted 
"The magic tape that aids injured muscles", supported by an unequivocal 
subheading: "Kinesio tape provides pain relief for sports stars. And it works 
on dogs, says Dr Kenzo Kase".

I agreed with readers that such puffery had no place on a science page. They 
pointed out that Kase's bona fides were further brought into question by this 
remark in the piece: "The reason we get jet lag is because we are at very high 
altitude and that causes our temperatures to go up. So the first thing I do 
after flying is jump into cold water, even during winter. That brings my body 
temperature down and I don't have jet lag." As one reader put it: "So all we 
need to avoid jet lag is to fly lower in a cold plane. Nothing to do with 
changing time zones, then."

Other concerns raised by readers in 4,000 email exchanges, about 100 
snail-mail letters and countless telephone calls included the Magazine's 
nomination of footballer Wayne Rooney as "Crush of the Week".

"This is a man who allegedly paid for sex while his wife was pregnant with 
their son," wrote a reader. "I was shocked and appalled when I read that Mr 
Rooney had 'leapt to the top of [your] "would list" and I would like an 
explanation as to what kind of message the Observer Magazine thinks this is 
giving to women (and men for that matter) in terms of their aspirations as far 
as respectful and loving relationships are concerned."

The Magazine responded: "If we banished every unfaithful public figure then we 
might have empty pages. But more pertinently, as a liberal paper we are not 
censorious."

Again, the problem here was one of apparent endorsement. It's fine to comment 
on the lifestyles and love affairs of celebrities (in moderation), but it's not 
so fine to claim they have won the heart of the paper – and, by extension, the 
readers – when some will have understandable and profound objections to their 
glorification.

In an example of misrepresentation, a headline announced "Nine out of 10 
doctors oppose NHS bill" nover a news story that said: "A new poll reveals that 
nine out 10 members of the Royal College of Physicians – hospital doctors – 
want the NHS shake-up to be scrapped."

But a closer examination of this "poll" revealed it wasn't a poll at all, but 
a self-selecting open-access survey; a campaign tool created by and linked from 
callonyourcollege.blogspot.com, a website set up to fight the health bill.

The Observer decided the survey showed "that 92.5% of RCP members want the 
Health and Social Care Bill withdrawn", while in fact what it showed was that 
92.5% of those who decided to respond wanted the bill withdrawn – something 
entirely different.
 