
Who has offshore trusts?

In the past, they were mostly wealthy British citizens seeking to hold their 
money outside the UK to avoid income tax and capital gains tax on their 
earnings, and to pass their wealth to heirs without inheritance tax. But 
successive HMRC clampdowns (such as onthe notorious Jersey-based K2 trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/19/tax-scheme-jimmy-carr-hmrc> 
once used by comedian Jimmy Carr) have made these schemes much less attractive.

Today, offshore trusts are principally used by the global rich who are 
resident in the UK but not “domiciled” here. For example, a Greek shipping 
millionaire living in Knightsbridge can set up an offshore trust so he avoids 
paying tax in the UK on his worldwide assets.

Was Cameron’s trust one of these sorts of things? 

No. Offshore trusts are purely private (and secretive) schemes, usually 
centred around one family. The Blairmore fund was officially open to anybody to 
invest in, but really only to those with more than $100,000 (£70,000), 
according to its 2006 prospectus. So it was very different to the sort of 
Fidelity or M&G Isa fund held by lots of conventional UK savers, where minimum 
investments are typically £1,000. Those types of Isa funds are based within the 
EU, mostly in London, Dublin or Luxembourg. What was unusual about Blairmore 
was that prior to Ireland it was registered in Panama, making it a more 
“tax-efficient” structure, while benefiting from lighter regulation and costs.

Trusts or funds, they are still a tax fiddle, aren’t they? 

Yes and no. It’s all about whether they are declared for tax purposes. Any 
British citizen can put their money into an offshore fund in a tax haven and 
receive their gains tax-free. But they have a legal duty to declare these 
earnings to HMRC and pay tax. Not doing so is pure tax evasion. Occasionally 
HMRC offers an amnesty to tax-dodgers – you own up, pay the full tax, but avoid 
additional fines.

I knew some well-off “trustafarians” at university. So their money was in 
Panama?

Highly unlikely. Most “trust funds” are set up within the UK, by well-off 
families, to “shelter” their assets from UK inheritance tax. They are very 
rarely offshore. They are also very numerous; the UK’s Society of Trust and 
Estate Practitioners has 20,000 members alone. Trusts in England date back to 
the Knights Templar of the 12th century. They left their landed estates to 
“trustees” to pass on to their children should they die while on crusades in 
the Middle East.

British expats use offshore trusts and private banks all the time, don’t they?

Yes, but they are not resident in the UK so have a good argument for not 
paying tax here. Whether they pay tax in their new location is another 
question. Financial planning for expats is big business; among the biggest is 
deVere Group in London, Globaleye in Dubai and AES in the UAE. DeVere alone 
looks after 80,000 people with $10bn in assets.

Fancy lawyers and accountants run rings around HMRC, don’t they? 

Yes. But tax avoiders are quivering about the introduction of the new, global, 
“common reporting standard” whereby 96 countries will automatically exchange 
information with the tax authorities about the owners of trusts and the amount 
of money in them. We will see the first information exchanges taking place in 
September 2017. Most tax havens have, grudgingly, signed up. Just one big one 
is refusing. Maybe you can guess which one? Yes, it’s Panama.
 