
The first tentative steps towards healing generations of bitterness between 
Turkey and Armenia will take place in a football stadium in Yerevan tomorrow 
when the two nations meet in aWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifier watched by 
their respective presidents.

In what has been termed "football diplomacy", Turkey's president, Abdullah 
Gul, will attend the match after accepting an invitation from his Armenian 
counterpart, Serge Sarkisian, in an attempt to kick-start relations between the 
two neighbours, who do not have diplomatic ties.

An estimated 5,000 Turkish fans are also expected in Yerevan, Armenia's 
capital, after the Armenian authorities waived normal visas controls for the 
match in a goodwill gesture.

The presence of a large travelling army of supporters has provoked fears of 
violent clashes with Armenian nationalists, who have vowed to demonstrate 
against Gul's visit, the first toArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> by a modern Turkish head of 
state.

In a sign of the political sensitivity, Gul only confirmed on Wednesday 
evening that he would make the trip, ending speculation that had been growing 
since the invitation was sent in July.

A carefully worded statement from his office said that the occasion had 
"meaning beyond being just a sporting event". It added: "The visit held in the 
context of a match will contribute to the creation of a climate of friendship 
in the region. The match will be an opportunity to overcome obstacles and 
prepare a new ground to bring the two people together."

The presidents are expected to watch side-by-side after discussions on a 
catalogue of issues that evoke emotion, mistrust and vast differences in 
perception.

Ankara and Yerevan have long been at odds over Turkey's refusal to accept as 
genocide the deaths of up to 1.5 million Armenians at the hands of Ottoman 
troops during the first world war.Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/turkey> insists that far fewer died, and 
that many of the deaths were caused by starvation and disease, but proposes 
establishing a joint historical commission to examine the issue.

Despite that longstanding disagreement, Turkey was among the first countries 
to recognise Armenia's independence following the collapse of the Soviet Union 
in 1991. But formal relations were subsequently frozen when Armenia occupied 
the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh region following a war with Azerbaijan, Turkey's 
close ally.Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> also resents 
Armenian territorial claims on its eastern borders.

The troubled backdrop drove opposition politicians to urge Gul not to accept 
the invitation, with Deniz Baykal, leader of Turkey's oldest party, the 
Republican People's party - founded by Ataturk, declaring that he would rather 
watch the game in Baku, Azerbaijan's capital. Devlet Bahceli, leader of the 
Nationalist Action party, said the president "should not go before the problems 
between Armenia and Turkey are solved".

Plans for a parliamentary delegation from the ruling Justice and Development 
party (AKP) to accompany Gul were scrapped amid fears of the trip becoming 
submerged in party politics.

However, the government supports rapprochement with Armenia as part of prime 
minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's proposal for a Caucasus stability pact, 
promoted by Turkey following the recent clash between Russia and Georgia. It is 
also keen to prevent the genocide issue clouding future relations with the US 
and the EU, which have both given favourable hearings to arguments presented by 
Armenian diaspora groups.

Mensur Akgun, foreign policy programme director of Tesev, a Turkish thinktank, 
said the visit could lead to an accord on the question, thus improving 
international perceptions of Turkey. "There may be some progress on the joint 
commission to see if it was really genocide under the 1948 UN definition, 
meaning we will be able to face our own history which is obviously really good 
for a democracy," he said. "With respect to Turkey's international relations 
there is a lot to be gained."

Alexander Iskandarian, director of the Caucasus Institute in Yerevan, said 
normalised relations with Turkey would provide Armenia with a direct pathway to 
Europe, which the landlocked country lacks. "At the moment we have open borders 
with just two of our neighbours, Georgia and Iran," he said. "It costs us the 
same to import 1kg of goods from Europe as it does from Australia, yet most of 
our trade is withEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Open 
borders with Turkey would be very important to us."

Backstory

The opening for the thaw in relations came when Turkey and Armenia were drawn 
in the same World Cup qualifying group. It will be the first time they have met 
at a senior level. President Serge Sarkisian of Armenia saw it as a chance for 
"football diplomacy" based on "ping-pong diplomacy", when the restoration of 
US-Chinese ties in 1972 was presaged by table tennis matches.

"Just as the people of China and the United States shared enthusiasm for 
ping-pong ... the people of Armenia and Turkey are united in their love of 
football," he wrote in the Wall Street Journal. "Whatever our differences, 
there are certain cultural, humanitarian and sports links that our people 
share, even with a closed border."

Amid fears of clashes between fans, Turkey's coach, Fetih Terim, called for 
calm, saying: "This is only a football game not a war. We cannot carry the 
weight of history on our shoulders."
 