
Older teenagers and young adults are able to improve their fundamental maths 
skills and reasoning abilities more rapidly than younger teens, according to 
research that overturns longstanding assumptions about children’s learning.

The research, published by academics from University College London’s 
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience <http://www.ucl.ac.uk/icn/>, also upends 
ideas that tests used in grammar school selection can be made “tutor-proof” to 
assess potential.

In particular, the research found that older adolescents significantly 
improved their performance in maths skills after training – suggesting that 
older teenagers could reveal further potential even after sitting GCSE exams at 
the age of 16.

“We find that these cognitive skills, which are related to mathematics 
performance, show greater training effects in late adolescence than earlier in 
adolescence,” said Lisa Knoll, one of the authors of the research.

“These findings highlight the relevance of this late developmental stage for 
education and challenge the assumption that earlier is always better for 
learning. We find that fundamental cognitive skills related to mathematics can 
be significantly trained in late adolescence.”

The research – the first of its kind to compare the effects of training 
between age groups – gave tests in one of three formats to more than 600 
children, teenagers and adults aged 11 to 33. After completing 20 days of 
training through brief online sessions, they were retested to measure 
improvement.

While one of the three formats – face recognition – showed no improvement 
after training, the other two tests, of non-verbal reasoning and number 
judgments, showed distinct differences between age groups, with those at the 
older end of the age scale developing more rapidly after training.

The tests were repeated six months later and showed little difference in 
outcome.

The non-verbal reasoning test involved looking at a grid of shapes, with the 
final square left blank. Participants had to choose the correct shape to 
complete the pattern, and the shapes could vary by colour, size, shape and 
position.

In another test, described as “numerosity discrimination”, participants were 
shown two groups of different coloured dots in quick succession and had to 
judge which group had the most dots.

Grammar schools are not just socially divisive – they’re deeply ineffective | 
Sam Freedman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/grammar-schools-education-selection-divisive-ineffective>
Prof Sarah-Jayne Blakemore, senior author of the study, said that while older 
teens did better following training in non-verbal reasoning, the tests showed 
that younger teens aged 11-13 could also advance rapidly after being given 
brief online training sessions for three weeks.

“This calls into question the claim that entry tests for selective schools 
that include non-verbal reasoning [can] assess the true potential of every 
child,” Blakemore said.

In the recent debate over the revival of grammar schools, supporters have 
claimed that “tutor-proof” tests using non-verbal reasoning could be used to 
judge academic potential in 11 year-olds. The claim has been challenged by
experts including Prof Robert Coe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/12/tutor-11plus-test-grammar-schools-disadvantaged-pupils>
 at Durham University, who argues that all such tests are vulnerable to 
coaching.

The UCL paper, published in the journal Psychological Science 
<http://pss.sagepub.com/>, concludes that “complex cognitive skills relevant to 
maths education, particularly relational reasoning, show larger training 
effects in late adolescence than earlier in adolescence”.

It notes: “The fact that relational reasoning can be trained in all age groups 
tested here, and is particularly amenable to training in late adolescence, does 
not support the notion thatmatrix reasoning 
<https://www.quora.com/What-is-matrix-reasoning> gives an indication of some 
kind of innate, fixed ability. This has implications for education because 
matrix reasoning is commonly used in IQ tests and school entrance exams.”
 