
The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time dominated the UK's most 
prestigious theatre awards on Sunday night, equalling the record by picking up 
seven Oliviers, including best actor for its star, Luke Treadaway. The 
28-year-old, who gives an astonishing performance as 15-year-old maths genius 
Christopher Boone, beat off heavyweight competition in the shape of Rupert 
Everett, James McAvoy, Mark Rylance and Rafe Spall to pick up the prize at the 
Royal Opera House ceremony.

The awards, now in their 37th year, also saw Helen Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren> win her first Olivier, for 
her performance as the Queen in The Audience. The musical honours were shared 
by Top Hat and Sweeney Todd, which won three apiece.

Accepting her award, Mirren said she thought the Queen would be thrilled and 
deserved an award herself for "the most consistent, committed performance of 
the 20th century and probably the 21st too."

But it was Curious Incident that dominated the night. It was nominated in 
eight categories and won in seven, equalling the record set by the Royal 
Shakespeare Company's Matilda the Musical last year.

The play, an adaptation of Mark Haddon's bestselling novel from 2003, began 
life on the National Theatre's smallest stage, the Cottesloe, and continues the 
theatre's impressive form in successfully transferring shows such as War Horse 
and One Man, Two Guvnors to the West End.

As well as the award for Treadaway, the show was named best new play, while 
Marianne Elliott won best director and Spooks actor Nicola Walker, who played 
the teenager's mother in the original production, won best supporting actress.

Elliott said: "We took risks and we thought we would fail and it is a 
testament to subsidised theatre that we were allowed to think we might fail."

Treadaway said his immediate plan was to get "incredibly drunk". Before that, 
though, he stressed the importance of public subsidy in getting the play 
started. "It is a story about a child with a lot of differences who sees the 
world in a different way, and people could connect to him, they could see 
themselves in him at times."

Walker, who said the last prize she won was a swimming badge at school, 
admitted that the early workshopping of the play had been "absolutely 
terrifying". She added: "We all felt that we were doing something really 
important, which sounds like a cliche but is true. It was something we really, 
really cared about. We were part of a proper company in the old-fashioned 
sense."

The show's inventive set, with a graph-paper stage and props appearing from 
trapdoors, won the best design award for Bunny Christie and Finn Ross, and 
there were wins too for Ian Dickinson and Adrian Sutton for sound and Paule 
Constable for light design.

The play tells the story of 15-year-old Christopher – who has an autistic 
spectrum condition, or behavioural problems, as he puts it – as he sets out to 
investigate who killed his neighbour's dog, opening in the process all sorts of 
cans of worms. The book, adapted for the stage by Simon Stephens, was a huge 
success with both young and adult readers and that is reflected in the West End 
audiences, where elderly couples and groups of teenagers are equally likely to 
join the standing ovation it regularly receives.

In her fourth Olivier nomination and her first win, Mirren picked up the prize 
for her performance as the Queen at various ages in her regular meetings – 
"audiences" – with prime ministers from Winston Churchill to David Cameron, as 
imagined by writer Peter Morgan. Richard McCabe, who plays Harold Wilson, was 
named best supporting actor.

McCabe later revealed that members of the royal household had been reported 
sneaking into the play incognito – "They must be reporting back!"

He added: "It is a very sympathetic portrayal and there is something rather 
celebratory about it. That's what I like about the play, at the end of it you 
do sort of think 'well us Brits are not bad, actually'."

By common consent the musical categories this year were not the strongest, 
with many producers delaying shows because of the Olympics, and heavyweights 
such as The Book of Mormon and Once arriving after the deadline.

Michael Ball and Imelda Staunton, presenters of the awards in 2011 and 2012, 
were named best actor and actress in a musical for Sweeney Todd, which ran at 
the Adelphi from March to September last year, and Leigh Zimmerman won best 
supporting musical performance for her role in A Chorus Line.

Top Hat, based on the 1935 Fred Astaire-Ginger Rogers movie, won best new 
musical as well as awards for its choreography and costume design.

Robert Wilson and Philip Glass's epic Einstein on the Beach, staged at the 
Barbican as part of the London 2012 Festival, was named best new opera 
production, while US tenor Bryan Hymel won an outstanding achievement award for 
performances at the Royal Opera House in Les Troyens, Robert le Diable and 
Rusalka.

The ROH's success continued in the dance categories with the Royal Ballet's 
Argentinian principal dancer, Marianela Núñez, winning an outstanding 
achievement award and Christopher Wheeldon's Aeternum winning best new dance 
production.

The only prize chosen by public vote, the Radio 2 audience award, which 
rewards long-running musicals, went to Billy Elliot, which has been in the West 
End since 2005.

Other drama wins were Eugene O'Neill's Long Day's Journey Into Night, which 
won best revival; Goodnight Mister Tom, which won best entertainment and family 
show; and the Royal Court theatre, which won outstanding achievement in an 
affiliate theatre for its season of new writing in the JerwoodTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Upstairs.

Special awards were given to choreographer and director Gillian Lynne and 
playwright Michael Frayn.

The awards were hosted by Hugh Bonneville and Sheridan Smith, who opened the 
show with a performance of Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend.

The Oliviers have become notably starrier and more razzle-dazzle in recent 
years – an attempt to emulate Broadway's Tony awards – and this year also 
brought changes in the judging, with West End producers and theatre operators 
voting alongside dedicated panels.
 