
“Adam, if you could say one more thing to Helen, what would it be,” asks my 
daftly insensitive but well-meaning cousin, Holly.

My answer shoots straight from the heart; surprising me and shocking her. “I’d 
tell Helen how much better I understood her job, how good she was at it and how 
loved, valued and respected she was by so many of those with whom she worked.” 
Blimey.

Holly looks at me, wide-eyed. “Is that it? What about that you loved her, the 
kids, how you are coping? Her work? Reeeeaaally?”

“Really,” I reply, suddenly tired of the conversation and reaching for another 
egg-and-cress sandwich. Why do they taste so much better at funerals? My aunt 
Grace, aged 93, is the last of the 10 Golightly siblings to pass. All, except 
Fred, shot down at 21 in his Lancaster bomber, lived well into their 80s and 
I’m here with regret at the passing of an era but no grief. Helen’s death in 
her 40s has created a new benchmark that has anything above 60 looking like a 
good innings.

Later, on the long drive home, I unpick my feelings further. Helen and I were 
so close and, in many ways, never more so than in the last two years. My time 
at her bedside as she slipped away meant that, when she died, there really was 
nothing unsaid between us, or so I’d thought at the time.

It was only later that I realised that there was more to say as my window on 
the world of her career opened wider. Ironically, this new understanding of 
Helen’s professional persona came alive to me through windows of the 
stained-glass variety. Years ago, Helen commissioned a leaded stained-glass 
panel for her parent’s 50th wedding anniversary. It is a lovely thing, 
beautifully crafted and painted by Tony, who, operating out of a small unit on 
his family’s farm, produces glazed masterpieces.

So Millie, Matt and I are back, standing opposite Tony in his workshop, trying 
to hold a conversation about five tiny windows we are briefing him about, to go 
above the door of the house. Each will illuminate one of Helen’s passions. It 
is a poignant moment slightly spoiled by watching the kids hopping around amid 
so much broken glass that I’m wondering whether I should have put the local A&E 
into the Volvo’s sat nav.

We had a list of the things Helen loved, including from Millie, “Playing 
cards, North Yorkshire, the art deco cinema down the road, Christmas.” From 
Matt, “Harry Potter, picnics, first snowdrops, poppies, her children’s stories, 
old films, long walks, holidays, the zoo, the abbey.”

I am struck that the list has nothing of that big part of Helen – her career 
in the heritage sector – and I recall my surprise at just how much respect and 
goodwill had been shared in person and in so many letters from past and present 
colleagues. In her eulogy, I quoted extensively from former bosses whose warmth 
and respect shone through, and in the congregation we had talented, titled and 
influential people I didn’t know she knew, come to mourn her out of liking and 
respect.

I’ll share with the kids as much as I know about Helen as the passionate 
professional, not just adoring mum

Since then, her most recent boss, Henry, has overseen the creation of an 
annual award in Helen’s name, supported by stakeholders in her wider industry. 
Millie, Matt and Helen’s immediate family had loved seeing it handed out and 
been so proud of the speeches about her – it was like introducing them to a new 
and brilliant part of their mum that they had never known.

I hadn’t fully understood this part of her life while she was alive, and doing 
so better now makes me a little more proud, a little more in love, and her loss 
a little more dreadful.

It is why one of the windows will be about heritage and why I’ll share with 
the kids as much as I know about Helen as the passionate professional, not just 
a brilliant wife and adoring mum.

It is a bit preachy, but why not open wider your own wife’s, husband’s, 
partner’s work window and get a better view – you might learn to love them more 
while you have the chance to tell them why. Really.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/MrAdamGolightly>
 