
Wales may have enjoyed a clean sweep in the opening round of the tournament 
but the biggest banker in the weekend's four cross-border matches, the Ospreys 
- holders and finalists in the past two seasons - were supremely fortunate to 
snatch a late and thoroughly unmerited victory over what may euphemistically be 
called an unfamiliarHarlequins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> 
side.

Dean Richards, Quins' director of rugby, insisted afterwards that he did not 
have a second team, merely a highly talented squad. But had this been a 
Premiership game rather than a tournament which, though financially lucrative, 
is treated contemptuously by most of the English sides as a means for hopefuls 
to show off their credentials, no more than two of yesterday's side would have 
started.

The Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys>, in contrast, were 
virtually at full strength. When they led 14-3 at the end of the first half and 
the Harlequins wing Epi Taione was sent to the sin-bin for an outrageously 
reckless attempted shoulder tackle on James Hook, it seemed merely a question 
of when the hosts would claim their try bonus point. Quins had taken more than 
30 minutes to enter the Ospreys' 25 and struggled to retain the ball at the 
breakdown - but by the end of normal time they led by six points.

The Ospreys nearly scored a try in the first minute after Shane Williams 
followed up his own chip ahead and forced a Keystone Kops moment from Quins in 
their own 25, but they were devoid of inspiration after that. They led 9-3 with 
two minutes of the first half to go, three penalties by Hook to one from Waisea 
Luveniyali, in a game which had been shockingly low on skill. And then a moment 
to satisfy a raging thirst: Alun Wyn Jones broke though the defensive line in 
his own half with an angled run and Gavin Henson, starting his first match for 
six months, fed Williams, who had a free run to the line.

It was Henson's high point. Shortly afterwards he stepped out of the way as 
Taione thundered towards him and in the second period he was outpaced by De Wet 
Barry, a centre who has never been accused of resembling even a three-legged 
hare. Henson found himself shunted to the wing, never in danger of receiving a 
pass but vulnerable should Quins attack in space. He got away with it, as did 
his side, but next Sunday they face Leicester at Welford Road in the Heineken 
Cup.

"We are quietly pleased as a management ahead of that game," said the Ospreys 
coach, Sean Holley. "We were tested all the way and we came out on the right 
side of the scoreboard."

The Ospreys are home to most of the Wales team and they started with 13 
internationals, but they played for the most part as individuals, not as a 
team. However, when they needed to find something at the end they had the 
resources. "The challenge for us is to be less individual and have more of a 
team emphasis," said Holley. "We talked about the need for that before the game 
but we failed to apply it and it leaves us with a selection headache for 
Leicester. It will be a different side."

Harlequins will also have a different team when they return to Wales on 
Saturday to face the Scarlets in what will be the last Heineken Cup match at 
Stradey Park, but once they had sorted themselves out yesterday, playing for 
territory in the second period, holding on to the ball and exposing weak points 
in the home defence, they turned the game on its head.

Barry's try three minutes after half-time, from a neat inside pass by his 
co-centre, Tosh Masson, was followed by Tani Fuga being awarded a try after 
emerging from a pile of bodies after three drives on the Ospreys' line. 
Luveniyali's conversions gave Quins a three-point lead which twice became six 
as he kicked two penalties either side of one from Hook.

The Ospreys lost their captain, Ryan Jones, to the sin-bin on 66 minutes after 
another breakdown offence and looked anything but the all-conquering European 
force they had been billed as, and not just inside Wales, at the start of the 
season. But if the hallmark of champions is to win when playing abysmally, the 
Ospreys are ones to watch. Two minutes of stoppage-time had been played when 
Lee Byrne found space down the left: after exchanging passes with Jonny 
Vaughton he chipped to the line where Charlie Amesbury, a replacement for the 
injured England wing David Strettle, who is set today for a third operation in 
14 months on the same metatarsal, gathered the ball only to spill it over his 
own line under contact from Byrne. Tommy Bowe fell on it and Hook's angled 
conversion completed the mugging.

Ospreys Byrne; Vaughton, Parker (Bowe, h-t), Henson, Williams; Hook, Webb 
(Biggar, 65); D Jones, Bennett (Hibbard, 52), A Jones, Gough (Bateman, 76), AW 
Jones, Tiatia (Tandy, 65), Holah, R Jones (capt).

Tries Williams, Bowe. Con Hook. Pens Hook 4.

Sin-bin R Jones, 66

Harlequins Williams (Stegmann, 73); Taione, Barry, Masson, Amesbury; 
Luveniyali, Gomarsall (capt); Croall, Fuga, Lambert, Percival, Robson, Robshaw 
(Guest, 55), McMillan, Davies.

Tries Barry, Fuga. Cons Luvenyali 2. Pens Luvenyali 3.

Sin-bin Taione, 40

Referee T Wigglesworth (Yorkshire). Attendance 8,057.
 