
Flattery will get you everywhere in Hollywood. So it is that the films leading 
the nominations haul for this year's Oscars 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/jan/24/oscars-nominations-2012-list> – to 
be presented on Sunday 26 February – are both love letters to movie making.

Martin Scorsese's Hugo is, essentially, about the need to preserve film 
history, couched in a kids' adventure that pays homage to George Méliès, the 
early effects pioneer. Michel Hazanavicius'sThe Artist is a paean to old 
Hollywood itself, to the silver screen, to studio moguls and to old-school 
Beverly Hills glamour. Academy voters in their retirement homes must be lapping 
it up – art telling old artists their art was important, and still is.

After a few years wringing its hands over Iraq, in documentary and feature 
form, the Oscars recently touched on the financial crisis and the internet but 
they have clearly decided – in rewardingThe King's Speech over The Social 
Networklast year – that the past is a more comfortable country. Of this year's 
nine best picture nominees, only three –The Descendants, Moneyball and 
Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close– could be said to be set in anything like 
the present. (I'm not counting the framing devices inThe Tree of Life or 
Midnight in Paris – both are about characters retreating into the past.)

I thought we lived in a futuristic age, the era of 3D, Sony 4K, Imax, digital 
distribution, iPads and Netflix. But try telling that to the Oscars. Not even 
Andy Serkis's motion-capture performances inThe Adventures of Tintin or Rise of 
the Planet of the Apes have been recognised, either as feats of modern acting 
or as game-changing special effects.

Veterans such as Scorsese, Spielberg, Woody Allen and Terrence Malick are back 
on top. Hell, even "negro" house servants are providing the entertainment – 
Help us, indeed. There's not a shred of the experimental about the Oscars this 
year, nothing daring, nothing new, except a counting system that leaves us with 
nine nominations for best picture, a move that ends up looking like someone's 
made a clerical mistake.

The Artist and Hugo are both excellent films that I like very much, but I 
don't think they can compare even with Scorsese's own work inTaxi Driver, 
Raging Bullor Goodfellas. What these two leading nominees do is, I suppose, 
remind viewers that character and story are of utmost importance amid any 
technological advancement, that man is more significant than machine, that time 
will get the better of us all, and that charm still has a currency in the 
digital age.

Even the host this year, Billy Crystal, will give us old-fashioned vaudeville 
schtick. As they tell us year after year, the Oscar show needs to halt 
declining ratings. Yet what teenager in Nebraska, or even South Central, is 
going to watch this and cheer on some unknown Frenchies?

What the Oscar nominations evidence is the entrenched lines now drawn in 
Hollywood between the blockbusters, franchises and multiplex fillers – movies 
audiences actually go to see – and the "quality" films for adults with a veneer 
of intelligence; though even here the two most crowd-friendly films involve the 
Disneyfication of the first world war and the civil rights struggle.

Obviously, the nominations bring good news for Demián Bichir, the unknown 
actor grouped with the best actors, and Rooney Mara, whose Lisbeth Salander is 
just the sort of young, internet cyberpunk you'd have thought the Academy 
fears. Bet she could even hack into the Pricewaterhouse Coopers computers and 
leak the results.

But wouldn't it be a relief if the blockbusters got better and were able to be 
considered come Oscar time? That would be Hollywood really waking up to some 
kind of new cinema. For now, things have got so bad over there that a 
black-and-white French pastiche by complete unknowns can come in, silently, and 
steal off the biggest prize, without breaking sweat.
 George Clooney in The Descendants 
Best actor


NOMINATIONS
Demián Bichir – A Better Life
George Clooney – The Descendants
Jean Dujardin – The Artist
Gary Oldman – Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy
Brad Pitt – Moneyball

Philip French: For once all five nominated actors (one of them British, one 
Mexican, one French, two American) give substantial performances in films of 
some quality. Only the Mexican, Demián Bichir inA Better Life and the 
Frenchman, Jean Dujardin inThe Artist, are unfamiliar faces. The other three – 
Gary Oldman (Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy), George Clooney (The Descendants), Brad 
Pitt (Moneyball) – have been considered contenders for years. Pitt has the big 
advantage of being in a movie about money and baseball.

• Should win: Jean Dujardin. Will win: Brad Pitt.

Sally Hawkins: George Clooney will win. I do love watching him. He has the 
Midas touch, everything he does turns to gold. But it would be wonderful to see 
Gary Oldman step up to the podium. Does it get any better than Oldman? He is so 
special.

• Should win: Tom Hardy for Warrior or Gary Oldman. Will win: George Clooney.

Jason Solomons: Thrilled to see Gary Oldman in here and delighted for Brad 
because he's great inMoneyball, perfectly cast. But Clooney's been around the 
Oscar block and he's admirable inThe Descendants, reminded me of Jack Lemmon.

• Should win: George Clooney. Will win: George Clooney.

Bidisha: Gary Oldman will win for his dry-skinned performance in Tinker Tailor 
Soldier Spy, a shadowy film full of underhand men talking about men's things in 
a manly undertone. Beige macs never looked so mysterious. I'd like Jean 
Dujardin to win for his turn (and twist, and shimmy, and jazz hands) inThe 
Artist. He can pop his eyes, sigh and glide across a sprung floor in a way 
that's so Valentino-meets-Beetlejuice.

• Should win: Jean Dujardin. Will win: Gary Oldman.

Mariella Frostrup: I suspect George Clooney will win best actor for The 
Descendants because they've failed to recognise him for better previous roles 
likeSyriana and Up in the Air. But for me Clooney as a downbeat cuckolded 
husband is just too great a stretch of the imagination. My choice would be Gary 
Oldman, who I felt was quietly, powerfully brilliant as George Smiley inTinker 
Tailor Soldier Spy. Ryan Gosling has had a spectacular year with Drive and The 
Ides of March, which hasn't been recognised in best actor nominations.

• Should win: Gary Oldman. Will win: George Clooney.
 Meryl Streep in The Iron Lady 
Best actress


NOMINATIONS
Glenn Close – Albert Nobbs
Viola Davis – The Help
Rooney Mara – The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo
Meryl Streep – The Iron Lady
Michelle Williams – My Week with Marilyn


PF: Five American performers are in contention, three playing Europeans, and 
only Rooney Mara appearing in a movie generally considered of the first rank, 
though she's playing a role famously created by a Swede inThe Girl with the 
Dragon Tattoo. The Help, a mediocre tearjerker about racism in the deep south 
50 years ago, has a touching performance by Viola Davis. But the real acting 
competition is between remarkable impersonations of 20th-century icons in 
second-rate pictures – Michelle Williams's convincing Marilyn Monroe inMy Week 
with Marilyn and Meryl Streep's uncanny Margaret Thatcher in The Iron Lady.

• Should win Meryl Streep. Will win Meryl Streep.

SH: From the list, Meryl should and will win. But then she is a goddess and 
has an ability to transform. But I would have loved to have seen the beautiful 
Olivia Colman and Tilda Swinton on that list too, and Kirsten Dunst for
Melancholia.

• Should win Meryl Streep. Will win Meryl Streep.

JS: Everyone who isn't called Meryl is just turning up for the party. For all 
her record-breaking nominations, Streep hasn't won much and her Thatcher is a 
towering achievement. Voters do love Viola Davis and her admirable dignity 
nearly rescuesThe Help. Michelle Williams is lovely but frankly she's no 
Marilyn Monroe.

• Should win Meryl Streep. Will win Meryl Streep.

B: It'll go to Meryl Streep for her pining in a belittling tribute to the 
niceness of Denis Thatcher. I preferred Michelle Williams for her nuancedMy 
Week with Marilyn. Or Glenn Close as a cross-dressing butler in Albert Nobbs. 
Women get Oscars for doing something interesting before being brutalised and 
dying.

• Should win Michelle Williams. Will win Meryl Streep.

MF: The academy loves Meryl Streep and there is a huge mythology in America 
about Margaret Thatcher. Out of their list I think she best deserves the gong 
forThe Iron Lady. But it will most likely go Viola Davis for The Help, to make 
up for the lack of black actors who've won an Oscar to date.

• Should win Meryl Streep. Will win Viola Davis.
 The Artist 
Best film: 


NOMINATIONS
War Horse, The Artist, Moneyball, The Descendants, The Tree of Life, Midnight 
in Paris, The Help, Hugo, Extremely Loud & Incredibly Close

PF: An unusually interesting and varied list of nominees, though they can't be 
said to touch on any urgent topical interest peculiar to 2011. It is most 
remarkable of course for featuring Michel Hazanavicius'sThe Artist, a 
Franco-Belgian film about the coming of sound to Hollywood, that is both funny 
and silent, and an American film, Martin Scorsese'sHugo, set in Paris, that is 
funny and about the silent cinema. Both are likely to take their place as 
classic films about the cinema itself.

• Should win: The Artist. Will win: The Artist.

SH: The Descendants will get it, but I would love The Tree of Life to win. 
Because it's Terrence Malick and he is a genius.

• Should win: The Tree of Life. Will win: The Descendants.

JS: Having just nine films is like admitting they couldn't find 10 good 
enough. Sort this category out – if you're tinkering, allow docs and foreigns 
in.The Tree of Life is too ethereal to be bound by such earthly matters as a 
film competition; lovely to see Woody back in butMidnight in Paris isn't even 
one of his own nine best.

• Should win: The Artist. Will win: The Artist.

B: War Horse. Not since Seabiscuit came out have I been so excited about a 
film.War Horse features amazing equine method acting – it's as though the old 
nag really thinks it's going to war and is slowly developing post-traumatic 
stress disorder! – all coloured in a brown haze from the syrup Spielberg's 
poured over it. Please, turn those Hollywood horses into Pritt Stick.• Should 
win:The Artist. Will win: War Horse.

MF: The Artist seems to have been a critical crowd-pleaser, and it has novelty 
on its side as well as being beautifully realised. My guess is it will beat the 
other favourite,The Descendants. Forced to choose from the academy's list I 
would be tempted byHugo, which showed an altogether more whimsical side to 
Martin Scorsese <https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese>. But very 
importantly I much preferredThe Ides of March, which could certainly stand its 
ground for best picture.

• Should win: Hugo. Will win The Artist.
 From Hell and Back Again 
Best documentary

NOMINATIONS
Hell and Back Again, If a Tree Falls: a Story of the Earth Liberation Front, 
Paradise Lost 3: Purgatory, Pina, Undefeated

{PF: All five nominated films touch on current social and political issues – 
errors in the American criminal justice system, environmentalism, the Afghan 
war, the underfunding of public education – except forPina, Wim Wenders's

rather beautiful 3D tribute to the late German avant-garde choreographer Pina 
Bausch. The war film, Danfung Dennis's harrowingHell and Back Again, about a 
badly injured US marine corps sergeant adjusting to stateside life, makes bold 
use of feature film techniques to take us into the man's experience.

• Should win: Hell and Back Again. Will win: Hell and Back Again.

SH: Pina by Wim Wenders is such a beautiful film about such a unique and 
beautiful artist, Pina Bausch. I loved it.

• Should win: Pina. Will win: Pina.

JS: As ever, the Academy's choices are baffling. Undefeated seems the wrong 
Sarah Palin doc (not Nick Broomfield's) andIf a Tree Falls is surely too green 
for Hollywood. Every time I see scenes from Wim Wenders'sPina, I just think, 
wow.

• Should win: Pina. Will win: Hell and Back Again.

B: It'll probably go to Hell and Back Again, a doc about an American soldier 
wounded in Afghanistan returning home. Yep, it's hard when you're a dispensable 
trained macho killing machine and another country's dispensable trained macho 
killing machine gets the better of you when you fully expected to Show Them, 
Bigstyle. I'd like some recognition forPina, Wim Wenders's doc about the 
pioneering choreographer Pina Bausch. It's exciting, accessible, vital and 
visually stunning and pays tribute to a woman of genius. Which is why it won't 
get no Oscar.

• Should win: Pina. Will win: Hell and Back Again.

MF: Hell and Back Again looks the most likely winner. But I loved If a Tree 
Falls for its original storyline and timely look at what inspires acts of 
terrorism, whether in the Middle East or middle America.

• Should win: If a Tree Falls. Will win: Hell and Back Again.
 A Separation. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Best foreign film

NOMINATIONS
Bullhead, Footnote, In Darkness, Monsieur Lazhar, A Separation

PF: This patronising, ill-conceived award should be reconsidered or abandoned. 
Films submitted by 63 countries were assessed by an academy committee on the 
way to a short list. Some notable directors didn't get their films nominated by 
their national organisations; most that did didn't get on the short list. The 
only film of the five put to the vote that I'd heard of is Asghar Farhadi's 
admirableA Separation, a story of a marital break-up and the desire to get out 
of Iran. It's a film of considerable merit, much admired here when it opened 
last summer.

• Should win: A Separation. Will win: A Separation

SH: I'm disappointed not to see Troll Hunter or Pedro Almodóvar's The Skin I 
Live In nominated. I also liked the look of the Canadian film Monsieur Lazhar.

• Should win: Monsieur Lazhar. Will win: A Separation

JS: Good to see Joseph Cedar's Talmud comedy Footnote in here but even I think 
it's too Jewish to win. Poland'sIn Darkness has vote-winning Holocaust 
credentials (shoah-business, they call it) butA Separation has to be favourite, 
even just to soothe America and Iran's relationship.

• Should win: A Separation. Will win: In Darkness

B: A Separation should and hopefully will win. Made by Asghar Farhadi, this is 
a stunning masterpiece about marriage, parenthood, family, gender, class and 
religion, a triumph of acting, writing and direction, a naturalistic urban 
thriller and psychodrama and a pitch-perfect paragon of contemporary Iranian 
cinema. Unforgettable.

• Should win: A Separation. Will win: A Separation

MF: A Separation was really wonderful and in this category I'm hoping the 
Academy and I concur, unlikely though that is. The wonderful Catalan entryBlack 
Bread should have been included in the shortlist and I'd love to have seen the 
hilarious Irish filmThe Guard nominated too. The Guard doesn't stand a chance 
in hell against the big guys, but it's insulting to define it as English, and 
in the foreign film category it could wipe out the competition. Brendan Gleeson 
was mesmerising and so funny.

• Should win: A Separation. Will win: A Separation
 We Need to Talk About Kevin 
Overlooked


PF: Sad to see no recognition for Kenneth Lonergan's intelligent, thoughtful 
Margaret, a flawed movie about life in a troubled, divided post-9/11 New York. 
Completed in 2007, long in post-production, and eventually re-edited by Martin 
Scorsese, it has excellent performances by Anna Paquin (she shared the London 
Film Critics' best actress award with Meryl Streep) as a disturbed teenager, 
Lonergan's wife J Smith-Cameron as her divorced mother, and some splendid 
writing. It will outlive many other nominees.

SH: Tyrannosaur? Where is it? Paddy Considine for best director? Similarly We 
Need to Talk about Kevin? It is a masterpiece. Lynne Ramsay is simply 
remarkable and should be coming home with armfuls of little golden men. But not 
even a whisper of a nomination?

JS: Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy should have been among best films, Tilda Swinton 
and Kristen Wiig among best actresses, and Michael Fassbender in there forShame
. Ryan Gosling will come again but surelySenna is the best film not to make the 
starting grid.

B: All the women. We Need to Talk About Kevin? Wuthering Heights? Bridesmaids? 
New director Angelina Jolie's excellent Bosnian war dramaIn the Land of Blood 
and Honey? Dee Rees and her brilliant, cool, powerful film about black-American 
lesbian life,Pariah? Kelly Reichardt's neo-western, Meek's Cutoff? Oh, and 
guess what, Madonna'sW.E. is a thousand times better than royal borefest The 
King's Snooze, in which a man spends two hours overcoming a speech impediment 
while Helena Bonham Carter looks on.W.E. actually has proper roles for women in 
it – and, sorry haters, Madonna can direct. Oh, and whither Steve McQueen, 
director ofShame? Hollywood strongly prefers war-haunted horses to black people 
or women.

MF: I'm disappointed that Senna isn't included in documentary feature and 
stunned thatTinker Tailor Soldier Spy isn't on the best film list. Clearly the 
Academy didn't have the stomach forShame and Michael Fassbender's performance 
but I think it was brave, honest and a brilliant piece of work that will become 
a cult classic. It certainly deserved a nod.
 