
This year has seen the eurozone crisis spiralling out of control, fears of a 
global recession growing deeper and consumers keeping their hands firmly in 
their pockets. So 2011 was not exactly a golden time for stock market investors 
and it is no surprise that a volatile 12 months saw theFTSE 100 lose 6.5%.

Unfortunately the Guardian's selection of share tips for the year came nowhere 
near matching the market's performance, losing 20% in total.

The standout performer was Real Good Food up 56%. At one stage the sugar 
distributor, cake maker and bakery ingredients specialist had tripled in value 
– a good point to take some profits, which many investors clearly decided to do.

Solid businesses such as BG and Compass also held their own. But we were 
rather too reliant on retail, not the best call as household spending became 
increasingly squeezed and the government embarked on its austerity drive and 
slashed public sector jobs.SuperGroup and Dixons Retail fell sharply while HMV, 
acknowledged at the time as a risky pick, added some problems of its own to the 
general sector malaise.

And 2012 doesn't look as if it will be much better, with the continuing 
prospect of the eurozone collapsing, a large amount of sovereign debt to be 
refinanced early in the year, China's economy perhaps facing a hard landing and 
austerity drives continuing to bite.

Despite this, we are sticking our necks out once more with 10 more shares we 
hope will outperform. The only rule was no retailers. Well, maybe just a couple.

Zoe Wood

The Olympics and Mike Ashley's mega new bonus scheme means 2012 holds the 
promise of glory forSports Direct International, 206.4p. The retailer's 
pile-it-high sell-it-cheap sales pitch is not glamorous but it is in keeping 
with the consumer mood and will offer a cheap way for Britons to jump on the 
sports bandwagon. Investors who bought into Sports Direct at the time of the 
IPO are still under water with shares trading at around 200p versus their 300p 
debut in 2007. But Ashley likes nothing more than a bet: the new bonus scheme 
means hitting profit targets for four years but with skin in the game you can 
be certain he will pull out the stops.

Julia Finch

All around Kingfisher – the group behind B&Q and Castorama in France – rivals 
are struggling as consumers resist big-ticket spending on their homes and 
fierce discounting cuts into margins. But Kingfisher, Europe's biggest DIY 
business, is looking remarkably healthy. It delivered strong third quarter 
numbers this month, with group operating profit up 14% ahead of expectations. 
Britain is benefiting from strong cost control while DIY is proving one of the 
most resistant areas in the gloomy French retail sector. Kingfisher, 246p, also 
has one of the most highly regarded management teams in the retail business, a 
strong balance sheet and yields more than 3%.

Terry Macalister

British engineering is not the most fashionable brand around and there will be 
no fireworks here butAmec, 902.5p, is a genuine force in oil and gas services. 
The company has amassed a substantial cash pile and has been using it with 
neat, targeted acquisitions. Meanwhile despite the economic gloom, crude prices 
remain strong and developers continue to spend heavily. Amec, whose shares are 
cheaper than its peers, is well poised to benefit whether in the North Sea or 
further afield. Samir Brikho, the Lebanese-born chief executive, is a man with 
a mission and he has built up a £3.3bn order book that should continue to grow.

Nick Fletcher

Aim listing mining group Mariana Resources has a number of gold and silver 
projects in Argentina and Chile, and recent drilling results from its Sierra 
Blanca site have been encouraging. AngloGold Ashanti recently showed confidence 
in Mariana by paying 12p a share to take a 19.9% interest, with the cash 
helping to fund the company's drilling programme for the next 12 months or so. 
This news prompted analysts at Fox Davies to put a 22p target on the shares, 
currently 10p. There is plenty of scope for consolidation among mining 
companies in the region, and in the long term Mariana may look at selling some 
of its projects, seek further partnerships with major mining groups or agree to 
a takeover.

Julia Kollewe

Last month Sphere Medical, 77.5p, became the second Cambridge company to debut 
on Aim this year, with a market value of £34m. It has used micro-electronic 
technology to miniaturise a $30,000 (£19,000) bench-top blood gas analyser into 
a disposable biosensor that provides near real-time blood gas analysis at the 
patient's bedside, allowing more frequent, cost-effective testing. The 
technology has been developed in collaboration with Europe's largest intensive 
care unit in Birmingham, and achieved an important milestone in its 
commercialisation just before Christmas. Broker Peel Hunt expects the firm to 
break even in 2014. Its lead product shows a lot of promise, so we are tipping 
the shares, which have fallen to 73p since floating at 92.5p on 17 November.

Simon Bowers

It is likely to be another tough year for leisure companies that rely heavily 
on discretionary consumer spending. Pub groups in particular have suffered. 
That said, there are some signs the picture may be stabilising for some more 
resilient players, with well-placed operators being those with strong 
value-for-money and food offerings.Marston's pub restaurant expansion has shown 
early promise, generating strong returns. The average spend here is £6.10. 
Meanwhile, a new franchising model – somewhere between managed houses and 
tenancies – is also providing a boost. Both these initiatives should continue 
to help group earnings for 2012, making Marston's – 90.5p – a stand-out stock 
in a very tough sector.

Rupert Neate

After four profits warnings in a year, surely things cannot get much worse for 
Pace, 71.5p. On the plus side the company's disastrous year allows you to pick 
up the stock at less than half the price it was this time last year. Back then 
the Yorkshire-based set-top box maker was a stock market darling, and most of 
its underlying potential is still there (albeit a little more underlying). Pace 
makes set-top boxes for most of the world's biggest satellite and digital TV 
providers, including BT and Virgin Media. As TVs get cleverer (think HD, 3D 
etc) Pace can charge more for its boxes, and it has plans to help integrate TVs 
and other household items with the internet. Also history shows that consumer 
spending on pay-TV subscriptions actually increases in difficult times, so if 
Eurogeddon does happen Pace should be better placed than most as people would 
rather forgo nights out on the town than access to the Premier League or the 
latest movies. The analysts seem to have faith in new boss Mike Pulli, who, as 
president of Pace America ,expanded its US customer base.

Jill Treanor

2011 was not a pretty year for Man Group when the hedge fund suffered a 
painful fall in shares following a weak performance at its main fund, AHL, and 
an outflow of funds in the fourth quarter. As the disastrous year drew to a 
close its house broker, Merrill Lynch, downgraded its forecasts for 2012 
because it expects the crucial performance fees from AHL to be down, though 
redemptions from the group's funds should slow. It is clearly a risky bet but 
if – and it is a big if – the markets recover their composure on a lasting 
solution to the eurozone crisis, some in the City reckon that Man, 127.9p, 
could be one of the big beneficiaries.

Richard Wachman

Vodafone's shares at 176.3p are relatively cheap and offer defensive qualities 
at a time when much of the developed world faces recession amid continuing 
turbulence in the eurozone. The company earns more than half its revenue in 
emerging markets and the US and less than half from Britain and Europe. The 
shares yield around 7% so if you can withstand some stock price volatility and 
hold on to your investment through 2012, and perhaps beyond, you could do well, 
providing dividends are reinvested. Vodafone has tidied up its sprawling global 
portfolio, while its Verizon joint venture in the US is poised to pay a 
dividend for the first time in seven years, with the promise of more to come. 
All in all, not a bad bet.

Juliette Garside

Peter Dubens, chair of telecoms reseller Daisy Group, is a master of the buy 
and build. He corralled 14 businesses into Pipex broadband before selling it to 
Tiscali, and built bookmaker 365 Media Group in the same way before cashing out 
to BSkyB. The unsold remains of Pipex were merged in 2009 with Daisy, whose 
founder Matthew Riley still runs the company. After 35 acquisitions, Daisy is 
the leading provider of communications bundles – mobiles, landlines, broadband, 
servers – to mid-sized British businesses. It acts as a wholesaler for BT 
Group, Cable & Wireless and Vodafone. The company listed on Aim in July 2009. 
Its share price had risen by around 30% to an average of 125.5p this July 
before markets crashed. The stock now looks cheap at 95.5p. Jefferies bank has 
a target of 145p, believing Daisy can fatten margins by selling more products 
to existing customers. Faster broadband and more data storage are becoming must 
haves for Daisy's client base and the economic climate is unlikely to dent that.

2011 HOW WE FARED

End price taken on 23 December

Centrica: start price 331.6, end price 290.3, percentage change -12.45

BG Group: start price 1296, end price 1348.5, percentage change +4

Compass: start price 581, end price 592.5, percentage change +2

Dixons: start price 22.92, end price 9.66,  percentage change -57

HMV Group: start price 32, end price 3.25, percentage change -90

Barclays: start price 261.65, end price 179, percentage change -31.5

Promethean World: start price 65.75, end price 58.5, percentage change -11

Real Good Food: start price 24, end price 37.5, percentage change +56

SuperGroup: start price 1297, end price 531, percentage change -59

Hiscox: start price 381.4, end price 372.8, percentage change -2.25

Average loss -20

The FTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 fell from 5899.94 on 
Jan 4 2011 to 5512.70, a loss of-6.56%
 