
Yet another report has been published showing frightening levels of mental 
illness among children and young people in England. The figure now stands at
about a quarter of a million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/03/quarter-of-a-million-children-receiving-mental-health-care-in-england>
. I have written before, downplaying the phenomenon, usually along the lines of 
“children have never had it so good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/27/we-oldies-arent-lucky-ones-children-today-have-much-better-lives>
” and pointing to the increase in child-centrism, the boons of technology and 
the growth in living standards for most.

I can’t keep my head in the sand any longer. Something is going seriously 
wrong. Owen Jones,in an article in this newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/04/ashamed-britain-children-intolerable-pressures-mental-health-problems>
, recited the usual suspects – overcrowded and poor housing, poor diet, lack of 
exercise, family conflict, the stresses of poverty and lack of state support. I 
am dubious about most of these explanations, largely because such matters have 
long been with us without an accompanying crisis of mental illness.

My explanation is that our children are having their childhood stolen from 
them, and at some level they know it. They kick against this with rage and 
frustration. But it is important to note that this is a rise in mental illness, 
not unhappiness. They are different things. Mental illness is an unhappiness 
that is unsanctioned, denied essentially. It is unhappiness that does not know 
itself. It is unhappiness that arises from confusion and double standards. Why 
this confusion? Chiefly, it is down to the idea that achievement and 
competition are all important. There is nothing wrong with this as an ethos, 
but achievement of what? Competition for what? And when does it end?

In the world I grew up in, when mental illness among young people was largely 
unheard of, achievement, although desirable, was not considered particularly 
important. Many people from my very ordinary background didn’t pass any 
important exams. Few went to university. And it wasn’t thought a big deal, 
because it was recognised that not everyone could be outstanding or high 
achieving. It wasn’t a failure to get a job in a local shop or factory, find 
somewhere OK to live and have a couple of kids. It was normal and many people 
embraced it.

But things have changed in the world of societal expectation. The myth seems 
to have arisen that individual striving and effort will always get you what you 
want – money, status or a satisfying career. A few generations ago, we were 
more realistic. The class structure of society, and our own individual 
limitations – such things were acknowledged then – meant that few of us could 
hope to hit the heights. But it didn’t matter as long as we had a reasonable 
job, our community, our homes, our families. Expectations were in line with 
reality.

Now that middle-class aspirational values have seeped and bled everywhere, 
this is no longer the case. Not only are we told that we can do anything if we 
want to, but that we should. We must all become middle class, or count 
ourselves a failure. Competitive narcissism runs rampant.

It is bad enough for those who come from a background that invests in this – 
the ambitious middle class. To get sucked in from a culture that does not 
invest in it, or have much of a chance in the race – well, no wonder some 
children are either rejecting education, or experiencing mental illnesses.

Achievement is healthy, but we don’t all have to hit the heights to feel good 
about ourselves. Society is made up of mostly low- or medium-achievers, and to 
make us feel ashamed of who we are is a great burden. Success should be 
redefined as achieving what you feel capable of, and what lies within the realm 
of possibility – not what society tells you that you must achieve in order to 
conform to a fantasy that, for most, only exists in glossy magazines and 
university prospectuses.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 