
The latest annual issue of the gross state product figures by the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/5220.0Main+Features12015-16?OpenDocument>
 showed that for the first time in a decade, Western Australia no longer is the 
fastest growing state economy. While WA’s economylast year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2015/nov/23/there-is-such-a-thing-as-wrong-kind-of-growth-just-look-at-western-australia>
 was still growing strongly, despite employment in the state shrinking, this 
year the performance of the economy is more reflective of the weak state of 
jobs in the state.

While Australia’s GDP figures are released every three months (the next are 
due on 7 December), the measure of each state’s economy only comes out once a 
year. Gross state product (effectively the GDP of each state) takes into 
account not just the consumption and investment in each state, but also 
includes exports from and imports into each state.

As has been clear from the GDP figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/08/48bn-found-down-the-back-of-the-couch-doesnt-leave-much-confidence-in-gdp-figures>
, exports was the big driver of Australia’s economy in 2015-16 (and will likely 
continue to be so). But the GSP figures show that while Western Australia 
remains the state most dependent on strong export growth, the sharp drop in 
mining investment is now such that even the export boom cannot keep WA’s 
economy powering ahead of the rest of the nation.

Since 2005-06 Western Australia’s economy has been the fastest growing across 
the nation.

Not any longer. 

In 2015-16, for the first time since 1990-91, New South Wales had the fastest 
growing economy in Australia. At 3.5% growth, it is not just the best 
performing state, its growth is the best NSW has achieved since 1999-2000.

With just 1.9% growth, Western Australia finds itself back in the pack – well 
down on the 3.6% growth it achieved in 2014-15, let alone the peak of 9.1% of 
2011-12:

I have excluded Northern Territory from the graphs because at just 1% of the 
national’s economy, and a mining area, it can be subject to very wild swings 
due to relatively small changes in investment – thus for example in 2012-13 it 
had growth of 15%, which dwarfs that ever achieved by the rest of the country, 
and as result rather ruins the scale of the graphs, so here is the graph of 
NT’s GSP and GSP per capita growth. For what it is worth, it’s growth in 
2015-16 was less than the national GDP growth this year.

On a per capita basis, the lead by NSW is even greater. Its 2% per capita 
growth is 0.6 percentage points greater than that of the next best performing 
state, Victoria, while WA and Queensland brought up the rear with just 0.7% 
growth in 2015-16:

And while there has definitely been the sense that Australia solid GDP growth 
is not translating into equally solid employment growth, the GSP performance 
compared with employment growth in each state suggests some good alignment.

NSW and Victoria are the two states with GSP growth faster than Australia’s 
GDP growth, and they are also the only two states with employment growth in 
2015-16 above the national average.

Mostly this can be explained by stronger growth of final demand (essentially 
consumption and investment) – which is a big driver of jobs, as opposed to 
exports which does not necessarily translate into extra work. Only Tasmania is 
a bit of an outlier on this, with above average growth of demand (mainly due to 
government and household consumption) but also the worst employment growth:

The driver of each state’s growth varies rather wildly across the nation. 

New South Wales’ economy benefitted from not having too many things dragging 
down its growth. Its biggest driver was actually government consumption, 
closely followed by private dwelling construction.

Somewhat surprisingly, the contribution of dwelling construction to NSW’s 
economic growth was not the biggest in the nation. Victoria and Queensland both 
saw dwelling construction as a bigger driver of their state’s economies – 
fuelled by the surge in apartment construction in those two states.

Western Australia and Queensland were also not the only two states to have 
growth come via strong exports. South Australia and Tasmania both saw strong 
performing export growth. For Tasmania a lot of the boost in exports came via 
an 80% increase in exports to China – mostly in the form of processed metals:

The change in WA’s economy from an investment superstar to export boomer has 
taken just three years.

In 2012-13, private capital expenditure in WA totalled $92.4bn, but since then 
it has declined by $25.3bn to now just $67.1bn. In the same period, net exports 
in the state rose $31bn from $49.7bn to a whopping $80.7bn in 2015-16:

A good way to see just how sharp the fall in private investment has been in 
the west is to compare private capital formation in WA and NSW.

In 2011-12 and 2012-13, WA, despite having an economy roughly half the size of 
NSW’s actually had more private investment:

The drop in performance of WA, and the improvement of NSW has also seen a 
change in the makeup of Australia’s economy.

Off the back of the strongest growth in the nation, in 2013-14 WA accounted 
for 16.9% of Australia’s economy – up from just 10.5% at the start of the 
century. But in 2015-16, its share has fallen to 14.5%, while NSW’s rose to 
32.5% - the biggest slice of Australia economy it has had since 2006-07:

The GDP figures out in two weeks will given an updated snapshot of how 
Australia’s economy has been travelling. Often those figures can obscure the 
performance across the states as they don’t count the exports from each state. 
But as the GSP figures have shown, even with strong export growth the key to a 
healthy economy for people looking for work is investment, and right now NSW 
and Victoria lead the way both in that, and also in jobs.
 