
For many people, being born into a notorious criminal family might present a 
huge disadvantage. For Julie Shaw it sparked her determination to one day build 
herself a better life. Not that she feels any shame or regret about her 
connection to the Hudsons, who dominated the once wild and lawless sprawling 
Canterbury estate in Bradford, West Yorkshire, for more than 40 years. Rather 
like a northern version of the Krays or the Richardsons of London, though 
without the extreme violence, the Hudsons were feared and respected far beyond 
the boundaries of their “manor”.

Among them there was even a Reggie, a Ronnie and a Charlie. But could they 
really be described as “the Krays of the north”?

Sitting opposite her in her smart, four-storey home in Bridlington, it’s hard 
to imagine this attractive and thoughtful woman having a criminal gene in her 
body. Her husband runs his own taxi-cab and, until recently, she worked as a 
teacher for children with behavioural issues. “I think it was a different 
dynamic,” she says. “You have to remember that in the 30s and 40s when my dad 
and his siblings were growing up, there were no jobs. It was a serious 
depression. I would go as far as to say they were criminals not by design, but 
by necessity – to survive. People around them were dying of poverty and 
starvation, and for a family of 15 there was almost no other choice. But they 
did have a really powerful code in as far as they would never steal from their 
own kind, never steal from an individual or a house, or rob a person on the 
street – not ever. They would say it was OK to burgle a factory or demand 
protection from a pub, in those days pub landlords were rich. So they had this 
ethic that put them above the common criminal, if you like. In their own 
territory, they were loved by everyone.”

In fairness, I say, that’s what they said about the Krays and the Richardsons, 
who “never bashed a granny” but between them served decades in prison for, 
among other heinous crimes, torturing their victims. Were the Hudsons really 
loved by everyone? “Well, they never tortured anyone,” she says. “They were 
just rough and ready. They were no angels, but they suffered too.”

Now 50, Shaw has chronicled the lives of her grandparents and their offspring 
in three recent best-selling books. Her writing style has echoes of the crime 
writer Martina Cole – graphic street vernacular and a pumping narrative with 
larger-than-life characters who thrill and chill in equal measure. But Shaw’s 
prose has an extra layer of polish and authenticity – and to her credit, there 
is no overt glamorising of any of her family’s nefarious activities. Her 
father, Keith, is the only surviving member of the 13 siblings. In his 70s, he 
lives happily in peaceful retirement with Shaw’s mother Shirley, also in 
her 70s.

“He still tells his stories,” she says, “and we laugh and cry just as much as 
we ever did. I wrote my books because I didn’t want the stories to be 
forgotten.”

When was she first aware that she was part of an infamous family? “We grew up 
with it. I’d be walking through the town centre and people would point and say, 
‘That’s Keith Hudson’s daughter,’ or ‘That’s Charlie Hudson’s niece’.”

Her father’s older brother, Charlie, was the best known of the clan, the 
fiercest “Canterbury warrior”, who, in his 20s, was running cons, illegal 
betting houses and prostitutes. But just as he was in the process of turning 
his life around, tragedy struck – the car he was driving skidded on a wet road 
and crashed into a wall, killing his new wife and baby daughter, along with his 
brother, Brian, and a friend.

For nearly the whole of the rest of his life Charlie lived on a bench in 
Bradford city centre, existing on handouts from sympathetic locals.

“The crash broke him,” says Shaw.

Shirley’s parents were relatively well-to-do and from Clayton, a neat Bradford 
village a world away from life on the Canterbury estate. “Mother was an only 
child. But her parents fought so much that for her it was like living in a war 
zone.

“When she met my dad, she saw the poverty, saw them eating off of newspapers 
and drinking tea out of jam jars, no electricity – she just couldn’t believe 
it. But she also couldn’t believe the warmth of the Hudson family. They were 
loud but they were happy.”

The anti-morning sickness drug Thalidomide claimed the life of Shirley and 
Keith’s first child, who was stillborn on 14 December 1962. More heartache 
followed when Shirley suffered a number of miscarriages, probably as a result 
of the continuing effects of Thalidomide, before Julie was born in April 1964. 
A brother arrived in 1965 and a sister in 1967. “When we were born, Mum wanted 
us to move back to Clayton so we could have the kind of upbringing she had had, 
but my dad and his family wanted us in Canterbury so we were always between the 
two. Sometimes we would go to sleep in one house and wake up in another, though 
that had a lot to do with hiding from the rent man.”

When did she realise they were poor? She smiles. “I was about 11 years old and 
for the first time ever I got invited to sleep over at a friend’s house. I was 
all excited. My mum made sure I had some decent clothes on. When I walked into 
my friend’s house the first thing I saw was a TV in the kitchen. When she took 
me upstairs into her room I saw she had her own TV and a wardrobe. I couldn’t 
believe it. I just assumed that everybody lived like us.” She laughs. “I never 
looked at my friend again in the same way. I thought she must be a right snob 
and I didn’t even know it!”

So many people brought up in problematic family circumstances never manage to 
break the cycle. What inspired her? Her reply is immediate. “Books,” she says. 
“From the age of five or six I wouldn’t go out to play, I’d just curl up with a 
book. I’d read every Enid Blyton book by the time I was seven. I read anything 
and everything. Later I discovered Shakespeare. I loved the stories. I used to 
read Romeo and Juliet over and over. To me that was a story about getting out 
and realising a dream.”

She wrote poems and stories that were published in Bradford’s evening paper, 
the Telegraph and Argus. “When I read, and when I was writing, I was in a 
completely different world. Books made me think, made me even more determined. 
The minute I can, I used to think, I’m gone. I knew I had to see more of the 
world than Bradford and that one day I would be a writer.”

Happily married to her husband Ben for 20 years and with her two children from 
her first marriage grown up, Shaw’s adult life has been as dramatic as any of 
the family stories in her books. Her first job after doing “really well” at 
school was working in a solicitors’ office. Two years later she joined the army 
and became a medical clerk, eventually teaching new officers army documentation 
and drill instruction. “I was always gobby,” she says. She left the army, got 
pregnant with her daughter and married at 21.

Three years later her son was born. She searches for words to describe the 
relationship with her first husband. Eventually, she says, she escaped with the 
help of Ben, a childhood friend.

Not surprisingly, writing her books took a while longer than she planned. 
“Life got in the way,” she says. “I just needed the time to be right – and now 
it is.”

The Hudson Family series: Our Vinnie, My Uncle Charlie and My Mam Shirley by 
Julie Shaw are published by Harper Element, in paperback and as eBooks. To 
order in paperback for £6.39, go tobookshop.theguardian.com  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=julie+shaw&order=relevance&dir=desc>
or call 0330 333 6846. To order all three together for £18, enter code shaw18, 
valid till 31 January 2015
 