
Here they come now, two rows of men on white stallions, wearing black hats and 
carrying lances, providing a guard of honour for a squat statuette wrapped in 
gold cloth. Surrounding the horsemen are thousands of people, many cheering and 
chanting "Vive Sainte Sara!" Musicians play bursts of flamenco guitar or 
squeeze Hungarian melodies out of accordions. The horsemen and the crowd head 
towards the sea, seeming to move as one, suggesting a mix of religious 
procession and party. And that is exactly what this Felliniesque scene 
represents.

Every 24 May the small seaside town of Les Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer hosts the 
Gitan Pilgrimage 
<http://www.saintesmaries.com/us/page.php?haut=1&navig=vivre&ssnavig=vivre&sssnavig=vivre&page=vivre>
. This legend of St Sara accompanying St Marie-Jacobé and St Marie-Salomé when 
they arrived here from Palestine (so giving this former fishing town its name) 
dates back to the 16th century and the pilgrimage is a unique opportunity for 
Europe's Gypsies – largely drawn from French- and Catalan-speaking communities 
– to come together and affirm their faith and culture. And party hard.

The Gitan Pilgrimage takes place in the Carmargue, a vast, swampy delta 
immediately south of Arles. The Carmargue is extremely exotic, with tall marsh 
grasses where pink flamingos, black bulls and white horses roam freely. And the 
Carmargue's main base is Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer, a delightfully working-class 
riposte to St Tropez and other snooty Eurotrash resorts. Van Gogh painted 
Gypsies in the Carmargue while living unhappily in Arles with Gauguin – and 
Saint-Maries' medieval church is home to Sara-la-Kali (aka Black Sara, aka the 
Black Madonna), the statuette the horsemen carry to the sea on the 24th. Black 
Sara is not recognised by the Vatican, yet she is celebrated as the patron 
saint of the Gypsies.

I first heard about the Gitan Pilgrimage when reading about Django Reinhardt, 
a regular attendee who, at the time of his death, was composing a mass for the 
event. I then found out that the Gipsy Kings literally formed around a campfire 
here, the two sets of brothers who make up the band having first played and 
sung together here as teenagers back in the 1960s. Obviously I had to attend, 
and the first year I stayed in Arles and bussed back and forth. Since then I've 
always stayed in Saintes-Maries (there's lots of reasonably priced 
accommodation) and it is a gem of a town.

A visit to the church's crypt where Black Sara resides is essential for 
Gypsies. Here you can buy a candle, light it and pray that she will help with 
whatever ails you. Scribbled notes are placed close to Black Sara and bright 
linen robes are draped on her. This Romanesque church fills with smoke and heat 
and noise, and in its fervour and passion gives off a primal atmosphere as 
powerful as the flamenco being danced to outside.
 Photograph: Marco Di Lauro/Getty Images 
The feast of music accompanying the Gitan Pilgrimage transforms this sleepy 
seaside town into a wild carnival of music and dancing in the streets. As the 
procession reaches the beach, the horsemen ride into Mediterranean waters 
carrying Black Sara high. They are accompanied by a young Gypsy woman, chosen 
to represent Sara that year. As the surrounding waters fill with people, the 
experience is both beautiful and ridiculous.

Black Sara is then returned to her crypt and celebrations get under way: 
alongside Catalan flamenco musicians and Parisian Gypsy jazz duos there are now 
Balkan brass bands and Hungarian string musicians. Observing these musicians 
from Europe's frayed edges gather, the listener gets a sense of how Gypsy music 
reinvents itself.

Exactly how much longer the community will be able to celebrate in 
Saintes-Maries is debatable: American evangelical churches have converted many 
Catalan Gypsies in recent years and they ban their flock from attending this 
loud, proud Catholic procession. And the town's mayor, a Front National 
supporter, has done his worst to make the Gitan pilgrims unwelcome.

The following day the procession is repeated, this time with the two Maries 
the town takes its name from. While still an entertaining procession, it is a 
much calmer event than the previous day's excitement, with the Gypsies having 
seemingly vanished overnight. Not that you also need move on – the local 
bullring has a running of the bulls, there are plenty of horse treks or boat 
tours to take through this marshy land and the sea is just about the right 
temperature for the first swim of the year. "Vive Sainte Sara!"

• Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com/en>) flies from Luton to Nîmes, 
45km from Saintes-Maries. Rail Europe (raileurope.co.uk 
<http://www.raileurope.co.uk/Default.aspx?tabid=39>) has returns from London St 
Pancras to Nîmes from £90. The Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer tourist office (+33 4 
9097 8255,saintesmaries.com/us <http://www.saintesmaries.com/us>) has further 
information, including accommodation

Garth Cartwright is the author of Princes Amongst Men: Journeys With Gypsy 
Musicians (Serpents Tail, £8.99)
 