
Age: Mid-30s, on average.

Life experience: PPE at Oxford.

Full title: Special adviser. Geddit?

Got it. Job description? Party apparatchik turned senior ministerial aide.

Appearance: All too often. There are ruddy loads of them!

I thought Adam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith> 
resigned – the one who covered for, sorry worked for Jeremy Hunt? Yes, but 
there are still thousands left.

Thousands? Well, 81.

Is that a lot? Three less than Tony Blair's government had in its heyday. But 
that's not the point.

What is the point? The coalition pledged to cut down on the number of spads, 
and their wages.

But? But their combined wage bill has actually risen by 25% since the 
coalition came to power.

And in other news, the country's in financial meltdown! Precisely.

So who's the worst offender? Well, the PM has 19 spads, followed by Nick 
Clegg, with 14.

Fourteen! He doesn't even run a department. Yep. Whereas John Prescott, who 
was transport secretary as well as deputy PM, only had two.

So what do they actually do, these spads? They've been around since at least 
the 60s, when Harold Wilson enshrined their role in the civil service code. 
Their supporters argue they give ministers advice from a party-political 
perspective, and consequently allow career civil servants to retain their 
impartiality.

What's the counter-argument? That the state shouldn't be paying for Tory 
spin-doctors – or for people unqualified for high office.

Unqualified? Surely not! Remember Chris Myers?

Remind me. He was the inexperienced 25-year-old whom William Hague made his 
spad at the Foreign Office.

Ah yes, the guy he shared a hotel room with. And who then had to quit. That's 
the one, though allegations of an affair were vehmently denied. And of course, 
the coalition isn't the first government to employ controversial spads.

No? Gordon Brown's spin doctor Damian McBride had to resign after being 
accused of planning a website dedicated to smearing Tory MPs.

For shame! And then, of course, there was Jo Moore (above), the Labour spad 
who suggested that 9/11 was "a very good day to get out anything we want to 
bury. Councillors' expenses?"

Do say: "Behind every great minister ..."

Don't say: "Are a series of overpaid, underused politicos who are a waste of 
taxpayers' money."
 