
“And who are you again?” you ask dismissively even though I have introduced 
myself as your father’s long-term oncologist. My heart sinks at the prospect of 
a testy consultation, but I tell myself that it will be OK if I remain calm.

You are the executive son, just flown in, poised to manage the unfolding 
crisis in your family. You manage crises for a living – and you are already mad 
that I have kept you waiting. You have upbraided the desk staff repeatedly for 
my “unprofessionalism”, and I can hear the strain in their voices as they keep 
interrupting me to check on my progress.

Your dad is in hospital, his liver finally succumbing to the cancer that has 
silently infiltrated it for the past six months. He stopped chemotherapy, 
wisely opted for quality of life, and we had hoped that he would slip away 
quietly. Instead, he developed delirium and fell, necessitating hospitalisation.

The patient who showed me how to be a better doctor and person
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jul/28/patient-showed-me-how-better-doctor-person>
I saw him early this morning and his delirium seems abated. He is no longer 
combative, thanks to the soothing presence of his nurse who tended him like a 
child yet accorded him the dignity of an adult. Now, he asks to go home but the 
question is whether your arthritis-ridden mother will cope. The conversation 
about going home, which is really about where you want to die, is always 
difficult. On the eve of a long weekend I shuffle a dozen patients to 
accommodate this consultation so that the job isn’t left for a covering doctor.

I imagine that finding your father so frail and vulnerable gave you a shock. 
And I realise that like many adult children who, for various reasons, have not 
been present for the whole harrowing trek of cancer, you are experiencing a 
melange of guilt, anger and dread, so I let your opening salvo through.

“You call yourself an expert but how can I trust you? Trusting you means 
letting my dad die.”

Your hostility continues unabated as you find fault with each process and each 
explanation. Of course he is your father, and you are worried, but he is also 
my patient, someone I care about. If you’d let your mother speak she would tell 
you that I have navigated them through countless appointments, chemotherapy 
complications and thorny dilemmas. Perhaps this is why, even through a mind 
fogged by delirium, he senses he is safe here.

But as your inquisition continues and you throw cold water on my 
consideration, concern and goodwill, something in me folds. I feel spent, and 
yes, resentful, unable to keep giving, except there are those dozen patients 
waiting, so I have to pull myself together.

Later, in insistent calls, you demand to know how to pull strings to expedite 
a transfer to hospice. The neediest patient gets the first bed, I say, a little 
bemused. You don’t believe me but instead of asking why, you say something 
utterly astonishing: “You just don’t understand how precious my time is.” And 
then, “I have no idea why you can’t keep to time. What do youdo behind closed 
doors?”

I am glad you asked. While you simmered at the delay, I was with a patient who 
was incidentally diagnosed with cancer while dying of renal failure. She was 
devastated. Even more crushing than the “you have cancer” conversation is the 
one that goes “you have cancer, but it’s not important.”

I knew that I couldn’t have achieved closure without her daughter, who had 
shown weeks of patience, love and sagacity in shepherding her mother through 
the news. So as we finished, I said admiringly, “You are doing a fine job, it 
mustn’t be easy.” The compliment dissolved her courage. Which doubled her 
mother’s guilt untilshe began to cry. It felt only human to allow them a few 
minutes to compose themselves, even at the cost of running late.

You might remember being annoyed when I apologetically ducked out of the door 
after our 40 minute consult which showed no sign of ending. I’d just realised 
with a start who was waiting. This patient is a refugee. When, after fleeing 
war, he was diagnosed with cancer, he developed such profound depression that 
he was an inpatient for months. Later, his chest pain was attributed to 
depression until I ordered a scan confirming a recurrence. Now he is incurable, 
teetering on the edge of psychosis and won’t see another oncologist if I’m in 
sight. All oncologists have such patients; without deeming ourselves 
indispensable, we simply recognise that in a labyrinthine system, the greatest 
catharsis for some patients is being able to call one doctor their own.

He is fidgety and his daughter is worn.

“I am very late,” I apologise. “Will you see someone else today?”

His face contorts with fear and I am stricken by guilt. 

“We’ll wait all day,” his daughter pleads.

Your paths will never cross and you will never even know that you benefited 
from a stranger’s sacrifice, but we would be nowhere without such gestures. The 
fact is, illness is messy and complicated and much as I’d like to not waste 
your time waiting, I doubt you’d envy my daily job of prioritising which dying 
patient is more important. To me, they are all first among equals.

By age 85, one in two men and one in three women will be affected by cancer, 
so your assertion that cancer professionals “don’t know what it feels like” is 
unfounded. On one team alone, our young medical student and intern have both 
lost a parent to cancer. Your father’s nurse has just returned from palliating 
her own father. No one will tell you of the searing memories evoked by caring 
for patients who resemble their parent. They won’t tell you because you don’t 
need to know. All you need to know is that we are here to care for you and make 
your experience better than ours.

The majority of people who wait in the clinic are a paragon of virtue and 
restraint – then why am I indignant about your conduct? Because these incidents 
are not as isolated as people think and they seem to be on the rise – just ask 
any worker in the emergency department. Healthcare providers have long excused 
poor behaviour, verbal abuse and even physical aggression because of the power 
imbalance between them and their patients. But over time, seemingly isolated 
incidents add up – to silent stress, deepening discontent, and ultimately 
cynicism.

When pain persists: what makes hospital patients really unhappy? | Ranjana 
Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/when-pain-persists-what-makes-hospital-patients-really-unhappy>
We protect ourselves by shedding empathy and distancing ourselves from the 
patient experience but because this too feels innately wrong, many burn out. 
This form of emotional burnout, when there is nothing left to give, has a name 
– compassion fatigue.

On some days, compassion fatigue creeps up on me and my response is to 
vehemently deny it for the shameful dereliction of duty that it feels like. How 
can a doctor ever stop caring about patients? But compassion fatigue in 
healthcare is real – and people like you can help us avoid it by tempering your 
words and actions a little and understanding that we are all human, even the 
doctor who keeps you waiting endlessly.

I am glad your father died peacefully and that we put your anxieties to rest. 
You have discovered that the business of healthcare is like no other business. 
We stumble, I know, but in our minds the bottom line never shifts from the 
patient’s best interest. And we owe our shareholders something money can’t buy 
– dignity, compassion and most of all, the pledge that once you walk in, we 
will look after you till the end, even if you have to do some waiting in return.
 