
The social anthropologist Paul Spencer, who has died aged 83, was best known 
for his work on the peoples – principally the Samburu and Maasai – speaking the 
Maa languages and living in the central Rift Valley from northern Kenya to 
northernTanzania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tanzania>. His initial 
interest lay in age organisation: how these livestock-rearing communities 
assembled groups of boys of around the same age and managed their passage to 
maturity through a succession of initiation ceremonies. The young men developed 
a lifelong bond by living and eating together apart from their families, 
dancing and raiding as one, and, later on, acting as patrons and mentors for 
junior groups in their turn.

Age and the passage of time remained at the core of Paul’s work, but he 
expanded his interests to include gender relations within the household, 
systems of belief and the social significance of dance. Despite his focus on 
men, he displayed an understanding of the predicament of women in a patriarchal 
world. They played a crucial role in upholding the core values that defined the 
community by shaming errant husbands and sometimes collectively punishing men 
whose delinquent behaviour transgressed the moral order. As Paul pointed out, 
relations between men were always mediated through women, despite the latter’s 
apparently subordinate position.
 Paul Spencer during his time with the Samburu in the 1950s 
Paul produced two ethnographies: The Samburu: A Study of Gerontocracy in a 
Nomadic Tribe 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-Samburu-Study-Gerontocracy-Nomadic/dp/041533005X> 
(1965), based on field research in the late 1950s and his resulting DPhil from 
Oxford University, andThe Maasai of Matapato: A Study of Rituals of Rebellion  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Maasai-Matapato-Rebellion-Ethnographies/dp/0415317231>
(1988), which he saw as his central ethnographic statement. In both, short case 
studies enabled readers to see how his subjects tried to make sense of, 
question or endorse the rules and structures within which they lived.

They were written in the “ethnographic present”, as here: “Maasai enthusiasm 
over their traditions is tempered by a marked reticence concerning forces that 
lie beyond their grasp; and they avoid the topic of death above all. No one can 
know what happens after death, but the clear presumption is – nothing.” Then 
the style was common, but now it is widely criticised for its apparent 
abstraction and timelessness, which gave the impression that particular ways of 
life were fixed, and ignored the existence of change, as for example through 
the gradual decline of the cattle-keeping economy.

However, while Paul did acknowledge change, he believed that much that he 
valued in traditional society was at risk from modern development. He wished to 
preserve the memory of the communities he had known and to celebrate the 
diverse possibilities of human experience. His ethnographies, snapshots in time 
from the 50s and 70s respectively, are now invaluable for further research.

In all he wrote six books on the Maa-speaking peoples. In the fourth of them, 
The Pastoral Continuum: The Marginalization of Tradition in EastAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> (1998), he placed a number of his 
earlier concerns within a more comparative context, considering the evolution 
and viability of subsistence pastoral societies in a rapidly changing world and 
the larger dynamics of ageing.

Time, Space and the Unknown: Maasai Configurations of Power and Providence 
(2003) looked more deeply into universal themes, including the problems of 
misfortune and the search for certainty in an unknowable universe.

There Paul wrote more fully about the well-known Maasai prophets, dangerously 
ambiguous figures who lived apart from the community and who had the power to 
bless and curse and to foresee the future. Maasai held them at arm’s length, 
but believed that they had access to cosmological truths hidden from ordinary 
people, and could use their knowledge to avert misfortune and to protect the 
community from sorcery. Paul was always intrigued that, while Maa speakers as a 
whole shared overarching institutions and a distinctive identity, communities 
differed substantially in how they understood and managed the process of 
maturation. In this book he proposed a division between the “northern” Maasai 
and the “southern” – the implications of which remain to be explored.

His final work, Youth and the Experiences of Ageing Among Maa, published in 
2014, marked the culmination of a lifelong commitment. Yet he continued to look 
to the future, suggesting further areas of inquiry and speculating that more 
recent findings about the Maasai, which seemed to contradict his own, were 
simply an indication of how much belief and practices had changed over the past 
50 years.

Paul was born in Acton, west London, the second child of Eleonor (nee Simon) 
and Douglas Spencer, a pioneer in colour photography. Douglas left Eleonor a 
month before Paul’s birth. After attending Woodhouse Grove school in Yorkshire, 
Paul took an engineering degree (1955) at Christ’s College, Cambridge.

With a career in industrial relations in mind, he became more interested in 
the human dimension of industrial organisation than industry itself, and so 
shifted to anthropology, which drew him into a three-year period of fieldwork 
in northernKenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>.

In 1962 Paul joined the Tavistock Institute in London, where he carried out 
sociological research unrelated to his work in Kenya. Nine years later he 
accepted a post as a lecturer in anthropology at the School of Oriental and 
African Studies (SOAS) in London. He became a professor at SOAS in 1993 and 
remained there until his retirement in 1997.

Throughout his career Paul was a meticulous fieldworker whose command of the 
Maa language – which he had taught himself in only five months – allowed him to 
engage his informants in long discussions, helping him to find the deeper 
meaning beneath the surface structures he observed. A hearing impediment, the 
result of childhood mumps, made him an especially attentive listener.

He is survived by his second wife, Diane Wells, whom he married in 1995; by 
his two sons, Aidan and Benet, from his first marriage, to Rosalind Scott, 
which ended in divorce; and by two granddaughters.

• Paul Spencer, anthropologist, born 25 March 1932; died 21 July 2015
 