
Paul O'Grady <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/paul-o-grady>, Alan 
Carr and Emma Forbes are to join BBC Radio 2 in a shakeup of its weekend 
schedule that sees Paul Gambaccini partly replace Russell Brand, the comedian 
of whom he was highly critical.

O'Grady will present a new Sunday afternoon show at 5pm while Carr and Forbes 
will co-host a Saturday show, Going Out withAlan Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-carr>, at 6pm.

The first half of the Saturday 9pm slot vacated by Russell Brand will be 
filled by Gambaccini, theRadio 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> DJ 
who was openly critical of Brand and former station controller Lesley Douglas 
in the wake of the "Sachsgate" scandal.

In other changes, the Saturday lunchtime comedy slot moves to Thursday at 
11pm, Dale Winton's Pick of the Pops moves from Sunday to Saturday afternoon, 
and there is a new Sunday afternoon show, Sounds of the 70s, for Johnnie Walker.

Gambaccini's Saturday night show moves an hour later, to 8pm. Veteran DJ Bob 
Harris retains his 11pm Saturday show.

The changes come only a month after the arrival of the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 2 controller, Bob Shennan, but 
were in the pipeline before he succeeded Douglas.

O'Grady previously presented a Christmas Day show on the station in 2008 and 
has filled in for Elaine Page on her Sunday movie themes and musicals show, 
which is extended by 30 minutes in the new lineup.

Carr has previously had shows on Radio 2 sister station BBC Radio 6Music, and 
presented a six-part comedy series on BBC Radio 2.

Forbes, the former co-host of BBC1's Live and Kicking, has previously guest 
co-hosted the Steve Wright in the Afternoon slot with Mark Radcliffe.

Shennan said: "Radio 2 is committed to offering the very best entertainment 
and in Paul and Alan we are bringing two of the UK's best loved presenters to 
our listeners."

The new schedule will come into force on 4 April.

Radio 2 - the changes

Saturday

• Pick of the Pops moves from Sunday afternoon to Saturday at 1pm. The 
Saturday afternoon comedy slot moves to Thursday at 11pm

• Dermot O'Leary moves back an hour, from 2pm to 3pm

• Alan Carr and Emma Forbes present a new 6pm show, Going Out With Alan Carr, 
with Paul Gambaccini moving from 7pm to 8pm, taking half of Russell Brand's old 
9pm slot

• The Saturday night documentary slot moves later, to 10pm

Sunday

• Elaine Paige on Sunday is extended by 30 minutes, to run from 1pm to 3pm

• Johnnie Walker gets a new Sunday show, Johnnie Walker's Sounds of the 70s, 
from 3pm to 5pm. Pick of the Pops moves to Saturday

• Paul O'Grady on the Wireless runs from 5pm to 7pm

• Alan Titchmarsh with Melodies for You moves to a later time, from 6.30pm to 
7pm, and loses 30 minutes

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 