 In the relationship between Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, who is Paul Simon and 
who is Art Garfunkel? The question is prompted by the coincidence of the 
squabbling songsters announcing a reunion tour and the screening later this 
month of Channel 4's The Rivals, which dramatises what happened When Tony Met 
Gordon. Both cases show the difficulty of the double-act.
The tensions in the two professions are slightly different, although both 
follow from the deep human instinct to be the only dog at the bowl. The problem 
for musical duos is that two people are competing for a slice of fame, glory 
and money which is available to them both simultaneously: they have an equal 
claim to be the poster boy.

In politics, the difficulty is that one half of the pair is asked to wait 
until the other one has finished with the job. Michael Frayn's enthralling new 
play Democracy dramatises this dynamic in German politics between Willy Brandt 
and Helmut Schmidt.

This after-me hierachy is usually merely implied. American vice-presidents, 
though frequently despising their senior, are kept loyal by the likelihood of 
getting the top-line on the bumper-stickers in the future. Intriguingly, the 
two President Bushes are unusual in selecting men - Quayle and Cheney - who had 
almost no chance of being voted their successor. This suggests a curious 
insecurity, given that American presidents are almost impossible to remove.

The special complication in the Brown-Blair case - which the screening of The 
Rivals again revives - is whether a formal handover was ever agreed: a little 
Islington version of the treaty over Hong Kong. This question will probably 
never be settled - coming down, like the Hutton report, to the multiple 
meanings words can carry - and has now been further blurred by the fact that 
it's much harder for a prime minister than a president to fix the nomination 
for his second.

Double-acts are inevitably compared to a marriage: there is a similar contest 
of egos, arguments over who really brings in the money and keeps the house in 
order. But the connection runs deeper than metaphor. I suspect that most 
successful double-acts - in comedy, writing and politics - have begun in loving 
each other. Not at a sexual level but in a recognition similar to the one which 
triggers love: that here is a person who reflects or completes yourself. The 
alternation of neediness and nastiness in Simon and Garfunkel's relationship is 
certainly recognisable from many love affairs.

Observers who were around at the time have suggested that Blair's initial 
reaction to Brown when they met as young MPs was something like a pash for a 
senior prefect. Brown's stance - to extend the school analogy - was perhaps 
more that of the captain of a school XI who spots a younger batsman who might 
bring a little flair to the middle order.

So is Blair Simon and Brown Garfunkel or vice versa? In both duos, there's a 
fey, pretty one who the public initially responded to and a dark, brooding 
partner who liked to regard himself as the brains of the act. The stories of 
Simon sitting on stage watching the delirious applause for his partner's 
falsettos and thinking "yeah, and who wrote that for him?" - and of the singer 
resenting the fact that the songwriter had more cred with the party crowd - 
clearly have parallels behind the two main doors of Downing Street.

In those respects, the prime minister is Garfunkel and the chancellor Simon, 
although we would probably put in the chancellor's think-bubble whatArt 
Garfunkel <https://www.theguardian.com/music/art-garfunkel> was once quoted as 
saying with regard to his on-and-off colleague: "It is very dangerous not to 
give sufficient credit to someone who has the talent to realise your dream."

The prime minister and chancellor might also reflect that there are few known 
cases in showbusiness of half of a major double-act doing better work outside 
it: for every George Michael, there are a thousand Ernie Wises. Garfunkel sang 
a song about some rabbits and starred in a movie about necrophilia. Simon 
admittedly recorded Graceland but also wrote one of the biggest flops in 
Broadway history.

It's unlikely that a Brown premiership would be as painful as Ernie Wise in 
The Mystery Of Edwin Drood, but something of the same difficulty in extracting 
solos from duos would apply. And what might Tony Blair's Bright Eyes be? Some 
European sinecure or a centrist thinktank?

By going back on the road, Simon and Garfunkel have come to the grudging 
recognition that their greatest talent was to be half of something larger. This 
may also turn out to be the message of The Rivals. But solo careers will still 
be attempted. Because, as Paul Simon once wrote and Art Garfunkel sang: "A man 
hears what he wants to hear and disregards the rest."

comment@theguardian.com <mailto:comment@theguardian.com>
 