
As we look back on past year, the Unite chapel can point to several successes. 
Most importantly, after six long months of negotiation, we managed to secure a 
3% increase in pay for members of our collective bargaining unit in last year's 
pay round compared with 2% for those outside the bargaining unit, who we are 
unable to represent.

In addition, thanks to a proposal from our rep earlier this year, the 
company's health and safety general policy statement now includes bullying and 
harassment as health issues, a point that we feel is very important for all GNM 
staff.

We will continue to pursue fair pay settlements in future and are keen to 
address the problem of wage anomalies and inequities that occur in many 
departments. Health and safety, along with workplace stress, will also continue 
to be a major focus for the chapel.

Inevitably, our activity this year has been dominated by the impact of falling 
revenues and cost-cutting measures across the business. While editorial staff 
have been offered the option of voluntary redundancy, in commercial departments 
redundancy has been on the agenda but generally it is not voluntary.

We have been busy helping members at GNM who face the loss of their job, 
assisting with meetings and trying to help with information and moral support 
at a very difficult time. At the same time, we have been talking to the 
management team about the importance of looking for volunteers wherever 
possible rather than earmarking people for compulsory redundancy.

Another consequence of job cuts is the increase in workload and stress of 
those left behind. This has been a concern for many of our members this year. 
We continue to be vigilant and raise our concerns whenever members come to us 
with complaints.

We were particularly taken aback at the large number of jobs lost at both the 
Manchester and Stratford print sites. Chapel reps were hit disproportionately 
hard at Stratford and, among others, we bade farewell to the deputy mother of 
the chapel there.

The cleaning staff, who work for subcontractor RCS, have also suffered badly 
this year. A team of 28 cleaners on an early-morning shift were replaced by 
half a dozen staff working in the day. We helped the team challenge this and 
put forward an alternative plan during their consultation process. A small 
number of staff transferred to the new shifts, but many lost their jobs here. 
We continue to work closely to assist those still working here, many of whom 
are our members, with any difficulties they encounter.

We also represent staff working for other subcontractors responsible for the 
canteen, security, post room, reception and switchboard – nearly all these 
areas have also lost staff this year. We will continue to help and represent 
all non-editorial staff as well as trying to ensure that cuts to these 
subcontracted services don't have a detrimental impact on the work of our 
members across the business.

For the past two years a significant element of the technology department's 
work has been outsourced and sent overseas to IT contractor HCL. We strongly 
opposed management's plans at the time and succeeded in reducing the scope of 
the outsourcing originally planned.

In the past 12 months we have seen the department move support of Macintosh 
servers and services to another company, a clear admission that, as predicted 
by us at the time, HCL was not up to the job in this area. Andrew Miller made 
it clear at a recent company briefing that the management team is concerned 
about the quality of support HCL provides and reviews the situation regularly 
at board level.

We see this as vindication of our arguments that outsourcing is a false 
economy and urge the company to reconsider in-sourcing these areas to ensure 
reliable and effective support – a conclusion that many other businesses have 
arrived at already!

We believe the company should review its approach to outsourcing throughout 
the business. While we have the greatest respect for our colleagues working for 
subcontractors at Kings Place, many of whom are members of the chapel, we 
firmly believe that keeping staff in-house ensures a higher level of 
commitment, loyalty and retention of experience and knowledge than outsourcing 
can ever provide.

Finally, we continue to liaise closely with the NUJ chapel on all questions 
that affect staff around GNM.

Last year's pay settlement shows that union membership can have a real, 
practical and immediate benefit. Once again, we would urge any non-editorial 
staff at GNM who are not already union members to consider joining the chapel 
and help us expand our bargaining unit so that more people can benefit from it.

We may not be the biggest union in Kings Place but we have the backing and 
resources of the biggest union in the country! We are dedicated to helping all 
our members. Join us now!
 