
For the best part of 30 years my working life was punctuated by phone calls 
beginning: "Alan? I've got Peggy for you." Peggy Ramsay, play agent, of 14a 
Goodwin's Court, St Martin's Lane, would come on the line and take my breath 
away with a simple statement like: "Hello, dear. I'm glad you're there because 
you'll be getting a call from Stanley Donen/Rex Harrison/Fred Zinnemann."

In the event, Zinnemann never called but I ended up working on abandoned 
projects for the other two. Either way, it didn't matter. It was all heady 
stuff for a fledgling writer, born a Geordie, living in Hull and easily 
impressed by famous names. Indeed, I was impressed by the mere fact of 
long-distance phone calls, expensive items hitherto reserved in my experience 
for family catastrophes.

There were many variations on the phone calls. Later came: "Hello, dear. I've 
had the BBC on the line. They want you to adapt Htel du Lac but I've told them 
you're quite wrong for it. It's a terribly interesting book. You should read it 
- we'll put a copy in the post. [Loud yell] Tessa! Send Alan a copy of Htel du 
Lac!"

Tessa was one of a long line of "girls in the office": Tessa, Annette, 
Stephanie, Jenny, Sally et al. They came and went, exhausted but exhilarated. 
Peggy tended to get them, and their names, confused.

But she was right about Htel du Lac. Christopher Hampton dramatised the book 
and the film won a shelf-load of awards. Later it became something of a game. 
I'd be sent a book for dramatisation, read it and call Peggy, saying: "I don't 
think it's for me. This one's for Chris."

"But he's read it, dear, and he thinks it's for you." 

Another day, another call. 

"Peggy for you." 

Peggy came on the line. 

"Ayckbourn, dear!" 

"Sorry, I'm the other one." 

She hung up immediately, because it was obviously my fault for being the wrong 
Alan.

Agents, according to show business legend, are obsessed with money. Peggy was 
obsessed with the corrosive effect it could have on the creative process. 
"Well, if you must go whoring in Hollywood, make sure you give good value and 
get the going rate on the street."

In the 70s I was approached by an American producer to write a 10-part 
mini-series about Tolstoy. Came the inevitable call: "Darling, what is this 
extraordinary nonsense about Tolstoy? They're offering 10,000 per episode."

"Pounds or dollars?" 

"Oh my God, I forgot to ask! Byeee!" 

We never heard another thing. If I ever write my autobiography, it will be 
called Abandoned Projects. They're often the most fun and the critics never go 
near them.

Eight years after her death, I have Peggy's picture on the wall, an elegant 
seat from her office in my study and her imperious voice in my head. Sooner or 
later, a play was inevitable, if only to make her shut up, though so far it 
hasn't worked.

Somewhere in my archive there is a letter from the late Henry Livings, a fine 
writer and friend, in which he wrote: "All plays about writers should be 
burned, with the exception of Present Laughter. The theory was that most plays 
about writers fall into the same category as articles for the school magazine 
about how difficult it is to write articles for the school magazine.

I don't know what Henry would think about my play Peggy for You, which 
presents an imaginary day in the working life of Peggy Ramsay, play agent, in 
the late 60s. It was written quickly a couple of years ago. I sent a copy to 
Alan Ayckbourn, who, like me, was taken under the Ramsay wing when we were 
fresh out of the egg.

"I've written this play and I don't know who it's for," I said. Alan said he 
liked it very much but he didn't know who it was for either; but because much 
of it is about the nuts and bolts of play-making, he thought it would be like 
inviting the critics into your bedroom.

One draft later, my present agent (who is as wonderful in her own way - I've 
promised to write a play about her, but only when we are both dead) sent the 
play to the producer Michael Codron, a long-time friend and associate of 
Peggy's. Michael said that if Maureen Lipman would play the lead, we had a 
deal. Maureen said yes - another triumph for the Hull mafia in exile - and 
everything was settled over a weekend, the old-fashioned way.

But what is it about this woman that causes so many people to celebrate her? 
From Simon Callow's brave and touching memoir of their love story to Vanessa 
Redgrave's understated performance in Prick up Your Ears, the film about Joe 
Orton, by way of Colin Chambers's excellent biography. It's too facile simply 
to say she was extraordinary. She would have said: "Everyone's extraordinary, 
dear. It's the writer's job to tell us why."

The heart of the matter was passion. Peggy wore hers on the outside. She was 
never - in modern therapy speak - out of touch with her true feelings. They 
generally arrived in the room 10 minutes ahead of her. The passion was backed 
up with a formidable intellect and relentless curiosity, and she was baffled by 
people - especially writers - who didn't share these qualities. Above all, she 
believed in Art, in living dangerously, and rejoiced in the contradictory 
nature of life. Only a fool would expect things to make sense. Thus, she held 
money in great contempt and left over £3m when she died, to be used for the 
benefit of writers.

Peggy was a brilliant gossip, with an endless supply of scurrilous and 
generally inaccurate anecdotes about the high and mighty. Nobody was exempt. 
Fifteen years ago, when I left Hull and moved to London with the woman destined 
to be my second wife, I'm told Peggy went around saying: "My God! Plater's 
actually done something! He's done the flight!"

Soon after Shirley and I arrived in London, Peggy came to dinner and said, in 
a very loud voice: "Well, of course, dear, I don't mind what my writers do in 
their private life. [Pause.] As long as it doesn't affect the work."

She was famously intolerant of wives, partners or significant others who, in 
her view, might be having a negative impact on the writing. The play was the 
thing - indeed the only thing that mattered.

"Has he got rid of that dreadful woman yet?" she would ask. She never spoke 
quietly. She had worked in the theatre in her younger days, and continued to 
make sure she could be seen and heard in the back row of the gallery, even when 
performing in a restaurant or a theatre bar.

She didn't much like women and insisted - despite having Ann Jellicoe, Caryl 
Churchill and Rona Munro as clients - that women couldn't really write plays. 
She was prejudiced, irrational, selectively scatterbrained and intimidating, 
though she could switch into charm mode when the moment demanded it. That one 
always made me laugh.

If in doubt, she believed in heading for the nearest precipice. She was 
delighted when I had a winning bet on a greyhound called Peggy at the old 
Craven Park dog track in Hull, but a little disappointed that it was a 
five-to-four favourite. She preferred outsiders. Joe Orton was the perfect 
client: a renegade in every way but also, crucially, a dedicated professional.

When I started writing the play, I heard her voice saying: "Just make sure 
it's a pack of lies, dear." And it is. I did no research, but relied on a blend 
of memory, anecdote, myth and legend. The few elements that can be clearly 
identified could not possibly have happened on the day in question.

Over the production period, tales proliferated. Jack Rosenthal gave me a 
lovely story about a carpet and, with his permission, it's now in the play. 
Writer/director Don Taylor told me of his first visit to Peggy, when she 
discovered he was scuffling on £4 a week at the Oxford Playhouse and said: 
"You'll need a typewriter. Take this one. It's always getting in the way." 
Whereupon she picked up the nearest typewriter and handed it to him.

There are three writers in the piece. There is a gauche youth who is a 
projection of myself . There is a flavour-of-the-month golden boy who is a 
fusion of all of us who, at various times, have been flavour of the month, 
though in my case it's generally only lasted a couple of days at 10-year 
intervals. Though who knows? I might be due another turn. Then, to confuse the 
issue, there is a mature writer called Henry, who is, give or take a Pennine 
nuance, a homage to Henry Livings.

I've used Christian names in the play - a deliberate ploy to confuse the 
fact-collectors. The device is, in itself, a lie. Peggy tended to refer to 
writers by their surnames - Arden, Ayckbourn, Bolt, etc - thus hurling them 
immediately into the same league as Ibsen, Chekhov and Gorky. If we didn't 
aspire to that category, we shouldn't be messing about with her beloved drama 
in the first place.

But historical objectivity is, in any case, a contradiction in terms and has 
no place in the theatre of the imagination. As for the initial question - Who 
is the play for? - I remember another conversation when I told Peggy I was 
writing Close the Coalhouse Door.

"What's it about?" 

"It's about the pitmen in the South-West Durham coalfield." 

"That's fine, as long as you make sure it's about everywhere else, dear." 

The challenge, therefore, is to make sure that for the purposes of the play 
the little office, formerly a brothel, up three flights of stairs in Goodwin's 
Court, becomes everywhere else and Peggy for You is not just a pack of lies for 
me (and the other 400 clients who came under the lash of her guidance) but also 
a pack of lies for everyone else.
 