
Last heard of fighting the establishment in the early eighties, anarchist 
group Crass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/jul/08/crass-punk-band-anarchy>
 are suddenly everywhere.Name-dropped by everyone from the Charlatans to 
Jeffrey Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/24/crass-penny-rimbaud-steve-ignorant>
, the band's debut album The Feeding of the 5000 was recently re-released while 
former Crass vocalist, Steve Ignorant, has been touring the band's songs.

Not to be outdone, Crass drummer and keyboard player Penny Rimbaud has 
released a new book:This Crippled Flesh – A Book of Philosophy and Filth 
<http://www.alice-wonderland.net/bracketpress/BOOKS/tcf.html>. A 
thought-provoking but unsettling rush of surrealism and darkness, the book is a 
mixture of neo soft porn and arcane weirdness that manages to be both profane 
and poetic. And if that wasn't enough, Rimbaud is producing his own musical 
interpretation of Alice in Wonderland and releasing a book of naked 
self-portraits. John Robb caught up with Rimbaud to find out more about his 
unusual new cultural ventures, and what he makes of the revival of Crass.

John Robb: What is it about what Crass stands for that has made them such a 
powerful rallying point, years later?

Penny Rimbaud: Central to what we had to say was the notion that there is no 
authority but yourself. At the time I promoted that idea with anarchistic 
thoughts and referring people to other anarchistic thinkers, but I have gently 
updated it to "no responsibility but to yourself". What I really believe is 
that it's not the politicians that change the world – it's people like 
Descartes and Nietzsche. To my mind the true battleground against capitalist 
ideology is the cultural one because I think it's from there that a sense of 
empowerment can grow.

JR: There has been quite a bit of Crass activity recently, including the 
reissue of The Feeding of the 5000.

PR: I battled to do the Crass reissues, and to get them released, because I 
believed in them. I finally managed to get them out, despite all kinds of legal 
threats from people. We did it, and the response has been amazing – 
interestingly, not just from the new young punks on the scene but from academia 
and the media, which is totally new to us. We have been getting praise from 
people who once spent most of their time deriding us and, suddenly, they're 
saying that we are important and a valuable voice, particularly in this hideous 
mess the country has been driven into by the coalition.

JR: It's taken a long time for Crass to be understood, is that your fate?

PR: It's taken 30 years for what we were saying then to be taken more 
seriously. I sort of feel the same fate for my books. My new book is as 
radically demanding as Crass was 30 years ago – if it's not, then I've failed. 
The book is not trying to be pretentious, it's simply looking into myself, 
trying to dig deeper and deeper. It's the human frame without the pretensions. 
That's what I have struggled to do all the time; expose myself as nakedly as I 
possibly can.

JR: Your books are complex, how long did it take to put the new one together?

PR: I first started writing it when we were fighting to avoid eviction from 
Dial House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/friday_review/story/0,3605,417770,00.html>, 20 
years ago. I had to look through reams and reams of legal documents every day, 
but I didn't want to stop writing creatively. So I created a series of files, 
each one of them for a different mood. I had an "upset" file and I had a 
"happy" file , and I could go into those and write whatever I felt like writing 
when I had time. While I was doing that I noticed that there were certain 
patterns emerging. After we hadwon the case 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dial_House,_Essex> I went back to this huge 
catalogue of files and thought: "Ok, I am going to make this into a complete 
book." Then it fell together extraordinarily easily, actually.

Another element in the book was that Gee [Gee Vaucher, Crass co-conspirator 
and the woman responsible for the band's artwork] had this collection of soft 
porn magazines because she has always used soft porn in her art. I got 
fascinated by their banality – of the cheap eroticism – and every time I drew a 
blank I used something from one of the porn mags in the book as inspiration. 
That culminated in the last big sexual act in the book which was fucking the 
capitalist pig. I realised that the whole book was about commodification; 
particularly the commodification of women – and how the sex that you read about 
in porn was completely divorced from the concept of love and attachment. So the 
book became this strange tangle of philosophy and filth.

JR: Now the book is out, you're working on an Alice in Wonderland project. Can 
you tell me a bit about that?

PR: I'm working on a very different angle to the original book. It's primarily 
a musical project at the moment – and then a book, maybe. I see it basically as 
a sort of opera. I have a young daughter who wants to be Alice. The idea was to 
simply try and draw her through Wonderland, so as it's seen from her 
perspective. I absolutely have no plan of guiding her at all. It's about her 
impressions and her ideas, like a sort of guided meditation through Wonderland 
as Carroll wrote it – to see what her reactions are, and look at the darkness 
and the light. I saw that new Alice in Wonderland film recently, and I could 
not believe that anyone could have done that. I can't see what relationship it 
bore, whatsoever, in any form to Alice. It seemed to me to typify everything 
that the modern world offers: a sort of post modern nightmare that is colourful 
and pretty but has no depth.

There was one saving grace, and that was Johnny Depp who does a great Mad 
Hatter. I really like what he brought to the character. But, beyond that, it 
seemed like no one had done any study or work. It was so completely banal and, 
given the huge depth that it could have had, it was disappointing. It typifies 
what I mean by this huge gap between deep culture and consensual entertainment 
– and that gap seems to be getting more and more enormous.

JR: What other projects are you working on?

PR: In book terms I'm working on a volume which is basically my notebooks of 
the last five years; one-liners and side thoughts, as well as 120 close-up 
photos of my naked body, because the naked mind and the naked body go together. 
Another novel could be difficult to do since they take so long to write. They 
seem to take 15 years, and I'm becoming aware of my own mortality. I'm sort of 
thinking of how best to use that time that I have got left.

• Crass's The Feeding of the 5000 is out now, with reissues of the rest of the 
band's catalogue out in the near future. For more information, head toSouthern 
records <http://www.southern.com/southern/band/CRASS/>.
 