
John is a year old. Elderly ladies outside shops make friends with him as he 
sits In his pram watching the cars pass; women in cafés return his smiles over 
their coffee cups; old men on park benches tickle him under his chill, and 
children ask me "if they can push my dear little baby." These, however, are all 
strangers. Most people who know us, and in a small town like this many do, also 
know that John is a mongol baby, and their reactions are quite different. With 
a few heart-warming exceptions they stand and talk to me with eyes averted from 
the pram. They inquire about other children but are careful, so careful, not to 
refer to John. When I return from pushing my invisible baby round the town in 
his invisible pram, my husband assures me that they mean well. They are trying 
to spare my feelings. And I sit and wonder what sort of a mother can have her 
feelings hurt because someone has taken an interest in her baby.

Finding something nice to say about other people's children is a game we are 
all expected to play. Spoilt, neglected, ailing, or overdressed babies are not 
excluded. John fills our time and thoughts rather more than an ordinary baby 
would, and it isn't surprising that we fail to make contact with people who 
regard him as unmentionable. His progress will be slow, but we don't know how 
slow, and an inquiry about how he is getting on would have some point.

There must be a number of half-finished matinee jackets: which have been 
pushed back into knitting bags or finished for someone else's baby, for they 
have not arrived here. Do people imagine that be does not wear clothes? Or that 
we can't possibly take any pride in his appearance?

That, I suppose, is what they do think. Surely we cannot find any pleasure in 
looking after a child who will be physically slow to develop and always 
mentally backward? Who will be a non-starter for the eleven-plus, will never 
play at Wimbledon or climb Everest or support us in our old age. I should like 
some of these people to look through our windows - I should not invite them in, 
as their long faces and tongue-tied behaviour are things we would rather keep 
outside - and see John at home. A baby attempting something he cannot yet 
manage is usually amusing. If John's efforts to crawl, to stand, to feed 
himself are some months behind the normal, that in itself is not a tragedy. 
That we can all laugh at his attempts and that he can join in the laughter 
gives us great satisfaction.

He is no skeleton in our cupboard, and the friends whose company we now enjoy 
are those to whom we can talk about him; brag a little about his unfailing good 
health and good humour; describe his latest antics or his recently acquired 
skill: show the holiday snaps of him paddling with his sisters or chuckling 
with his brother.

Have we our heads in the sand? We don't think so. To let misgivings about the 
future destroy the enjoyment of the present is foolish in any age and madness 
in this one. Which parents can look at their children and say, "Nothing can go 
wrong here. There will be no heartaches, no disappointments. The future is 
assured"?

And let no one else, please, ask our friends if we are going to keep the baby. 
Babies do not come on approval, to be rejected if they do not suit. A family 
which rejected a mongol baby simply because he was a mongol would be equally 
justified in rejecting a boy if what they had wanted was a girl. Later, John's 
development and the interests of the rest of the family may be best served if 
John does not live at home. We do not know. But he is as much our child as the 
others are, and at present, though hardly anyone seems to be able to believe 
this, he is fun. It may be that he is not as sweet and appealing to others as 
he is to us. If that is so, we are not the first parents whose goose is a swan.

· This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 Years 
of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 