
Just because race is a social and not a scientific construct does not mean 
that it can be simply dismissed as an outdated fiction. The lived reality of 
“race” (uninterrupted for centuries) is that our lives are all shaped by 
whether we are perceived as white or non-white – and, particularly in America, 
whether we are visibly black – and how we are free to operate in society as a 
result of that public classification.


Race might not be “real”, but that doesn’t make it non-functional.

So when Meryl Streep told an Egyptian reporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/11/meryl-streep-berlin-film-festival-diversity-were-all-africans-really>
 at the Berlin International Film Festival last week “We’re all Africans, 
really”, in response to a question about the festival’s all-white jury panel, I 
bristled. When Steven Spielberg responded to the #OscarsSoWhite controversy a 
few days after that by tellingThe Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/race/steven-spielberg-supports-diversity-academy-864310>
: “Look, I have two black children, you know? I’ve been colorblind my entire 
life”, I was actually aghast.

And then when Bill Clinton – who was once unofficially deemed America’s “first 
black president” 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/notes/2015/08/toni-morrison-wasnt-giving-bill-clinton-a-compliment/402517/>
 –told an audience in Memphis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/14/bill-clinton-we-are-all-mixed-race-tennessee-rally>
 at a campaign event for his wife, Democratic presidential candidate Hillary 
Clinton, “We are all mixed-raced people”, I felt almost apoplectic.

No matter the context, each serves as glaring demonstrations of how to deny 
the social power of race.

While it might sound forward-thinking to promote a racially unified front by 
suggesting that we’re all of African descent, or that one does not see color 
(although how Spielberg can acknowledge that his children are black but not see 
color is perplexing), these tropes are at best just another way of ignoring 
racial inequality.

At worst, they represent one major factor in what fuels the already well-oiled 
machine of systemic racism in America: white liberals of a certain age using 
their political and social platforms to erase black people and their unique 
contributions.

Theirs is a self-indulgent reinterpretation of the one-drop rule; it’s yet 
another way in which white people are entrusted with the arbitrary assignment 
of race, which was never afforded to black people. The one-drop rule once 
served exclusively to identify anyone with any known African ancestry as black, 
and therefore subhuman; now, it’s being used to excuse the absence of actual 
black people from historically white spaces and to allow white people to 
congratulate themselves on their open-mindedness.

But white people were not openly volunteering how mixed we all are when that 
meant being hunted down and killed by the KKK. White people were not boasting 
of African heritage when that meant being lynched. And white people were 
certainly not claiming colorblindness when they bought and sold the folks who 
picked their cotton and built their industries.

Yes, we have made progress since violations of the one-drop rule were still 
punishable by law. But we have not made enough progress to allow well-educated 
white actors, directors and politicians to minimize or deny the importance of 
how race functions in society. To imply that, after 400 years of black people 
being lynched, shot, maimed, dehumanized, raped, incarcerated, underpaid and 
disempowered, it turns out that race isn’t all that important in progress 
towards racial equality or harmony. To do so because somebody white and famous 
feels excluded or needs to get out of a tight spot with the media is on a par 
with those who respond to the Black Lives Matter movement by shouting “all 
lives matter”: it’s the willful dismissal of the effects of racism in favor of 
a non-existent “universality”.

And let’s not pretend that systemic racism is not what allows people like 
Streep, Spielberg and Clinton the freedom and agency to make such lazy and 
dismissive remarks in the first place. Whether willful or ignorant, people are 
not connecting the dots here, either in their personal and public lives, 
because they don’t have to. They can be blind to the effects of the social 
construct of race because they perceive themselves as race-less, and they 
believe that it’s a boon to offer the same to us.

But white liberals in positions of power – especially those from the Baby 
Boomer generation and who participated in or witnessed the civil rights 
movement – could be uniquely qualified to both address and understand racism. 
But it would require unprecedented levels of honesty and self-awareness, words 
not often associated with politics or Hollywood.

Streep, Spielberg and Clinton are not uniquely evil in their insularity: in 
fact, they have all in some way or another publicly allied themselves with 
black culture. Streep notablyproduced Sarah Jones’s critically acclaimed stage 
show Bridge and Tunnel 
<http://www.playbill.com/news/article/sarah-jones-journeys-bridge-and-tunnel-as-meryl-streep-produced-solo-opens--118005>
, and has beena longtime supporter of actress Viola Davis 
<http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/entertainment/2014/10/viola-davis-reveals-lesson-meryl-streep-taught-her/>
; Spielberg, apart from adopting two black children, directed the film 
adaptation of Alice Walker’s The Color Purple and the slave film Amistad; and 
Clinton, in addition to the aforementioned “black president” moniker, asked 
black poet Maya Angelou to deliver a poem at his inauguration.

I am not suspicious of their motives – although it does make me question a 
person’s integrity when they cannot or do not recognize how certain comments 
and behavior are perpetuating racism. But I do wonder why it is that they (and 
many others) seemingly believe that the best way to achieve equality is to 
erase blackness rather than force all white people to acknowledge that it makes 
us no less human than they are – that race is a social construct, but blackness 
is not.
 