
José Mourinho was quick to criticise his players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/jose-mourinho-claudio-bravo-red-rooney-tackle-penalty>
 after Saturday’s2-1 defeat by Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/10/manchester-united-v-manchester-city-premier-league-live>
. “A few players were below the level,” he complained. “Sometimes players 
disappoint managers.” But Mourinho’s tactical blunder was equally to blame for 
Manchester United’s poor first-half performance and their improvement after the 
break owed much to his change of formation.

City’s most dangerous players in Pep Guardiola’s 4-3-3 system are the two 
advanced central midfielders, David Silva and Kevin De Bruyne. Although both 
are more accustomed to higher positions, they have adjusted excellently to 
their new roles, driving forward and combining swiftly between the lines. 
Without the threat of Sergio Agüero, usually City’s obvious dangerman, 
Mourinho’s primary task was protecting the zone where Silva and De Bruyne 
operate.

Manchester City’s derby delight as De Bruyne inspires win over United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/manchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
Instead, Mourinho made no obvious plans. He continued with a midfield duo of 
Marouane Fellaini and Paul Pogba, a combination that was repeatedly exposed 
throughout the first half. Pogba, in particular, gave an incredibly 
indisciplined midfield display, positioning himself as if he were playing in a 
midfield trio, the system he is accustomed to. He was often caught ahead of the 
ball at turnovers, which left Fellaini isolated in front of the defence. The 
Belgian has generally been impressive this season but was inevitably incapable 
of shutting down both Silva and De Bruyne.

United’s problem was exacerbated by their full-backs, Antonio Valencia and 
Luke Shaw, being dragged out towards the touchlines as City stretched the play 
determinedly through the left-sided Nolito and right-sided Raheem Sterling. 
Therefore, huge gaps opened up in the channels, most obviously in City’s 
inside-left position. De Bruyne put himself between Eric Bailly, Valencia and 
Fellaini. No one knew who was supposed to be stopping him.

De Bruyne ran the show, repeatedly collecting long passes into that 
inside‑left channel. City generally built play down the left, then switched 
balls to Sterling, as if Shaw had been identified as United’s weak link. But 
none of the home defence looked comfortable, with the usually reliable Daley 
Blind caught out badly for the opener, scored by De Bruyne. That goal, from a 
long ball, and the second, by Kelechi Iheanacho from a rebound, did not do 
justice to City’s slick passing football, but this was a hugely impressive 
all-round performance.

After Zlatan Ibrahimovic had offered United a lifeline shortly before 
half-time, Mourinho’s tactical switch changed the game dramatically. The two 
wide players, Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Jesse Lingard, were sacrificed, with Ander 
Herrera introduced as a third central midfielder, Marcus Rashford brought on 
down the left, and Wayne Rooney moving to the right. It was now 4-3-3, with 
three outright forwards.

The difference was immediate. Herrera won a tackle within the first minute of 
the second half, and provided more discipline in front of the back four. Pogba 
and Fellaini pushed forward, the latter acting as a target for long balls, and 
United started to dominate. In particular, their pressing improved 
significantly: the goalkeeper Claudio Bravo, who made a nervous start to his 
City career, suddenly found himself without passing options. United’s attackers 
pushed forward on to City’s defenders and everyone else backed up, tracking 
individuals closely when they dropped into deep positions. City were under 
pressure.

Therefore, Guardiola changed things decisively just eight minutes into the 
second half, with the holding midfielder Fernando replacing the centre-forward 
Iheanacho, and Fernandinho and De Bruyne, City’s two outstanding players on the 
day, pushed forward to maintain the 4-3-3 system. The extra defensive 
qualities, and the added midfield discipline, worked excellently, as City 
stabilised the game and regained control. They should have capitalised more on 
their counterattacking chances, particularly after Leroy Sané replaced Sterling 
down the right, but United’s best spell had arrived before Guardiola’s change.

Mourinho waited until 10 minutes from time before using his final change, 
Anthony Martial for Shaw. United now in effect played four up front in the 
closing stages, and Guardiola – always keen to maintain a spare man in defence 
– switched to a 5-4-1, with the ultra-versatile Fernandinho playing his third 
position of the day as City were forced to defend long balls.

Guardiola won this tactical battle: his starting system outfoxed Mourinho, and 
when the United manager changed things intelligently to chase the game, City’s 
head coach responded to every move quickly and effectively. Tactical battles 
are not simply about defensive, cagey football – this was fascinating 
strategically, and also a brilliantly entertaining game.
 