
I wrote a joke the other day, along the lines of: “Our greatest fear is that 
we die alone – which is why I intend to take quite a few people with me.” And 
it would be funnier, I suppose, if it didn’t constitute Britain’s actual policy 
on defence. It’s hard to make a moral or strategic case forTrident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident>, so its cheerleaders have resorted to 
metaphor. Trident, we’re told, symbolises Britain’s place in the world. Of 
course, I understand Cameron saying he thinks Britain is still a great country 
(talking something up is a good way to get the best price when you’re selling 
it), but we don’t actually have much sense of history, and don’t really travel, 
so it seems odd thatwe’re being told to spend hundreds of billions of pounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/12/replacing-trident-will-cost-at-least-205-billion-campaign-for-nuclear-disarmament>
 projecting a version of ourselves that we barely understand on to people we 
will never meet. Perhaps Trident is really a symbol of the era of late 
capitalism, where most things we buy are unnecessary to the point of 
ludicrousness. Persuading austerity Britain to spend billions on Trident is 
like convincing a tramp he needs a bazooka.

What is the British way of life? What do we value? Daytime drinking; freedom 
of speech (for anybody who isn’t joking); a big centre-forward who can hold the 
ball up; making drunken, sexual online threats to respected academics; hating 
people from a broadly similar town 30 miles away; watching strangers bake; 
watching someone we know fail; and whatever the opposite of reading a history 
book is. I’m not saying it’s all bad, I’m just saying it doesn’t justify 
heating up a 100 million civilians to a temperature where their shadows catch 
fire. Perhaps we need to face up to the fact that Britain is becoming a sort of 
redneck country that doesn’t give a shit about education or health, but needs 
to have the latest weapons; the renewal ofTrident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident> casts Scotland as the wife who has 
given you one last chance, listening wearily to your story about how you’ve 
blown the benefits money on booby-trapping the driveway and a new sniper rifle.

Cameron has eroded so many flood defences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/29/money-no-object-cameron-flood-defences>
 it might just be an act of tactical military genius. Which of our enemies 
would expect a Trident submarine to be bobbing around a Morrisons car park in 
York? The PM hasderided Jeremy Corbyn’s idea of keeping the subs without 
missiles as patently ridiculous 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/pmqs/12110164/David-Cameron-Jeremy-Corbyn-is-a-risk-to-national-security-and-will-take-Britain-back-the-1970s-PMQs-live.html>
, and in no way comparable to buildingtwo huge aircraft carriers with no 
aircraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2010/oct/19/defence-budget-aircarft-carrier>
. Scaling down Trident might actually better suit our military requirements 
over the next century, as it has to be easier hauling two submarines through a 
desert rather than four. Or maybe the subs could find a non-military role: 
becoming a place where we put Britain’s worst sexual deviants, perhaps 
eventually replacing the Premier League. 

If we are wiped out in nuclear war, the planet will need to be repopulated by 
the staff of the submarines, so the fact that they now let women serve could 
actually be seen as a deeply pessimistic move. The officers in charge of 
launching the missiles are trained to “fire and forget”. That’s fire up to 160 
nuclear warheads, and forget that the world has been reduced to a cursed 
sandscape where the strongest mutants will rule as Petrol Sheriffs. The 
government insists that we are prepared for cyber attack, but to be honest 
we’re rarely prepared for snow in winter. Having Trident (whichgenuinely has an 
operating system called Windows for Submarines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/16/trident-old-technology-brave-new-world-cyber-warfare>
) might almost be like a half-hearted suicide attempt. As for the supposed 
threat of North Korea, with their current missile delivery technology it would 
take years for them to save up for the necessary stamps. Yes, they launched a 
satellite recently, but remember that it’s much easier to hit a target that is 
basically The Universe. I’m going to stick my neck out and say that people 
doing eight hours of gymnastics a day while living on acorns aren’t going to 
build a viable, targeted intercontinental missile. And if they do, it’s going 
to be an absolute coupon buster if they decide to send it 3,000 miles to 
Britain rather than – just to pick a country at random – South Korea.

Corbyn said he would never launch nuclear weapons. He has commissioned a 
report into the renewal of Trident, and hopefully it will change his mind. It 
takes a truly humble and magnanimous man to say: “Well, I have to respect the 
decision of the committee and, if the occasion arises, I will now destroy all 
life on Earth.” In any case, launching Trident is surely too big a 
responsibility for one person. The truly democratic method would be to have a 
giant button somewhere that can only be pressed by the weight of 51% of the 
population. Think of the fun we will have coming from all over the country to 
fire our missiles. Peace campaigners waving bedsheets with sad-face emojis from 
motorway bridges at jeering megabuses of drunken pro-war monsters. Hordes of 
people living for days on the open Bakelite savannah of the button waiting for 
their numbers to build. The cheer going up as they finally reach critical mass 
with the screeching arrival of the Chelsea team coach. It will be an event that 
the whole country will talk about for ever, which will be a matter of a few 
minutes.

In the final moments of life on Earth, someone will think of arranging their 
hands to make a shadow puppet, creating a dragon or a dove to be immortalised 
by the bomb. They’ll know that nobody will ever see it, but they’ll do it 
anyway. And this, I think, is what it is to be any kind of artist these days, 
with no posterity to address but still compelled, for reasons you don’t 
understand, to work in the terrible now.
 