
A few weeks ago, Peter Sellars travelled to Mali to collaborate with a 
musician called Rokia Traoré. "We worked with these wonderful traditional 
players, literally, under a mango tree," recalls the opera and theatre 
director. "It couldn't have been more African. Except it's difficult to know 
what African, or western, means any more. A few minutes after I started talking 
to the kora player, we realised we had both worked with the Berlin 
Philharmonic. And that was kind of perfect. The world really was connected."

Sellars's work has always been linked to hot contemporary issues, whether he 
is updating Mozart into the Harlem drug economy, or creating new works about 
Richard Nixon, or Palestinian hijackings, with his long-term collaborator, John 
Adams. Currently preoccupied with issues of globalisation and international 
interconnectedness, he explodes with delight at the fact you can now, "on a 
whim, fly to Shanghai and stay at the Hyatt". Contrast this to his first visit 
in the early 1980s when working with Adams on Nixon in China: back then, such a 
trip was "a very, very big deal".

Now aged 53, Sellars's trademark rapid-fire intensity and enthusiasm remains 
intact from his days as a wunderkind, as do the lurid shirts, the beads, that 
distinctive haircut and the hugs for anyone who comes within his orbit. His 
scattergun fluency is still punctuated by almost comically exaggerated displays 
of admiration or indignation: "Puh-leeze!"

And there is plenty of indignation. Born in Pittsburgh, he was brought up a 
Christian Scientist, and has maintained a lifelong engagement not only with the 
Bible but the Qur'an, as well as Jewish, Buddhist and Hindu texts – and his 
work has always been underpinned by a strong morality. He animatedly details 
the horrific economics of 21st-century slavery and talks about a project with 
the Slow Food movement in Italy that will reflect the plight of farmers 
worldwide. "Not only chemical farming and GM food," he elaborates. "Our 
interference – via the IMF and the World Bank – means that farming is virtually 
economically impossible anywhere right now. It is difficult to grow rice in 
Indonesia, for goodness sake. There's a huge suicide rate among farmers from 
India to Iowa. Something has gone very wrong. And that's why immigration is 
such a big deal. People simply can't stay where they are. We have made large 
parts of the world unliveable."

Kafka's irradiated tightrope

These issues, and others, inform his staging of Kafka Fragments, György 
Kurtág's song cycle for soprano and violin, which receives its European 
premiere at the Barbican this week. The Hungarian composer's 1987 work 
comprises 40 short musical responses, ranging from a few seconds to a few 
minutes in length, to extracts from Kafka's letters, diaries and notebooks. 
"The usual stuff," he guffaws. "Kafkaesque crisis, intense self-loathing. But 
since I was a kid starting out, I've tried to do work based on subject matter 
that is meaningful to people."

The work follows his 2003 production of Antonin Artaud's For an End to the 
Judgement of God, staged as a Pentagon press conference about the Afghan war, 
in the Turbine Hall at London's Tate Modern. "It looked very plausible," he 
chuckles. "And if Artaud looks plausible, you know you are dealing with 
something fairly extreme. This piece is a companion, in that it features an 
American housewife watching that war on television."

Soprano Dawn Upshaw, the housewife, will be accompanied by violinist Geoff 
Nuttall for the song cycle, which also includes images of mentally ill and 
homeless people, taken by David Michalek. "I wanted to get at what comes home 
from large-scale and catastrophic expenditures. In the second world war, 
everyone knew there was a war on. Now, it is just part of the general hum and 
buzz. What's wonderful about Kafka is that he shows you ordinary life, but of 
course it's not ordinary at all. It is irradiated with everything you are not 
acknowledging. The insistence on ignoring that you are shaped like a cockroach. 
So when the appalling and outrageous and unthinkable is normal, it's time to 
look at what normal is,"

Sellars has Upshaw doing a day's housework: laundry, floor, dishes. "It is no 
coincidence that Kafka is obsessed with cleanliness, this need to cleanse 
yourself because you feel tainted. That's how most of us feel today. How can we 
clean our spotted souls and how do you wash hands that are this dirty? And this 
is what classical music can deal with. Life of the soul stuff, where the 
political meets your own personal integrity."

He describes Kurtág's music as "sort of anti-Wagner", in that instead of 
stretching across hours of orchestral grandeur, "these stripped-down pieces can 
last 23 seconds, but in that time Kurtág has 50 ideas. So the music moves at 
the speed of thought. It is only a violin and a soprano, but it is so dense and 
intricate to perform that daily life becomes a tightrope act."

Hanging from a truck axle

For him, classical music gains its power from its subject matter, not its 
style. "Style is a fake issue brought to the fore by people who are trying to 
avoid content." He mentions, by way of example, timing indicators. "Beethoven's 
metronome marks are not the main issue. Puh-leeze! This is a guy writing music 
when Napoleon is bombarding Vienna. This music is dealing with what that 
experience is. That is what classical music is about: these very powerful, 
in-the-line-of-fire experiences, which are eternal because there are plenty of 
places where people are in the line of fire today."

Sellars's apparently evangelical levels of certainty about the theatre and the 
world have sometimes seen him castigated as too self-satisfied and his work as 
too glib. But it is worth remembering how innovative his 1980s updated 
Mozart–Da Ponte series was; that his trilogy with Adams (Nixon in China, The 
Death of Kling- hoffer and Dr Atomic) has entered the mainstream repertoire; 
and that other productions, such as his 1996 contemporary totalitarian US 
setting of Handel's Theodora are widely regarded as classics.

"When we were making those early pieces, such as Nixon in China, it was the 
first time for a very long time that opera had been completely contemporary. 
Verdi, Mozart and Monteverdi were also about their moment, so it shouldn't have 
been a big deal. But it was. Now when you see an opera in modern dress, it is a 
cliche, but in the 80s and early 90s I was trying to make the specific case 
that opera was not the books you loved at college. It was not nostalgic or 
retrospective."

Although he made his name with full-scale opera house productions, he now 
often works on a smaller scale. His most recent UK productions have been a 
staged clarinet concerto and a collaboration with video artist Bill Viola on an 
acclaimed version of Tristan und Isolde. What is the appeal of doing the Kurtág 
as a smaller scale staged concert? "This is all about getting to the core of 
something, the essence. The staged concert doesn't have a whole lot of stuff 
hanging around – it involves just a few elements that can be charged with 
meaning. "

The core concern here is a world where, because of war or famine, people are 
forced increasingly to move. "People are willing to hang onto the axles of 
trucks to get from Kabul to London. In a previous era, it was recognised that 
refugees were a sign. You're meant to actually read the sign and respond. Not 
only should you welcome them on a humanitarian level, you should engage with 
their issues – because they are telling you about something going on that, if 
it continues, then no one will be safe."

Sellars admits his stagings have often been characterised by "whatever crazy 
or goofy thing is going on", but 30-odd years after he began his professional 
career, his focus has changed. "Most of my stage work is actually invisible. 
The surface is just the surface, but what we're all really interested in is 
everything that is not the surface. It's just a woman doing the ironing, but 
because it is Kurtág, and because it is Kafka, it is charged with a kind of 
spiritual energy and this woman equals all the kings and queens and armies in 
the world. So my work doesn't look much like it did 20 years ago. Things I did 
then are now done a lot by other people, so I don't need to do them myself. I 
don't have to make the case that opera is contemporary. I'm free to fry other 
fish."

• This article was amended on 10 November 2010. The original said that recent 
UK productions included a staged flute concerto. This has been corrected.
 