
Sammy McIlroy's frustrations reached new levels when a late goal by midfielder 
Artur Petrosyan claimed victory for Armenia afterNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> had failed to score for 
a seventh successive game. The loss leaves McIlroy's side with just one point 
from three Euro 2004 qualifiers.

'It is going to be very hard to qualify,' said McIlroy, 'but we've got to pick 
ourselves up and prepare for Wednesday's game against Greece.'

It is now 13 months since a Northern Ireland player found the net and 17 since 
McIlroy celebrated a victory. Both those unwanted records seemed destined to 
fall againstArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>, but the Irish 
paid the price for spurning a host of chances when Petrosyan capped a fine solo 
run with a smart 86th-minute finish.

Defeat was harsh on the visitors, particularly as it came from a team who have 
recorded just one victory, against Andorra, in their past 21 competitive games.

Life is never easy as the manager of Northern Ireland, but McIlroy's job has 
been made considerably harder with the defection of a clutch of his most 
experienced players. The news that Manchester City's Kevin Horlock had added 
his name to those of Neil Lennon and Jim Magilton by announcing his retirement 
from the international game this week, added further to McIlroy's woes.

With centre-back Gerry Taggart expected to follow suit shortly, the manager's 
plans to put his faith in youth have been considerably fast-forwarded. The fact 
that this vital qualifier was being played in Yerevan, just 400 air miles north 
of Baghdad didn't help matters, possibly contributing to the withdrawal of 
Sunderland's George McCart ney who cited 'personal reasons' for his 
non-appearance.

The manager is nothing if not optimistic, though, and with talents such as 
Aaron Hughes and Damian Johnson maturing rapidly, his upbeat belief that his 
side can prosper is not misplaced. Newcastle United defender Hughes in 
particular is reaping the benefits of performing regularly in the Premiership 
and the Champions League and gave yet another performance that belied 23 years.

With sporadic gusts of snow and a rutted playing surface, predictably it was 
the home side that made the first chance, with striker Arman Karamyan turning 
well before sending a sharp drive inches past goalkeeper Maik Taylor's 
left-hand post in the first minute.

Undaunted, McIlroy's side responded admirably with winger Keith Gillespie 
providing an impressive outlet down the right flank, and it was from the 
Blackburn Rovers man's deep, eighth-minute cross that Paul McVeigh almost ended 
Northern Ireland's woefully barren spell.

Unmarked at the far post, the Norwich City striker showed great composure to 
bring the ball under control before volleying goalwards, but his effort was 
deflected off a home midfielder and agonisingly on to the crossbar.

A sharp piece of defending by Stephen Craigan denied Karamyan another chance 
but otherwiseArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> made few 
inroads against a visiting backline that was well-protected by the tenacious 
midfield pairing of skipper Steve Lomas and Johnson.

As the opening 45 minutes wore on, the visitors added a sharper cutting edge 
to their attacking efforts and should have been ahead by the break. Twice 
McIlroy was left shaking his head in disbelief as first James Quinn and then 
David Healy fired wide from close range.

Quinn's chance was the better of the two after Gillespie had again out-paced 
his marker before sending a teasing cross towards the striker at the near post. 
Then Healy appeared to receive a hefty shove just before connecting with Grant 
McCann's left-wing cross, forcing him to misdirect his header.

Just two minutes after the restart, Northern Ireland allowed Karamyan another 
sight of goal and it was to Taylor's relief that the striker couldn't find a 
finish to match his approach play.

As the game wore on, the confidence and fluency of the visitors' early efforts 
ebbed away with the Armenians noticeably more aware of the threat of Gillespie. 
The wide man was not to be subdued, however, and his darting run and cross set 
up his side's best chance of the second period, a Healy volley that the home 
keeper deflected wide at full stretch.

'This defeat was a bitter pill to swallow. I thought we should have been three 
up at half-time but we didn't take our chances,' said McIlroy.

'I was disappointed with their goal because I thought it should have been 
dealt with before he got into the box. He was their one quality player. Steve 
Craigan said he didn't challenge him because he thought he would give away a 
penalty and get sent off and I'm not going to blame the lad.'
 