
Philippa Scott, widow of the 20th century's greatest conservationist, Sir 
Peter Scott, has died at the age of 91. For almost four decades – from their 
marriage in 1951 until Scott's death in 1989 – Phil, as Lady Scott was always 
known, worked in close partnership with her husband. In the words of Sir David 
Attenborough, "the Scotts put conservation on the map, at a time when it was 
not a word that most people understood".

She was born Philippa Talbot-Ponsonby in Bloemfontein, South Africa, where her 
British naval officer father was recovering from tuberculosis, and spent her 
early years on a farm in Orange Free State. In Britain during the second world 
war, she served in the Land Army and then did intelligence work at the 
code-breaking centre at Bletchley Park, Buckinghamshire. She spent a year in 
postwar Belgrade, capital of what had by then become communist Yugoslavia, for 
the Foreign Office, before returning in 1947 to what she later recalled as 
"cold, grey England", undecided as to her future career. When a friend 
suggested she apply to work for Peter Scott at his London office she did so, 
and to her surprise was offered the job immediately.

Two years later she moved to the headquarters of the newly founded Severn 
Wildfowl Trust (later the Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust,WWT <http://www.wwt.org.uk>
), at Slimbridge in Gloucestershire, becoming Scott's secretary. Her rural 
upbringing proved useful: as she remarked in 2005: "I think he appreciated the 
fact that I was basically a country girl and I knew how to round up ducks and 
geese without frightening them."

They had met several years before, during the early years of the war, when 
Scott was engaged to the novelist Elizabeth Jane Howard but by 1951, Scott's 
marriage to Howard was over, and in August that year he and Phil married while 
on a bird-ringing expedition in Iceland. She became stepmother to Peter's 
daughter, Nicky; and in 1952 gave birth to a daughter, Dafila, followed in 1954 
by a son, Falcon. During this period the Scotts were busy turning Slimbridge 
into the world's finest collection of ducks, geese and swans. By the late 1950s 
Peter – already a renowned artist – had developed another successful career as 
a TV presenter with the series Look, produced by theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Natural History Unit. Faraway Look took 
them farther afield, and Phil accompanied Peter and cameraman Tony Soper on a 
trip to the Galapagos Islands. In those days before regular tourism, she 
recalled that their accommodation, on a Chilean coastguard ship, left much to 
be desired.
 Lesser flamingoes: Scott became a fellow of the Royal Photographic Society. 
Photograph: Philippa Scott/WWT 
For the next 30 years the couple travelled the world as leaders of the 
conservation movement, and also indulging Peter's many enthusiasms, from 
birdwatching to snorkelling and gliding to sailing. Phil became a keen scuba 
diver andphotographer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/gallery/2010/jan/11/obituary-gallery-philippa-scott?picture=357892491>
, and a fellow of the Royal Photographic Society; her pictures were used to 
illustrate many of her husband's books. Her own particular interests included 
Antarctica, which she visited six times, and the great whales.

After Peter's death in 1989, Phil continued to promote the cause of 
conservation, and published a book, The Art of Peter Scott. She also wrote two 
volumes of memoirs, Lucky Me (1990) and So Many Sunlit Hours (2002): among its 
bizarrer episodes was the "surreal" encounter that she recalled with the artist 
Andy Warhol. In 2006 she attended a reception at the Houses of Parliament to 
mark the 60th anniversary of the WWT.

Phil lived at Slimbridge to the end of her life, overlooking the wildfowl 
collection she and her husband had created, and holding the post of honorary 
director of the WWT, which now has a national network of nine wetland visitor 
centres. She is survived by Dafila, Falcon, Nicky, and her five grandchildren.

• Philippa Scott, conservationist, born 22 November 1918; died 6 January 2010
 