
It says it all about Philip Clarke's tenure at the top of Tesco that the stock 
market value of the grocer jumped by half a billion poundswhen his departure 
was announced this morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/21/tesco-boss-philip-clarke-quits-profits-warning>
 – even though that announcement came at the same time as an unexpected profit 
warning.

The shares have come back a little since the statement, first thing this 
morning, that Clarke's 40-year career atTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> was over, but they are still well 
ahead.

The fact is that Clarke, although he inherited a bad hand, has played it 
poorly since he took over fromSir Terry Leahy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/terry-leahy> three years ago.

How wrong Clarke was when he boasted of inheriting a "golden legacy" from 
Leahy back in 2011. The fact is the UK stores had been woefully underinvested. 
They had become unpleasant places to shop, with long queues at the tills. The 
entire Tesco shopping experience had become so poor that within a year of 
taking over Clarke was forced to come up with a £1bn programme to fix the core 
UK estate – hiring more shop staff and improving ranges, quality and stores. 
Clarke said he needed to put "the love" back into the shops. It is a job still 
far from done.

Part of the reason that the UK stores had been so ignored was Leahy's focus on 
international expansion, and the US in particular, where he had ambitions to 
build Tesco's Fresh & Easy start-up into a chain as big as the UK business. But 
there were problems apparent in the US from the very outset. Leahy was never 
going to admit defeat and pull the plug, but when Clarke took over he took too 
long to make that decision. The entire US misadventure eventually cost Tesco 
around £1.7bn.

There were other international problems, from overambitious plans to build 80 
vast shopping malls across China to more local issues across Europe and Turkey.

Clarke, it is worth remembering, ran the international business before he took 
over from Leahy. Some problems were beyond Tesco's control, such as trading 
performance being impacted by political and economic problems in countries such 
as Thailand and Turkey. But they were undoubtedly compounded by self-made 
issues, and hubris, too.

Issues such as failing to spot the sea change in consumer shopping habits 
which has been underway for more than five years – the move away from big 
weekly shops at vast out-of-town stores to more regular, smaller basket 
shopping at high street discounters, from Aldi and Lidl to Poundland, where 
prices are substantially cheaper. The same is happening in overseas markets.

Tesco, of course, was the first of the big grocers to come up with a 
convenience store concept – Express – putting the brand back on the high 
street. But its prices are way out of kilter with its discount rivals.

As a result Tesco is estimated to have lost 1m shopper visits a week over the 
past year – worth £25m through the tills – to its discount rivals. Its market 
share is down to 28.9%, according to the latest figures from research group 
Kantar, compared with 30.3% a year ago and 31.8% at the peak. In a £175bn a 
year market, those are massive losses.

Online, Tesco was first in the food delivery business, back in 2000, but it 
failed to spot the move to online shopping for clothing and appliances, which 
had generated big margins and profits for the out-of-town Extra hypermarkets.

Clarke has tried numerous different initiatives to win back customers and use 
now unwanted space in Extra stores – from soft play areas, to inviting in 
Sports Direct, buying the Giraffe restaurant chain, and, last week, coming up 
with a new plan to share excess car park space with car hire firm Avis. But 
analysts have criticised almost every such initiative as fiddling while Rome 
burns.

The one tactic Clarke shied away from was fighting on price, apart from a 
little local skirmishing on everyday essentials.

Tesco could launch a price war, a big one. It has the firepower to blow many 
rivals out of the water. It would be bloody, Tesco's margins would be battered, 
there may even be casualties. Analysts have questioned whether Clarke had the 
bottle for it, although in recent days Tesco-watchers detected signs that might 
have been exactly what he was preparing for the autumn.

Clarke had other problems, of his own making, in the boardroom. After moving 
into the top job he lost – some were fired, some left – every one of the close 
team of top executives built by Leahy. It was probably inevitable; Leahy never 
had a deputy but kept a small team of directors constantly jostling to become 
his successor. When one was chosen, the others were disgruntled and angry.

There is usually an informal code of conduct among former directors that they 
don't criticise each other. But there were a number of former Tesco directors, 
who had worked alongside Clarke for years, who have been more than willing, 
when asked, to put the boot in and point out what they regarded as his 
professional and personal shortcomings.

Even Leahy hasn't been entirely loyal to his chosen successor, saying recently 
that the share price performance under Clarke had been "disappointing".

There is more than a whiff of Marks & Spencer about Tesco. M&S was once the 
UK's biggest retailer, shoppers knew what it stood for. But it became 
complacent. M&S managers failed to recognise the impact that cheaper operators 
such as Matalan, and then Primark, would have on the M&S business. They simply 
thought their shoppers would be loyal. There were problems with international 
expansion, and boardroom infighting. Today M&S is still vast, but no one 
considers it a leader.

So now the problems are all Dave Lewis's. He must, in no particular order: 
stop losing customers to the discounters; re-establish Tesco's Price 
credentials; tackle the ramifications of the structural change underway in food 
shopping; reassess Tesco's marketing and brand message – what does it stand for 
now?; decide which, if any, overseas markets Tesco must abandon; build a new 
top team of executives.

It's a long list, but required in short order.
 