
It's Sunday morning in Arles and I have finally seen too much photography. In 
the last four days I have visited about 70 shows and looked at God knows how 
many images. My feet are sore, my temper is short, and I can no longer tell 
what is good or bad. It's time to retreat.

The opening week of the 40th Rencontres d'Arles 
<http://www.rencontres-arles.com/A09/>, one of the world's leading photography 
festivals, culminated on Saturday night in the town's open-air Roman 
amphitheatre with the announcement of the Discovery award, which celebrates the 
work of new photographers. It was followed by a screening of guest curator Nan 
Goldin's most famous ongoing work,The Ballad of Sexual Dependency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artblog/2008/may/26/nangoldinsphotographicwork>
, which includes over 700 images from the 1980s right up to last year. The 
latest edit was shown with music by Tiger Lillies. Despite this being the first 
year the organisers have charged for admission to evening events – €27 for this 
particular one – there was a bottleneck at the entrance, with ticket-holders 
fighting their way though hordes of the luckless. Inside, under the moon, 
people were sitting in the aisles and on the edge of the stage itself. The new 
French minister of culture turned up with several men in black. (He didn't have 
to queue.)

The speeches, as ever at Arles, were many and long. The French don't seem to 
mind, and everyone else suffered in silence as their backsides – and brains – 
grew numb with boredom. In the end, Martin Parr's nominee, Rimaldas Viksraitis 
from Lithuania, won the Discovery award with his images of Lithuanian villagers 
dancing and getting falling-down drunk. It was a popular choice: Viksraitis, 
who has been quietly pursuing his art for years, cycling around the countryside 
with his camera tied to his bike, received a long ovation. He seemed almost 
overwhelmed.

The two book prizes went to Susan Meiselas for In History, which documents the 
shattering impact of war on landscape as well as people, and to Swedish 
photographers Anders Pedersen and JH Engstrom for From Back Home, their 
collaborative study of their home country over two generations. Good as the 
study is, it seemed an odd choice considering the strong competition. I can't 
help feeling that, just as there is too much photography here, there are also 
too many photography books.

The festival was as overloaded, surprising and frustrating as ever. The most 
talked-about shows were Leigh Ledare's Pretend You're Actually Alive, which 
comprises images of his sexually ambiguous relationship with his mother (a 
subject I tackled in mymain review for yesterday's Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jul/12/les-rencontres-darles-photography-review>
), andWithout Sanctuary: The James Allen Collection 
<http://www.withoutsanctuary.org/movie1.html>, a truly shocking photographic 
exhibition of lynchings in America's Deep South.

Without Sanctuary was social history as trauma. Many of the images, collected 
by an antiques dealer, were from postcards that were distributed at the time. 
There are contemporary newspaper reports, too, which recorded – in lingering 
detail – the gruesome killings and the celebratory mood that accompanied them. 
For all the tactics on display elsewhere, this show truly shocked. I don't 
think I have ever heard such silence in a gallery before.

It is difficult to imagine an event of this scale – and one that affords 
photography such importance – taking place in Britain. I had a late-night chat 
with Martin Parr about how photography is still not taken seriously as an art 
form here, and how many of our best photographers are given more respect 
abroad. Quite why this is, I'm not sure – the usual snobbery towards a popular 
form, maybe, or the sense that we like our "serious" photography to be old, 
black and white, and reverent towards its subject.

Arles in early July is the place to go to see photography in all its myriad 
forms, and to catch a glimpse of its struggle to retain meaning in a world 
overloaded with images. The exhibitions run until September. It's well worth a 
weekend jaunt, if only to see Nan Goldin's personal collection, which includes 
work from EJ Bellocq to Warhol, and beyond.
 