
The young Alfred Hitchcock <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfredhitchcock> 
was so obsessed with the bright lights of London’s Piccadilly Circus that he 
gave them a starring role in no fewer than five of his films. In his eyes, the 
illuminated hoardings first introduced in 1908 to the West End’s great popular 
intersection symbolised everything glamorous and exciting about London – 
especially sex and death.

In his 1927 silent thriller The Lodger, a crowd swarms to Piccadilly Circus to 
read a glowing electric news bulletin on the latest slaying by a Jack the 
Ripper-like serial killer. In The 39 Steps (1935), fugitive Robert Donat, after 
fleeing through the Scottish Highlands handcuffed to Madeleine Carroll, finally 
makes it back to the bright lights, and we see a verité sequence of Piccadilly 
Circus, its signs glowing against the dark. “BLACK and WHITE”, reads a huge 
whisky ad.
 The hoardings in 1970. Photograph: Paul Almasy/Corbis/VCG via Getty Images 
Now those lights have gone out 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-38610332>, and they will not be 
lit again in our lifetimes – if Trump manages to blow up the world before a 
giant new hi-res digital board is switched on in the autumn. Assuming 
everything goes OK, this is still the longest break in Piccadilly’s commercial 
illuminations since they were turned off during the second world war. Looking 
at images of a century of London’s most visible pop art, it is easy to see why 
Hitchcock saw this glowing urban hub as a place of romance and danger, 
excitement and sleaze.
 1974, after power cuts and shortages ended. Photograph: Bettmann/Bettmann 
Archive 
Even before it got the lights, Piccadilly Circus was symbolically marked as a 
place of sex and the night by Alfred Gilbert’s statue, popularly known as Eros. 
This Greek love god was put up in the 1890s to commemorate Lord Shaftesbury, 
but is more suggestive of Saturday-night dates than Victorian social reform. 
The electric signs gave Piccadilly a feeling of the future and a whiff of being 
the centre of the world at a time when motor traffic was still sparse and 
horses and carriages could be silhouetted against the lights.
 The lights in 1973. Photograph: David Cairns/Getty Images 
Because these adverts were constructed as painted letters or images covered in 
lightbulbs, they could be read even when the lights were switched off. Some of 
the most moving images of Piccadilly Circus show people celebrating there in 
1945, its signage still vivid in spite of austerity. This wide space with its 
ads and shows became the true heart of 20th-centuryLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> because its images of pleasure and fun, 
as opposed to authority, made it a people’s square, a democratic territory – as 
the 1945 celebrations make plain.
 VE Day, 1945: Crowds gather to celebrate the end of the second world war. 
Photograph: Keystone/Getty Images 
Glowing, raw full-colour 1960s images bring us into today’s Piccadilly Circus, 
a place busier than ever with bigger hoardings than ever, which is not so much 
the centre of London as a self-conscious symbol of being here. Tourists perch 
around Eros, show-goers and hen parties mill underneath the flashing colours of 
the city at night.
 Going dark … the hoardings will be switched off until autumn. Photograph: 
Leon Neal/Getty Images 
We wouldn’t want it any other way. Close enough to Soho to feel disreputable, 
raucous enough to feel dangerous, Piccadilly Circus will never suffer the fate 
of New York’s Times Square, and get cleaned up for midwestern visitors. It is 
impure and corrupting, the luminous heart of London.

• This article was amended on 17 January 2016. An earlier version referred to 
“Alfred Gilbert’s statue of Eros. This bronze Greek love god”. The statue 
popularly known as Eros (and said by some to be of his brother, Anteros) is 
made of aluminium, though it is set on a bronze fountain.
 