
Key points

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, decided not to tackle the 
biggest story of the week, the EU referendum, but instead chose a subject that 
has been a favourite of his at prime minister’s questions, the NHS. He claimed 
the prime minister and the health secretary had misrepresented figures on 
mortality rates at the weekend, and called on the government to do a deal with 
junior doctors.

David Cameron stood firm on the government’s position on the NHS, defended the 
health secretary and called on Corbyn to withdraw his remarks. But the exchange 
was electrified when a Labour MP called to Cameron: “What would your mother 
say?” (Cameron’s mother hassigned a petition about cuts to children’s services  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-oxfordshire-35532047>in her local area.) 
It allowed Cameron to mount a personal attack on Corbyn’s sartorial choices 
while saying it was “what his mother would say”.

Verdict

It should be worrying for a Labour leader if he can’t win, or at least hold is 
own, on the NHS. Cameron knocked Corbyn out of the ring with his glib “Do up 
your tie” jibe (some people admire Corbyn for his sartorial humility, but there 
are probably many more who think a would-be prime minister should turn up to 
work looking smart), and even though Corbyn parried with a spirited comeback, 
he could not repair the damage done.

But, even without that putdown, Cameron had the upper hand, because he 
successfully defused Corbyn’s question about “misleading” hospital weekend 
mortality figures with a new figure that left Corbyn (and all the rest of us – 
I didn’t know what he was talking about) stumped. Corbyn was not prepared with 
a response, and just moved on. His final question just amounted to a plea for 
higher NHS spending, but Cameron retaliated with a fair question highlighting 
Labour’s ambivalence about the entire seven-day NHS project.

Best lines

David Cameron:

I think I know what my mother would say: ‘Put on a proper suit, do up your tie 
and sing the national anthem.’

Jeremy Corbyn:

If we’re talking of motherly advice, my late mother would have said ‘stand up 
for the principle of a health service free at the point of use for everybody’.
 