
This week's poem, "The snow whirls over the courtyard's roses," is by the 
Finland-Swedish writer, Tua Forsström, translated from the Swedish by Stina 
Katchadourian. It's the first poem in her 1998 collection After Spending a 
Night Among Horses, which is included in thefour-part Bloodaxe collection of 
Forsström's work <http://www.bloodaxebooks.com/titlepage.asp?isbn=1852246499>.

The poems in After Spending a Night Among Horses are inspired by the 
film-maker Andrei Tarkovsky and are interleaved with quotations from 
Tarkovsky's film, Stalker, and from his prose-book, Sculpting in Time: 
Reflections on the Cinema. Tarkovsky once said, "There is only one way of 
thinking in cinema: poetically <http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/tarkov.htm>." 
Forsström expresses the reverse idea, of thinking in poetry cinematically. The 
collection itself is a montage, and many of the individual poems, like this 
one, draw on a similar technique, combining different settings, seasons, voices 
and moods in one imaginative sweep. All have a dream-like and open-ended 
quality.

In fact, the collection opens with five verses from the film-maker's father, 
the poet Arseny Tarkovsky – some melancholy stanzas, based on Per-Arne Bodin's 
translation from the Russian, beginning "Now the summer's gone/ as if it never 
was./ It's still warm in the clearing./ But that's not enough." This is 
followed by a quotation from the character of the wife, spoken to the camera at 
the end of Stalker: "Of course it's quite possible that I'm inventing this 
after the fact. But that time, he just came up to me and said: 'Follow me,' and 
I did. And I've never regretted that. Never." Both voice themes of compulsion, 
restlessness and sacrifice.

Forsström's first line "The snow whirls over the courtyard's roses" is like a 
camera direction. The image is arrestingly visual, with implied contrasts of 
colour, temperature and movement. While the rose-garden appears literally 
frozen in time, the scene elsewhere is busy, with the whirling unseasonal 
snowflakes and the speaker's excited, abbreviated thoughts: "Didn't bring my 
boots and scarf … don't know what to do with all this light!" She's not simply 
talking to herself but to the film-maker, testing her poet's material against 
his cinematic vision: "You wouldn't approve of the colours./ It's too striking, 
Andrei Arsenyevich, too/ much, too much of everything!"

There's a tension between abundance – too much colour, too much light, too 
much to remember – and the concentration and "cutting" needed for making art. 
But, if art is represented by the frost's grip on the iconic rose garden, 
destruction must be the inevitable result of such preservation. Perhaps the 
attraction of cinema is that it combines art with apparent fluidity and 
process. But creative limitations are suggested by the references to the flight 
and crash of the hot-air balloon at the beginning of another Tarkovsky film, 
Andrei Rublev. Originally, Tarkovsky had shown a peasant attempting flight with 
home-made wings, and the poet seems critical of his editorial decision. 
Depicting the "aerial balloon, a clumsy/ creation cobbled together from rope 
and rags," the translation catches the contraption's awkwardness in its 
alliteration: clumsy/ creation/ cobbled/ropes/rags. It's not immediately clear 
how wings would have been an improvement.

The memory triggers thoughts which seem rather abstract and personal. "Before, 
I had a lot and didn't remember. Difficult/ to stick to the subject. Difficult 
to stick to the subject. /Hope to return. Hope to return to the principle/ of 
wings." These repeated statements are like memos to self. Perhaps they allude 
to abandoned poems, and plans for future poems. Several themes from "The snow 
whirls …" will be explored later on.

The memory of the high twittering heard from a Benidorm hotel, for instance, 
is reprised in a poem where the speaker hears caged willow warblers singing 
from a barber's shop. Perhaps the birdsong in "The snow whirls …" is associated 
with hearing the news of Tarkovsky's death. The hare, though it belongs to the 
"zone" of the frozen rose garden, is also out of place when it almost hops into 
the "entrance hall here at the Foundation." These poems value the effects of 
dislocation, but, read sequentially, they strike up echoes with each other. 
Another poem begins "It doesn't usually snow in Central Sweden in October." 
This helps explain "the hare's calendar," and its implied disharmony with the 
seasonal alterations caused by humans.

Before the hare appears, the poet quotes a passage from Sculpting in Time 
where Tarkovsky apparently comments on Stalker, "The zone is a zone, the zone 
is life,/ and a person can either be ruined or survive when/ she makes her way 
through this life. Whether she makes it or/ not depends on her self-esteem." 
The poem's gently sceptical tone elsewhere destabilises a quotation which could 
almost be a banal homily out of a self-help manual. "Self-esteem" becomes 
credible, though, if translated into artistic independence and conviction.

In the end, the poem owns up to a traditional expression of piety, again 
suggesting Rublev, but with a characteristic twist: "one should/ not constantly 
give thanks, one should definitely give thanks." Maybe this chimes in with the 
earlier desire "to return to the principle/ of wings." The strong colours at 
the end bring us back to the frozen roses. Defiantly contrasting the leaden 
Swedish lake with the body-and-blood, white and red of the snow and roses, the 
poem also evokes the shift from black-and-white photography into glowing 
"sovcolour" near the end of Andrei Rublev.

Forsström has said that she writes every poem 50 or 60 times, and that she 
often travels with her notebooks to a foreign city in order to complete a poem. 
"The snow whirls over the courtyard's roses" seems to open a poetry workbook, 
to show us an intriguing display of raw material. It's a series of comments, 
notes and sketches for future writing, held together by the casual but 
constantly-renewed conversation with Tarkovsky. There are moments of lyric 
concentration and heightened rhythm, but they're held in a framework of 
increasingly long and enjambed lines which seem to exert an outward pull. While 
the imagery of snow and roses recalls Louis MacNeice's poem "Snow," Forsström's 
vision of the world's incorrigible plurality is far more discursive. There's 
really no zone, it seems to say, and no magical room, even for the poet: 
there's only the journey.

The snow whirls over the courtyard's roses

The snow whirls over the courtyard's roses.
Didn't bring my boots and scarf, leafing
through books, don't know what to do with all this light!
You wouldn't approve of the colours.
It's too striking, Andrei Arsenyevich, too
much, too much of everything!
You exchanged the wings for an aerial balloon, a clumsy
creation cobbled together from rope and rags, I remember so well.
Before, I had a lot and didn't remember. Difficult
to stick to the subject. Difficult to stick to the subject.
Hope to return. Hope to return to the principle
of wings. The fact remains: the freeze preserved
the rose garden last night. 'The zone is a zone, the zone is life,
and a person can either be ruined or survive when
she makes her way through this life. Whether she makes it or
not depends on her sense of self-esteem-' A hare
almost hopped into the entrance hall here at the Foundation,
mottled against the snow; it's October in the hare's calendar.
You seem to be a moody sort of person
and it's possible that none of this is of interest to you.
On the other hand, you yourself complain fairly often.
I'm writing because you are dead and because I woke up
last spring in my streetside hotel room in Benidorm to that wonderful
high twittering. One shouldn't constantly say one is sorry, one should
not constantly give thanks, one should definitely give thanks. Lake
Mälaren like lead down there. The rest is white and red.
 