
The absence of violence in the aftermath of the Ayodhya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya> verdict has been interpreted as an 
indication of improved Hindu-Muslim relations, but it is more likely to signal 
a change in the political atmosphere. The numerous violent incidents India has 
witnessed in the past were mainly politically motivated, not due to real 
divisions between Hindus and Muslims.

Mild reactions to today's ruling indicate that divisive religion-related 
issues no longer benefit any political party.

The land dispute existed even during British rule. As a solution, the British 
split the site into two, giving Muslims access to the main portion of the 
structure, and Hindus to the outer area. Two years after the 1947 independence, 
an idol of Rama was secretly kept inside the portion given to Muslims, which 
renewed tensions.

However, the dispute took on a political flavour when the Hindu nationalist 
Bharatiya Janata party (BJP), mentored by the hardline Hindu Rashtriya 
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), led a campaign in the 1980s to build a temple to Rama 
at the very spot where the mosque stood in an attempt to gain an edge over the 
"secular" Indian National Congress. It culminated in the demolition of the 
mosque on 6 December 1992, which led to the violence that killed more than 
2,000 people people.

Many BJP leaders – including the founder of the movement, Lal Krishna Advani – 
admit that the politicisation of the dispute gave power to the party in 1998, 
though through a coalition.

The BJP pushed the Hindu nationalist agenda during its rule. In western 
Gujarat state, more than 2,000 people – mostly Muslims – were killed in 
violence in 2002 that followed the burning alive of 59 Hindu passengers in a 
train fire, which the BJP claimed was caused by local Muslims.

In the 2004 elections the BJP's coalition lost to a Congress-led alliance. The 
vote was believed to be in favour of secularism and development. But the RSS 
blamed the BJP's defeat on the dilution of the Hindu nationalist ideology and 
sought to create more unrest. In 2007, and again in 2008, a massive spate of 
violence flared against Christians in eastern Orissa state following the 
killing of a Hindu nationalist leader. The assassination was blamed on local 
Christians, and more than 100 people were killed and thousands of homes torched.

In the 2009 general elections, the BJP fared even worse than in 2004, which 
led to the return of the Congress party. Again, the BJP's defeat was attributed 
to its Hindu nationalist agenda. Twice bitten, the party was finally shy and 
began to distance itself from communal violence.

The peace after today's verdict reflects the reality that it is party politics 
– not troubled Hindu-Muslim relations – that cause violence in the country.

Vishal Arora is a freelance journalist in Delhi who specialises in politics 
and religion
 