
The UK economy maintained “healthy” growth over the last three months but 
faces threats from political uncertainty at home and an economic slowdown in 
the eurozone, a leading business group will warn on Monday.

Ahead of Chancellor George Osborne’s autumn statement on Wednesday, when he 
will highlight the UK’s outperformance of other advanced economies, the CBI 
says growth remained stable over the three months to November. Expectations for 
growth are also above their long-run average but not as strong as earlier in 
the year, according to the business group’s latest growth indicator.

“Previously pent-up demand delivered a strong boost to growth during the first 
half of the year but this effect may be fading. The UK is continuing to expand 
on a healthy trajectory, returning now to steadier and more sustainable growth 
rates,” said Rain Newton-Smith, CBI director of economics.

But she flagged a number of hurdles ahead.

“Domestic political uncertainty is an issue for businesses but the global 
backdrop is a greater concern. The eurozone is weak, with a real risk of 
deflation, growth in emerging markets has slowed and geopolitical tensions in 
the Middle East and Ukraine are the biggest threats to confidence,” said 
Newton-Smith.

Osborne is expected to echo those concerns about overseas pressures, placing 
the blame for the UK’s recent slowdown on faltering demand from the eurozone in 
particular.

Economists at the EY Item Club, the Ernst & Young-sponsored, independent 
economic forecasting group, said despite the likely upward revisions in growth 
forecasts, disappointing tax receipts meant there were few grounds for 
pre-election “giveaways” from the chancellor this week.

Martin Beck, senior economic advisor to the EY Item Club said: “In recent 
autumn statements, the chancellor has been able to trumpet a series of upward 
revisions to the Office for Budget Responsibility’s (OBR) growth forecast as 
evidence that his economic plan is working. However, that’s where the good news 
is likely to end. We expect the Chancellor to repeat his Budget 2014 strategy, 
where giveaways designed to provide a short-term boost were financed by a 
future squeeze on spending. But, on the whole, his speech will be about 
promises, rather than pounds.”

A separate report from the manufacturers’ organisation EEF on Monday painted a 
picture of steady growth but disappointing export orders. The sector is on 
track to grow 3.5% this year, beating the wider UK economy, said EEF chief 
economist Lee Hopley. But she expects manufacturing growth to slow to 2% in 
2015 and that there are “at least a couple of years to go” before the sector 
returns to its pre-crisis peak.

“There have been some notable areas of strength this year, especially among 
sectors which rely on demand in the home market. Overall we should see a good 
balance of sectors and sizes delivering positive news on output, jobs and 
investment this year,” she said.

“Despite some uncertainty ahead, the fact companies are maintaining their 
investment and hiring plans shows they have some optimism about prospects 
ahead. The chancellor can do his bit to back these plans by ensuring the 
business environment for companies planning to invest, recruit and get into new 
markets is a target for further action on Wednesday.”

The group’s latest quarterly survey showed output growth accelerating and 
investment and job creation holding up. But confidence in the months ahead had 
softened, according to the poll of 276 companies carried out with accountants 
BDO. Manufacturers’ expectations dropped for both output and orders.

“The exports pictures is not getting any better,” added Hopley.

The pressure on exports is a blow to Osborne who back in 2011 promised a 
“march of the makers” and a “made in Britain” boom. He set a target of doubling 
exports between 2011 and 2020 as part of a strategy to rebalance the economy 
away from over-reliance on domestic, consumer demand.

Further doubt will be cast over his export goal on Monday as the thinktank 
IPPR warnsthe UK lacks the breadth of business sectors needed for an export-led 
recovery 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/gathering-strength-backing-clusters-to-boost-britains-exports>
.

While Britain still has some industrial strengths such as aerospace, 
pharmaceuticals and cars, its export basket has become less diverse since 1995, 
IPPR says in an analysis of export data covering more than 100 countries. The 
thinktank rejects standard economic theory by claiming the countries most 
competitive in the global economy, such as Germany, tend to diversify rather 
than specialise in their exports.

“We are good at exporting services but, with a very few exceptions, poor at 
exporting goods,” said Tony Dolphin, IPPR chief economist. “As a result, the 
‘export led recovery’ promised by the chancellor has not happened. There has 
been no ‘march of the makers’. The UK is living beyond its means in the global 
economy, and has been doing so for some time.”

Sticking to an “eggs all in one basket approach” would make the UK 
increasingly vulnerable and unable to increase its share in global markets, he 
added.

“The UK has to take on the tougher task of developing new export strengths,” 
Dolphin said.
 