
Students from white British backgrounds are often holding themselves back by 
making poor educational choices, with many shutting themselves out of better 
careers as a result, according to a study for the government’s social mobility 
watchdog.

Researchers found that as much as half of the gap in admissions to highly 
selective Russell Group universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/11/universities-told-to-raise-numbers-of-working-class-and-black-students>
 between children on free school meals (FSM) and their better-off peers could 
be a result of factors beyond academic ability.

The analysis published by the Social Mobility Commission, headed by former 
Labour minister Alan Milburn, found that pupils with the same GCSE grades 
differed markedly in their later progress, withwhite British students from 
deprived backgrounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/10/schools-focus-struggling-white-working-class-pupils-uk>
 in particular choosing weaker academic subjects and institutions, and less 
likely to attend higher education than their better-off peers.

Milburn, who chairs the commission, said: “When low income youngsters from the 
same area with the same school results are progressing less than their 
better-off classmates, that is not about lack of ability. It is about lack of 
opportunity. The progression gap has many causes but it suggests something is 
going badly wrong in oureducation <https://www.theguardian.com/education> 
system.”

The lack of proper careers advice and the complexity of post-16 education and 
training made it hard for those from lower income groups to “translate their 
attainment at school into qualifications that are well rewarded”, Milburn said.

The researchers from the Education Datalab unit, which carried out the 
analysis, said pupils on free school meals “have marked differences in the 
post-16 choices they make that cannot be explained by inequalities in 
institutional availability”, compared with those in the same neighbourhoods 
with similar GCSE performance from wealthier households.

Rebecca Allen, Datalab’s lead author on the research, said the issue presented 
a dilemma for policymakers who wanted to improve educational results, if the 
groups involved avoided making the best choices they had available.

“One response is a behavioural one: try to understand their choices and nudge 
them into better ones,” Allen said. “The other is an authoritarian one – if 
they aren’t making academically stretching choices then shut down the choices 
they are able to make at 16.”

Only 21% of children on free school meals went on to study three A-levels, 
compared with 47% of their better off peers – with a third of the gap coming 
from choices made by students in the same areas with similar GCSE results.

“We estimate that as much as half of the FSM gap in Russell Group attendance – 
at 2% for FSM versus 10% for non-FSM – could be removed if we were able to 
equalise university access between pupils living in the same neighbourhoods and 
with similar GCSE attainment,” the researchers noted.

The report found that all other ethnic minority groups were “much more likely” 
to attend a school sixth form or sixth-form college, were more likely to take 
A-levels and in most cases were less likely to drop out of education after the 
age of 16.

Wales unveils means-tested university grants of up to £11,000 a year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/22/wales-unveils-means-tested-university-grants-of-up-to-11000>
Pupils from black or Pakistani and Bangladeshi ethnic groups were also more 
likely to stay in education than white British children despite having lower 
GCSE attainment.

But the report also showed that white British students, especially white 
British boys, fared unusually well in gaining admission to research-intensive 
Russell Group universities. Girls with the same GCSE results as boys were 17% 
less likely than boys to attend Russell Group universities, and white British 
pupils outdid all other ethnic groups other than Indians in attendance.

The report also highlighted the struggles faced by pupils living in areas with 
few or no school sixth forms, which meant they had restricted choices in 
carrying on with high-quality education after the age of 16.

The researchers speculated that sixth-form colleges offered a wider range of 
A-level courses, “increasing the chances that they study less traditional 
subjects”, making it more difficult to progress to higher education.

 