
The Portuguese parliament has provoked outrage by failing to condemn the long 
prison sentences handed to the so-called Luanda book club, 17 dissidents 
convicted of political defiance against Angola’s government.

The Angolan president, José Eduardo dos Santos had warned the former colonial 
power against “interfering” in Angolan justice, but campaigners attacked the 
blocking of a motion in Lisbon to repudiate the verdicts as “complicity in the 
ongoing looting” of the country by the government.

The 17 include the rapper Luaty Beirão, the political writer Domingos da Cruz 
and the T-shirt seller Nito Alves, who were arrested along with two women for 
holding a meeting at which they discussed books, including one by the US author 
Dr Gene Sharp on non-violent protest entitled From Dictatorship to Democracy.

After a lengthy remand, during which several of the activists went on hunger 
strike, all 17 were handed jail terms ranging from two to eight-and-a-half 
years and given hefty fines.

Beirão was given five-and-a-half years for “falsifying documents” and Da Cruz 
was given the longest sentence “for leading the criminal association”.

Another activist, Francisco Mapanda, was later sentenced to eight months for 
contempt of court after shouting “this judgment is a joke” in the courtroom.

Both the prosecution and defence lawyers have said they will appeal against 
the sentences. There is particular concern about the state of health of Alves 
and Prof Nuno Dala, who has been on hunger strike for 19 days.

Sharp’s thinktank, The Albert Einstein Institution, has strongly condemned the 
men’s trial, as has the Human Rights Foundation in New York, which called on 
the Angolan government “to vacate the convictions and release the activists 
immediately.”.

Amnesty International has adopted all 17 as prisoners of conscience, and has 
called for their immediate release, calling the trial a “mockery of justice”.

Its director for southern Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, 
Deprose Muchena, said: “The activists have been wrongly convicted in a deeply 
politicised trial. They are the victims of a government determined to 
intimidate anyone who dares to question its repressive policies.

 “This unjustifiable conviction and draconian sentences against these peaceful 
activists who should never have been detained at all demonstrate how Angolan 
authorities use the criminal justice system to silence dissenting views.

“They should not have spent a single day in prison.”

There were demonstrations in Lisbon earlier in the week in support of the 
activists. Many protested against the “reverse colonisation” of Angolan 
tycoons, who have been investing in Portugal’s cash-strapped news and 
telecommunications industries.

Further protests are planned to coincide with demonstrations in Luanda, where 
the convictions have caused deep anger, especially amongst young Angolans, who 
increasingly use rap music to highlight the climate of fear in the country.

“Despite the state’s efforts to withdraw sponsorships and subsidies from 
pro-people hip-hop artists, they continue to use the internet, flash disks, 
blank CDs, taxi operators and street vendors to distribute their message,” the 
political writer Rafael Marques de Morais said.

Index on Censorship, which gave an award to De Morais last year, said the case 
was absurd.

“The Angolan authorities always proclaimed to have caught this group 
‘red-handed’ in their crime. That crime was reading a book. Evidence was so 
scant of the alleged coup-plotting that those charges had to be dropped.

“It is absurd and tragic that these young men have been convicted of rebellion 
and must now see out jail terms,” said Vicky Baker, the deputy editor of the 
magazine.

“This has been another sham trial, similar to the one we saw last year with 
Rafael, who was convicted of defamation after writing a brave and much-needed 
exposé of the country’s blood diamond industry.”

Sunday marks the 14th anniversary of the end of Angola’s 26-year civil war, 
which began after the country’s independence fromPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal>. Dos Santos, 73, has been 
president since 1979 and has been accused of presiding over one of the world’s 
most corrupt governments, amassing a great fortune for himself, his family and 
friends, while two-thirds of his country lives below the poverty line.

The president is worth an estimated $20bn (£14bn) and the wealth disparity in 
Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> is one of the worst in the 
world.

The jailed activists insist they are peaceful campaigners lobbying for Dos 
Santos, 73, to step down. He said earlier this month he would retire in 2018, 
but has broken other pledges in the past.
 