
Reducing a European Championship semi-final to a clash between two individuals 
seems somehow simplistic yet this tactical battle essentially revolved around 
how Wales and Portugal used Gareth Bale and Cristiano Ronaldo. Bale was 
regularly involved in play butRonaldo proved decisive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
.

Wales’s epic journey comes to an end as Ronaldo gets to run Portugal show | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016>
On a wider level this was a clash between two teams playing without a 
traditional centre-forward and instead using two natural wingers up front. Hal 
Robson-Kanu and Nani are more accustomed to wide positions but have been 
outstanding as strike partners for Bale and Ronaldo respectively.

Therefore, this was an unusual test for both defences, who theoretically were 
not battling against sturdy penalty box prowlers but instead were forced to 
make decisions about how far to track dangerous runs from mobile, speedy 
attackers drifting across the pitch. For James Collins and Bruno Alves, both 
immobile, physical centre-backs making their first start of the tournament, it 
was a particular challenge.

Bale plays as a No10 in Chris Coleman’s 3-5-1-1 system, starting behind 
Robson-Kanu but allowed freedom of movement to drift around.Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> started defensively here and 
Wales struggled to play penetrative passes into Bale’s feet, so he wandered 
into much deeper positions, sometimes popping up at left wing-back, sometimes 
collecting short passes into feet from the centre-backs.

What Bale really wanted, however, was an opportunity to peel away into the 
channels. Midway through the first half, having started quietly, he suddenly 
burst into life. When the Portugal right-back Cédric Soares was dragged up the 
pitch to close down theWales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> 
left-wing-back Neil Taylor, Bale instinctively exploited the space before 
firing a low near-post cross into the box. Moments later he was dribbling down 
the opposite flank, tracked by – of all people – Ronaldo.

Then came Bale’s chance to counterattack. Receiving a short ball into his feet 
in his own right-back zone, Bale waited for the challenge of Danilo, Portugal’s 
sole holding midfielder, before majestically turning past him, driving 70 yards 
with the ball, before hitting a fairly tame 25-yard shot at Rui Patrício. 
Ronaldo simply was not offered that counterattacking threat.

Wales exceeded expectations at Euro 2016 – but must now deal with them | Paul 
Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/07/wales-euro-2016-gareth-bale-portugal-cristiano-ronaldo>
Ronaldo, aside from that surprising moment when he was challenging Bale on the 
edge of his own box, was much less mobile. Ashley Williams halted his first 
attempt to run at the Wales defence with a strong early tackle, and from then 
Portugal’s captain was primarily involved when trying to get on the end of 
crosses. Coleman would have worried Ronaldo and Nani would use their pace in 
wide areas to exploit the space on the outside of Wales’s back three – instead, 
they played centrally and Wales coped well.

Collins outmuscled Ronaldo to reach a right-wing Soares cross, with Portugal 
appealing for a penalty, while towards the end of the opening period Adrien 
Silva created a headed chance for him with a cross from the left. But 
Portugal’s narrow midfield, with Silva, Renato Sanches and João Mário all 
playing in a similar zone, meant Portugal were not working combinations down 
the flanks, meaning they were unable to cross from advanced positions. The 
crosses were floated, hopeful deliveries from deep.

The obvious opportunity to cross from an advanced position, though, was from 
corners. Five minutes into the second half João Mário rolled a left-wing corner 
back to Raphaël Guerreiro, whose whipped, left-footed cross found Ronaldo 
towering over James Chester to head home. Wales had looked so secure defending 
crosses in open play, yet conceded when able to get themselves organised at a 
set piece.

Portugal doubled their lead with a fortunate goal, Ronaldo’s scuffed shot 
being diverted into the net by Nani. It hardly owed much to design, yet it was 
further evidence of Nani’s ability up front: this was his third goal of the 
tournament.

Over the past decade Portugal have regularly turned up for major tournaments 
with world-class wingers but no prolific centre-forward and suffered from poor 
finishing at this stage. Here, with Ronaldo heading home and Nani playing 
poacher, Fernando Santos has found the answer to Portugal’s long-standing 
problem up front – simply do not bother with a centre-forward. Coleman and 
Wales, meanwhile, have overachieved by doing exactly the same.
 