
Portugal slumped to an embarrassing 1-0 defeat at home to Albania in their 
opening Euro 2016 qualifier on Sunday as any hopes of bouncing back from a 
miserable World Cup were shattered.

A stunning volley from Bekim Balaj early in the second half decided the Group 
I match.Portugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal>, who rested 
Cristiano Ronaldo, were booed off and the crowd waved white handkerchiefs at 
the end.

Portugal were eliminated at the group stage in Brazil and this was another 
setback for Paulo Bento and his team. The manager said afterwards: “We know the 
public was not satisfied. These are natural reactions. We have to respect 
people’s reactions and carry on our way. In the first half we had chances to 
take the lead and we had the game completely under control. In the second half 
we started well but conceded a goal from the only chance that our opponents 
created.”

The midfielder João Moutinho said: “We have to do better, there can’t be any 
more excuses.”

The home side started on top in Aveiro, with Nani at the heart of much of 
their most promising play early on, but he, Antonio Eder and Pepe wasted 
chances.

The home fans were silenced by a moment of magic seven minutes into the second 
half. Odise Roshi swung in a cross from the right which was behind Balaj, but 
on the turn he managed to get his foot to the ball and his right-footed volley 
found the bottom corner from 15 yards.

Ricardo Horta hit the post as Portugal sought an equaliser and Nani then 
headed over from close range. It was Portugal’s first home competitive defeat 
in six years.

In Group F Romania gained some small measure of World Cup revenge as they beat 
Greece in their opening Euro 2016 qualifier on Sunday. Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/romania> lost to Greece in a World Cup 
play-off last November and Greece went on to reach the last 16 in Brazil, 
losing on penalties to Costa Rica.

But Ciprian Marica’s early penalty was decisive and, although he was sent off, 
Romania held on in a game that was played behind closed doors because of crowd 
disturbances in previousGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/football/greece> 
games. It was the worst possible start for Claudio Ranieri, the former Chelsea 
and Monaco manager, who took over from Fernando Santos after the World Cup.

Also in Group F the Faroe Islands gave Finland an early scare in Torshavn when 
they took the lead in the first half before losing 3-1.

Denmark were spared another home embarrassment at the hands of Armenia as 
goals from Pierre Emile Hojbjerg and Thomas Kahlenberg secured the 
Scandinavians a 2-1 victory in their Euro 2016 qualifying campaign opener on 
Sunday.

Armenia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> had pulled off a famous 
4-0 victory over Denmark at the Parken stadium during World Cup qualifying last 
year and the Danes looked set to be humbled in Copenhagen once again when the 
Borussia Dortmund midfielder Henrikh Mkhitaryan put the visitors 1-0 up in the 
50th minute. Hojbjerg levelled 15 minutes later with a long-range effort and, 
with 10 minutes to go, the substitute Kahlenberg headed home the winner, to 
give Denmark the early advantage in Group I.
 