
The cost of taking out a fixed-rate mortgage over five or 10 years has fallen 
to a record low, in a surprise side-effect caused by money markets reacting to 
a possible Brexit.

Exclusive figures prepared for the Guardian by financial firm Moneyfacts show 
the average interest rate on a five-year fixed-rate deal has fallen to 3.16%, 
down from 3.18% a month ago and 3.34% in June 2015. Meanwhile, the average cost 
of fixing for 10 years is 3.46%, down from 3.49% last month and 3.7% a year ago.

How EU vote will affect prices, property and pensions, plus lakeside homes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/16/eu-vote-prices-property-pensions-landlord-mortgages-stamp-duty-changes>
As investors have poured out of risky shares and into assets considered safer, 
such as government bonds, the result has been a fall in the “yield” on these 
bonds. In turn, this feeds through to lower mortgage rates.

In recent weeks, several major lenders have reduced rates on five-year deals 
for both owner-occupiers and buy-to-let investors, and on Wednesday the UK’s 
biggest building society, Nationwide, reduced five- and 10-year fixes by up to 
25 basis points. Its lowest priced 10-year mortgage has a rate of 2.99%.

However, these record low deals may not last for long. Yields on 10-year bonds 
hit an historic low last week as opinion polls suggested the UK may vote to 
leave the EU at Thursday’s referendum. On Friday, as the polls swung towards 
remain, yields started to increase again.

Ray Boulger, senior technical manager at mortgage broker John Charcol, said 
the fall in yields was the prime driver behind lower mortgage rates, and a 
clear sign of what would happen following a Brexit vote. “If you are betting on 
Brexit then there is probably some merit in holding off from fixing your 
mortgage, although the scope for rates to fall further is pretty limited,” he 
said.

Boulger said lenders had not passed on all of the falls to consumers. “If we 
do vote to stay and we get a little bit of a bounce in yields we are not going 
to see much of an increase in rates,” he added.

However, the chancellor has warned that mortgage borrowers will be hit by a 
Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/15/george-osborne-says-brexit-will-drive-up-interest-rates>
 if the Bank of England has to act to defend sterling. Commentators have 
suggested that a plunge in the currency will force the Bank to raise base rate, 
and in turn mortgage rates will rise.


 For now though, the message to existing borrowers is that they can switch 
deals to make savings. Research by legal firm LMS found that more than half of 
people who remortgaged in May moved on to a better interest rate. A third of 
remortgagers reduced their monthly outgoings, while others increased their 
borrowing or shortened their borrowing term.

Andy Knee, chief executive of LMS, said increased competition between lenders, 
record low rates and rising house prices provided a setting “ripe for 
remortgaging”.

“It is clear that many savvy borrowers are taking advantage of the current 
climate and we expect activity to maintain its momentum,” Knee said. “With an 
uncertain economic climate, knowing what your mortgage payment will be for five 
years is a very seductive offering for many remortgagers.”
 