
Economists campaigning for Britain to leave the European Union have accused the
Treasury 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/hm-treasury-analysis-the-long-term-economic-impact-of-eu-membership-and-the-alternatives>
 and international institutions of “groupthink” in a report that says growth 
would be boosted if all trade barriers were removed after a leave vote in this 
month’s referendum.

The group Economists for Brexit (EfB) said consumers and businesses would 
benefit from lower prices once EU-imposed tariffs were removed and dismissed 
predictions that the UK would be plunged into immediate recession if the remain 
campaign lost on 23 June.

“Groupthink, political collusion and bizarre assumptions have combined to see 
the economic models of the Treasury and international institutions provide 
dangerously inaccurate results to the public,” the group said.

ProfPatrick Minford said all the studies showing that leaving the EU would 
have detrimental consequences for the economy were based on the “same flawed 
model” and the “same damaging assumptions”.

Minford said that instead of trying to negotiate access to the Euroepan single 
market, a post-Brexit Britain should opt to remove all barriers to imports.

The move, Minford added, would lead to cheaper food, less expensive 
manufactured goods and stronger growth, but his admission that UK firms would 
have to pay tariffs on exports to the single market brought criticism from the 
former chancellorAlistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling>, who is campaigning for 
a remain vote.

“In recent weeks, there has been a relentless stream of output from modelling 
groups on the topic of Brexit – all of it negative. This has included long-term 
and short-term reports from not merely the Treasury but also the Centre for 
Economic Performance at the LSE, PWC, OxfordEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>, the National Institute for 
Economic and Social Research, the OECD and the IMF,” Minford said.

“The common element in the consensus outside Economists for Brexit is that 
after Brexit, under the World Trade Organisation option, the UK continues to 
maintain protectionist tariffs and other trade barriers against the rest of the 
world, including the EU. By contrast, EfB assumes unilateral free trade after 
leaving the EU.

“What has emerged from considering all these approaches used by different 
modelling groups is that they all assume post-Brexit, the pursuit of 
protectionist policies on imports by the UK. This reduction of the scope of 
free trade predictably would damage UK output and productivity whatever 
methodology is used.”

Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, 
said last month that a vote leave the EU would have “pretty bad to very, very 
bad” consequences <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-36284200> for the UK, but 
Minford said the IMF and other forecasting bodies would get a completely 
different response if they put in different assumptions.


“The key difference in EfB is the use of the unilateral free trade assumption 
under which Brexit is a move towards free trade,” Minford said.

Such a move would provide a growth boost of 4% of GDP within five years and 
help the UK emerge unscathed from the immediate post-referendum period. “It 
also enables the UK to be strong in negotiations and take control of its own 
policy environment, independently of any actions by our EU neighbours. This in 
turn closes down short-term policy uncertainty, avoiding the ad hoc rises in 
credit and other financial costs.”

Minford took issue with the chancellor, George Osborne, for dubbing those 
campaigning to leave the EU aseconomically illiterate. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/george-osborne-brexit-campaigners-case-is-economically-illiterate>
 “Osborne is the one who is economically illiterate here,” Minford said.

Responding to Minford’s comments, Darling said: “The leave campaign have today 
admitted leaving would mean higher prices and devastation for UK industries.

 “After weeks of expert warnings, the truth has now been exposed. Families’ 
incomes, British businesses and our financial stability would all be hit if 
Britain leaves the EU’s single market. Leaving would be a leap in to the dark 
that Britain cannot afford to make.”



 