
Alejandro Jodorowsky In Conversation
London

An oft-dropped name in cult cinema circles, Jodorowsky has, unlike his few 
peers, retained much of his mystery. Due to legal wranglings, his best films 
have remained unseen for decades. He's also seen several ambitious projects 
bite the dust - notably his "recreation" of Frank Herbert's Dune, designed by 
HR Giger and Moebius, starring Salvador Dali and Mick Jagger with a score by 
Pink Floyd. As a result we've been robbed of his movie career as much as he 
has, but with new prints of his classics El Topo and The Holy Mountain now upon 
us, he's ripe for discovery by a new generation - his films are too unusual to 
date. Jodorowsky remains a cheerful individual and he's always eager to impart 
the knowledge he's garnered on a dazzlingly wide variety of arcane subjects. 
Miss this event and you may well end up regretting it for the rest of your life.

· BFI Southbank, SE1, Fri 13

New Cinemas Of The Arab World
Edinburgh, Manchester

Film seasons like this are the only real way to get an insight into the varied 
psyche of the Arab world - this event collects films from eight Arab countries. 
These Girls offers heart-rending tales of youngsters fending for themselves on 
the streets of Cairo; WWW: What A Wonderful World weaves a complex tale full of 
unexpected turns around its central hitman character in Morocco. Lebanese 
vampire movie, The Last Man, has more to do with rich symbolism than simple 
blood-letting, while Tunisian film Making Off places religious extremism within 
an easily recognisable youth context. VHS - Kahloucha is a rousing and often 
hilarious documentary about an amateur Syrian action-movie director who unites 
his community in making such films as Tarzan Of The Arabs.

· Edinburgh Filmhouse, to Mon 9; Manchester Cornerhouse, Apr 15 to Apr 22

Heroic Grace
London

Brutality and elegance in equal measure, with another dip into the fathomless 
depths of Chinese martial arts flicks. The films deal with feudal history, 
fables, supernatural tales - anything really that gives the protagonists the 
flimsiest excuse to bear arms and slice their way through the opposition at the 
drop of a hat. Most hail from the pre-CGI 1970s when the rest of the world was 
delivering much duller action movies. These gems are part of the move from 
swordplay to the unarmed combat of Bruce Lee and Jackie Chan. Needless to say, 
your life will be considerably less complete if you never see The New One-Armed 
Swordsman, Dirty Ho, King Boxer, The Deaf And Mute Heroine and The Boxer From 
Shantung.

· BFI Southbank, SE1, to Apr 29

The Woman Next Door + Q&A With Fanny Ardant 
London

Ardant came to prominence with her impressive turn in The Woman Next Door, a 
typical French tale of simmering, obsessive love and François Truffaut's 
penultimate film. While her career with Truffaut was cut tragically short - the 
pair did enjoy an offscreen relationship though that produced a daughter - 
Ardant has gone on to become a fixture in French cinema. She's been a 
permanently in-demand actress for a slew of great directors, including Franco 
Zeffirelli and François Ozon, even working with Roman Polanski in the theatre. 
Unlike peers, such as Catherine Denueve, Ardant has made few English language 
films - a notable appearance in Elizabeth notwithstanding - a factor which has 
no doubt held back her international fame. But to those with even a passing 
knowledge of French cinema, this evening's Q&A with such a key, as well as 
charming, figure will prove irresistible.

· Ciné Lumière, Institut Francais, SW7, Tue 10
 