
The 2014 annual Prison Reform Trust <http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/> 
writing competition attracted a record 624 entries from incarcerated men, women 
and children from prisons around the country. As one of the judges in the 
competition I am always pleased to see that, despite serious literacy issues 
among prisoners and the ever-diminishing opportunities to take part in creative 
activities, increasing numbers of people are still able and enthusiastic enough 
to put pen to paper to try to have their voices heard.

I know from my own experience how important writing can be to the prisoner. 
Constantly living inside your head with thoughts that torment and exhaust, 
writing allows you live outside your head a little and to get a more objective 
perspective on your situation. Thoughts become words on paper. Memories and 
dreams become poems and narratives which you can form and fashion and upon 
which you can build and reflect. This year’s short story winner Every Passing 
Moment written by Danny, encapsulates this perfectly. “Every passing moment is 
another chance to start turning your life around,” says one of Danny’s 
characters, who could be speaking to the entire prisoner population when he 
adds, “Use your present wisely, you’re painting your future with it.”

The fact is writing in prison can raise a crushed spirit and reignite embers 
of hope – and might just help you to get to where you want to be – and more 
importantly help you to become who you really want to be.

Juliet Lyon, director of the Trust, has no doubts about the value of the 
writing competition given the government’s present stand on prisons. “A 
ramped-up political emphasis on punishment rather than real rehabilitation, and 
the introduction of a raft of mean and petty restrictions makes it more 
important than ever,” she says. “The writing completion offers a rare 
opportunity to express yourself and maintain your identity in a bleak, sparsely 
staffed institution increasingly devoid of meaning and purpose.”

The three categories in the competition, sponsored by the Band Trust 
<http://www.bandtrust.co.uk/2.html>, were: Short Story, judged by novelist 
Rachel Billington and Warhorse author Michael Morpurgo; Rap/Lyric/Poem, judged 
by actor Femi Oyeniran and rap star Kingslee “Akala” Daley and Comment, judged 
by myself and MP Chris Mullin. Each offered a wide scope of possibilities for 
entrants – and the entries always provide a strong flavour of the current state 
of the prison system. One of my favourites was a short comment article by a 
17-year-old serving time in a young offenders institution who wrote about the 
impact of the justice secretary’s decision to have televisions in YOI’s turned 
off at 10.30pm. “The punishment is to be in prison. To lose your freedom and be 
behind a locked door at night,” he writes. “Sometimes negative thoughts can 
creep inside your head, or other people won’t stop shouting out their windows. 
The only thing you have to distract you is your TV in your cell, it’s your best 
friend and now someone who sits behind a desk and has most likely never worked 
in a prison has made this decision. Nothing will be gained, but plenty will be 
lost.” For this insightful piece, Chris Mullin and I awarded the boy a highly 
commended.

Invoking the memory of one of the country’s greatest prisoner writers, Michael 
Morpugo explains his interest in being a judge in the competition. “I read a 
long time ago The Ballad of Reading Gaol by Oscar Wilde, and remember thinking 
that to him then the most precious thing he could have wanted would have been 
pen and paper. To be able to write, to be encouraged to write, when a prisoner 
is so isolated from the world outside, when so much has gone wrong in life, for 
whatever reason, is important, for so much of writing is communicating. And to 
communicate is to feel human, is to feel part of the world, a way of finding 
your voice, of making contact with the world outside. This opportunity of being 
able to contribute to the PRT writing competition is important to the growth of 
self-worth and self-confidence during dark and difficult times, as vital today 
as pen and paper were to Oscar Wilde in his cell at Reading Gaol all those 
years ago.”

Winning poem: A Walk Along the Water, by Adam


As we walk in the wet sand
we connect with the past,
the present, the future, one
step ahead, footsteps
left behind.
We drift into forbidden sections
of our mind.

We feel the water run through
our toes like time slipping
by, relentless, aimless and
non-committal to the ease of 
life, no contest to the labels
placed upon us by illegal
liberal litigation.

Our hands tightly holding onto
each other like the consequences
of the lack of interest in
each other’s feelings, more
in tune with the smell of
salt in the air
arrogant and self-satisfying 
interest of our own indulgence
clinging to what is, was,
or can be.

Our journey continues along
the beach, trying to
reconnect with the sands of 
time.

The once deep blue ocean now 
tainted, brown and filthy
polluted with the sewage from
past conquests, victorious
in the loss of purity and
innocence.

We reach our depth of deep
depravity, the realisation that
we are unable to stand
so deep, we kick continuously
against the tide of time 
and age that comes with
waves of salty realisation 
that with each blast of
cold salty water a
residue is left in the 
corner of our eyes,
the skin withering, wrinkling
with age and experience.

How will this journey
end, will we run out of
sand, like the time we
will want to spend in
each other’s arms,
wasting our breath in
deep conversation like the sea
breeze passing you by by sending
chills and thrills like a 
gentle touch to your lips
with each unspoken word.
 