
When I agreed to speak at the Festival of Dangerous Ideas 
<http://fodi.sydneyoperahouse.com/>, on this weekend at the Sydney Opera House, 
it was with some reservations. I wondered if my idea – that prisoner 
rehabilitation should be a primary concern of any advanced society’s prison 
system – could really be thought of as dangerous at all. A much more fearful 
notion to my mind is the alternative: locking people up and doing relatively 
little to enable them to address the failings that led them through the 
prison gates in the first place. That way people get out of jail after serving 
their time and almost inevitably commit further crimes, create more victims and 
cost the state and society obscene amounts of public money.

For the past two decades that is what has been happening on the whole under 
the British system. Successive governments have hammered the “tough on crime” 
agenda which has led to record prisoner numbers and mass over-crowding, while 
year on year resources available to those responsible for running the prison 
system have been cut and spread thinner and thinner. It’s no wonder then that 
almost half of the 80,000 adults who leave prison each year are once again 
convicted within 12 months of release. For young people aged 18-20 the figure is
nearer to 60% <>, and more than 70% for children aged 10-17.

The national audit office has calculated the financial cost of re-offending 
annually to be in the region of between£9 and £11bn 
<http://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2010/03/0910431.pdf>. The reasons why 
re-offending rates are so consistently high are clearly defined in the recently 
published annual report by HM Prisons Inspector Nick Hardwick, who details 
prisoners spending too long in their cellswith nothing constructive to do 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/news/press-releases/hmi-prisons/cracks-beginning-to-show,-warns-chief-inspector-of-prisons>
. He says than in the 12 months since justice minister Chris Grayling took 
office, the quality and quantity of “purposeful activity” across the prison 
estate has “plummeted” and describes his findings across the prison estate as 
“the worst outcome for six years.”

Ministerial complacency, public apathy and a popular media that jumps on 
progressive and innovative proposals for prisoners with “soft on crime” banner 
headlines have all collaborated in creating this on-going crisis. Re-offending 
figures for prisoners 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/4102.0Main+Features10Mar+2010%20>
 released from Australian prisons are similar to those of the UK, with the same 
issues affecting progress. 

I hope what I have to share at this year’s festival will have some resonance. 
I guess the really dangerous element to my idea is that for positive changes to 
happen in prison and beyond, attitudes towards prisoners need to change. For 
victims of crime, especially of the most serious crimes – crimes that have 
devastated families and caused immeasurable pain and grief – this is not going 
to be easy or maybe even possible. But however unpalatable it may be to some, 
the fact is prisoners are still people, and if we want them to have any respect 
for society when they get out we need to be mindful of their dignity as fellow 
human beings.

Many people die in prison. Each year in the UK, six or seven prisoners a month 
take their own lives, sometimes more. A similar number die of "natural causes". 
Some are murdered, and some have their deaths categorised as “unexplained". But 
the vast majority will one day be released and will be somebody’s neighbour. 
This is not an argument for sympathy or compassion for prisoners, and neither 
is it an appeal for prisoners’ rights. But so long as any society has a system 
that lets people out of prison it is in everyone’s interests that they are 
let out in better shape than they were when they went in.

If they need education, let them have it. If they need work skills, give them 
training. If they have behavioural or psychological problems or have issues 
with drug or alcohol abuse, provide the necessary treatments. And if they are 
mentally ill, don’t put them in prison in the first place. These simple 
measures are all it would take to bring a better public safety and cost 
efficient outcome by ensuring that more people come out of prison able, willing 
and motivated to be good neighbours.

Is that really such a dangerous idea?

• Erwin James will speak at the Festival of Dangerous Idea 
<http://fodi.sydneyoperahouse.com/> this weekend. 
 