


Supportive relationships and rehabilitation are being put at risk by the ban 
on parcels and books being sent to prisoners, says areport by the Prison Reform 
Trust (PRT) <http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/ProjectsResearch>.

Letters to the trust's advice and information service indicate that the 
quality of prison life has deteriorated sincethe ban, which also covers writing 
materials and stamps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/31/prison-books-row-justice-secretary-could-face-legal-action-lawyer>
. It is one of a number of significant changes introduced last November to the 
Incentives and Earned Privileges scheme (IEP).

The scheme offered three levels of regime: basic, standard and enhanced. It 
was designed to incentivise good behaviour by rewarding prisoners for engaging 
constructively. On reaching the enhanced level, prisoners were allowed to wear 
their own clothes, have extra visits, more time out of the cell and in-cell 
television. Under the new regime, prisoners must do something more for the 
prison community than just demonstrate "good behaviour". But opportunities to 
engage in so-called "purposeful activity" are "plummeting", according to the
2012-13 chief inspector of prison's annual report 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/publications/corporate-reports/hmi-prisons/hm-inspectorate-prisons-annual-report-2012-13.pdf>
. Consequently, many who had enhanced status, some for years, have now been 
downgraded. The parcel ban applies to all sentenced prisoners so even those who 
are doing everything right are being penalised.

An imprisoned father highlights the strain a lack of access to writing 
materials is having on family ties: "It [the new IEP scheme] has totally 
destroyed my relationship, almost to the point of no return," he writes to the 
trust. "I have a five-year-old daughter and a partner who is finding it 
difficult as a single parent out there on her own on benefits. We like to 
exchange letters a lot so we can try and maintain what little relationship we 
have left … my daughter cries when she doesn't get a picture or letter off me 
and takes it to heart and actually says: 'doesn't my daddy love me anymore?' I 
know that if I lose my family because of this lack of contact, it will be 
straight back to square one and I know I will go straight back to crime as I'll 
have nothing left to lose."

Another prisoner, who was about to start a distance learning course, explains: 
"A friend of mine has done all these courses and is fully qualified and was 
going to send me all his books but we can't have books sent in any more."

Juliet Lyon, the PRT director, is calling for a return to a policy of 
"fairness and decency in prison regimes" . She says: "The legitimacy of prison 
regimes risks being undermined by low staffing levels, new, mean and petty 
restrictions and a developing culture of punishment without purpose."

Defending the new regime, Chris Grayling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>, the justice secretary, 
has said: "The changes we have made to the incentive scheme … are about making 
them [prisoners] work towards their rehabilitation."

As a prisoner for 20 years, I recall only too well that our prisons have 
always been places of deprivation and misery with the odd pocket of hope. 
The current policy of impoverishing further already poor regimes is foolhardy 
and dangerous, and smacks of irrational political vindictiveness. Allowing a 
little kindness in prison can go a long way. During my time there, I often 
witnessed how, for many prisoners receiving the occasional small parcel from 
the outside was all that was needed to keep hope alive.

Grayling says that the parcel ban is "to prevent illicit items, such as drugs, 
extremist materials, mobile phones, sim cards and pornography getting into our 
prisons."

But this was never an issue when I was in prison, as Steve Gillan, general 
secretary of the Prison Officers Association confirms, "For decades prison 
officers have dealt with parcels. They searched them. The reality is, it was 
never a problem."

And the banning of books makes me want to weep. Glancing at my bookshelf 
today, almost 10 years after I was released, I see books that people who cared 
sent to me in jail: Prisoners of Honour by David L Lewis, The Upstart by Piers 
Paul Read, The Grass Arena by John Healy, Soledad Brother by George Jackson, 
the Catastrophist by Ronan Bennett – these books became my best friends on 
those wings and landings, and remind me of how much a book sent to a prisoner 
can nourish the heart as well as the mind.

The justice secretary would do well to remember that the punishment of prison 
is shame and loss of liberty. It really does not need to be any more than that.
 