
Today is a good day for the roughly 500 prisoners at Ramsey County 
correctional facility in St Paul, Minnesota. Today is an egg day. It’s just 
before 7am and the inmates are lining up in the mess hall for breakfast, which 
this morning features two boiled eggs as well as porridge, cold toast, coffee, 
orange juice and a carton of milk.


Andre Ragland, a 52-year-old drug addict from Chicago who has been in and out 
of Ramsey over the past 30 years, is excited. “Eggs are special,” he says as he 
sits down to tuck into his breakfast from a beige plastic tray in the 20 
minutes allotted to eat. “Today is going to be a good day.”

The soaring US prison and jail population – which has hit a record 2.2 million 
and is the highest per capita in the world – is putting a huge strain on state 
and federal budgets, costing more than $8.5bn a year. Wardens and prison 
managers are under intense pressure to cut costs across the board, including 
the food provided to inmates, some of whom are thought to be fed for less than 
$1.20 a day.

In many prisons across the US, inmates only rarely receive eggs, dairy or meat 
and fresh fruit and vegetables are sometimes banned altogether. Instead 
nutritionists are called into figure out ways of achieving states’ minimum 
calorie counts and vitamin and nutrient intakes via tubs of margarine and 
fortified mineral powders and supplements.

Being in prison is punishment enough, they don’t have to be tortured by bad 
food
Tom Roy, Minnesota’s commissioner for corrections 
Many prisons’ food service has been outsourced to private companies offering 
big cost savings and making big profits for their shareholders. One of the 
biggest, Philadelphia-based Aramark, a company with annual sales of $14.3bn, 
continues to serve up 380m meals a year as the sole food provider to more than 
600 prisons and other correctional institutions despite repeated fines over 
scandals including serving food tainted by maggots and rats.

While they have a long list of complaints about the food, which is prepared by 
teams of fellow prisoners, the inmates at Ramsey are luckier than most. 
Minnesota has brought its food service provision back in-house after years of 
outsourcing to the private sector and has committed to providing real food for 
inmates even if it costs more money.

“We don’t want to fill a bowl with a substance that might meet the calorie 
requirement and vitamins and minerals [the state requires], but has no appeal,” 
Tom Roy, Minnesota’s commissioner for corrections, said in an interview. “Being 
in prison is punishment enough, they don’t have to be tortured by bad food.”

Roy said he has been able to spend a little bit more than most other states as 
Minnesota has one of the lowest per capita incarceration rates in the country 
at less than 200 per 100,000 people compared to more than 800 per 100,000 in 
Louisiana, the state with the highest.

There is no nationally collected data on prison food spending, which is set at 
the state or individual prison level. Roy said Minnesota spends an average of 
just under $3 a day on food for its 10,000 prisoners. “That is on the high end, 
there are some states that do it for considerably less.”

How ramen became the unlikely new symbol of prison neglect | Chandra Bozelko
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/22/ramen-unlikely-new-symbol-of-prison-neglect>
Tim Thielman, a lieutenant at Ramsey and the president of the Association of 
Correctional Food Service Affiliates (ACFSA) which brings together prison 
officials and food providers for an annual conference taking place across town, 
said some jails feed prisoners for as little as $1.20 – the average cost of 
each meal at Ramsey.

Thielman, who has devoted his career to thinking about the food provided to 
prisoners, said spending a little bit more money on food can have a huge impact 
in improving prisoners’ mental and physical health and bringing down 
reoffending rates.

“A lot of people are still in the mentality of bread and water,” he said. “We 
are passed that in this country. A lot of people don’t understand the 
importance of taking care of inmates and giving them proper nutrition.

“Food service is one of the most important things in an institution. Inmates 
don’t have a lot of things to look forward to – they have their mail, their 
visits and their food. If any of those things aren’t right there will be a 
problem. If the quality of the food is really poor it can sure set things off.”


People don’t understand the importance of taking care of inmates and giving 
them proper nutrition
Tim Thielman, president of ACFSA 
Thielman said years of penny-pinching on food can be wiped out in minutes if a 
riot erupts over the quality of food. Riots have erupted at several prisons 
with Aramark-provided food leading the company to lose contracts in Michigan 
and Florida.

Aramark, which also supplies hospitals, schools and event arenas around the 
world, made a $236m profit last year, a 56% increase on 2014, on sales of 
$14.3bn. The company’s chief executive, Eric Foss, was paid $21m last year and 
$32.4m in 2014.

The prison nutritionist

When prisons have difficulty meeting the calorie and nutrient requirements on 
tight budgets, they have a nutritionist to call. Barbara Wakeen, owner and 
operator of Correctional Nutrition Consultants, has carved out a niche of 
helping prisons “find the most creative way to provide and meet nutrient needs” 
without spending more money. Her big secrets: margarine, beans and fortified 
baking powder.

“I’d like to see everybody get all of the food groups, but I know that in this 
environment it’s not always possible,” she said. “As a result we have all these 
wonderful fortified things, we’ve got fortified beverages, there’s fortified 
cake mixes and baking powders.”

The fortified products, which featured heavily at the ACFSA vendor showcase 
trade fair in Minneapolis, are generally designed for use in hospital patients 
having difficulty eating solids but producers have found a lucrative secondary 
market in correctional facilities. “We use [them] sort of for cost containment 
and in some case to prevent security issues [in cases where prisoners might use 
fruit as a weapon or to block toilets].”

Roy has a rule when he visits prisons – he calls it the Rule of Three. He 
talks to the prison administrator, a general prison staff member and at least 
one offender. “My icebreaker is always: ‘How’s the food today’?” he said.

Roy, who says he makes a point of hanging out in the mess hall and eats with 
the inmates occasionally, said the responses are “mixed”. “We do have some days 
when it’s pretty tasty, there are others when its school cafeteria food.”

If Roy had asked Ragland about this breakfast morning, he would have given him 
an “all right, but could do better” mark mainly because the prisoner who 
normally makes the porridge was off today.
 