
Independent schools in England want to offer 10,000 free places a year to 
children who would otherwise attend state schools, under a plan that would 
require tens of millions of pounds in government subsidies.


The Independent Schools Council, representing 1,200 private schools, says it 
couldprovide 10,000 means-tested places 
<http://www.isc.co.uk/media-enquiries/news-press-releases-statements/joint-funding-could-see-10-000-free-new-independent-school-places-every-year/>
 if the government pays an annual subsidy of £5,500 for each pupil – a figure 
similar to the per pupil funding state schools currently receive.


If the offer was fully taken up it would cost £50m a year in taxpayers’ 
subsidies, rising to £250m each year after five years.


The move would come close to recreating the assisted places scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/may/26/private-school-alienated-poor-pupils>
 – begun under Margaret Thatcher in 1980 and abolished by Tony Blair’s first 
government in 1997 – which gave paid for places at private schools for children 
whose families were unable to afford the fees.


Patrick Derham, the headmaster of Westminster school in London, said the ISC 
scheme offered “real social mobility”.

“This scheme, like so many in our schools, is not about choosing the brightest 
pupils but about providing genuine transformational opportunities for those who 
need them most,” Derham said.

“We all want all young people to flourish and to be authors of their own life 
stories.”

'Massively' improved state schools threaten private sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/05/massively-improved-state-schools-threaten-private-sector>
The plan is in the response from private schools to the government’s recent 
green paper on expanding the number of grammar schools, which threatens to 
strip charitable status from private schools that fail to help run or assist 
state schools.

Barnaby Lenon, the former Harrow headmaster who chairs the ISC, said the group 
first made the proposal to education secretary long before the green paper was 
published.

“It’s really got nothing to do with charitable status,” Lenon said.


The ISC said the plan would target children from families with lower income, 
and that the 10,000 places would be available across age groups and schools and 
awarded using “a range of assessment criteria”.


Lenon said the plan was fiscally neutral, since it would transfer funds the 
government would have spent on the pupil’s education in the state sector.

The proposal was dismissed by the National Union of Teachers. “A system in 
which public funds are used to support the admittance of a small proportion of 
pupils from low income backgrounds into private schools is a dangerous step 
towards a voucher system for education,” said Rosamund McNeil, the NUT’s head 
of education.

Day school fees at independent schools in England average about £13,000 a 
year, although that figure can rise to £18,000 around London.

The 1,200 ISC primary and secondary schools say they currently award 40,000 
means-tested bursaries worth £350m a year, but only 5,500 cover the full cost 
of fees.

Under the proposals, independent schools would also group together to 
co-sponsor new state-funded schools in one or more of the six educational “cold 
spots” in England identified by the Department for Education (DfE).

A DfE spokesperson said: “We welcome contributions to the consultation and 
will respond in due course.”

Labour politicians derided the move as resuscitating a failed policy, with the 
assisted places scheme largely dominated by middle-class children, and costing 
an estimated £800m while it was running.

Lucy Powell, the former shadow education secretary, said many private schools 
were unable to effectively manage state schools, with a half of state schools 
in formal partnerships classed as inadequate or requiring improvement by Ofsted.

“There are thousands of excellent state schools that are turning around 
failing schools. Ministers should look to these rather than fixating on 
independent and grammar schools as the silver bullets to school improvement. 
They are clearly not,” Powell said.

“It’s time for ministers to drop their gimmicks and focus on what really 
matters: enough excellent teachers in the classroom and proper resources for 
schools, things they are singularly failing to deliver.”

The Ofsted chief inspector, Michael Wilshaw, criticised the ISC’s proposal 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-38258454> as not going far enough. “I 
think they can do better than that and if I was government I would be asking 
them to do more as a quid pro quo for their tax privileges,” he told BBC Radio 
4.

The ISC countered that the move would be the equivalent of building 10 new 
state secondary schools, and represented a considerable saving for the 
government.

Independent schools have collaborated in opening new state schools, including 
a high-performing sixth form college, the London Academy of Excellence, in the 
borough of Newham.

The ISC offer comes as the government faces criticism over its efforts to open 
more selective state schools.

Research published by the Sutton Trust 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/researcharchive/gaps-in-grammar/> found pupils from 
white working-class backgrounds – the “just about managing” group not eligible 
for free school meals – were far less likely to win grammar school places than 
those from wealthier backgrounds.

“There is a strong indication that families on below-average earnings are not 
being helped by the current grammar school system,” the trust said.

The research showed that black children were also less likely to get places in 
grammar schools. “Today’s research raises concerns about the government’s plans 
to use new grammars as a vehicle for social mobility,” said the Sutton Trust’s 
chairman, Peter Lampl.






 