
Governments across the European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
have finally given the green light to a new deal on how consumer data must be 
transferred with the United States, ending months of delay caused by concern 
over US surveillance.

Privacy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> Shield, the new commercial 
data transfer pact, was provisionally agreed by the EU and the US in February 
and will come into effect on Tuesday.

The EU’s top court had struck down the previous data transfer agreement, Safe 
Harbour, on concerns about intrusive US surveillance – leaving companies, 
including Google,Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> and 
MasterCard, in legal limbo.

 Representatives of European Union member states mostly voted in favour of the 
EU-US Privacy Shield, but there were abstentions from Austria, Slovenia, 
Bulgaria and Croatia, sources said. Austria and Slovenia have voiced concerns 
that the pact does not go far enough to secure their citizens’ privacy.

 The new framework will underpin over $250bn of transatlantic trade in digital 
services annually by facilitating cross-border data transfers that are crucial 
to international business.

 “Today member states have given their strong support to the EU-US Privacy 
Shield, the renewed safe framework for transatlantic data flows,” Commission 
vice-president Andrus Ansip and justice commissioner Vera Jourova said in a 
statement.

 The Privacy Shield seeks to strengthen the protection of Europeans whose data 
is moved to US servers by giving EU citizens greater means to seek redress in 
case of disputes.

 For 15 years Safe Harbour allowed both US and European firms to bypass tough 
EU data transferral rules by stating they complied with European privacy 
standards when storing information on US servers.

 Cross-border data transfers by businesses include payroll and human resources 
information as well as lucrative data used for targeted online advertising, 
which is of particular importance to technology companies.

Industry group DIGITALEUROPE which represents Apple, Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, IBM and others, expressed 
relief at Friday’s vote, saying it would restore trust in data transfers 
between the EU and United States. “Our members are ready to implement the new 
framework and meet the compliance challenge that the strengthened provisions 
demand from companies,” said John Higgins, director general of the group.

TechUK, which represents 900 firms in the UK, described Privacy Shield as a 
“restoring a stable legal footing”. “The coming months will see much discussion 
on future options for the UK’s data environment in a post-Brexit world, today’s 
agreement underlines the importance of data flows to transatlantic trade,” said 
Charlotte Holloway, the group’s associate director of policy. “We urge 
policymakers to continue to keep front of mind that data and trade go hand in 
hand in today’s global economy.”

European parliament approves tougher data privacy rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/14/european-parliament-approve-tougher-data-privacy-rules>
 Brussels and Washington intensified negotiations to hammer out a replacement 
for Safe Harbour after the Court of Justice of the European Union in October 
declared it invalid because it did not sufficiently protect Europeans’ data 
from US snooping.

 Revelations three years ago from former US intelligence contractor Edward 
Snowden of mass US surveillance practices caused political outrage in Europe 
and stoked mistrust of big US tech companies.

 “It (the Privacy Shield) is fundamentally different from the old Safe 
Harbour: it imposes clear and strong obligations on companies handling the data 
and makes sure that these rules are followed and enforced in practice,” Ansip 
and Jourova said.

 The United States will create an ombudsman within the state department to 
field complaints from EU citizens about US spying and has ruled out 
indiscriminate mass surveillance of Europeans’ data.

 EU data protection authorities in April demanded that the framework be 
improved, citing concerns with the leeway they said it left for the United 
States to collect data in bulk.
 