
The procurement department at GNM was formed in July 2010 to deliver a 
strategic sourcing approach, and the last financial year was spent developing 
policies and procedures.

A significant step to embedding sustainable thinking into procurement was the 
board-approved mandate, of which sustainability is key thread. This requires 
the majority of our supplier spend to be strategically reviewed by the central 
procurement team.

By having a centralised department overseeing purchasing, GNM can ensure it 
generates real value for the business, society and the planet.

Paper procurement for our newspapers and magazines is our single largest 
third-party spend and highly significant from a sustainability risk 
perspective. We have in place a comprehensive sustainable paper-sourcing 
policy, and we work very closely with our suppliers to monitor sustainability 
performance.

This is achieved through the collection of real-time data that allows GNM to 
see on a monthly basis how much paper we are buying, the percentages of 
recycled and virgin fibre being used, certification levels, and also carbon 
intensities.

For more details on our performance against our paper key performance 
indicators please visit thepaper section 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/sustainability-report-2012-operations-paper>
.

We are now beginning to pay more attention to the managing and reporting of 
the sustainability credentials of our key suppliers in the digital field.

This is already proving to be challenging for a number of reasons. One is that 
it is difficult to get quality information from suppliers about the 
environmental footprint and social justice aspects of the digital products and 
services they sell.

Beyond this, we lack in digital what we have in paper purchasing: a single 
expert who understands the newsprint market inside out. Also, the world of 
digital is more diverse and complex and therefore harder to understand.
This is a problem shared by most companies, and GNM has been able to make 
progress thanks to the innovative digital footprint research we have been 
supporting.

Nevertheless, this difficulty in relating to digital impacts still makes it 
difficult to fully engage senior managers in discussions, especially during 
periods of structural change.

Where we need to make improvements is in creating a clear framework and 
language to allow the organisation to systematically consider risks and 
opportunities when making decisions.

We also need to clarify the boundaries of our responsibility. Is it the 
computer hardware makers, the networks, or the consumer who logs on to our 
website?

If the answer is "all of the above", we need to understand better how to 
account for these and separate them out in a meaningful way.

Internal training

To increase our knowledge of sustainable procurement in general, a number of 
workshops were held for staff.

Working with the internal procurement team, the focus was on looking at how 
sustainable thinking could identify broader and more complex risks and 
opportunities that may affect costs over the length of the contract.

Examples from a range of organisations was used to show how sustainable 
procurement provides business resilience through better control, awareness and 
traceability throughout the value chain.

The Guardian Offers/Revenue team, which sells products ranging from travel to 
books, have been keen to develop a sustainability policy for their customers 
and suppliers as part of their commitment to openness and transparency.

Workshops for this department focused on helping them to identify key risks 
within their supply chain that should be controlled through a sustainability 
policy and appropriate due diligence. Thetravel policy 
<http://www.guardiancottages.co.uk/sites/cottageselection/partners/gdn/pages//popups/GHOSustainablePolicy.pdf>
 is now live.

Tendering and contracts

GNM does not have the budgets or buying power of a large multinational 
company, so we must use the contracting and post-contracting stage of the 
process to influence service delivery and sustainability.

We recognise that smaller suppliers can find it difficult to provide relevant 
information, so we are looking to develop flexibility in the sustainability 
questions we ask to avoid bidders being put off. The questions are being 
developed around how our demands for services and products drive emissions, 
consumption and ethical working practices.

Our tendering templates are flexible, consisting of a core template that is 
agreed and then modified to fit the needs of the business, the specific risks 
associated with the purchase and maximising value from the suppliers.

Also, more specific questions have been developed regarding what the supplier 
will do to help reduce our impacts and meet targets, rather than whether they 
simply have a CSR policy or not.

Even though GNM is going through a period of radical change, we remain 
dedicated to developing sustainable supply chains. To help ensure this, the 
sustainability team advises the procurement department during each tender 
process.

In the past, the procurement department ensured that sustainability was 
integrated into purchasing, but we found that a core weakness was that 
individual departments often did not follow up and ensure that our suppliers 
met their original commitments.

To ensure this does not continue, we have put specific targets into contracts. 
In some cases, this means implementing sustainability goals at the outset where 
perhaps previously they did not exist.

An excellent example of this in action was the 2011 tender for the 
consolidation of travel services. GNM's sustainability department was involved 
from the outset, identifying the appropriate sustainability areas for potential 
suppliers to cover during the tender drafting.

Shortlisted suppliers were asked to demonstrate how they would support GNM in 
reducing travel emissions as well as costs. The responses were assessed by 
GNM's environmental and sustainability manager Christopher Hodgson, who also 
attended the tender interviews.

The winning contractor was asked to: 


 * Provide appropriate data to enable GNM to calculate and monitor its full 
carbon and environmental footprint 
 * Provide analysis of this data to understand patterns, identify 
irregularities and suggest opportunities for improvements 
 * Assist the setting and delivering of travel sustainability targets that 
support and align with GNM sustainability objectives and targets 
 * Propose a mechanism for travellers and travel bookers to determine or 
identify the true cost of travel decision and alternatives 
 * Encourage travel bookers to book a sustainable travel option and identify 
opportunities to reduce travel 
Progress on actually delivering on these goals has so far been mixed. While we 
now have full carbon reporting for our travel, the more innovative elements 
have not yet been addressed and will require more focus from GNM.
 