
The media is powerful. It informs public opinion and influences policy. But 
while the world has never been more connected, millions of voices worldwide 
still go unheard as a result of poverty, social exclusion and political 
repression. Without the power to share information, some of the most critical 
news falls under the radar. Corruption and abuse go unreported, successes and 
innovation go unnoticed and the opinions of the majority remain undocumented.

While India has a strong and active civil society, the media is still driven 
by the educated middle to upper classes. Those who are most vulnerable in 
society are also the least likely to report on their experiences. Slum 
dwellers, those from rural communities particularly women and girls, those with 
disabilities, and those from marginalised castes within Indian society are 
overlooked as sources, contributors and reporters.

As one Delhi-based blogger said: "It is easy to find instances of media 
manufactured struggles in India if the victims are elite, educated or middle 
class but to say the same for this very media taking up the causes of the 
underprivileged, oppressed or rural masses is difficult. No wonder there is 
hardly any coverage of Vidharba farmer suicides or of atrocities on Dalits 
across the length and breadth of the country."

By 2020 India will have the biggest internet market in the world, with 600 
million online users. However, the people generating and consuming online news 
and digital information will be those who already have access to disposable 
income, already enjoy a relative level of social freedom and live within reach 
of a sufficiently developed infrastructure to allow for connectivity.

According to the Internet and Mobile Association of India, only 2% of rural 
India currently has access to the web and around 18% of those rural internet 
users have to walk more than 10km to access the web. However, approximately one 
in two rural households now has a mobile phone. India has one of the lowest 
call tariffs in the world and NGO and government authorities are already 
drawing on the high mobile prevalence to deliver education, health advice and 
mass development messages to rural districts.

Mobile can also offer a cheap and easy means for traditionally voiceless 
communities to share news that has an impact on their daily lives. At a time 
when media budgets are being cut and overseas staff reduced, mobile is a great 
way to source information from within hard-to-reach groups, track stories as 
they develop and gather fresh, diverse opinions.

With that in mind, the Guardian has teamed up with Radar, a communication 
rights organisation that harnesses the power of mobile as a tool for diverse 
citizen reporting in areas with few resources and low connectivity. Instead of 
introducing new hi-tech equipment, Radar trains people to report using whatever 
they have in their pockets, from old Nokias to smart phones.

In the run up to the Big Tent Activate Summit in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/mar/05/guardian-google-activate-india-delhi>
, Radar are holding a series of practical training workshops for 
representatives from the most under-represented communities in Indian society 
including Dalit women, rural farming communities, youth with disabilities and 
female slum dwellers. The workshops, to be held in Delhi and Himachal Pradesh, 
will train people on how to capture news and opinion via mobile and share that 
by text message.

All trainees gain a basic grasp of reporting principles and information 
verification as well as a chance to develop story ideas. Radar runs a central 
hub from London that receives these SMS reports and subjects them to a swift 
yet rigorous editorial process before broadcasting them online and alerting 
international editors.

The Guardian Foundation and Yasir Mirza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/yasir-mirza>, Head of Diversity 
and Inclusion at Guardian News and Media, are partnering with Radar in order to 
help bring these unheard and marginalised voices to the event. 

Yasir says: "Tapping into the wealth of diverse and marginalised voices out 
there is central to what we are trying to achieve with truly ground breaking 
and open journalism. It's easy to talk, but we need to get out there 
and provide the means and tools for these voices to be heard, drawing them in 
using our platforms and influence."

During the summit, Radar will be running the hub from within Big Tent Activate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate> so that these SMS reports 
can be broadcast direct to the conference from a screen in the networking area. 
Newly trained citizen reporters will be sitting in sessions and sharing live 
information with the Radar India network via SMS. There will be a focus on the 
social, cultural and economic impact of the digital divide on India's 
marginalised communities and solutions for access and inclusion.

In the lunch break, five of the Delhi-based citizen reporters will have the 
chance to pitch a story idea to a panel of Guardian and Indian national 
editors. In a Dragon's Den style, each editor will be encouraged to 'invest' 
their interest in the development of one of those stories in partnership with 
Radar.

In keeping with the Guardian's aim to promote diversity and open journalism, 
this project uses the most simple mobile technology to bring together community 
leaders, activists and citizens from the most marginalised groups within Indian 
society and ensure their active engagement with this high-level summit.

Libby Powell is founding director of Radar <https://twitter.com/OnOurRadar>, a 
communication rights organisation training and promoting citizen reporters and 
media professionals in low resource settings.

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership to theGuardian Media Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/> – this content is brought to you by 
Guardian Professional.
 