
Prominent figures from the football world, including a former manager 
described as still working “in the senior echelons” of the sport, have 
repeatedly been named by some of the players alleging sexual abuse in the 
escalating crisis that has also led to new claims about a number of clubs, not 
justChelsea, paying off victims with hush money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/gary-johnson-says-chelsea-paid-him-50000-for-silence-about-abuse>
.

Lawyers representing a new independent body, the Offside Trust, that has been 
set up to help the victims and their families described it as “extremely 
worrying” that, only three days after its formation, there had already been 
numerous first-hand accounts from former and current professional footballers 
directly implicating people who were still involved in the game and “need 
further investigation”.

Football League warned all its clubs about Bob Higgins in 1989
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/football-league-warned-all-its-clubs-about-bob-higgins-in-1989>
Other victims have informed the trust they were offered large sums of money as 
long as they signed confidentiality agreements to prevent the clubs suffering 
damaging publicity, in the same way that Chelsea paid £50,000 to their former 
player Gary Johnson in an attempt to stifle the allegations against Eddie 
Heath, a scout for the London club in the 1970s.

Chelsea issued an apology over the weekend but Ed Smethurst, representing Andy 
Woodward and Steve Walters, the two players whose interviews in the Guardian 
opened what the Football Association chairman, Greg Clarke, has described as 
the biggest crisis he has ever known within the sport, said there was already 
clear information that other clubs had been part of similar cover-ups. Asked 
how many clubs he was referring to, he said it was “less than five” but also 
reiterated that the trust had been operating only since Friday. “It is 
unfurling as we speak,” he said.

Smethurst went on to say there were grave misgivings about the FA’s 
independent inquiry, pointing out that “a lot of people have come forward who 
have said they don’t have trust the establishment”, but his most alarming 
revelation was that some of the people identified as offenders were still 
working within the sport.

“There are certain names who do come up repeatedly,” he said. “I’m not going 
to divulge specifics but there are absolutely people in the game today who 
victims have spoken to me about. There are specific allegations against 
specific individuals, many of whom have been rumoured to be involved for a very 
long period of time, some of whom still work in the senior echelons of 
football, and it’s extremely worrying.”

Smethurst described it as a “tidal wave” of calls since Woodward spoke to this 
newspaper and was asked about the fact that some of the coaches who had 
previously been under suspicion were still working in football. “Is it a 
surprise? No. There are other individuals in the game, past and present, where 
further action could, and should, have been taken,” he said.

The latest police figures, issued last Thursday, stated that around 350 
alleged victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/fa-punish-clubs-cover-up-martin-glenn>
 had made official complaints. Thoseinvolved 55 clubs, at professional and 
amateur level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/football-abuse-scandal-grows-55-clubs-now-involved>
, but the players who have driven the campaign are aware of many others with 
similar stories who do not want to go public.

Football is listening on child abuse but took far too long to do so | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/football-child-abuse-dispatches>
“I’ve had about 50 different ex-players who have contacted me to say things 
have happened to them,” Walters said. “Andy has had a similar number of calls. 
Some have told me they’ve been groomed, others had a certain level of abuse, 
some are horrific stories. It’s never-ending. I had one call on the way here 
today. There are so many more. I’m getting phone calls every day. You wont 
believe how many are still to come out.”

Walters, sitting next to Woodward at an emotional press conference to launch 
the trust, added: “Fair play to Chelsea – it’s too little, too late, but they 
have put their apology out there in a sincere manner. Other clubs, though, have 
got their heads in the sand. These children trusted them and the clubs have let 
everyone down.”

Two individuals who previously worked together at the same club have 
repeatedly been named – one no longer in employment – and Smethurst said some 
of the players making complaints felt unable to waive their anonymity. “Unless 
you’ve been a victim of something like this I think it’s very difficult for an 
outsider to understand. Some want to talk about it, but don’t necessarily want 
the furore. They might not want their parents or children to know, or they 
might think that there is nothing they can do about it, or that it might be 
swept under the carpet.”

The FA has appointed a QC, Kate Gallafent, to oversee its investigation but 
some of the victims have questioned whether it can truly be considered an 
independent inquiry if the governing body is paying the person investigating 
its own role.

Smethurst, working on a pro bono basis for the trust as managing director of 
the Manchester firm Prosperity Law, made the same point and encouraged other 
players to come forward even if they had agreed payments from clubs to remain 
silent.

“Certainly, allegations have been made by victims that confidentiality clauses 
have been used in relation to other clubs,” he said. “It does happen. I can’t 
speak about what Chelsea’s lawyers advised them but, from a campaigning 
perspective, we think some things are so important – the protection of children 
for one – that clubs should not hush these things up and tie victims up in 
confidentiality.

“There is a wider perspective here about the protection of the victim and 
stopping these things from reoccurring. It’s often the case if there is an 
abuser that there are other people who know, or who have turned a blind eye, so 
I would say even if the person is dead I would not encourage the use of 
confidentiality.”
 