
One of the world’s wealthiest men has said he is protected by diplomatic 
immunity from claims that he is responsible for the kidnap and torture of a 
British citizen, a court has heard. Lawyers for Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin 
Jaber al-Thani, the former prime minister ofQatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar>, said he could not be prosecuted in a 
compensation claim brought by Fawaz al-Attiya, a former official spokesman of 
the emirate, who says Qatari agents acting on behalf of Thani falsely 
imprisoned him in Doha for 15 months and subjected him to conditions amounting 
to torture.

 “Mr al-Attiya’s extremely serious allegations are, without exception, a 
combination of distortion, exaggeration and wholesale fabrication,” the lawyers 
said.

They were responding in the high court to a claim for “hundreds of millions of 
pounds” from Attiya, whose legal team said Thani had ordered his detention for 
“15 months, including 8 months held incommunicado, in solitary confinement 
[and] denied contact with his family or with the outside world, subject to 
threats and psychological abuse”.


Thani, sometimes known as HBJ, stood down as Qatar’s prime minister and 
foreign minister in June 2013. He has appeared on the UK’s Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office diplomatic list as a “minister-counsellor” serving in the 
London embassy and has remained on the diplomatic list.

Monica Carss-Frisk QC, who is acting for HBJ, said the FCO had confirmed that 
his appointment began on 6 November 2013. As a minister-counsellor he would 
have legal immunity under the Vienna convention of 1961. Attiya’s legal team 
say there is no evidence HBJ took up his role in London, and argue that he is a 
“private individual, and had been taking time for himself, his family and his 
private businesses” since ceasing to be prime minister of Qatar. They also 
claim that HBJ has breached the terms of the Vienna convention by engaging in 
commercial activity for personal profit.

In court papers, Attiya claims that HBJ – worth an estimated £8bn – controls 
leading London hotels. It is claimed that he owns the Intercontinental hotel in 
London’s Park Lane, and effectively controls the Hyatt Regency. In May 2015, it 
is argued, he took a controlling stake in the company that owns Claridge’s 
hotel, the Connaught and the Berkeley.

 Carss-Frisk said that the only relevant point was that Qatar had freely 
appointed the billionaire as a diplomat and that this had been confirmed by the 
FCO, which had been made aware of claims of business activity.

She said it was wrong to suggest that HBJ could not claim diplomatic immunity 
under the Vienna convention just because one of its articles forbids commercial 
activity for personal profit. She argued that the court should speak with one 
voice with the government “on such a matter of international relations”.


Justice Blake said: “Hypothetically, if a court were to conclude a sham 
diplomatic appointment was not an appointment, then that would be a finding in 
law.” Carss-Frisk said there would have to “substantial wrong” by a diplomat 
for him or her to lose their diplomatic status.


The case continues.
 