
“Everyone knows I don’t like the fucking Chinese!!” she bellows, shattering 
the quiet hum of the clinic. The doctor holding her file is flummoxed. The 
horrified secretaries just put their head down and continue working, the 
patient’s obscenities mingling with the ringing phones. All the waiting 
patients feign an interest in their laps.

I pull my colleague into my office.

“Are you OK?”

“Just got abused by a patient.”

“Do you want me to say something?”

“Oh no! As long as she gets good care. She’s probably tired.”

Not wishing to prolong his palpable discomfort, I let the matter go. The file 
moves to an Anglo-Saxon doctor who dispenses with the patient politely, 
quickly. Nothing more is said about the incident, then or ever.

I remembered my colleague when the New England Journal of Medicine ran an 
unprecedented essay <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1514939> called 
Dealing with Racist Patients. The journal is recognised more for publishing 
research on stem cells and guidelines on osteoporosis than advising doctors on 
the delicate problem of managing racist patients, so many readers were 
pleasantly surprised to find the matter finally accorded the attention it 
deserves.

Patients can hurt doctors, too | Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/11/patients-can-hurt-doctors-too>
The authors advise doctors to do what we already do: distinguish between 
competent and incompetent patients and patients who make appropriate requests 
(such as a Muslim woman preferring a female clinician) as opposed to patients 
who are simply bigoted. Commonly, we elevate the patient’s interest above our 
own, as we should. But the authors concede also that “for many minority 
healthcare workers, expressions of patients’ racial preferences are painful and 
degrading indignities, which cumulatively contribute to moral distress and 
burnout”. This prompted me to check on my colleague.

He wryly observed that on the phone, the offending patient would never have 
guessed his country of origin from his thoroughly Australian accent. He’d been 
unsettled by the patient but the feeling had turned to anger when the next 
patient astonishingly sought to justify the vitriol, instead of expressing 
regret. I asked him how this patient had managed to attend frequent 
appointments and never once encountered him.

Here, it turns out, the patient was right. Everyone really did know of her 
aversion to “the Chinese”, so to spare him any awkwardness, there was an 
unspoken pact that an Anglo-Saxon doctor would keep the patient out of his 
path. In this way, the patient got seen quickly by the doctor she demanded, 
while protecting her bigoted stance. The squeaky wheel did get the grease, 
every time.

Australia is one of the countries most heavily reliant on foreign doctors. 
According to the 2011 census, 56% of GPs and 47% of specialists were born 
overseas. Of these, 40% were also overseas-trained, with the largest influx 
coming from the Indian subcontinent, south-east Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa.

Gone are the days of mostly British and Irish expatriates: the new arrivals 
stand out in appearance and accent, neither of which should automatically 
diminish their professional stature but research shows that it does. A 
Queensland experimental study found that despite comparable qualifications, 
education and personality, a doctor with Pakistani credentials wasless likely 
to be hired 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/foreign-doctors-obstacle-course-a-disgrace-20111119-1nonl.html>
 than one with Australian credentials.

A Korean GP observes that for every sick certificate he refuses to furnish for 
a weekend hangover, the patient sniggers that “in Australia, we do things 
differently”. A patient calls a doctor “clueless” for not knowing John and Jack 
are interchangeable but makes no effort to pronounce her name correctly. 
Someone asks an Indian specialist if she came to Australia to escape “all that 
bride burning”. A patient tells an African trainee to get the “real doctor”.

Racism is the elephant in the room but, committed to serving patients, what’s 
a doctor to do? Most say nothing. Intoxicated and drug-affected patients in the 
emergency room are known (and repeatedly excused) for their racist abuses but 
mostly, racism is subtle and implicit. It disperses before you even recognise 
it for what it is and then, it seems churlish to say anything. Casual racism, 
it’s called.

For doctors, reacting to racism is anathema. We would rather suffer the 
indignity of the occasion than draw attention to ourselves. We are steeped in 
the learning that the patient always comes first and that the power imbalance 
between doctor and patient is so great that to object to a patient’s conduct is 
ungallant.

Also, there has never been a strong culture of administrative support to 
shield doctors from racist patients. Indeed, when I asked my colleague why he 
didn’t report the encounter, which had dozens of witnesses, he replied that the 
thought didn’t occur to him as no one would take it seriously. This is a 
familiar theme among doctors who tolerate bullying and harassment for similar 
reasons.

Studies document the unconscious bias, prejudice and discrimination that 
doctors exhibit towards patients of a different race or colour, therefore 
compromising their healthcare outcomes, but the bias doesn’t stop at patients. 
Racial aggressions are also directed by doctors at other doctors.

Last year a British medical tribunal reprimanded a Syrian surgeon accused of 
racist rants against Indian doctors, suggesting that the “bloody Indians” 
should stick to cleaning toilets and gardening.

Following his advice might just hobble the NHS since Indians constitute the 
largest percentage of foreign doctors working for it.

If you thought only ill-educated and uncultured people were racist, think 
again. An Egyptian trainee, wholly educated in Australia, is told by his 
supervisor that he needn’t bother competing with “the locals”. A Vietnamese 
doctor is advised by her boss to aim “no higher” than a GP. A Sri Lankan 
surgeon is told that it’s curious but he just doesn’t “look” like a surgeon. 
Such remarks made under the thin guise of offering counsel besmirch the 
reputation of the entire medical profession.

University suppressed study into racism on buses and 'victimised' its co-author
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/27/university-suppressed-study-into-racism-on-buses-and-victimised-its-co-author>
Many foreign doctors have a story to tell but are loath to voice it for fear 
of reprisal. They perceive that at a certain level of seniority, racism becomes 
less conspicuous and less relevant to career progression, although no less 
wounding. Therefore the safest survival technique, preached by senior doctors, 
is to studiously ignore the slights while redoubling efforts to clamber up the 
ladder and escape the fetid airs below.

If this is accepted wisdom, how should we address racism in medicine? The same 
way as we address it everywhere else – beginning with the acknowledgement that 
it exists so that we can appreciate what it looks like, and strengthen 
institutional integrity to denounce it.

Foreign doctors who occupy positions of influence must support and mentor 
their peers. If we are going to rely on foreign doctors to take care of us, all 
of society has a duty of care towards them.

Top medical schools and hospitals are now scheduling lectures on unconscious 
bias, forcing us to confront an uncomfortable question that we have never ever 
thought to do, “Could I be a racist doctor?” The New England Journal of 
Medicine uses its clout to underline the problem of racist patients.

 Who would have thought? At long last, we have arrived at a place where it is 
permissible to discuss how race intersects with healthcare.
 