
Walk, says the government. Where, you may ask. Here's one reply: from sea to 
shining sea.

Get fit and do good by taking Alfred Wainwright's coast-to-coast path 
<http://www.wainwright.org.uk/coast_to_coast/index.html>, 192 miles with scores 
of useful squeeze-stiles to monitor loss of obesity as you march along.

Thirty three years old, the path is a village version of the M62, bringing 
unexpected prosperity to backwaters whose economies have long been on the back 
foot. Walkers don't just slim down. They fill bed-and-breakfasts and the tills 
of pubs and shops. Ten thousand a year have brought a whole range of new 
business into life.

The Cumbrian staging post of Kirkby Stephen has developed a holistic health 
centre on the back of demand. Taxis ferry walkers' baggage between overnight 
stops and are poised to convert redundant, out-of-fashion youth hostels into 
bunk barns.

The kitchen worktop trade at Honister slate mine in the Lake District has 
gained from walkers who check out the range after the long haul from Black 
Sail, and then come back a few weeks later to place orders.

This is not new for long-standing tourist areas such as the Lake District and 
the North York Moors, which the path crosses; but Wainwright leads his 
followers down different tracks. His route goes through Cleator and Moor Top, 
old mining towns on the coastal rim of Cumbria, which have struggled to find a 
prosperous future since coal collapsed. It brings processions of hungry and 
thirsty people to Danby Wiske in the middle of North Yorkshire's Vale of 
Mowbray, a nowhere land bypassed by the nearby A1M and East Coast main line 
trains.

In the early days of organised long distance hiking, the countryside was 
nervous about the idea or downright hostile. The first path, thePennine Way 
<http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/PennineWay/index.asp>, developed out of 
violence at theKinder mass trespass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk_news/story/0,3604,689869,00.html> in 1932 and 
jail sentences afterwards. Who wouldn't be worried about ten thousand people 
marching through their back garden and forgetting to shut the gates? But it 
hasn't turned out like that.

Walkers have proved responsible and farming areas such as the Vale of Mowbray 
and the limestone plateau between Shap and Kirkby Stephen have become among the 
most welcoming of the whole coast-to-coast. Locals enjoy the extraordinary 
range of visiting nationalities and the chance to show them the realities of 
country life.

Just beyond Kiplin in North Yorkshire, one farm has installed an unobtrusive 
information booth in a hedge by the path; a sign explains the farming methods, 
a book with a ballpoint on a chain invites comments and the farmer has even 
left his mobile number for anyone who wants to know (or say) more.

The point is taken by the countryside's official authorities. Cumbria county 
council asks the walk's guidebooks and mapmakers to emphasise routes through 
Moor Top and Orton, villages that can otherwise be skipped by detours on a 
disused railway and farm paths. Walkers who follow the advice reap benefits; 
Farren's store in Cleator is a mine of information about route conditions on 
the next, often boggy stretch over Dent Fell to Nannycatch Gate. The shop also 
keeps a comment book like the Kiplin farmer's (more than 1000 entries a year), 
and far more picnic, first aid and wet weather gear than any ordinary village 
store.

Analysis in detail of these economic benefits is still anecdotal. Taxi drivers 
in Richmond, for instance, say that walkers needing lifts as they stop and 
start have met a shortfall caused by increasing tours of duty overseas for 
troops from Catterick Camp. But another long distance path has just published 
statistics because it is an official National Trail and they make interesting 
reading.

Also spanning northern England from coast-to-coast, the Hadrian's Wall path 
<http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/hadrianswall/> brought £4.4 million last year 
to the local (and in many places fragile) economy. The number of people 
trekking the full 84 miles went up by 65%, from 4,000 in 2004 to 6,600. In 
terms of profit and loss, the path cost £6m to create (by providing waymarks, 
anti-erosion measures and maintenance). Since its opening in 2003 it has 
brought in £9.9m through walkers' spending.

As a result, the Countryside Agency is appointing Britain's first full-time 
path "lengthsman", borrowing a concept from Victorian railway days. Alan 
Gledson, a 47-year-old former farmer, will divide the wall trail into stretches 
and patrol them to pick up signs of wear and tear before repairing them gets 
expensive.

Get fit, help the countryside, see the world. Better still, plot your own long 
distance trail and turn these ribbons of health and prosperity into a web.
 