 Tony Blair's memoirs. Photograph: Random House/PA 
There have been so many journeys. The Journey was the title chosen in 2004 by 
diva Donna Summer to best describe a collection of her disco classics. Also a 
1959 Hollywood potboiler starring Deborah Kerr and Yul Brynner about the Soviet 
occupation of Hungary. Even now, it is the title under which the US self-help 
guru Brandon Bays offers "cutting-edge transformation and healing work".

And so Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> should not 
have been surprised when politicians and publishers stood underwhelmed by his 
decision to call his memoir, the book that sparked the biggest political 
bidding war in British political history, The Journey. Where is the gravitas, 
asked some, perusing the celebrity tell-all cover picture of a half smiling 
Blair, dressed in a black jacket with an opened necked shirt?

What does this tell us about him, asked the New Statesman; especially when set 
against accounts produced by other former prime ministers: Harold Wilson – The 
Making of A Prime Minister. Margaret Thatcher – The Downing Street Years?

Still, the book, which was written by Blair himself rather than a ghostwriter 
and is scheduled for publication in September, has already earned him a 
colossal advance, said to be around £5m.

It will go on sale simultaneously in the UK — where it will sell for £25 — the 
US and Canada, and with huge sales anticipated in all those territories, Blair 
is expected to garner significant royalty earnings. Translation rights have 
been sold to 12 territories. Blair will also create an audio version and 
publishers Random House will make an e-book available. He will then embark on 
an international publicity tour.

But what will he say? Few clear pointers from the man yesterday. "I have tried 
to write a book which describes the human as much as the political dimensions 
of life as prime minister. Though necessarily retrospective, it is an attempt 
to inform and shape current and future thinking as much as an historical 
account of the past. Most of all I want readers to have as much pleasure 
reading it as I had writing it."

As expected, the description provided by his publisher, Gail Rebuck, was more 
effusive. The chief executive of Random House, is married to Lord Gould, 
pollster of choice throughout Blair's reign over Labour and at No 10.

"Tony Blair's The Journey will break new ground in prime ministerial memoirs 
just as Blair himself broke the mould of British politics," said Rebuck. "His 
book is frank, open, revealing and written in an intimate and accessible style. 
As an account of the nature and uses of power, it will have a readership that 
extends well beyond politics."

According to Sonny Mehta, his US publisher, the anticipation is just as great 
over there. "Tony Blair is an extremely popular figure in North America. His 
memoir is refreshing, both for its candour and vivid portrayal of political 
life," he said yesterday. "We all knew Blair was an extraordinary statesman and 
gifted thinker. We can now add exceptional writer to that list."

These blurbs do nothing to address the appetite to find out just how much 
detail Blair chooses to share about the Iraq war, his relationship with George 
Bush, his dealmaking in Northern Ireland, the intervention in Kosovo, his 
battles with Saddam – or his battles with Gordon.

Still, commercially, he will be pushing at an open door. "This is a book that 
people have been anticipating since the moment Tony Blair left office, and 
should be the bestselling political memoir since Margaret Thatcher's," said 
Andrew Lake, the politics buyer for Waterstones.

It is astonishing that Blair found time to write the book at all. Since 
leaving office he surged ahead to a role as the envoy in the Middle East for 
the UN, the EU and Russia. In 2008, Blair launched his Faith Foundation. The 
following year, it was the Faith and Globalisation Initiative, launched with 
Yale University. There have been advisory roles and event appearances in Paris 
and Singapore and the US, a period that has led to speculation that he has made 
about £10m since leaving office.

For all that, there was an accord between Blair and Brown which ruled out the 
book's publishing before the next election. And with that in mind, is Gordon 
looking forward to it, reporters asked No10 yesterday? "He hasn't specifically 
mentioned that book, but I know he has a wide-ranging interest in books," 
replied the prime minister's spokesman. Even tomes with dodgy titles.
 