 On Saturday night groups of women in cities all over the country took to the 
streets. They called their campaign, 'Reclaiming the Night', and they walked 
through Leeds, Manchester, Bradford, York, Nottingham, Brighton, Salisbury, 
Guildford, Bristol, and London. They were campaigning against the increasing 
dangers for women in the streets at night. They want to reclaim their right to 
go where they please when they please, without fear. Many of them were women 
who had themselves been raped or otherwise attacked in the streets.
Every year the street crime statistics get worse, and more and more people, 
men as well as women; are beginning to develop siege mentality about urban 
living. Women, of course, are at much greater risk. Last year there were 1,094 
reported easer of' rape, and 10,901 cases of Indecent assault on females. 89 
people were murdered by complete strangers. (The rest of the 493 homicides were 
committed by family, friends or lovers.). There were in all 77,748 crimes of 
violence.

Sir Robert Mark in his last report on London crime breaks down his statistics 
more precisely. Last year there were In London 180 rapes and 149 violent 
assaults on females. Violent personal robbery, i.e. mugging, rose by 37 per 
cent in a year, and there were in all 12,613 such robberies. Saturday's 
campaigners were organised by the women's liberation movement. They were not 
asking for a change in the law, or even for greater police protection. They 
were campaigning for a change in society's attitudes towards women, no less 
attacks, because men are are encouraged, at all levels, to regard women in a 
predatory way, and women are encouraged to be passive and helpless.

In London they chose Soho for their demonstration, as they regard pornography, 
and displays of women as objects and not as human beings as partly responsible 
for the increasing number of attacks on women. For a long time they have 
plastered stickers reading "This degrades women" over posters of naked women in 
underground. They are anxious not to be associated with Mary Whitehouse-type 
censorship. They aren't asking for any change in the law, but they are trying 
to influence the way people think. They believe that if people had a greater 
respect for women, pornography would wither away.

As a campaign it seemed to be ideologically sound enough but tactically and 
politically a hopeless gesture. The political naivete would be almost pathetic, 
if it weren't for their sincerity and earnestness. What's the good of taking to 
the streets to change the whole way society thinks, without making a single 
demand for specific changes in law, its policing or in the allocation of money? 
They say they have no faith in the law.

It is also hard for them to muster publicity, since they have no faith in the 
male chauvinist press. They will only speak to the press as a collective, and 
as a result have difficulty in speaking on the telephone. And it is not so easy 
for collectives of women to get into the Guardian offices any more. Ever since 
our Women Against Rape demonstrator bit one of our security guards during an 
altercation, over whether or not her group should be allowed in, the officers 
have been doubly wary of large groups of women. The Reclaiming the Night group 
are anxious to stress that they have no connections at all with Women Against 
Rape. Indeed, although the whole aim of Saturday night's demonstration was to 
bring publicity to the cause, the women involves were loath to say exactly what 
they were going to be doing, when and where.

The fact remains that they are right. Women are becoming more and more 
restricted in their movements, especially at night. Of course everyone is 
threatened, but women far more so. Public transport, underground trains in 
particular, dark insanely designed underpasses, and empty streets present 
threats that keep women at home. The women's liberation movement was enraged 
when a Bradford police officer advised all women not to go out alone at all 
even in the day.

I never used to be much afraid. Although I live round the corner from the tube 
station described once as the worse muggers black-spot, I hardly ever worried 
about it. I sometimes feel uneasy walking at night, but I am not afraid enough 
to stop walking home at night. But since an incident a year ago I am much more 
alert and aware of the danger than I ever used to be.

It wasn't even night time. It was a quiet Saturday afternoon and I was 
changing trains on my way home at Stockwell tube station. As I stepped on to a 
train, alone on the platform I thought, two boys ran up and jumped up behind 
me. The train was about a third full. The boys began jostling and shoving me, 
and I thought they were just playing around, until I saw one of them snatch my 
purse out of my bag. As I turned to grab it back he handed it to his friend who 
started to run off with it. I caught him by his coat and held on.

They both pushed and shoved me but it didn't really occur to me to let go of 
his coat. I shouted at the other passengers that he'd got my purse and would 
they please help. No one moved. No one said anything. The doors of the train 
were trying to shut, but they were standing in the way and keeping them open, 
and I still had hold of the coat. I think they saw a guard coming as they 
suddenly dropped the purse, threw me across the carriage, leapt out of the 
train and ran away.

As the train moved out of the station I was so angry and upset that I screamed 
and ranted at the passengers in that carriage. "Why didn't you help? Why didn't 
you do something? Why didn't you at least shout?" No one said a word. They 
looked away, tucked their heads into their newspapers, behaved as if I was a 
madwoman harassing them.

I approached one man, who had been sitting within inches of where it had 
happened, and I challenged him. "I didn't see," he said, and blushed as the 
other passengers stared at him. I challenged another man. "I was asleep. Never 
saw a thing," he muttered.

It was then that I became really afraid. That's what people say about New 
York, but I always thought that in England that any number of law and order 
minded decent citizens would come to your assistance but it's not so.

I started wandering round this office to find out how many other women have 
had some kind of unpleasant experience. I was astonished to find among the 
small number I asked, how many of them had frightening stories to tell.

Janet Watts, feature writer, was attacked in daylight, one morning walking 
through Regent's Park on her way to work. As she came to a secluded place she 
heard pounding of feet behind her, and an enormous "gorilla-sized" man pounced 
on her from behind, grabbing her breasts. She screamed, and he ran off, leaving 
her much shaken.

Felicity Roskrow, Guardian Diary secretary, was pursued down a dark road 
outside her home, and a man jumped on her and grabbed her round the reek. She 
struggled and screamed, and he ran off.

Lindsay Mackie, reporter, alone in her ground floor flat awoke one night to 
find a man by her bed. He pulled back her bedclothes and warned her not to make 
any noise. When she raised her fist to him he took fright and ran away.

Caroline Tisdall, art critic, has been attacked three times. The last time was 
in the underpass at Shepherd's Bush, on her way to a television broadcast at 
the BBC. Four youths approached her from behind, and one of them grabbed her. 
She swung round with such force and indignation that they were surprised, and 
ran away.

The worst attack, though, on a Guardian woman writer happened in Mayfair. 
She'd rather not have her name printed, as she feels she's managed to put the 
whole thing behind her. She went out to buy a packet of cigarettes at 9pm and a 
man with razor blades in his gloves punched her face and made criss-cross cuts 
all the way up her legs and hands.

Eventually, she got away, covered in blood.

I haven't counted the large number of indecent exposings, bum pinchings and 
touchings-up which may be infuriating but aren't frightening. After finding so 
many attacks by just asking a handful of people, I am beginning to become more 
alarmed myself.

I've always tried to avoid getting involved in the great noise that the 
women's movement has been making about rape. It seems to me perverse, and 
somehow irrelevant to pick one fairly infrequent crime to campaign about, just 
because for them it represents symbolically the way they feel all men treat all 
women. It reminds me of the great American fund raising campaigns for sickle 
cell anaemia. This is a form of leukaemia that only attacks black people. It is 
not, of course, the disease that most black people die of, by a long shot, but 
because it only affects blacks it has become a strong political cause.

The group of women who came to talk about Saturday's demonstration said that 
rape was only the extreme edge of a spectrum. One woman said, "It starts with 
the 'Hello darling' and wolf whistles and it goes right through to rape. It's 
exactly the name kind of sexism." Perhaps that's true.

I've never had any doubt that wolf whistles and provocative taunts in the 
street are intensely aggressive. I never know how to deal with it. Usually I 
just try to maintain an absurd sort of dignity and pretend I haven't heard. If 
I smile back, I feel angry, with myself inside and even more vulnerable, 
Perhaps it's silly to mind about it but now I come to think about it I find I 
do feel indignant that women walking along the street minding their own 
business should be teased and forced to respond.

These women also believe that rape is at the root of all sexuality as we now 
know it. It is not that they regard every man as a potential rapist. It is not 
as simple as that. They believe that all our views on sex are centre around the 
idea that men should dominate and rape is the natural extreme conclusion of 
that kind of sex.

One girl said rather touchingly "We don't exactly know what sex would be like 
if you took away the idea of male power and domination, because our own heads 
have been so conditioned with this notion, but we believe it must be possible 
to make sex about something other than power. The Hite Report appears to be 
having great influence. They say that if the female view of sex were generally 
accepted instead of the male aggressive and predatory view, there would be no 
more attacks on women, no rapes, no fear.

Still, that's rather a complicated message to take out on to the streets. 
Until the feminist millennium, women are in danger of having their lives 
increasingly restricted by real danger and their own fear of it.

&183; This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 
Years of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 