
Just before kick-off at the King Power Stadium an image is flashed up on the 
large screens that hang high at each end of the ground. It is of a mean-looking 
fox with piercing blue eyes. The message is obvious and on Saturday it proved 
apt, given the hosts performed like a team with the scent of blood in their 
nostrils.

Leicester’s dismantling of Manchester City was a throwback to last season, 
when theystormed to the title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/leicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri>
 playing with togetherness, intensity and a killer instinct on the 
counterattack. They were 3-0 up inside 20 minutes and delivered the reaction 
Claudio Ranierihad demanded following recent poor results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/porto-leicester-city-champions-league-match-report>
. But as Wes Morgan and Jamie Vardy revealed, it was also a planned 
exploitation of their opponents’ weaknesses, the champions returning to their 
ravenous best because they knew City would allow them to.

Pep Guardiola may tweak tactics after Leicester beat Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/pep-guardiola-tactics-leicester-beat-manchester-city>
“They [City] like to build from the back and get forward through quick 
passing. We studied them and decided to sit back and be effective on the 
counterattack. It worked,” said Morgan. While from Vardy came this: “We’d been 
watching videos and they like to use their keeper. So once you’ve got them in 
the corner you have to press the keeper. Luckily the ball came across and he 
wasn’t ready for it.”

That last point was in reference to Leicester’s fourth goal, with which Vardy 
sealed his first hat-trick for the club after Riyad Mahrez – who was 
outstanding throughout – persuaded John Stones to play aweak pass back to 
Claudio Bravo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/claudio-bravo-manchester-city-goalkeeper>
, who indeed was not ready for it. Vardy then took the ball round the Chilean 
and squeezed it over the line. Stones hung his head in despair, Bravo looked 
equally crestfallen, both aware of the personal criticism that was to follow. 
Yet, as Morgan outlined, it was City’s entire defensive structure that 
Leicester targeted, and the manner in which they succeeded means the harshest 
spotlight should focus on Pep Guardiola.

After all he is the architect of a side that has kept only two clean sheets in 
15 Premier League games, conceded at least three goals in the last two and on 
Saturday reached a collective low when it comes to the basics of stopping the 
other team from scoring.

City’s back three of Bacary Sagna, Stones and Aleksander Kolarov were rarely 
if ever a cohesive unit, with the latter two badly at fault for Leicester’s 
first and third goals, scored by Vardy. Ahead of them Pablo Zabaleta looked 
utterly lost in right-back-cum-central-midfield role while Bravo was as exposed 
for Leicester’s second goal, a thumping finish from Andy King, as he was for 
their fourth.

It was shambolic, the consequences of a back line - and the ‘protection’ in 
front of it - setup to focus on what to do with the ball and with little regard 
for what to do without it. Jamie Carragher, a man who knows one or two things 
about defending, summed up the mood of many onlookers when he tweeted: 
“Defensively Man City are one of the worst teams in the league, all over the 
place.”

City cannot mount a title challenge if they continue to defend in this manner 
and a worry for their supporters must be that Guardiola is not overly concerned 
by the way his team is responding to his instructions, structurally as well as 
tactically. He spoke here of never compromising his values – “I will be the 
same. I feel what I feel” – and raised eyebrows after being made aware City had 
not won a single tackle in the opening 35 minutes of the contest. “I’m not a 
coach for the tackles,” he said. “What’s tackles?”

Jamie Vardy hat-trick leads Leicester demolition of Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/leicester-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
Guardiola is an ideologue and his dismissive approach to tackling is one 
shared by others who steadfastly believe in the refined style of play that has 
made Spain a dominant force in football. Xabi Alonso, for instance, describes 
tackling as a “last resort” while Javier Mascherano, who played under Guardiola 
at Barcelona, once said making a tackle meant he had failed as a defender.

It is undeniably fascinating to have a man who believes so strongly in a 
progressive way of playing on these shores but, having come to England, 
Guardiola has to recognise some need for compromise and/or adjustment given the 
full-blooded nature of football here, and certainly while he does not have the 
players to pull off such a high-risk, technically demanding approach.

Kolarov for one looks ill-suited for his role in this City side. And then 
there is Stones, who continues to look like a central defender who does not 
want to defend. He either needs to change position or play alongside a reliable 
partner. In that regard, Vincent Kompany’s return from injury cannot come soon 
enough. Without the captain Stones looks like Bambi without his mother.

City’s flaws should not totally overshadow Leicester’s display in what was 
their first league win since late October, and one that would have been more 
comfortable had they not allowed City to score late on through Kolarov and 
Nolito. “We wanted to get back to basics,” said Vardy, whose 16-match goal 
drought is well and truly over. “We knew we were still the team of last year 
and we’ve got that back.”
 