
Relatives of Woodhill prisoners who took their own life in jail have launched 
a judicial review, calling for action over safety procedures at the prison, 
which this year recorded the highest number and highest rate of self-inflicted 
deaths across the entire prison estate.

There have been 17 suicides at the high-security Woodhill prison, in Milton 
Keynes, since May 2013, and at least six this year, a rate of about one every 
45 days.

Suicide, self-harm, stabbings and riots – prisons reach crisis point
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/12/staff-shortages-british-prisons-bedford-pentonville-truss>
Despite guidance from coroner reports and from the official body that 
investigates deaths in custody, the families claim the prison has failed to 
implement basic preventative measures, according to legal papers.


The claimants hope their legal challenge will secure a high court order 
compelling the Ministry of Justice and the prison’s governor to put in place 
measures to reduce the risk of self-inflicted deaths. These measures are 
already required by law, but the claimants believe the prison has not managed 
to get staff to follow the guidance.

A high court judge granted permission on Thursday for the judicial application 
to proceed.

Mr Justice Lavender rejected a MoJ submission saying that appropriate steps 
had been taken at the prison to prevent further deaths and that the families’ 
claim was misconceived and unarguable.

The judge said that reports on the prison revealed “repeated failure, despite 
earlier recommendations, to implement applicable policies”. He said this could 
not be dismissed as operational failures.

Suicides and assaults in prisons in England and Wales at all-time high
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/28/suicides-and-assaults-in-prisons-in-england-and-wales-at-all-time-high>
Pearl Scarfe and Julie Barber, the mother and sister of Ian Brown, who took 
his life in his cell in Woodhill on 19 July 2015, have brought the claim, 
together with Jamie Blyde, the brother of Daniel Dunkley, who died on 2 August 
2016, four days after he was found hanging in his cell.

The high rate of suicides at Woodhill come at a time of rising deaths inside 
prisons nationally. In the 12 months to June 2016, there were 105 apparently 
self-inflicted deaths, a 28% increase over that period, and when taken together 
with homicides inside prisons this was the highest level for 25 years, 
according to MoJ figures cited in the legal challenge. The number of incidents 
of self -harm also rose by 27%, to its highest level since records began, over 
the same period.

Jo Eggleton, partner at the legal firm Deighton Pierce Glynn, who represents 
the families of nine of the 17 people who have died since May 2013, said: “This 
case is borne out of the families’ desperation. They don’t want another family 
to go through this and it absolutely crushes them when they hear that another 
one has. They have been through every legal avenue they can – there have been 
inquests and coroner recommendations and nothing has changed. It happens again 
and again in very similar circumstances.

“What’s missing is the detail of what the prison is doing. But when there are 
more deaths in similar circumstances it is hard to believe they are doing 
enough.”

Investigation into self-harm at secure jail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/jul/24/woodhill-prisoner-self-harms-again>
The judicial review seeks to address the “exceptionally high current rate of 
self-inflicted deaths at HMP Woodhill”. The papers state: “There is no mystery 
about what needs to be done; the problem is that the defendants are not doing 
it.”

The safety procedures that need to be taken to reduce the risk of deaths are 
already set out in MoJ policy and are mandatory. But the families argue thatit 
is clear from investigations by the prison and probation ombudsman, made each 
time someone dies in prison, that the governor had “failed to put in place 
appropriate general measures for the protection of inmates from suicide”. In 
one coroner’s report, there was clear frustration at the prison’s failure to 
implement their recommendations.

The report says: “There needs to be an urgent review as to why the necessary 
measures to prevent suicides from recently admitted prisoners have not been 
implemented.”

The summary of the families’ case states: “The reports identify similar 
failings occurring in case after case. They include repeated failures to comply 
with the requirements of national policy on suicide and on emergency response.”

One of the key recommendations is that the governor should ensure that there 
are full suicide risk assessments for newly arrived prisoners. The legal papers 
state that in seven in nine deaths where an inquest was heard, there was no 
compliance with the regulations setting out how prisons should respond to a 
medical emergency.

Deborah Coles, director of the charity INQUEST 
<http://www.inquest.org.uk/about/staff>, welcomed the legal challenge. “The 
shocking failure of HMP Woodhill to act on a body of recommendations exposes 
the absence of a robust system to ensure that action is taken. Repeated calls 
for urgent change are ignored and deaths continue.”

An MOJ spokesperson said: “This matter is the subject of ongoing legal 
proceedings, so it would be inappropriate to comment further at this stage.”
 