
I love holidays but hate going on holiday. Every aspect of planning makes me 
tense and the hell-in-a-bucket of airports, insurance, hire cars etc causes 
huge angst even with another adult to carry the weight. Millie, Matt and I are 
heading to Italy to the villa Helen borrowed from a kind colleague, numbers 
boosted back to four by honorary uncle Kenny. Despite this, I expect it to be 
hard going, emotionally and practically, simply because he’s not Helen with her 
smiling tour de force of planning and general jollying along of our trips.

Italy may also pale by comparison with the last two years’ fabulous 
family holidays. A road trip through Romania staying most notably in Viscri and 
then a full monty Florida trip – theme parks, alligator dodging, dolphin 
worrying and Anna Maria Island beach bathing.

The Romanian adventure was right up Helen’s street, fuelled by the fact that 
my brother Richard lives there and his wife, Ioana, worked so hard to make it 
special in our post-diagnosis world.

Florida was less obvious, Helen concluding, “Wild horses wouldn’t usually drag 
me there, Adam, but I want to give Millie and Matt a holiday to remember.” In 
denial, I didn’t see so clearly that mentally she had inserted the word “me” 
after “remember”, tragically aware this might be her last big trip.

It was a very special two weeks in every way even if Disney’s best 
was overshadowed for Millie and Matt by the excitement of my being caught 
speeding by slow-talking, gun-packing but smiley and forgiving “Trooper Dan”.

Our final short break together was my birthday weekend, which Helen kept 
secret for months. She maintained the subterfuge even into the Friday night 
journey: “You’ll need to drive without looking at road signs, Adam, or you’ll 
spoil the surprise. I’ll navigate.”

This is harder to do than you might think, and not recommended. After a 
somewhat adventurous trip, we arrived on a stormy waterfront facing what looked 
like a brick wall against a black sky. “We’re here, we’re here!” Helen shouted, 
full of infectious gaiety. It was the Landmark Trust’s magnificent Martello 
tower that I’d admired for so long.

The weekend was extraordinary – wonderful like no other and will be a lifelong 
reminder for me how much Helen cared to make it special, including a surprise 
dinner in the tower cooked by her sister Sarah, brother-in-law Brian and waited 
on by our nephew Nathan. We walked, talked and generally loved one another; the 
13ft-thick walls of the tower providing temporary respite from the stark fact 
of Helen’s decline, as it had for so long against raging Suffolk seas.

Indeed, so powerful was her life force during the Martello weekend, I’m 
convinced she saved her remaining strength for this final hurrah and expression 
of her love. Just over a month later, I was at her bedside as she slipped away 
peacefully.

So Italy without Helen was sure to be dreadful. But in this assumption, as in 
so much, I was so wrong. Italy was great. A total focus on the kids, a new 
dynamic in having funny, kind Kenny with us and I found myself relaxing for the 
first time since Helen’s death.

I know I was relaxed because while we were watching the Italian Job I 
experienced the same “Nooooooo!” reaction I’d had as an eight-year-old when the 
Mafia crush the E-Type Jaguars. On a scorching day in Turin we tracked down the 
route of the Mini Coopers’ escape.

If I’m brutally honest, my ease is also because for the first time in ages I’m 
holidaying without the worry of Helen’s health and the emotional weight of 
knowing every second might make for precious memories.

Any guilt I feel about this sense of relief is overwhelmed by the joy everyone 
takes in the trip and perhaps shows that I may be turning a corner in dealing 
with the omnipresent weight of loss. I love that it’s happening on a holiday 
chosen and planned by Helen, so perhaps even now she’s still navigating me to 
sanctuary.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 