
With news that Christopher Nolan’s breakthrough film Memento is being remade 
just 15 years after the original 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/16/christopher-nolan-memento-remake-just-15-years-after-origina>
, and The Mummy (1999) is getting an equally unsolicited reboot,perhaps 
starring Tom Cruise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/24/tom-cruise-in-talks-for-reboot-of-the-mummy>
, Thomas Batten listens in on Hollywood executives as they plan how to improve 
classics and blockbusters of recent memory and bring them kicking and screaming 
into the modern day.

Memento 

“Love everything about the original, it’s a total classic – but maybe a little 
confusing? What we need to do is turn it all around so it’s in the right order, 
and maybe ditch those ugly tattoos the guy gives himself … maybe he uses 
Instagram to post reminders instead, and then his investigation becomes a kind 
of viral sensation?”

The Mummy

“We have to be careful of running into the same problem the franchise ran into 
the first time around: a complete lack of scenes where the Mummy travels to 
modern-day Miami during spring break and gets drafted to judge a bikini 
contest.”

Clueless

“I get that the original is largely a satire, but given everything that’s 
going on in the culture right now, we have a responsibility to seriously depict 
the kinds of trials and difficulties a young, wealthy Caucasian must face in 
21st century America.”

Forrest Gump

“Is it just me or should Forrest constantly be vaping?”


Pulp Fiction

“What people remember best about this one is the music and dancing, so how 
about instead of assassins the Jules and Vincent characters are coaching an a 
cappella team? Instead of murdering Butch they recruit him, thinking he has the 
edge they’ll need to win the state championship, and how about Rebel Wilson as 
the Gimp, but instead of living in a box she’s kind of the soul of the squad?”

Home Alone

“I’ve been thinking about the problem of modern technology making it very 
difficult for the kid to get left behind, given that he could just call his 
parents’ cellphone, and I think I have a solution. Instead of forgetting the 
kid, the whole family is dead in a car crash. Also, I never bought that the kid 
could put all these traps together to foil the burglars but couldn’t get his 
hand on a gun, and grim and gritty is big right now. Just a thought.”

Edward Scissorhands

“We’d be remiss in not exploring the ‘shared universe’ potential here – maybe 
he’s got a brother with combs for fingers, a sister whose whole arm is a hot 
towel? I’m picturing a dog that secretes sculpting gel from his eyes and having 
a hard time seeing that not being the number one toy next Christmas.”

The Sandlot

“Millennials don’t like baseball, don’t play outside and won’t go for the kid 
tricking the lifeguard into giving him a kiss. Personally I think it’s worth 
considering we ditch all that and go with a prequel, focus on the thing 
everyone’s been wondering since this thing first came out anyway – how did that 
lot get so sandy?”

Hocus Pocus

“Getting all three Kardashian sisters to play the witches is a coup, so if 
they insist on being the heroes in this version and that all prints of the 
original be destroyed, I say we comply.”


American Beauty

“I’m confident we can get Josh Gad for the voice of the plastic bag.”
 