
Giovanni Trapattoni said beforehand he would settle for a victory by the only 
goal, even if he had to suffer. TheRepublic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> manager duly went 
through the wringer on a nervous night in the capital Yerevan but he emerged 
with the result he wanted to ignite his team's Euro 2012 campaign after the 
substitute Keith Fahey, who had been on the field for eight minutes, swept home 
the precious goal.

The Birmingham City midfielder was winning only his fourth cap but had not 
played in a competitive international before. With one swing of his right boot 
he became an instant hero. Trapattoni ought to struggle no more with the 
pronunciation of Fahey's surname.

It felt as if Ireland had been let off the hook. Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> had the initiative for much of 
the second half and there was a desperation about some of Ireland's defending. 
But Trapattoni's team could also point to a glaring miss by the captain, Robbie 
Keane, in the 63rd minute, when he dragged a shot against a post when clean 
through. It was not his only miss of the evening, moreover.

Ireland have a chequered history in what used to be the Eastern Bloc but this 
result was one to cherish. If it once again demonstrated the perilously fine 
margins at international level, it also allowed Ireland to look ahead with 
optimism. Next are Andorra in Dublin on Tuesday. Trapattoni will fancy his 
chances of making it six points from six before the sterner tests in Group B .

"Sure, I suffered tonight," the Italian said, "because Shay Given had to make 
two or three important saves. The result could have been 0-0. We had difficult 
situations in our defence. But I knew that Armenia would be tough and other 
teams will not find it easy to come here and win."

Keane had said on the eve of the tie that the most important thing was not to 
lose but nobody really believed him. Armenia, ranked 96th in the world, have 
had some encouraging results at home lately – they beat Belgium in a World Cup 
qualifier last year and in Euro 2008 qualification they drew against Serbia and 
Portugal and beat Poland. But if Ireland were to entertain hopes of making it 
to a first major finals since the 2002 World Cup, everyone knew, deep down, 
that this was a match they needed to win.

Keane, who is carrying a knee problem, might have put his team ahead in the 
early running, only to volley wide after meeting Kevin Doyle's headed flick. 
The captain looked dangerous throughout, even though he could not add to his 
record 43 international goals. He also had the ball in the net in the 36th 
minute, only to be pulled back for offside.

The best chance of the first half came from an Ireland set piece. Aiden 
McGeady's corner was deep and Sean St Ledger's header firm after he had got up 
well. The goalkeeper, Roman Berezovsky, made a fine reaction save.

Armenia showed themselves to be quick and technically talented – other teams 
will surely struggle here too. All of their front players caught the eye, 
especially Henrik Mkhitaryan, Shakhtar Donetsk's new £6m signing, who roamed 
and probed with menace, while Yura Movsisyan was excellent. Ireland restricted 
Armenia to efforts from distance in the first half, a volley from Movsisyan 
apart, although one shot from the striker whistled just over the crossbar.

Ireland's defence did not enjoy the best protection from Glenn Whelan and Paul 
Green, who started anxiously on his competitive debut. It was tense and tight 
stuff. Armenia were the better team in the second half and they subjected 
Ireland to a series of nervous moments. One almighty scramble ended with 
Movsisyan firing at Richard Dunne. And the Ireland defender – his usual tower 
of strength – almost put a looping header through his own goal.

But after Keane had blown his golden chance and Doyle had gone close the last 
word, unexpectedly, went to Fahey, who capitalised after good work by Liam 
Lawrence. It was far from a beautiful performance but, as Trapattoni has always 
said, it is the result that stands the test of time.
 