
Preamble:
This morning I was awoken by a loud rat-a-tat-tat on my door. No, it wasn't 
the bailiffs. It was my 72-year-old neighbour, who's Armenian. I opened and he 
handed me a large bag of apricots. "There," he said with a mischievous, 
toothless grin. "That's the only thing the Irish will get offArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> today."

Apparently Armenia invented apricots (its scientific name is even prunus 
armeniaca). It's also said to have given the world chess. And now they've only 
gone and concocted a handy football team (which is unusual, as Tom Jones 
explainshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/oct/11/armenia-ireland-euro-2012>). 
They're fast, intricate and bold and they need to win in Dublin to earn a 
play-off spot that seemed highly improbable when the groups were picked 
possible when: other than in 1998, when they finished fourth in their World Cup 
qualifying group, Armenia have always finished bottom or second from bottom. 
Now a swashbuckling run of victories, and goals galore, of propelled them into 
a position where Giovanni Trapattoni genuinely fears them. Then again, he fears 
all opposition, since the basic premise underpinning his management is that 
Ireland are rubbish and will be beaten by everyone if they try to do anything 
other than scuff, scurry and hoof. Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Gevorg Ghazaryan and 
Yura Movsisyan have scored more goals than the entire Irish squad in this 
campaign.

Ireland could score too, most likely from set-pieces since Armenia's weakness 
is their aerial fallibility. But chances are the hosts won't attack much unless 
they concede. This is sure to be a tense, possibility agonising spectacle. The 
question, then, is will I be chucking apricots through my neighbour's window 
tonight in celebration or dismay?

Teams:
Rep of Ireland: Given, St. Ledger, Dunne, O'Shea, Kelly,
McGeady, Whelan, Andrews, Duff, Doyle, Cox. 
Subs: Westwood, Coleman, Walters, Long, Hunt, Fahey, O'Dea.

Armenia: Berezovsky, Hovsepyan, Mkrtchyan, Pizelli, Malakyan,
Ghazaryan, Movsisyan, Mkoyan, Aleksanyan, Mkhitaryan, Hayrapetyan. 
Subs: Petrosyan, Yuspashyan, Artur Edigaryan, Sarkisov, Artak Edigaryan, 
Badoyan, Manucharyan.

Referee: Eduardo Iturralde Gonzalez (Spain)

6.35pm: "We've got to be positive tonight and dominate this game," hollers 
Packie Bonner on Sky. Has he been watching this campaign?

6.40pm: The injured Robbie Keane is being interviewed pitchside. "It's a 
massive, massive game," he says. "We just need to be really cautious of them 
because they're very dangerous on the counter-attack."

6.43pm: They're going to have to rattle through these anthems if the match is 
to kick off on time. Perhaps that will help set a high tempo to the game?

6.45pm: news from elsewhere: Belgium's hopes of sneaking into the play-offs 
aren't looking great as they're 2-0 down in Germany. Greece, meanwhile, are 
losing in Georgia, which is good news for Croatia.

1 min: The renovated Lansdowne Road looks about 90% full and it's crackling 
with noisy tension as Armenia get the game going.

2 min: It's a positive start from Ireland as they attack down the right. Duff 
eventually digs out a cross in the general direction of the back post, but 
there is no one there to meet it.

4 min: Armenia are showing their threat early on, attacking in great numbers 
whenever they get the ball. Mkhitaryan fails to test Given, however, with a 
rasper from 25 yards. "The last (and only) time Ireland qualified for the Euros 
(God bless you Gary McKay) the team would've been something like: Bonner, 
Hughton, Moran, McCarthy, Morris, McGrath, Whelan Sheedy, Houghton, Aldridge, 
Cascarino." recalls Niall Mullen. "Of the current lot, I reckon only Given 
would get in that team. Maybe Richard Dunne for Big Mick and Duff from 2005. 
Trap is just the latest in a line of managers unable to fashion a silk purse 
from a sow's ear." It's true that Ireland don't have the same calibre of 
players as before but they're still better than they have looked for most of 
this campaign, and Trap has mostly ignored Seamus Coleman, James McCarthy, Wes 
Hoolahan ...

6 min: Corner to Armenia after a comical miskick by St Ledger. Pizelli takes 
it short and, after getting it back, pings it into the near post and forces a 
desperate clearance by St Ledger. Nervy.

8 min: Armena are already looking the more comfortable and progressive in 
possession. It's all a bit harum-scarum from Ireland.

10 min: Russia have taken the lead over Andorra thanks to Dzagoev. Ireland's 
feint hopes of nicking top spot have gone up in flames. And judging by the 
early exchanges here, they're going to have a job hanging on to second - and 
hanging on seems to be what they're setting out to do: they're sitting very 
deep.

12 min: That's better from Ireland. A nice sequence of passes to feet, all in 
the opposing half. Eventually they win a corner, but Berezovsky punches it 
clear.

12 min: Ooooh! Great chance! Doyle flicked on a punt to Cox, who tried to 
manouevre space for a shot from 16 yards but was crowded out by defenders. He 
eventually popped the ball back to Doyle, who has a free shot from 14 yards 
.... but drives it straight at the keeper.

14 min: Kelly, who has made an uncomfortable beginning, is booked for a 
dangerous tackle on Pizelli. A long night ahead of the defender.

15 min: Pizelli pokes a fine pass through to Movsiyan, who beats Given to the 
ball but can't keep it in play. This match is taut.

17 min: After neat interplay by Armenia in midfield, where Pizelli is 
continually finding space, Pizelli overhits an attempted pass to Mkoyan. "You 
are making me nervous with the pictures on your MBM," shudders Niall O'Keefe. 
"The contrast between Doyle and Movsisyan is a bit too stark. What about a 
happy Shay Given?" Tell you what, I'll put up a shot of a happier Doyle if/when 
Ireland score. Kevin is looking sprightly.

20 min: Ireland continue their up-and-at'em approach, which isn't making much 
inroads at present but at least the game is being played in the Armenia half. 
Meanwhile, Germany are 3-0 up against Belgium. I had a wager earlier on there 
being a red card in that match, largely because I expected one of the fiery 
young Belgians to get frustrated and do a Rooney. Still 40 minutes for that to 
happen.

22 min: Kelly launches in a long, rather aimless cross from the left. Cox 
challenges the keeper for it and is - wrongfully - penalised for a foul. The 
keeper then milks it for far more than it's worth.

25 min: Red card for the Armenia keeper! They were caught out by a ball over 
the top and Berezovsky charged out of his box to block Cox's shot! The referee 
sends him off! The keeper protests that the ball hit his chest and replays are 
inconclusive - the ball may have hit his chest, but you can understand the ref 
thinking it was the arms, since the keeper certainly tried to block the ball 
with them. Off he toddles and on comes a 20-year-old replacement who has never 
got a senior cap before!

28 min: The first task for the new keeper, Petrosyan, is to stop the freekick 
from 20 yards. If you can judge a keeper by his gait as he comes on to the 
pitch, Petrosyan is dodgy. A decidedly flouncy walk. But McGeady's freekick 
fails to put that theory to the test, as it whistles over the bar. "Maybe your 
neighbor is hoping you aren't aware of the fact that apricot pits are poisonous 
cyanide," claims Paul Taylor. "How many did he give you to eat, again?"

31 min: In a radical departure from normality, Ireland are going all-out 
attack now. They win a corner ... but decide not to stick in on the novice 
keeper ... and then try to work room for a shot, but fail. Armenia then hurtle 
down the other end and Movsisyan fires in a wonderful cross. But no one can get 
on the end of it.

33 min: Petrosyan gets his first touch of the ball, bending down to pick up a 
long-range trickler from Cox. "Thanks Paul for the interesting insight from Tom 
Jones," blurts Justin Kavanagh. "This begs some tight-trousered questions: Will 
Ireland say just help yourself to the Armenians, despite being on the green, 
green grass of home? Or will it be a not unusual case of Trap's man desperately 
on hanging (what's new pussycat?) and everyone going home delirah?" What, you 
couldn't think of any way to work a sex bomb into your analysis?

35 min: Here's a thing: the replay of the red card incident suggest that 
Berezovsky probably didn't handle the ball (despite trying to) ... and Cox did, 
when taking down the ball over the top. That prompts this observation from 
Niall Mullen. "I assume thousands of my fellow countrymen will be up in arms 
about Simon Cox's handball there. It was a shocking piece of skulduggery 
compounded by the majority of the Irish team calling for the keeper to be sent 
off. After the Thierry Henry affair I know how much we Irishmen hate injustice."

37 min: Ireland are not making use of their numerical advantage at present. 
Simply not using the ball intelligently enough to find space. And Armenia 
continue to look menacing on the counter, notably through Pizelli, the 
naturalised Brazilian (who, I'm told, speaks fluent Armenian). He's just had a 
crack from 25 yards and presumably said the Armenian equivalent of 'drat' as it 
flew well wide.

40 min: Kelly is caught in possession by Mkhitaryan, who lopes forward and 
exchanges passes with Movsisyan before Andrews makes an important intervention 
at the edge of the Irish box. "McGeady looks pretty woeful," groans James, and 
many others. " Not followed much of his money spinning tour of Russia but his 
fairly limited flashdancing doesn't seem to be fooling Armenia at all."

GOAL! Ireland 1-0 Armenia (Aleksanyan with a preposterous own goal!)  
Jamnation once again! Having already benefitted from a contentious red card, 
Ireland take the lead through a ridiclous own goal. Duff put in a lovely low 
cross from the left and Doyle, attempting a slinky back-hell, completely missed 
it. Aleksanyan just had to wallop it clear under no pressure but instead 
hammered it into his own net!

44 min: What's wrong with the Armenian keepers? Petrosyan hares out of his box 
and handles! It's only a yellow, as there was no immediate danger. Ireland 
waste the freekick.

45+1 min: Freekick to Armenia about 25 yards out. Movsisyan curls over the 
bar, to the relief of the home crowd.

Half-time: Well that was bonkers. Eamon Dunphy infamously described Mick 
McCarthy as "a congenital loser" following a series of misfortunes in 
qualification campaigns. Giovani Trapattoni, by contrast, and notwithstanding 
that Thierry Henry's decried intervention, has generally been incredibly lucky 
sicne taking charge of Ireland. And tonight he has been jammier than ever 
before, as Armenia suffered a harsh red card (brought about, it must be said, 
but their keeper's rashness) and then conceded an absurd own goal. Armenia 
remain menacing on the counter, but it seems they are facing an impossible 
force here. "Niall Mullen is right," confirms Justin Kavanagh. "I look forward 
to the long and protracted campaign by the FAI to have the match replayed or to 
give the Armenians a wildcard place at Euro 2012." Ireland should put the ball 
into their own net at the start of the second half out of solidarity.

Update:  As things stand, Ireland could face Portugal in the play-offs, as 
Cristiano Ronaldo & Co are trailing 1-0 in Denmark. Greece could be in the hat 
too, although they have pulled it back to 1-1 in Georgia. Turkey too, as 
they're beating Azerbaijan as Belgium are being battered in Germany.

46 min: Ireland get the second half under way. Within seconds Armenia have the 
ball and are probing forward. "Half-time entertainment in Dublin is a kid's 
match," reports Liam Rooney. "And I fear for the future of Irish football. They 
appear to have learnt nothing from their seniors. They are passing to feet."

47 min: Pizelli slides a pass into Movsisyan, who turns deftly past Dunne but 
St Ledge hurls himself in front of his shot, taking the sting out of it. Easy 
save by Given.

48 min: According to Sky, the ref came to look at one of their monitors at 
half-time and, having seen a replay of the sending off, insists it was the 
right decision.

50 mins: Chaos in the Armenia box - for all their enterprise and slickness 
going forward, they're shoddy at the back - but this time their frantic 
scrambling is enough to thwart Cox. "Ireland can still lose this. If Armenia 
score it will be game on. So please don't count the chickens yet," pleads Kevin 
Mannerings. "As for potential opponents, can't we have Scotland?" Not counting 
chickens, eh? And no, you can't have Scotland: they're losing 1-0 in Spain 
already. Wales are 1-0 up in Bulgaria but already out of the running in the 
group.

53 min: Ireland summon their best move of the match, and Cox was central to 
it. After fizzing the ball about incisively, they forge an opening for the 
overlapping Kelly, but he hesitates before shooting, allowing a defender to 
strip him. Of the ball.

54 min: Andrews lets fly from 20 yards. It flies just past the post. But 
Ireland are well on top now.

55 min: Surprising substitution by Armenia: Pizelli, who had been playing very 
well, is replaced by Manucharyan.

56 min: Greece came from behind to win in Georgia, meaning Croatia finish 
second in that group and will be in the play-offs.

57 min: Trapattoni was criticised by some for his decision to include Cox 
ahead of Long tonight but Cox has been one of Ireland's best players, and 
certainly more influential than Doyle. He got in again just now but was again 
thwarted by a block. "The goal in this game was very similar goal to Michel's 
own goal in 1989 at Landsdowne when Ireland beat Spain 1-0," recalls John 
Cotter. "Now, in 2011, we would gladly accept the same result against the 10 
men of Armenia. How times change." In fairness to Michel, he was slightly 
unlucky insofar as the ball was deflected that night by the grass, which Jack 
Charlton had allow grow to about knee-height.

GOAL! Ireland 2-0 Armenia (Dunne 60') And there we see the consequences of 
Berezovsky's red card: the novice replacement goalkeeper was all at sea as he 
attempted to deal with a decent cross by McGeady, leaving Dunne to nudge home 
from close range.

GOAL! Ireland 2-1 Armenia (Mkhitaryan 62') More dodgy goalkeeping, this time 
from Given. Armenia get a reward for another tidy attack, and Ireland are 
punished for messy defending. Somehow they ignored Mkhitaryan at the edge of 
the box and Armeina worked it to him nicely. He placed a low shot towards the 
centre of the goal and Given succeeded only in helping it into the net.

64 min: Armenia change: Ghazaryan, who has been disappointing off. Sarkisov on.

65 min: McGeady booked for an oafish tackle on Mkitaryan. St Ledger was booked 
a moment ago too. Ireland are determined to make this as nervy as possible, it 
seems.

66 min: Armenia have been emboldened by their goal. They're passing crisply 
and purposefully, and Ireland's defending has again assumed a rather desperate 
quality.

67 min: Pitiful. That's waht McGeady's shot was after Duff stole possession in 
midfield and presented him with a glaring opportunity to score. But his shot 
from 16 yards might not have reached the goal even if Petrosyan didn't pick it 
up. And that's McGeady's last contribution to the game, as Stephen Hunt comes 
on in his place.

69 min: Doyle, who hasn't played well tonight, will miss the first leg of the 
play-off if Ireland get there after being booked for a desperate foul.

70 min: Mkhitaryan floats a corner to the back post. Manucharyan meets it but 
nuts over.

73 min: Ireland attempting to settle down with some keep-ball. Working at the 
moment. "Ireland are showing great determination to overcome Stephen Kelly and 
maintain a lead over ten man Armenia," snarks JR in Illinois. "We have a term 
here in the States for the way he's played. We'd call it 'terrible'. Have you 
heard of that one over there?" Rings a bell.

75 min: Ireland change: Fahey on for Whelan. Elsewhere, Croatia may not 
necessarily be into the play-offs - if Holland beat Sweden, they could go 
through directly as best runners-up. The Swedes, however, are currently on 
course for that as they're drawing 1-1.

78 min: Here comes Jon Walters - the most improved player in the Premier 
League in the last year?

79 min: Walters replaces Cox.

81 min: RED CARD! Trap's error in not withdrawing Doyle rather than Cox 
suddenly looks costly: Doyle gets a second yellow - and deservedly so - for 
leading with his elbow as the jumped for a ball with Mkrtchyan. So both sides 
now have ten players.

83 min: Walters is fouled .. but the ball runs through to Hunt so the ref 
waves play on and Hunt should score ... the keeper comes out ... and Hunt goes 
down ... the crowd demand a penalty but the ref gives a corner, reasoning that 
the backtracking defender (Aleksanyan?) prodded the ball out. Duff is booked 
for his protests.

85 min: Ireland are finishing on the front foot. Walters goes for a curler 
from the corner of the box, but finds only the keeper's mid-riff.

88 min: A trap team might have been expected to sit on their lead now rather 
than risk conceding the two goals that would put them out but this has become a 
madly helter-skelter game. Hunt slips Walters in, and the Stoke man booms wide 
from the edge of the area. "This is brutal stuff from Ireland," rages Seamus 
Scanlan. "Even if we do qualify for Euro 2012 do we want another two or four 
years of this from Trapattoni? NO!" I'll second that.

90 min: There will be four more minutes. And a corner to Armenia after Given 
saves a decent Manucharyan shot with his foot.

90+3 min: There will be one more chance for Armenia, as Kelly concedes a 
freekick wide on the right. Meanwhile, Slovenia have taken the lead over 
Serbia, meaning Estonia could be in the play-offs.

Full-time: The Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> have reached the 
play-offs after a madcap match! And they may even be seeded there, depending on 
results from elsewhere tonight. There were some good performances tonight - 
Duff, Cox, Dunne and Andrews stood out for Ireland while Pizelli, Mkhitaryan 
and Movsisyan were splendid for the visitors, whose defending let hem down 
badly. Oh, I see Bosnia-Herzegovina have just scored in Pairs meaning .... 
Ireland could face France again in the play-offs! Now, I'm off to feast on 
apricots.
 