
If ever you wanted evidence that we are in a bizarre economic environment, you 
only needed to see that when the latest inflation figures came out on 
Wednesday, the annual growth of 1.3% was deemed high enough to have financial 
markets all but ruling out the chances of an interest rate cut next week.

The latest consumer price index figures released yesterday by the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/6401.0Main+Features1Sep%202016?OpenDocument>
 showed quarterly growth of the CPI was 0.7% and the annual rate was 1.3%. 
Despite the very low annual growth figures, the value of the dollar immediately 
jumped nearly 1% from US$0.7642 to US$0.7707 as the market took the quarterly 
inflation “jump” of 0.7% as a sign that an interest rate cut next month is off 
the table.

But a look at the figures show that inflation remains extremely low – indeed 
so low that even 12 months ago such figures would have had the market assuming 
a rate cut would almost be certain.

Yes, the CPI jumped a bit in the September quarter. The 0.7% growth was the 
fastest for 3 years:

But the reality is that was due largely to an exceptional 19.5% increase in 
the price of fruit after flooding in the major growing areas reduced supply. If 
we excluded food and non-alcoholic beverages from the figures, the CPI would 
have only risen 0.5%.

The Reserve Bank, whose board meets to decide on interest rates on Tuesday, 
will pay the CPI increase no mind at all when it comes to making its decision. 
Instead it will look at the underlying inflation growth rates of the “weighted 
median” and “trimmed mean”. And both of these saw slowing growth in the 
September quarter:

The RBA targets an underlying annual inflation growth of between 2% and 3%, 
and again here we see nothing that would suggest a rate cut is off the table – 
far from it. Underlying inflation has now been growing below 2% for a year and 
the weighted median growth of 1.3% is a record low:

While underlying inflation growth did dip below 2% for a brief period in the 
last 1990s, the difference between then and now could not be starker.

In 1998 when underlying inflation growth fell to 1.8%, the cash rate was at 5% 
– that is the real cash rate was 3.2%; by contrast, with underlying inflation 
growth currently at 1.7%, the cash rate is at 1.5%, for a real cash rate of
negative 0.2%:

However, while inflation growth is low, that does not actually mean the RBA 
will cut rates next week – indeed the strong likelihood is they will not.

Last week when I suggested interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/20/interest-rates-are-at-record-lows-dont-expect-them-to-go-any-lower>
 were unlikely to go lower any time soon, the market was pricing in just a 14% 
chance of a rate cut on Melbourne Cup day. The next day this went up to 19%, 
today’s figures have dropped to around a 4% chance.

The market is now slightly more optimistic of another rate cut by this time 
next year, but it is still at best just a 50:50 proposition. And you have to 
wonder given how low interest rates are right now, whether another rate cut 
would have much impact.

Low inflation is a symptom of both low prices via goods and services that are 
tradeable (that is their price is largely set overseas) and from the 
non-tradeable sector.

While the price growth of tradeable prices is generally more erratic, the 
current 1.7% growth of the non-tradeables items suggests very weak demand 
within the economy:

One area that reflects the state of the economy, with weak wages and tepid 
full-time employment growth, is rental prices. Across the nation, rents 
increased by just 0.7% in the past 12 months – the slowest ever outside of the 
1990s recession. There has also been a slowing in the growth of the price of 
new houses purchased by owner occupiers:

But as it often the case, where you live greatly affects how much your rent is 
going up. The national average is being dragged down by the end of the mining 
boom out west.

Perth property and rent prices are falling rather quickly – rents down 6.4% 
and housing down 2.4% in the past year:

A chart of the growth of rents in Perth compared with Sydney and Melbourne is 
a very good depiction of the effects of a mining boom and bust. While rents in 
the two biggest capital cities are growing around where they were prior to the 
massive increases in 2006-07, in Perth they have utterly collapsed:

Perth rents might be cheaper than they were last year, but there are also 
fewer full-time jobs in WA than last year:

In the midst of a housing affordability debate, it’s a nice reminder that one 
of the quickest ways housing can become affordable is when an economy tanks.

The inflation figures reveal continuing weak demand in the economy, and little 
sense of any quick return to prices growing within the RBA’s target band. But I 
suspect they won’t cut rates next week – especially while coal and iron ore 
prices are improving.

Nothing in these figures would have the RBA thinking inflation is improving; 
but the question remains whether they believe that with the cash rate already 
below the level of inflation growth that cutting rates further will do any good.
 