
Week four and we wrap up the first part of the course, the more "factual" side 
of things, as course leader Toby describes it. After next week's analysis of a 
big old book called the Bible, we'll start looking into the practical and 
spiritual ways of being a modern Christian. To be honest, I'm keen to move on, 
because these discussions about the historicity of Jesus' life and death are 
circular, largely because my definition of "factual" does not align with 
Alpha's.

Of course, as everyone knows, people don't come back from the dead (vampires 
and zombies notwithstanding). It doesn't happen. Why is it so important to the 
teachings of Christ that his brutally murdered corpse did just that? Not for 
the first time, I don't get it.

Toby talks about how there have been historical attempts to rationalise 
Christianity by removing the alleged physical reality of his rising from the 
tomb. On slides, he presents and addresses each one in turn. Maybe Jesus was 
only spiritually or metaphorically raised: no, because the Bible uses very 
physical language; maybe they got the wrong tomb: no, because Jesus was 
actually seen after the empty tomb was discovered; mass hallucination could 
explain his resurrection: but there were multiple sightings over several days; 
he actually didn't die: unlikely, as along withsanitation, medicine, education, 
wine, irrigation <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4vbSRaXH3NM>, and so on, the 
Romans were spectacularly good at killing. This last one gives us all a gallows 
giggle.

In the first week Toby told us that if Christianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> is true, then it's true for 
everyone. But surely compassion and turning the other cheek are universal human 
traits that exist entirely independently of zombification. Would the message 
really change if it turned out that JC retired from public life and moved into 
a bungalow in East Sheen? Why does the story have to be true to carry meaning?

Steve, an agnostic and the most eloquent Alpharino, is fascinated by the 
resurrection historicity and digs around in the evidence presented. Toby backs 
it up with yet another piece of un-parsimonious reasoning: If JC didn't really 
die, then why were early Christians sowilling to die for their beliefs 
<http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=acts%206:8-8:3&version=9>?

Toby is no fool, but this is just plain silly to me. Apart from its cosmic 
distance from parsimony, it makes me think of a few other examples of people 
willing to die for charismatic leaders: how about theRev Jimmy Jones 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peoples_Temple>, or David Koresh. I'm not 
denigrating modern Christianity by saying it's a cult; it is not. But by using 
this as evidence of its truth and roots, it sure sounds like it. That doesn't 
seem like a sensible argument to me.

As happens two or three times in each session, scripture is quoted as 
supporting evidence. Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, chapter 15, verse 
14, flashes up on the screen:
 And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is 
also vain. 
There it is. The primary limiting factor in setting up and galvanising 
Christianity to the exclusion of other stances. Paul goes on to say that if 
Jesus didn't rise from the dead, then we cannot atone for our sins. Stone me, 
why can't you see why it's so frustrating that Christianity's vice-like grip on 
this verse prevents anyone rational from buying into what could otherwise 
simply be a moral philosophy?

I'm glad that this part of the course about the historicity on which 
Christianity is built is over. Everything so far on the Alpha course has been 
repetition of centuries-old stories so ingrained that they are part of our 
shared Anglican culture. As someone blessed with an absence of faith, I want to 
know what having it means, and that presumably will come in the later sessions. 
What I have learnt so far is that Christianity does not lend itself well to 
hard rational and factual analysis. No great revelation there. But what appears 
to be a theology of atonement via penal substitution relies on the physical 
truths of Jesus' life, death and resurrection. My sense from this course is 
that our latent cultural Christianity, particularly amongst us, the 
de-churched, means we are prone to relinquishing critical faculties out of 
apathy. Barbara, of whom I am growing fond, doesn't buy into the resurrection 
myth and is unmoved by this session. But she's not bothered enough to let it 
shake her belief that there is something divine to inspire her faith. It 
strikes me this might be a key to Christianity's success: give them enough to 
believe, but not enough to tear it apart.
 