
The UK's biggest retailers are being asked to intervene in the Scottish 
referendum debate, spelling out how a yes vote next week could force up the 
costs of doing business in an independentScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and result in higher prices in the 
shops.

With the explicit support of No 10, the initiative – which will come in the 
form of a letter to be released at the weekend – was being led by Sir Ian 
Cheshire, the chief executive of Kingfisher, the business behind B&Q, the DIY 
chain. Other retailers understood to have agreed to back the initiative so far 
include Marc Bolland, the chief executive of Marks & Spencer, and Charlie 
Mayfield, chairman of theJohn Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> Group. Andy Clarke, the chief 
executive of Asda, and John Timpson, boss of the Timpson shoe repair business, 
also support it.

On Thursday night Cheshire confirmed his involvement: "Business leaders need 
to speak out and get the facts in front of Scottish voters who need to make a 
decision. It's not scaremongering, which seems to be a favourite phrase ofAlex 
Salmond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>. There are costs and 
consequences of separation and I think the current system works better. 
Independence is possible but people have to decide if it is better. There needs 
to be measured debate."

So far, it is understood that Morrisons has refused to add its name and that 
several other leading retailers are holding back, fearing it would alienate 
vast numbers of Scottish shoppers.

News of the coordinated move will fuel Salmond's concerns that a dirty tricks 
campaign against him is being co-ordinated in Downing Street.

On Thursday the first minister launched a stinging attack on the Treasury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/11/alex-salmond-treasury-bbc-rbs-scottish-independence>
 over an alleged leak about how Royal Bank of Scotland would relocate its head 
office to London if next week's referendum backed a breakaway from the union.

A furious Salmond also demanded co-operation from the BBC – with which the 
Scottish National party has had a fractious relationship during the 
independence campaign – over its reporting on Wednesday night that the 81% 
taxpayer-owned bank could relocate if there were a yes vote. It was a matter of 
"enormous gravity" for an unnamed Treasury official to have tipped off the BBC 
on Wednesday night, he said, demanding a formal leak inquiry by Sir Bob 
Kerslake, the head of the UK civil service. Salmond insisted theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> had a duty to cooperate, implying it 
was duty-bound to reveal its source.

Salmond accused the Treasury of being a major force in the no campaign: 
"They've now been caught red-handed as being part of a campaign of 
scaremongering." There were Treasury fingerprints all over a campaign of 
"intimidation and bullying," he said.

RBS confirmed the details of its contingency plans in a 7am stock exchange 
announcement which came after the other bailed-out bank with major Scottish 
operations,Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group>, had also set out 
its plans to potentially move its Edinburgh-based headquarters and prompted 
TSB, Tesco Bank and the Australian-owned Clydesdale bank to reveal similar 
contingency arrangements.

Amid union fears of sweeping job cuts across the financial services industry 
in Scotland, the banks played down the toll on employment in their combined 
Scottish workforces of 35,000, while the yes campaign insisted any shift of 
head offices amounted to little more than moving brass plates. However, Danny 
Alexander, the Liberal Democrat Treasury minister, backing Better Together, 
said it was of the "utmost seriousness for Scotland". "In the short term, jobs 
and tax revenues would be lost. But in the longer term, the centre of gravity 
and decision-making of Scotland's financial sector would have shifted to a 
foreign country. This would have the much more profound consequence of the 
steady erosion of the jobs and prosperity that this sector has brought to 
Scotland for two centuries," Alexander said.

Even before the new initiative to encourage top retailers to speak out in a 
coordinated way, there had been warnings from retail bosses that prices could 
rise if Scotland became independent. But Salmond kept the focus on the way 
RBS's plans had emerged on Wednesday night. A BBC spokeswoman said: "We note 
that Alex Salmond has called for an inquiry by the cabinet secretary and we 
will await a decision on that request. The story in question was accurate and 
BBC News exercised normal editorial judgments."

The Treasury denied it activated the story about RBS or Lloyds – whose plans 
were first reported by the Sun – although the Treasury did issue a press 
release at 10.15pm for immediate release entitled "Government response to Lloyds
Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group statement on 
Scottish referendum".

Any leak was a breach of Treasury and civil service rules, Salmond said. "It 
is a basic rule that it can't be released prior to the announcement at 7am this 
morning. This is a matter of enormous gravity."

Controversy about whether the RBS announcement was price-sensitive – which 
would require a formal Stock Exchange statement – was exacerbated by the 
decision by Lloyds not to make such a formal announcement following advice from 
its City brokers that the market did not have to be informed of contingency 
planning.

Shares in RBS and Lloyds both rose 1% in a falling market although Ian Gordon, 
an analyst at Investec, said: "I'm not aware of anything contained in the 
announcements that we wouldn't have taken as a given [although] may be we 
hadn't had it confirmed as a given".

Salmond played down the significance of the RBS announcement on the 
independence campaign, reading from a memo from Ross McEwan, the boss of RBS, 
pledging no impact on jobs. McEwan wrote to staff – some 11,500 of whom are 
based in Scotland – to tell them: "Our current business in Scotland, including 
the personal and business bank, IT and operations, human resources and many 
other functions, are here because of the skills and knowledge of our people, 
and the sound business environment. So far, I see no reason why this would 
change should we implement our contingency plans".

Lloyds Banking Group, the biggest private sector employer in Scotland with a 
16,000 workforce, has 75 individuals based in its Edinburgh-based HQ with 3,000 
in Bank of Scotland branches, 4,000 for Scottish Widows and a variety of other 
roles across the country. Tesco Bank, owned by the supermarket chain Tesco, 
employs 3,000 in Scotland, Clydesdale an estimated 3,500 and TSB around 2,000.

Despite the reassurance about jobs, a union source said: "There are concerns 
that there could be job cuts whatever the outcome."

While the banks warned that they needed to move their headquarters to ensure 
they remained protected by the Bank of England, Martin Gilbert, the boss of 
Aberdeen Asset Management, said an independent Scotland would be a big success.

Even so retail bosses also spoke of their concerns about the impact of 
independence.

Andy Clarke, chief executive of Asda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda>, the UK's second largest 
supermarket, said: "If we were no longer to operate in one state with one 
market and, broadly, one set of rules, our business model would inevitably 
become more complex. We would have to reflect our cost to operate here."

Mayfield, chairman of John Lewis, said: "The costs of doing business for most 
retailers are somewhat higher in Scotland than the rest of the UK but most 
retailers have one price across the UK. In the event of a yes vote that might 
change."
 