
Does an artist have any moral obligation when it comes to deciding who to sell 
their work to? Does the character or the family of the customer matter – and 
how they earned their money? TheAmerican artist Richard Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/18/instagram-artist-richard-prince-selfies>
 has just confronted such ethical anxieties head-on in an entertainingly 
paradoxical way.

Today’s wealthy art collectors range from oligarchs to trustafarians, from 
aristocrats to – and here’s what Prince is worked up about – people like those 
in the Trump dynasty. There is no conspicuous consumption as conspicuous as 
art-collecting and the president-elect’s daughter Ivanka is an enthusiastic 
buyer of art, who likes to show off her purchases onInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram>. Prince made a painting of 
Ivanka for her collection and, following the US election, now has seller’s 
remorse.

As the world awaits the presidential inauguration, Prince has excommunicated 
his portrait of Ivanka by claiming it is not a genuine work by him at all. 
Returning the $36,000 she paid for it, he parodied the president-elect’s 
enthusiastic use of Twitterin a tweet that declares 
<https://twitter.com/RichardPrince4/status/819281967225180160>: “This is not my 
work. I did not make it. I deny. I denounce. This fake art.”
 Good, postmodern fun … Richard Prince in front of his work Hands at the 
Kunsthaus Bregenz in Austria. Photograph: Gian Ehrenzeller/AP 
To fully appreciate Prince’s repudiation of his own artwork as an act of 
satire and protest, you need to know a bit about him. In the days when Donald 
Trump was building his tower in Manhattan, boasting about his book The Art of 
the Deal and getting satirised in the film Gremlins 2, Prince was a leading 
provocateur in the 1980s New York art scene. He made his name with consciously 
crass postmodernist “appropriation art” that gleefully borrowed images from 
advertising and recast them as art, most infamouslyhis pictures of cowboys 
<https://www.guggenheim.org/arts-curriculum/topic/cowboys>, made simply by 
rephotographing details of the macho western guys with their horses and lassoes 
in Marlboro cigarette ads.

If art can be a game of appropriation, irony and inauthenticity, why can’t 
politics be a cynical pop art performance?

So for Prince to call one of his own works “fake” is both easy and 
self-mocking. Nothing he does is entirely original, nor does his art claim to 
be anything but an image of an image, a simulation of the lies of advertising. 
He isconstantly battling accusations of plagiarism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/04/richard-prince-sued-copyright-infringement-rastafarian-instagram>
, such as a recent complaint by a photographer whose Instagram images Prince 
has reproduced as paintings. In fact, his portrait of Ivanka belongs to the 
same series of Instagram-based work. Prince took a screengrab of a selfie 
Ivanka had posted of having her hair done, then made a painting that reproduced 
it in every detail, including the comments and emojis added by followers. 
Ivanka, in turn, posed for a shotnext to Prince’s painting 
<http://hyperallergic.com/351403/richard-prince-disowns-his-ivanka-trump-portrait-possibly-increasing-its-value/>
.

What good, postmodern fun. But now Prince has opted out of the game and says 
his artwork is not a genuine Richard Prince – whatever that might be. At a 
moment when so many are desperate for political payback, here’s a hilarious way 
of beating the Trumps at Donald’s own game of denouncing unwelcome news as 
“fake” while shamelessly telling egregious and easily disprovable lies.

 Photograph: AP 
But the relationship between the New York art world and the dawning of the age 
of Trump adds up to a lot more than just one painting – and moral complicity 
might be harder to shake off than this. For where did today’s relativist 
attitude to truth begin if not with pop postmodernists like Prince?


Published in 1987, The Art of the Deal quotes Andy Warhol, the godfather of 
contemporary art, praising “business art”. In another of his business 
bestsellers, Trump praises an unnamed New York artist who showed him how easily 
he makes money by knocking up a quick piece and sending it off to his dealer 
before lunch. In Trump’s eyes, art is all about making a quick dollar and who’s 
to say he’s wrong? The instant production method adopted by Prince, Jeff Koons 
and a horde of followers ever since have made it easier than ever to turn art 
into money. Only the old guard conservatives were crying “fake” in those days.

If art can be a mirror game of appropriation, irony and inauthenticity, why 
can’t politics be a cynical pop art performance? Prince has played a small joke 
on the Trump family but Donald Trump has played a much bigger joke on the art 
world. He has stolen its ideas, and they helped him bring the unimaginable to 
life. There is a serious case for calling him the first pop-art president. 
Looking and sounding as if he was made up by Koons or Prince – or perhaps the 
more vicious Paul McCarthy – as some gross kitsch sculpture, he is taking 
Warhol’s vision of a nebulous world of fame and money to a whole new level.
 