
It's more than possible that Richard Parks is the nicest man I have ever met, 
or you will ever meet, and I do hope you get the chance. I use the word "nice" 
in its utterly best modern sense. In the vernacular of modern fame, you might 
expect a tall, tanned, good-looking former Welsh rugby international who is, 
when I first meet him in Cardiff, 12 frantic days away from setting the rather 
astonishing record of visiting both of Earth's poles and climbing the highest 
mountains on all seven continents within seven months, to carry a certain 
arrogance, hauteur; even some simplesway. Instead, he apologises for putting 
his bacon roll too close to my coffee, then tries to shrink into his seat and 
hide, nicely.

This is the slowest-burn story of adventurous heroism there has ever been in 
this media age. Those few weeks ago, in Cardiff, I was rather taken by the 
story of Richard, a fine flanker who had to give up professional rugby four 
years ago after a severe shoulder injury and decided, after a few desperate 
dark nights of the soul, to start climbing instead. He used his life savings 
from rugby, re-mortgaged his home, as did his parents theirs, to learn how to 
do it, found his fitness worked at altitude and that he could climb, and, 
somehow along the way, with urging and backing from friends, it morphed into 
the 737 Challenge. The seven hugest mountains on our seven continents, 
including Everest (roughly acknowledged by most now as a "pole", being the 
highest point on the planet), plus both poles, and all within seven months. 
Quite an achievement to aim for; quite an achievement to finish. Which he just 
did.

But I couldn't understand, back that day in Cardiff, why there weren't legions 
cheering; why there had been frankly derisory media coverage; why people 
weren't more excited. It hit me on the train back to London: it's half because 
Richard is a lovely, shy, brave, determined, quiet, nice non-prick, and half 
because – well, these challenges. These "journeys". There isn't a peak 
unexplored, very few last, dark, twisty corners of our planet unwormed by the 
wormers. What was the point?

And then suddenly, finally, a couple of weeks ago, just after Richard had 
managed to do Russia's Mt Elbrus, his increasingly dodgy rugby-d knees and one 
severely Everest-frostbitten toe (he named it Lazarus; it's still there) and 
the militant armed border skirmishes notwithstanding, he'd done it. Got home. 
To Cardiff, which, despite everything he's seen, he would "never leave". And it 
all began to happen. A huge government-sponsored reception; thousands of 
children queuing for his autograph. Richard is about to take off, and 
deservedly so.

"But I never started it with the intention of recognition," he says. "I didn't 
want to break some record for the sake of it. I had pretty personal reasons at 
the beginning. Gosh, I'm probably more reluctant now and more embarrassed than 
before to talk about it, as the profile rises.

"I didn't take it well, the injury, if I'm being honest. It was easily the 
most difficult year of my life; 26th of May 2009 – I was 30, and pretty wary 
and scary of what else I could do. I loved rugby and simply wasn't ready to 
finish, and wanted to play more for Wales; it was a real kick in the nuts, if I 
can use that phrase. It was a lifestyle and privilege to earn money for 
something I would do for free. Rugby had controlled all my adult life, but not 
in a negative way.
 On the ball: Richard Parks during a match between Leeds Tykes and London 
Irish in 2005. Photograph: Gary M. Prior/Getty Images 
"So when that last injury came and the consultant told me I could never play 
again, the overriding feeling was just fear – nearly agoraphobic. All of a 
sudden, with no plans in place for my life, I had out of the blue no structure, 
no regime. The decision to finish hadn't been in my control.

"I read, and I thought. Two years before that my nana, Gwen, had passed away. 
At her funeral I remembered a sentence: 'the horizon is only the limit of our 
sight' – it resonated with me at the time, but I hadn't fully understood it. 
Then, lying in bed, the full meaning of that sentence became clearer. Rather 
than being scared of the future, of the unknown, I could try to embrace it. I'd 
always been into outdoors, mountain biking and stuff like that, but had never 
climbed a mountain. I was just googling, and I came across the seven summits. 
They're climbed quite regularly by a reasonable amount of people. I just wanted 
to find out if I could do it."

He could. He went to an expedition company in Sheffield called Jagged Globe, 
and met a man called Simon Lowe with whom he has now done several summits. 
"Simon's become a very big part of it since, a bit of a mentor. My original 
plan was to climb all seven over three years, just to learn the skills – but 
then there was a mixture of different people becoming involved, and suddenly… 
well, the idea. I wanted to raise a ton of money for Marie Curie."

And, he says, 'The challenge wasn't necessarily climbing them. There are 
commercial companies who take novices up, haul you up. It was learning the 
skill of mountaineering, a new skill, testing myself in a new environment with, 
I suppose, a hope of closing the door on my rugby career. I found I was lucky 
in that I acclimatise easily, but there's no real way to tell who will and who 
won't; it's almost nothing to do with physicality. So, anyway, I trained on 
Mont Blanc, actually a serious mountain, fairly pleased with the way I 
performed. At that stage it was just an adventure, a toe in the water, just 
seeing how it suited. Suddenly the whole thing blossomed."

All these months later, does Richard think he's learned things? "Perspective. 
One of the blessings it's given me is life perspective. We worry about what to 
wear, what to eat. Hmm. When I came back from Everest, the longest I was back, 
maybe about two weeks, and I didn't change clothes for about a week. I wasn't 
trying to be dirty, or "cool", you simply get into the habit of not choosing 
what to wear – that was the first time I was really hit by howalien things 
were, on both sides.

"Also, strikes in Chile, Russian politics, waiting for eight days for a plane. 
I learned really quickly, the first leg in Antarctica, many delays, went quite 
quickly from me being stressed about it to finding it quite comical. Learned 
not to worry about things you can't control. It's terribly similar to climbing 
– nature is so much more powerful than you, so don't even think you can control 
it."
 Journey’s end: on Mount Elbrus, high up in the Caucasus mountain range, and 
his final summit of the trip. 
Your best dream or memory, Richard? "Dreams were horrendous. They always are 
at altitude. Don't try it. But memories… Antarctica has never left me. I have 
every intention of going back, if I'm ever fortunate enough. Some of the guys I 
learned with are grand polar travellers – you learn systems, planning, 
operating in something which isn't a mountain but is an equally hostile 
environment. It comes down to the lightest gear, knowing exactly where 
everything is on your body all the time so you can get at it instantly. There's 
a weird phrase: 'moisture management' – God, it all sounds so boring but it's 
incredibly important; it can be fatal. If you sweat excessively you'll have a 
layer of ice next to your skin, even though your outside jacket's dry – and 
there's very little solar energy, especially on the north pole. The average 
temperature was -39C, 24 hours a day for seven days, so you couldn't dry 
anything: once something's wet it's wet for the whole expedition. It's these 
boring, tiny, disciplined things. Actually I quite enjoyed them. Every second 
of the day you have to (or I chose to) be doing something constructive: to keep 
warm, or keep your circulation going, then ski again – the only time you rest 
is in your bag. Glove rotations. You'd be amazed. Even in severely cold 
conditions there's sweat." But, Richard –glove rotation? Where's the romance?

"It's there, I promise, it's there – I just needed to stay alive and keep 
those brilliant people with me alive. I was organised, but conscious of 
history, of course. I left Cardiff 100 years after Scott's expedition left 
Cardiff. I'd read up on him, Shackleton, the history, the heroic age, and I 
don't use the word lightly, I promise, but I felt privileged to be down there 
for the centenary for Amundsen's reaching the south pole. Antarctica simply 
rocked me. I felt a strange connection with that past: I wouldn't have been 
there without their efforts. I'm fascinated by the gear and am lucky to be 
using the best you can get. But it didn't stop me thinking all the time, on the 
poles and also on Everest, thinking about Hillary, that they were doing all 
this with the kind of gear we wouldn't, now, take the dog out for a walk in."

There is from Richard, more, so much more. The horrendous crevasse fall on 
Denali, Mount McKinley; the serious drip of frozenly cold water which almost 
did for him. "Over an hour is a long time to spend in a crevasse, below 40, 
wet, and looking into the cavern which I almost slid into, the size of a huge 
cinema. That would have been it." This is the closest I've come to seeing this 
fine man's eyes retrospectively scared.

Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, finally, loves this man. It's 
just woken up to him. He won't push it, not his style – but he should. He has 
raised little of his targeted million for cancer care, but I suspect he will 
within the next year. He is changing, and he's done it. What next? We have a 
later, less professional or less tetchy over-the-phone and slightly more 
emotional conversation – he's done it! – and I ask: what, when you are a 
grandfather, will you tell?

"I'd like to think if I do ever make it to, say, 80, that when I look back on 
it I'll think, yes, of nature, but more pertinently of all the friends I've 
made. Everywhere. God, I've been lucky to do this. It wasn't trying to break 
some record – many people can break records – it was trying to get me through 
the loss of something. I think I've done that. No, absolutely no idea now what 
I'll do. I'm stone broke."

Richard's charmingly shy story is just, I suspect, beginning.

For more information about Richard's quest, or to contribute, go to 
737challenge.com <http://www.737challenge.com/completed.html>
 