
Giovanni Trapattoni is confident that Richard Dunne will start in tomorrow's 
opening Euro 2012 qualifying tie for theRepublic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> against Armenia, 
despite him sitting out the latter part of yesterday's final training session 
in Dublin.

Trapattoni, the manager, boarded the long flight to Yerevan without four of 
his original 25-man party – the major absentees are Damien Duff and Keith 
Andrews – and with a further five players having not enjoyed any football at 
their clubs so far this season, including the potential starters Shay Given, 
Aiden McGeady and Liam Lawrence.

Ireland's preparations have been further undermined by injuries, with a 
handful of players suffering problems or continuing to carry them. Dunne is 
part of the latter group. The Aston Villa defender has a niggling back 
complaint that needs careful management and he has not been able to play a full 
part in training.

But Trapattoni, who relied heavily on Dunne during the qualifying campaign for 
the last World Cup, in which Ireland came up agonisingly short, appeared 
unconcerned. Darren O'Dea, the Ipswich Town defender, also failed to train 
fully, because of a knee sprain, but he was given the all-clear to travel.

"We let both of them stay quiet but it was a precaution and I am optimistic 
because we have 48 hours," Trapattoni said. "Richard, sure, and also O'Dea can 
be on the bench. It's possible. Richard still has this knock in the muscle but, 
tomorrow, he will train with us.

"The sharpness of the players is not a concern. Many players don't play in 
their teams but they play with us and they play well with us. I am confident 
about this. I have seen the players with the right mentality and enthusiasm, 
and I am happy with the situation. I was young and I played 90 minutes without 
training."

The captain, Robbie Keane, is carrying a knee problem – he has trained in a 
protective brace – while he is also seemingly out of favour at Tottenham 
Hotspur. He was offered to other clubs during the transfer window. Trapattoni 
said that he had spoken to Keane about the situation but he suggested that the 
striker considered that there was still a role for him to play at White Hart 
Lane.

"Robbie is balanced in his mind about football," Trapattoni said, "because he 
knows the situation from many years in England. Robbie also doesn't need to be 
in condition for 90 minutes because he has 90 minutes in his head. He is proud 
and I am sure he can play like Robbie Keane."

Trapattoni said it was "60% sure" that he would hand Derby County's Paul Green 
a competitive debut from the start alongside Glenn Whelan in central midfield, 
preferring him to Darron Gibson. The Italian anticipated a test of temperament 
for his players.

"Psychologically, it will be a different game," he said. "At home, Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> are hard, they can make an 
impression – it's no excuse but they can provoke us. We must be calm and play 
with the same mentality as we did in the last campaign, when we went without 
suspension. We need to understand that the result is more important."
 