
When he was a student in Toulouse, François Delattre found his regular train 
trip to Paris frustratingly slow, so he turned to paying drivers to “rent” a 
seat in their vehicle for the journey via internet forums. Ten years later he 
regularly takes passengers in his own car when travelling from his home in east 
London to France, a journey he makes every few months, charging for their seats 
and offsetting his costs.

While this concept of ridesharing is enormously popular in continental Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – most of his passengers are 
French – one of the largest growing areas of the sharing economy has failed to 
grab hold of the British public consciousness in the same way as renting out 
rooms via Airbnb.

“When I mentioned [ridesharing] in the office [in London] people were quite 
surprised. It is not very popular here. If they need a cheap transportation, 
people will take the long-distance bus,” he said.

The biggest player in ridesharing is Paris-based BlaBlaCar, which allows 
drivers and passengers to key in the details of where they are going and be 
linked with others doing the same journey. With 30 million users, the 
multinational company was last year valued at £1.1bn. Nicolas Brusson, one of 
the three founders of the company, said the UK takes up a small proportion of 
its users and has not become as mainstream an option for transport as it has on 
the continent.

“It works [in the UK]. You can see trips, you can go from Paris to Manchester. 
If you go on the website and check Paris to Lille or Berlin to Hamburg, you see 
the volume of offer is between five and 20 times higher,” he said.

“And the perception is the same. If you go into a bar in Spain and ask people 
have you heard of BlaBlaCar, the likelihood is yes. If you go to a bar in the 
UK and you ask if people have used BlaBlaCar, the likelihood is probably no … 
so it is still kind of niche in the UK.”

When I mentioned ridesharing in London, people were surprised. They take the 
long-distance bus
BlaBlaCar user François Delattre 
The system works by giving drivers a window of prices which they can charge 
for a journey, with a ceiling so that a driver cannot profit from the trip. The 
passenger pays a fee to the company for the service, which ranges between 10% 
and 15% depending on the country.

For the consumer, this appears to work best with spontaneous trips or at short 
notice. A trip between London and Manchester this weekend – leaving Friday and 
returning Sunday – would cost approximately £20 each way on BlaBlaCar. A train 
would cost twice the price, although the bus would come in slightly cheaper at 
£32. Try for the same journey at the end of July and there are no options for a 
rideshare, while the train costs £57 and the bus £14.

Similarly, travelling internationally at short notice can also be good for the 
pocket. A journey each way to Paris from London this weekend costs between £24 
and £52 on BlaBlaCar. A return journey on the Eurostar costs £245, the bus £63, 
and £118 on budget airlines. Again the advance option for the end of July does 
not throw up any options on rideshare while the train cost about £100, the bus 
£39 and flights £78.

Under BlaBlaCar charging, the number of seats drivers can offer and the fees 
they can charge are limited so that a profit cannot be made by the driver. All 
motor insurers within the Association of British Insurers have agreed that 
cover will not be affected as long as the fees contribute towards the running 
costs and no profit is made.

So why have the British not embraced the idea of sharing their car in the same 
way that they share their homes viaAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb>? Part of the problem, according 
to Brusson, is insurance.

Although insurance systems are similar across Europe, he said, there is a 
perception among some British drivers that they will not be covered if they 
take passengers. “In continental Europe it has always been a non-issue. People 
understand that as they are sharing a cost with other passengers, they are 
insured, and we offer additional insurance through a partnership with Axa,” he 
said.

“There is a fear in the UK that as I get someone stepping into my car, and 
transacting money, then you are at a bigger risk. The perception of legal risk 
… and the [fear] of being sued in the UK is much, much stronger.

“The thing that has been making the UK not as mainstream as other countries is 
the ability to convince drivers to actually offer their seats between cities, 
and the only rational thing that we found to be radically different between 
continental Europe and the UK was this notion of car insurance.”

In the same way that avoiding profit avoids insurance implications, the same 
applies to tax. A HMRC spokesman said that if the charges are just to cover 
costs, there would be no taxable trading activity: “When an activity is 
undertaken such as car-sharing it will depend on the individual facts, but if 
it goes beyond cost sharing resulting in a profit, it may constitute a taxable 
activity.”

For ridesharing in particular you are not making a profit through those 
journeys, it is about sharing the costs.
Rob Vaughan, PricewaterhouseCoopers 
Rob Vaughan, an economist with PricewaterhouseCoopers who has produced a 
report on the sharing economy, said studies have shown that some in continental 
Europe have more altruistic objectives when using the sharing economy, while 
British people can be more focused on financial gain.

“The culture of sharing and collaboration can be very different across 
different countries … In continental Europe, I think the motivation for people 
using the sharing economy and ridesharing tends to be not just financial in 
nature. There are broader, more community objectives which [are] built on the 
way local communities have tended to be more open and neighbourly and fair with 
each other,” he said.

“For ridesharing in particular you are not making a profit through those 
journeys, it is about sharing the costs. So financial rewards are lower than 
other types of activity in the sharing economy.”

But maybe it is just because British people prefer to travel alone? Brusson 
does not believe this is true, as flat and home sharing has proved successful.

For Delattre, ridesharing has spread through the family and his 70-year-old 
mother uses it, while he has taken some unique passengers. “I’m a kind of car 
sharer pet expert. Because it is very difficult to bring animals to the UK 
other than by car, people ask me if they can bring them,” he said. “So I 
regularly take cats, dogs and even ferrets and rats; weirdly, the latter don’t 
need to go through the vet border controls. But the smell can be terrible, so 
I’ve decided to limit it to dogs and cats,” he said.

Lille and back for two at under £62

Finding a reasonably priced last-minute weekend away for the spring bank 
holiday was always going to be an uphill struggle,writes Shane Hickey. First 
attempts threw up limited availability for self-catering in the UK, but 
seemingly unlimited prices – ranging from £300 for the long weekend for two 
people. Coupled with car hire of £120 (before petrol costs) we gave up and the 
search continued. Going to Paris via Eurostar presented no better hope. With 
tickets starting at £120 a head, each way, investigations were abandoned before 
we even checked the price of Parisian hotels.

Instead, myself and my wife opted for the sharing economy alternative - a 
rideshare via BlaBlaCar and an Airbnb in Lille, described by Lonely Planet as 
“France’s most underrated major city”, but, more importantly, somewhere we 
could get to at last minute. While we are Airbnb veterans, it was our first 
experience of ride sharing.

Collected in a Peugeot 205 at 2pm on the Saturday, we were joined in the car 
by a Hungarian IT worker on his way to Bruges. Along with our French driver, it 
was a tight but comfortable fit. Before the trip we knew something of the 
driver, who has reached “ambassador” seniority level on BlaBlaCar’s rating 
system, and the four of us chatted pleasantly on and off throughout the journey.

The only problems arose during delays on entering the Eurotunnel, where we 
queued with many others to get on to a train - not a situation which could be 
blamed on the driver - and after leaving the train at Coquelles and driving 
another 120km, we arrived at our destination.

When we were dropped off, with our one bag between us, outside the main train 
station in Lille, it was just after 7.30pm local time. At almost six-hours, the 
journey may have been longer than a flight to Paris, but look at the price 
using ridesharing: at £30.15 each going out and £31.78 coming back, it was a 
valuable budget option for a last-minute bank holiday weekend away.
 