
Last week, I brought you some yeast-free breads 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/26/yeast-free-bread-recipes-whittingstall>
. Now I'm moving on to the yeasted variety, the kind of well-risen, 
soft-crumbed, crusty items that most of us think of when we hear the word 
"bread".

Yeast is magical stuff, lying dormant in the kitchen cupboard until you choose 
to wake it up. All you need do is feed it, which takes nothing more than mixing 
it with flour and water. Thus attended to, its mystical power is unleashed.

Not only does it produce bubbles of carbon dioxide that aerate and inflate 
your dough most obligingly; it also, rather daringly, releases alcohol and 
acids, which help make your bread taste amazing. This awe-inspiring chemical 
process is what gives you the wherewithal to turn a bowl of flour and a jug of 
water into a delectable loaf. Or pitta. Or focaccia, pizza, crumpet, bun, 
baguette... Whatever bready, belly-filling delight takes your fancy.

I could have gone in at entry level with a basic white loaf recipe 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2009/sep/10/bake-your-own-bread>, but 
I fancied a treat or two, so instead I'm sharing recipes made with dough that's 
sweetened and/or enriched to a greater or lesser extent. They're marginally 
more complex than a plain loaf, but not hard. Even if you've never baked with 
yeast, don't feel intimidated by any of this week's recipes. They're yours for 
the baking.

Generally, enriched doughs take a bit longer to rise because the added 
ingredients slow down the yeast, but beyond that it's the same bread-baking 
basics that are important: measure your ingredients, keep your dough relatively 
wet and loose (bagels being a rare exception), and let it rise initially until 
it's at least doubled in size, no matter how long that takes, so it's properly 
developed and the gluten nicely stretched. The standard one hour's rising may 
not be enough – it may take more like two (bear in mind that a warm kitchen 
will help speed it along).

I've specified dried yeast, which needs to be "activated" in a warm liquid 
before use, rather than the "easy-blend" or quick yeast that you simply stir 
into the flour. This latter is very popular, but it does contain additives, 
whereas standard dried yeast is usually just that: yeast and nothing else. If 
you want to use quick yeast instead, feel free – just leave out the frothing 
stage at the beginning, add the water and yeast to the dry ingredients, and go 
straight to dough. (Check the pack, but you'll probably need about a 
teaspoonful in place of two teaspoons of dried.) For me, though, that frothing 
prelude is all part of the excitement. It's where the yeast comes alive and 
announces its curious, ancient, alchemic intentions: to rise so that you may 
shine.

Apple and walnut buns

My nutty, appley take on the classic Chelsea bun. Makes 12.

250ml whole milk, warmed to just above blood heat 
2 tsp dried yeast 
50g caster sugar
500g strong white bread flour
10g fine sea salt
100g butter, melted
1 medium egg, lightly beaten

For the filling
60g butter, melted
3 dessert apples, peeled, cored and cut into 5-10mm dice
100g raisins
75g walnuts, roughly chopped
100g caster sugar 
1 tsp ground cinnamon

To glaze
3 tbsp apricot jam, sieved

Combine the warm milk, yeast and sugar, whisk and leave for about 15 minutes, 
until the mixture is frothy.

Combine the flour and salt in a bowl. Add the yeasty mixture, melted butter 
and egg, and mix to a rough dough. Turn out on to a lightly floured surface and 
knead until smooth and silky – about 10 minutes. It's a slightly sticky dough, 
so you may want to flour your hands a little, but try not to use any more than 
you absolutely have to.

Put the dough in a clean, lightly oiled bowl, cover with clingfilm and leave 
until doubled in size – this will take at least an hour, probably more like two 
or three, because the egg and butter slow the action of the yeast.

Liberally grease a deep rectangular baking tin (I use a 25cm x 30cm one) with 
melted butter. Heat 25g of the butter for the filling in a large frying pan 
over medium heat. Add the apple and cook, stirring often, for eight to 10 
minutes, until softened. Leave to cool.

Tip the risen dough on to a floured surface and roll out to a 45cm x 30cm 
rectangle, with one of the longer sides towards you. Brush the remaining melted 
butter over the dough, leaving a 2cm margin at one of the longer edges. Scatter 
over the apple, raisins and walnuts, then combine the sugar and cinnamon, and 
scatter on top. Roll up the dough, starting at the long edge closest to you, 
enclosing the filling in a long, swiss roll-style sausage. Trim off the ends, 
so you have a neat roll, and cut into 12 equal pieces (if any filling escapes 
when you cut the buns, just press it back into a few of the spirals). Turn each 
piece on its side, arrange in three rows of four in the tin, then put the tin 
inside a clean plastic bag and leave to prove in a warm place for a good hour, 
until nicely puffed up. Meanwhile, heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6.

Bake for 25-30 minutes, until deep golden brown (I like a dark, 
not-quite-burned top). Warm the sieved jam with a splash of water in a small 
pan, to loosen it, and brush over the buns while still hot. Leave to cool at 
least a little bit before eating.

Brioche
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's brioche: A sweet, rich french loaf. Photograph: 
Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
This recipe for the lovely, sweet, rich french loaf is from The River Cottage 
Bread Handbook 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bread-River-Cottage-Handbook-No/dp/074759533X>, by 
Daniel Stevens. Makes one loaf.

2 tsp dried yeast 
90ml warm milk
2 tbsp caster sugar
400g strong white bread flour
10g fine salt
100g softened butter
4 medium eggs, lightly beaten

To glaze
1 medium egg
2 tbsp milk

Put the yeast, warm milk and sugar in a jug, whisk, then leave for about 15 
minutes, until frothy.

Combine the flour and salt in a bowl, pour in the yeasty mixture, butter and 
eggs, and mix to a rough dough. This is a soft, sticky dough that's easiest to 
knead in a mixer with a dough hook, but you can do it by hand. Either way, 
knead until smooth and shiny. Shape into a round, place in a bowl and cover 
tightly. Leave in the fridge overnight.

The next day, shape the dough into a rough loaf shape and put in a loaf tin. 
Cover with a plastic bag and leave somewhere warm until almost doubled in size 
– this can take up to four hours because the dough is cold.

Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6. Beat together the egg and milk for the 
glaze, and brush over the loaf. Bake for 10 minutes, then lower the heat to 
180C/350F/gas mark 4 and bake for a further 30 minutes, until golden brown. 
Cool on a wire rack.

Bagels 

Is it worth making your own? Indisputably, yes – unless you happen to have 
access to a really good bakery that actually bakes real bagels with a lovely, 
chewy texture and glossy skin. Like these. Makes 12

2 tsp dried yeast
1 tbsp sugar
500g strong white bread flour
10g fine salt
1 tbsp sunflower oil
2 tbsp malt syrup (from health-food shops; or use sugar)

Put the yeast, 250ml warm water and the sugar in a jug, whisk, then leave for 
about 15 minutes, until frothy.

Put the flour and salt in a bowl, add the yeast mixture and oil, and mix to a 
rough dough. Tip on to a lightly floured surface and knead until smooth and 
silky – around 10 minutes. It should be tight and stiff.

Put the dough in a clean, lightly oiled bowl, cover with clingfilm and leave 
until doubled in size – this will take at least an hour. Meanwhile, oil two 
baking trays.

Tip the dough out on to a lightly floured surface, deflate it with your 
fingers and cut into 12 equal pieces. Roll each piece into a sausage, then form 
each sausage into a ring, sealing together the ends with water. Put the bagels 
on lightly oiled baking trays and leave to rise again for 20 minutes. 
Meanwhile, heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6 and bring a large pan of water 
to a boil.

After the bagels have proved, add the malt syrup to the boiling water. You now 
need to poach your bagels before baking – this is what gives them their unique 
texture and crust. Slip two or three bagels at a time into the simmering water 
and poach for one minute, flipping them over halfway through. Fish them out 
with a slotted spoon and return to the baking sheets. When all are poached, 
bake for 15 minutes, until golden brown. Cool on a wire rack.

• For the latest news from River Cottage HQ, go to rivercottage.net 
<http://www.rivercottage.net>.
 