
If Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> wants to pose the 
classic question "Are you better off now than before the last election ?" Ed 
Miliband will be relieved to see that the answer – in the Treasury's official 
figures – remains an emphatic no.

Current forecasts are that real wages will have fallen 5.8% over the course of 
the five-year parliament. Even in 2015, average earnings are due to rise by 
just 3.3%, alongside an increase in the retail price index of 3.3%; in other 
words, more stagnation. This is the first parliament in memory when living 
standards will have fallen.

Indeed, the Resolution Foundation, the leading wallahs on the subject, says 
that the first full year when average wages are expected to recover to 
pre-recession levels has been pushed back from 2017 to 2018 under the 
government's official economic forecast.

The median wage – the pay of the typical worker – will still be below 
pre-recession levels in 2018, and no higher than it was in 2003. This means, in 
the view of the Resolution Foundation, that many UK households are likely to 
have experienced 15 lost years of pay.Ed Balls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> is cautious enough to 
acknowledge there may be a point in 2015 when wages exceed prices, and much 
will depend on the labour market, and even how many Romanians and Bulgarians 
come to the UK next year.

So Balls and Miliband will be relieved that their chosen ground for the 
election has still not been swept away, despite the remarkable upgrading of 
economic growth in this year. Balls bet the farm on living standards, and feels 
his strategy is intact.

Yet Balls cannot believe the living standards question is going to be the only 
one posed by the electorate in 2015. Saying "Oooh, that is a bit pricey!" is 
not a macro-economic strategy.

Moreover, the chancellor made it clear he is determined to make Balls himself 
and his judgment the issue at the next election. Declaring victory, one of his 
aides pointed out: "Ed Balls not only said there would be no recovery without 
plan B, he said there could be no recovery without plan B."

The shadow chancellor has many ripostes. He says the recovery is still 
relatively weak, with the pace of growth due to slow in election year, pointing 
to falls in business investment and downward revisions for export growth.

In one of the most obvious political trapdoors ever constructed, Osborne has 
now promised to test Balls's commitment to deficit reduction. There will be a 
new Charter of Responsibility setting out the path to fiscal consolidation in 
2016-17 and 2017-18, and how the coalition will seek to reduce public-sector 
debt thereafter. In effect, Osborne will challenge Balls to vote for or against 
his fiscal reduction plans next autumn, at least six months before a general 
election.

So far, Balls has said he will only match the coalition's current spending 
plans for 2015-16. He will have some room for political manoeuvre since, like 
the Liberal Democrats, he can say the burden of deficit reduction should be 
shared between tax rises and spending cuts. The Tories have said there should 
be no more tax rises in the next parliament, a key battle line, and a point on 
which Balls could make common cause with business secretary, Vince Cable.

It is understood Cable was firm with his own leadership that there can be no 
agreed Tory-Lib Dem deficit reduction plan. But he will be disturbed by OBR 
predictions that spending on public services will reach its smallest share of 
national income since 1948.

Cable, privately, is still expecting the Bank of England to call a halt to 
Help to Buy, at least in south-east England, and fears theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> have made a pretty cynical 
calculation that rising house prices, in the absence of rising living 
standards, will engender the feelgood factor that gets Tory property-owning 
classes to the polls.

House prices will in 2018 still be 3.1 percentage points below their peak a 
decade ago. All the ingredients of a bubble are there. The OBR has had to 
revise its forecast for house price inflation in 2017-18, such that prices will 
be 10 % higher than predicted in March. This has a beneficial impact on the 
Treasury, through extra revenue from stamp duty. Overall, it expects the 
receipts from stamp duty to double over the forecast period from £8.9bn in 
2013-14 to £16.9bn in 2018-19. London is driving this surge since London 
accounts for more than 40% of the total stamp duty receipts.

That makes the issue of how to build more houses – an issue that normally 
never quite reaches the forefront of political debate – the unavoidable issue 
of 2014, and possibly the election. Conservatives and Labour have policy 
reviews under way, but, judging by these numbers, half-measures will no longer 
do.
 