
Robbie Keane is to undergo a scan just two days before the Republic of 
Ireland's home Euro 2012 qualifier againstArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia>, with Giovanni Trapattoni 
indicating that the LA Galaxy striker is a "strong doubt" for the crucial tie.

The 31-year-old striker complained of soreness in an abductor muscle after 
returning from Andorra during the early hours of Saturday following his side's 
2-0 Group B victory.

The Italian otherwise has no fresh injury problems, and his squad has been 
boosted by the arrival of the Stoke striker Jonathan Walters, who withdrew from 
the squad for Andorra with an ankle problem.

Trapattoni's only new concern is finding a replacement for the left-back 
Stephen Ward, who picked up his second yellow card of the qualifying campaign 
and will be suspended on Tuesday evening. However, with Richard Dunne available 
after serving his ban, the manager has options, with John O'Shea one possible 
solution.

If Keane does not make it, that will represent a blow to Ireland as they 
attempt to claim the point they need to book a play-off place. One positive for 
Trapattoni is that his preferred strike-partner for Keane, Kevin Doyle, looked 
to be back to his best against Andorra after regaining match sharpness 
following a knee problem.

The free-scoring Armenians stand between Trapattoni's side and a place in the 
Euro 2012 play-offs. Should Russia beat Andorra in Moscow on Tuesday, as they 
surely will, even victory for the Irish will secure only second place in Group 
B.

The Armenians, who lost 1-0 at home to Ireland in the first round of 
qualifiers in September last year, have won their last three games, against 
Andorra, Slovakia and Macedonia, and scored 11 goals in the process.

But asked if he had been surprised by their late surge, Trapattoni said: "No. 
Maybe if you know the players who play for Armenia, it is not a surprise.

"The Armenian players play in strong leagues, and some of our players play in 
the Championship. If you think about it, it is no surprise.

"We must play with 100% mentality and 100% attitude and 100% concentration, 
and be careful of silly mistakes. We are in this position because of one or two 
silly mistakes against Russia, for example.

"Armenia is a very, very strong team. They have scored more goals than us and 
we must pay very, very much attention."

The 72-year-old Italian will send his team into the game with his own future 
still undecided but amid speculation that he will be offered an extended 
contract should he guide them to the play-offs.

However, as his second qualifying campaign draws to a close – the first ended 
in a controversial aggregate defeat by France which denied Ireland a place in 
the World Cup in South Africa – Trapattoni is confident significant progress 
has been made.

He said: "At this stage, I hope I have succeeded in instilling a mentality in 
our players. Unfortunately, I am quite demanding because in the past I have 
built this mentality with teams I have previously managed.

"I am very pleased with our way, but we can improve again. Yesterday evening, 
I said we want to look at Manchester United. Obviously we do not have the 
players of Manchester United, but with their mentality, with attitude, with 
balance, I think we can achieve."
 