
Robbie Keane is being given every chance to prove his fitness ahead of the 
Republic of Ireland's Euro 2012 qualifier withArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> on Tuesday. The 31-year-old 
captain is a major doubt for the Aviva Stadium game which will decide Ireland's 
Group B fate as they attempt to secure a play-off place.

The manager, Giovanni Trapattoni, revealed on Saturday that Keane, Ireland's 
record goalscorer with 51, was to undergo a scan on a sore abductor muscle, and 
it was later confirmed that his chances of making the game were minimal. On 
Sunday it emerged that the problem is an abductor-muscle injury and while the 
assistant manager, Marco Tardelli, was refusing to rule the Los Angeles Galaxy 
forward out of a fixture in which Ireland need to avoid defeat to finish second 
in the group, the chances of him playing appear to be slim.

Tardelli said: "Robbie has a little problem, but we are hopeful he will 
recover. It will be very difficult, but we are hopeful. It's the same problem 
he had after the last match in Los Angeles. Yesterday, he had a scan and he has 
a problem – a big problem, not a little problem."

Asked to put a percentage on Keane's chances, Tardelli said: "I don't know. It 
is better to ask the doctor. There is very little possibility that he will 
recover, but we are hopeful."

Keane and his team-mates endured a gruelling trip back from their 2-0 win in 
Andorra on Friday night, which involved a three-hour coach journey from the 
Pyrenean principality to Barcelona and then a delayed flight, arriving in 
Dublin shortly before 7am on Saturday.

Those members of the squad who played at the Estadi Comunal were rested from 
an open training session at Tallaght Stadium on Saturday afternoon, but the 
bulk of them, Keane excepted, were back in action at a windswept Gannon Park in 
Malahide on Sunday morning.

Among them was the Stoke City striker Jonathan Walters, who met his colleagues 
after missing the trip to Andorra with an ankle injury. He and the West 
Bromwich Albion pair Shane Long and Simon Cox are the leading candidates to 
partner Kevin Doyle in a new-look front two if Keane misses out.

All three have impressed for their country recently, with Long in particular 
having established himself as a genuine option for Trapattoni's starting 
line-up.

However, Tardelli was giving little away on Sunday. He said: "We have many 
options. We have Walters, Long, Cox – we have many options. We are confident in 
all our players. We have different solutions, but we will wait and see 
tomorrow."

Richard Dunne will also be available after serving a one-match ban on Friday, 
although the left‑back Stephen Ward will replace him on the sidelines after 
picking up his second yellow card of the campaign in Andorra.

Preparations for Armenia will start in earnest on Monday, with the players 
having been given time to recover from their physical exertions and the 
psychological blow of seeing automatic qualification all but mathematically 
taken out of their hands by Russia's win in Slovakia. Several players expressed 
their disappointment at that after the game.

Tardelli said: "Me too, me too. It changed the point of view because if Russia 
had lost the match it was possible to finish top of the group. But now it is 
not and we are focused on this match against Armenia and we want to arrive in 
the play-offs."

To do that, Ireland will have to end Armenia's run of three successive wins, 
which have come courtesy of an 11-goal avalanche. Tardelli said: "I think they 
are better in the forwards. In defence, maybe they make some mistakes."
 