
Robbie Keane has expressed his relief at the closure of the transfer window 
and the striker is now determined to fight his way back to prominence at 
Tottenham Hotspur and, more immediately, inspire theRepublic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> to a winning start in 
Euro 2012 qualification against Armenia.

It has been an unsettling start to the season for Keane, after he was offered 
to other clubs including West Ham United, Everton, Newcastle United and Aston 
Villa, often as the makeweight in proposed deals. HThere was the feeling that 
if he had not been earning as much as £68,000 a week, he might have been sold.

The past 10 days have brought more disappointment. Harry Redknapp preferred 
Jermain Defoe to him last Wednesday, in the Champions League play-off second 
leg against Young Boys of Berne, even though the manager had said Defoe needed 
a groin operation, was not fully fit and could last no longer than an hour. 
Last Saturday Keane remained on the bench in the shock home defeat by Wigan 
Athletic and Redknapp introduced Giovani dos Santos ahead of him. Keane has 
made two substitutes' appearances so far for Tottenham, totalling 46 minutes.

The contrast to his international status is stark. Keane won his 100th cap 
last month against Argentina, becoming only the fourth Irishman to the 
landmark, and his 43 goals are a record by some distance. Niall Quinn is second 
on the all-time Ireland scoring chart with 21. Keane thrives on being the main 
man in Giovanni Trapattoni's squad, the leader and creative inspiration. When 
he pulls on his country's jersey at the Hanrapetakan Stadium, he will feel 
pride but also a sense of release.

"I think all the clubs are probably glad that the transfer window has closed 
and now everyone will concentrate on playing football," said Keane, who has 
maintained that he was "not going anywhere" over the summer. "At least there 
won't be any more speculation for a few months. Obviously every player wants to 
play in every game and I am certainly looking forward to theArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> match and next Tuesday's tie 
against Andorra in Dublin."

As ever, Trapattoni is prioritising the result over the performance. He 
pointed out that Brazil and Argentina, two very attacking teams, came unstuck 
with their approach at the World Cup finals and, therefore, it was vital to 
maintain the balance between attack and defence. It did not escape Trapattoni's 
notice that Spain, despite their pleasing passing style, emerged triumphant 
with four 1-0 wins at the knockout stage. "I'd take a 1-0 win against Armenia, 
even if I had to suffer," he said.

Ireland have been placed in Group B with Russia and Slovakia but Trapattoni 
was bullish. "In my heart, I think maybe we can finish first," he said.

Armenia (4-2-3-1, probable) Berezovski; Hovsepyan, Arzumanyan, Mkoyan, Artak 
Edigaryan; Artur Edigaryan, Kkrtchyan; Pachajyan, Mkhitaryan, Malakyan; 
Movsisyan.

Republic of Ireland (4-4-2, probable) Given; O'Shea, Dunne, St Ledger, 
Kilbane; Lawrence, Whelan, Green, McGeady; Keane, Doyle.

Referee Zsolt Szabo (Hungary).
 