

A rock'n'rollercoaster of a novelist! Stephen King on his Harley. Photograph 
Eamonn McCabe.

It was the publishing month's hot ticket: the evening Stephen King 
<http://books.theguardian.com/authors/author/0,,-98,00.html> finally made it 
back to London. The venue was the spectacular Middle Temple Hall, in the Inns 
of Court, a lavish setting more familiar to barristers, solicitors and other 
legal eagles than mere publishing and writing folks.

Now, there are publishing parties and publishing parties. Premiership authors 
get good champagne and a non-stop march of tasty canapes, while your average 
first and lower divisions run-of-the-mill scribe has to satisfy himself with 
publishers footing the bill for lukewarm white wine with crisps and Twiglets in 
a pub or at the Groucho Club.

Needless to say, Hodder & Stoughton gave Stephen King the top notch treatment, 
not only good champagne but also live music from theAlabama 3 
<http://www.alabama3.co.uk/>, who actually numbered four musicians. And Stevie 
even joined them for one song, despite suffering from flu. And what a sight for 
sore eyes it was to see a posse of publishing executives clapping along to his 
out of tune effort. But then, the harmonica player in the band happened to be 
the son of notorious Great Train Robber Bruce Reynolds, so maybe he'd made them 
an offer they couldn't refuse?

All the junior Hodderettes had put on their party frocks and the occasional 
literary agent had slipped on her little black dress, but the accent was very 
much on casual un-chic with King - who released new novelLisey's Story 
<http://books.theguardian.com/reviews/sciencefiction/0,,1933381,00.html> last 
month - leading the fashion fray with old jeans and a baggy tee-shirt. You 
can't take the rock'n'roller out of the man...

Curiously enough few horror writers appeared to be present (or to have been 
invited), although a full complement of Hodder crime authors were there 
(Margaret Murphy, Peter Robinson, Meg Gardiner), and the ebullient Martina Cole 
who had shamefully if proudly kept King off the number one spot last week, 
alongside an assortment of leading reviewers like Mark Timlin, Barry Forshaw, 
Stephen Jones, Mark Sanderson, Roz Kaveney, John Dugdale, etc ... It was also 
nice to see that most of King's previous publishers had come along, including 
the legendary Bob Tanner and Nick Webb, once of New English Library, where King 
first made his bow.

And, after King's departure, folk were even seen dancing, a spectacle Middle 
Temple Hall has surely not witnessed before. What is literary London coming to, 
I ask you.
 