
Always quick with a quip, Eddie Jones promised “fish and chip” rugby – 
traditionally English. “Stick it up your jumper, kick and clap,” Jones said, “I 
love fish and chips”. There was just a sprinkling of vinegar on the team too, 
to make things more interesting. Semesa Rokoduguni started on the wing, his 
first game since his one match against New Zealand back in 2014. Rokoduguni has 
scored 27 tries in 48 Premiership games in the last three years, and has gained 
more metres, made more clean breaks, and beaten more defenders than any other 
player in the league this season. Rokoduguni, who has, as his teammate Dave 
Attwood says, real “razzle-dazzle”, isn’t someone you pick when all you want to 
do is stick the ball under your jumper.

Scotland steal victory over Argentina thanks to Greig Laidlaw’s late penalty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/scotland-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
It’s a wonder it took Jones this long to get Rokoduguni in the team. He scored 
two tries, was involved in the run-up to a couple more, and was picked as the 
man-of-the-match. Rokoduguni kick-started England’s first attack with a deft 
sidestep inside Fijian fullback Metuisela Talebula and a short burst up the 
right wing. The move ended on the other side of the pitch, where Elliott Daly 
glided to the try-line, beating Talebula again on the way. Soon after, 
Rokoduguni scored himself. He took a quick flick of a pass from Alex Goode, 
skipped out of Akapusi Qera’s desperate attempt at a tap-tackle, regained his 
balance just in time to ricochet away off Benito Masivelu and dive across the 
line.

Rokoduguni’s second try was far simpler. He took a long pass from George Ford, 
who started smiling while the ball was still up in the air because he was so 
sure his teammate was going to score. Rokoduguni took a moment to kiss the ball 
before he set it down on the ground. There were other cute touches too, a 
flying 40m sprint from a re-start, a high leap to beat his opposite number 
Nemani Nadolo to a kick, and a lovely run as he cut in off his wing and into 
midfield. Good as he was, it all felt a little bittersweet. England’s gain was 
Fiji’s loss, because Rokoduguni was, of course, born there, and only left the 
country when he enlisted in the British Army at the age of 19.

During the first thirty minutes Fiji were all at sea. England were playing so 
well that Fiji looked like the Washington Generals, the team of stooges whose 
job it was to go down to the Harlem Globetrotters each week. Unlike the 
Generals, Fiji were at least trying to win, but the circumstances surrounding 
the game meant it felt like they’d been set up to fail. They had one three-day 
training camp before this tour, squeezed in between two rounds of the Top 14, 
then a single match against the Barbarians in Belfast. By the time they got 
into the swing of things at Twickenham they were already 31-0 down.

They fought back well after that, with three tries in the next 12 minutes. But 
you have to ask but how much better they’d be if they had the time and 
resources available to England. Being able to pick their best players would be 
a help, too. It’s not just Rokoduguni. He was one of several exiles turning out 
for other teams on Saturday. There was his England teammate Nathan Hughes, who 
came on with 30 minutes of the match to go.Over in Dublin, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/19/ireland-v-new-zealand-rugby-union-autumn-internationals-live>
 Waisake Naholo was on the bench for the All Blacks. In Paris, the French had 
Noa Nakaitaci on one wing and Virimi Vakatawa on the other. Across from them 
the Wallabies included Sefanaia Naivalu, Tevita Kuridrani and Henry Speight in 
their backline. All of them born in Fiji, and each with his own story about 
how, why, and when he’d left the country.

Wales are run close by inspired Japan before late Sam Davies drop goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/wales-japan-autumn-internationals-match-report>
The one common theme is that most of them they felt they’d be better able to 
provide for their families by moving overseas. Some of this is just modern 
sport. Fiji’s own fly half, Josh Matavesi, was born in Cornwall because his 
parents met while his Fijian father was over on tour in 1987. But there are 165 
Fijians playing in France alone. World Rugby’s mooted solution is to extend the 
residency period from three years to five, which would mean that anyone who did 
switch nationality would have to skip at least one World Cup to do it. It’s not 
going to be enough in itself. Two French teams, Brive and Clermont, already 
have academies in Fiji. They’re already recruiting from the under-15s. The 
Fijian players don’t begrudge the men who leave to play overseas.

Nikola Matawalu made a point of giving Rokoduguni a hug after he had scored 
his second. But if their team is going to reach its potential, they will need 
to staunch the flow of players. Ben Ryan, who coached Fiji’s Sevens team during 
the Olympics last summer, may have a fix. Ryan wants to establish a Super Rugby 
team in Fiji, with a new 20,000-seater stadium by the airport. “That would be a 
long way off, it would help us absolutely massively,” said Fiji coach John 
McKee, “if we had top players in Fiji we’d have more access to them through the 
year.” In the meantime Fiji will struggle, under-paid and under-prepared, the 
odds always stacked against them.
 