
Rolf Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/rolf-harris>, who was 
convicted of assaulting young girls last year, has been stripped of the CBE 
awarded to him by the Queen.

An official announcement in the London Gazette states 
<https://www.thegazette.co.uk/notice/2295581>: “The Queen has directed that the 
appointment of Rolf Harris to be a Commander of the Civil Division of the Most 
Excellent Order of the British Empire, dated 17 June 2006, shall be cancelled 
and annulled and that his name shall be erased from the Register of the said 
Order.”

Harris, 84, was jailed for nearly six years for sex attacks on girls as young 
as seven. He has already been stripped of honours in his native Australia. 
Harris received his CBE in 2006, a year after he painted the Queen’s 80th 
birthday portrait. He had previously been awarded the MBE and OBE.

Under normal protocol, honours from Buckingham Palace are forfeited if a 
person is considered to have brought the system into disrepute. A 
recommendation can be made by the honours and appointments secretariat to the 
forfeiture committee to revoke an honour if a person has been found guilty of a 
criminal offence. The decision to revoke an honour must be approved by the 
Queen.

The disgraced entertainer was jailed in July for 12 indecent assaults on four 
girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/30/rolf-harris-guilty-indecent-assault>
. Seven of the 12 counts against Harris related to a friend of his daughter 
Bindi, including one incident when she was 15 when he seriously sexually 
assaulted her while Bindi slept in the adjacent bed. The girl, whom he had 
known since she was two, was 35 years his junior.

In December he abandoned any attempt to overturn the conviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/02/rolf-harris-gives-up-attempt-to-overturn-sexual-assault-convictions>
. Harris was the second person to be convicted under a wide-ranging police 
investigation set up in the wake of the Jimmy Savile revelations.


Harris’s career began when he arrived in London from Perth in 1952 and was 
diverted from a planned destiny in art through performing in cabaret and then 
children’s TV.

Over the decades he hosted prime-time entertainment shows, had a series of 
novelty pop hits and presented cartoon programmes and then animal shows.


Much of his career was based on his skilled and rapid sketching and he 
eventually acquired some renown as a serious artist.

Harris is not the first public figure to have been stripped of an honour. Fred 
Goodwin, the former chief executive of the Royal Bank of Scotland, was stripped 
of his knighthood in 2012.

Prince Naseem Hamed, former world boxing champion, lost his MBE in 2007 after 
being convicted of dangerous driving. Lester Piggott, the former champion 
jockey, lost his OBE after serving 12 months for a £2.8m tax fraud in 1987. 
Jack Lyons lost his knighthood after being convicted for fraud in the Guinness 
trial in 1990.

Robert Mugabe had his honorary knighthood annulled in 2008, while Nicolae 
Ceausescu, the Romanian dictator, had his honorary grand cross of the Most 
Honourable Order of the Bath removed the day before his execution on Christmas 
day, 1989.

Kim Philby lost his OBE and Sir Anthony Blunt had his title of knight 
commander of the Royal Victorian Order removed after it emerged they had spied 
for the Soviet Union.
 