
In the 1950s, British anthropologists normally conducted their fieldwork 
overseas. Ronnie Frankenberg, who has died aged 86, broke the rules by focusing 
on the former slate-mining community of Glyn Ceiriog, then in Denbighshire and 
now in Wrexham county borough, for his first book, Village on the Border (1957).

In doing so, he showed how anthropological methods could be effectively 
applied to British society. His choice of subject was fortuitous: he had 
intended to write his doctorate on the Caribbean, but his outspoken communist 
sympathies led to him being deported from Barbados, and the vice-chancellor of 
Manchester University demanded that he study within a day’s journey from the 
city. Needing to conduct his research in a non-English language to satisfy the 
conception of anthropology at the time, he hit upon the settlement in the 
Ceiriog Valley, not far beyond the Cheshire border.

Frankenberg’s study savaged the nostalgic romantic belief that small-town 
communities were cosy affairs, as well as the view that there was a settled 
sense of hierarchy and that people knew their place in a traditional and 
deferential social order. He emphasised instead how the town was riven with 
conflict, and showed how these tensions played out in the town’s day-to-day 
life – notably in the affairs of the local football club. He also showed how 
migrant “strangers” – far from disrupting community life – could actually 
assist solidarities within the town by acting as arbiters of local issues, 
though only where the locals gave them licence to.

His thinking was deeply influenced by Max Gluckman 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Max-Gluckman>, founder of the department 
at Manchester University that gave rise to the widerManchester school of 
anthropology 
<http://anthropology.ua.edu/cultures/cultures.php?version=1&culture=The%20Manchester%20School>
, who had inspired him to abandon his undergraduate medical studies at 
Cambridge. However, Frankenberg introduced new themes, notably an emphasis on 
the power of gender inequality.

The success of Village on the Border enabled Frankenberg to straddle 
anthropology and sociology in a way that has not been achieved in Britain 
before or since. His 1966 book, Communities in Britain, surveyed the growing 
number of community studies that had been carried out since the second world 
war and restated the fundamental division between urban and rural social life. 
This standpoint flew in the face of much urban theory, which was beginning to 
play down this division because of the steady proliferation of urban sprawl 
into the countryside, and so the book did not prove as significant as his 
earlier study.

By this time his energies had become devoted to academic leadership. In 1969, 
after working as education officer for the National Union of Mineworkers in 
south Wales, and then at Manchester and at the University of Zambia, he was 
appointed inauguralprofessor of sociology at Keele University 
<http://www.keele.ac.uk/sspp/people/staff/ronniefrankenberg/>, and helped make 
it one of the leading departments in Britain.

There Frankenberg used his authority to build a genuinely joint department of 
anthropologists and sociologists, and was inspired by the student protests of 
the period to develop the innovative workshop seminar system. Students met 
their lecturers at the start of term and hammered out a weekly curriculum and 
reading list together. Lecturers were not empowered to impose their views on 
the students. When I taught at Keele in the early 1990s, I responded to 
enthusiastic student demand to introduce a workshop on the sociology of 
Stoke-on-Trent, which proved to be one of my favourite teaching experiences.

This teaching format proved very effective in allowing new and emerging topics 
to be rapidly put on to the curriculum. It helped make Keele a pioneer in key 
areas of research in science and technology studies, in visual culture, and in 
the sociology of time. Frankenberg also edited theSociological Review 
<http://www.thesociologicalreview.com/> from 1970 to 1994, positioning it as a 
more maverick outlet than its rivals, and held visiting positions at the 
University of California, Berkeley, and Case Western Reserve, Ohio.

Born in London, Ronnie was the son of Louis, a businessman, and his wife, 
Sarah (nee Zaions). From Highgate school, north London, he went to Cambridge. A 
talk by Gluckman persuaded him to switch from anatomy, physiology and 
biochemistry for the first part of his bachelor’s degree to archaeology and 
anthropology. In 1950 he moved to Manchester, where he gained a master’s in 
social anthropology and undertook the project in north Wales that brought him a 
PhD (1954).

His later research moved away from communities: in 1985 he became professor 
emeritus, but continued at Keele as director of its Centre for Medical
Anthropology <https://www.theguardian.com/education/anthropology> until 1995, 
leading the first master’s course in the UK devoted to this topic. This move 
was linked to his Marxist-inspired concern with how power relations affected 
the experience of health, and he did fieldwork in Tuscany on health traditions 
and reforms. His last post at Keele was as a part-time tutor in medical social 
anthropology (1996-2000); he was also a part-time tutor and professor of 
medical anthropology at Brunel University (1989-2000).

After this final retirement, he continued to live in north Staffordshire, 
which he had come to identify with while at Keele. It was also where his third 
wife, Pauline (nee Hunt), whom he married in 1977, conducted pioneering 
research on gender and class relationships in coal-mining villages.

Obituary: Ruth Frankenberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jul/09/guardianobituaries.obituaries3> 
In 1953 Frankenberg married Alison Sherratt, and they had two daughters, Ruth 
and Rose-Anna. In 1964, he married Joyce Leeson, and they had a daughter, 
Helen. Both marriages ended in divorce. With Pauline he had a son, Adam, and 
daughter, Rebecca.Ruth, also a sociologist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jul/09/guardianobituaries.obituaries3>, 
died in 2007. He is survived by Pauline and his other children.

• Ronald Jonas Frankenberg, anthropologist, born 20 October 1929; died 20 
November 2015
 