
Zlatan Ibrahimovic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> 
usually makes a grand entrance, and it felt somewhat inevitable Manchester 
United’s new centre-forward would prove the matchwinner at Wembley. Overall, 
Ibrahimovic’s performance was relatively quiet, but he provided precisely what 
United were lacking throughout last season – killer instinct in the penalty box.

Ibrahimovic’s headed winner, from Antonio Valencia’s right-wing cross, was a 
classic centre-forward goal from Europe’s most consistent No9 over the past 
decade. But the Swede’s movement throughout the game demonstrated he is more 
than a goal poacher, which will prompt further questions about Wayne Rooney’s 
optimum role underJosé Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho>.

Community Shield: Manchester United beat Leicester with Ibrahimovic header
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/leicester-city-manchester-united-community-shield-match-report>
The Swede played an interesting role during his three seasons with Paris 
Saint-Germain. Fielded up front in a 4-3-3, he generally remained in typical 
striking positions against Ligue 1’s minnows. But against serious opposition, 
particularly in the Champions League, he would drift into much deeper 
positions. He was a creator as well as a goalscorer, in the knowledge that 
PSG’s wide forwards would run in behind.

On his United debut, Ibrahimovic’s movement into deeper zones was particularly 
notable during the first half. Wes Morgan and Robert Huth prefer remaining 
close to their own penalty box rather than being dragged upfield, and 
Ibrahimovic likes to move towards play to collect short passes into feet. In 
truth, his link play was not particularly impressive, but it was obvious he 
wanted to become part of United’s buildup play.

Those deeper positions, however, are Rooney’s domain. Mourinho has declared he 
will not field his captain in central midfield, where he often played under 
Louis van Gaal, and for England at Euro 2016, and he started in his traditional 
No10 role here. At this early stage, however, there were minimal signs of 
harmony between United’s two centre-forwards. Ibrahimovic was dropping into the 
zone Rooney was occupying, and the latter showed few signs of bursting beyond 
his strike partner into goalscoring positions, prompting a couple of frustrated 
sighs between the duo when attempted passing combinations broke down.

Jesse Lingard gets José Mourinho’s Manchester United up and running
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/07/jesse-lingard-jose-mourinho-manchester-united-leicester-city-community-shield>
It would be unfair to criticise their relationship after one game, but the 
question is whether Rooney still possesses the necessary dynamism to make 
continuous sprints and exploit the space created by Ibrahimovic, or whether 
they will simply play in front of opponents rather than offering penetration, 
which was a major problem under Van Gaal. Both players, you suspect, would 
prefer to play alongside a nippier, more mobile attacker at this stage of their 
careers.

That player was located out wide: Ibrahimovic’s arrival forced Anthony Martial 
to switch from No9 to No11 for 2016-17, and he will spend this season primarily 
on the left flank. The Frenchman could be crucial to making Ibrahimovic’s and 
Rooney’s relationship work, by providing powerful sprints from outside to in, 
as Edinson Cavani did alongside Ibrahimovic at PSG. But in this 4‑2‑3‑1 shape, 
and under this manager, United’s wide midfielders will have to spend plenty of 
time in their own half performing defensive duties.

The newcomer Henrikh Mkhitaryan played only a couple of minutes, while Paul 
Pogba’s signing is set to be confirmed this week, so United’s starting XI might 
be very different for their trip to Bournemouth on Sunday. Nevertheless, 
Mourinho is likely to devote time in training this week to improving United’s 
understanding in the final third, to bring out the best in his two star 
forwards.
 