
Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> created a 
global media empire from humble beginnings when he inherited Adelaide'sThe News 
from his father in the 1950s. More than 60 years and dozens of deals later, the 
83-year-old presides over a pay-TV, film and publishing conglomerate that is 
pushing for another transformative transaction: the attempted $80bn acquisition 
of Time Warner. If Murdoch succeeds with a second bid it will crown a decade of 
power-enhancing deals.

2003

DirecTV This was seen at the time as a radical departure, because it 
represented a significant bet on a satellite TV market that lagged cable. News 
Corporation - as Murdoch's media interests were formerly known - paid $6.6bn to 
acquire DirecTV from its unlikely parent, General Motors. The deal madeNews 
Corporation <https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> a maker of TV 
content and a US distributor, an unusual combination, unless you were AOL Time 
Warner, whose cable arm was later spun off.

2005

Full control of Fox Some of Murdoch's most important transactions involved 
corporate house-cleaning, including this $6bn manoeuvre to buy out shareholders 
in Fox Entertainment Group. It gave Murdoch greater leverage in future 
acquisitions by simplifying the power structure in his empire.

2005

Myspace Acquiring social networking site Myspace seemed like a good idea in 
2005, when Facebook wasn't the phenomenon it is now. Keen to tap into the craze 
- Murdoch at least got that hunch right - News Corporation spent $580m on 
Myspace.com, but it struggled from the start and was sold for $35m in 2011.

2006

 Buying out John Malone Another bit of housekeeping saw Murdoch take a stake 
in News Corporation owned by rival Malone, who handed over his $11bn slice in 
return for Murdoch's holding in DirecTV. This removed a distraction that was 
hampering News Corporation's ability to do deals and threatening Murdoch's 
plans to hand his empire to his children.

2007

Dow Jones Murdoch pulled off one of his most personal deals with the $5bn 
acquisition of theWall Street Journal publisher. He bought out another media 
family, the Bancrofts, in the process, but many observers saw it as consolation 
for his unsated desire for theFinancial Times.

2011

Shine Entertainment News Corporation paid £415m for Murdoch's daughter 
Elisabeth's TV production business. Elisabeth made £130m from the sale of the 
company behindThe Tudors and MasterChef. One group of investors accused Murdoch 
of treating News Corp "like a wholly owned family candy store" but it brought 
Elisabeth back into the News Corporation fold.

2013

 The big split Murdoch was under pressure from shareholders when he agreed to 
split News Corp in two after the phone-hacking scandal. Book publishing and 
newspapers including theSun and the New York Post were hived off from film and 
TV assets, which came under21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox>. The publishing assets 
were folded into a business called News Corp. The move has been a success for 
the entertainment unit, whose soaring shares have emboldened Murdoch to make 
his move for Time Warner.
 