
Asked whether he felt the EDF Energy Cup has a future, after his Sale reserves 
had been robbed by a late try from a full-strengthCardiff Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> side, Philippe Saint- André's 
body language was as confused as this stop-gap Anglo-Welsh competition.

First, the Sale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> Sharks director 
of rugby gave a Gallic shrug and said: "I don't know - I am the coach, and if I 
have to play a competition, then I play it." Then he stuck out his lower lip, 
pondered for a second and let rip: "For the safety of players, I will never 
pick guys who have played only three days earlier. Against London Irish the 
game was so physical, and you break your players and go against their safety if 
you do it. You can do this in football, or ping-pong, or tennis, but you don't 
do this in rugby because of the physicality. It is my responsibility, and I 
won't do it."

Saint-André felt sore on a couple of counts. Firstly, the Blues, playing only 
their second match in eight days, had been allowed to escape with a fortuitous 
win by an inexperienced side, many of them fresh out of the Sale academy. Sale 
led 17-13 deep into the final quarter, thanks to a spectacular Rudi Keil try 
and the accurate goal-kicking of Nick Macleod.

Secondly, his senior squad had been reduced to 28 after losing three players - 
the hooker Sébastien Bruno (biceps), lock Sean Cox (kneecap) and yesterday the 
wing Oriol Ripol, with a broken arm - over a nine-day period in which the 
Sharks played three matches.

The Frenchman was also keen to assume the role of Heineken Cup underdogs - his 
team have to travel to Clermont Auvergne on Saturday and are then home to the 
holders, Munster, a week later. This was a daunting enough task, Saint André 
said, without a growing injury list. "Clermont have been the best team in 
France for the past two and half years, with Toulouse, and the atmosphere will 
be amazing. I played for them for nine years, so the next two games against 
them and Munster will be huge - but we will have a go, although we are the 
outsiders in this group."

His opposite number, Dai Young, whose team play Calvisano first, criticised 
his players for a lacklustre display which saw them bailed out by the 
replacement wing Richard Mustoe's try nine minutes from time. "It is hugely 
frustrating... we know some of these players can pass, and that they do not 
fall off tackles, but that seemed to be the case today."

However, having struggled against Saint-André's reserves, for whom the 
Scotland captain Jason White and England scrum-half Richard Wigglesworth - 
playing here at fly-half - made impressive guest appearances, Young quipped: 
"We wish we had his problems."

Sale Macleod; Kuadey (Royle, 53), Keil, Tuilagi (Kennedy, 68), Ripol; 
Wigglesworth, Leck; Faure, M Jones, Halsall (Davies, 73),

C Jones (Shaw, 76), Cockbain, White (capt; Gaskell, 68), Fearns, Tait.

Try Keil Pens Macleod 4.

Sin-bin M Jones, 35.

Cardiff Blues Blair; Halfpenny (Mustoe, 50), J Robinson 

(T Shanklin, 71), Roberts, G Thomas; C Sweeney (N Robinson, 65), Rees; J Yapp, 
R Thomas (G Williams, 76), Filise (G Powell, 54), Davies (Jones, 53), Tito 
(capt), A Powell (Sowden-Taylor, 65), Lewis, M Williams.

Tries Halfpenny, Mustoe Con Blair Pens Blair, Sweeney. 

Referee T Hayes (WRU) Attendance 7,458. 

Heineken Cup one to watch: Jason White (Sale)

The return of the heavyweight Scotland forward alongside the rumbustious 
19-year-old No8 Carl Fearns, who caused Cardiff all manner of problems at the 
breakdown, was a big factor in the Sharks pushing a near full-strength Blues 
for the entire 80 minutes.
 