
Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> overcame a 
sluggish start to claim a bonus-point victory and a berth in the semi-finals of 
the EDF Energy Cup - although, if truth be told, it was a triumph based on 
strength of character rather than any great acumen or fluency.

Seven tries makes it sound like this was a feast of rugby, but it was a 
largely staccato and error-strewn affair that never truly emerged from third 
gear. Still, the Northampton fans will not care too much about that. After 
being in National League One last season, the Saints are now two wins from 
qualifying for next season's Heineken Cup. Good for them.

'It's great for the club and great for the fans that we are in the 
semi-finals,' said Jim Mallinder, Northampton's director of rugby. 'It was a 
good win for us. The Scarlets are a good side who like to play wide and it took 
us time to react to that. We were disappointed with our start, but we were 
level by half-time and confident of doing better in the second half. We 
achieved that by maintaining our composure and raising our game.'

Indeed they did, but Northampton barely knew what had hit them after the 
Scarlets crossed for two unconverted tries in the first seven minutes. Dominic 
Day secured clean line-out ball and Ceiron Thomas effected a break that took 
him to within spitting distance of the home line before Regan King crossed with 
ease to demonstrate what quickly recycled ball can do for you.

It became 10-0 after Northampton made a mess of their own scrum, just outside 
the Scarlets 22. With the ball lying unclaimed behind the Saints scrum with a 
big 'pick me up' sign on it (where was Ben Foden?), Simon Easterby did just 
that and battered his way into enemy territory. After the Saints prevented 
release at the ensuing breakdown, Sililo Martens took a quick tapped penalty 
and Morgan Stoddart was over in the corner after more quick hands.

Northampton, at that stage, had a mountain to climb, but Chris Ashton gained 
them a toe-hold when he evaded the close attention of Martens to bulldoze his 
way over from short range. The Saints drew level, at 13-13, just after the 
half-hour mark, when Ashton squeezed over in the right corner, though it was a 
controversial score. Not so much because the wing was adjudged to have 
satisfactorily grounded the ball - there was no problem there - but because 
Bruce Reihana's pass to him seemed to be clearly forward.

The Scarlets were denied a try right at the end of the first period, when 
Stoddart was deemed, by the video referee, to have been held up. David Lyons 
also went close, midway through the second half, when Myler made a marvellous 
try-saving tackle on the former Australia No 8. Again, the intervention of the 
video referee was required.

But, those moments apart, Northampton's line was never really threatened - 
apart from a late consolation score - as the home side denied the Scarlets 
territory and possession. Reihana burst on to a Foden pass to scamper home from 
35 metres out shortly after the restart and Sean Lamont came off his wing with 
15 minutes remaining to accept Lee Dickson's pop-pass at pace and smash his way 
over for the bonus-point try. As it turned out, a win without the bonus point 
would have sufficed for the Saints, but they were not to know that.

Franklin's Gardens: 12,042

Referee: W Barnes (Eng)

Northampton:Reihana (capt; Diggin 58); Ashton, Mayor, Downey, Lamont; Myler, 
Foden (Dickson 53); Smith, Shields (J Gray 72), Murray (Tonga'uiha 71), 
Fernandez Lobbe, Lawes (Day 23), Hopley (Easter 71), S Gray, Wilson

Tries: Ashton 2, Reihana, Lamont
Cons: Myler 2 
Pens Myler 3

Scarlets:Stoddart; Higgitt (Davies 55), King, G Evans, Jacob; C Thomas (S 
Jones 50), Martens (Roberts 51); I Thomas, Owens (Rees 50), Meeuws (John 66), D 
Jones, Day, N Thomas (G Thomas 50, Turnbull 76), Easterby (capt), Lyons

Tries: King, Stoddart, Davies 
Con: S Jones 
Pen: C Thomas
 