
Sam Allardyce’s most famous comments about his own managerial style – “I would 
be more suited to Internazionale or Real Madrid” – make more sense in the 
context of the question he had been asked.

Sam Allardyce: the big man gets the biggest job in football | Observer profile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/23/sam-allardyce-new-england-manager-football>
His interviewer had implied he only makes sense at an unfashionable 
bottom-half Premier League side such as Bolton or Blackburn. Allardyce’s point 
was simple – he has always played to the strengths of his squad, and given 
greater talents, his teams would play in a different manner. If appointed as 
the nextEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> manager, he 
would finally be given the opportunity to prove himself right.

It is easy to understand Allardyce’s frustrations, for example, when a manager 
emphasising the importance of attractive football such as Roberto Martínez is 
appointed to a big job at Everton – immediately after suffering relegation with 
Wigan. Allardyce hasn’t created such forward-thinking sides, but he’s never 
been responsible for such a hapless defence, and he’s never been relegated from 
the Premier League.

It’s hardly the most exciting tag line for his CV – “never relegated” – yet 
it’s more impressive when you consider the nature of his past clubs. He led 
both Bolton and West Ham to promotion, with Premier League survival clearly 
their major target, and would subsequently establish Bolton as a top-half club.

With Blackburn Rovers and Sunderland, he took charge when the two clubs were 
second-bottom of the league, meaning avoiding relegation was unquestionably an 
achievement. Even when sacked by Newcastle after an unhappy half-season in 
2007-08, he left the Magpies 11th in the table. In a world where Premier League 
survival is, sadly, essentially the biggest financial prize in football, 
Allardyce has a fine track record.

He is a great innovator in terms of sports psychology and physical 
conditioning. He was also an early adopter of Prozone, an area where he clearly 
differs from Roy Hodgson. The one area where he remains somewhat anachronistic 
is the on-field approach of his teams.

Allardyce is an incredibly thorough planner, consistently praised by players 
and coaching staff for his ability to deconstruct an opposition’s gameplan, 
finding ways to expose their weakness. He takes great pride in frustrating 
managers of more established clubs, particularly annoying Arsène Wenger over 
the years and reacting with great glee at having “out-tacticked” José Mourinho 
in 2014.

Often unashamedly direct, Allardyce has nevertheless created some thoroughly 
likeable football teams. His Bolton side, for example, may have started attacks 
with long balls towards the ultra-physical centre-forward Kevin Davies, but he 
was supported by the likes of Youri Djorkaeff and Jay-Jay Okocha, among the 
best technicians the Premier League has witnessed. Allardyce continually took a 
chance on talented attacking players: Mário Jardel, Hidetoshi Nakata, Fredi 
Bobic. Some proved inspired signings, others flopped – but they were usually 
signed for free, and Allardyce was willing to gamble on exciting players.

At Euro 2016, teams that based their attacking play around quick-passing 
combinations found it difficult to penetrate opponents sitting deep, with only 
Germany and, in the group stages, Spain, playing cohesive passing football. 
Iceland were the biggest overachievers, with an approach based around long 
balls and long throws, while Portugal triumphed with the most organised 
defence. Few will have enjoyed those stories as much as Allardyce.

However, Allardyce’s most recent managerial performance suggests there’s some 
nuance to his approach – his great escape with Sunderland didn’t involve no 
“big man” whatsoever. His 4-3-3 system featured Jermain Defoe, himself 
accustomed to playing alongside an aerial threat, between hard-working, pacey 
Fabio Borini on one flank and creative Wahbi Khazri on the other.

Recreate that system with England’s Euro 2016 squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/england-euro-2016-squad-23-picked-roy-hodgson>
 and you might find Jamie Vardy flanked by Raheem Sterling and Dele Alli, a 
forward trio hardly short on technical quality. We might find an Andy Carroll 
figure as a Plan B, but that wouldn’t have been an unreasonable selection this 
summer anyway, while Harry Kane is a perfect blend of an old-school 
centre-forward and an intelligent, modern striker.

Allardyce embraced attacking full-backs with Sunderland, too. Patrick van 
Aanholt is a highly technical left-back and DeAndre Yedlin all about speed, 
meaning Danny Rose and Kyle Walker are unlikely to be jettisoned in favour of 
defensive-minded alternatives. There’s a minor question mark in midfield, where 
Allardyce has generally liked hard-working, defensive-minded players, often 
playing centre-backs such as Ivan Campo, Fernando Hierro and Phil Jones in 
midfield. But England already have that mould of defensive midfielder in Eric 
Dier.

Few believe Allardyce is as suited to managing England as Allardyce himself, 
but the more you inspect England’s current options, the more his appointment 
makes sense.
 