
Sam Allardyce has welcomed the chance to manage “a very ambitious club” after 
making a swift return to football management after hisill-fated 67-day stint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
 in charge of England as Alan Pardew’s replacement at Crystal Palace.

The 62-year-old has signed a contract through to 2019 worth around 
£2.5m-a-year, marginally less than he briefly earned with the national team, 
with bonuses applicable if he succeeds in steering the club to Premier League 
survival. Palace have lost eight of their last 10 games, and 22 over the course 
of the calendar year, to hover just a point and a place from the relegation 
zone and will hope to tap the talents of a manager who has never seen his team 
demoted from the top flight.

Sam Allardyce the organiser will bring normality back to Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/sam-allardyce-crystal-palace-manager>
Allardyce will oversee his first training session on Saturday, as well as 
preparations on Christmas Day, and will be in the dugout as Palace take on 
Watford at Vicarage Road on Monday. He has acknowledged the priority is to 
tighten Palace up defensively, with the team having achieved only two clean 
sheets in the league in close to a year. “You generally get a new job on the 
back of there being a few difficulties at a club, and I’ll hopefully sort those 
difficulties out with my experience,” he said. “I’ll try and get a few more 
results on the board over Christmas and the new year to make everyone feel more 
comfortable.

“It’s been very impressive the way Palace has grown, and the fact they’ve held 
their Premier League status over a number of years. I hope I can bring some joy 
over Christmas and new year, and in the long-term between now and the end of 
the season. The club itself seems to be very ambitious.

“Certainly the chairman and the owners seem to be taking the club forward in 
the right direction. I like the look of the squad, and that’s probably the 
reason I’m here. Hopefully I can help the club move forward. It seems to be 
very ambitious.

“Attacking players, when you’re in possession, are fantastic. The 
strengthening in that area by the club and Alan this season has brought a lot 
of flair to the team, and quite a few more goals compared to last year.

“But the other side is we have to stop conceding when we are not in 
possession, so the goals we score win us games. That’s what we have to turn 
around. Let’s stop losing first. The objective is trying to find the basis of 
consistency to bring us some results.”

Allardyce had travelled down from his home in Bolton to the south London 
club’s training complex in Beckenham on Friday afternoon and met the chairman, 
Steve Parish, to finalise the deal. “We are delighted to be able to make an 
appointment so quickly and fortunate that someone of Sam’s calibre and 
experience was available,” said Parish, with the hierarchy having offered the 
new man assurances he will be able to bring in players next month. The team 
currently imbalanced by the absence of a senior left-back, and need better 
cover at centre-forward and centre-half.

“January is a very difficult window,” said Allardyce. “And we’ve got to try 
and make sure we protect the players we’ve got. But, certainly, trying to 
recruit and make the squad bigger, with a bit more strength in depth, will be 
key. The players here are good enough but if we can add to that, let’s do it.”

The former Bolton Wanderers, Blackburn Rovers, Newcastle, West Ham and 
Sunderland manager departed his position with the Football Association in 
September after only one match having been filmed discussing FA rules on 
third-party ownership by undercover reporters. He expressed only last week his 
intention to return to the game as soon as possible, telling beIN Sport “I 
don’t think I can leave it where it ended”, and had fielded tentative interest 
from clubs in China and agents claiming to work on behalf of Swansea City.

That impressed some urgency on Palace’s pursuit of his services, with the 
club’s American co-owners, David Blitzer and Josh Harris, having been made 
aware of his credentials late last month and increasingly concerned from afar 
over the threat relegation would pose to their investment. They were impressed 
by the level of detail, both on Palace’s current squad and potential targets 
for January, provided by Allardyce in a dossier supplied while the team were 
embroiled in a six-match losing streak, which culminated in a calamitous 5-4 
defeat at Swansea on 26 November.

Allardyce had indicated a desire to bring in his own coaching staff, but will 
initially lean heavily upon Pardew’s assistants, Keith Millen and Kevin Keen. 
They took charge of the squad’s preparations for the game at Vicarage Road on 
Friday, along with the goalkeeping coach Andy Woodman, following Pardew’s 
dismissal the previous day.
 