
With a familiar starting XI assembled for his debut as England manager, Sam 
Allardyce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sam-allardyce> hopes a change 
of system will improve the team’s fortunes.

Allardyce is set to use a 4-2-3-1 rather than the 4-3-3 and 4-3-1-2 Roy 
Hodgson deployed at Euro 2016. It has the benefit of being the formation the 
majority of these players are accustomed to at club level, and should mean 
everyone plays in their favoured position. Wayne Rooney will return to the No10 
role rather than being fielded as a conventional midfielder, while Jordan 
Henderson – in place of Dele Alli – should provide the defensive midfielder 
Eric Dier with close support.

Sam Allardyce shows faith in beaten Euros squad with first England lineup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/02/sam-allardyce-england-world-cup-2018-qualifying-slovakia>
Allardyce’s determination to persist with Rooney alongside Raheem Sterling, 
who had an underwhelming tournament in France, and Adam Lallana, who was much 
brighter, underlines his preference for talented, creative footballers in the 
final third.

Although often criticised for favouring a big striker and telling his 
defenders to pump long balls forward, Allardyce once created a highly 
entertaining Bolton side that included Youri Djorkaeff and Jay-Jay Okocha, two 
top-class playmakers. He has always insisted his teams would play good football 
if he was working with good players, and now is his time to prove it. Lallana’s 
role is crucial: in France his intelligent positioning encouraged Kyle Walker 
forward on the overlap, and England’s best passing combinations generally 
involved the Liverpool playmaker, although he will start on the opposite flank 
againstSlovakia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia> and open space 
for Danny Rose.

Rooney’s partnership with Harry Kane will also be interesting. They have 
rarely been fielded together as a duo, primarily because of Hodgson’s formation 
decisions – he often used Rooney behind two strikers, with Kane playing 
alongside another out-and-out striker. They should work well together, 
especially with Rooney playing behind Zlatan Ibrahimovic at Manchester United – 
the Swede likes to drop deep, inviting Rooney to motor forward into goalscoring 
positions. Kane, who makes similar movements and has been deployed as a second 
striker for Tottenham at the start of this season, will appreciate a partner 
providing a threat from deeper.

John Stones: ‘I feel like there is a weight off my shoulders’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/02/john-stones-manchester-city-england-slovakia-everton>
The most eye-catching inclusion is John Stones, making only his third 
competitive start forEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england>. 
Allardyce has repeatedly stressed his preference for traditional defenders who 
understand their job title, rather than ball-players likely to make errors. 
Stones is not a typical Allardyce defender, but his probable improvement under 
Pep Guardiola ensures he commands a place. Slovakia lack a reliable 
centre-forward and Stones might be perfect if Jan Kozak decides to field Ondrej 
Duda up front, as was the case for the goalless draw between these sides in 
June. Duda is a converted No10, more likely to drop deep and create rather than 
provide a penalty-box threat, and Stones will be happy to step forward and 
close him down.

The crucial question is how often Stones is able to demonstrate his passing 
quality. When managing West Ham, Allardyce’s centre-backs barely touched the 
ball, sometimes making as few as five passes per game because they were 
bypassed by long goalkicks. If that’s the case, Stones’s inclusion is 
questionable. If England pass forward more methodically, however, it may 
require good distribution from Joe Hart, who will inevitably find his kicking 
under close scrutiny.

England will be able to play out because Slovakia will not attempt to press, 
instead remaining in a deep, compact defensive shape. This will be the biggest 
test of Allardyce’s approach. He is accustomed to managing underdogs who see 
relatively little of the ball, so can he adapt and create a side capable of 
penetrating packed defences? With Scotland, Slovenia, Lithuania and Malta 
providing the other tests in Group F, England are likely to get plenty of 
practice.
 