
Sam Mendes - like American Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-beauty>, the film he has directed - 
is not what he seems. The echoes between the soul of the film and the man 
himself are the reason why the film is already being spoken of as a classic. 
Because, for his screen debut, Mendes - renowned for precise and cool 
theatrical productions - has made a highly emotional movie. His response to the 
first draft of the script was, he says, "instinctive". It was also, as it 
turned out, another example of his canny ability to make precisely the right 
choice.

Mendes is the man who reinvented the musical Cabaret, making it a massive hit 
in London - at the Donmar Warehouse, where he is artistic director - and on 
Broadway, by rescuing it from designer decadence into contemporary, sparkling 
musical terror; the man who has already, in little more than a decade, created 
two landmark Shakespeare productions, with his Tempest and Othello; who, before 
he was 24, had already achieved two popular classic hits in the West End 
(London Assurance, with Paul Eddington, and The Cherry Orchard, with Judi 
Dench); and who also notched up - hallmark of all bright young directors in the 
90s - a pension-earning Cameron Mackintosh musical, in his case Oliver!

Serious people who have already caught American Beauty in the US, or at the 
gala screening that closed last year's London Film Festival, will tell you that 
it is a triumph and, in all likelihood, an Oscar winner. And they're right. The 
normally restrained Washington Post frothed, "One of the year's finest 
pictures... hilarious, painful and achingly tender." The blousy LA Times: "A 
hell of a picture." The New York Times simply called it "a triumph".

Which, in a way, is odd, because the film cuts at the heart of modern America, 
of which the media is so much a reflection, stripping away the pretence of 
well-being layer by layer, all the way through black comedy to poignancy. Kevin 
Spacey, co-star with Annette Bening, says, "People ask, 'How does a thing like 
Columbine, Colorado happen?' I think this movie answers that question." And, 
somehow, that's nothing like as far-fetched as it might be from another actor 
about another film. What Spacey means about the Columbine school massacre is 
that, when the soul becomes a shopping mall, when to live is to own things, it 
is hardly surprising if kids turn to murder. American Beauty manages to be both 
hilarious and dark about that crisis in spirit.

Through the dissolution of a suburban marriage - by way of boredom, 
lovelessness and the fact that, when the wife's pruning shears match her 
gardening gloves, it is no accident - the film suggests there is beauty next to 
you, that you can reach out and touch it, that people are not what they seem 
and that everyone's life is infinitely more interesting than they think it is. 
I should add that the most beautiful sequence in the film is several minutes of 
a plastic bag blowing in the breeze. And yet the movie is seductive and 
intelligent, clear-eyed and unsentimental, and tells many stories - of the 
couple, of their next-door neighbours, of the two children of the two families 
who find in each other a soulmate, of real estate, of suburbia, of sexual 
identity, of teen beauty and of murder - confidently cutting from one to 
another within a deceptively simple framework that defies easy categorisation. 
Whodunnit? Love Story? Comedy? Teen Angst? Live Action Cartoon? Surreal 
Fantasy? Or just, The American Condition at the Turn of the Century?

Spacey and Bening are the Burnhams. He is a wilfully disillusioned adman, 
pathetic and admirable in equal part, who whacks off in the shower (the day 
goes downhill from then on), blackmails his boss when he is sacked and 
embarrassingly drools over his daughter's best friend. She, on the other hand, 
is an estate agent and a gloss-painted worshipper at the altar of material 
achievement.

Mid seduction: "Lester, you're going to spill beer on the couch." 

"So what? It's just a couch." 

"This is a four-thousand-dollar sofa upholstered in Italian silk. This is not 
'just a couch'." Collapse of not only this seduction, but of the prospect of 
any more, ever.

At the heart of the film are the two children, Ricky and Jane, played by Wes 
Bentley and Thora Birch. The former is certainly a teenage dope dealer and 
apparently a voyeur, a weirdo who films everything including the girl next 
door, a dead bird and the signature plastic bag. "Sometimes," he says, "there's 
so much beauty in the world I feel like I can't take it... and my heart is 
going to cave in."

As Mendes says, "Ricky is the film's conscience, its soul. At first, you think 
he is a voyeur, but you realise that Ricky is using his camera to reach out and 
touch people, not just to record... it's his way of reaching out." When talking 
to Mendes, you do feel that Ricky and he might have much in common.

Dark and rather cuddly, with good looks that betray his distant Portuguese 
ancestry, Mendes is a lot younger-looking than his 34 years. His voice is 
standard public-school posh, with no concessions to Royal Court street-smart: 
no aitches dropped, no donkey jackets worn. He is exceptionally polite, softly 
spoken, not given to excess or exaggeration; only occasionally does he raise 
his voice. He is warm, yet always gives an impression of self-control, so you 
could kid yourself that he is unemotional. And there is a certain watchfulness 
about him, which you might assume in a director, but they're not all like that. 
The overwhelming impression is that Mendes is very self-contained.

When I arrive at the offices of the Donmar Warehouse, he sits for 10 minutes 
or so at his desk in the open-plan office, completely absorbed in his 
correspondence, while we, the admin staff and I, gossip like hens in a coop not 
10ft away. The actor Simon Russell Beale, one of Mendes's closest 
collaborators, having played Iago and Ariel for him, recounts one of the 
rehearsals for the Tempest at the RSC some years ago. "He stopped the rehearsal 
because he knew the ending just wasn't working. And then he sat for 45 minutes 
in the stalls, completely on his own, just thinking. For 45 minutes. You could 
see his brain working. We were all chatting on the stage. And then he came up 
with the solution."

Mendes was born in 1965, an only child. His parents, Peter and Valerie, were a 
university lecturer and a children's story writer. He went to Magdalen College 
School in Oxford, then to Cambridge, where he graduated with a first. Despite 
having staged what he describes as "several terrible productions" at 
university, he speedily got a job at the Chichester Festival Theatre, and 
within no time at all was running the nascent Minerva Studio for its first 
season.

Then, when he was barely out of shorts, he took over from a senior director 
who dropped out of a production of London Assurance and graduated to the West 
End. He had the two hits there by 1989 and was becoming known as something of a 
wunderkind . He joined the RSC, and in 1992 started to run the Donmar, which he 
has programmed with an eclectic mix, from Stoppard and Sondheim to Shakespeare. 
He has encouraged new writing with the Four Corners season (plays drawn from 
the four countries of the British Isles) and launched into West End successes 
such as The Rise & Fall Of Little Voice, Company and The Glass Menagerie.

The work that Mendes has produced is not grand and conceptual, but draws its 
impact from his ability to match actor and text. Critics always praise him for 
finding the sense within plays, rather than looking for spurious relevance or 
loading them with contemporary devices. What makes him stand out is his clarity 
of purpose. Russell Beale says of Mendes's first show at the RSC, Troilus & 
Cressida, "Sam analysed the pitfalls of young directors needing to show off and 
completely avoided them. What he did was just very clear and very simple." 
"You're creating an alternative universe," is the way the director himself puts 
it, "so you're simply telling a story."

Apart from his directing, there is an entrepreneurial side to his work. He has 
been credited with turning the Donmar Warehouse into "the sexiest theatre in 
London", perhaps because he attracts top-rate performers for bottom-rate money. 
They come to the Donmar for kudos or to reinvent their careers. The success of 
David Hare's The Blue Room, for example, transformed Mrs Tom Cruise into Nicole 
Kidman. And, like his contemporary Stephen Daldry, former artistic director of 
the Royal Court, Mendes' charm and ability to network are considerable. On the 
other hand, he has no appetite for public campaigning: "I'll always help the 
theatre world achieve greater strength, but I don't want to be a spokesperson 
for the arts."

He had a longish relationship with the madly talented Jane Horrocks, and was 
subsequently linked with Calista Flockhart and Rachel Weisz. The casting of 
Nicole Kidman in an artistically disappointing but publicity heat-seeking 
production of Hare's play made him noticed further afield than the London 
theatre world and gave him an aura of glamour. Next thing, he was being asked 
by Steven Spielberg to make the film everybody is tipping to win this year's 
Oscar for best picture. All very a,b,c. All very silver-spoon-in-the-mouth. But 
hardly predictable, even for a middle-class, privileged boy, who plays cricket 
in Harold Pinter's cricket team, The Gaieties.

What fascinates about Mendes is his preter- natural confidence. How can you 
direct Judi Dench at 23? How can you deal with Spielberg on your first film? 
How do you make such clear choices in life and in art?

He stumbles in his answer. "I am very resistant... there are so many things 
going through... I don't think there is one thing in particular. You're forced 
to come up with key moments that kind of spur you on and then you begin to 
believe them yourself. Directing is such a strange thing to do with your life." 
There is the sense behind everything he says that his own palpable 
solitariness, within his charming and clubbable exterior, is not up for 
examination. Yet he seems to have put it on screen in American Beauty. "There's 
no doubt that I found myself drawn to the script because I felt very personal 
about it. Directing is a very solitary job, in the sense that you never meet 
other directors. One of the things about running this building is that I get to 
see other directors work, so I am always learning."

But he's only 34, and he has already achieved an enormous amount. How does he 
do it? Not just by watching others. "There is nothing in my upbringing that 
explains why I do what I do." And then he says later, "A great deal of it is 
buried in my youth. I was very bad academically at school. I didn't 
concentrate. I scraped through my O-levels and just got into sixth form, and 
then decided that, 'Hang on, I'd better take control of my own life.'

I don't like talking about this much, because I feel responsible to my 
parents. I find it unfair to them." It is a matter of record that his parents 
divorced when he was five. But he elaborates and says, "My life was turned 
upside down on many occasions, to the point where, if I didn't take control of 
my life, I would have just taken a lot of drugs or something." And then he 
says, "the periods of calm and the periods of turmoil with each of my parents 
were the single most determining thing of my childhood. I took control of my 
life when I was 16 and kind of said, 'Stuff that. I am not going to depend on 
anyone else again.' Nothing can compete with the fear that everything stable in 
your life is out of control. Nothing's frightening after that. Not even Cameron 
Mackintosh!"

So he spent his childhood being a skilled cricketer, watching movies and 
reading, sheltering from the uncertainty. He says he was "a troubled fantasist 
who told stories to himself". But, in the midst of it all, he seems to have 
developed one skill, alongside his confidence and the decision to take control 
of his life. He is remarkably relaxed one-to-one. "I mainly spent my life," he 
explains, "with one other person, my mother." And this has lead to a great 
ability with actors. "I love actors; I have great respect for them." He has 
unlimited willingness to communicate with them precisely in a way that they 
understand. "I will go out and find what they need. My language to each of them 
has to suit their brain."

Russell Beale tells a story: "He stayed with me in Stratford during the 
technical run of Troilus & Cressida, and I saw him one night with his notebook. 
He had just scrawled things like 'shit' or 'crap' or 'wrong' quickly during the 
run-through. But then he spent hours at night sitting up translating each point 
differently into something each actor could understand."

Mendes knows this about himself. "I am not a masterclass director," he says. 
"I am not a teacher. I am a coach. I don't have a methodology. Each actor is 
different. And on a film set you have to be next to them all, touching them on 
the shoulder saying, 'I'm with you. I know exactly how you're working. Now try 
this or that...'"

He illustrates: "Kevin Spacey likes to joke and piss about and do 
impersonations right up to the moment of action, on his mobile phone to his 
agent or whatever. The more relaxed, the more jovial he is, the more he's not 
thinking about what he does. When you say, 'Action', he's like a laser beam. 
His relaxation leads to spontaneity. So to Kevin you're saying, 'Give me a 
Walter Matthau impersonation.'" Annette Bening, on the other hand, "is on her 
Walkman half-an-hour before the cameras roll, cutting off the set, focused 
down, listening to music that the character would listen to". His conclusion on 
his own method is simple: "All I know is that I operate by going out to each of 
them and trying to learn the territory in which they operate."

The script for American Beauty really came to him thanks to two productions: 
Oliver! and Cabaret. Spielberg had seen Oliver! in London and says now that "it 
was a visual candy-store, and I sort of banked his name in my mind". In 1998, 
Mendes's production of Cabaret opened in a converted nightclub in New York, and 
the producers of American Beauty, Bruce Cohen and Dan Jinks, saw it, as did 
Spielberg, whose company Dreamworks had just bought Alan Ball's script, then 
titled American Rose, from them.

 There were other directors' names in the frame, but Spielberg approached 
Mendes, asking him to lunch. "I stuffed my face while he sipped a mud-coloured 
health shake," says Mendes. He read Ball's screenplay and was immediately 
taken. "It was incredibly multi-layered, but it made me laugh. Then I read it 
again, and it was full of sadness and loneliness, about imprisonment and 
escape. Then there was this theme of beauty running through it, and it was so 
many different things and I just didn't know how Alan [Ball] had done it. And 
that really fascinated me."

 He storyboarded the whole film during the run of Blue Room at the Donmar. He 
had very clear ideas about what it should look like. When you hear him say, "I 
enter things visually before I enter them emotionally", it explains much of his 
work in the theatre, its completeness and unity of style and text. At times, 
the look of American Beauty has the remorselessly logical illogicality of a 
Magritte.

 There is a moment when the young cheerleader, with whom Lester has decided he 
is in love, opens her blouse and scores of rose petals cascade out. At another 
moment, she is submerged in a bath full of them. At these moments, a touch of 
the surreal hovers a foot above the real. But at other times, the film has the 
still symmetry of an Edward Hopper. "I wanted a very composed, peaceful visual 
style to tell a story that was full of emotional tumult," he says. "And I 
realised, when I was cutting it, that I had made an even more emotional film 
than I thought I was making. In fact, the film I read, the film I thought I was 
making, and the film I actually made, are three different things."

It was an immaculate script by Ball, a co-executive producer and writer on the 
sitcom Cybill and co-writer of Grace Under Fire. But it was honed during 
filming. First, in editing, Mendes managed both to guide the story and to throw 
the audience a loop. For instance, he added an opening pre-title scene to 
create the first of several McGuffins, as Hitchcock called red herrings, in 
which the kids are filmed solemnly and quietly agreeing to kill Jane's father. 
The next thing you hear is the original opening, a voiceover from Spacey, as 
the father, saying, "My name is Lester Burnham... I am 42 years old. In less 
than a year I will be dead." A whodunnit?

The second factor, which made a big difference for many of the actors, was 
that Mendes, with his theatre background, gave them two weeks' rehearsal. This 
gave actors, especially the younger ones, time to develop considerable depth 
and the company a sense of family, which shows in the ensemble of the finished 
movie. "We sat around a table for much of the time, because I didn't want them 
to move. You don't want them to shoot their wad eight weeks before they're in 
front of the camera. But I was trying to fill up their petrol tanks with 
emotions and tapping into their imaginations."

The other smart thing Mendes did was to hire one of the great 
cinematographers, 72-year-old Conrad L Hall, who won an Oscar for Butch Cassidy 
And The Sundance Kid. Mendes simply says of him, "Conrad is a great man. He 
embraced my storyboard and made it happen." But not immediately. After three 
days of shooting, Mendes had a crisis: he hated what he had shot. He responded 
with typical surefootedness.

 "Everyone was being too theatrical, telling it to the audience. The thing 
that was lucky was that I had got everything wrong. I made every wrong artistic 
choice. If I'd got it just a bit wrong, I might have just tried to adjust a 
little. But, because it was everything, I said, 'This is not what I wanted it 
to be.'" Fortunately, the studio agreed. He asked if he could shoot the scenes 
all over, and they said yes. "Frankly, they were relieved that I thought it was 
crap, too!"

Mendes could now be on the brink of a movie career. However, he will not be 
moving to Hollywood. "Nothing that goes on in Hollywood throws anything that 
goes on here in the shade." Mendes loves his Donmar Warehouse. It's family and 
home. "I made that film, and went there, because it was an American script. I 
didn't go to LA saying, 'I must make a film.' It has plot and characters, and 
is not just another attempt to second-guess the mass audience." He is working 
himself up. For the first time, the quietish, genial air starts to slip.

"I have no desire to live in Hollywood. I found there an industry with 
thousands and thousands of craftspeople who are simply the best in the world at 
their job and are prepared to drop their rates for a project they really love. 
But I am telling you, and I have worked there, we should concentrate on what we 
do well here." It's now a well-argued torrent.

"What's happening here is that newspapers have consistently relegated theatre, 
ballet, visual arts to the bottom of the page. And always above it is film and 
rock music. But I'm telling you now, stop obsessing - and this is ironic coming 
from me - about American film. The Observer film section is 16 pages long, and 
you have to search through the back pages of the Review to find theatre. And it 
is advertised as 'What really goes on in Tinseltown'. Who fucking cares? We 
have so much richness of talent here. And that's why I am back here. Because 
it's a fucking great place to work."

For the first time in four years, Mendes has no idea what he is going to do 
next. There were plans to do Hamlet with Russell Beale, but he had to shelve 
them because of the film. He was to have directed Sondheim's new musical, Wise 
Guys, but it's not ready yet. Having directed Kidman on stage, he moves in the 
movie stratosphere now, with an Oscar nomination a racing certainty. He even 
spent New Year's Eve on the Cruise/Kidman yacht moored in Sydney harbour. But 
he will return to Britain to see American Beauty open at the end of this month, 
and then set about taking the Donmar off in another direction.

He has no game plan for the theatre. He is "a great believer in retrospective 
policy. Do the play," he says, "and then say it was your policy. Don't make any 
great announcements. We're very light on our feet at the Donmar. We're a 
maverick theatre. Always have been." And Mendes will certainly be around for 
the next three years or so to see what his policy was once he's done it. Even 
if American Beauty wins the Oscar. Which it should. Shouldn't it? Mendes shrugs 
and smiles contentedly
 