
All four of the US’s big mobile phone providers have stopped providing 
replacement SamsungGalaxy Note 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/galaxy-note-7> smartphones due to 
concerns that the new phones are still overheating and, in some cases catching 
on fire.


Over the past 24 hours AT&T, T-Mobile, Verizon and Sprint have suspended 
handing out Note 7 phones – which were being issued as replacements following 
an earlier US government safety recall – pending investigation of the fresh 
incidents.

It comes as the South Korean company, which last month insisted the device was 
safe despite the worldwide recall of 2.5m phones , halted all new production of 
the troubled device.

On Monday a T-Mobile spokesman said: “While Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> investigates multiple reports 
of issues, T-Mobile is suspending all sales of the new Note7 and exchanges for 
replacement Note 7 devices.” The other operators released similar statements, 
and all companies are offering to exchange existing Note 7 phones for any other 
smartphone.

Samsung Galaxy Note 7 crisis deepens with reports of production halt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/10/samsung-halts-production-galaxy-note-7-phone-battery-fires>
Australian mobile operators Telstra, Optus and Vodafone also have stopped 
selling the phone. The Galaxy Note 7 is not yet available in the UK after its 
British launch was delayed by the safety concerns.

The operators’ decisions to stop selling the phones come shortly after a US 
aircraft was evacuated shortly before takeoff after the cabin filled with smoke 
from an overheating replacement Note 7. The US Consumer Product Safety 
Commission (CPSC) is investigating the incident, which occurred aboard a 
Southwest Airlines flight from Louisville to Baltimore . The CPSC is said to be 
investigating five other reports on the phone catching fire.

The passenger Brian Green, 43, said he picked up his Note 7 device from AT&T 
on 21 September as a replacement for his previous model, which he returned to 
Samsung following the recall.

“I really liked the device. It had a lot of nice features,” Green told the 
Associated Press . But he said he bought a iPhone 7 rather than risk another 
Samsung device. “At this point, I don’t want to mess with it anymore.”

Airlines and airport security officials are asking customers to put the Note 
7s in hold baggage or ensure the phone is turned off for the duration of 
flights.

Several US consumers have reported that their replacement Note 7 have 
overheated, melted, caught fire and caused burns. Michael Klering from Kentucky 
told ABC News that his replacement Note 7 made a hissing sound before filling 
his bedroom with smoke. “When we woke up, the whole room was full of smoke,” he 
said, and added that a small flame was coming out of the device at one point.


Samsung is investigating the incidents, which it described as “heat damage 
issues”. “If we determine a product safety issue exists, Samsung will take 
immediate steps approved by the CPSC,” the company said.

American carriers’ reaction to the phones has thrown doubt on the UK launch of 
the Note 7, which already had been delayed until 28 October because of the 
fault reports. In a statement, Samsung UK said: “We are temporarily adjusting 
the Galaxy Note 7 production schedule in order to take further steps to ensure 
quality and safety matters.” The company has begun a program offering 
replacement phones to consumers who had pre-ordered the device in the UK.

 Samsung halted production of the device on Monday, which appears to be 
suffering from defective battery technology. Samsung said it was “temporarily 
adjusting the Galaxy Note 7 production schedule in order to take further steps 
to ensure quality and safety matters”. The company is expected to issue a more 
detailed statement later this week.


Samsung must act fast to keep an exploding phone from blowing up its brand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/10/samsung-galaxy-note-7-exploding-phone-brand>
South Korean news agency Yonhap reported that: “This measure includes a 
Samsung plant in Vietnam that is responsible for global shipments (of the 
Galaxy Note 7).”

Social media images of photographs of charred Note 7 phones have only added to 
the humiliation felt by Samsung, an iconic South Korean firm that has built a 
reputation for innovation and quality since entering the consumer electronics 
market in the late 1960s.

The latest problem with the Note 7 will frustrate Samsung’s attempts to repair 
its battered reputation and result in severe financial penalties, with some 
analysts predicting that the worst recall crisis in the firm’s history could 
cost it US$5bn in revenues.

“I thought the Note 7 matter was coming to an end, but it’s becoming an issue 
again,” said CJ Heo, a fund manager at Alpha Asset Management. Heo said he 
expected Samsung to recover from short-term damage to its reputation, but added 
that the recall crisis would hit fourth-quarter sales of the Note 7.

Despite the recall, Samsung said last week that its third-quarter profit rose 
6 percent to about $7bn on total sales of $43.9bn, thanks to income from 
Samsung’s other products.

The company sold 76m smartphones in the second quarter of 2016, most of them 
lower-priced models.

Samsung’s continuing problems help lift rival Apple’s share price by 2.6% to 
$116.7. Shares of Samsung fell 1.5% to 1,680,000 won in Seoul after closing at 
a record on Friday.
 