
The recall and replacement program for Samsung’s faulty Note 7 smartphone has 
officially begun in the US after an agreement was reached with the Consumer 
Product Safety Commission, increasing the number of devices that could be 
returned to 1.9m.

Yet the company has claimed that despite the vast scale of the recall – which 
Samsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> estimates will eat 
into $2.33bn of its profits – only 96 handsets have been found to have caused 
damage or injury owing to the faulty battery problem.

There had been 92 complaints by early September, but 19 of those were found to 
be unrelated to the battery problem after investigation by Samsung. There have 
been an additional 23 complaints in the past month, bringing the total number 
of smoldering, smoking or sparking devices to 96.

Of those, 13 have caused injuries and burns to people, and 47 have damaged 
property. There have also been accounts of the smartphones smoldering and 
smoking during flights, including one in India and one in the US.

All Note 7 owners will be able to exchange their devices for another Samsung 
smartphone or receive a refund under the plan approved by the CPSC, the company 
and agency said in statements on Thursday. Customers who exchange the Note 7 
for a Samsung device will get a $100 credit, while those opting for an 
alternative brand will receive $25 credit.

“We are committed to doing everything we can to make this right,” said Tim 
Baxter, president and chief operating officer of Samsung Electronics America.

The recall was complicated by further problems with the replacement Note 7. 
Samsung has now completely cancelled production of the device. The latest 
incidents appear to be due to a battery flaw different from the one that 
triggered the original recall last month, a person familiar with discussions 
about the issue told Bloomberg.

Thursday’s announcement almost doubles the number of smartphones subject to 
the recall. The US consumer agency had announced a voluntary recall of almost 
1m Note 7s on 15 September. The commission mainly enters into agreements with 
companies for recalls rather than going to court to compel action.

“The lithium-ion battery in the Galaxy Note 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/galaxy-note-7> smartphones can overheat 
and catch fire, posing serious fire and burn hazard to consumers,” the agency 
said in a release.

“The recall expansion announcement made just now won’t make any difference on 
the cost that Samsung has reflected on its latest revised earnings estimates,” 
said Song Myung-sup, a Seoul-based analyst at HI Investment & Securities.

“However, winning back the customers’ trust is a different issue. That 
side-effect will linger until early next year.”

Samsung cut its third-quarter operating profit by $2.3bn on Wednesday after 
deciding to permanently end production of the troubled smartphone. After three 
straight days of declines, Samsung shares rebounded on Thursday, rising 1.4% in 
Seoul trading. The stock has slumped 10% in the previous three trading days, 
wiping $21bn from its market value.
 