
It was another exceptional encounter, a sunlit thriller in Reading, pulsating 
with action and drama from first to last.Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> had to chase the game and they had 
to protect their lead and, in doing so, they added richly to these days of 
majesty for the club rugby of England.

Saracens’ Chris Ashton and Wasps’ Christian Wade both fast on the draw | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/23/saracens-wasps-chris-ashton-christian-wade-england-europe-champions-cup-rugby-union>
There were heroes and villains. The Vunipolas shone, as did George Smith and 
Dan Robson. Owen Farrell was a little scratchy over the kicking tee and a 
little scratchy of temperament – not for the first time – in the tackle. He was 
sent to the sin bin in the second half but returned to steady his team’s 
progress.Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> too had to cope 
with being reduced to 14. Simon McIntyre was given 10 minutes for kicking Maro 
Itoje, which sounds worse than it was and did nothing to sully the overall 
positive feel of the game.

Any fear that this semi might take a little time to reach the dramatic heights 
ofthe Wasps-Exeter quarter-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/wasps-exeter-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 was crushed within a minute. Or to be precise, 18 seconds over the first 
minute of play, at which point Dan Robson touched down for the opening try. 
Wasps had claimed the kick-off and kept the ball in hand, going wide one way, 
then the other until Frank Halai released Christian Wade and the winger surged 
out of his own half, before passing to his scrum-half. There was still work to 
do, but Robson side-stepped inside his covering opposite number and made it to 
the line. Jimmy Gopperth converted from a tricky angle.

It was a statement of daring and adventure by Wasps and it also marked the 
moment when they said goodbye to the ball. From the scrummage where Petrus du 
Plessis won a penalty against Matt Mullan, Saracens dominated possession and 
territory. Having started scintillatingly on the front foot, Wasps were now 
exclusively on defensive duty.

So tight was Saracens’ grip on the ball that it seemed only a matter of time 
before they touched it down for a try of their own. They felt confident enough 
to kick penalties to the corner, rather than take three points.

Even when Farrell, deciding finally that a little something on the board 
should not be resisted, pulled his first shot at goal wide, it seemed that it 
was still only a matter of time. The Vunipola brothers were on the charge and 
the recycling rituals were crisp and efficient.

Even when a touchdown by Duncan Taylor, falling on a loose ball in the Wasps 
dead-ball zone after Halai had failed to make it safe, was disallowed it seemed 
it was still only a matter of time. It took a lot of it to review the charge by 
Chris Ashton into Halai. Eric Gauzins, the television match official, and 
Romain Poite eventually decided that the one wing did lean a little too 
obstructively into the other, but Saracens were soon back on the attack.

If there was a problem for them – other than having no points yet – it was 
their passing, which was a little untidy at times. The close-quarter stuff was 
brutally slick; beyond there, less so. The clock was running deeper towards 
half an hour and this business of having nothing to show must have been 
starting to nag.

When the try came, it was a bit of a gift. There was no slickness required – 
just good old pressure – as Michael Rhodes chased the ball from a scrum and 
jumped in front of Gopperth. The Wasps fly-half had wound himself up for one of 
his monster clearances and the act of bracing himself for contact lasted a 
fraction too long. Rhodes blocked the kick, kept his feet and picked the ball 
up off his toes to score. The South African was having a superb game.

Farrell missed the conversion but landed his first successful kick in three 
attempts on the stroke of half-time. It had taken time, but Saracens were at 
long last in the lead. And it grew not long afterwards, with two long, and more 
assuredly struck, penalties from the same boot.

Joe Marler kicks back into spotlight as Harlequins see off Grenoble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/22/harlequins-grenoble-european-challenge-cup-match-report>
It was not the last intervention by the England player. Soon he was in the sin 
bin, for a dangerous tackle on Robson. The incident cost Saracens three points, 
but no more. Wasps were now starting to play with abandon, but could not beat 
down the Saracens defence. Nothing new there, although the steal by James 
Haskell and the run by Wade from a quick lineout showed that Wasps would never 
stop trying.

Farrell returned as McIntyre was heading for the bin, the replacement prop 
having tapped, rather than kicked, Itoje while trying to break free from the 
second row’s grip. It was a grip that could not be broken by any means and when 
Farrell kicked the penalty, and the conversion following a penalty try awarded 
after an all-in driving maul was hauled down, it seemed that the game was done.

Not a bit of it. Back came Wasps, throwing long, long passes to work their way 
around the rushing defence. Elliot Daly, denied by that suffocating blanket all 
day, suddenly had a bit of space. Off he went, gliding, sliding and setting up 
the ruck close to the line, over which Ashley Johnson barrelled to set up a 
frenzied last few minutes.

It ended when Joe Simpson had the ball stripped and the referee deemed it a 
knock-on. Saracens, through to the final; Wasps out in heroic fashion, just 
like Exeter in that quarter. European rugby has never been played as vibrantly 
in England.
 