
Michael Parkinson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/michael-parkinson> is not 
here yet, so I have a nosey around his office. It's a beautiful place in 
Windsor overlooking green fields, grazing horses, croquet lawns. Hardly the 
Barnsley of blackened miners and stoical poverty that he grew up in.

If you want to understand Sir Michael, just look round here. There are photos 
of cricket heroes Fred Trueman and Dickie Bird on the wall, his press passes 
for the BBC and ITV, biographies of Muhammad Ali and Bette Davis and assorted 
jazz greats, his own books – from Michael Parkinson's Confession Album to A 
Collection Of Outrageous Wit and Wisdom From Barnsley's Favourite Son. There's 
the grey Olivetti typewriter he tapped out his bestselling memoir on four years 
ago – the same model that Hemingway wrote Death In The Afternoon on. And 
there's a framed photo of him with the guests from his last TV show. It's 
classic Parky; of eight guests, there are only two women and one of them is 
Dame Edna Everage. Parky loved to touch knees with theShirley MacLaines 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S4-jYB_9B2w> and Raquel Welches of this world, 
but he was even more at home with men's men – Ali, Peter Ustinov, Orson Welles.

Parky was, and still is, the great British talkshow host. He brought such 
enthusiasm to the job – crying with laughter atTommy Cooper 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PXQnAAEYw3M>, in awe of polymath Jacob 
Bronowski, mesmerised by Ali, fatherly toDavid Beckham 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pvNo_5p_UUA>, agog at the world's most 
beautiful women. We loved him because he reacted to his guests just as we would 
have done. As he scratched away at himself, or picked at his nose when 
particularly absorbed, he really did seem to forget he was on TV.

And now he's back, 77 years young next month, with a new show. Parkinson has 
just signed up to do six masterclass slots on Sky with leading practitioners in 
the arts, starting in September.

He looks ridiculously fit – lean, less wrinkled than you'd expect (his face 
was famously compared to a scrotum), white hair parted immaculately.

Right, he says, where do you want me? And within seconds he's off – virtually 
interviewing himself. Everything is neatly documented chronologically: the 
miner father desperate for his son not to go down the pits; the smart, 
frustrated mother who read and read; growing up as an only child (his parents 
made an economic decision) in "Debtors' Retreat", aka Cudworth. There is 
grammar school, and the time he kept Geoffrey Boycott out of the Barnsley 
cricket team by scoring a century and 50 in successive matches, his 
apprenticeship on the local paper, the prestigious transfer to the Manchester 
Guardian as a features writer vying with Michael Frayn for the splash on the 
miscellany page (for which you got an extra halfcrown), the even more 
prestigious transfer to the Daily Express (it doubled his money to £2,000 a 
year), the boozy lunches that lasted for ever, the best of times.

The trouble with journalists now, he says, is they don't enjoy themselves. 
"I've been very lucky because I had the best of journalism. I mean, you poor 
buggers today, it's different, it's not as pleasant as it was. I came up in 
that period of journalism when there was a great burst of opportunity because 
of television. I always had the ability to turn round to somebody I didn't like 
who was bullying me at work and say, I don't need your job, I've got another 
one down the road. You can't do that."

"Oi," I say, "Are you trying to make me feel crap about my lot?" He laughs and 
pats my arm – and for a moment I feel like Shirley or Raquel. "No, I'm just 
telling you how lucky I've been. I've been a journalist now for 60 years, I've 
seen the changes and I know bloody well that if I have been gifted at all, it 
has been with timing."

In the 1970s he discovered TV. He prided himself on applying journalistic 
skills to the talkshow – interviews had to be well researched with a beginning, 
middle and end – and became a celebrity in the process. It's funny, he says, 
these days the press are never sure which side he's batting for. "I don't want 
to make too much of this, but I had my phone tapped. It was about George Best. 
So I'm a celebrity now. Then they'll ring me and say, 'Muhammad Ali is dying, 
could you give me 2,000 words?' So I'm a journo now am I? There's a dichotomy. 
They're not quite sure what I am." Has he ever been confused? "No. Because all 
the jobs I've done have been about journalism in one way or another."

And that's why he succeeded when so many others failed in the chatshow game. 
"If you look at the number of people who tried it since I started in 1971, it's 
like a tombstone; it really is. The graveyard is full of people who tried 
talkshows and didn't make it, mainly because they weren't journalists."

Who did he rate? "My heroes were the people who gave me an idea of the 
possibilities of television – people like [Alan] Whicker. Tonight was a hugely 
influential programme to journalists of my generation. If television wanted to 
do current affairs they had to get journalists. Picture Post provided Whicker, 
Fyfe Robertson, Macdonald Hastings. And they formed the foundation of that 
great programme, which has never been bettered in my view. It was a training 
ground. Believe you me, none of us knew what the bloody hell we were doing when 
we went into television. That was the joy of it. It was a very accommodating 
media for a journalist to be in [see footnote]."

So what changed? "Aha! Hehehehe! What changed? Ha! The screen got smaller," he 
says with a smile. Parky has got a touch of the Norma Desmonds about him. You 
sense he likes to see himself as a man out of time, clinging to the triumphs of 
a golden age. He's often said he's in danger of becoming a professional grumpy 
old git.

"The talkshow is the perfect barometer for what has happened. There isn't one 
talkshow on television today that asks questions or listens to answers. Name me 
one. There isn't one."

Jonathan Ross? He snorts. "No! What?" When Parkinson returned to his BBC 
chatshow in 1998 after a 16-year break, the format had changed – on most shows, 
guests played second fiddle to the comedians who hosted them. What does he 
think about guests being pawns of the presenters? "It's up to them. They've got 
the right to say no. You won't get me doing it." He says the worst thing was 
the narrowing of the range of guests. "We had comics, we had them all, but they 
were on with people like David Attenborough or Peter Ustinov. Why has Jonathan 
Miller not been on a talkshow for about 20 years? He's still funny as hell. 
He's wonderful."

He has a point. Back in his heyday we could all impersonate the cerebral 
Malcolm Muggeridge because we'd seen him on Parky. "And he didn't 
intellectually downgrade himself to the third division south to appear on 
television. They were instructing you, teaching you all the time because they 
were men of intellect. Men of tremendous opinion. And they were allowed to do 
that." He's really getting into his stride now. "And that's what's missing 
today, that kind of talk at a popular level. They didn't treat the audience 
with contempt, they didn't think they had to come on with big feet and funny 
hats. They just thought they'd go on and talk to people."

He pauses for a swig of tea, and he's off again. "There was a lovely headline 
yesterday about Paul O'Grady – he said, 'The reason I left the talkshow was 
because I couldn't stand the bloody guests!' Heeheeehee!" Parky's almost 
weeping with laughter. "Anybody who's done a talkshow recently would say 
Hallelujah to that. Heeheeehee!"

What are the changes in TV he most objects to? "There's a change in manner, in 
attitude, in dress, a change in everything, and for an old bugger like me it's 
depressing. Not because it doesn't include me. It depresses me because I love 
the industry."

There are plenty of people who still want to learn from telly, I say. "You try 
telling television bosses that." Has he? "Well no, why would I? But all I know 
is nobody's running after me saying, 'Would you like to advise on a talkshow or 
do one yourself?'. Not that I'd want to do one now, because I'm retired."

How can he say he's retired when he's just announced a new show? Well, this is 
different, he says, it's not a talkshow, and there are only six of them.

What does he think made him such a good interviewer in the first place? He 
talks about how he'd relax the guests, body language, leaning into them, eye 
contact. "There comes a moment when their eyes change. You can see a relaxing 
and then they'll sit back, then you know you've got them."

Was he always so tactile? "Well, I am normally. But they were more than I was. 
There'd be a rumour going round that I was a touchy person so they'd touch me 
first. Hopefully. Often if you asked a question they didn't want to answer, 
they'd say can I touch your knee, and I'd be like, 'Come on! Answer the 
question, not touch my bloody knee!'"

Parkinson has been married to Mary, a teacher turned TV presenter, for 52 
years and they have three sons. Did she ever think his flirting went too far? 
"Nooooooah!" She never thought he got too close to any guests? "I think she 
might have thought Shirley MacLaine and I probably, you know, in another world 
might have sort of seen each other a bit more often, but … heeheehee! No."

Did he get many offers? "No! No, no." For once, he's not making eye contact. 
Really? "No, I promise you. No, not at all. Not as many as I would have liked 
actually." He's staring studiously at the table. "No it was a lovely, lovely 
time," he mumbles.

I tell him that when I think of the great Parky shows I go back to the 70s and 
early 80s. "Well, I would disagree with that because I think I was a better 
interviewer later on. I was more confident, more accomplished."

It's not surprising he stands his ground – he always has. Why did he leave the 
BBC in 2002? He says he was insulted when they put Match of the Day in his 
slot. "They said, don't worry, we'll give you a good spot. I said, what's that, 
and they said Wednesday night. I said what time and they said 8.30-9pm. I said, 
against Coronation Street, they said yeah. You're bloody joking. So that was 
our parting of the ways."

He went to ITV and fell out with them. "The problem with ITV was that there 
was a guy I didn't get on with called Simon Schapps." Why didn't he get on with 
him? "Well, let me tell you why. He said I'd like to meet you for lunch at the 
Ivy and say hello, and he arrived with my contract in his hand. Halfway through 
the meal he tried to tell me how he wasn't happy with this contract. I said to 
him unless he took the contract away he'd find it shoved somewhere on his 
person he didn't like. I went back to the office and said to my team if that 
man ever becomes boss of ITV, start the car, we're all off. And it happened 
thus! Hahahahaha!"

Parky has always been a proud man. "We were laughing the other day. They were 
singing the praises of the success of David Beckham on Ross. He got 
4.5 million. I got 9.4 million for that, and audiences haven't changed that 
much."

Since quitting ITV five years ago, Parky has toured Australia, written his 
memoirs, run his Michelin-starred pub with his son Nick in Maidenhead, worked 
out at the gym three days a week and relaxed. Yes, he says, he's thoroughly 
enjoyed retirement, and no, the Sky shows are not fulltime work, and of course 
he doesn't have to work for money any more. Yet you can't help sensing he 
wouldn't mind one last go; that there might just be a little bit of unfinished 
business. He talks about how he can't wait to do that thing he really loves 
once again – finding out what makes great people tick. And now his Eeyorish 
negativity about modern telly has disappeared. All I can see is that boyish 
enthusiasm as he bounces on the balls of his feet, limbering up for one final 
comeback.

• This footnote was appended on 27 February 2012: The quote has been 
correctedly reported, but in fact Alan Whicker did not work for Picture Post.
 