
As is its habit, Saturday Night Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/saturday-night-live> addressed the 
most significant topical event of the week in its cold open, launching with its 
take on Donald Trump’s recent, chaotic press conference. Alec Baldwin returned 
with his serviceable Trump impression to confirm that, indeed, “this is real 
life” – Trump is about to become the 45th president of the United States, and 
“two months later, Mike Pence will become the 46th”.

The show made no bones about its fears of a Trump presidency; when a reporter 
suggested that repealing the Affordable Care Act could kill people, the 
president-elect responded flippantly: “Listen sweetheart, I’m about to be 
president. We’re all gonna die.” The strongest moments came in cameos from 
Cecily Strong as Trump’s exhausted lawyer and Kenan Thompson as a the Family 
Feud host Steve Harvey: “I do government now. Does this bode well for our 
country? Survey says: no.” And of course, the show couldn’t resist playing up
the most salacious rumor in this week’s leaked intelligence document 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/kenbensinger/these-reports-allege-trump-has-deep-ties-to-russia?utm_term=.tbxxEnNMGe#.Bear 
kuoK60mlAG>, with puns ahoy about the “steady stream” of jobs that Trump claims 
he will create because he’s a “major whiz”.

First-time host Felicity Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/felicity-jones> never seemed to fully relax 
into her monologue, reading stiffly off the cue cards before being interrupted 
with, of course, some Star Wars-related shenanigans. The whole segment was 
saved by the “hologram” appearance of Tina Fey, who took on the heavy lifting 
and allowed Jones to relax into an endearing scene. Fey’s advice to Jones 
quickly turns into a meta-commentary on SNL – Thompson’s long run on the show, 
the use of a “horny” Leslie Jones whenever the writers have run out of ideas, 
as well as the “way too many” reviews of each episode and Trump’s tendency to 
tweet about negative things about the show.

The only truly solid sketch of the night was the first post-monologue scene, a 
spoof of The Bachelor clearly written by someone who’s spent way too much time 
absorbing the dating reality show. “Beard Hunk” featured the titular hunk on a 
bench as a series of women in evening gowns “steal” some time to tell him about 
themselves – “My name is whatever and I have the most abrupt ombré”; “I’m a 
judge-mental bitch.” Jones’ American accent wasn’t great, but she gave it a go 
and held her own in a cycle of impressive SNL women, including a particularly 
hilarious turn by Aidy Bryant.


Weekend Update had a few hits and more than a few misses. Much of it was 
devoted to Trump’s press conference, which felt redundant after the cold open. 
Colin Jost’s best line referenced a Trump tweet asking if we are “living in 
Nazi Germany?”. “Of course not. Nazi Germany at least had the guts to take on 
Russia.”

The two guest segments – Pete Davidson’s first impressions of Trump cabinet 
appointees, Beck Bennett as a half-assed pop star – both felt a bit 
undercooked. Luckily, Michael Che seems to be finally putting more of his own 
comedic persona into the role, showing off the charisma and sharp wit that 
rocketed him to success in stand-up: “It seems like every decision Donald Trump 
makes begins with the sentence, ‘Yo, you know what would be hilarious?’” His 
take on racial profiling in theChicago police department  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/chicago-pd-police-justice-department-excessive-force-loretta-lynch>
slowly built into a great riff that was pure Che.


There wasn’t much else to recommend of this episode – a pre-tape with Thompson 
and Jones as rival drug dealers never quite cohered, while a sketch with Kate 
McKinnon as Susan B Anthony seemed like it had potential but ultimately landed 
on the idea on a vague idea about the vapidness of modern life that didn’t say 
much. Jones did her part admirably, but sketch comedy doesn’t appear to be her 
strongest suit, and the show’s material certainly didn’t give her enough to 
ensure success.

 