
Alistair Darling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling> 
intervened twice with the Irish government on behalf of UK banks yesterday amid 
fears that Dublin's blanket guarantee for savers was causing an exodus of funds 
across the Irish Sea.

As the Irish government sought to rush legislation through the Dail to protect 
its banks, Treasury sources said last night that the Irish finance minister, 
Brian Lenihan, was told "in no uncertain terms that the scheme was a problem 
for the UK".

Lenihan told Darling that the decision to safeguard all deposits at six banks 
had not been planned, but had been an emergency move to prevent the collapse of 
one Irish bank leading to the failure of another.

The Treasury said last night that the chancellor had been given a sympathetic 
hearing. Darling made two calls in response to signs that savers were rushing 
to open accounts at Irish-backed banks, including the UK Post Office, whose 
accounts are provided by Bank ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

Under pressure from furious high street banks, the chancellor urged Lenihan to 
make the scheme open to British banks operating in the republic.

Last night, in a sign that the chancellor's concerns had hit home, Lenihan 
indicated that he would consider applications from non-Irish-owned banks with 
tangible presence in Irish cities and towns to be considered in the guarantee 
scheme.

Dublin was unrepentant about the scheme, which has drawn criticism from 
elsewhere inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, hinting 
that France might follow suit. Paris denied the suggestion. Instead, President 
Nicolas Sarkozy is floating the idea of a €300bn lifeboat for European banks, a 
plan that appears to have little support in Britain and Germany.

Anglo Irish Bank, which offers a telephone-based savings account in the UK, 
experienced one of its busiest days ever. Allied Irish Bank said it had been 
similarly deluged, leading to concerns that the savings market was being 
unfairly distorted at a time when UK banks feel they need every penny.

Like the UK, Irish banks lent liberally during the housing bubble, and it is 
thought that the bank that came near to failing had been extending loans worth 
110% of property values.

Darling was told by Lenihan that Ireland was not seeking to undermine British 
banks, but that it had been forced to act to save the financial system from 
collapse. The chancellor said the scheme could have significant repercussions 
for Britain, including weakening the value of the pound.

Angela Knight, chief executive of the British Bankers' Association, will write 
to the Irish government today to complain about the distortion of competition 
caused by the security of Irish deposits.

The Irish guarantee scheme covered six domestic institutions - Allied Irish 
Bank, Bank of Ireland, Anglo Irish Bank, Irish Life & Permanent, Irish 
Nationwide Building Society and Education Building Society - much to the 
frustration of Royal Bank of Scotland and HBOS, which have large Irish 
operations.

RBS said its Ulster Bank operation "intended to apply to join the scheme and 
expects to be successful". The UK's savings guarantee scheme is being increased 
from £35,000 to £50,000 to bolster confidence, but does not contain the 
explicit guarantee that savings beyond this figure will be safe.

In practice, when Northern Rock and Bradford & Bingley got into difficulties, 
the government moved to ensure depositors were protected, suggesting that in 
practice no saver would lose out if another big bank went bankrupt. Despite 
this, savers have been voting with their feet.

Yesterday it was difficult to get through to the Treasury-backed and 100% 
secure NationalSavings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> & 
Investments. All the Irish banks were also busy. The nationalised Northern Rock 
has been another recipient of disenchanted savers' cash as they look to avoid 
the next at-risk bank. "It's been our busiest day for years," said a call 
centre operator at Anglo Irish Bank.

A Post Office spokeswoman said: "Since last week when the government first 
changed the amount that was protected, we have seen a significant increase [in 
savings customers]."

A Bank of Ireland spokeswoman said there was growing evidence British savers 
were moving cash to the bank. She said the bank was seeing a "very, very 
steady" increase in people contacting its call centres from Northern Ireland; 
the pattern was thought to be the same across the UK. After weeks of ad hoc 
meetings to deal with the financial crisis, Gordon Brown is to set up an 
emergency committee of finance chiefs to coordinate responses similar to the 
Cobra body on emergencies.
 