
I’m a bit of a Scrooge at Christmastime, often choosing to give experiences 
over things, eschewing plastic toys whenever possible, and usually making a 
vegetarian meal instead of the classic roast turkey. But even I can’t deny the 
allure of a beautifully wrapped gift.

It’s still possible to make eco-friendly choices while also giving gorgeously 
wrapped presents; the holiday season truly doesn’t have to mean expensive paper 
and tons of waste. Each year, the US spends over$3.2bn on wrapping paper 
<http://money.usnews.com/money/personal-finance/articles/2014/11/28/the-hidden-costs-of-the-holidays>
 and each year Britons throw out enough gift wrap to circle the globenine times 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/8964837/How-Britain-bins-227000-miles-of-Christmas-paper.html>
.

Here are some ways to say bah humbug to these costly, wasteful ways and 
embrace a greenChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
in 2016.

‘Brown paper packages tied up with string’

This famous line from The Sound of Music sums up the happy charm of a simply 
wrapped gift, one that remains even in today’s over-the-top culture. It’s easy 
to create a waste-free version of this wrapping style by reusing paper grocery 
bags (turned inside out and cut to fit) or by reusing paper packaging.


Depending what look I’m going for, I’ll either let my daughter decorate the 
paper with her drawings, or tuck a sprig of fresh greenery into the bow. 
Simple, pretty and waste-free.

Black and white and red all over

As a lifelong book lover, I’ve always been partial to the look of gifts 
wrapped in newspaper. The crisp black text on a white background lends a 
modern, abstract look and a thick red fabric ribbon keeps it looking luxe (I 
buy fabric ribbons instead of the plastic kind and also save them from gifts I 
receive). This is a fantastic way to use up newspapers headed to the recycling 
bin and kids love getting their presents wrapped in the comics section.

Furoshiki

The Japanese practice <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Furoshiki> of wrapping 
gifts in reusable cloth dates back to the 1600s, but it has enjoyed a bit of a 
comeback recently as a beautiful, waste-free wrapping choice.

Whether you’re a quilter with extra fabric scraps lying around or you want to 
include a scarf or tea towel as part of your gift, wrapping presents in fabric 
is a striking departure from thin, crinkly wrapping paper. Secondhand stores 
are a fantastic source for beautiful silk scarves and if you’re really handy 
you can even sew reusable fabric gift bags.

Functional art 

My daughter is a prolific artist (thankfully she hasn’t yet explored the blank 
canvas of my walls) so I began saving the art roll from her easel. When it’s 
time to wrap gifts for Christmas or her friend’s birthday parties, I use the 
painted paper instead of gift wrap. It’s a nice way to reuse something I’d feel 
guilty throwing out and our family loves seeing their gifts decorated with her 
wild paintings.
Now that we’ve got gift-giving sorted, what do you do with the wrapping paper 
on gifts received from others?

Well, despite my affection for the rip-and-tear folks among us (who can 
begrudge such unbridled enthusiasm?) I have absolutely no shame in beingthat 
person who carefully peels off tape and neatly folds gift wrap for later use. 

Doing so reduces waste and allows an opportunity for reuse, but another reason 
to save that pretty paper is because a good portion of wrapping products aren’t 
recyclable.


That’s right, although it’s called wrapping paper, many kinds of gift wrap are 
actually made with shiny foil or coated in plastic film, rendering it unfit for 
the recycling bin. Same goes for plastic ribbons and bows (they’re inexpensive 
and pretty but can’t be recycled) and tissue paper (which is best reused or 
tossed in a compost bin if you’ve got one).

The best way to ensure you’re disposing of wrapping products properly is by 
checking with your local recycling department. A quick Google search of “[Your 
city/town] recycling guidelines” will let you know what your local recycling 
service prefers you to with these festive trappings.

Of course, the most effective way to reduce wrapping paper waste is to reduce 
gifts altogether. Consider organizing a secret santa exchange, getting just one 
or two gifts per child, and giving experiences instead of things. A certain Mr 
Grinch said it best:

It came without ribbons. 

It came without tags.

It came without packages, boxes or bags.

And he puzzled and puzzled ‘till his puzzler was sore. 

Then the Grinch thought of something he hadn’t before.

What if Christmas, he thought, doesn’t come from a store. 

What if Christmas, perhaps, means a little bit more...
 