
The Bank of England's decision to cut another quarter-point off the base rate 
means that savers can expect to see the returns they enjoy shrink even further. 
So it's crucial to review the rate you are being paid and move your money if it 
is not working hard enough.

Most banks and building societies will trickle out details of their savings 
rate reductions over the next two or three weeks, so keep an eye out for the 
ads they put in newspapers to notify customers - and watch future editions of 
Jobs & Money too, of course.

Halifax says full details of changes to its savings rates which will take 
effect on May 1 will be unveiled "later this month", while Nationwide says its 
savings rates are under review with an announcement to be made "in due course".

One of the few providers to announce rate reductions immediately after the 
base rate cut was Abbey National's online bank Cahoot. However, its current 
account rate cuts do not affect existing customers, who will continue to 
benefit from returns of up to 7.1% gross.

Those investing less than £5,000 in a new Cahoot current account who don't opt 
for a chequebook will receive 6.2% instead of 6.5%. The biggest cut is being 
imposed on new customers who stash away more than £50,000 and forego a 
chequebook: the 7.1% rate has been slashed to 6%.

New research from Sainsbury's Bank highlights the poor deal millions of savers 
are getting. It reveals that the average rate of interest for £5,000 in an 
instant access account is now just 1.40% gross compared to 12.27% ten years 
ago. Yet it found that almost two-thirds of savers are under the illusion that 
they would not be any better off if they switched.

As things stand, the best instant access-style account rates include Capital 
One Bank's 6.1% on its Direct Saver 2 account (includes a 0.4% interest bonus 
for the first six months), internet and phone bank Intelligent Finance's Direct 
Access account paying 6%, and Standard Life Bank's 5.55% on its Direct Access 
account, says data provider Moneyfacts. For online accounts the best rates are 
offered by Nationwide, Halifax and Egg (6.3%, 6.1% and 6% respectively).

Investment watchdog the Financial Services Authority (FSA) says savers need to 
understand that today's low-inflation, low-interest environment means lower 
returns - but also that low inflation protects the value of savings.

It is worried that savers in search of higher returns will buy risky products, 
unaware of the dangers. "Consumers should be wary of any investment product 
offering the sort of high returns commonly available during the 80s and early 
90s," says the FSA.
 