
Another 0.25% base rate interest rise - and another incentive for savers to 
switch their money from tired old accounts to new ones, possibly adding several 
percentage points to their investment income in the process.

And one place to start is on the web. The growth in internet savings schemes 
is fast and furious. Tesco is joining the online banking revolution next month, 
initially offering online access to balances and transfers between accounts 
(www. tesco.co.uk). The superstore says the net offers lower costs with less 
need for expensive advertising and mailshots.

Egg, the Prudential brand, is still the market leader. But there are several 
others wanting to turn Egg into an omelette. They want to establish themselves 
as internet banks and the best way they can do that is to offer rates that 
competitors criticise as "ruinously lossmaking".

First-E www.first-e.com <http://www.first-e.com> is currently offering an 
annual 6.25% from the first pound on its net-only account. But you cannot 
invest more than £250,000, so major corporations cannot make free money by 
borrowing at a fraction over base rate and parking the cash with First-E.

Besides interest rates calculated daily, it offers 24-hour access to your 
account backed by a call centre in case something goes wrong, email statements 
and the ability to transfer money in and out of other net-based accounts. 
First-E's unique selling proposition is that it pays interest monthly without 
any income tax deduction. First-E can legally do this because it is registered 
offshore - it is an offshoot of the French Banque d'Escompte. The easy to 
navigate site also offers a current account and promises share dealing shortly.

Egg's rates www.egg.com <http://www.egg.com> also lose money for its parent. 
The Egg no notice, no-penalty savings account requires £1 to open with a 
£250,000 maximum. Interest can be paid monthly or annually. Egg is now only 
accessible online to new customers. Its primary online account pays 6% or 5.75% 
for those who also want access accounts by phone or post - and 5.25% for 
customers who use the cash machine facility.

But these rates could fall soon. The interest rate includes an introductory 
bonus of 0.5% until January 1, although the guarantee that the Egg rate will 
not drop below the official base rate lasts until January 2001.

Egg, however, has had its share of technical problems. Egg customer James 
Lewis, a London-based sports journalist, opened an account a fortnight ago.

He says: "I had seven good days followed by seven bad, where all I got was a 
message saying 'server error' and when you try the phone number, you can't get 
through because so many internet users have switched to voice communication. I 
wanted to transfer an £1,800 balance but nothing has happened."

Lewis eventually received various explanations from Egg, including the need 
"to take the database offline to boost memory and processing power" and being 
informed that Egg had attracted more demand than expected while simultaneously 
denying that it had underestimated its customer attraction.

The Co-op's Smile www.smile.co.uk <http://www.smile.co.uk> is a fully fledged 
bank account which offers 4.07% gross interest on credit balances. There's an 
interest-free £500 overdraft cushion. Smile also has a savings account paying 
4.25%. The Co-op Bank is selling Smile as a standalone account rather than as 
an online addition to an existing account.

Most online accounts from high street banks only work on computers with 
Windows software.

Savers should not limit their search to the net, however. They can often find 
better rates from post and phone banks listed in Moneyfacts. Many of these come 
from smaller banks and building societies which do not yet rate websites as 
cost effective.
 