
A scheme designed to parachute “elite teachers” into struggling schools, 
launched with much fanfare last year, has been scrapped by the government after 
just 24 teachers were placed through the programme .

The national teaching service was announced last year by the then education 
secretary Nicky Morgan. It was supposed to help solve the perennial problem of 
schools in difficulty being unable to recruit the experienced teachers they 
needed to thrive.

But despite offering £10,000 in relocation expenses for teachers with three 
years’ experience, few appeared to be willing to take the plunge. Freedom of 
information requests revealed that only about 100 teachers had made enquiries, 
and just 24 had accepted places in schools.

The cost of the ill-fated scheme ran to £200,000, according to government 
figures released after questions raised by the Labour MP Lucy Powell.

The Department for Education confirmed that what it described as a pilot 
scheme would be shut down.

A DfE spokesperson said the department had been “pleased” with the level of 
interest in the pilot, and in the calibre of candidates it attracted.

“However, following a review of the outcomes, we can confirm that we will not 
be progressing with the further rollout of the national teaching service.

“We recognise that it is vitally important that schools, particularly in 
challenging areas, can recruit and retain excellent teachers, and we are 
determined to continue to support them to do this.

“We will use the lessons learnt from the pilot to secure a better 
understanding of how to support schools in the future, and will set out future 
plans in due course.”

The news comes a day after the outgoing Ofsted chief inspector, Michael 
Wilshaw,criticised the government for being fixated on structures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/01/england-faces-widening-skills-gap-says-outgoing-ofsted-chief>
, such as grammar schools, and failing to maintain a good supply of teachers.

Wilshaw said that in some parts of England with severe teacher shortages, such 
as the north-west, he had heard of “auctions” taking place when an experienced 
staff member became available, with schools bidding for qualified candidates.

Russell Hobby, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, 
agreed that the government was failing to get the basics right over teacher 
supply and recruitment.

“I think we have learned now that we cannot rely on schemes that only transfer 
people from one part of the country to another. We must help local areas 
develop, support and retain their own staff,” Hobby said.

“One reason the scheme has not delivered is that there are simply not enough 
teachers in the system. We have to get the basics right – proper starting pay 
and good working conditions.”

When originally launched by Morgan, the scheme was intended to place 1,500 
teachers over four years, to help schools that were struggling because of their 
location or status to recruit staff.

In launching the scheme in November last year, Morgan said: “Too many young 
people aren’t being given a fair shot to succeed because of where they live. 
That’s why today I’m announcing the creation of a national teaching service, 
sending some of our best teachers to schools in struggling areas.”

As recently as January this year, Morgan said: “We have already received 
hundreds of expressions of interest and I want to encourage even more top 
teachers and middle leaders to apply and be part of our mission to extend 
opportunity to young people across the north-west from September 2016.”

But the government’s figures suggest that Morgan was over-optimistic: only 116 
applications were received under the scheme, and only 54 of those were able to 
take part. By August, the deadline for acceptances, just 14 had agreed to 
posting. The deadline was extended and a further 10 teachers accepted places.
 