
Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> are being urged to 
focus improvement efforts on struggling white working-class pupils who get the 
worst GCSE results of all the main ethnic groups, amid growing concern about 
stark disparities in attainment.

A study by the Sutton Trust <http://www.suttontrust.com/> education charity 
found that disadvantaged pupils from Chinese backgrounds were almost three 
times as likely to get the benchmark five good GCSEs as their white 
working-class peers.

While poverty continues to play a major role in educational outcomes, 
attainment among pupils from Bangladeshi, black African and Chinese backgrounds 
who are on free school meals (FSM) has improved dramatically in the past decade.

White children 'falling behind other groups at GCSE'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/04/white-children-falling-behind-other-groups-at-gcse>
Among poorer white children, meanwhile, just a quarter of boys (24%) and a 
third of girls (32%) achieve the benchmark of five goodGCSEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses>, leading to calls for schools to 
target those pupils at risk of falling behind.


Attainment at GCSE among disadvantaged pupils from Bangladeshi, black African 
and Chinese pupils has improved by more than 20 percentage points since 2006, 
while the national average has improved by 13.5 percentage points. Performance 
amongwhite working-class children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/04/white-children-falling-behind-other-groups-at-gcse>
 over the same period has remained stubbornly low.

“Several explanations have been proposed for this shift,” says the report. 
“The popularity of private tutors among ethnic groups and the latter’s 
concentration in large urban areas such asLondon  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/22/is-londons-ethnic-diversity-driving-its-school-success-story>
(where average results have improved in recent years, with some suggesting that 
ethnic minorities have driven this progress), the impact of supplementary 
schools, and differing levels of parental aspiration, among others.”

Sir Peter Lampl, chairman of the Sutton Trust, welcomed improving attainment 
among some ethnic groups. “This may reflect a strong cultural appreciation of 
education from which we can all learn,” he said.


“But it is worrying that there is such a disparity in the achievement of 
different ethnic groups at GCSE and particularly concerning that white 
working-class boys and girls continue to perform so poorly.

“Harnessing that same will to learn that we see in many ethnic minority groups 
in white working-class communities should be a part of the solution to the low 
attainment of many boys and girls. We need a more concerted effort with white 
working-class boys, in particular.”

Beyond school, the paper – entitled Class Differences and published on 
Thursday – reports that 45% of white British pupils attend university, the 
lowest rate of all ethnicities excluding Gypsy/Roma. Yet white British students 
have better rates of attending elite universities, with 24% of those who go on 
to higher education attending a Russell Group university, more than most 
minority ethnic groups.

The Sutton Trust is calling for targeted improvement programmes aimed at 
pupils at particular risk of falling behind, including white working-class 
children. It is also urging the government to introduce incentives to attract 
the best teachers into the most deprived schools; “enrichment vouchers” for 
disadvantaged ethnic groups to provide opportunities to supplement core 
lessons; and a dedicated fund to support highly able pupils from less 
advantaged backgrounds who fall behind.


Meanwhile, the Social Market Foundation has published a report arguing that 
the government should fund after-school family literacy classes in primary 
schools, to tackle inequality by helping parents take a more active role in 
their children’s education.


The report from the thinktank’s bipartisan commission on inequality in 
education, led by the former deputy prime minister Nick Clegg, found that 
children with parents who regularly read to them, helped with homework and 
attended parent-teacher meetings made much faster progress and had better 
attainment.


The commission also suggested independent schools and universities could be 
encouraged to open their facilities and activities to parents, as part of the 
government’s latest proposals on school improvement and higher education access 
agreements.


Children who listened to or played music outside of school also made better 
progress at school, the report noted, as well as those who took part in 
cultural and social activities such as art.


“This research clearly highlights the benefits of parents and carers’ 
increased engagement with their children’s education,” Clegg said. “The 
government should work closely with Ofsted and primary schools to create more 
opportunities for parents to be involved in after-school activities. This is a 
low cost, simple solution that could significantly improve outcomes for many 
children.”
 