
Scientists believe they may have found a way to treat a rare but devastating 
cancer that kills young children often within months of their diagnosis.

There is currently no treatment for malignant rhabdoid tumours, which usually 
develop in the kidneys and have no symptoms in the early stages. By the time 
they are diagnosed, the cancer has often spread to other organs and is fatal. 
Most of those affected are infants and toddlers.

The mutated gene that causes the cancer is well known, but scientists have not 
been able to find a way to target it. However, scientists working for the
Institute of Cancer Research <http://www.icr.ac.uk/london> (ICR) believe they 
have a made a breakthrough. They have now identified two other genes that 
appear to be implicated in driving the growth of the tumour, which produce 
proteins that can be inhibited by drugs that are already in use in other 
cancers or are in the development pipeline.

We could prevent millions of cancer deaths with knowledge we already have | 
David Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/prevent-millions-of-cancer-deaths-with-knowledge-already-have>
Prof Paul Huang, team leader of the protein networks laboratory at the ICR, 
says they have found “a chink in the armour” of these very aggressive tumours, 
using drugs that attack proteins known as kinase inhibitors.

 “There are a lot of kinase drugs out there, so we don’t have to re-invent the 
wheel,” he said. “In many cases in drug discovery you find a new target and 
spend 10 to 20 years developing drugs against it.”

In this case, they hope that will not be necessary . “We have been able to 
re-purpose existing drugs, some of which are already approved.”

So far, the drugs have been tested against cancer cells in the laboratory. The 
scientists, who have published their results in the journal Cell Reports, found 
that inhibiting proteins produced by one of the genes had little effect, but 
attacking both of them killed the cancer cells.

The drugs pazopanib, dasatinib and sunitinib were all successful at inhibiting 
the protein from the PDGFRA gene – but if high levels of protein from the other 
gene, called FGFR1, remained, the cancer returned and would not respond to 
treatment even at higher doses. This may explain why, when doctors have tried 
chemotherapy with their young patients, even where it has worked at first, 
resistance has quickly set in.

An existing drug called ponatinib, currently in use as treatment for 
leukaemia, can target both proteins at once. But there are questions over the 
safety of the drug in children, so there will be a need to screen other drugs 
to find one with fewer side effects that works.

The cancer is very rare – there is one case in 2 million children – but the 
work the ICR is doing will pay dividends in other cancers too. About 20% of all 
cancers have genes from this class.

Studies in mice will now be necessary before the drugs can be tried in 
children. The ICR is leading the world in the hunt for treatments for very rare 
children’s cancers, which are very unlikely to make a profit and are not a 
field that private drug companies are keen to enter.

Prof Paul Workman, chief executive of the ICR in London, said: “We need to see 
much better, more targeted treatments for children with cancer, that further 
drive up survival rates and spare children the serious long-term side-effects 
that conventional chemotherapy can cause.

“This study provides an exciting pointer for how we might treat more 
effectively an aggressive childhood cancer for which there is currently no 
cure. It’s crucial, when as here there is a strong scientific rationale for a 
new treatment approach in children, that we can assess them as rapidly as 
possible in clinical trials. At the moment, it’s much too easy for 
pharmaceutical companies to avoid evaluating their drugs in children, even when 
there is good evidence that they could benefit.”

Jennifer Kelly’s four year-old daughter Grace was diagnosed with malignant 
rhabdoid tumours two years ago and died soon afterwards. Her mother set up the
Grace Kelly Ladybird Trust <http://www.gracekellyladybird.co.uk/> to fundraise 
research into childhood cancers.

“Grace went from being a happy, healthy schoolgirl to passing away within 
three weeks,” said her mother. “She started school in September and didn’t make 
it to half-term. She was an athlete – she was the monkey hanging upside down 
from the monkey bars. Even when she was admitted to hospital initially she 
seemed quite well. It progressed very rapidly.

“It is basically a diagnosis of death, whether they try to hold it at bay with 
chemotherapy for a while or not. They simply can’t treat them. There is a lack 
of funding for childhood cancers as a whole. People don’t realise childhood 
cancer is the biggest medical cause of death in children in the UK. People 
think it is rare and it actually isn’t. It is that that shocked us more than 
anything else.”

One in 500 children get some kind of cancer before the age of 14, according to 
figures from Cancer Research UK. In the UK, 1,700 children under 14 get a 
diagnosis each year, and 2,300 between the ages of 14 and 20.
 