
It was decision day and from the northernmost Shetland isle of Unst to the 
southernmost hamlet of Cairngaan,Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> was deciding.

Queues had formed at polling stations before the doors opened and a record 
turnout was expected as the fate of the UK was determined by one simple yes/no 
question at the ballot box: "Should Scotland be an independent country?"

Some 4,285,323 people – 97% of the Scottish electorate – had registered to 
vote in this, the busiest day in Scottish electoral history, with some 
predicting a turnout of more than 80%. The future of the 307-year-old union 
with England would be determined. For the first time, 16- and 17-year-olds were 
voting, adding an extra uncertainty.

A final YouGov poll, released after polls closed, put support for the no side 
at 54% and yes at 46%. The pound had a good day against the dollar, buoyed by a 
slew of pre-result polls putting the no camp ahead. But the undecideds – about 
4% of the electorate according to a late poll – were still all to play for.

The leaders of the yes and no campaigns were upbeat. "I got a fantastic 
night's sleep," chirruped Scotland's first minister,Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>, as he cast his vote at 
Ritchie Hall, Strichen, in his Aberdeenshire constituency. "Obviously there's a 
great deal of anticipation: it's a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity; it's a day 
that everybody will remember," he added. Joined by two first-time voters, 
Natasha McDonald, 18, and Lea Pirie, 28, he handed both women a soft yes toy as 
a memento.

Support came in the form of Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>, who, said Salmond, "had hit 
another winner this morning" after the tennis star's apparent late backing for 
team yes when he tweeted: "Huge day for Scotland today! no campaign negativity 
last few days totally swayed my view on it. excited to see the outcome. lets do 
this!"

At Church Hill theatre in Edinburgh, a bright-eyed Alistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling>, the Better Together 
leader, was equally well rested. "I slept very well indeed, thank you," he told 
inquirers. "I'm feeling very confident."

Gordon Brown, whose passionate speech against independence on the eve of 
polling day won many plaudits, seemed focused on the practical aspects of the 
day as he cast his vote. Shaking hands with no campaign supporters, as well as 
one yes voter, waiting for him in the mist at North Queensferry community 
centre in Fife, the formerLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
prime minister mused: "I don't know if the rain will stay off."

For some, the decision had already been reached. In Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow>, Elizabeth MacGregor, 49, was 
leafletting for the yes campaign outside Hillhead high school. "I've waited my 
whole life for this moment", she said. "It's going to happen."

Her daughter Flora, 17 and a first-time voter, was with her: "I think that if 
I hadn't done anything I'd have felt awful about it." Flora said that her 
friends on Twitter and Facebook seemed to be mainly voting no: "I thought maybe 
I could try and sway them, or at least inform them of both sides." Adopting the 
slogan on the leaflet she was offering to passersby, she added: "It's our 
future in our hands, and we should take the opportunity to do it."

In the affluent suburb of Bearsden, north of Glasgow, Claire Simpson had just 
voted no. "I feel the campaign has been pretty horrible, for families and for 
society," she said. "I've got friends on the yes side and it has been 
difficult. It's difficult to tell which way the vote will go, or how a yes vote 
will affect the community." The healthcare worker believed that independence 
would be "a disaster for the NHS".

For others, the decision had yet to be reached, even as the clock was ticking 
down to 10pm. Standing outside a polling station on Govan Road, on Glasgow's 
south side, with their bags of shopping at their feet, Angela Colquhoun and 
Helen-Marie Tasker said they were "absolutely gobsmacked" because polling day 
has come and they had still not decided how to vote. "I've watched all the 
debates, but you get no answers", said Colquhoun, 41, a nursing auxiliary who 
has concerns about currency and pensions. She intended to spend another few 
hours thinking, then return to vote later.

Tasker, 33, a working mother, was likewise uncertain. "It's been going on for 
two years and nobody can give you a straight answer. I thinkDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> should've been telling us 
the positives of staying in the UK. I do wonder if it's just scare stories, but 
there's no going back after this."

History was being made – in more ways than one. Among the 16- and 17-year-olds 
able to vote for the first time was Brandyn Murphy, 16, a student inDundee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/dundee>. "When I went into the polling place I 
didn't really know what to do because it was my first time voting. My 
girlfriend helped me. I felt it was a big responsibility but I've taken it 
seriously. I've listened to the debates and went to the event at the Hydro [a 
debate for youngsters held in Glasgow]. Once I'd voted I felt happy."

The city was offering free taxi rides to polling stations, and opponents 
shared chocolate bars and coats in the drizzle, while Dundee pies were being 
handed out in the city centre.

In the runup to referendum day there were warnings that the atmosphere could 
turn spiteful in what had been billed as "yes city", but, in the main, the mood 
was good humoured and positive.

Wayne O'Hare, co-owner of Dundee Taxis, was ferrying older people to the 
voting booths. "It's about making sure as many people as possible get a chance 
to vote," he said. One elderly passenger, Adelia Couttie, said she had been 
waiting for this day for 60 years.

Labour MP Jim McGovern arrived in the city centre with a plate of pies (or 
"pehs" as he and his supporters said they should be spelled). He was harangued 
by a passerby – but a yes supporter quickly came to apologise. "Sorry – he 
doesn't represent us."

Evelyn Stenhouse and Tom Dumphie, on opposite sides of the argument, shared a 
Twix outside the Mill of Mains polling station. They reckoned the yes voters 
came up the hill from the housing scheme; the no voters from the private houses 
on the hill. "But we all have to get on tomorrow no matter what," said 
Stenhouse.

At the Glenlivit bar on Strathmartine Road, an independence day party was 
already in full swing. Yes voters were being charged £2 a pint, no voters £20. 
A sign outside read: "All English welcome except Cameron)". Landlord Brian 
Nelson said the bar would shut at midnight and the party move to his house. 
"Then we'll be back first thing to carry on."

Police Scotland confirmed they had stationed officers at many polling stations 
because they expected a very high turnout, though there was no intelligence to 
suggest there would be any problems.

By early afternoon there had been one report of an arrest, with police 
confirming a 44-year-old man had been detained in connection with an alleged 
assault outside a polling station in Clydebank at 8.30am.

Graffiti reading 'Vote Yes or else!' was also sprayed on to the entrance wall 
of a church hall in Balloch, Dumbarton, but swiftly painted over.

In Glasgow's East End, one of the key referendum battlegrounds, the SNP and 
Labour were reporting huge turnouts, with queues forming at many polling 
stations.

Scottish Labour councillor Frank Docherty, standing outside St Denis's primary 
school, in Dennistoun, said that by 1pm 755 of an eligible electorate of 2,700 
had voted, a figure they would not normally reach until about 5pm. The surge in 
voting normally came when people finished work, he said. In Craigmillar,
Edinburgh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh>, a flame-blowing piper 
from Las Vegas led yes supporters through a housing estate.

At a church used for polling in Gorgie, in the west of the city and close to 
the home ground of Hearts football club at Tynecastle – a club known for its 
historic Protestant associations – there were union jack stickers bearing the 
face of the Queen, David Bowie and Harry Potter plastered along the railings 
stating "your union needs you".

The boy wizard's creator, JK Rowling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling>, has declared firmly for the no 
vote, donating £1m to the Better Together campaign. Jason Robb, a Better 
Together activist stationed outside the polling station, said he thought Gorgie 
and Dalry, its closely associated neighbouring area, were traditionally 
unionist.

But he believed that the pro-independence vote at the church was doing well. 
"There are a lot of these areas where we know we're not going to get the 
majority of the vote," Robb said.

Cathy Fullerton, the area's Scottish National party councillor, said she was 
anxious but delighted by the referendum, something she had been hoping for for 
30 years.

"I've had butterflies in my stomach ever since I got up this morning," she 
said. "It's such an occasion; words can't describe it actually. It does bring 
tears to your eyes when you're talking about it."

After voting, Salmond began to slowly make his way southwards to Aberdeen, 
stopping off in the towns of Turriff and Ellon on the way. In Turriff, yes 
voters who were glad to see him included Bangladesh-born curry house owner, 
Mohammed Faruk, who said: "He's a great man and what is happening today is 
because of him. I was happy to get my vote away today."

On an estate, mother-of-two Helen Reid was as elated as a number of others 
coming out of their houses to pose with him for selfies: "He's magic, god, 
isn't he?

"I was up early to vote and I knew what I was going to do – freedom," she 
added, prompting her saltire-waving infant granddaughter to shout the same 
word."

Outside the polling station in central Lockerbie a man in a yes T-shirt played 
Flower of Scotland on his bagpipes – to the visible disapproval of at least 
half of those passing by. Hope Robertson, 22, said she was "fed up with yes 
campaigners ramming it in my face. I can't wait for the morrow when it's all 
over." She was voting no, she said, because her partner's family are farmers. A 
man in a tartan cap and saltire-emblazoned polo shirt said he wasn't voting, 
full stop: "I'm 89 and I've never voted before and I'm not about to start."

In the famous blacksmith's shop at Gretna Green, one young couple got married, 
aware of the significance of their union on such a momentous day. Sarah Smith, 
21 and 20-weeks pregnant, is from Annan, nine miles west of Gretna on the 
Scottish side. Her new husband, 32-year-old Jonathan Codona, is from Carlisle.

"It's a big day for me and a big day for Scotland," said Jonathan as he waited 
nervously for his bride's arrival. Only Sarah has a vote: she went "no" before 
heading to the ceremony: "I just don't see the point in changing something 
that's done me fine all my life, and I want the same for my children."

Jonathan's father Brian, 71, said: "I hope the only 'yes' today is the one my 
son gave."
 