
Health campaigners have accused the Scotch Whisky Association of arrogance 
after it launched a fresh legal challenge over plans for minimum alcohol 
pricing inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>.

To the dismay of medical experts and ministers in Edinburgh, the SWA said it 
would appeal to the UK supreme court against aScottish court ruling last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/21/scottish-court-rejects-appeal-against-minimum-alcohol-pricing>
 that plans for a 50p minimum price for alcohol were compatible with EU law.

Alcohol charities said the SWA, which represents global drinks giants such as 
Diageo and Pernod Ricard alongside smaller family distillers, was borrowing 
tactics fromtobacco companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tobacco-industry>, putting their 
commercial interests above public health.

“Twenty-two Scots are dying because of alcohol every single week,” said Alison 
Douglas, chief executive ofAlcohol <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alcohol>
 Focus Scotland. “In taking legal action, SWA members like Diageo and Pernod 
Ricard continue to put their shareholders’ profits above the public interest. 
When it comes to the nation’s health, we cannot allow the alcohol industry to 
call the shots.

“It is totally disingenuous of the SWA to say they are committed to tackling 
alcohol harm when they consistently block the single most effective measure to 
achieve that. They are borrowing from the tactics of the tobacco companies in 
delaying this live-saving measure.”

The Scottish health secretary, Shona Robison, said she was deeply saddened by 
the SWA’s decision to appeal again against another ruling by Scottish judges. 
She urged the association to drop its legal action.

“I think the SWA may want to consider that minimum unit pricing was passed 
with the overwhelming support of the parliament, has been tested inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, and has now been approved 
twice in the Scottish courts,” she said.

“We remain committed to ongoing dialogue with the alcohol industry. Should the 
SWA drop their appeal, and accept that the time has now come to implement this 
measure that will save lives, they could expect very strong support from across 
Scotland.”

A 50p minimum unit price would push the cost of a standard bottle of whisky up 
to £14. The data analyst Nielsen said earlier this week its research showed 69% 
of spirits in Scotland would be affected, and 67% of beers. Measured by brand, 
76% of Scotland’s most popular spirits would have to increase prices, Nielsen 
said, with blended scotch prices rising by 20% overall.

The fresh appeal is likely to delay a final ruling well into 2017. The SWA’s 
legal battle began four years ago and its case has now twice gone through the 
Scottish courts, with the drinks industry losing each time.

Backed by European drinks associations and nine EU member states including 
France, it insists that imposing a fixed starting price for all drinks is a 
breach of EU competition and free trade rules. The SWA argues a blanket 
approach penalises responsible drinkers unjustifiably, when ordinary taxation 
could be used to target cheaper types of drink.

The European court of justice (ECJ) ruled last December that this was a clear 
issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/23/minimum-alcohol-price-in-scotland-could-breach-eu-law-court-rules>
 but it referred the case back to the Scottish courts to assess whether that 
breach of EU competition rules was justified on health grounds. The ECJ added 
it had to be shown to be more proportionate and effective than using general 
taxation.

The Treasury already taxes certain alcohol drinks more heavily than others, 
targeting some on health grounds. However Scottish ministers have no control 
over drinks taxation but are responsible for health policy, limiting their 
options.

Last month, Lord Carloway, Scotland’s most senior judge, said minimum pricing 
was justified as there was a link between alcohol-related deaths and cheap 
alcohol. “The fact that the legislation would affect moderate drinkers in some 
way does not detract from the legitimacy of the aim as a measure designed for 
the general protection of public health and life,” he said.

Julie Hesketh-Laird, the SWA’s acting chief executive, would not explain in 
detail the legal basis for the further appeal, but said: “This is not a 
decision we have taken lightly. [But] given our strong view that minimum 
pricing is incompatible with EU law and likely to be ineffective, we now hope 
that our appeal can be heard quickly in the UK supreme court.

“Having studied the ruling, we believe the Scottish court has not properly 
reviewed the legislation’s compatibility with EU law as required by the 
European court’s judgment.”

The Sheffield Alcohol Research Group at the University of Sheffield argues 
that minimum unit pricing has been consistently effective and well-targeted 
when used abroad. It believes a 50p minimum unit price would result in 60 fewer 
deaths in Scotland, 1,300 fewer hospital admissions and 3,500 fewer crimes due 
to alcohol within the first year.
 