


The Scottish parliament is expected to be offered total control over income 
tax afterLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> reluctantly 
backed a cross-party deal to help halt a surge in support for independence.

Labour’s decision to drop its opposition to full devolution of income tax, 
worth about £10.8bn a year, comes afterAlistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling>, the last Labour 
chancellor, warned that doing so would end in “floods of tears” and increase 
the UK’s borrowing costs.

Darling told the FT he feared the measure, which is expected to be the 
centrepiece to sweeping new powers for the Scottish parliament being unveiled 
by Lord Smith on Thursday,would damage the UK’s history of pooling resources 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/1590a38e-732e-11e4-a257-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3K0XzhrTj>
 and sharing risks.

Labour had insisted on giving Holyrood limited powers over income tax until 
recent polls showed a sharp surge in support for the Scottish National party, 
hitting record levels of 52% and plummeting backing for Labour.

The significant switch will be confirmed on Tuesday by Jim Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jimmurphy>, the favourite to become the 
next Scottish Labour leader, two days before Lord Smith of Kelvin publishes his 
cross-party deal on extra powers for Holyrood.

Describing the move as one of the most significant changes in Labour policy 
since it dropped its Clause 4 policy backing nationalisation, Murphy will argue 
that giving Holyrood full tax powers will make MSPs far more accountable for 
their spending decisions.

“It will create the clear connection between the raising of taxes and the 
spending of revenues, which is missing at present,” Murphy will say in a 
leadership campaign speech in Glasgow, echoing the views of both the Tories and 
the Lib Dems.

Murphy will also signal that Labour will use the new powers to campaign for 
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to reinstate the 50p top 
rate in income tax in a bid to outmanoeuvre the SNP, which has repeatedly 
refused to endorse the policy.

Having the power to raise tax rates would “result in there being no hiding 
place for those who want to talk about radical politics but then fail to 
deliver them,” he will say.

Smith is expected to confirm on Thursday that the main UK parties – backed by 
the SNP – have agreed to give the devolved parliament a swath of new welfare, 
tax and legal powers, as pledged by the no campaign before it won the 
independence referendum on 18 September.

The most far-reaching proposal to allow Holyrood to completely control the 
rates and bands for income tax had been opposed by some of Labour’s heavy 
hitters, including the shadow chancellor, Ed Balls, and former prime minister 
Gordon Brown, who last month warned that devolving income tax was a “Trojan 
horse for fiscal autonomy” that could lead to the unravelling of the UK.

Backed by some of Labour’s most senior advisers, Balls and Brown fear that 
breaking up the UK’s entirely integrated income tax system will accelerate 
moves to restrict the voting rights of Scottish MPs in the Commons.

It could allow Scotland to cut tax rates below the rest of the UK, increase 
the chances of reforms to the Barnett formula system of funding Scotland, and 
make it far more difficult for a Labour chancellor to push through a 
controversial budget.

Darling has also warned that dividing up the UK-wide tax system also meant 
that people in Scotland would not pay directly for “quintessential” UK services 
such as defence, protecting bank deposits and the UK-wide welfare system.

“For the first time in 300 years, a UK government would no longer have control 
over its power to raise income taxes,” he wrote.

“It could be left in a position where it determines the rate of income tax 
only to find it impossible to implement in Scotland, Wales and Northern 
Ireland.”
 