
It seems a bit strange, given they have beaten France twice in their past 11 
meetings at Murrayfield, that Scotland were once very much these same 
opponents’ bogey side there. Between 1980 and 1992 the Scots beat the French 
seven times in a row at home. Le XV du Chardon were a prickly prospect for Les 
Bleus.

It wasn’t as if professionalism after that golden streak knocked Scotland 
clean out. Four years after the great shock to the pocket of 1995, they won the 
very last Five Nations title, beating France in Paris 36-22 in the final round. 
There was still a tempo to Scotland’s recycling game that could knock the 
heavyweight French off their feet.

Little has changed on that front. Scotland remain the quickest ruckers in the 
championship and their scrum-half, Greig Laidlaw, winning his 50th cap on 
Sunday, has to be sharp to keep up – not for him the couple of seconds afforded 
to other No9s to survey the options. Hehas to plan on the move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/26/greig-laidlaw-scotland-six-nations-italy>
. The high rhythm satisfies the general requirement to test stamina levels and 
keep the ball visible and in play.

So, with Laidlaw so at ease with the tempo, why don’t Scotland win more games 
and not just against France? Well, there’s still the old argument that in rugby 
– still defining itself as a passing game, as opposed to the kicking of 
association football – every time the ball is taken to ground is an admission 
that the player in possession has failed to make a pass. You can ruck all day – 
and at speed – but you’re not doing what the game is all about.

Scotland’s Laidlaw and Seymour finish off battling Italy to end drought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/27/italy-scotland-six-nations-match-report>
Defences are not stretched by Scotland’s runners. The line of tacklers may 
bend a little, but it does not break. In the 16 years of theSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations>, Scotland have become an 
impatient side, trying in their frustration at not forcing a breach, to give 
the miracle ball – too often a little too ambitious, a little too delivered 
under stress. So they knock on or lose their shape or generally get in a 
muddle. And in that confusion they leak points in batches.

Against Italy, and at long last, Scotland kept their discipline and patience 
and worked their passes accurately to John Barclay and John Hardie. Stuart Hogg 
delivered his with real aplomb to Tommy Seymour. Add to the precision and the 
sleight of hand, the mixing up of the options – the box kicks by Laidlaw, the 
delicate chips by Finn Russell – andthe performance looked more polished and 
complete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/27/italy-scotland-six-nations-match-report>
. It was a 10th consecutive defeat in the championship avoided with a dash.

It was a victory over Italy. France, for all their lack of attention to the 
details of collective defence, and other such fundamentals as realignment in 
attack, are a completely different proposition. None of their players remember 
the age when France could not win at Murrayfield. To beat Scotland is almost a 
given. Condescension can be turned against most teams; not necessarily against 
France, who can still finish the championship on eight points, enough – by a 
stretch of the imagination – to win the title.

France have made six changes to the starting team that lost to Wales. Scott 
Spedding from full-back offers a galloping counterattack, rather less elegant 
than Wesley Fofana on the wing. Gaël Fickou returns to the centre in the place 
of the robust Jonathan Danty, giving grace the edge over power.

The ball may fall on Spedding sooner than it comes to the midfield. Scotland 
will kick it high towards the back three, no doubt, and France have to manage 
its passage through the hands of infield players who may not yet be in tune 
with any grand plan. The lineout has been functional and the drive from it
dynamic enough against Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/26/wales-france-six-nations-match-report>
 to produce a late try. Scotland will not be able to stop the French maul, the 
French maulers will be thinking.

But what if the Scots resist the drive? The ball will leave the darkness and 
be handed to Maxime Machenaud and François Trinh-Duc, who do not portray 
themselves as natural, finger-wagging generals. Besides, who will serve them? 
The back row have been in a rush to set up camp only on the far touchline. 
There may be some nice possibilities out there, but the extraction of Wenceslas 
Lauret and Damien Chouly from the heavy traffic looks a little premature.

Guilhem Guirado has selflessly offered himself as ball-carrier and tackler but 
he may feel a little overworked, what with the captaincy and the throwing into 
the lineout. The props and second-rows have yet to make many legal dents in the 
championship. France do not seem to have a clear notion of how to build towards 
the unleashing of their top runners outside.

Which way will it tilt, this encounter between Scotland, obviously buoyed by 
victory and committed to their plan, and France, patently not of one mind and 
not quite where they want to be on any front? The home team have their best 
chance in two dozen years to make themselves once again the scourge of the 
visitors.
 