
The leaders of the yes and no campaigns are making their final pitches in the 
Scottish referendum campaign ahead of Thursday's historic vote, with the first 
ministerAlex Salmond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond> saying 
Scotland would be the "envy of the world" if it votes to leave the UK.

The three latest pollsfrom ICM, Opinium and Survation suggest the no campaign 
has a slight lead, showing support for independence at about 48% and those 
backing the union at about 52%.Alistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling>, the leader of the 
Better Together campaign, said the vote would go "right down to the wire".

With just under 24 hours to go before polls open, campaigners will be out in 
force acrossScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> making their 
final pleas and delivering millions of leaflets in an attempt to swing 
undecided voters.

Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> is due to make a 
series of campaigning visits over the next two days and Gordon Brown is leading 
a rally in Glasgow on Wednesday morning, as Labour battles to save the 
307-year-old union in a part of the country that it considers part of its core 
constituency.

The Westminster party leaders have unveiled a package of devolution measures 
and made a promise to keep the Barnett formula, which ensures 19% more spending 
per head for Scots than the English, in a last-minute attempt to save the union.

The yes campaign is targeting older voters who are more likely to say no to 
independence and holding a rally of celebrity supporters in Glasgow. Salmond is 
giving a final speech in Perth on Wednesday night, after writing an impassioned
open letter to Scotland urging people 
<http://newsnetscotland.com/index.php/referendum/9759-first-minister-letter-to-voters-qlets-do-thisq>
 to vote so that they wake up on Friday in a better country.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme on Wednesday morning, he dismissed 
the offer of the Better Together campaign.

"These are the same package that was announced last spring, reannounced a week 
ago and repackaged in desperation yesterday by the three Westminster leaders. 
They've been heavily discounted by the Scottish people. And as for the currency 
we'll use? We'll use the pound."

On the same programme, Darling gave a final warning to the Scots that there 
would be no going back if independence did not work out.

"It's not like a general election where if it doesn't work out, or you don't 
like the government of the day, you can kick them out," he said.

"This time the vote we cast tomorrow is final. If we decide to go, there is no 
going back. I believe that voting no gets you a stronger Scotland, with a 
stronger Scottish parliament. Voting yes brings all sorts of risks, on 
currency, on jobs, and I think the majority of people in Scotland just don't 
want that. There are so many unanswered questions, so much uncertainty as to 
how it would affect families, with price rises and so on. Which is why I think, 
by the end of tomorrow, we'll win."

Better Together is facing a nervous wait, after losing its clear lead in the 
polls over the past few months. Recriminations have already started to fly 
within the no camp, and some Westminster MPs are angry that David Cameron and 
Ed Miliband have promised so much Scottish devolution without considering the 
needs of England or consulting parliament.

The prime minister is seen has having taken a gamble by offering the 
referendum with a misplaced degree of certainty that he would win.

Cameron defended his decision in the Times, saying: "I think that actually 
Scottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> would be closer 
today if I had taken that approach than it is by having a proper, legal, fair 
and decisive referendum."

Both sides have been putting pressure on celebrities, business leaders and 
other opinion leaders to speak out in their favour with endorsements over the 
past few weeks.

A major coup for the no campaign was the support of Bill Clinton, the former 
US president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/17/bill-clinton-independence-scotland-uk>
, on the grounds that the new powers due to be devolved to the Scottish 
parliament would guarantee "maximum self-determination". He said: "I understand 
and sympathise with those who want independence … however, I hope the Scots 
people will vote to remain in the UK."

Fourteen former British military chiefs also issued an urgent warning to 
voters in Scotland, saying Thursday's referendum could prove "critical to our 
security".

Rupert Murdoch, the executive chairman of News Corp, who appeared to be 
flirting with the yes camp during a brief trip to Scotland over the weekend, 
has hedged his bets after the Scottish Sun declined to endorse either side. In 
an editorial on Wednesday the paper said the decision was so momentous people 
had to make up their own mind.

The final days of campaigning have been dominated by the battleground issues 
of theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and the UK constitution. 
Demonstrations have taken an abusive and chaotic turn in some areas, with 
Miliband forced to abandon a walkabout because he was being shouted at and 
insulted by yes supporters.

The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader was caught in 
a crush with TV crews and journalists at the St James shopping centre in 
central Edinburgh. Yes campaigners hurled abuse at him, calling him a liar and 
a serial murderer, prompting him to say: "I think we've seen in parts of this 
campaign an ugly side to it from the yes campaign."

It was the latest in a series of incidents in which senior Scottish Labour 
figures campaigning for a no vote, including Jim Murphy and Gordon Brown, have 
been targeted by pro-independence protesters.

In one snatched interview during the melee, Miliband said he was in Edinburgh 
to argue for "more powers for a stronger Scotland as well as NHS funding 
guaranteed, and that's got to be weighed up against the big risks of voting 
yes. And that's the choice people are facing in the last couple of days of this 
campaign."

There were also claims that Alex Salmond had tried to put pressure on Prof 
Louise Richardson, the principal of St Andrews University 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/scottish-independence/11100754/Revealed-Alex-Salmond-personally-pressurised-St-Andrews-University-head-over-independence-concerns.html>
 to criticise the Westminster government's higher education policy. The 
Telegraph reported that the First Minister phoned Richardson after she refused 
to put out a statement penned for her by one of Salmond's aides.

In the referendum campaign's final surge, rival campaigns have sent out more 
than 4m leaflets. Yes Scotland targeted pensioners with 1.2 million personally 
addressed appeals.

Salmond suffered a blow when a leaked document raised significant questions 
about the Scottish government's funding of the NHS.

The paper for senior NHS managers revealed they were planning to have to deal 
with a £450m shortfall over the next two years. Sweeping cuts would be needed 
to fund the shortfall, the document said.

The leak sabotaged Salmond's efforts to put the future of Scotland's health 
services at the centre of the yes campaign, by alleging that NHS privatisation 
policy in England could force Scotland to cut health spending.
 