
At some stage on the 192 miles of the Coast to Coast walk, conversation 
inevitably turns to the Great Question: is it better to trek from St Bees to 
Robin Hood's Bay or vice versa? Are the overwhelming numbers of 
Coast-to-Coasters who set out from Cumbria right, or do the wisest and most 
discriminating walkers come from the east?

The answer is that it doesn't really matter, because part of the genius of the 
walk's sole creator, the great fell-wandererAlfred Wainwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alfred-wainwright> (no relation), is that he 
laid on a lavish stretch of coastal walking at both ends. The sea cliffs of St 
Bees Head and North Cheek are alike alluring destinations; grails to keep in 
mind on testing sections of the fortnight's march, when you are creeping 
through Lake District mist or knee-deep in Pennine bog.

For all that the route crosses three delectable national parks, it doesn't 
strike off impatiently away from the sea at either end. Starters at both St 
Bees and Robin Hood's Bay must head north for a good three miles, with the sea 
at their side all the way, before at last turning their faces inland.
In each case, this initial stretch has all the best features of a coastal 
walk: the mighty sea, huge views and a dose of traditional British seaside 
goings-on. It may sound odd, but after days spent surrounded by the loveliness 
of Borrowdale or the North York Moors, it is fun to start the home run to Robin 
Hood's Bay by navigating through a caravan park, exchanging chat with a 
different type of holidaymaker who prefers the static life.

If I was forced to plump for one starting point over the other, though, I 
would choose St Bees, largely because you then have the prevailing weather at 
your back and don't get late-afternoon sun in your eyes. A traditional, albeit 
very small, bucket and spade resort, the village has some great history. Check 
out itswebsite <http://www.stbees.org.uk> and here's a sample. 

In 1895 a Durham vicar with the good name of Reverend Pagan gave St Bees' 
fledgling parish council a local farm, on condition that the rent was invested 
to buy further property. His idea was that soon the whole of St Bees would 
belong to the council, at which point funds would be lent to neighbouring 
Whitehaven or Sellafield to start the same process there. In due course the 
whole of Britain would be in public ownership and, at last, fair rents would be 
charged to the poor. It hasn't happened yet, but St Bees continues to benefit 
from charity payments via the Pagan Legacy.

Pick up your pebble for eventual deposit on the North Sea coast and stride up 
the towering red sea cliffs of the two Heads, North and South. They have some 
of the best bird-watching spots in Britain. Even if you've never given the 
subject a moment's thought, the antics of seabirds such as guillemots and 
puffins with their bright bar-coded beaks are mesmerising and the RSPB has 
excellent identification boards.

Up a sloping field, frequented by Clouded Yellow butterflies from June to 
August, a dumpy lighthouse was the last in Britain to be fired by coal, only 
changing to oil in 1822 after sailors complained that smoke from its fire 
obscured the light beams. Down below is an idyllic, isolated stretch of pebbly 
beach, Fleswick Bay. Beyond patches of gorse you can see the distant spooky 
towers of Sellafield nuclear plant.

North lies Whitehaven, where Jonathan Swift was taken as a one-year-old baby 
by his over-fond nanny, causing a national kidnap alert. That's a good subject 
for reflection as you turn towards the east and the Lakeland hills; start your 
own wanderings by wondering if and how this episode may have influenced the 
story of Gulliver's Travels.

Days later, the first distant glimpse of the North Sea from the moors above 
Rosedale reawakens the salty, wild and open feeling of cliff-walking. Through 
the caravan park, complete with a hollow tree famed for Coast-to-Coasters 
pressing their ears to the trunk to hear the whispers and cheeps of a bluetits' 
nest built annually inside, the path returns to the seaside.

The final stretch is a wonderful undulation, right on the edge of 
grassy-topped cliffs which fall sheer (and dangerously - keep well back) to 
rock scars such as Craze Naze and scoured-out collapsed caverns like Homerell 
Hole where the waves reverberate as they crash in and out.

Wainwright's masterful route-planning keeps the beautiful tumble of Robin 
Hood's Bay itself out of sight until the very last of the 192 miles. Round 
North Cheek and the red-tiled cottages appear at last, beyond Rocket Post Field 
with its replica tower which was used as target practice for rescue crews whose 
job was to fire lines by rocket to haul mariners from the many ships which 
foundered on the rocks hidden up to a mile offshore.

The agreeable shudder you get from reading about such dramas, knowing that you 
are safe and sound on dry land, is another part of the endless appeal of 
coast-walking. Like looking into a fire on an evening, there are times when 
simply sitting on a clifftop or beach and gazing out across the rollers to the 
far horizon seems the only thing in the world to do.

· Coast to Coast Walk by Martin Wainwright is published by Aurum Press 
<http://www.aurumpress.co.uk>, £12.99. Buy it at the Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781845132224>

· Join Martin Wainwright on May 14 at 1pm for the launch of Coast to Coast 
Walk when he will be climbing to the summit of Kidsty Pike (2560ft). Leaving 
Mardale Head car park (top of Haweswater) at 11am - or reaching peak by any 
other route, from Hartsop, Patterdale et al.

In foul weather, though, we'll be content with the Haweswater Hotel.

RSVP to martin.wainwright@theguardian.com 
<mailto:martin.wainwright@theguardian.com> if you are planning to attend.
 