
When my mother died, 30 years ago, I had to adjust to the fact that she was 
nothing like the person I took her to be. That this cheerful, spirited, 
much-loved woman had taken her own life was enough of a shock. When I 
discovered (much later) that she had been on heavy duty anti-anxiety drugs even 
before I was born, it turned my image of her inside out.

People are mysteries. When I try to find out what is on the mind of my younger 
daughters – as advised by all the parenting books – I am usually stonewalled. 
And for good reasons, as they intuit that information is power. Furthermore, 
sharing does not always have the healing qualities advertised. “A problem 
shared is a problem halved,” I once sagely intoned to one of my children.

“Well that’s a load of shit for a start,” she replied briskly. Sadly, I think 
she had a point.

Secrets are at the heart of family life – yet we are inclined to fantasise 
that we can live in some kind of idealised micro-society where we are open 
books, sharing and caring together. But children are strangers to adults 
and vice versa. Partners likewise. Inside us all are hidden and unexplored 
universes – unknown even to the private consciousnesses that inhabit them. If 
you doubt it, readTimothy Wilson’s remarkable Strangers to Ourselves 
<http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674013827>.

Family Secrets by Deborah Cohen – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/12/behind-closed-doors-deborah-cohen>
This does not preclude love. Love is not knowledge, except in a certain sense, 
feeling ourselves to be within and part of one another. But ordinary knowing – 
how people think, who they are, what drives them, what they most fear – largely 
eludes us.

What stands in the way of this knowledge? Language is just not up to the job. 
What we say is inevitably different from what others hear, or perhaps what we 
even mean, as by the time it reaches the interior consciousness of the hearer, 
it has passed through the filters – on both sides – of emotion, of denial, of 
wishful-thinking, of deniability, of all the layers of distortion built up 
through the experiences between the individuals involved. Obviously, this is 
not true of statements such as “I want chips”, but “I am angry” is a different 
matter.

There are other ways of communicating. Sex in the case of your partner, but 
also touch, body language, tone of voice, certain kinds of silence. But even 
when these are deployed, even if they happen to be understood, they leave much 
out.

Do we want to show those around us who we are, anyway? Do we even know who we 
are in the first place?

This fascinates me from an artistic point of view because I write novels, and 
understanding the way people communicate is central to the success (or failure) 
of the project. It is also an urgent fact of lived life – how can we show those 
around us who we are? Do we want to show those around us who we are, anyway? Do 
we even know who we are in the first place?

The fuel of drama and storytelling is secrets – because life itself runs on 
secrets. Not because we choose them (although some do, as it saves them from 
too much intimacy, and can give an advantage in any situation), but because 
secrets are inescapable. We can only learn to live with them – for if we 
believe too much in the illusion that they are absent, we become dangerously 
overconfident about what we know about a given individual – or so it seemed to 
me after my mother’s death.

To know people at all takes the utmost sensitivity. Empathy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/oct/08/literary-fiction-improves-empathy-study>
 is the ultimate human quality. I know that I lack a sufficient degree of it – 
perhaps because I could not bear it. For if we were to look too closely inside 
those we love – our children, our partners – what we would see, above all, is 
their vulnerability.

This has the power to break our hearts. Compassion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2011/nov/18/compassion-brings-risks>
 – “suffering with” – was Jesus’s greatest quality. The fact that he ended up 
crucified for it says more about us a species than we like to admit.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 