
An Indian court ruled on one of the most bitterly contested religious sites in 
the countrytoday, deciding that the land at Ayodhyashould be split between one 
Muslim and two Hindu groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/30/ayodhya-verdict-hindus-muslims-india>
.

Despite fears that the long-awaited verdict, which was delivered amid chaotic 
scenes, would spark religious violence, many cities remained tense but calm. 
Authorities had stepped up security, deploying hundreds of thousands of police 
and paramilitaries and holding at least 10,000 people in "preventive custody".

Earlier, amid scenes of confusion in the Lucknow Allahabad high court, judges 
gave control of the main disputed section of the 16th-century mosque, 
demolished by a mob of Hindu extremists in 1992, to Hindus. Other parts of the 
site will be controlled by Muslims and a Hindu sect.

Lawyers who had argued that the whole site belonged to the Muslim community 
said they were "partly disappointed". They plan a supreme court appeal.

The destruction of the mosque – known as the Babri Masjid – 18 years ago 
sparked some ofIndia's worst ever religious rioting of recent decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/28/ayodhya-mosque-india-guardian-report>
, with nearly 2,000 deaths. A decade later, Ayodhya was linked to renewed 
violence in which more than 1,000 people were killed.

Hindus first protested that the Ayodhya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya> mosque, built in 1528 by the Mughal 
emperor Babur, had been erected at the birthplace of Rama more than 150 years 
ago. The conflict was aggravated in 1949 when idols of Rama appeared in the 
mosque. Hindu extremist groups and the BJP then exploited the issue to build 
mass popular support in the 1980s.

The reaction to today's decision is being seen as a crucial test of India's 
commitment to secularism and rule of law. Politicians from all sides and 
representatives of all faith communities called for calm.

"It is my hope that the response of the people of India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> to the judgment will be respectful, 
dignified and do our country proud," the prime minister, Manmohan Singh, said.

Analysts say India today is a far cry from the more polarised, violent nation 
of the early 1990s. Young people particularly show little interest in issues 
such as Ayodhya that once mobilised huge numbers.

"It was always thought there would be wailing and groaning on one side and 
triumphant gloating on the other but it is very clear that India has matured 
and the Indian, Muslim or Hindu, has decided that the law must take precedent 
over sentiment," said MJ Akbar, a newspaper editor and author.

However, Hindu nationalists, who have long used the issue to rouse passions, 
felt the judgment opened the way for the building of a new temple on the 
contested land, pointing to the judges' ruling that the mosque had been built 
at the site of earlier Hindu temples and on the birthplace of the god-king Ram.

Mohan Bhagwat, the chief of the Hindu paramilitary volunteer organisation 
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, said the "stage had been set" for a new temple: "I 
will appeal to Muslims to forget the past. We have got an opportunity to act 
together."

LK Advani, a senior leader of the opposition BJP who was implicated in the 
original destruction of the mosque, said the decision would mark a new 
beginning in "national identity".

The majority judgment means that the central portion of the site where the 
mosque itself once stood will remain with Hindus, and idols placed there 
decades ago will be allowed to stay.

The 2,000-page judgment <http://rjbm.nic.in/>, however, ordered that the 
status quo at the religious compound in Ayodhya at the centre of the dispute – 
currently under state control – be maintained for three months while details of 
the division are decided, and drew attention to historic traditions of joint 
worship at the site.

One judge made the point that significant portions of the site belong to both 
Muslims and Hindus.

Many Indian schools and offices were shut today as a huge security operation 
involving hundreds of thousands of troops and paramilitaries across the country 
got under way.

Police placed more than 10,000 people in "preventive custody" and extended a 
ban on mass texting to stop people inciting violence. More than 40,000 police 
were deployed in Mumbai, which had erupted in anti-Muslim riots and retaliatory 
bombings after the Babri mosque demolition but has seen only scattered peace 
marches in recent days.

With the opening ceremony of the Commonwealth Games in Delhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/commonwealthgames2010> due to take place on 
Sunday, today's decision poses a new security threat to athletes and 
dignitaries arriving in India.
 