
Nearly 19,000 children and young people were treated in hospital in England 
and Wales after self-harming in the last year, a figure that has risen steeply 
in recent years, according to a leading children’s charity.

NHS figures show 'shocking' rise in self-harm among young
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/23/nhs-figures-show-shocking-rise-self-harm-young-people>
The National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> (NSPCC), which collected the 
data from hospitals using freedom of information requests, says the rise of 14% 
over the last three years – an extra 2,400 cases – is worrying. A growing 
number of hospital beds are being filled by children who have taken violent and 
drastic steps to alleviate their emotional pain and suffering, says the charity.

The children most likely to harm themselves are aged 13 to 17 and tend to be 
struggling to cope with the pressures of modern life, the charity warned.

Childline, run by the NSPCC, also delivered 50 counselling sessions a day in 
the last year to children and young people about self-harm.The charity is 
appealing for funds <https://www.nspcc.org.uk/what-you-can-do/make-a-donation/>
, saying it can deal with only three out of every four young people who call 
the free hotline.

One 14-year-old boy who contacted Childline said: “Sometimes I get flashbacks 
from what happened when I was younger and I cope with the horrible memories by 
cutting myself. School helped take my mind off things but now that the holidays 
are here I’m struggling. My parents always seem to be too busy for me and I 
don’t want to tell my friends what happened. I feel so miserable and lonely – 
can you please help?”

A 14-year-old girl told counsellors: “Recently I’ve lost some people that were 
really close to me. When I started to self-harm it seemed to mask the emotional 
pain I was feeling, even if it only helped for a little while. When I get the 
urge, I can’t seem to stop it until it’s done; otherwise I get really upset and 
angry. A couple of times I’ve gone too far and ended up in hospital.”

Peter Wanless, chief executive of the NSPCC, said: “A frightening number of 
children and teenagers are being driven to self-harm as a way of dealing with 
unresolved feelings, tensions and distress in their lives.

“Knowing hospital beds are full of young people crying out for help should be 
a real wake-up call to all those [who] care for the wellbeing of the younger 
generation. It is vital we confront the fact that an increasing number are 
struggling to deal with the pressures and demands of modern-day life, to such 
an extent they are inflicting terrible damage upon themselves.”

Childline’s president, Dame Esther Rantzen, said it was deeply disturbing that 
children were ending up in hospital. “Self-harming is at epidemic level among 
young people: at Childline we hear from them every day.

“It has become one of the most common problems young people bring to us, and I 
know from our counsellors that these are some of the most painful stories we 
hear. Often the young people feel too ashamed and fearful to seek help from 
those around them, until they harm themselves so badly they have to be rushed 
to hospital.”

Dr Max Davie of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> said the rise in the numbers was 
of real concern. “Whilst we don’t know what it was that brought all 19,000 
children to self-harm, what we do know is that support was not offered early 
enough to prevent it from getting this serious. Early intervention is essential 
if we are to reduce the number of children self-harming and needing specialist 
mental health or emergency services.”

He called for comprehensive personal, health, social and economic (PHSE) 
teaching in all schools, which addresses a range of issues including eating 
disorders, self-harm and suicide, as well as positive relationships, sex 
education and the dangers of drugs and alcohol abuse.

“There are a lot of pressures on children. It is not easy being a child these 
days,” said Dr Jon Goldin, a consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist and 
spokesman for the Royal College of Psychiatrists. “In some ways children are 
encouraged to grow up too fast.”

He cited the sexualisation of children in the media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/12/sexualised-behaviour-in-very-young-children-increasing-say-teachers>
 and the pressure of social media on children and adolescents to look good and 
as if they are having a good time, when the reality might be different. 
Cyberbullying is a problem and schools are focusing intensely on academic work 
and examinations. Children need also to learn about relationships and emotional 
wellbeing. “I think schools need permission from government to see that as part 
of their remit,” he said.

Economic and social factors affecting families are also part of it. “Young 
people are a kind of canary in the mine, drawing attention to other social 
problems,” he said. Sadly, he felt young people were not always optimistic 
about the future of themselves or their world and he said that they need their 
often-very-busy parents and others to find time to listen to them and help them 
understand their own distress.

Sarah Brennan, chief executive of YoungMinds, said the rise in self-harm was 
extremely worrying and called for early intervention. “We know from our 
research that young people face a huge range of pressures, including stress at 
school, college or university, body image issues, bullying on and offline, 
around-the-clock social media and uncertain job prospects. Difficult 
experiences in childhood – including bereavement, domestic violence or neglect 
– can also have a serious impact on mental health, often several years down the 
line.

“As a society, we need to do far more to prevent mental health problems from 
developing in the first place. To start with, we urgently need to rebalance our 
education system, so that schools are encouraged to prioritise wellbeing and 
not just exam results.”
 