
Tony Abbott has challenged Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> to find “another 
deregulatory measure” to win the Liberal Democratic party senator David 
Leyonhjelm’s vote on restoring the building and construction commission and 
take gun control definitively off the table.


Abbott told Guardian Australia on Tuesday evening there was “no way on God’s 
Earth” he would have allowed eight-shot Adler guns to “flood into the country” 
while he was prime minister.

Abbott said he had moved to ban the weapons when he heard the guns were being 
imported, detecting the “anxiety” of police and security agencies – and the ban 
had then been subjected to a sunset clause because of what he termed “pushback 
in the Coalition” – not because of any agreement with Leyonhjelm on non-related 
migration legislation.

Tony Abbott 'disturbed' by reports Turnbull trading off Adler gun laws for 
ABCC vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/18/tony-abbott-disturbed-by-reports-turnbull-trading-off-adler-gun-laws-for-abcc-vote>
The intervention from the former prime minister followed a sustained effort by 
Labor to intensify political pressure on the prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/18/tony-abbott-disturbed-by-reports-turnbull-trading-off-adler-gun-laws-for-abcc-vote>
 after Turnbull first appeared to leave open the option of cutting a deal with 
Leyonhjelm on gun regulation – which is a pet subject of the libertarian 
senator – in return for a positive vote on the government’s legislation 
restoring the Australian Building and Construction Commission.

Turnbull had entered Tuesday with the objective of putting political pressure 
on the ALP over the ABCC and the party’s links to the trade union movement, but 
the day quickly became consumed by political controversy over gun control.

Shorten moved a parliamentary motion citing reports that Turnbull would “do a 
deal on gun laws to pass the Abbott government’s industrial relations bills”, 
and noting Turnbull “has on at least five occasions just this morning refused 
to rule out trading away John Howard’s gun laws to pass the Abbott government’s 
industrial relations bills”.

Labor then followed up in question time with a series of questions about the 
government’s ongoing commitment to gun control.

Shorten cited an agreement during the Abbott period where the government 
introduced a prohibition on the importation of lever action shotguns. The ban 
was subject to a 12-month sunset clause.

Leyonjhelm on Tuesday released correspondence between himself and staff of the 
justice minister, Michael Keenan, which linked the application of the sunset 
clause directly to the LDP senator’s vote in favour of non-related migration 
legislation.

Turnbull eventually moved to shut the issue down in parliamentary question 
time, telling the house there was no prospect of weakening the Howard agreement 
on gun control.

“There is no prospect, no chance of my government … weakening, watering down 
John Howard’s gun laws. And I might say there is no proposal being made to do 
so,” the prime minister told the chamber.

The prime minister said the government has ensured “no Adler-lever action guns 
with more than five rounds can be imported in any category”.

That ban would remain in place until state and territory ministers resolved a 
permanent view of the weapon, the prime minister said. Police ministers meet 
this Friday.

The ABCC bill finally passed the house 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/oct/18/malcolm-turnbull-rejects-amnesty-claim-that-detention-akin-to-torture-politics-live>
 by close of business on Tuesday, but its fate in the Senate remains uncertain.

Leyonjhelm, who had been expected to vote for the bill, is now not making any 
commitments, beyond talking to the government.

Malcolm Turnbull says there is 'no chance' of Coalition watering down gun laws 
– politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/oct/18/malcolm-turnbull-rejects-amnesty-claim-that-detention-akin-to-torture-politics-live>
The LDP senator told Sky News on Tuesday he had told Turnbull in August he was 
angry about being “dudded” over the sunset clause.

He said subsequent to that meeting, the workplace minister, Michaelia Cash, 
had given him the impression to government might meet his demands on gun 
control.

Asked by host Andrew Bolt whether he’d been given the impression his demands 
would be met, Leyonjhelm replied: “Yes.”

He said there was no definitive deal, only an “intention” expressed by Cash 
that they wanted to find an agreeable landing point.
 