
If you have a good degree and a passionate interest in understanding why human 
beings are so drawn into violence and conflict, this could be the postgrad 
course for you. Unfortunately, this is something of a growth business - the 
number and intensity of violent conflicts around the world shows no sign of 
diminishing, and this whole area has become a major area of study in its own 
right.

While there are lots of postgrad courses in anthropology around the country - 
and undoubtedly conflict plays in important part in most them - there is a new 
course that you might want to consider, offered at Sussex. Its MA in 
anthropology of conflict, violence and conciliation is currently two-thirds of 
the way through its first year, and it is aimed at those who have either 
experienced conflict first hand or those looking to gain a deeper understanding 
of its influence in the contemporary world.

While it is primarily aimed at those with a first degree in anthropology, it 
is also open to anyone with a loosely related degree as long as they have a 2.1 
or better, assuming they can demonstrate a strong interest in the subject.

According to its convenor, James Fairhead, those signing up to the course can 
expect a lot of reading and some long written assignments. "The MA will expose 
students to contemporary advanced theoretical approaches to conflict, violence 
and conciliation in a number of specific situations in the contemporary world. 
It is not a study of history - the furthest back we go is to the Second World 
War and it should be noted that the course is not an anthropology of war, 
although it does embrace the subject."

He is also keen to stress that while some students will have first hand 
knowledge of conflict, the course is in no way designed to be therapy through 
study. He says the course aims to consider the links between individual and 
wider social suffering, and does so within the larger context of political 
economy, colonial and post-colonial history.

Students can expect to write five 5,000 word studies - on top of a 
dissertation. Particular areas of interest might be the conflicts in western 
Africa, Sri Lanka, or recent events in the Balkans. Each member of staff who 
teaches on the course has become an expert on several geographical areas, and 
between them they seem to have every recent world conflict covered.

James says he expects students to come from a variety of backgrounds - a 
mixture of recent graduates and those who have worked in the field most notably 
for non-governments organisations and similar bodies.

As for the job prospects, he says many of those doing the course will return 
to the life they had prior to doing the course. Others will carry out further 
research and go on to teach. And an MA in this area will undoubtedly help you 
get a job with the major bodies that operate in the area of conflict resolution 
- such as, the UN, EU or Amnesty International.

miles.brignall@tiscali.fr <mailto:miles.brignall@tiscali.fr>
 