
Seven years of quantitative easing (QE) and record low interest rates have 
cost savers an estimated £160bn, but supported strong increases in the prices 
of property, stocks and bonds.

Analysis by financial firm Hargreaves Lansdown suggests that up to £106bn is 
being held in accounts paying no interest, as loose monetary policy has 
“annihilated” returns on cash.

Saturday 5 March marks the seventh anniversary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/mar/05/interest-rates-quantitative-easing>
 of the day the Bank of England cut interest rates to their current historic 
low. The move followed five other sharp reductions as the Bank tried to keep a 
lid on the growing financial crisis – between September 2008 and March 2009 the 
base rate fell from 5% to 0.5%.

At the same time, the Bank kicked off a programme of QE, which saw money 
printed to buygovernment bonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/apr/12/businessglossary25> (gilts) 
and corporate debt, in an attempt to prop up the economy. So far, the programme 
of QE has been worth £375bn.

Laith Khalaf, a senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Loose monetary 
policy has supported rises in stock, bond and property prices over the past 
seven years, while annihilating the returns on cash.”

Mortgages


Hargreaves Lansdown said the average mortgage rate had fallen by 31% over that 
period, saving borrowers £270 a month on a £200,000 repayment. Access to cheap 
credit has supported the housing market, leading to a 32% rise in prices over 
the same period.

Figures from the Bank show that for a borrower with a 25% deposit, the average 
cost of a five-year fixed rate mortgage has plummeted since 2009. At the time 
the base rate was cut, it stood at 3.98%, but now borrowers are paying an 
average of 2.77%. Meanwhile, rates on two-year deals have halved, from an 
average of 3.98% seven years ago to 1.95% today.

Not much of that fall was registered immediately. Mortgage rates started 
coming fown after the first base rate cut in October 2008, but began creeping 
up as the credit crisis took hold and banks stopped lending to each other. 
Lenders became fussier, offering loans only to the most creditworthy borrowers 
who had considerable deposits.

In 2012, the government attempted to kickstart the market with the Funding for 
Lending scheme, offering banks and building societies access to cash that they 
could lend to small firms and individuals. Rates have since tumbled and 
competition in the market has kept them low.

“Mortgage costs have fallen significantly from pre-crisis levels, but this 
positive effect is laced with an underlying risk,” said Khalaf. “If borrowers 
get too comfortable taking on high levels of debt at low interest rates, they 
could be in for a nasty shock if and when rates rise.”

David Hollingworth, of mortgage broker London & Country, said borrowers should 
bear in mind that although the base rate had been at 0.5% for a long time, 
“it’s not normal and at some point it will change”. He said the 1.8 million 
first-time buyers who had entered the market over the past seven years were not 
naive but “you would urge them to prepare for the future and when they can to 
maybe pay more off their mortgage each month or reduce the term”.

Savers

In November 2007, before the Bank started to cut interest rates, the average 
return on a one-year fixed-rate savings account was 5.99%. As the base rate 
fell, so did savers’ returns, and by the end of March 2009, weeks after 
interest rates hit the record low of 0.5%, the average rate had dropped to 2.7%.


After more than three years hovering around that level, it started to fall 
again, as Funding for Lending came into effect. With no need to attract cash 
from retail deposits, the amount banks were willing to offer started to fall. 
Within six months of the scheme’s launch, the average rate on a one-year fixed 
rate savings account fell by 0.5 percentage points to 2.18%. It continued to 
drop as the scheme was more widely used and encouraged banks to lend to each 
other.

Hargreaves Lansdown said it believed that savers may have lost out on a total 
of £160bn since 2009 – the equivalent of £6,000 for every household. Meanwhile, 
the amount of money held in non-interest-bearing deposit accounts has almost 
trebled since March 2009.

Susan Hannums, the director of advice firm Savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> Champion, said savers had suffered 
“seven long years of pain”. “Few people would have thought that rates would 
have remained at this low level for so long and even less the knock-on effects 
the financial crisis could have had on savers,” she said. “Today, we’ve hit 
over 4,000 rate reductions for existing savers, with little sign of this 
practice slowing down.”

Ian Gordon, a banking analyst at Investec, said: “My take on Funding for 
Lending is that it had an indirect effect on savings rates.”


He added that its aim of acting as a confidence boost to banks worked, meaning 
that although in the early years it did not achieve any increase in lending, 
the scheme reduced the cost of borrowing for those companies. “Fast forward to 
today, and what hasn’t changed is that the banks’ balance sheets are still 
strong.”


Gordon said banks no longer needed to attract savers’ money to lend out. In 
the event of a rate rise, “the banks may be strong-armed into passing on the 
first one or two increases, but over time I expect they won’t be. The outlook 
for depositers is bleak. It’s bleak now and it will get bleaker.”

Investors

Despite recent jitters in the stock market, investors in UK shares have seen a 
return of 87%, or 138% if they reinvested the dividends, according to 
Hargreaves Lansdown’s figures.

QE has helped supply liquidity and confidence to markets, it said, while low 
interest rates have helped companies access debt markets cheaply. At a time of 
miserable savings rates, firms paying dividends look appealing to investors.

Khalaf said this search for returns had led to strong performances from stocks 
such as Unilever, Reckitt Benckiser and British American Tobacco, “whose stable 
dividend payments have seen investors flock to them as ‘bond proxies’, seeing 
as bonds are paying so little interest”.
 