
It doesn't take Tom Shanklin long to tot up the trophies of his rugby career. 
"I haven't won anything anywhere," he says. And then he remembers something: 
"Apart from two grand slams, that is."

He pauses. "A bit of an oversight, really. But I was thinking of my clubs." He 
played, like his father Jim, for London Welsh, before switching to Saracens and 
in 2003 to Cardiff. "No, nothing ... unless you count school, when we won the 
Rosslyn Park Sevens ... "

Now, though, the Cardiff Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues>
 are heavily involved in the business end of the season, with the EDF Energy 
Cup final against Gloucester at Twickenham tomorrow and a Heineken Cup 
semi-final against Leicester on Sunday 3 May at the Millennium Stadium.

"Don't forget the Magners League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/magnersleague>," Shanklin says. The Blues 
are currently in eighth place out of 10, 23 points behind the leaders, Munster. 
"With a game in hand ... OK, OK, perhaps not the Magners."

So, it won't be a treble then. But simply to be in contention in any 
competition is new. "We have improved on two fronts," says the Blues centre. 
"We've made progress in terms of size and power, which allows us to compete 
physically with the best teams."

The centre partnership of Shanklin and Jamie Roberts proves how the Blues 
yield to no one in certain areas. "And then there's our mindset. Two or three 
years ago we might have found ourselves in tight games, like Northampton in the 
EDF semi andToulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> in the 
Heineken quarter, and we would have lost.

"Now we seem to be able to dog out results. We've learnt how to shut games 
out. It's difficult to put my finger on what has changed, except that the core 
of this team has been through all the disappointing times together, and we've 
learnt something together. What it's like when things go against you ... "

For years the Blues were the most frustrating side to follow. They would carve 
a course to grand occasions in exhilarating style, and then collapse when it 
came to the crunch. Only last season, for example, they went to Toulouse for a
Heineken Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> quarter-final and 
lost 41–17. Last Sunday they beat the same opponents 9–6.

"And we've brought in some very good players, like the three New Zealanders, 
Xavier Rush, Paul Tito and Ben Blair. Like all Kiwis, they're born and bred to 
win. They've performed for us year on year.

"But it's difficult to be precise about what's different ... I suppose there 
have been a couple of games this season which sum up how we are now. The first 
was the away win in Biarritz [10–6, in December]. Nothing flash at all about us 
that day, but we really stuck together. And that in itself teaches you 
something. Makes you want more.

"The other game would be from the same Heineken Cup pool, when we won away in 
Gloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> [16–12, in 
January]. It wasn't so much the victory, but that we were down to 14 players 
for 60 minutes, after Tom James was sent off. Instead of being anxious about 
finding ourselves up against it, it's as if we welcome it now."

Last week Shanklin went down with food poisoning and lost half a stone before 
the Toulouse game. If there's a new collective stubbornness about the Blues 
there's an ongoing defiance in their No13. Shanklin's role in the rise of the 
Welsh region – and his part in those two grand slams [in 2005 and 2008] that 
slipped his mind – cannot be overstated.

He says it took him a bit of time to grow accustomed to the blitz defence 
introduced by Shaun Edwards to the Wales team last year, but he is very much 
its linchpin now. He says it is useful having Leigh Halfpenny and Jamie Roberts 
around him, equally instilled in the disciplines of the defensive operation, 
and he also pays tribute to Gareth Baber, the defence coach with the Blues.

He says he even hears Edwards in his head when it comes to the all-important 
last few minutes of tight games. It is nevertheless one thing having gratitude 
and theory – and even voices – in your head and another to drag yourself up to 
make another flying tackle when every fibre of your being is telling you to lie 
down and have a rest. Shanklin is one very determined player.

As such, he would make an ideal tourist with the Lions, whose squad is to be 
announced on Tuesday. It is his cruel luck to play in the same position as 
Brian O'Driscoll but despite, by his own admission, not being quite as agile as 
he was when he was winning the Rosslyn Park Sevens, Tom Shanklin is still 
versatile enough to carve a place for himself in the Test squad. Make a name 
for himself, that is, and promptly forget all about it.
 