
The reason shared ownership is hailed as the answer to the housing crisis for 
younger people is simple: aside from a social tenancy (which aspiring shared 
owners would not qualify for anyway) it is by far the cheapest way to secure a 
roof over your head.

Even once both rent and mortgage payments are taken into account, the monthly 
cost of a shared ownership arrangement is less than owning outright; and in 
areas of high demand, property listings show it can be as much as £700 a month 
cheaper than renting a private property of the same size and quality.

The hidden dangers of shared ownership
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2013/sep/03/hidden-dangers-shared-ownership>
So when three academics – Dave Cowan at the University of Bristol, Alison 
Wallace at the University of York and Helen Carr of the University of Kent – 
interviewed 71 shared owners, it’s no wonder the words commonly used to 
describe their housing situation included “affordable”, “opportunity”, 
“security” and “independence”.

But the shared owners used other words, too, to describe their experiences. 
“Frustration” was a term regularly heard, along with “hassle” and 
disappointment”. So why is the model causing so many problems?

Shared ownership <https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/shared-ownership>
, which has been around for some 30 years, was originally designed as a way to 
help low- and middle-income social tenants get a foot on the housing ladder. 
Building homes for shared ownership has since been prioritised by government 
and social landlords because it allows for cross-subsidy of social housing, but 
now the target audience for that model has changed.

In some areas of high demand (London is an obvious example) the product is 
pricing out low-income applicants. People who did become shared owners felt 
they had won some sort of arbitrary lottery rather than secured a home they had 
a right to.

“Shared ownership remains a politically pragmatic policy approach to combat 
rising entry thresholds to homeownership and weaknesses in other tenures,” the
report 
<http://www.york.ac.uk/media/chp/documents/2015/Shared%20Ownership%20Report%20FINAL%203%20%281%29.pdf>
 finds, but warns that it is a being “ marketed very much as a private, 
aspirational tenure … as the first rung on the property ladder”.

This is where the problems start. Social landlords often treat their shared 
owners in exactly the same way as social tenants, but shared owners today do 
not consider themselves to be part-social tenants (even though they are).

They want to be treated as owners except in one key area: maintenance. Shared 
owners often misunderstand the nature of the agreement, that all internal 
maintenance is their responsibility.

The problem is exacerbated by the well-known scourge of shared ownership: 
sky-high service charges that can bear little resemblance to the physical 
appearance of a development or the work apparently done to it.

The study spots the key problem: right at the outset, shared owners are 
failing to understand the complicated relationship they are entering into. The 
lease signed is “a lengthy, complex document which is not necessarily easy to 
translate”, the legal interpretation of which rests on case law. The nature of 
the obligation is rarely spelled out in plain English, resale purchasers may 
have even less opportunity to understand the lease they sign and their 
solicitors are not doing anything to help matters, either. “Few buyers were 
provided with much in the way of advice,” the study finds.

A review of shared ownership is expected from government this summer. It is 
timely, as the deal is now leaving many people perplexed and out of pocket as 
unexpected costs rack up.


On paper, shared ownership is the best answer we have for a generation locked 
out of traditional ownership and paying exorbitant private rents. But if it 
continues to place all the responsibility, and few of the benefits, on the 
shoulders of one party its reputation for being a frustrating and disappointing 
arrangement will grow.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
Guardian Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you 
every Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 