
A bitter dispute over the future of hundreds of roadside trees in Sheffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield> looks set to continue into 2017, as 
campaigners rally to protect the second longest avenue of limes in the UK.

The row came to national attention in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/28/sheffield-trees-dispute-scenes-putin-russia-nick-clegg-arrests>
 when council contractors summoned people out of bed to move their cars and 
police detained protesters as eight trees were chopped down in Hallam.

Nick Clegg, the local MP, said it was “something you’d expect to see in 
Putin’s Russia rather than a Sheffield suburb”. The council apologised and 
promised not to employ the same tactics again.

But the dispute is far from over. Residents are determined to save 31 towering 
lime trees set to be cut down on leafy Rivelin Valley Road, described as one of 
the jewels in Sheffield’s arboreal crown.

The road, which was built in 1907 by the local water company, is lined by 700 
lime trees across three and a half miles, second only to Clumber Park in 
Nottinghamshire.

Rebecca Hammond, a local protester, said the plan to remove some of the trees 
would create two clear gaps in the avenue. “The visual impact will be 
humongous. There’s no need for it,” she said.


“If all of those go in one go, it will not look the same in my lifetime. Those 
trees are now over 100 years old and if they’re replaced with saplings it’s 
going to be a long time before it looks the same.”

She said local people had been told that most of the trees would be felled 
because the roots could be damaged when the road was resurfaced. “That’s a bit 
like saying I might graze my finger and it might go septic so I’m going to 
amputate my hand now,” Hammond said. “That’s lazy and unacceptable.”

She added: “Lots of people, not just in Sheffield but even people who now live 
abroad, remember Rivelin Valley Road and what it is – a majestic avenue of lime 
trees. It is so loved, Sheffield-wide. It’s not just a local thing. It’s not 
just the tree outside my house on my street. It’s actually a Sheffield 
landmark.”

The fight for Sheffield’s trees has its roots in a 25-year private finance 
initiative (PFI) deal signed by the Labour-run council in 2012. The contractor 
Amey is tasked with maintaining the city’s 36,000 roadside trees as part of a 
road maintenance agreement that the company says will “see Sheffield’s roads 
transformed from some of the worst in the country to the best in the country 
within the first five years”.

The contractor and council say the trees that are being removed are diseased 
or dangerous, but protesters say many of them simply do not fit in with Amey’s 
resurfacing approach.


Nearly 2,000 people have signed a petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/sheffield-city-council-amey-streetsahead-sheffield-gov-uk-save-the-trees-on-rivelin-valley-road-sheffield>
 urging the council to reconsider felling the 31 lime trees, which they 
describe as “an invaluable asset to Sheffield and its heritage”.

Bryan Lodge, the council’s cabinet member for the environment, said: “The 
independent tree panel is looking at the trees on Rivelin Valley Road. We have 
not yet received its report so are unable to provide definite plans or 
timescales at this stage. We will provide more information as the process 
continues.

 “We have taken on board comments, good and bad, over the past year and I want 
people in Sheffield to know that we will use this feedback to inform how we 
work to maintain and improve Sheffield’s streets – for now and future 
generations. Where trees are removed, we will replace them.”
 