
In previous series, we've seen Sherlock's brilliance challenged mostly by 
fellow sociopaths operating outside of social norms, be it Moriarty, Mycroft or 
The Woman. But now the social norms come crashing down on him. With no security 
crises to neutralise or military testing sites to infiltrate, he is stumped 
instead by a test of old-fashioned charm and wit: the best man's speech. He 
hates it, prompting a full police backup to arrive at his front door, just 
because he can't think of any funny anecdotes.

'The point I'm trying to make is that I am the most unpleasant, rude, ignorant 
and all-round obnoxious arsehole that anyone could possibly have the misfortune 
of meeting'

His speech doesn't begin smoothly. Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> goes from speechless and 
uncomfortable to witheringly dismissing the irrational institution of marriage, 
the "exceptional plainness" of the bridesmaids and John's middling intellect. 
It does, however, make for a great episode set piece: Sherlock's fluctuating 
performance is interspersed with flashbacks from the wedding build-up, as well 
as his recent cases. And after all the bromance, it's good to get back to some 
proper sleuthing.

Sherlock's first anecdote concerns the case of a royal guard who got in touch 
fearing he was being stalked. By the time Sherlock and John arrive to 
investigate, it's already too late. He is covered in blood and it appears that 
he has been stabbed to death in the shower with no way in or out. It's "a 
classic locked-door murder," says Sherlock, acknowledging the homicide as if 
part of a genre. But this is still a wedding, and so it turns out that Sherlock 
recounting the tale isn't an opportunity for showing off, but a demonstration 
of John's heroism. Sherlock was stumped, but John stopped the bleeding and 
managed to save the guard's life. What a bloody good bloke.

'Mr Holmes, I honestly think I had dinner with a ghost'

And so to the stag. Sherlock and Watson head off for a round of macabre pub 
golf. There are even boozy test tubes, although these serve to keep their blood 
alcohol at a perfect and monitored level, rather than a three-for-£5 Cointreau 
and Baileys horror story. They're so wasted by 9.30pm that they endeavour to 
solve a random case – a woman who thinks she's dating a dead man, and has found 
other women who believe the same thing.

What follows is part psychological detection, part Two Pints of Lager and a 
Packet of Crisps: Sherlock and Watson pass out and vomit all over the supposed 
crime scene. In the cold light of day, and with more iChat windows open than 
could ever be healthy, Sherlock discovers that a few of the women were visited 
by the same Mayfly Man: a serial romancer who steals the identities of the 
recently deceased. But once again, the case has him stumped.

'The Mayfly Man is here today'

And so the crescendo of the speech, where strands thin and thick are woven 
together, from Watson's embarrassment over his middle name to the Mayfly Man's 
criminal intent. With Mycroft appearing as Sherlock's internal deduction 
taunter and Irene Adler making a suprise return as a distraction in his mind 
palace, Sherlock solves both cases with a single suspect, and locates him at 
the wedding – all while continuing his speech. It's well executed and a 
satisfying payoff for what often seemed an erratic episode.

I realise only having three 90-minute episodes a series annoys a lot of 
people, but one of the joys of having a limited time to tell a story is that 
the normal structure of a detective show (clues dotted throughout the 
programme, a seemingly insignificant detail at the beginning turning out to be 
the perfect analogy for how it was done) is dispensed with. There are so many 
crimes, major and minor, to be dealt with here, that you don't know what's 
relevant to the solution until the end. Indeed, a few of the clues dotted 
throughout the episode turned out to be pointing towards a different mystery 
entirely – Mary is pregnant.

'I'll let you know something, Jeanine. I love dancing. I've always loved it'

Elsewhere, Sherlock's potential for romance is being played on. He seems 
almost disappointed when the bridesmaid he's been helping out ends up with the 
comic-book geek he suggested she go home with. I like the idea that Sherlock is 
being shown as a bit of a catch: musical, good at dancing, carries handcuffs. 
If it wasn't for all that darn social ineptitude he'd be Mr Darcy. I still 
think something's going to happen between Sherlock and Molly. She was 
embarassed by her boyfriend when he tried to offer an explanation for the 
stabbed guardsman, and she looked pretty annoyed when Sherlock was flirting 
with the bridesmaid. If you're watching on iPlayer, skip to 8:30 to see her 
freeze-framed scowl in the wedding photographs.

Notes and observations

• I'm glad I'm not the only one who does a post-treadmill belly-podge slap, as 
if the weight will have just magically shed. Hold tight, Mycroft, I'll catch 
you at Zumba.

• "Whenever she tweets, you respond within five minutes. Do you have anything 
to say in your defence?" Sherlock might not be the ideal best man, but I did 
like him scaring the crap out of Mary's exes and keeping the pageboy on board.

• The club Sherlock and Watson went to on the stag played the underrated MIA 
debut album track Galang <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DCL1RpgYxRM>.

Mysteries unsolved

• What happened to the Waters Family, the impossible-to-arrest crime gang from 
the episode opener?

• Just as Mycroft is hanging up on Sherlock, he says: "Oh, by the way, do you 
remember Red Beard?" "I'm not a child any more, Mycroft." Who is Mycroft 
taunting Sherlock with?

• Mrs Hudson's backstory is building – we saw her friend who weeped through 
her wedding and her drug-trafficking husband. Is she going to get a visit from 
her past?

I can't help feeling that this series is building to a miserable conclusion. 
All this upbeat reconciliation means someone is definitely going to die soon, 
aren't they? Let us know your thoughts below.
 