
During the final weeks of her life, all spent in an Indian hospital, my 
grandmother deteriorated peacefully, and gracefully, until she slipped into a 
coma and breathed her last. My 10-year-old self remembers a thing or two about 
this time.

The hospital’s egg curry, a much-loved north Indian dish, was amazing. The 
tiny cakes with real butter icing that defied all dietary guidelines weren’t 
bad either so my cousins and I, gathered in the small room, took turns 
selecting the menu and outwitting the nurses, who sweetly played along, 
praising the voracious appetite of our fading grandma. Enveloped in grief at 
their mother’s impending death, the adults couldn’t bear to look at the food – 
if our mirth seemed out of place, they never said so.

I'm a doctor. The real issue isn't Hillary Clinton's health – it's that she 
might win | Celine Gounder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/hillary-clinton-health-rumors-doctor-column>
As we wolfed down the food and settled down to another game of Scrabble, my 
diminutive grandma would open her eyes to peer at us. We often sat within her 
line of sight and sometimes when she wasn’t tired, she would lift her hand in 
blessing. She didn’t have any last-minute advice for us neither did she say 
goodbye. She never cried and she never complained. In fact, she barely spoke 
but she smiled when possible. The kind of quiet, contented smile that said she 
was at peace with life even though she was dying far too young. I remember 
thinking how much she loved her grandchildren – the feeling was so powerful and 
visceral that it never struck me there could be suffering behind it.

But my grandmother’s skin had turned bright yellow and explanations were 
called for.

“Why is she yellow?”

“They say it’s jaundice,” the adults replied.

“Why does she have a drip?”

“The doctor ordered it.”

“Why is she sleepy?”

“She is tired.”

“Is she hungry?”

“No.”

“Then, can we have the egg curry?”

It was through incidental observations that as children we became witness to 
life drawing to a close.

There were no doctors in our family and there was no sophisticated 
understanding of the process of illness and dying. Since the adults didn’t know 
much, there were no customised, careful explanations for the children. In fact, 
as loss stared us in the face, there was very little to say. But what we lacked 
in words we made up for in another way – we stuck together to observe the 
ritual of dying.

Alongside our parents, we watched our beloved grandmother sleep, awake, groan 
and smile. We watched her totter to the bathroom and then confined to her bed. 
We watched her eat half her food and then none at all. We learnt to scrutinise 
the doctors’ expressions and understand that our sorrow wasn’t their fault. We 
saw how hard the nurses worked and came to fill in their gaps without rancour.

Thus it was through incidental observations that as children we became witness 
to life drawing to a close. It was a gradual and real schooling so that when 
our grandmother finally died, we were sad but neither inconsolable nor 
traumatised. Years later, as grown-ups, we find ourselves helping our own 
children navigate illness and loss – as the cycle continues, we summon our own 
memories about the importance of just having been at the bedside.

I found myself thinking of all this when I looked after an elderly patient who 
came for an elective procedure which went horribly wrong. As organ after organ 
failed, my patient retained an uncommon spirit of optimism, expressing hope 
that he would get home to see his grandchildren whom he greatly missed.

In the week he became irretrievably ill, his daughter came up to me, wringing 
her hands.

“What should I do about the kids?”

I waited, sensing there was more. As it turned out, her children, 8 and 13, 
had not been in at all. She had protected them from his temporary problems and 
when his condition took another downturn, she was grateful that they were 
occupied at school. She maintained an anxious vigil over him but kept hoping 
for a day to come when her father was well enough to greet his grandchildren 
like his old self.

“What are you afraid of?” I gently asked.

“That they’ll have lifelong nightmares. Isn’t it better if they remember him 
being well?”

I felt a stab of regret. It’s true that her father looked pale and gaunt but 
the warmth in his eyes was unmistakeable. And he could still speak, telling me 
he didn’t have long and thanking me for my care. He didn’t want to burden his 
daughter but I longed to fulfil his final desire without compounding her 
dilemma.

“What would you do if you were me?” she tearfully asked.

GPs report meeting adults ... who fall apart when a parent falls ill because 
they have never encountered illness

There, she had asked the question I had dreaded. I believed that although 
there had been better opportunities, a visit to their grandfather’s bedside 
would still be meaningful and provide an opening to a later unavoidable 
conversation with the children about illness and mortality. I thought the 
children were old enough to be left confused by the turn of events and wondered 
what views they might form of what happened in a hospital. I feared that their 
mother, coping with bereavement, might struggle to find reasonable explanations 
later. And I fretted that the emerging disagreement in the family over the 
children would test adult relationships. So I told her sincerely, “I would find 
it heartbreaking but I’d try to bring them in.”

When it comes to children visiting sick or dying relatives in hospital, every 
family decides differently. Granted, hospitals aren’t designed for the ease of 
young (or old) visitors. There is a maddening lack of space, chair and 
amenities and visitors can feel conscious of getting in the way. It’s unlikely 
that these deficiencies will disappear anytime soon though people do find their 
way around them.

Studies show that childhood bereavement alone is unlikely to be related to 
adult outcomes. Rather, factors such as parental support, open communication, 
age-appropriate explanation and the presence of other adverse social and 
psychological events may have more impact than the fact of the death.

In hospitals and nursing homes, there is a stark lack of young visitors to the 
bedsides of their elderly relatives. When children do visit, they are nearly 
always parked on a device, making real engagement impossible. We seem happy to 
let our children Google illness, just not let them near it. But making illness 
and mortality invisible to our children has unexpected consequences. GPs report 
meeting adults in their 40s who fall apart when a parent falls ill because they 
have never encountered illness up close and don’t know how to deal with their 
own emotions, let alone their children’s.

There is an epidemic of loneliness among our elderly population as they trudge 
from residential care to hospital and back again. For staff, the loneliness is 
in plain sight – every doctor has met a patient who begs to stay an extra day 
because “it’s nice here, people talk to me.”

What it's like to survive cancer, by those who have done it | Guardian readers 
and Sarah Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/03/what-its-like-to-survive-cancer-by-those-who-have-been-given-the-all-clear>
Addressing loneliness is hard when there are a dozen other priorities even 
though a visit from a loved one is worth a dozen pills. And the comfort of 
strangers is no match for the consolation of family, so every day we convince 
and cajole relatives to visit, until it becomes a job as routine as checking 
bloods.

Patients cheer up when anyone visits but when children come they have an 
unfailing effect on lifting the mood and alleviating the loneliness of 
patients. Occasionally, I’ve needed to take one of my children on a weekend 
ward-round and felt bad about it. But my misgivings have melted at the sheer 
delight of patients. Nothing banishes the dreariness of being in hospital than 
an innocent banter with a child. The food tastes nicer, the pain seems bearable 
and life itself seems more hopeful. Indeed, children inject a kind of optimism 
and happiness in patients that it’s hard to replicate. Countless patients have 
thanked my children, saying, “You remind me of my grandchildren,” prompting one 
green medical student to ask me, “Then where aretheir grandchildren?”

Unfortunately, for my patient, time ran out and his grandchildren didn’t come 
in. But the encounter was another reminder of the therapeutic benefit of young 
visitors to the bedside.

We cannot forever shield our children from the realities of life. It’s normal 
to feel apprehensive but there are steps parents can take to prepare everyone 
for a visit. We need to protect our children but we also need to spare a 
thought for our elderly who have often given years to building a bond with our 
young only to be deprived of it when they most need it. Being sick is hard 
enough, they don’t need to be lonely too.
 