
Barbara Ellen is an Observer columnist

Teacher Benedict Garrett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/sep/01/johnny-anglais-sex-stripper-teacher>
 was suspended in July 2010, after being discovered working as a stripper, 
naked butler and porn actor. Garrett (stage name: "Johnny Anglais") was 
reprimanded by the General Teaching Council – but he is free to resume 
teaching, should he choose to do so. This seems a fair result: from what I can 
tell, there was no significant concern regarding Garrett's demeanour in the 
classroom – though, away from school, some of his pupils discovered his 
activities via a trailer for a porn movie in which he was appearing. There are 
also some funny pictures of Anglais enjoying a bubblebath on his website, but 
joking apart, he has done nothing illegal. With this in mind, one wonders how 
this case got as far as it did. Since when were teachers morally answerable to 
the public about their out-of-school activities?

Oliver James is a psychologist and psychotherapist

If there was no chance of his pupils finding out about this second career, it 
might be easier to justify. The trouble is, there would always be a significant 
risk of him being exposed (sic), as, indeed, he has been. His porn acting would 
particularly carry that risk. Once the pupils know about it, it's indefensible.

Because they are authority figures, teachers are offering pupils a model of 
moral and social conduct, as well as pedagogy. This is their role, whether they 
like it or not, and whether or not they are conscious of it.

It's true that it is legal for an adult to earn money by exposing their body, 
whether that be Katie Price or a male stripper. But it is unacceptable for a 
teacher to more or less implicitly advocate it to pupils.

For one thing, he will lose his position of authority and become a figure of 
fun. For another, he should be encouraging scholarship and the life of the 
mind, and it is not part of his duty to encourage his pupils to believe that 
selling access to their bodies is a desirable way to earn money. And how far 
are you prepared to take your argument: what if his pupils were of 
primary-school age?

BE All interesting points. For no logical or legal reason I would feel 
differently if the teacher involved was primary-level. And I don't know how I'd 
have reacted as a schoolgirl if I'd turned up at double chemistry to find one 
of the leads fromDebbie Does Dallas standing at the chalkboard. Maybe said: 
"Hello sir, is that a blackboard rubber or are you just pleased to see me?" 
Then, again, maybe not.

Joking apart, I probably wouldn't have discovered sir's extracurricular 
activities, as I wouldn't have been looking at porn trailers. Doesn't it say 
something about these pupils' cultural life that they even caught "Johnny 
Anglais" at it? Surely this is a parental concern – it's Mum and Dad who have 
the responsibilities here. We already ask far too much of teachers. They are 
routinely overworked and underpaid. Only last week, the government announced 
that teachers are going to be able to use more "physical force" in schools – 
whatever that means, though it sounds less like a boon, and more like another 
shovelful of stress and responsibility. In fairness, teachers have it difficult 
enough, and should only be responsible for the child's welfare inside the 
boundaries of the classroom. What they do in their spare time must remain their 
personal business. We'll be electronically tagging them next.

OJ It is indeed a big worry that they spotted him as part of their 
extracurricular internet studies. Alas, I fear there is nothing much we can do 
on a practical level to stop teens going on to websites, except, as parents, 
have a good relationship with them. But teachers should surely not be muddled 
up with the cybersex part of their pupils' lives. There have to be boundaries 
and teachers must keep their sex lives separate from the classroom, in every 
respect, including arousing their pupils in any way.

There are grey areas, I agree. If a teacher regularly strips for his wife as a 
way of arousing her and she is an indiscreet person who tells this to the 
parents of his pupils or to them directly, that would be less cut and dried. 
It's true that teachers get sucked into parental roles more and more, which 
should not be the case. But again, insofar as that cannot be helped, one would 
hope parents as well as teachers were not working in the porn industry.

Also, what would we be saying if the teacher were female – do all the same 
points apply precisely?

BE First, thank you for your vivid description of teachers stripping to arouse 
their indiscreet spouses. I sense a Channel 5 documentary in the offing. More 
seriously, concerning the possibility of a "Jenny Anglais", my stance remains 
the same. Indeed, where education and the sex industry are concerned, I ask 
you, with the savage government cuts, wouldn't the true scandal be that vastly 
increased numbers of undergraduates are likely to be stripping (and more), just 
to pay their way through university? Isn't that far more worrying?

Elsewhere, I feel that we are in broad agreement that neither teachers nor 
parents could hope to 100% "police" teens on sex sites. But does this mean that 
it's exclusively Garrett's fault that he was discovered? After all, his sexual 
activities played no part in his job – they were contained within his private 
life (less private than most, but that's another story).

I'm not pretending that I want teachers to appear in porn films as part of 
their BEd, nor that I'm such an ultra-liberal I'm comfortable with the sexual 
lives of teachers taking precedence. No thanks. However, isn't all this "shock 
horror" coming from the same mentality that used to force gay teachers to hide 
their "unnatural" sexuality, lest they be persecuted and sacked? To conclude, 
it seems that, even now, teachers are routinely burdened with additional, and, 
I would argue, erroneous, accountability for our children's moral welfare.

OJ We do not begrudge teachers their sex lives. The problem is that Garrett 
did stuff that could seriously undermine his authority and offer a bad example 
to his pupils. The bottom line is I would not want my teenage daughter saying 
to me: "My teacher does porn films – what's wrong with me doing it?", nor my 
son either. And if one of your nippers was his pupil, I think you would feel 
the same.
 