
If you have been losing sleep recently – and it’s not inconceivable that the 
ongoing collapse of the postwar global order has been keeping you up at night – 
I have good news. With fortuitous timing, the Canadian cognitive scientist Luc 
Beaudoin has invented a new cure for insomnia, which he calls the “cognitive 
shuffle”. Essentially, it’s a method for deliberately scrambling your thoughts, 
so they make no sense. And since the world these days already doesn’t, what 
have you got to lose?

Traditional ways of tackling insomnia, Beaudoin notes, are largely useless. If 
anxious thoughts are keeping you awake, counting sheep won’t work: it’s an 
utterly boring activity, which means almost any other thought – especially 
worries – will prove more compelling. Relaxation techniques are often doomed by 
the fact that you’re consciously trying to get to sleep – a guaranteed path to 
failure. And mindfulness meditation, done properly, leaves you more alert, not 
less.

The cognitive shuffle 
<https://mysleepbutton.com/support/the-cognitive-science/> involves mentally 
picturing a random sequence of objects for a few seconds each: a cow; a 
microphone; a loaf of bread, and so on. It’s important to ensure the sequence 
is truly meaningless, otherwise you’ll drift back into rumination. One option 
is Beaudoin’s app,MySleepButton <https://mysleepbutton.com/home/>, which speaks 
the names of items in your ear. Another is simply to pick a word, such as 
“bedtime”, then picture as many items beginning with “b” as you can, then “e”, 
then “d”, then… Well, by then, if my experience is anything to go by, you’ll be 
asleep.

In part, Beaudoin argues, this works because the brain has evolved to 
determine whether it’s safe to fall asleep by checking what one specific part 
of the brain, the cortex, is doing. If it’s engaged in “sense-making” activity, 
that’s a sign it may be weighing up dangers. But if thoughts have degenerated 
into rambling nonsense, the coast is probably clear. By filling the mind with 
nonsense, you trigger the sleep switch. Yet the technique also works for a 
simpler reason: it’s hard to focus on multiple things at once. While you’re 
busy generating a mental image of a microphone, it’s tricky to fret about your 
mortgage.

A must-read book? Go on, make me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/24/why-oliver-burkeman-wont-see-hamilton-boyhood-must-read-books>
And the “cognitive shuffle” has implications beyond insomnia. Attention, as 
you’re doubtless aware by now, isa finite resource 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/20/dont-be-victim-attention-theft-oliver-burkeman>
. This means it’s important to steward it carefully; if you let yours be seized 
by panicky headlines, there’ll be less left over for what matters. But it also 
suggests a clever way to silence negative thoughts: deliberately overload your 
attentional bandwidth. A screaming baby, faced with a grownup making silly 
noises, will often fall silent; it can’t focus on being distressed and 
intrigued at the same time. Adults aren’t so different. That’s why the best 
cure for anger isn’t venting, but switching to something sufficiently complex 
that anger isn’t an option. (Ever tried doing sudoku while ranting internally?) 
It’s also why it’s fine if your Brexit coping strategy includes some 
distraction. In moderation, fiddling while Rome burns has its upsides.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <>
 