 Folk rock duo Simon and Garfunkel have managed to bridge the troubled waters 
in their personal relationship and will tour again in the US for the first time 
in 20 years.
Speculation had mounted that the pair, Paul Simon and Art Garfunkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/art-garfunkel>, might hit the road again 
after they reunited to perform one of their biggest hits, The Sound of Silence, 
at the Grammy Awards in February, when they were given a lifetime achievement 
award.

It was their first performance together for 10 years. 

"There has been a deep, buried affection for the last decade or so, and it was 
the Grammys that forced it out of burial," Garfunkel said, as the two announced 
their plans at a Greenwich Village club.

In their heyday, Simon and Garfunkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/simonandgarfunkel> sold 40m albums in the US 
alone, helping to define the sound of the 1960s with songs including The Boxer, 
Mrs Robinson, and Homeward Bound.

But the pair, who attended the same school in the New York borough of Queens, 
split in 1970 amid reports of a fractious personal relationship.

Simon was eager to pursue a solo career and there were tussles over royalties 
and credit for their collaborative work. Both men are now 61.

Simon said: "We've known each other since we were 11. It was time to forgive 
and forget and move on. It's not like you live forever. Because we've tended to 
go on tour every 10 to 12 years, I think this is probably going to be the last 
time we're going to do this."

Garfunkel added: "This is a very deep, old friendship. It's like family for 
the two of us - our moms know each other."

The band will launch a 32-city tour in Michigan on October 18. The concerts 
will focus on their hits from the five albums they recorded in the 1960s - 
Wednesday Morning 3am; Sounds of Silence; Parsley, Sage, Rose mary and Thyme; 
Bookends; and The Graduate - and on Bridge Over Troubled Water, released in 
1970.

The pair last played a series of shows in New York in 1993, as well as a few 
shows in Japan that year. But they have not undertaken a fully fledged tour 
since they played in North America, Europe, Asia and Australia in 1982 and 1983.

Simon said the pair intended to keep the sound as close to the one they 
created in the 1960s as possible. "We don't intend to reimagine the work," he 
added.

The pair will tour with a seven-piece band. 

Columbia Records said it would release a compact disc, The Essential Simon and 
Garfunkel, to coincide with the tour.
 