
It’s time to pretend that the world isn’t totally shit by returning to work, 
and I’m worried. Since Helen’s funeral, I’ve been digging out a routine for 
Millie and Matt from the rubble of a domestic happiness all but flattened by 
their mother’s death. It’s not my employers who are the problem – they have 
been great. Nor is it because I think everyone will be watching me – very few 
colleagues know that she is dead. From Helen’s bedside, I’d lobbied human 
resources for the news of her death to be kept quiet.

Ivan, who works in HR, got the plot quickly. “We’ll tell only the senior team 
to explain your absence. There will be no general awareness of your situation. 
You do realise, though, that this means people will be insensitive to the 
rawness of it all for you. You’ll need a thick skin,” he added. Fair warning, 
but a rhino hide seems a reasonable trade-off for being spared the awkwardness 
of “I’m so sorry …” exchanges and to avoid seeing the fear in people’s eyes 
that I might blub like a baby.

Sheryl Sandberg's moving tribute to the husband who died: 'Dave was my rock'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/06/dave-was-my-rock-sheryl-sandbergs-beautiful-tribute-to-the-husband-she-lost>
Yet I fear disaster, despite reports that the routine of work provides 
stability for the bereaved. This includes Facebook executiveSheryl Sandberg, 
who returned to work 10 days after her husband’s unexpected death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/06/dave-was-my-rock-sheryl-sandbergs-beautiful-tribute-to-the-husband-she-lost>
. I respect so much of what she has written but, God, she must love her job. 
For me, I sense there’s been a recalibration in what I give a toss about, which 
does not include some of the pain, politics and arse-covering required to 
succeed in my media-related industry. It might be easier were I a doctor, where 
the scale of importance of saving lives would meet my narrower definition of 
what now matters.

There were signs, even from the morning of Helen’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/16/the-week-after-my-wifes-death>
, that the tectonic plates of my worldview had shifted. It was 7am and I was en 
route back from the hospital to be home when Millie and Matt woke. I’d be 
waiting to tell them the dreadful news and, in doing so, lower but hopefully 
not bring crashing down the curtain of their childhood.

Emotionally and physically exhausted after a long night in Helen’s room, I 
needed to bolster myself. Seeing a coffee shop open as I entered town, I’d 
pulled over for refreshment.

Parked outside the bank, I’d sprawled across the car’s back seat, the privacy 
glass of the rear windows making me invisible to the world.

An Audi sports car pulled up and, leaving his engine running and door open, a 
suited figure of about 35 got out and put his card into the nearest cashpoint. 
Minutes passed and, despite it being 7am so a bit early for a meltdown, he 
started swearing angrily. The machine had only eaten his card, but he was 
behaving like Gordon Ramsay served with a rotten oyster, but without the 
blessing of the overdubbed beeps.

The week after my wife’s death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/16/the-week-after-my-wifes-death>
I felt a gush of burning anger that he should behave that way for so small an 
inconvenience, given what I was facing, and in a mad departure from the 
middle-class book of law-abiding etiquette, I wanted to jump in and steal his 
car. That would really have given him something to swear about, as I found out 
how well that big engine got the rubber on the road.

The moment passed, he drove off and I was still fit to be a member of 
civilised middle-class society. Fate, however, had not finished with me. From 
around the corner came a much older man, furtive and conspicuous; a present-day 
version ofGeorge Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/06/george-cole-actor-who-played-arthur-daley-minder-dies-aged-90>
’s Flash Harry from St Trinian’s, peering up and down the empty road. He 
stopped before the cashpoint only four feet from my hidden vantage. Seeing no 
one about, he started to remove something from the cashpoint. I’m stunned. It’s 
a sting in which the potty-mouthed Audi man’s cashcard had been cloned. That 
would really give him something to swear about.

The previous day, I would have been photographing this scene, calling the 
police or even wading in, but that day – and maybe for ever – I did not budge.

What this means for work I’m not yet sure, but it’s likely to be trickier than 
I imagined – my lens on the world has shifted from compliance (with an 
occasional wildcard moment) to something more intolerant of my time being 
overloaded with inconsequential pap.

If only I’d pleased my mum and become a surgeon.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym
 