
Mike Ashley should send a bottle of bubbly to Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>. The Sports Direct 
founder’s attempt to dodge a grilling by MPs almost seems a sideshow when there 
are bigger fish to fry. Two select committees – work and pensions; and 
business, innovation and skills – want to hear from the BHS bogeyman and have 
invited him to a joint session on a day of his choosing in the next few weeks.

Green, unlike Ashley, will be up for the fight, one suspects. He loves the 
spotlight, feels his arguments aren’t being heard and may fear a consumer 
backlash against his Arcadia interests, notably Topshop. A refusal to attend 
would simply guarantee another verbal battering for a tycoon already branded 
the new “unacceptable face of capitalism” by one Tory MP.

But a word of advice for committee members: please do not compete to see who 
can provoke Green to the greatest level of fury. That game may guarantee top 
billing on theNews at Ten, but it is too easy to play. The BHS debacle requires 
forensic blow-by-blow questioning about the process by which Green extracted 
£580m in dividends, rent and interest payments from the business over the 
years, even as the deficit in the pension fund grew larger. We also need to 
know how he came to think a bunch of retailing amateurs led by a twice-bankrupt 
individual would be a suitable buyer ofBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>, complete with those daunting 
pension liabilities.

Here are a few questions to get the MPs started. BHS paid dividends of £423m 
between 2002 and 2004, but why did Green not divert some of that cash into a 
pension fund that was already heading into deficit towards the end of the 
period? What evidence can he provide that sale-and-leaseback property deals 
between BHS and the members of the Green family were conducted at arm’s length 
and on commercial terms?

Similarly, how were fees calculated when BHS bought services from the wider 
Arcadia group? In 2012, the company and the pension fund agreed to close the 
deficit in the pension fund over 23 years. Why was such a long period deemed 
sensible?

How was Green introduced to Dominic Chappell, the former racing driver who 
headed the Retail Acquisitions consortium that bought BHS for £1 in 2015? Why 
did Green regard him as a fit and proper owner? Why did he not seek approval 
from the Pensions Regulator for the transfer of the business? What discussions 
did he have with trustees of the BHS pension at that time? What contact did he 
have with Chappell’s consortium after the sale?

It has been reported that Green made an offer of £80m – half in cash, half in 
the write-off of a loan – to top up the pension fund after the failure of BHS. 
Did he make that offer and, if so, why? What was the basis of the calculation?

The MPs must do their homework because Green will have done his. Indeed, it 
might be wise to borrow a trick from Andrew Tyrie – the chairman of the 
Treasury select committee and a veteran in the art of cross-examining slippery 
bankers – and hire a QC to fire some detailed questions.

Of course, the session should not be confined to gathering facts. There is a 
basic question of morality at stake: what responsibilities does Green feel 
towards 11,000 BHS staff and 20,000 pensioners? He owned the business for 15 
years, and paid his wife fat dividends, yet sold BHS in an enfeebled state to a 
buyer lacking retail experience. Whatever the legality of his business 
manoeuvres, doesn’t he feel a duty to ensure BHS pensioners get every last 
penny of what they expected in their retirement?

If Green can’t accept the moral case for writing a large cheque to close the 
£571m deficit, he will deserve every last drop of the MPs’ – and the public’s – 
scorn. It would be a shabby finale to a business career, but Green has a 
choice: does he want he seen as a decent man or as a shameless chancer?

So Europe’s not doing so badly after all…

The eurozone economy was bubbling in the first three months of the year. Never 
since the 2008 crisis hasit expanded by 0.6% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/29/eurozone-economy-grows-faster-than-expected-ecb>
 in a single quarter – 2.4% if extrapolated over the year. Such is the pace of 
growth that the 19-member bloc outstripped the UK and the US. UK growth was 
just 0.4% in the first three months, andstatisticians in Washington said the US 
had flatlined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/28/sluggish-us-growth-global-economy>
.

And this comes after GDP increased steadily for 18 months, putting a smile on 
the faces of tired eurocrats more accustomed to dealing with Greek debt or the 
refugee crisis. Even France was near the head of the pack. Its economy grew 
0.5%, beating economists’ expectations and boosting the fortunes of socialist 
president François Hollande, who will stand for re-election next year. So much 
for Europe’s reputation as a bombed-out economic has-been.

And yet there was talk of a false dawn, in part because unemployment remains 
in double figures and inflation dropped from zero to -0.2%. And just as US 
figures for the early part of the year are often upgraded, the eurozone’s are 
often later downgraded.

Another barrier to a more sustained recovery is the slowdown in global growth 
recently documented by the IMF.Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/28/bank-of-japan-shocks-markets-by-voting-against-more-stimulus>
 andChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/15/china-quarterly-gdp-growth-slows-but-signs-of-stability-emerge>
 are struggling to maintain the export-driven growth that has served them so 
well, and Brazil and Russia are coping with recession. No wonder the Brussels 
elite want the UK to stay. They have avoided a crisis for almost two years and 
seen the benefits. Britain leaving would bring the EU’s brief period of benign 
expansion to a halt and worse, if the many economists who predict gloom for 
Europe following a Brexit are to be believed.

They fear is not just political instability, but a collapse in trade and 
investment akin to the 2008 crash.The OECD said last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/27/brexit-cost-uk-households-2200-by-2020-eu-oecd>
 that financial markets were already increasing the insurance premiums they 
charged to hedge against the worst possible outcomes, raising the costs of 
trade.

Brussels knows how ugly family crises can get and wants to avoid another.

Time is tight at RBS

Running bailed-out Royal Bank of Scotland was never going to be an easy gig. 
But for Ross McEwan, at the helm since October 2013, it just got harder. On 
Friday, the market reacted badly to the idea that the bank will not be able to 
resume dividend payments until 2018 – a decade after shareholders last received 
a share of the spoils. The delay to payouts is one problem caused by thebotched 
job of carving out the Williams & Glyn network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/28/rbs-admits-delays-offloading-williams-and-glyn>
 as demanded by Brussels at the time of the bailout.

McEwan cannot be expected to take all the blame for what one analyst has 
rightly described as a farcical situation, but it is definitely his problem 
now. He has spoken vaguely of alternatives. Vagueness will not be tolerated for 
long. The City’s patience is wearing thin and the European commission is 
unlikely to look kindly on an already extended deadline being missed.
 