
Andy Woodward’s harrowing account of the sexual abuse he suffered from the 
football coach Barry Bennell in the 1980s has led to six people coming forward 
to the police and the Football Association setting up a helpline for potential 
victims.

The police are now in the early stages of collating the new information and 
speaking to a number of former players who have contacted them since Woodward 
waived his anonymity to tell the Guardian he had been targeted for several 
years at Crewe Alexandra, from the age of 11, when Bennell was one of the 
youth-team coaches.

“As of Monday we have been made aware of six other people who have come 
forward wishing to speak to the police,” Ben Hilton, acting detective sergeant 
in Cheshire Police’s public protection unit, said in a statement. “We are 
currently in the process of making contact with the six people and at this 
stage no one else is under investigation.”

Woodward, now 43, said he had been raped on hundreds of occasions and spoke of 
his belief that many other players had suffered in silence because of a man who 
described himself in legal proceedings as a “monster” but once had a reputation 
for being one of the outstanding coaches and talent-spotters in the sport.

Andy Woodward: ‘It was the softer, weaker boys he targeted’
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> 
Two players have independently told this newspaper of another person within 
the football world who they say abused them, while Crewe have broken their 
silence amid growing criticism of the way they were handling the fallout of 
Woodward’s interview.

John Bowler, the club’s chairman since 1987 and a director from 1980, said it 
was unfair to think they were not taking the issue seriously enough and that 
the nine-man board of directors would hold specially convened talks in the 
light of Woodward’s harrowing story and the growing realisation about the way 
the case was escalating.

Dario Gradi, the club’s director of football and long-serving former manager, 
had earlier said that the directors and staff had been placed under 
instructions to “keep out of it” but, five days after Woodward’s interview was 
published, Bowler insisted Crewe did not warrant criticism for their lack of 
response.

“All this came out of the blue,” Bowler said. “When things come out of the 
blue you want to make some inquiries from within. There is no doubt we concur 
with what the FA have said and we are now looking at it from within and 
considering what our actions should be going forward.

“We are a proud club and when allegations are made that we didn’t take it 
seriously we want to reflect. I will be meeting with the directors to review 
the situation. I’m the chairman but we have a board of very dedicated people 
who are at the heart of what Crewe Alexandra are about. We don’t take lightly – 
and I don’t mean that aggressively – any of these comments. We are not 
belittling anything.

“I’m not asking you to be kind but please don’t be too unkind because we 
really are taking it seriously and looking at the whole issue. We are talking 
about something 30 years ago, and a lot has changed in that time, but we must 
look at the current climate and, if we are to make changes, not just at Crewe 
but in football.”

Bennell was imprisoned for nine years in 1998 after admitting 23 specimen 
charges against six boys, aged nine to 15, with another 22 offences allowed to 
lie on file. The hearing at Chester crown court was told one offence took place 
on one of Crewe’s training pitches. Another was said to have happened at 
Gradi’s house, though the court was told the then manager did not know about it.

Andy Woodward showed great courage – but is his story just the tip of the 
iceberg? | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/andy-woodward> 
Bennell was jailed for two years in May 2015 for another historic offence, 
involving a 12-year-old boy on a football course in Macclesfield, and has also 
served a four-year sentence in Florida after the buggery and indecent assault 
of a 13-year-old British boy on a football tour.

Bowler went on to say that he concurred with the joint statement put out by 
the Football Association, the Premier League and the Football League that 
described Woodward’s ordeal as “heart-breaking” and praised him for his 
“immense courage”.

Earlier in the day, however, Gradi had said there was an understanding at 
Crewe that nobody from the club should talk to the media. “I can’t help you, 
I’m afraid,” said Gradi, whose association with the club began in 1983.

“The chairman has told me he will issue a statement if he feels it necessary 
and that otherwise we should keep out of it. I don’t understand any of it. It 
was a long time ago and for all intents and purposes it was dealt with at the 
time.”

• The NSPCC’s helpline is 0808 800 5000 or Child Line for children and young 
people can be contacted on 0800 1111.

• In the UK, The Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 