
Slovakia stunned the world champions, Germany, with a 3-1 win in rain-soaked 
Augsburg on Sunday night.

Mario Gómez put Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> in 
front with a penalty, only for Marek Hamsik and Michal Duris to turn the tide 
before the interval.

The restart was delayed by almost 40 minutes after a storm peppered the pitch 
with large hailstones and heavy rain, making life difficult for both sides.

England’s Roy Hodgson: making tough choices for Euro 2016 is part of job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/england-roy-hodgson-euro-2016-daniel-sturridge>
But it did not deter Slovakia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia> 
and an unmarked Juraj Kucka added a third after 52 minutes, sending the wet 
ball through the legs of the unfortunate Marc-Andre ter Stegen who was standing 
in for the rested No 1 keeper Manuel Neuer.

“I’ve never experienced anything like it. It’s unique that the halftime break 
lasted so long. Thankfully nothing happened,” Germany coach Joachim Loew said 
of the conditions. “We weren’t good at the back and we were too open in 
midfield.”

Slovakia, who are England’s final group opponents at next month’s European 
chmapionships, are now unbeaten in seven matches, with Northern Ireland 
awaiting in their final friendly before the finals in France.

Nolito pressed his claims for inclusion in Spain’s squad with two goals in a 
3-1 victory overBosnia-Herzegovina in Switzerland. Emir Spahic replied for 
Bosnia after Nolito’s double, only to be sent off before half-time for clashing 
with Cesc Fàbregas, whose Chelsea colleague Pedro completed Spain’s win with a 
late goal.


The Borussia Dortmund forward Henrikh Mkhitaryan’s hat-trick spearheaded 
Armenia’s 7-1 rout of Guatemala, after the central Americans had opened the 
scoring in the seventh minute through Carlos Ruiz.

They held on to the lead until the 39th minute when Mkhitaryan equalised and 
Edgar Manucharyan putArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> 
ahead on the stroke of half-time. Gegham Kadimyan added the third before 
Mkhitaryan struck twice more after which Arthur Sarkisov and Zaven Badoyan also 
got on the scoresheet.

In Turin Ukraine hit back strongly to beat Romania 4-3 after going behind to 
Gabriel Torje’s opener, a right-foot shot from distance, in the 23rd minute. 
Roman Zozulya equalised from close range just before half-time and goals from 
Aleksandr Zinchenko, Yevhen Konoplyanka and Andriy Yarmolenko put them 4-1 up 
just before the hour. Denis Alibec cut the deficit from a free-kick in the 74th 
minute and Nicolae Stanciu scored six minutes from time butUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ukraine> held on to win.

Mehmet Topal stole a 1-0 victory for Turkey over Montenegro with a goal in the 
fourth minute of added time.

Nerijus Valskis and Fiodor Cernych supplied the goals as Lithuania defeated 
Estonia 2-0, whileAlbania beat Qatar 3-1. Arlind Ajeti, Ermir Lenjani and 
Armando Sadiku put Albania on top after Abdelkarim Hassam’s early strike for 
Qatar.

The United States thumped Bolivia 4-0, Gyasi Zardes scoring twice and John 
Brooks and Christian Pulisic getting one apiece. Raúl Ruidíaz, Andy Polo and 
Yoshimar Yotún were all on target inPeru’s 3-1 victory over El Salvador, for 
whom Nelson Bonilla was on target.
 