
Homemade mayonnaise is so different from anything you can buy in a jar that 
it's worth making at least once – even if only to see what all the fuss is 
about. I've got plenty of time for ready-made mayo – I keep a decent organic 
variety in my fridge, which I dispense freely for greedy sandwiches and 
impromptu sauces – but the homemade stuff is something else altogether. Try a 
batch and you'll see that you've made not just something better, but also 
something utterly different.

Shop-bought mayo has a blandness and often a slight vinegary edge that, in 
poor examples, take it into salad cream territory. Because it has to be 
pasteurised, it'll never match the creamy delicacy of homemade, whipped up with 
fresh, raw free-range egg yolks, the seasoning balanced precisely to your 
taste. A good homemade mayo has an enticing balance of rich, blanketing 
velvetiness and piquancy from the seasonings. As a dressing or sauce, it brings 
together other ingredients, and provides that lovely lubrication by which so 
many foods are enhanced – lightly cooked or raw veg, say, or cold meats, fish, 
potatoes and eggs.

This classic sauce is a very simple thing: an emulsion of oil in a blend of 
egg yolk, salt, mustard and an acidic ingredient such as vinegar or lemon 
juice. Since it's composed mostly of oil – at least 80% – it's essential you 
choose the right one. You can make mayonnaise purely with extra-virgin olive 
oil, but this is rarely done, for two reasons: first, it makes a very unstable 
mayo that can separate soon after making; and, more particularly, it produces a 
very strong, bitter-tasting result. That much olive oil, mitigated by what is a 
small amount of egg and seasoning, is just too powerful in the mouth.

I've experimented with various ratios and have more or less settled on around 
one-third extra-virgin olive oil to two-thirds of a bland oil such as 
sunflower. This gives some olivey flavour without being overwhelming. You can 
make half-and-half olive and sunflower, but even that is a touch too much for 
me. I also often make a rapeseed-and-sunflower blend mayonnaise, which is 
delicious – a little more delicate than the olive oil version, with a slightly 
grassy, floral tone and lovely lemon yellow colour.

Mayonnaise has a reputation for being moody and difficult, but it shouldn't be 
– the hardest thing is the elbow grease required to make it, and even that's 
not excessive. It's a good idea to start with all the ingredients at room 
temperature: this helps them to emulisfy speedily and easily. So take your eggs 
out of the fridge (if that's where you keep them) an hour before you start. 
Salt is crucial in mayonnaise, not only for flavour but because it aids 
emulsification, so always add it right at the start. I find the simplest 
approach is to mix the egg yolks with all the seasonings first, then slowly 
whisk in the oil. It's then a simple matter of adjusting the seasoning at the 
end.

Mayonnaise can occasionally split or curdle, but only if you start with very 
cold ingredients, add the oil too fast or don't whisk it properly (you need to 
give the yolky base a chance to absorb and envelop the growing number of oil 
droplets). Even if it does curdle, it can usually be saved with the addition of 
a little more liquid and a bit of vigorous beating. Alternatively, put a fresh 
egg yolk into a clean bowl and gradually whisk the curdled mayo into it to 
create a new, stable emulsion.

You can cut the effort almost completely by making mayo in a blender or food 
processor. There's no reason not to, except that you may need to increase the 
quantities so that the beaters or blades are immersed in yolky mix to start 
with. Also, mechanically made mayo can often thicken more than handmade stuff. 
If this happens, "let it down" by stirring in a tablespoon or two of warm water 
(a handy trick for any over-thickened mayonnaise).

This luscious condiment needs to be eaten quickly, because it includes raw 
egg, so store it in the fridge and consume within a day or two. Low 
temperatures can affect its stability. If, when chilled, it starts to look a 
little oily, let it come back to room temperature, then whisk lightly to 
re-emulsify, if need be adding a touch more liquid – a few drops of lemon juice 
or vinegar, for example – to help it along.

Basic mayonnaise

Serve this classic with cold meats and vegetables, hard-boiled eggs 
or crudités; or use it for dipping homemade chips into; or in a generous ham 
and salad sandwich; or as the base for all manner of mayonnaise variations (see 
below). These quantities make enough for six to eight people.

½ small clove garlic, peeled 
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
2 large, free-range egg yolks
½ tsp English mustard
1 tsp cider vinegar 
175ml sunflower oil
75ml extra-virgin olive oil (or rapeseed oil)

Crush the garlic to a paste with a good pinch of salt, then thoroughly combine 
in a bowl with the egg yolks, mustard, vinegar and some pepper.

Combine the oils in a jug, then slowly start whisking into the egg mix, a few 
drops at a time to start with, then in small dashes, whisking in each addition 
so it is properly amalgamated, before adding the next. By the time you've added 
all the oil, you should have a thick, glossy, wobbly mayonnaise that holds its 
shape. Taste and add more salt, pepper, mustard or vinegar if you like. If the 
mayonnaise seems too thick, stir in a tablespoon or two of warm water to let it 
down.

Cheaty rouille
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's cheaty rouille: Excellent, even without 
breadcrumbs. Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
An authentic French rouille includes breadcrumbs, but this version is 
excellent even without them. It's flavoured with lots of garlic and chilli, and 
stained with paprika and tomato (rouille means "rust" in French). Rouille is 
traditionally served on fish soups and stews such as bouillabaisse, but it also 
makes a great dip. Serves six to eight.

2 medium-hot red chillies 
2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed or finely grated
About 1 tsp thyme leaves
2 anchovy fillets (optional)
1 tsp tomato puree
½ tsp sweet smoked paprika
½ tsp English mustard
1 lemon, zest finely grated, plus the juice from half the lemon
 A pinch of sugar
2 large, free-range egg yolks
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
175ml sunflower oil
75ml extra-virgin olive oil

Cook the chillies under a hot grill, turning a few times, until the skins are 
blistered but not black. Transfer to a small bowl, cover with clingfilm and, 
when cool enough to handle, peel them, and discard the seeds and stalks. Tear 
each chilli into a few pieces, place in the bowl of a food processor with all 
the other ingredients except the oils, and whizz to a rough purée.

Combine the oils. With the motor running, slowly trickle in the oil until you 
have a thick emulsion. Taste and add more salt, pepper or lemon juice if 
needed. If the rouille seems too thick, stir in a tablespoon or two of warm 
water to let it down. Refrigerate until ready to serve.

Mayonnaise variations

• Aïoli is a pungently garlicky Provençal take on mayonnaise that goes 
wonderfully with crunchy crudités, new potatoes or chips. To make it, increase 
the crushed garlic in the basic recipe to two cloves – or more, if you prefer.

• Tartare sauce is a great favourite of mine, and delicious with fish. To whip 
some up, start with two good tablespoons of mayonnaise and add one or two 
chopped hard-boiled eggs, a tablespoon of chopped parsley, a teaspoon of 
chopped dill (optional), two or three finely chopped gherkins, two teaspoons of 
finely chopped capers and a squeeze of lemon juice.

• Anchovy and caper mayonnaise is a real winner on asparagus or with crudités. 
To the basic mayo, add four to six drained, finely chopped anchovies and a 
tablespoon of chopped capers. Season with plenty of black pepper and lemon 
juice.

• Saffron mayonnaise is great with fish or shellfish. Use it as you would 
rouille, or bring it out at barbecue time. Make the basic mayo with an extra 
shot of garlic (perhaps one to one and a half cloves). Infuse a good pinch of 
saffron strands in a tablespoon of boiling water for 10 minutes, then stir both 
the saffron and its soaking water into the mayo. Finally, adjust the seasoning 
to taste.

• Delicate and delicious tarragon mayonnaise works a treat with cold chicken, 
cold new potatoes or hard-boiled eggs. – just add two tablespoons of the finely 
chopped herb to the basic mayo recipe.

• For the latest news from River Cottage HQ, go to rivercottage.net 
<http://www.rivercottage.net>.
 