
It’s unusual for Saturday Night Live to be live four weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/16/saturday-night-live-baldwin-is-back-as-trump-for-worst-ever-presidential-debate>
 in a row, but it seems to have done the writers good – this week’s episode was 
one of the strongest in recent memory.


Saturday Night Live: Baldwin is back as Trump for 'worst ever presidential 
debate'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/16/saturday-night-live-baldwin-is-back-as-trump-for-worst-ever-presidential-debate>
Much of this was due to the presence as host for a ninth time of Tom Hanks, an 
actor not just able to inhabit weird characters but with an intuitive 
understanding of the pace and timing of the show. Even very funny and talented 
people can struggle to match that.

The cold open was, of course, a parody of the final presidential debate. Hanks 
stepped in as moderator Chris Wallace, doing an excellent deadpan of a man 
desperately trying to give Donald Trump a chance. Kate McKinnon continued to 
develop her inspiredHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, beginning literally with 
the knives out.

“In the first debate I set the table,” she said. “In the second debate I fired 
up the grill, and tonight” – rubbing two knives together – “I feast.”

Alec Baldwin’s Trump remains mostly crazy faces and verbal tics, but he did 
score with a line about Trump having the support of “the best Baldwin brother – 
Stephen Baldwin”.

Once again, the show seemed to be willing to play fast and loose with 
tradition, using a rare cutaway to show the entire world laughing at Trump’s 
claim that “no one has more respect for women” than he does. None of this 
year’s debate sketches will go down in SNL history, but they were funny enough. 

Like last week, when Emily Blunt sang about puppies and cake, Hank’s monologue 
was framed as a reaction to the terrible state of the world. “America’s 
Favorite Dad” switched to a cardigan for a “little chat” about anxiety in a 
country getting “a little darker” and “a lot gayer”, and about dealing with 
debt. It was a pep talk about the good in America that can overcome these dark 
days: cute and fairly clever, if not uproariously funny.

After the monologue, the show returned with one of its best in a while, a 
“Black Jeopardy” with Kenan Thompson as host and Hanks as Doug, an older white 
man in a Make America Great Again hat who favored “Git R’ Done” as a 
catchphrase. Everything about the sketch worked: the writing was tight and 
topical, the performances were great and Hanks really sold it as an older, 
working class guy with suspicions about the Illuminati and who thinks skinny 
girls can do “not a damn thing” for you.

Game show sketches are old-fashioned and can tend towards lazy, but this one 
was incredibly well done, making solid points about current affairs and taking 
advantage of the show’s now diversified cast.

There were a few more hits. A clever parody mimicked dramedies like 
Transparent with a promo for a show about “a family of adjunct professors who 
are all diagnosed with depression on the same day … but it’s 30 minutes so it’s 
a comedy”. Hanks as the oddball David Pumpkins in a haunted house worked for 
fans of absurdity and deliberate nonsensicalness.

No groping for laughs as Baldwin nails Donald Trump on Saturday Night Live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/09/no-groping-for-laughs-as-alec-baldwin-nails-trump-on-saturday-night-live>
As was the case last week, Weekend Update’s political jokes felt a bit tired, 
though Colin Jost got in one good jab about Mike Pence accepting the results of 
the election “unless they’re gay”. Update has being relying more on characters 
for flavor, though, and this time it worked: Leslie Jones came on to talk about 
email hacking, a thin but welcome excuse for her to do some stand-up material 
about her own leaked photos that was as funny and in-your-face-as as she always 
is.

Cecily Strong also returned as “the girl who wish you hadn’t started a 
conversation with at a party”, a reliable enough Update character who was 
amusing while rambling about “Jillian Assange” and sheeple.

Hanks also got to reprise the role of Captain Chesley “Sully” Sullenberger for 
a brief sketch with Baldwin, and to play his frequent director Ron Howard 
hosting a pet bloopers show with two dreary French commentators. Neither sketch 
was extraordinary, but they were an indication of how excited the writers were 
to write for Hanks.

Perhaps the writers took comfort in knowing they, too, could rely on 
“America’s Favorite Dad” to deliver.
 