
So. This piece is about how public figures and now members of the general 
public have started prefacing something they are about to say with the word 
"so" when it is a packaged exercise in self-presentation. "So" is the new 
"look". Look was the word Tony Blair made his own as a verbal preface for 
whatever he was about to say. The most startling example was his: "Look, I 
think most people would say I'm an honest kinda guy": pure doublethink, it 
turned out, following his speech about WMDs.

You may think this is a trivial matter but remember George Orwell's famous 
exhortations <https://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/orwell46.htm> about the 
importance of the use of language in public life. As he showed in his book 
1984, language can be manipulated to change reality. Notable examples of so's 
in recent times includeJeremy Hunt's carefully manicured spiel to the Leveson 
inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2012/may/31/jeremy-hunt-leveson-adam-smith-video>
 about the role of his special adviser, Adam Smith. Hunt was about to ask us to 
believe that he had no idea at all that his hand-picked, closest political 
confidante was communicating inside information about the government's position 
on Rupert Murdoch's takeover of BSkyB.

Perhaps starting with the word "so" was a psychological punctuation mark to 
himself, as much as us, that he was about to deliver a rehearsed manipulation 
of the truth, a way of steadying himself as he prepared to deliver a speech, 
like an actor. A similar "so" came from the mouth of James Murdoch when up 
before the all-party parliamentary select committee on the media. He was being 
walked by the MPs through the minefield of what he did and did not know about 
phone-hacking by News of the World journalists. His "so" smelt of hours of 
being coached by professional impression managers (pace his father's opening 
statement to the committee, "this is the most humble day of my life").

That "so" has replaced "look" does not, in itself, signify anything. It used 
to be placed at the end of sentences, in a "cute" and utterly meaningless 
verbal tic popularised by the TV series Friends. There have always been words 
swilling around the cultural lexicon signalling artifice and there are others 
around at the moment. Prefacing a package with "I would like to say" or "To be 
honest" are hardy perennials. But "so" is the weasel word of the moment, 
spreading into general usage.

Last Monday evening, a member of the public was interviewed on Radio 5 Live 
outside Buckingham Palace. Asked why she and her friend had come there, she 
began: "So. We went out to dinner together and both received texts from our 
husbands at the same time saying that the royal baby was born." "So" has become 
a way for a person to begin delivery of a packaged account of themselves.

So what? Care should be taken before building ideological mountains out of 
verbal molehills. But I think all this So-ing may be a symptom of broader 
trends. It is a fact that we have become whatErich Fromm 
<http://theoreticalmusings.blogspot.co.uk/2012/11/erich-fromm-on-american-consumerism-and.html>
 characterised as marketing characters in a marketing society. Such characters 
experience themselves as commodities whose value and meaning are externally 
determined. They define themselves by having rather than being, by what they 
own, not who they are. Thishomo consumens is a thing to be bought and sold, 
just like a house or a car. All of us are involved in trying to increase the 
value of the commodity that is us.

An Australian study of such people 
<http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/sbp/sbp/2001/00000029/00000002/art00010> 
showed that, among other things, people who score high on a test of marketing 
character are heavy consumers, uncritical of society and have a strong drive to 
publicise and promote themselves. With a 24-hour news cycle, public figures 
have been forced to become acutely wary of what they say in public. Frank 
authenticity has almost disappeared. Even the Today programme sometimes seems 
as if it has given up the struggle to uncover the truth. But, more profoundly, 
the present ruling elite – many of whom never knew a society that was not 
governed by Thatcherism or Blairism, have been forced from a young age to 
market themselves. The pursuit of money, status and fame (affluenza, 
materialism) are our primary values.

When I was a lad in the 1960s and an undergraduate in the early 1970s, the 
idea of doing internships during holidays to market myself to future employers 
was unknown and would have been anathema. Our goal was to please ourselves, 
intrinsically satisfying work was king.

Modern children are under massive pressure from a young age to give the 
teachers and employers what they want. They also pressurise each other to do so 
– pictures of "hot bods" on Facebook, creating Tumblr personal sites to impress 
(mostly just packed with second-hand material like advertisements), a much 
greater concern with fashion.

The packaging of self has become crucial for success in a 
service-industry-based economy. How your contribution is perceived is more 
important than what you have actually contributed, so office politics 
(impression management) have become the key to promotion and pay.

So. What a shame.
 