
Commuters on Southern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> were 
faced with the complete cancellation of all train services for the third day 
this week as drivers resumed their strike this morning.

Around 300,000 passengers were left without their usual service as Southern 
cancelled all its 2,242 weekday services on Friday.


Talks between Southern’s owning company, Govia Thameslink Railway, and the 
train drivers’ union Aslefcollapsed on Thursday without agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/southern-rail-strike-dispute-talks-end-without-agreement>
, despite earlier positive soundings. The two sides had been meeting at Acas 
since Wednesday morning.


GTR on Thursday said that it was deeply disappointed that Aslef had been 
unable to accept its proposals. The company said it had put a “practical offer” 
to the union for consideration to get Friday’s strike called off, although the 
union said there had been no real concessions, describing it as a “non-offer”.

At the centre of the dispute between unions and Southern is the move to 
driver-only operation of trains, which unions say is a safety issue, as well as 
potentially seeing many rail jobs lost or conditions downgraded in the future. 
Sources said the latest Southern proposals would continue the roll out of 
driver-only trains and did not address Aslef’s concerns.

Pressure is growing on the government to find a solution to the deadlock, 
which has seen a series of strikes by conductors causing disruption before this 
week’s escalation. A group of around 120 passengers marched to the Department 
forTransport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> from Southern’s main 
London hub, Victoria station, on Thursday night to hand in a letter demanding 
government action to end the crisis.


'My life shouldn’t be dictated by Southern rail strikes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/13/my-life-shouldnt-be-dictated-by-southern-rail-strikes>
A spokesman for the Association of British Commuters, said: “We have suffered 
a year-long nightmare because of the collapse of Southern rail. We have 
desperately called for government action and have been repeatedly ignored – 
even while many of us have lost our jobs, or had to move house.”

Katy Davies, 30, one of the organisers of the march, who commutes from south 
London, said: “This is not just about the financial impact of paying for a 
service that doesn’t work, but quality of life: people who are losing jobs, 
patients missing treatment, families who have to arrange emergency childcare, 
people thrown off trains that aren’t going anywhere late at night.”

She said Southern services had been unreliable every single day, not just 
during the strikes, adding: “We’re at breaking point and want answers fromChris 
Grayling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>. If he fails to 
act, we’d call for his resignation.”

Transport secretary Chris Grayling said: “I am deeply disappointed that this 
totally unnecessary strike action is to continue and cause thousands of 
passengers more disruption and misery.

“No jobs are being lost and no pay is being cut, but the unions are in dispute 
over who presses the button to close the train doors. Driver-only operated 
services have been safely used across the rail network for 30 years and the 
rail regulator has confirmed it is safe. The unions want to take the rail 
industry backwards and stop the roll out of new, modern trains, which are 
already in use in the UK and across Europe.”

The strike will last through Friday, but an overtime ban by drivers will 
continue to cause disruption for the foreseeable future on the understaffed 
network. A conductors strike by members of the RMT union will also further 
disrupt services on Monday and Tuesday next week, with more strikes to follow 
over the new year.
 