
The 3-0 scoreline did not do justice to the superiority Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> enjoyed over West Ham, with 
the visitors creating a huge number of chances and only Hammers goalkeeper 
Adrian keeping the scoreline respectable. Claude Puel’s team were better in 
almost every department – but the greatest contrast was at full-back.

Both Aaron Cresswell and Arthur Masuaku were unavailable for West Ham because 
of injury, so Slaven Bilic handed Álvaro Arbeloa his league debut at left-back. 
On the opposite side Bilic curiously used Havard Nordtveit, a centre-back or 
holding midfielder, rather than the recognised right-back Sam Byram.

West Ham’s defending ‘laughable’, says Mark Noble after Southampton shocker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/25/west-ham-southampton-defending-mark-noble-slaven-bilic>
From the outset it was obvious neither were looking to push forward. Nordtveit 
remained in a deep position and hit hopeful long passes in the vague direction 
of the lone striker Simone Zaza, while Arbeloa advanced into the opposition 
half more readily, but as a distinctly defensive, right-footed full-back, was 
not exactly overlapping menacingly.

On the other hand Southampton’s key player throughout the first half was the 
left-back Ryan Bertrand. With Puel playing a solid midfield trio in conjunction 
with a front three given license to roam and often ending up in very narrow 
positions, Bertrand sped forward continually and was the only player offering 
dangerous running here.

Inside the first five minutes Southampton played a dangerous passing 
combination down the left that nearly found Bertrand running in behind. Ten 
minutes later he overlapped before picking out a brilliant low pass to 
Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg on the edge of the box – the Dane should have done better 
with his finish. Finally, after 40 minutes of a truly underwhelming first half, 
Bertrand overlapped past Michail Antonio before providing a low cross which 
Charlie Austin swept home.

Bertrand’s aggressive positioning was the consequence of Puel’s system. A 
4-3-1-2 or 4-3-3 on paper, depending on the positioning of the front three, it 
often turns into more of a three-man defence because Oriel Romeu stays 
extremely deep in front of the centre-backs, who spread into wider positions. 
Bertrand has defensive security behind him and often few team-mates providing 
genuine width in front, making it imperative he attacks. It is worth 
remembering that Bertrand was often fielded on the left of a three‑man defence 
by Ronald Koeman last year, with youngster Matt Targett as wing-back. Few 
Premier League footballers would be so comfortable in a back three and in such 
an attack-minded full-back role.

Sleek Southampton stroll to win and give West Ham grounds for concern
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/25/west-ham-united-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
At half-time, Bilic introduced Sofiane Feghouli in place of Manuel Lanzini, 
who had been reasonably bright from his No10 position. This resulted in Dimitri 
Payet moving from the left to a central role and Michail Antonio switching 
flanks to the left. The use of Feghouli, a disciplined and hard‑working 
right‑sided midfielder, was probably about containing Bertrand’s runs rather 
than an attack-minded substitution.

Antonio’s left-sided positioning then caused West Ham problems on the opposite 
flank. Bertrand was more reserved after half-time but the right-back Cédric 
Soares came into the game, pushing forward to become an attacking force, at one 
point blasting into the sidenetting when Austin was begging for a pass.

By this stage West Ham’s backline had fallen apart and Southampton’s second, 
scored by Dusan Tadic after a lightning-quick passing move between he, Austin 
and Nathan Redmond, was ludicrous. Arbeloa played Tadic onside, Nordtveit did 
not tuck in properly, and the centre-backs Angelo Ogbonna and Winston Reid were 
on top of one another.

The substitute James Ward-Prowse made it three, and this could have been a 
much more comprehensive victory. West Ham were outclassed in a technical and 
tactical sense, and now have the Premier League’s worst defensive record. 
Bilic, a commanding centre-back in his day, desperately needs to improve his 
backline.
 