
Dr. Aubrey de Grey, biomedical gerontologist and chief science officer, SENS 
Foundation 

How, in your experience, have web technologies been employed to make the world 
a better place?

My own experience is pretty limited, to be honest - it revolves only around my 
work, which is biology and biotechnology. But even in that area, the web has 
incomparably transformed people's efficiency. This applies particularly to 
scientists like me who focus on maintaining expertise across a broad range of 
areas.

And where for you are the real problem areas that remain that you think the 
internet and its associated technologies can help to tackle?

I think there's still a huge potential for the internet to accelerate the 
growth and advancement of the developing world. I have quite a few friends who 
are involved in third-world philanthropy and investment, and I repeatedly hear 
that the single thing that will help such parts of the world the most is better 
connectivity to the developed world.

So what projects are you currently engaged in on a day to day basis and how 
does the internet fit into this?

I'm the chief science officer of a foundation that works on the application of 
regenerative medicine to the problem of aging. We're still small, and the staff 
are based all over the world. Moreover, most of our work consists of the 
funding of extramural research (research that takes place in university labs 
rather than in our own). Therefore, a vast amount of our day-to-day operation 
involves net-based communication, both with each other and with other 
researchers and their work. For example, we scrutinise an average of about 150 
published academic papers every day. Also, I use the internet a great deal to 
facilitate my outreach work aimed at educating the public about the feasibility 
and desirability of combating aging.

Who do you admire in this space? Who's inspiring you? Who's pushing the 
boundaries and how?

There are always new ideas coming out that offer new ways for the net to help 
biologists, and mostly they come out of the blue. Wikipedia was a big help for 
science, especially science communication, and it shows no sign of diminishing 
in importance. Some things tend not to work so well for science - things that 
rely on substantial written contributions by key experts are a case in point - 
but even there I tend to keep an open mind, because it may just be a case of 
finding the right formula.

And what can we expect from your presentation at Activate 2010?

I plan to focus on the acceleration of progress in technology (with an 
emphasis on biomedical technology, naturally) that arises from the internet's 
facilitation of communication between scientists, technologists and the general 
public. Public enthusiasm for new advances is a key ingredient in influencing 
policy-makers to stimulate follow-up work with suitable funding, and it can be 
achieved far faster now that interested non-specialists can explore new 
research autonomously and can also be appealed to directly by scientists. I 
will illustrate this with a few examples from my foundation's work.

Click here to register 
<https://www.medivents.co.uk/webivents/portal/guardian/activate2010.asp> 
 