
The adult social care sector faces a “very difficult couple of years” and 
there is an increased risk of failures in the care market, the president of the 
Association of Directors of Adult Social Services (Adass) has warned.


Ray James told a London conference on Friday that the additional money for 
adult social care in the spending review is not enough and comes too late to 
address funding issues in the sector.

While acknowledging that there was some recognition of challenges faced by 
social care in the chancellor’s autumn statement, James said additional money 
for the sector through the Better Care Fund won’t come into effect until 2017: 
“This is the opposite to theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> where 
the money has been frontloaded, the additional money for social care is 
backloaded.” It is this that will create the difficulties for the sector over 
the next two years, said James, who added that there could be “some very 
worrying consequences for individuals and their care and support during that 
time”.

Softening the blow for residents when a care home closes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/nov/27/softening-the-blow-for-residents-when-a-care-home-closes>
James also criticised the new 2% precept local authorities will be able to 
levy on council tax in order to fund adult social care. He said: “Personally I 
wouldn’t have done it locally because I think there are real issues about 
equity in doing that, you get three times more money through your council tax 
in affluent areas than you do in deprived areas.” He continued: “Hopefully we 
can do something with the distribution formula behind that to try and make it 
more equitable.”

James was speaking at the conference of the National Care Association (NCA), 
which represents independent care providers. Nadra Ahmed, the NCA chair, said 
it had been a “challenging year” for the sector, and referenced the costs of 
the new national living wage and rising registration fees for providers. Ahmed 
also mentioned the new 2% council tax levy, and asked the audience of 
providers: “How many of you think that’s a great idea?” She was met with 
laughter and a distinct lack of raised hands.
 