
The Victorians, with their big trees, lavish decorations and plump turkeys, 
may have invented modern Christmas, but if you want to find the source of some 
of our most cherished festive flavours, you need to go much further back. 
Spices, which we have coveted and fought over for centuries, are among the 
defining notes of our festive kitchen, laced through the cakes, puddings, stews 
and brews that have helped keep out the winter chill since medieval times.

Few of us can breathe in the sweet perfume of cinnamon, say, or the hot, sharp 
whiff of cloves and not come over a bit warm and glowy. Add nutmeg to the mix, 
with its intensely aromatic, crisp scent, and you have Christmas on a plate.

But there's no need to reserve these heady ingredients for purely festive 
fare. What fresh herbs so often do for summery cooking – enhancing and 
underlining the natural flavours of good raw ingredients – spices can ably 
achieve in our darker months. They can add great depth and complexity not just 
to puds and cakes, but to meaty, fruity or even vegetably things. Parsnips and 
pumpkins, for instance, love a bit of spice.

Cinnamon can be divisive – I'm among the many who don't care for it when used 
too liberally – but its warm, smoky sweetness can be exceptionally good with 
red meat, fruit and preserves, or in sweet dishes. The trick is to balance it 
with harder, sharper flavours, which is why it works so well with nutmeg and 
cloves. Citrus zests and juices are also amazingly good partners for cinnamon – 
not only the classic orange, but much sharper lemon (and even lime or 
grapefruit), too.

The fragrant dried bark of a tree native to Sri Lanka, cinnamon tires quickly 
in its ground form, so buy it in sticks, or "quills", for infusing into 
curries, drinks and syrups, and keep the musky powder, regularly replaced, for 
soups, cakes, cookies or anything requiring a smooth finish. Cinnamon is the 
thing in your spice rack most likely to vary in quality from supplier to 
supplier. Sometimes it can be insipid, at other times too harsh, particularly 
if mixed with or replaced by ground cassia bark, a closely related but more 
bitter spice. It's rarely possible to try before you buy, of course, but check 
the label and stick to brands that offer a sweet, fresh smell as soon as you 
pop the lid.

Cloves – tiny dried flowerbuds – are a deliciously dark spice with a unique 
hot, pungent flavour. That tang comes from a compound called eugenol, which is 
also found, at lower levels, in cinnamon. Food writer Tom Stobart once said 
that cloves "are best when kept below the level of recognition". I'm not sure 
I'd go that far, but it's certainly easy to use too many. Infusing whole cloves 
in liquid is often the safest path. However, there are times when a pinch of 
ground cloves gives the intensity you need; just add with caution.

Nutmeg, on the other hand, is a forgiving spice. Although it has a delicate 
bitterness beneath its woody, perfumed scent, you can use it quite generously. 
Always buy whole nutmegs and grate them freshly, on a fine grater, directly 
into your dish (the gorgeous aroma is lost if the ground spice is stored for 
any time). It gives definition to smooth, milky dishes such as rice puddings, 
white sauces and custards, but I frequently add it to spinach dishes, too, and 
it's very good in buttery mashed potato.

This spicy trio is usually found in the ready-blended "mixed spice" that 
defines the welcoming aroma of Christmas cakes, mincemeat and seasonal 
biscuits, but I think it's more fun, and dependably more delicious, to use them 
separately.

Another good way to spike your cooking with a good blend of spice is to add 
well-spiced preserves or sauces. A fruity chutney, sweet and tangy with spices 
that have mingled and mellowed over time, adds aromatic backbone to a tagine or 
curry, while a clove-rich homemade tomato ketchup is an excellent addition to a 
beany, bacony stew.

However you use them, these spices are pretty much guaranteed to turn on the 
twinkly lights, raise a few smiles and spread a warm, generous glow.

Roasted, spiced squash mash

Sultry warm spices mingle exotically with the sweet squash. Delicious with 
roasted lamb or grilled chops. Serves three to four as a side dish

1kg squash such as butternut or crown prince
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
2 tbsp olive oil, plus a little extra, for roasting the squash
1 onion, peeled and finely chopped
1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed or finely grated
1 tsp ground cinnamon
A good grating of nutmeg
Finely grated zest of ½ lemon 
2 tbsp pumpkin seeds (optional)
A pinch of chilli flakes (optional)

Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5. Cut the squash into four, scoop out the 
seeds and place cut side up in a roasting tray. Brush lightly with oil, season 
well and roast for 50-60 minutes, until soft.

Meanwhile, heat the oil in a saucepan over a medium-low heat and add the 
onion. Fry for 10-15 minutes, until soft, add the garlic, fry for a couple of 
minutes more, then add the cinnamon, nutmeg, lemon zest and plenty of salt and 
pepper. Stir for a minute, then take off the heat.

If you want to finish the mash with pumpkin seeds, heat half a tablespoon of 
olive oil in a frying pan over a medium-low heat, add the pumpkin seeds and fry 
gently for a couple of minutes, until they start to pop. Drain on kitchen 
paper, then sprinkle with salt.

Scoop the soft, hot flesh off the squash skin and drop straight into the pan 
with the spicy onion mix. Either mash the squash flesh and the onions with a 
potato masher or blitz them with a stick blender to get a more purée-like 
texture. The type of squash you use will dictate the texture of the mash: a 
dryish squash such as crown prince will give a dry, fluffy mash (add a little 
butter or hot milk to soften it a touch, if you like). Butternut, on the other 
hand, will give a softer, looser finish. Either way, serve piping hot, 
sprinkled with chilli flakes and/or pumpkin seeds, if using, with roasted or 
grilled lamb and wilted greens or spinach.

Mulled wine
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's mulled wine: 'Hard to beat for a warm welcome.' 
Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
It's hard to beat this for a warm welcome, though you can ring the changes by 
swapping cider for the wine. These quantities serve six, so scale up the recipe 
as necessary.

1 large orange
100g caster sugar 
2-3 strips lemon zest
About half a dozen cloves
2 cinnamon sticks
A good grating of nutmeg 
2-3 star anise
1 bottle red wine (cabernet sauvignon or chianti)
A shot of brandy (optional)

Pare half a dozen strips of zest from the orange and put them in a large 
saucepan. Squeeze in the juice of the orange, too, then add the sugar, lemon 
zest and spices. Heat gently, stirring, to dissolve the sugar, then simmer for 
a couple of minutes. Add the wine (and brandy, if using), bring to steaming, 
almost-simmering point, then turn off the heat and it's ready to serve. I like 
to make this a few hours in advance, leave it to cool and the flavours to 
deepen, then reheat very gently before serving.

Spiced figs

These are very versatile. They make a lovely, simple pudding with some thick 
plain yoghurt or crème fraîche, but I also like them in a savoury context, with 
a big, glazed, baked ham at Christmas (where, of course, cloves studded into 
the sugary, mustardy crust of the joint also come into play). Serves six.

500g soft dried figs
1 tea bag
50g light soft brown sugar
3-4 strips orange zest
3-4 strips lemon zest
1 cinnamon stick
4 cloves
½ vanilla pod

Trim off the tough little stalk at the top of each fig. Put the figs into 
a large bowl, boil the kettle, then make up 500ml of tea, using the tea bag. 
Leave it to brew for two to three minutes, then remove the tea bag and pour the 
hot tea over the figs. Leave to soak until the tea has cooled down to room 
temperature.

Drain the liquid into a saucepan. Add the sugar, citrus zest and spices. Bring 
to a simmer and cook for about five minutes, until lightly syrupy. Pour over 
the figs and leave to cool completely. Serve chilled as a pudding, or at room 
temperature as an accompaniment to baked ham (in which case you may want to 
hold back a little of the syrup).

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 