
A well-liked priest was left “extremely shaken” after he was robbed at 
gunpoint and ordered to empty a church safe, police have said.


Three men, one believed to have been holding a handgun, made off with charity 
donations for a children’s orphanage in the robbery at about 6.25pm on Tuesday.


The assailants rang the doorbell of Father Peter Hannah’s residence in St 
Helens, Merseyside, and demanded money before marching him to Vincent de Paul 
church.

There they ordered him to empty the church safe, before making off on foot. 
The priest was not assaulted or injured during the incident, Merseyside police 
said.

Local residents and churchgoers expressed disgust at the robbery and said it 
was the second time the priest had been held by armed men. Volunteers at the 
church said Father Hannah had been robbed at knifepoint several years ago.


Angela Thompson, a parishioner at the church, said the crime would be 
“difficult to forgive”.

“I am absolutely disgusted. The money was being donated to an orphanage,” she 
said. “It is the lowest of the low to go and take money from a priest like 
that. He is a lovely man and you could go to him for absolutely anything.”

Ian Bradley, a local resident, said he was in disbelief and would donate money 
to replace part of the stolen kitty.


“I heard about the robbery and that the money was for an orphanage. I was 
disgusted and surprised someone would rob and target a church. I can’t imagine 
what’s going on in people’s minds who would do such a thing.”

A spokesman for the archdiocese of Liverpool said: “Our thoughts and prayers 
are with Father Peter Hannah, who was not injured but left shaken by the events 
of yesterday evening.


“Such events are an attack on the whole of the worshipping community who in 
these last weeks have given of their time to raise money for an orphanage in 
Zimbabwe. The repercussions of this act will be felt far beyond the town of St 
Helens.”

Officers carried out an extensive search of the area but were unable to trace 
the three men. CCTV is being examined and house-to-house inquiries are being 
conducted in an attempt to identify and catch the offenders.

The three were described as white and aged between 17 and 21. All three had 
their faces covered during the incident.

DS Chris Burrows, of St Helens CID, said: “I am sure the people of St Helens 
will be shocked and saddened to discover the church has been targeted in this 
way.

“It is a focal point for many in our community, particularly at this time of 
year, and it is heartbreaking to think the offenders have taken money which we 
understand was a charitable collection intended for a children’s orphanage.


“While he was thankfully not injured, this would have been a very frightening 
incident for the priest. I would like to reassure people who live locally that 
we are doing everything we can to trace the offenders.”

Anyone with information about the robbery should contact detectives at St 
Helens CID on0151 777 6811 <> or Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111 <>.
 