
To mark its 75th birthday, the BFI asked 75 lofty figures which one film they 
wouldmost wish future generations to see 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/75/visions_future>. Blade Runner came top of the poll, 
but the runner-up was a surprise to some. Way ahead of the The Godfather, Pulp 
Fiction and The Third Man came Andrei Tarkovsky's sci-fi classic,Stalker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76519/stalker>.

This film's been puzzling cineastes ever since it appeared in 1979. Perhaps it 
puzzles you. If so, what do you really want to know about it? Not, surely, what 
the whole mysterious concoction might actually be supposed to mean. What you're 
almost certainly wondering is why the film's original director of photography 
had his name left off the credits.

Or if you aren't, I know a man who is. Director Igor Mayboroda 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0537367/> worked with the DoP involved, Georgi 
Rerberg <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0720162/>, and considers him one of 
cinema's towering figures. In 1993,Tarkovsky's diaries were published 
<http://www.amazon.com/Time-Within-Diaries-1970-1986/dp/0860914070>. In these, 
the great man justified Rerberg's sacking by accusing him not just of technical 
and aesthetic inadequacy, but also of a wide range of sordid personal failings.

Up with this, Mayboroda was not going to put. What could he do? What would you 
expect an impassioned Russian film-maker to do? Naturally, Mayboroda put 
together a documentary that examined in depth the way in which Stalker came to 
be shot. With a running-time of 140 minutes, it turned out to be almost as long 
as Stalker itself.

Yesterday, Rerberg and Tarkovsky: The Reverse Side of Stalker 
<http://sheffdocfest.com/films/show/4853> got its UK premiere at the Sheffield 
Doc/Fest. Before the screening, Mayboroda warned us that his film would prove 
"long and difficult to watch". No worries! We expected no less. It's true that 
some members of the audience did sneak out before those all-important credits 
got a chance to roll. This was, however, their loss entirely.

Rerberg and Tarkovsky makes it clear that Stalker's protracted gestation was a 
great deal more eventful than the film to which it gave birth. Tarkovsky was 
determined to pull off an effect that he'd seen Bergman achieve. When Rerberg 
failed to deliver it, even after a special studio had been built, Tarkovsky 
went ballistic. Then, dud film stock proved disastrous. Should Rerberg have 
tested it first?

While documenting these incidents, Mayboroda makes it clear that more profound 
forces were really shaping events. Many of his witnesses agreed that 
Tarkovsky's wife Larisa was the key to the action. Seen originally as a docile 
simpleton intent only on gratifying her spouse's wishes, she quickly turned 
from an angel into a "fiend" (according to some) or a "witch" (according to 
others).

As a thesp of sorts, she demanded that she, rather than the slated candidate, 
should play the stalker's wife. Tarkovsky wavered. Rerberg asked him, "Do you 
want Larisa or the actress?" The intervention did for Larisa's chances, but 
apparently she never forgave her nemesis. Some had it that all the trouble that 
bedevilled Stalker's production could be put down to the machinations of "the 
Empress".

Certainly, Mayboroda succeeded in summoning up plenty of film greats prepared 
to testify to the majesty of Rerberg's talent. At one point, Tarkovsky is said 
to have demanded of Rerberg, "Do you think it's you who's the genius?" One sage 
perhaps hit the nail on the head with the comment, "Two geniuses on one set is 
one too many."

This film might leave you convinced that Tarkovsky was a wilful, selfish, 
vainglorious and treacherous megalomaniac. He insisted that 17 different 
versions of Stalker were made. Apparently, he demanded that most of Rerberg's 
footage should be reshot, but in such a way that the new work was identical to 
the old.

Still, nobody's (yet) made a 140-minute doc giving Tarkovsky's side of the 
story. After the screening, I put this point to Mayboroda. How different might 
such a film be from his own effort? "Several weaknesses operating in the same 
situation could be viewed from different perspectives," he opined 
magisterially. Quite so.

Yet it's not only the perspectives of his mighty antagonists that Mayboroda 
has managed to capture. Somehow, he gets across the way life must look to all 
those for whom only film-making matters. He also shows that when something 
matters in Russia, it seems to matter more than it does elsewhere.

Even the baleful Tarkovsky once said that Rerberg's images were shaped by "an 
aspiration for the truth, the truth presupposed by all his previous 
experience". You wouldn't get Michael Winner saying something like that of his 
lensman.

This premiere was part of a Russian strand in the Sheffield programme, marking 
the 20th anniversary of the USSR's demise. In fact, Rerberg and Tarkovsky is 
the one of only two wholly Russian features being shown. No matter. On its own, 
it's a sufficient tribute to Russia's film-making prowess, which it perhaps 
goes some way to explain.
 