
The estate agent was quite adamant the day she came to value my flat. “In a 
normal market this would go for £260,000 or so. But no one will pay that 
because of stamp duty, so the truth is you won’t get anyone offering a penny 
over £250,000. We could try asking £275,000 and see if someone bites at around 
£260-£270, but I’m not optimistic.” She was right. After a month I had to 
accept that the stamp duty cliff was just too tough to climb, and I settled at 
£250,000.

This week’s overhaul of stamp duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/george-osborne-stamp-duty-overhaul-autumn-statement>
 was long overdue and will be hugely popular. Each time stamp duty has been 
raised in recent budgets, the anomalies in pricing have got worse. Making the 
tax more of a slope than a cliff was a move that should have been taken long 
ago.

But before we thank George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> for this welcome reform, 
let’s not pretend it’s going to help the hard-pressed first-time buyer. What 
would I have done with my flat were there no stamp duty cliff at £250,000? I 
would have put it on at £260,000 and probably settled at something around 
£255,000. So I, the existing property owner, would have pocketed £5,000 extra. 
But it would not have stayed in my pocket for long, as I’d use that £5,000 to 
be able to bid that bit more for the next place up the so-called ladder. My 
buyer would be worse off and in reality I’d be no better off.

I checked a few properties that have been added to Rightmove since the 
chancellor’s announcement, and the evidence of re-pricing upwards is already 
beginning to emerge. Anice four-bedder in Oldham 
<http://www.rightmove.co.uk/property-for-sale/property-49394771.html> has just 
gone on for £259,950. The agents, Ryder & Dutton, told me that previously they 
might have struggled to sell at that price, but now they’re confident they’ll 
get the full amount. It was the same story for a similar£255,000 home in 
Liverpool <http://www.rightmove.co.uk/property-for-sale/property-33096417.html>
, added to Rightmove the day after stamp duty was changed. The agents, Davis 
Beyga, said they are now far more optimistic it will sell at or near asking 
price.

The greater issue with Osborne’s stamp duty reform is not that he’s ironed out 
the anomalies, but that he has used the occasion to pump lots more money into 
the property market – an £800m giveaway that means stamp duty is reduced on 
nearly every sale up to £937,500.

Surely one lesson we have learned about the British property market, is that 
every time more money is made available for purchasers in a country with 
inelastic supply, all that happens is that prices rise. Osborne knows this, so 
this tax cut is a cynical ploy to revive a market that looked dangerously (to 
him) like it was cooling just ahead of an election. In the past he has boosted 
the market with Funding for Lending, then Help to Buy, and the stamp duty cut 
is just the latest adrenaline fix. To put it into perspective, Wednesday’s 
£800m injection into the property market is equal to nearly one-fifth of the 
total the government spends on unemployment benefit.

A nurse we spoke to, Katherine Roberts, said she has to go to bed early just 
to keep warm, such is the financial pressure she is under. She summed up what 
many people would conclude about Osborne’s speech this week – there was nothing 
in it for her. That said, it was good news for someone buying a £700,000 home 
(£3,250 off the stamp duty bill), taking the family to the Bahamas (£213 off 
the airfare) and whose parents have lots of money in their pension pot (new 
inheritance tax giveaways). All in it together?
 