
The standard of degrees from Abertay University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofabertay> has been questioned 
in two separate reports in the past month.

Last month, a Quality Assurance Agency audit said there could be only "limited 
confidence" in degree standards. Yesterday, another report raised concerns over 
quality at an affiliated overseas college.

Yesterday's QAA report criticised the university's lack of scrutiny over the 
degrees being awarded at a sister college in Greece, which is described as a 
"virtual school of the university".

North College, in Thessaloniki, delivers four full-time undergraduate 
programmes leading to BA awards in business studies and applied art and design, 
and a BSc in computer studies, following the completion of Higher National 
Diplomas undertaken in the UK.

The fourth programme in psychology is a full degree course lasting four years. 
All four programmes were designed by the college and are validated by the 
Scottish university. The college refers to itself as a centre of the University 
of Abertay Dundee.

The report found that, until recently, there was no contact between staff from 
the university and the college. It also said the university had appointed 
Greek-based external examiners with no experience of teaching or examining in 
the UK, leaving the university with only limited means by which to judge 
academic standards.

In one case, the report found, degrees had been awarded to students after one 
year of study on a university-validated programme, without the involvement of 
either an external examiner or a member of the university's academic staff.

In last month's report, the QAA highlighted problems with quality management 
in the university and a lack of quality assurance policies.

Although it was commended for its policies for widening participation and its 
work with local colleges, as well as its degree portfolio, which is tailored 
towards local industry, the report said: "Without a substantive engagement with 
the academic standards debate at the university level, there can be limited 
confidence in the university's ability to assure and maintain the standards of 
its awards."

A QAA spokesman said the university was not failing, but there were areas that 
needed improving to "maintain our confidence".

A university spokesman said the institute accepted the main criticisms of the 
report, but added: "It is unfortunate that the rather restricted nature of the 
overseas audit model overlooked other positive features of the partnership, and 
that the audit itself took place before improvements we were bringing in had 
time to take effect, although the report acknowledges that this process had 
begun."

He said new measures had been introduced as a result of the report, including 
new procedures for managing the external examination system and revised 
admissions procedures.

Abertay had two subject reviews last year in business and economics. In both 
cases the QAA said it had confidence in academic standards.

A spokesman for the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council said 
universities were responsible for maintaining their own academic standards, but 
added: "We expect the university to act swiftly to address the concerns 
identified by the QAA."
 