 A baying mob of Hindu bigots plunged India into social and political crisis 
yesterday, tearing down a mosque on the site where they want to build a temple. 
In a few frenzied hours the mob brought down the government of India's most 
populous state, Uttar Pradesh, and provoked deep communal tension throughout 
the country.
Last night curfews were in force in several areas, and police forces were on 
full alert. In Delhi itself, about 2,000 armed paramilitary troops were on 
patrol to prevent outbreaks of Hindu-Muslim violence.

The prime minister, Narasimha Rao, made repeated television and radio 
broadcasts appealing for calm and bitterly condemning his political enemies who 
had backed the temple project. The president, Shankar Dayal Sharma, made an 
impassioned plea for peace, too.

The explosion of madness happened in the north Indian town of Ayodhya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya> , home to 6,000 shrines and a 
militant Hindu vision: the construction of a giant new temple in honour of the 
great deity Lord Ram.

Hindu zealots believe, fervently, that Ram was born in Ayodhya , in the exact 
spot occupied until yesterday by the central part of the mosque erected in 
about 1528 by lieutenants of the first Moghul emperor, Babur.

Over recent years various militant groups have urged the destruction of the 
mosque. Yesterday their dream - and the nightmare of secularIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> - became real.

At least 100,000 kar sevaks (construction volunteers) had assembled in Ayodhya 
at the call of the most powerful Hindu militant organisations, the Bharatiya 
Janata Party (BJP), the Rashtirya Swayam Sevak (RSS), and the Vishwa Hindu 
Parishad (VHP).

Over the past week leaders of all three groups had engaged in an audacious, 
dangerous game of brinkmanship with the government in Delhi. First they 
insisted that the temple would be built - a promise made at least three times 
in the past two years then, more plausibly, that there would be only a token 
ceremony.

That ceremony was supposed to start at 12.15pm yesterday. But at 11.45am a 
small, frenzied section of the huge mob broke away to make history, in defiance 
of their own leaders. Brushing past the ineptly-led, ill-prepared force of 
police and paramilitary troops supposedly guarding the mosque, they occupied 
the disputed structure, provoking thousands more to follow.

Over the next nine hours or more they used primitive tools and their bare 
hands to tear the mosque to pieces. First the three domes went, then the 
spartan interior and the perimeter walls. The Hindu idols, installed in the 
late 1940s at the start of the arcane, obscurantist dispute, also disappeared.

At least four volunteers were reported killed in the maddened scramble to 
demolish the mosque. They were said to have been crushed by rubble released in 
the amateur demolition. About 150 others were injured, by falling bricks, by 
being trampled in the rush to the mosque, or by slipping from the top of it.

The ferocity of events evidently took both the state and the central 
government by surprise. They were convinced that they had worked out a rational 
compromise, delaying the confrontation instead they were embroiled in an 
instant crisis.

The central government insisted that national paramilitary forces should keep 
the peace. But they had not reckoned with the partisan Hindu zeal of the 
state-controlled Provincial Armed Constabulary.

The PAC factor was crucial. As Hindu zealots converged on what was once a 
mosque, its supposed defenders quietly retired from the coming fray, betraying 
their state government's repeated pledges to defend the 450-year-old building.

The tiny, helpless contingent of central government controlled central reserve 
police was overwhelmed, and gave up after token resistence.

Last night the pro-Hindu forces were in disarray, claiming implausibly that 
the disturbances were nothing to do with them. The main forces in favour of the 
temple claimed desperately that the disturbances yesterday were the work of 
agents provocateurs, and that the events in Ayodhya were 'unfortunate'.

Whatever the interpretation, the bleak and terrifying fact is that law and 
order in India stands exposed, until further notice, as a sham.

Among the victims of the frenzy were many Indian and foreign reporters, 
attacked apparently with no cause except xenophobic zeal.

When the scale of the debacle became known, Delhi ordered other paramilitary 
formations to the scene, including the recently formed rapid action force.

But their progress was delayed by barricades of burning tyres and other 
obstructions.

Meanwhile, the cabinet met in emergency session in Delhi. The Uttar Pradesh 
government, headed by chief minister Kalyan Singh, was peremptorily dismissed, 
and president's rule - a euphemism for central control - was imposed in a state 
with about 150 million citizens.

There were no reports of any communal disturbances. But in a situation of high 
tension, virtually every Indian state has put its police on high alert.

'What has happened today is a matter of great concern and shame for all 
Indians,' the prime minister said.

'We shall not spare any action at this grave moment of crisis. It is a 
betrayal of the nation and a confrontation with all that is sacred to all 
Indians.'

The VHP leader, Ashok Singhal, said: 'These are the pent-up feelings of people 
which have burst out.' The parliamentary leader of the BJP, Lal Krishan Advani, 
said the destruction of the mosque was 'very unfortunate' but refused to 
comment further.

Opposition parties condemned the state and national governments, ministers of 
the ruling Congress party began to jostle for position in the event of a full 
scale political crisis, and the state-controlled Doordarshan television network 
haplessly grappled with what it called, with massive understatement, 'a swift 
turn of events'.

AFP adds: The organisation of the Islamic Conference condemned the 'barbaric 
act' in Ayodhya and said it had warned the Indian government of the seriousness 
of the situation. It made a 'pressing appeal' to the government to protect 
Indian Muslim lives and property.
 