
It’s clear that her symptoms are advancing and that she was right on the 
futility of further chemotherapy. She is having trouble staying awake, her 
appetite is deteriorating, and she is weaker by the day. This may well be our 
last appointment.

“We can get rid of a number of your medications,” I say, frowning at the long 
list that her daughter says is proving increasingly difficult to administer.

“Let’s do that,” she says joyfully.

So in one of my favourite acts, I slash half her list, explaining why as I go 
along.

But she stops me at the statin, an anti-cholesterol drug she was prescribed 20 
years ago for a barely elevated cholesterol detected on an insurance test.

Statins prevent 80,000 heart attacks and strokes a year in UK, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/08/statins-prevent-80000-heart-attacks-and-strokes-a-year-in-uk-study-finds>
“I need that so I don’t die from a heart attack.”

“Not quite,” I say soothingly. “Statins exert their benefit over many years 
and we agree that now, it’s more important to maintain comfort.”

“I can’t imagine my day without my statin,” she declares, leaving me to wonder 
somewhat enviously how her cardiologist managed to evince such devout 
compliance for a questionable cause.

Just then her husband pipes up. He is a sprightly 74, still working, and 
unlike his wife, detests medications, including the statin he was prescribed 
after a serious heart attack some years ago.

“Well, I’ve decided that at 75, I am swapping the statin for sausages. From 
what I hear, the two are as bad as each other.”

She has heard this before because the wife adds with a smile, “At 75 or when I 
die, whichever happens sooner.”

I urge the husband to discuss his decision with his doctor before stopping 
treatment, I tell my patient to stop her statin and I bid them both a fond 
goodbye.

As they leave, I find myself thinking about many recent conversations I have 
had with patients about statins. With cancer patients who have a limited life 
expectancy, stopping the statin is both safe and right. But during my stints in 
general medicine, where we treat heart attacks, strokes and dementia, the 
answer is more nuanced.

Does everyone need a high-dose statin? How many will experience side effects? 
Is lifestyle modification a reasonable starting point or should every patient 
be commenced on a statin? The reality of most hospital management is that a 
drug is prescribed and the patient finds out as an afterthought. But if a 
statin, once started, is likely to become a lifelong drug, what considerations 
are important beforehand?

Many patients have heard of statins but awareness does not mean familiarity 
and it certainly does not mean being informed. For every person who trusts a 
doctor’s recommendation to take a statin, someone else suspects a conspiracy 
theory fuelling the prescription of the world’s highest-selling drug.

For the patient who wants to know more, things can get complicated. A cursory 
internet search warns that statins make women (but not men) more aggressive, 
accelerate ageing, damage stem cells, worsen heart disease, cause dementia and 
are “unhealthy and unethical” to prescribe.

Alongside are studies asserting that statins significantly reduce the 
incidence of heart attacks and strokes and improve mortality. Their benefits 
are evident within the first year of intake and accumulate over time, making 
them among the few drugs to have a dramatic impact on health outcomes. 
Considering that heart disease is the number one killer in many parts of the 
world, this is no ambit claim. But pity the hapless patient trying to make an 
informed choice – it’s hard to know which “expert” advice to heed because 
everyone sounds knowledgeable.

Very few patients needed to stop statins due to adverse effects.

When I recently prescribed a statin to a young woman with a heart attack and a 
host of coronary risk factors, she expressed concern. I explained that no drug 
was without side effects but a new, rigorous, non-industry funded, 
meta-analysis by the clinical trial service unit of Oxford University,shows 
that the benefits of statins have been underestimated and harms exaggerated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/08/statins-prevent-80000-heart-attacks-and-strokes-a-year-in-uk-study-finds>
. The results were published in the Lancet medical journal.

Treating 10,000 high-risk patients with a low-cost, generic statin for five 
years prevented 1,000 strokes and heart attacks and treating 10,000 lower-risk 
patients prevented 500. Of 10,000 patients, five might suffer muscle aches, up 
to 100 may develop diabetes and five to 10 may suffer a brain haemorrhage but 
these side-effects have been included in the estimate of the absolute benefit.

Very few patients needed to stop statins due to adverse effects. It may not be 
the absolute final word but the meta-analysis concludes that many problems have 
been misattributed to statins, therefore planting fear in the minds of those at 
high cardiovascular risk and dissuading them from taking a potentially 
life-saving drug.

But how did these rare toxicities garner so much attention in the first place? 

In October 2013, the British Medical Journal, as part of its mission to 
promote rational prescribing, published a paper quoting the incidence of 
statin-related side effects being as high as 18% and thus concluding that 
statins did not provide an overall health benefit to those patients deemed at 
low risk. But the 18% figure was based on flawed research and it was apparent 
that even in the quoted research, the figure was closer to 9%, but without the 
inclusion of a placebo-controlled group, which meant even the 9% could not be 
genuinely attributed to statins. (The meta-analysis says that statins are “no 
less well-tolerated than placebo”).

Seven months later the BMJ corrected the erroneous statements but did not 
retract the entire paper. Sir Rory Collins, the lead author of the Oxford 
meta-analysis, warned at the time that without full retraction, doctors and 
patients would continue to be misinformed. It turns out he was prescient.

Medical journal editors ... owe it to society to publish papers that “first do 
no harm”.

Misleading media reports followed and led to increased reticence among doctors 
to prescribe or even discuss statins and increased unwillingness among patients 
to take them.Statins <https://www.theguardian.com/society/statins> were already 
being under-used but a new wave of adverse media meant a further reduction in 
use.

In the UK, 200,000 patients stopped taking statins. 60,000 fewer statin 
prescriptions were dispensed in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/14/60000-fewer-patients-took-vital-statin-drugs-following-abcs-catalyst-program>
 following a now-withdrawn television program. If those patients avoided 
statins for the next five years, researchers estimated that a few thousand 
would suffer a fatal heart attack or stroke. For a disease that kills 17 
million people around the world each year, an ounce of prevention is not to be 
sniffed at.

So what does the statin saga teach us? For one, it underlines the power of the 
media and in turn, the responsibility of health reporters and newspaper editors 
to think twice before exploiting health news to suit their audience.

“Beloved grandma loses mind to cholesterol drug” and “How statins ruined my 
life” might be guaranteed click-bait but responsible reporting might instead 
discuss the dreadful statistic of one Australian dying of cardiovascular 
disease every 12 minutes and how to prevent it. Statins are no panacea but 
combined with diet, exercise and curbing cigarettes and alcohol, they have a 
role.

Second, it reminds medical journal editors that they owe it to society to 
publish papers that “first do no harm”. If Big Pharma can’t be trusted to 
provide unbiased data and to base advice on sensational tabloid fare makes a 
mockery of medicine, doctors must put their faith in someone to provide 
credible information.

Criticism of Catalyst misses the point. No journalist should be in thrall to 
mainstream opinion | Michael Slezak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/12/criticism-of-catalyst-misses-the-point-no-journalist-should-be-in-thrall-to-mainstream-opinion>
There is an old joke that the majority of academic papers are read only by the 
author and the editor – this may be a little harsh but busy clinicians mostly 
flick through abstracts and note key points rather than read even a fraction of 
the million scientific papers published annually with an interrogating mind. It 
is up to journal editors to simplify the task and spell out the difference 
between interesting research and findings that transform patient care.

Finally, better health arises from better health literacy. In a free society, 
patients are allowed to make poor choices but the media shouldn’t facilitate 
it. Just this week an acquaintance asked me what I thought of her daughter’s 
“courageous” bid to not vaccinate her child for fear of “giving her autism”. I 
reminded her that the fraudulent data had long been exposed and retracted but 
she said she had seen it on the net and that was that. Dashing my hopes, she 
next took on statins.

“What do you make of the controversy?”

“There is no controversy,” I replied. “Read the report.”

“You would say that, wouldn’t you?”

Then, after a pause, “But seriously, did you see the story about the old lady 
who went mad on her statin?”

No, I didn’t. But newspaper editors, please take note!
 