
Steve Borthwick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steve-borthwick> spoke 
about how much he owed to Eddie Jones, who hired him once to be his forwards 
coach when he was working with Japan, and then again when he took charge of the 
England team. “He has been phenomenal for me as a young coach developing,” 
Borthwick said. “I have an awful lot to learn but I feel very fortunate that 
I’ve got a head coach like him.” For all Jones has apparently taught Borthwick, 
he might also pass on a few tips about how best to handle the press, a part of 
the job which Jones relishes but Borthwick approaches with all the enthusiasm 
of a man on his way to the dentist to get a cavity drilled.

Borthwick offered no comment, other than “it would be an honour”, on reports 
that Warren Gatland has asked him to help coach the British and Irish Lions 
next summer; no comment, other than “he’s one of the players who is in the 
frame for selection”, on whether or not George Kruis was going to come back 
into the England team now he has recovered from the ankle surgery he had last 
month; and no comment, other than “it’s an ongoing thing”, on Joe Launchbury’s 
citing for kicking Asaeli Tikoirotuma in the head, which had not been resolved 
when he spoke. All of which made for a most enlightening press conference.

Rugby union autumn internationals: talking points from the latest action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points>
Fortunately for England, Borthwick is rather better at the more important 
business of drilling forwards in how to run a lineout, which is why they have 
won 37 in a row during their last three Tests. “I think it is pretty obvious 
what he has done for our lineout,” said Mako Vunipola, who played alongside 
Borthwick at Saracens and is coached by him now. “He was a great lineout caller 
– one of the best that ever played. As a player he was like an extra coach out 
there. If the opposition changed plans, then he was able to adapt on the field, 
work out what we needed to do to get the ball back, and I think that’s what 
he’s done with us here.”

Borthwick has been a full-time coach for only four years, so the Lions job has 
come along quickly for him. Vunipola is not surprised. “He picks up on 
anything, the smallest little things make a massive little difference to him. 
And he’s all about the basics, get them right first and then everything else 
will come along with it.” Vunipola explained that Borthwick had helped him 
adjust the position of his feet to improve his lifting. He also explained that 
Borthwick “makes it very easy for us, even though he has that level of detail, 
he makes it very easy for us to understand.”

“As a player he just made it very easy for me to do my role,” Vunipola said. 
And as a coach, the same thing goes. Vunipola believes that’s why “the new boys 
who have come into the squad have bedded in really easily and not really looked 
out of place at the set piece”.

England hint at attacking riches to rival pomp of Woodward era in defeat of 
Fiji
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/england-fiji-autumn-internationals>
Bath’s Charlie Ewels, who made his debut during the final 15 minutes of the 
Fiji match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/england-fiji-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, would be the most obvious example. “It was great to see him make his debut,” 
said Borthwick. “It’s an area of the team that has got a lot of competition, so 
for a young man like him to have got on to the field, he’s deserved that 
opportunity.”

Ewels’ Bath team-mate Dave Attwood has also been called into the training 
camp. So, even though Maro Itoje is injured andLaunchbury is now banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/joe-launchbury-banned-two-weeks-england-fiji>
 for the remaining two autumn internationals against Argentina, this Saturday, 
and Australia on 3 December, lock is an area where England now have real 
strength in depth.

“Joe has been excellent in the last two games, his work-rate has been 
phenomenal, the amount of ground the guy covers in the game is tremendous.” 
Borthwick said. “And Courtney Lawes has led the lineout superbly well for the 
last two games. To prepare for Test match rugby you need to have people who are 
going to make training very competitive. But only two can go on the pitch.”

As for Kruis, Borthwick said: “Along with the other guys in that position he’s 
played really well this season. I feel fortunate that whenever we’ve altered 
things or changed things in that area the players have played well. We’ve used 
a fair number.” They are, he said, “pushing each other hard and there’s a lot 
of area for growth. They’re going to get a lot better.”

In Borthwick, it seems, they have the right man to help them do exactly that. 
“When he talks, people listen,” Vunipola said. Which figures because, in public 
at least, he does not say much.
 