

Steven Spielberg’s live action take on Roald Dahl’s classic children’s novel 
The BFG will debut out of competition at this year’s Cannes film festival,
reports Variety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/cannes-film-festival-predictions-bfg-2016-1201738289/>
.

The heavily anticipated fantasy, which features the voice of British 
Oscar-winnerMark Rylance <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mark-rylance> as 
the Big Friendly Giant himself, looks likely to join a number of other 
Hollywood productions on the Croisette.

The trade bible is heavily tipping Jodie Foster thriller Money Monster, 
starring George Clooney as a flamboyant financial TV expert held hostage by a 
man who took his advice on the stock market, for a debut in the south of 
France. Woody Allen’s Cafe Society, starring Kristen Stewart, Bruce Willis and 
Jesse Eisenberg, will reportedly debut out of competition, while Sean Penn’s 
The Last Face, with Charlize Theron and Javier Bardem as aid workers who fall 
in love in Liberia, is expected to compete for the Palme D’Or.

British films tipped for a competition place are Ben Wheatley’s Free Fire, his 
70s-set crime thriller followup to the British director’s current critical 
smash High Rise, and Ken Loach’s I, Daniel Blake, the Cannes stalwart’s drama 
about an injured carpenter and single mother struggling to get by on welfare. 
Spanish Cannes perennial Pedro Almodóvar looks likely to present femme-powered 
drama Julieta, while Holland’s former Hollywood powerhouse Paul Verhoeven could 
compete with thriller Elle, starring Isabelle Huppert as a woman who fights 
back after being attacked during a burglary. New films from Belgian festival 
favourites The Dardennes Brothers (The Unknown Girl), Canada’s Xavier Dolan 
(It’s Only the End of the World) and Iran’s Asghar Farhadi, whose proposed film 
remains untitled, are also expected to make the main selection.

French film-makers set to compete for the Palme D’Or include Bruno Dumont, 
with period comedy Slack Bay, and Olivier Assayas, whose film Personal Shopper 
also stars Stewart. Also in with a shout of a competition place are Arnaud des 
Pallieres’ Orpheline, starring Adele Exarchopoulos and Gemma Arteton, and 
Bertrand Bonello’s Paris Is Happening, the potentially controversial tale of a 
bombing attack on the city by young people who feel disenfranchised by society.

According to Variety, Danish director Nicolas Winding Refn’s much-hyped 
female-fronted horror The Neon Demon could miss out on a competition place, 
while Cannes president Thierry Fremaux is desperate for (but unlikely to get) a 
world premiere for Martin Scorsese’s highly anticipated Japanese-set period 
piece Silence. Likewise Oscar-tipped dramas Manchester By the Sea (Kenneth 
Lonergan) and Snowden (Oliver Stone) are likely to be held back by their 
respective distributors until closer to the 2017 awards season.

 