
The authors of a study called High Frequency of Postcoital Penis Cleaning in 
Budongo Chimpanzees 
<http://content.karger.com/ProdukteDB/produkte.asp?Aktion=ShowAbstract&ArtikelNr=93700&Ausgabe=232007&ProduktNr=223842>
 do not beat about the bush. "We report on postcoital penis cleaning in 
chimpanzees," they write. "In penis cleaning, leaves are employed as 'napkins' 
to wipe clean the penis after sex. Alternatively, the same cleaning motion can 
be done without leaves, simply using the fingers. Not all chimpanzee 
communities studied across Africa clean their penes and, where documented, the 
behaviour is rare. By contrast, we identify postcoital penis cleaning in 
Budongo Forest, Uganda, as customary."

Sean O'Hara, a Durham University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/durhamuniversity> anthropologist (who 
has since moved to the University of Salford), and Phyllis Lee, a psychology 
professor at the University of Stirling, published their monograph in the 
journal Folia Primatologica, in 2006.

They list the few instances in which humans had documented the practice. Jane 
Goodall "mentions it in the Gombe chimpanzees, Tanzania, and leaf napkin use in 
Kibale forest, Uganda, is known ... and in 25 years of observation at Taï 
Forest, Côte d'Ivoire, 'leaf-wipe' has been recorded just once".

O'Hara and a field assistant named Monday Gideon did the Budongo detecting 
"between January and September 2003 and were able to verify 'cleaning' or 'not 
cleaning' for 116 copulations. Penis cleaning occurred in 34.5% of copulations 
(9.5% with leaf napkins and 25% without use of a tool)".

The team expresses wonder that this particular form of tool use varies so 
starkly in popularity. "For penis wiping to be common in some locations while 
rare or absent elsewhere presents a puzzle," they say.

They point out that many kinds of animals use one or another type of tool. 
They cite reports about New Caledonian crows, bottlenose dolphins, parasitoid 
wasps, capuchin monkeys, and other species. O'Hara and Lee explain that most of 
these tool-using practices are "cultural behaviours" – that is, learned from 
fellow dolphins, wasps, monkeys, or whatever.

What's especially notable here, they say, is that "few material cultural 
behaviours are conducted in asocial contexts ... Postcoital penis cleaning is 
one such activity. Although the copulatory act is, by definition, a social 
event encompassing more than one individual, the penis wiping that follows is 
solitary and self-directed".

They note the existence of hypotheses that the cleaning serves some important, 
particular function. The males do it to check for signs of sexually transmitted 
disease [STD], perhaps, or maybe to monitor some reproductive aspect of the 
females with whom they consort.

But O'Hara and Lee keep a disciplined focus on the main question: culture.

"Whatever the motivation or function", they write, "Budongo males appear more 
fastidious in penis hygiene than elsewhere. We found no proclivity for the use 
of specific leaf types; leaves appeared to be plucked non-systematically ... 
While the functional or STD context remains unclear, we suggest that using leaf 
napkins is a cultural trait in chimpanzees."

Thanks to Torbjörn Karfunkel for bringing this to my attention.

• Marc Abrahams is editor of the bimonthly Annals of Improbable Research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/research> and organiser of the Ig Nobel 
prize
 