
Life over a waterlogged mangrove swamp on the edge of the Ecuadorian city of 
Guayaquil was tough in 1978, but it didn't stop anthropologist Professor 
Caroline Moser going to live there for eight and a half months with her husband 
and two children, who were taken out of their Church of England primary in 
south London, aged eight and six, and put into a class of 70.

It was to be the first of many visits to Guayaquil, as Moser, then attached to 
the development planning unit at University College London, and now director of 
Manchester University's global urban research centre, was to chart the 
development of the community over a period of nearly 30 years.

And the recently published result of her relationship with the community is 
her book Ordinary Families, Extraordinary Lives, a study of everyday life in a 
Latin American community over three decades. The subtitle is Assets and Poverty 
Reduction in Guayaquil, 1978-2004.

Over that period, Moser returned to the slum settlement of Indio Guayas 10 
times and each time stayed for at least a month. Unlike some anthropologists, 
she didn't want to drop in and "extract information" in the way that 
multinational companies extract oil fromEcuador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador>. She wanted to live alongside the 
244 households that she studied in depth, to make friends and share their 
experiences. "I have a passion for development work," she says, "and that 
informs everything I do."

In the initial long trip, her children found school, where they learned by 
rote, very different from England. Like the other buildings in Indio Guayas, 
the school was bamboo with a corrugated iron roof. The houses were connected by 
precarious catwalks on stilts. Amoebic dysentery was rife. Residents had to 
fill up petrol drums with fresh water from a visiting tanker. "We washed in a 
plastic container and shared the contents in a particularly hot and sticky 
climate," says Moser.

Her husband, Brian Moser, worked for Granada Television and had a 
distinguished pedigree making films about tribes in remote parts of the world. 
His wife is more concerned with urban communities. "I'd done my PhD on market 
traders in Bogota, and I've since worked on drug-related violence in Jamaica 
and Guatemala," she says. "Brian and I wanted to use the model of Disappearing 
World [his TV documentary series about vanishing tribes] in an urban context, 
blending anthropology with skilled camera work."

The film was eventually made for Central Television under the title People of 
the Barrio (neighbourhood). Moser's book would take considerably longer to 
appear – and for good reason. She wanted to take a long-term perspective, 
albeit at close quarters.

Ordinary Families, Extraordinary Lives is dedicated to Emma Torres, a young 
community leader in Guayaquil in 1978, who became a close friend. She saw the 
benefit of publicity and acted as a bridge between her neighbours and the 
incomers from the UK. "She also taught me how to cook using kerosene," recalls 
Moser, who still stays with the Torres family when she returns to Indio Guayas. 
Instead of a bamboo hut, they now live in a house made of cement blocks, as do 
most of their neighbours. They have electricity, sanitation and running water.

"Materially, these families are a lot better off than they were in the 70s," 
says Moser. "Ecuador's transition from military dictatorship to democracy meant 
that politicians were prepared to offer improvements in their lifestyle in 
return for votes. Schooling has improved as well. That, in turn, has led to 
higher aspirations." When these are not met, alienation can set in. "The 
downside is the lack of employment opportunities alongside drug-related crime. 
For young men there would appear to be three options – hang on and work their 
butts off for little money; join a gang and get involved in drugs and robbery; 
or emigrate."

With the help of Torres's daughter, Lucy, Moser has tracked down some of the 
emigrants to their new lives in Barcelona. She is currently seeking funding for 
an in-depth comparative study. "Some of them have taken out dodgy mortgages on 
apartments and I want to see how the collapse of the sub-prime market has 
affected them," she says. "Until the recession, some of them were doing quite 
well. I compared the incomes of two brothers doing similar factory work. The 
one in Guayaquil is earning $62 a month and the one in Barcelona the equivalent 
of $820. But he's also sending remittance money to his family back home."

And the trauma of being transplanted from a CofE primary in the first world to 
a slum school in the third world did not affect her two sons long term. One of 
them is now an economist, working in Russia; the other is a social development 
worker for Shell. "I think the experience of living on the edge of Guayaquil 
sold him for life on issues of development," she says.

• Ordinary Families, Extraordinary Lives is published by Brookings Press of 
Washington DC at £23.90
 