
Here is an exchange that must be familiar to all parents. Father: "Come on, 
let's go for a walk!"

Child: "Hooray! I'll get my boots."

Like hell.

Maddy (aged five) was a great little walker at three, but lately she has 
devolved. Walking means dragging her feet like a zombie, accompanied by 
groaning noises which occasionally become comprehensible: I need hot chocolate. 
I can't walk. My leg is broken. I hate you.

These symptoms occur, reliably, within 100 yards of the start.

I never thought Alfred Wainwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alfred-wainwright> would be much assistance 
in such situations. He came from a different geological period; one when 
children couldn't wait to jump into a home-knitted sweater and skip up a 
fellside to eat bread and dripping in a gale. Wainwright's famous pictorial 
guides do contain some enchanting sketches of rain-sodden grey rocks, but as an 
inspiration to youth he just isn't there. That is, until now.

Cumbria Tourism has teamed up with publishers Frances Lincoln to create a CD 
of walks, all narrated by Nik Wood-Jones, the voice of Wainwright on the BBC TV 
series. Each of the eight walks can be downloaded on to an iPod, MP3 player or 
mobile phone. I suppose you could call it an iPlod, the biggest advance on 
guides to the Lakes since Father Thomas West penned the first in 1778. 
Wainwright is not around to express an opinion - he died in 1991 and his ashes 
lie scattered on Haystacks, his favourite fell - but I suppose an initiative 
that gets people enjoying Lakeland walks would have pleased the man.

I started with one of those scientific experiments journalists enjoy. I placed 
a copy of Wainwright's The Central Fells and an iPod in front of Maddy. To make 
the experiment valid, I also put in a bar of Kendal Mint Cake to act as a 
control. The result was predictable: she went for the iPod every time.

That's how we find ourselves standing in Grasmere village. Myself with map and 
Wainwright's book in hand while Maddy and my partner, Sophie, are wired up to 
iPods. We will test old and new. There is a brief tussle when I discover the 
pair of them have switched tracks: Sophie is on some yogic mantra and Maddy has 
Sweet playing Blockbuster. But once Wood-Jones is reinstated, we set off.

Helm Crag is really only an afternoon's amble, yet it was Wainwright's 
favourite walk in all the Lakes. Unfortunately for old Alfred, the iPod leaves 
him standing on basic orientation and starting directions. The startlingly 
up-to-date information on Grasmere really makes things easy, and as we swing 
out of town on Easedale Road, it is Maddy and Sophie making the early running.

After a mile, the lane takes a right and there's a choice: either follow the 
metalled track or do a quick diversion over an enticing footbridge and 
alongside Easedale Beck. I can see, plainly, on the map that this is possible, 
but the iPod pack cannot respond: heads down, brows furrowed, they are deep in 
Wood-Jones. A point to the old ways, I decide, being able to cope with 
inveterate strays like myself.

Maddy, however, has still not done the zombie thing and I daren't risk an 
altercation. Reluctantly, I abandon my detour and chase after the others. We 
start to climb now, striding up a cobbled stream bed and emerging on a 
brackened hillside. Sophie is having trouble using the rewind button while 
wearing gloves. "Did he say, 'turn right?'"

I laugh gleefully, holding up my map and book in the all-weather case. "I 
think you'll find it's left."

A little light hail begins to fall.

The rewind is found. "No, it's definitely right." We pause. A woman in Arctic 
weatherproof gear comes waltzing down from the direction Sophie has indicated.

"Well!" she calls to Maddy, "you'll be the youngest ever person to climb this 
mountain - if you beat those girls up ahead. Well done!"

The whiff of competition delivers Maddy a new lease of life. She is off up the 
steepest part of the fellside faster than a greased Wainwright, overtaking the 
other girls. "Are they five years old, Daddy?"

"Put your headphones back in."

"But it's finished."

I glance at the machine to see that she has been listening to Sweet again. 
There follows a frank discussion about mountain navigation, and we swap roles: 
Maddy assumes control of the map and book while I don the iPod, and waste 
valuable minutes finding the right track and place. When I look up, I see Maddy 
going hard for the summit. Chasing after her, I accidentally let the soundtrack 
skip on, catching Wainwright's description of the top: "The resemblance of the 
summit rocks to a lion is so striking that recognition from several viewpoints 
is instant ..."

But hang on, wasn't that near the beginning? I can't actually see the screen 
because of the sleet shower splattering on it, and anyway I hit the wrong 
button and lose the commentary altogether. Meanwhile, Maddy has abruptly run 
out of steam. When I find her, she's the familiar, sulking zombie, sprawled on 
the grassy slope below the summit, refusing to take another step.

"You'll get wet lying there."

"I want hot chocolate."

"Yes, when we get back to Grasmere."

"I want hot choccy now."

We hang there, perched on the precipice of fatherly impatience. The view is 
magnificent. Great godly legs of sunshine are striding towards us through the 
sleet. One of them squashes down in the soft meadows below, and out squirts a 
rainbow, arcing towards Calf Fell. This is one of those moments of the sublime, 
a Wordsworthian epiphany, the sort that come rarely in a lifetime.

I turn to Maddy. "OK. I bet you can't reach the top in the time it takes Sweet 
to sing Blockbuster!"

A flicker of life returns to her eyes. She jumps to her feet. Thank you, 
Wainwright. I doubt the iPod would have come on our fell walk without you. 
Sophie catches us up and we all proceed to the summit in harmony.

It is, as Wainwright claimed, a special place. The boulders don't look much 
like lions to my eyes, but their rugged outlines do make the place more 
interesting. We sit below the lion, out of the wind, and eat our sandwiches. 
After a time, we become aware of the sound of singing. There is a large party 
gathered on the lion and they seem to be about to empty a kind of urn.

"I've never seen that before," says Sophie. At that moment, someone flings a 
cloud of white ashes into the air just as a gust of wind arrives. The crowd 
cheer and the ashes disperse over the summit of Helm Crag. We remove a few 
specks of someone's grandparent from our sandwiches.

It was on the summit that the Wainwright iPod made a late bid for victory. 
Listening to the commentary, I realised there was more to enjoy up here: shapes 
of rocks and vistas to identify. Without it, I think we might have missed the 
subtler pleasures of the summit and left too soon, forgoing the very reason 
Wainwright so loved this walk.

Final results? The commentary certainly helps at the start of walks, and is a 
useful reminder for features and views en route. It doesn't replace map and 
book, of course, but it does add to the pleasure. And, as a spur to reluctant 
companions, it has real currency - even if you have to download 70s glam rock 
songs to sing on the descent.

• Wainwright: The Podcasts (£9.99, golakes.co.uk/wainwright 
<http://www.golakes.co.uk/wainwright>) and The Central Fells, by Alfred 
Wainwright (£12.99), both published by Frances Lincoln. Map for Helm Crag: The 
English Lakes South-Eastern Area OL7 (Ordnance Survey, £7.99). Until Dec 23 the 
Bridge Hotel in Buttermere (017687 70252,bridge-hotel.com 
<http://www.bridge-hotel.com>) is offering doubles from £30pp per night B&B 
(two nights minimum, £25 each additional night). Alternatively, the Grasmere 
Hostel (015394 35055,grasmerehostel.co.uk <http://www.grasmerehostel.co.uk>), a 
simple but by no means spartan independent hostel, costs £18.50 per night. 
Further information:golakes.co.uk <http://www.golakes.co.uk> and 
independenthostelguide.co.uk <http://www.independenthostelguide.co.uk>.
 