
Aitor Karanka earned his first Premier League victory but his Middlesbrough 
side were pinned back by Sunderland –before and after Cristhian Stuani’s two 
goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/21/sunderland-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
.

Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> dominated the 
opening 10 minutes with their energetic pressing in advanced positions. Jermain 
Defoe made the game’s first tackle within 10 seconds and his closing down 
invited Sunderland’s three attacking midfielders, Duncan Watmore, Lynden Gooch 
and Adnan Januzaj, to push up the pitch, disrupting Middlesbrough’s build-up 
play.

David Moyes’s side did not look comfortable in deeper positions, however. With 
players pushing up to press, the backline was exposed and Middlesbrough’s 
counterattacking speed was a constant threat. The right-back Donald Love looked 
particularly vulnerable to pace, getting himself into poor positions and beaten 
easily by both Stewart Downing and George Friend. Papy Djilobodji also 
struggled in a positional sense, which meant the departure of the captain, John 
O’Shea, the man playing between them, was a particular blow.

Middlesbrough sink Sunderland with Cristhian Stuani double
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/21/sunderland-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
Middlesbrough’s major tactic throughout the first half involved pushing their 
full-backs forward. Moyes allowed Watmore, Gooch and Januzaj freedom to switch 
positions but they often found themselves unable to sprint back to track Friend 
and Emilio Nsue, who prefers playing in a more advanced role. They attacked in 
different ways: Friend offers guile in possession and a decent left-foot 
delivery, while Nsue is about powerful runs on counterattacks. His 
determination to support the attack was obvious from the opening 10 minutes, 
when he made a storming diagonal run from his right-back position and ended up 
on the left of the attack. That is full-back movement even Pep Guardiola would 
advise against. He later made a crucial, underlapping run inside Stuani before 
peeling wide at the last moment, dragging Patrick van Aanholt away and opening 
up space for Stuani’s stunning long-range opener.

After going ahead Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> were excellent for the 
remainder of the first half, composed in possession and intelligent at slowing 
the pace of the game. With Sunderland’s intensity dropping and their pressing 
no longer obvious, Middlesbrough’s defenders passed the ball forward 
intelligently and Adam Forshaw offered incision with some clever forward 
passes, including in the build-up to Stuani’s second, which came after a 
brilliant team move and a selfless assist from Álvaro Negredo, who played the 
lone centre-forward role excellently.

Moyes’s half-time switch helped Sunderland get back into the game. Jeremain 
Lens was summoned to replace the central midfielder Paddy McNair, which meant 
Gooch dropping deeper and Sunderland essentially playing two up front, with 
Lens and Defoe a tremendously speedy strikeforce. Middlesbrough’s centre-back 
combination of Ben Gibson and Antonio Barragán dropped deeper in response, 
allowing Sunderland to build a sustained spell of pressure at the start of the 
second half. Middlesbrough’s defensive shape was surprisingly poor during this 
period, with Stuani particularly guilty of not tucking inside enough and not 
tracking runners. His direct opponent, Van Aanholt, became a considerable 
attacking force and was quickest to react to a rebound from Watmore’s shot, 
which got Sunderland back into the game.

Surprisingly, however, there was no late charge forthcoming from the home 
side. Moyes elected to substitute Watmore, who had been inconsistent with his 
end product, but his energy was driving his side forward, as Sunderland’s 
attack was based more around intensity rather than creativity. Moyes’s final 
change saw the debut of the quick young Swedish striker Joel Asoro but this did 
not provide Middlesbrough’s backline with a different challenge as Sunderland 
required more of a plan B. Moyes has been reunited with former Everton 
midfielders Jack Rodwell and Steven Pienaar at the Stadium of Light, but here 
he needed a Marouane Fellaini-type figure to provide a proper penalty box 
threat in the closing stages.
 