
Endeavour 
8pm, ITV

Debut for the fourth series of the Morse prequel. This picks up where the 
third series left off: the late 1960s, with both the young Endeavour Morse and 
mentor/sidekick Fred Thursday struggling to absorb significant departures. 
Diversion is provided via a cohort of boffins who have arrived at Lovelace 
College to develop a computing contraption. A larger number of drownings among 
the scientists than would appear coincidental suggest that bigger, darker 
interests are at play.Andrew Mueller

Dance Dance Dance 
6.30pm, ITV

The massive success of Strictly has prompted a typically ITV-ish response: a 
flashy, oldies-free competition in which the nubile stars of, among others, 
Towie, Emmerdale and JLS and their partners/friends re-enact before a panel 
some of the most famous dance routines of pop and film. In tonight’s opener, 
these include Michael Jackson’s Scream and Ed Sheeran’s Thinking Out Loud. 
Alesha Dixon presents; Ashley Banjo of Diversity fame is a kindly judge.David 
Stubbs

Walking the Americas 
8pm, Channel 4

Following in the footsteps of Bear Grylls and Bruce Parry, Levison Wood is the 
latest soldier-turned-TV adventurer. In this new series, he treks through 
Central America on foot, encountering monstrous arachnids, skulls from ancient 
human sacrifices, menacing drug gangs and much more besides. He’s a slightly 
more cheerful travelling companion than the intense Grylls, in a watchable if 
inessential slice of January escapism.Phil Harrison

Still Open All Hours 
8.30pm, BBC1

As the warm, milky sitcom sequel continues, knackered lothario Gastric (Tim 
Healy) is still having no luck with the grimly clenched Madge (Brigit Forsyth). 
David Jason’s Granville concocts a plan that has comfortingly familiar comic 
elements – ladders, silly costumes – so nobody minds if it doesn’t really make 
sense. Elsewhere, it’s a torrent of produce-based innuendo, with leeks, custard 
and bacon rind pressed into
 erotic service. Jack Seale

Sherlock 
9pm, BBC1

“What’s the very worst thing you can do to your very best friends?” As the 
fourth series of the intricately plotted global hit continues, Toby Jones gets 
to indulge his diabolical side as hiding-in-plain-sight schemer Culverton 
Smith, yet another calculating nemesis for Benedict Cumberbatch’s tetchy 
consulting tec. Will the isolated Holmes be able to rebuild his relationship 
with estranged pal Watson in time to reveal Smith’s malicious machinations?
Graeme Virtue

The Big Spell 
5pm, Sky1

Twenty extraordinarily grown-up nine- to 13-year-olds (they say brilliantly 
earnest things such as “This competition means EVERYTHING” and “It’s go big or 
go home”) take part in a contest to find the nation’s best speller, with Sue 
Perkins and the (usually very blue indeed) Joe Lycett on hosting duties. Moira 
Stuart is the show’s chief pronouncer, putting the kids through their paces, 
while Perkins keeps it all super-light, diffusing the pressure and keeping any 
tears at bay.Ben Arnold

Killing Reagan
8pm, National Geographic 

There are a couple of issues with this latest entry in Nat Geo’s Killing 
series, dramatising the murders of iconic figures from JFK to Jesus. Firstly, 
Ronald Reagan wasn’t actually killed. Secondly, it’s not very good – although 
Tim Matheson and Cynthia Nixon (as the Gipper and Nancy) are comprehensively 
out-acted by Kyle S More as John Hinckley Jr, who can’t decide whether he wants 
to kill Jodie Foster, Reagan or himself.Ali Catterall

Film choices
 A sexy, sensual and funny dance of attraction … Venus in Fur. 
Venus in Fur
(Roman Polanski, 2013) Sunday, 10.30pm, BBC4
Roman Polanski adapts David Ives’s play about a theatre director (Polanski 
lookalike Mathieu Amalric) adapting a 19th-century novel, Venus In Fur. In 
sweeps Emmanuelle Seigner’s actress Vanda, enticing in bondage kit, to 
audition: she thinks the book is “S&M porno”; he thinks it’s a bit more 
sophisticated (and deeply personal). So the stage is set for a sexy, sensual 
and funny dance of attraction; an enigmatic gender-driven power play in which 
one thing is clear: Vanda is in charge.Paul Howlett

The Witch
(Robert Eggers, 2015), 2.30pm, 10.35pm, Sky Cinema Premiere
In 17th-century New England, a devout father (Ralph Ineson) rebels against the 
puritan elders and leads his family to set up home beside a forbidding forest. 
Here they fall foul of what appears to be a horrific witch, except that much of 
the torment stems from the family’s inner lives and twisted faith, centring on 
pubescent daughter Thomasin (Anya Taylor-Joy), in a tale that springs from the 
darkest folklore.Paul Howlett

The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 1
(Francis Lawrence, 2014), 9pm, Channel 4
Jennifer Lawrence’s heroic Katniss Everdeen is whisked out of the reality show 
combat to continue the fight against vindictive President Snow’s (Donald 
Sutherland) government on the airwaves. With the weapons largely set aside, 
there’s room for cutting-edge satire, giving the likes of Julianne Moore’s 
rebel leader and Philip Seymour Hoffman’s gamesmaker a chance to shine as 
brightly as Stanley Tucci’s teeth.Paul Howlett

A Most Violent Year
(JC Chandor, 2014), 10pm, BBC2
That year is 1981, when New York hit peak crime figures. Heating oil 
businessman Abel Morales (Oscar Isaac) seeks to bury his family’s gangster past 
by going legit. But his plans hinge on acquiring a huge waterfront site where 
hijacking wiseguys hold sway, while his wife Anna (Jessica Chastain), prefers 
the older, more ruthless methods (she’s a crime boss’s daughter, after all). 
Marital tensions, murky politics and gangland violence play out compellingly.
Paul Howlett

Live sport

FA Cup Football: Liverpool v Plymouth Argyle 1pm, BT Sport 2
The third-round clash from Anfield (kick-off 1.30pm).

Premiership Rugby: Wasps v Leicester Tigers 2.30pm, BT Sport 1
The stuttering, Cockerill-less Tigers face title-chasing Wasps.

FA Cup Football: Tottenham Hotspur v Aston Villa 3.35pm, BBC1
A third-round tie at White Hart Lane (kick-off 4pm).
 