
Sherlock 
9pm, BBC1

Following last week’s shocking familial revelations – not to mention the 
brilliantly grotesque turn from Toby Jones as the “dangerous and despicable” 
Culverton Smith – the reunitedSherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> and Watson wind up series 
four with a most daunting challenge, when a threat that they believed to have 
been long consigned to the past makes a worrisome return. As far as dastardly 
criminal long games go, this one looks to take some beating.Ben Arnold

John Berger: The Art of Looking 
11.30pm, BBC4

This superb film was first broadcast in November, on the occasion of Berger’s 
90th birthday, and is being repeated by way of mourning the fact that it proved 
to be the art critic’s last. The film hinges on Berger’s delight on being able 
to see properly again, following surgery to remove cataracts; for someone who 
gave so much thought to what we absorb through our eyes, it was an opportunity 
to be astonished all over again.Andrew Mueller

Call The Midwife: The Casebook 
5.05pm, BBC1

In a series curtain raiser, the very actorly Stephen McGann, AKA Dr Patrick 
Turner, goes in search of the “real stories behind Call The Midwife”. As we see 
photographs of shocking deprivation taken in Liverpool, it’s a stark reminder 
of how the Britain of the 1950s and 60s was a completely different world. There 
are lighthearted moments too, though. Midwife Eleanor Stewart on how trainees 
would huddle around beds to view births: “Can you all see, girls?”Jonathan 
Wright

Endeavour 
8pm, ITV

Another outing for the enjoyable Young Morse drama, now in 1967. Tonight, the 
independent arrival in Oxford of decency campaigner Joy Pettybon and a rock 
group, the Wildwood, coincides with the death of a young bricklayer’s mate. 
Great stuff from Roger Allam and Shaun Evans as the show blends 60s and 70s 
themes with stylish spirit. Good luck to the (fictional) Wildwood for their US 
tour with the Kinks; in real life the Kinks would be banned there until 1969.
John Robinson

Thailand: Earth’s Tropical Paradise 
9pm, BBC2

Last trip to sample the wildlife in the south-east Asian kingdom. Tonight we 
visit northern Thailand, where whitewater streams bleed through vast 
mountainous woodland, offering shelter to some of nature’s rarest creatures. As 
viewers of Planet Earth II will know, racer snakes are a formidable threat to 
any potential prey. Their presence in subterranean caverns offers one example 
of how challenging life is for the region’s wildlife.Mark Gibbings-Jones

Sea of Hope: America’s Underwater Treasure 
7pm, Nat Geo Wild 

A tour of the oceans in the company of conservationist Sylvia Earle, whose 
efforts to safeguard marine biodiversity become more urgent with every passing 
year. Earle campaigns for US waters to include areas protected from 
overfishing. As she puts pressure on presidents – Barack Obama is persuaded to 
visit Hawaii and expand the reserve there – and educates kids, sparkling 
underwater photography illustrates what’s at stake.Jack Seale

Freddie Down Under 
8pm, Sky1

Early on in this new series, the voiceover admits that the premise is 
“paper-thin”. And this pre-emptive mea culpa is borne out in spades. The idea 
is that cricketer-turned-banter merchant Andrew Flintoff will reprise his 
mobile chippy project, only in Oz, offering barbecued meat. But not much meat 
is cooked in this opener; instead, Flintoff joshes with travelling companion 
Rob Penn, tries cattle mustering and generally behaves like the bluff overgrown 
schoolboy he is.Phil Harrison

Film choice

The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey

 Majestic … The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey. Photograph: AP 
(Peter Jackson, 2012) Sunday, 6.45pm, ITV2
Peter Jackson’s companion piece to the epicest-of-epics The Lord of the Rings 
gives Tolkien’s smaller, lighter novel a similarly majestic treatment. This 
first part of the trilogy launches another heroic quest, with good wizard 
Gandalf (Ian McKellen) sending Martin Freeman’s modestly heroic hobbit Bilbo 
and a band of bad-tempered dwarves (led by Richard Armitage’s mighty but 
miserable Thorin) to recover the lost kingdom of Erebor, which is now ruled by 
Smaug the dragon. And of course, the ‘orrible Orcs are back…Paul Howlett

Get Carter
(Mike Hodges, 1971), 10.05pm, TCM
Still the guvnor of British gangster films, Michael Caine’s impassive, amoral 
Jack Carter – a very ’eavy London ’ood who goes up to Newcastle to sort out his 
brother’s killers – is now raised to the status of screen icon. The dour 
locations are matched by the hard faces – John Osborne, Ian Hendry, George 
Sewell – in a stark, seminal thriller.Paul Howlett

Poetry
(Lee Chang-dong, 2010), 1.10am, Film4
There’s a poetic sensibility to Korean director Lee Chang-dong’s quietly 
enchanting drama. It centres on a luminous performance by Yoon Jeong-hie as 
Mi-ja, a grandmother looking after her troubled grandson. But two discoveries 
fracture her life: a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s and the appearance of a teenage 
girl’s body in the river, with whom Mi-ja has a tragic connection.Paul Howlett

8½
(Federico Fellini, 1963), 1.15am, Sky Arts
As a director inclined to share his life with his audience, this is Fellini’s 
most explicitly autobiographical work. His favourite leading man, Marcello 
Mastroianni, plays an anguished director “trying to pull together the pieces of 
his life and make sense of them,” as Fellini once explained. It’s an exotic 
meld of fact and fantasy that won Fellini a best foreign film Oscar.Paul Howlett

Today’s best live sport

ODI Cricket: India v England 7.30am, Sky Sports 2 First of three one-day 
matches.

Snooker: The Masters, 1pm, BBC2 Six-time winner Ronnie O’Sullivan takes on 
Liang Wenbo in the opening last-16 match.

Darts: BDO World Championships, 4pm, BT Sport 1; 4.15pm, Channel 4 The men’s 
final, from the Lakeside Country Club.

Australian Open Tennis 12midnight, Eurosport 1 Opening day coverage.
 