
Soup <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/soup> is always in season. In 
winter, warming and hearty; in high summer, chilled and refreshing (or, should 
the weather let you down, heated up to be warming and hearty again). Whatever 
the season, making soup is always worthwhile. And at this time of year it's 
particularly flexible and fun – a melting pot for the very best early-summer 
produce.

Proportions needn't – shouldn't – be exact. Just grab plenty of what's good 
and fresh, such as delicious new broad beans, sweet, earthy potatoes or 
handfuls of parsley, and muddle together without worrying too much about 
precise quantities.

That doesn't mean being slap-dash and using second-rate or sad ingredients: 
always use top-quality veg. Take care with your soup's base – the liquor in 
which you simmer the other ingredients – and the finishing swirls, sprinkles 
and seasonings, and you'll produce something not merely good, but outstanding.

Many soups are built on chicken stock – savoury and flavoursome enough to give 
body and depth without being too assertive. Other meat stocks have their place, 
but can overwhelm lighter ingredients such as herbs or summer vegetables. My 
standard chicken stock method is given below. All I'd add is that, if possible, 
make stock with more than one chicken carcass, increasing the veg quotient, too 
(you can freeze carcasses, saving them for a stock-making session). For the 
same, minimal amount of work, you'll get two or three times as much delicious 
liquor. It freezes well and, once you've got a hoard stashed, you can make soup 
at a moment's notice.

A light fish stock can also be put into service for summer soups. If made with 
very fresh fish trimmings, aromatic veg and herbs, and simmered lightly for 
just half an hour or so, it makes a subtle liquor that will contribute little 
or no "fishy" flavour to the finished dish, just a winning, well-seasoned base.

Sometimes I prefer a vegetable stock for summer soups, particularly when using 
delicate veg such as peas and beans. I'm no stranger to stock cubes and 
granules, and these can save the day when you're in a hurry (my favourite is
Kallo's yeast-free organic 
<http://www.saykallo.com/products/stocks-and-gravy/stock-pots-stock-cubes-/yeast-free-vegetable-stock-cubes>
). But a homemade veg stock is more subtle and complex, and also very easy. 
Make a good, speedy one by coarsely grating an onion, a carrot, a celery stick 
and a garlic clove, frying them in a little oil with a few peppercorns, a 
couple of bay leaves and some thyme, then adding a splash of white wine, 
covering with boiling water, simmering for 10 minutes or so, then straining.

When it comes to finishing your soups, be bold. It's amazing how a shot of 
high flavour can bring the bowl alive: punchy herbs, shards of fried garlic, 
crisp bacon, gratings of pungent cheese, a shake of paprika or cayenne, 
garlicky croutons, little chunks of fruit (grapes or melon, say), preserved 
lemon rind. All are good cushioned on a swirl of something rich – a spiral of 
cream, a blob of yoghurt, a trickle of virgin oil.

View your soup as a trinity of sound seasonal alchemy: base, bulk and bits on 
top. If they all get love and attention, you can't go wrong.

Spring onion and new potato soup with chorizo

This soup has few ingredients, so be sure they're top-notch. Serves four.

For the chicken stock
1 roast chicken carcass 
1-2 peeled onions, roughly chopped
1-2 large carrots, roughly chopped
3-4 celery sticks, roughly chopped
½ large leek, roughly chopped
A few black peppercorns
2 bay leaves
1 sprig fresh thyme (optional)

For the soup
350g very fresh new potatoes, cleaned and cut into small dice
250-300g spring onions (ie, about 2 bunches-worth)
1 tbsp olive oil
150g chorizo (or bacon), diced
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Tear the chicken carcass into fairly small pieces and cram into a large pot 
with any skin, bones, fat, jelly or burnt bits from the roasting tin, and all 
the stock vegetables, peppercorns and herbs. Add enough water just to cover 
everything – you should need no more than 1.5 litres – bring to a very low 
simmer and cook, uncovered, for about three hours. If need be, top up the water 
once or twice. Strain the stock through a fine sieve – you should have about a 
litre of it – and leave to cool. Skim off excess fat, then chill or freeze.

To make the soup, put a litre of chicken stock into a large saucepan and bring 
to a simmer. Add the diced potatoes and return the broth to a simmer. After 
four minutes, add the spring onions and cook gently for two to three minutes 
more, until the potatoes are nicely done.

Meanwhile, heat the oil in a small frying pan over a medium heat. Add the 
chorizo and fry until crisp.

Season the soup, then ladle into bowls. Top each serving with a spoonful of 
hot chorizo and a trickle of oil from the pan.

White bean soup with new-season garlic and parsley

New-season or "green" garlic is harvested when the cloves are still tender and 
barely formed, and their skin still soft. It's milder than later-season garlic. 
If you've got really nice young bulbs, simply peel away the outer skin, then 
slice whole, like leeks. More mature examples will have tougher skins, which 
are best removed: just slice off the bulb's top and base, and remove the tender 
cloves one by one. If you can't get new-season garlic, use six to eight cloves 
of mature garlic. Serves four.

6 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
2 whole bulbs new-season garlic, peeled and thinly sliced
1,200g canned white beans (ie, 3 tins), such as cannellini, drained
500ml chicken or vegetable stock
1-2 bay leaves
1 sprig fresh thyme (optional)
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 medium bunch flat-leaf parsley, leaves picked and roughly chopped

Heat two tablespoons of the oil in a large pan over a low heat. Add half the 
thinly sliced garlic and let it sweat very gently for a minute or two, until it 
just starts to colour. Add the drained beans and enough stock just to cover 
them (top up with water if necessary). Add the bay and thyme (if using), bring 
to a simmer and cook for five minutes.

With a slotted spoon, scoop half the beans, and any garlic that comes with 
them, into a bowl; take out the bay and thyme, too. Use a stick blender to 
puree the beans and liquid left in the pan. Return the reserved beans and heat 
gently. Season to taste, then stir in most of the parsley.

Heat the remaining oil in a small pan over a low heat and add the rest of the 
sliced garlic. Cook as before, very gently, until it starts to turn golden, 
then remove from the heat.

Ladle the soup into bowls, spoon some garlic and its oil over each serving, 
and finish with a scattering of yet more parsley.

Broad bean and lettuce soup
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's broad bean and lettuce soup: Light but 
satisfying. Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
This gorgeous green bowlful is light but satisfying. Skinning the beans takes 
time, but is worth it to get the best taste and texture. Serves four.

500g podded broad beans (around 1.5kg in the pod)
1 tbsp extra-virgin olive or rapeseed oil, plus extra to serve
1 knob butter
1 onion, peeled and chopped
2 tender inner stems of celery, thinly sliced
1 garlic clove, peeled and sliced
500ml light vegetable stock
2 large little gem lettuces, shredded
2 tbsp double cream, plus a little more to serve
Sea salt and black pepper
About 1 tsp chopped thyme, to serve

Bring a saucepan of water to a boil, add the beans, cook for four to five 
minutes, then drain in a colander. When cool enough to handle, slip all the 
beans out of their papery skins. As you work, put a third of them – the 
smallest ones – in a separate bowl.

Heat the oil and butter in a large saucepan over a medium-low heat. Add the 
onion, celery and garlic, cover and sweat for 10 minutes. Add the stock, cover 
again and simmer for 10 minutes or so, until the veg are soft, then add the 
lettuce and simmer for five minutes more, until it has wilted. Remove from the 
heat, add the larger broad beans and puree. Stir in two tablespoons of cream 
and season to taste.

Reheat the soup gently if necessary, then ladle into warmed bowls. Swirl a 
little more cream over each serving, then drop the reserved small beans over 
the top – the soup should be just thick enough to stop them sinking. Dust with 
a little thyme and serve.

• For the latest news from River Cottage HQ, go to rivercottage.net 
<http://www.rivercottage.net>.
 