
The present cold snap means many of us will be turning the heating up to full 
blast, only to receive a nasty shock when the bill comes in.

But, if you want to keep the costs down, now is the time to consider switching 
your gas or electricity supplier.

Apathy is the main reason why many people don't bother. Gas and electricity 
companies offer a range of confusing tariffs and there are wide variations in 
price. They often try and market their services through door to door salesmen, 
an unsophisticated and off-putting method for many people. And, consumer advice 
and guidance has to date been in relatively short supply.

Competition in the utilities market is relatively new - the market was only 
opened up in May 1999. But by June of last year one in four electricity 
customers decided to switch suppliers and the results have only just been 
analysed by the National Audit Office.

It says the 6.5 million customers who had changed their electricity supplier 
by June 2000 will have seen their bills fall by £299 million since the start of 
competition. This is a 15% reduction in real terms, an average of £45 a 
customer.

But, even those who have not switched may still have experience savings since 
the regulator imposed price caps, which meant some bills fell. That said, there 
are still around 15.4 million customers who have not seen any reductions.

Although the market is now far better, many people continue to receive a poor 
deal.

"There is scope for the benefits to be spread wider," admitted the National 
Audit Office's head, Sir John Bourn, and he urged Ofgem and the newly set up 
consumers' watchdog, Energywatch, to do more to educate the public.

But, just by shopping around, it is possible to find out if you can obtain 
cheaper supplies. The websiteUnravelit.com <http://www.unravelit.com> allows 
consumers to check out all the suppliers in the market and its data and 
analysis is used by Ofgem.

Once an alternative supplier is provided, it is possible to sign up online. 
CEO Joe Malinowski admits that switching can appear complex on the surface.

First of all, customers need to decide what type of product they want based on 
whether they are a low, medium or high user. Then they need to look at payment 
options such as standard billing, direct debit or prepayment meters.

These have a major impact on any savings and once assessed, Unravelit will 
calculate savings and produce a list of products matched to preferences. The 
site contains over 5,000 gas, electricity and duel fuel tariffs ranked 
according to region, payment method and product features.

There are now 23 companies selling gas and 16 selling electricity, and prices 
fluctuate. Eastern Electricity, for example, was one of the cheapest in the 
market, but has recently hiked its prices.

British Gas, a company which was far more expensive than most of the others, 
is now on a par in some cases since it has been forced to cut its tariffs 
substantially.

Apart from price, there are other reasons why someone might want to move from 
their existing power supplier. There are also a range of so-called affinity 
group deals on the market, but these are not necessarily cheaper. There are 
also environmental energy products such as Equigas, a link-up between Southern 
Electric Gas and the Christian organisation, Ebico.

Some offer incentives such as Amerada, which provides air miles, while 
Norweb's deal with Tesco gives clubcard points for each £1 spent on gas or 
electricity.

It looks as if energy consumers are in for a better deal; Ofgem has been told 
to tighten up on service standards. To switch companies you generally need to 
give four weeks notice. But, there have been cases where the wait has been 
longer and where literature regarding tariffs have been misleading.

However, it seems the worst off will continue to lose out. The National Audit 
Office admits that those with pre-pay meters tend to receive worse deals. This 
is because the meters are costly for the energy companies to set up and 
administer and those who have to use these tend to be poorer and without bank 
accounts.

Unravelit.com has provided the following examples of pricing variations:

Electricity - London Region
 Potential savings for a Medium user (using around 3,300kWh annually) paying 
by standard credit (normal billing) with a bill of £247 with London Electricity

Supplier  (Saving) 
Npower (£24)
Southern Electric  (£21) 
Basicpower  (£19) 
Seeboard Energy  (£18) 
 Northern Electric & Gas (£16) 
Norweb Energi  (£15)

Gas
 Potential savings for a Medium user (using around 12,300kWh annually) paying 
by standard credit with a bill of £317 with British Gas

Supplier  (Saving)
 Amerada  (£67)
Powergen  (£63) 
Yorkshire Electricity (£55) 
Eastern Energy  (£54) 
Cambridge Gas  (£48) 
 London Electricity (£45)
 