
In a nutshell 


A watery world of lakes, lagoons and marsh linked by flat paths, where 180 
species of birds have been seen. It’s vibrant in spring and summer with chicks 
galore, the pond ripe for dipping and meadows bright with flowers and insects, 
but autumn and winter have their own appeal. Stroll around the main lake and 
duck into one of the six hides to admire wintering fowl in weak sunlight. It 
can feel like you have the place to yourself.

Fun fact 


A bomb disposal unit had to be called out when an unexploded second world war 
bomb was discovered during the development of the site.
 There are birds from all over the world at the centre. Photograph: Duncan 
Eames 
Best thing about it?


There are birds from all over the world, but the biggest crowds gather for the 
two playful Asian short-clawed otters at feeding time. Little human creatures 
will no doubt find the adventure playground with its water vole tunnels a 
highlight.

What about lunch?


This column’s regular bugbear, the options are uninspiring and pricey: mains 
£8.95, kids’ meals £4.25, tea £2.05. My usual advice stands: bring a packed 
lunch. There’s no shortage of picnic spots.
 Children’s play area at the centre. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Exit through the gift shop? 


There’s no escape on the way out but plenty of educational and 
environment-related toys, kits and books.

Value for money? 


On a dry day you can spend a good few hours here. The discovery centre, with 
interactive exhibits, is good on a rainy day but not worth the entry price 
alone: adult £11.91, child £6.55, family £33.27 (more with gift aid). Annual 
membership is a reasonable £64 and covers all nine UK wetland centres.
 Two boys in the discovery centre. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Opening hours


9.30am-5pm (6pm in summer) daily, except 25 December.

Verdict 


It’s a small miracle to find 105 wildlife-rich protected acres in this city. 
For that it deserves support. 10/10.
• wwt.org.uk <http://www.wwt.org.uk/wetland-centres/london/>
 