
The lives of millions of people in Britain are so precarious that a third of 
families would have trouble finding £500 for an emergency bill. With average 
wages still below where they were eight years ago, it’s hardly surprising so 
many people, particularly the young, struggle to make ends meet. But there are 
a string of smartphone apps that could make the task of staying in the black 
that little bit easier.

They all claim to be simple to use, and are not just for geeks. They track 
your spending closely and alert you when you’re going wrong, with some claiming 
to save you thousands. Unfortunately, they aren’t all free – so your budget may 
have to include spending oney on an app. But are they worth using? Guardian 
Money put them to the test.

You Need A Budget <https://www.youneedabudget.com/> (YNAB) 
There’s quite a buzz about YNAB in tech circles, with plenty of “lifehacker” 
articles tipping it as the standout budget app. YNAB makes the bold claim that 
after nine months the average user will have saved more than $3,300 (around 
£2,326).

YNAB is a digital take on the concept of having pots of money for different 
things. Its mantra is “give every dollar a job” (it is American but you get the 
option to work in pounds). Users divide their income into separate pots, such 
as rent or groceries, when they get paid, and every pound is accounted for. If 
you over- or under-spend in an area you can move money to another pot.

YNAB also encourages users to save money each month for larger expenses such 
as car insurance or birthday gifts.

However, it isn’t free. It costs $5 (around £3.50) a month or $50 (£35) a year 
with a 34-day free trial. Nor is it, strictly speaking, an app: it is desktop 
software with an iOS or Android smartphone app running alongside it. But the 
phone app is handy to keep track of spending while you’re out and about.

Goodbudget <https://goodbudget.com/> 
Previously called the Easy Envelope Budget Aid, Goodbudget is another app 
based on the “envelope budgeting method” – dividing your cash into pots of 
money for different things.

You can check your envelope balances as well as your bank balances, and 
expense tracking is also available. Envelopes and balances can be synched 
between different devices and other people – useful to work out the household 
budget with your other half.

There’s a free version of Goodbudget and a “Plus” version with more features 
for $5 (£3.50) a month. It’s available for iOS, Android and desktop.

Wally claims to offer a 360-degree view of your money, tracking what comes in, 
what goes out and what you have budgeted

OnTrees <https://www.ontrees.com/> 
Bought by financial website MoneySuperMarket in 2014, the app, or desktop 
version, lets you view all your bank accounts from different providers in one 
place with one login. It’s a read-only service, which means it cannot be used 
to move money in or out of accounts.

Unlike YNAB, which is focused on planning ahead and recording every penny you 
spend, OnTrees concentrates on where your money has gone. You don’t have to 
enter transactions manually as it sorts your bank and credit card transactions 
into categories.

OnTrees is free but only available for desktop and iOS. Developers are working 
on Android and Windows apps.

Wally <http://wally.me/> 
This is another app with rave reviews. Its developers claim the free app 
offers a “360-degree view” of your money, tracking what comes in, what goes 
out, what you have saved and what you have budgeted.

Wally also works with smartphone location services to track where you’re 
spending your money. Another feature is the ability to photograph your receipts 
to update your spending and expenses.

Notifications will remind you of upcoming payments and when you have reached a 
savings goal.

Wally is available for iOS and Android, but there’s no desktop version.

Money Dashboard <https://www.moneydashboard.com/> 
Another app that shows you all your account balances in one place. Like 
OnTrees, you need to enter your bank login details for the software to read 
your bank statements. This may make some users uncomfortable, although the 
application is read-only so no payments, withdrawals or transfers can be made 
from accounts.

Once each account is linked to Money Dashboard your transaction types will be 
automatically grouped and categorised into various tags, such as electricity 
and food. It claims that “with a clearer view of how, when and where you’re 
spending your money you’ll be in a better position to organise your finances 
more effectively”.

Money Dashboard is free and available for Android and iOS.

Halifax Balance Extra <http://www.halifax.co.uk/bankaccounts/> 
This isn’t an app but a feature available to Halifax current account customers.

It provides a simple view of the money customers have available to them before 
their next payday by deducting forecasted payments, such as standing orders and 
direct debits alongside pending transactions.

For example, if you were paid a salary of £2,000 each month but had a £800 
mortgage, £100 council tax bill and £100 energy bill to come out, Balance Extra 
would calculate you had £1,000 left to spend before your next payday.

Food for thought

You can also use apps to shop for your groceries, saving money or even earning 
cashback in the process.

Money-saving sites 
The Mysupermarket 
<http://www.mysupermarket.co.uk/cleancontent/landingpages/landingpage/mobilelandingpage>
 app lists prices from Sainsbury’s, Aldi, Waitrose, Tesco, Ocado, Asda, Iceland 
and Morrisons. You can scan products by their barcodes to find out where they 
are cheapest, check product prices and find out where your basket would be 
cheapest overall.

There’s a grocery section on the app for deal-sharing community HotUKDeals 
<http://www.hotukdeals.com/groceries/deals/hot>, which allows its 1.4 million 
members to share information about bargains. You can search for products, 
scroll through posts and sign up for keyword alerts for specific items. To make 
the biggest savings, sign up for keyword alerts on pricier items such as meat, 
fish and alcohol.

Cashback sites 
Some apps let you earn cashback by taking a photo of your supermarket receipt. 
WithTopCashback’s <https://www.topcashback.co.uk/app> Snap & Save app you buy 
an item, upload a photo of your receipt and the cashback (advertising 
commission paid to the site by the retailer) will be credited to your account.

Quidco <http://www.quidco.com/clicksnap/app/> is similar, though there is an 
option to activate personalised offers. With the ClickSnap app, when you go to 
a store and buy a featured product you upload the receipt to earn money back. 
Alternatively, you pick a supermarket, share that choice with the app and buy 
featured products online.

Shopitize <https://www.shopitize.com/help/get-the-app>, meanwhile, allows you 
to earn money when buying certain brands. You browse the offers, unlock them by 
answering consumer-focused questions, do your shopping then scan and upload the 
barcodes and your receipt to earn cashback.
 