
The furore surrounding Lord Levy's tax payments has put the spotlight on how 
individuals can legally limit their tax burdens. The average, law-abiding UK 
punter can use offshore accounts to help with tax planning and make their 
investing more tax efficient, provided some caveats are taken into account.

Whatever the mythology of secret Swiss bank accounts, offshore does not spell 
tax evasion. Craig Wetton, chief executive of independent financial advisers 
Chartwell Asset Management, says: "The whole point of offshore investing is 
that you can defer paying tax, not avoid paying it forever. If you think that 
you can put the money overseas and never have to declare it, you are on to very 
dodgy ground. You declare these investments in the same way as any other."

In other words, on savings accounts you will have to pay the tax at some point 
in the future and with investment bonds you will have to pay the tax upon 
encashment.

Because you can roll over tax obligations, offshore accounts are used for tax 
planning purposes, mainly by higher rate tax payers who have already used up 
their tax allowances on their UK investments.

Clever planning means you can roll over your tax obligations into a year when 
you are not using your full capital gains tax allowance and so avoid paying 
capital gains tax, or if you are a higher rate income tax payer, you can defer 
some income tax liability until you retire, when you may fall into the basic 
rate payer category.

Lower rate payers can also make use of the tax advantages: you can offset your 
tax allowance against offshore bonds, as payouts are gross and not net as with 
their UK equivalents.

The best rates on £10,000 with instant access to your cash are offered by 
Skipton Guernsey, whose Guernsey Access account pays 6.25% gross, although 
there is a minimum withdrawal of £500, and Cheshire Guernsey which is offering 
5.85% gross on its Offshore Access account, this time with a minimum withdrawal 
of £1,000. Interest is paid annually in both cases.

If you want a higher rate but will not need to get hold of your money so 
quickly, the Anglo Irish Bank, based on the Isle of Man, is offering 6.55% 
gross on its Privilege account which has a nine day notice period.

But there are potential pitfalls. Wetton says that you should stick with the 
familiar: "Everyone has heard of Jersey and Guernsey, but who knows where the 
Dutch Antilles are?

It also makes sense to go for a brand name you know from the UK high street. 
Most building societies and some banks have offshore divisions."

If you do want to invest further afield, you should try to pick a country 
which has tight financial regulation, such as Bermuda.

Halifax has two international operations, one in the Isle of Man which caters 
for UK-based customers and one in Jersey for ex-pat customers, the majority of 
whom are resident in Saudi Arabia or Spain.

David Wilkinson, business operations manager for Halifax Isle of Man, says: 
"Our UK customers tend to be fairly high net-worth individuals who have already 
exhausted their tax planning possibilities onshore." The average investment is 
£20,000-£30,000 and if customers chose to roll over their tax liability until 
the next tax year, this can save them hundreds of pounds.

And if you want to hold a dollar or euro account, the Isle of Man operation is 
the only part of Halifax offering this.

"These are still niche products, but people use them if they tend to travel 
abroad frequently, or if they work for foreign companies and are paid in 
dollars or simply because they want to pay the currency rate game: for the 
first time I can remember the US Federal Reserve rate (currently at 6.35%) is 
higher than UK bank base rates," says Wilkinson.

But the most effective way of putting your money offshore is to take yourself 
with it: spend all but 90 days of the year abroad and you will not be eligible 
for the UK's high rates at all.

Cheshire Guernsey 01481-726-885, Anglo Irish Bank (IoM) 01624-625508, Skipton 
Guernsey 01481-727374.

 Controversy: Lord Levy's tax payments have caused comment
 