
In a nutshell


It calls itself “the world’s first submarium”, but that’s a made-up word. It 
is, in fact, a huge and very impressive charitable public aquarium, in a 
landmark building on the point where theHull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> and Humber rivers meet. Sections 
such as Endless Ocean and Amazon Flooded Forest are home to 3,500 sea 
creatures, including seven kinds of shark. Touchpool sessions throughout the 
day are led by engaging keepers happy to talk about crab poo and similar 
savoury topics. The Lagoon of Light exhibit is closed for refurbishment until 
February (as part of the general sprucing up for City of Culture year) but 
there’s plenty more to see – with maybe less of a crowd.

Fun fact(s)


The Deep’s tanks contain 2.5m litres of water and 87 tonnes of salt.
 A Gentoo penguin. 
Best thing about it


Fish can be beautiful (tropical species), ugly (deep-sea horrors) or scary 
(sharks), but it’s hard to relate to them. Children are all fascinated, 
however, by the Kingdom of Ice and its colony of Gentoo penguins (with names 
like Brian and Nessie), which can be viewed from the landward side, or at their 
graceful best under water. We worried about a couple of miserable-looking ones, 
but a keeper explained that they were moulting (itchy, and bored because they 
can’t swim in that state). Chicks born this summer are now half-grown but 
playful.

What about lunch? 


At the top of The Deep, with great estuary views, Castaways Cafe does 
crowd-pleasers, such as fish and chips, chilli, or pasta bake from about £5. Or 
come early for breakfast (five items £5, until 11.30am), or beans on toast for 
£2.
 Shark tank. 
Exit through the gift shop?


Not exactly but it is hard to avoid as you leave.

Value for money?


Adult £10.80 online (£12 at the door), 3-15 years £9 (£10) but the ticket 
gives free entry for a year. Small children may start to flag, but interested 
over-10s could probably stay longer than the recommended two-to-three hours.

Opening hours


Open daily 10am-6pm, closed Christmas Eve and Christmas Day

Getting there

The Deep is a 20-minute walk from Hull’s Paragon Station, or take Simplibus 16 
from the bus station next door.

Verdict

 8/10

• thedeep.co.uk <https://www.thedeep.co.uk/about-the-deep>
 