
In a nutshell 
A tunnel of changing coloured lights leads to a gallery where dry ice billows, 
waves bounce, mist flows and materials are tested at the Chemical Bar. This new 
permanent feature in the popular Kensington museum has 50 interactive exhibits, 
with staff to explain the science and get kids involved. Regular live shows 
(included) demonstrate the science behind rockets, explosions and other noisy, 
messy phenomena.

Fun fact
The tesla coil used in the regular electricity demonstrations discharges 
lightning at one million volts. In comparison, the mains electricity in UK 
homes is 240 volts.
 Experiments at the Chemistry Bar in Wonderlab 
Best thing about it 
The variety. My son zipped about like a pinball between the displays, making 
spiky crystals out of magnetic liquid, watching ice form under a magnifying 
glass, winching himself up on a pulley system, testing friction on slides and 
more. Even maths is fun here as children create patterns and solve puzzles. 
It’s a teacher’s dream – and parents will enjoy it as much as their children.

What about lunch? 
Serving food is a way for free museums to make money, so don’t expect cheap. 
At the Energy Cafe – one of three places to eat in the main museum – a 
margherita pizza was £9.95, salad plate £6.95, kids’ box £4.95 and cake £3.95. 
That’s if you make it past the Shake Bar, an ice-cream parlour by Wonderlab, 
probably a bigger magnet for kids than any of those in the gallery. Again, it’s 
not cheap: one scoop of ice-cream is £3.60, two £4.50; a milkshake is £3.35.
 Flash Bang Whallop show in the Wonderlab auditorium 
Exit through the gift shop?
There’s a small selection of gifts just outside Wonderlab. I caved in to a 
pocket money toy there to avert my six-year-old’s attention from the much 
bigger shop on the ground floor.

Value for money? 
If you can go twice or more, an annual pass is good value. Day pass £17.50 for 
a family of three (annual £30); £22.50 for four (annual £39). We spent four 
hours there, with a break for lunch.

Getting there
The museum is a five-minute walk from South Kensington tube station.

Opening hours
10am-7pm.

Verdict 10/10
• sciencemuseum.org.uk <https://www.beta.sciencemuseum.org.uk/wonderlab>
 