
Cake culture is killing us. The faculty of dental surgery at the Royal College 
of Surgeons has claimed thatsugary office-based snacking is contributing to an 
epidemic of obesity and poor oral health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/let-them-eat-nuts-dentists-want-office-cake-culture-to-end-in-2017>
 in this country.

However, its suggestions – such as eating sugar only at lunchtime and doling 
out birthday cake only on Fridays – seem like half-measures. If you’re 
determined to avoid office cake, here are your options.

1 Fake an intolerance

The easiest way to refuse cake in the office is to say that you’ve gone 
gluten-free 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/25/gluten-free-diet-life-saving-fad>
. However, this has its drawbacks: people will either start to bring in “free 
from” cakes just for you or they will shun you for being a fun-hating grump. So 
say you’re coeliac instead. Not only does it sound serious, but you might also 
be able to convince them that it’s contagious, and they’ll leave you to work in 
peace.

2 Start a new birthday tradition

On your birthday, why not set an example for your colleagues by bringing in 
some unwashed carrots and a pile of flaxseed? “Why aren’t you eating any?” you 
can shout at your co-workers. “Aren’t you happy that it’s my birthday? Kevin, 
try this flaxseed. It tastes better if you mix it with saliva.”

Let them eat nuts: dentists want office 'cake culture' to end in 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/let-them-eat-nuts-dentists-want-office-cake-culture-to-end-in-2017>
3 Get a new job

If cake culture is ruining your health, then don’t be afraid to up sticks and 
change career. Maybe the Anti-Flour League has a position going. Or perhaps the 
charity Butter is Bullshit wants a new social-media coordinator. Have you 
enquired at the dental surgery faculty at the Royal College of Surgeons? You 
may find that everyone there is gaunt and unhappy, but it sounds like your kind 
of deal.

4 Eat so much cake that you die

This one is a bit drastic, but bear with me. Whenever someone brings cake into 
the office, grab as much of it as you can and force it into your mouth in front 
of everyone. Eventually, if you combine it with a total lack of exercise, this 
will cause your heart to give up, and you’ll collapse to the floor covered in 
icing, and your colleagues will forever equate brightly coloured celebration 
treats with the harrowing memory of your death. Congratulations – you have 
saved their lives.

5 Work from home

If you don’t have an office to go to, you’ll never be invited for cake. But 
it’s OK. You’ve got three coconut Quality Streets left over from Christmas and 
a slice of bread that you can ball up and stick a candle in if you want to 
pretend it’s someone’s birthday. God, you’re lonely. But you’re also thin, so 
that’s something.
 