
The wow factor in the field of play

Flick your eyes across to an analogue clock and you’ll sometimes find that the 
second hand seems to stand still. Neuroscientists call this the “stopped clock 
illusion” and use it to prove how unreliable our perception of time can be. 
There was a fine example of a similar phenomenon at the Waca last weekend, at a 
quarter past two in the afternoon, when David Warner knocked the ball down to 
the off side and started out on a quick single. Temba Bavuma came sprinting in 
from point. He took 10 strides, dived, gathered the ball in his right hand, 
fell, and, all four limbs in the air,threw at the stumps 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qDWnknH1_yg>. The entire scene took three 
seconds, the key piece of the action, Bavuma’s pick up and throw, around two 
10ths of one of them.

It all unfolded so fast that at first no one seemed to quite realise what had 
happened. “Some great athletes,” wrote David Remnick, “experience a round, a 
play, even an entire contest, in slow motion, as if their superior speed, their 
gift of judgment and coordination, provides them with a more usable perception 
of time. The athlete who sees the contest in this way has invariably won, he 
has beaten his opponent to the punch, run down the quarterback, read the seams 
on the curveball, and hit it out of the park.” Or knocked his stumps out of the 
ground.


Fumbles, fallouts and faulty planes: England’s nightmarish 1993 tour of India 
| Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/08/fumbles-fallouts-and-faulty-planes-englands-nightmarish-1993-tour-of-india>
If Warner knew what Bavuma was doing, he realised it just a shade too late, so 
was a touch too slow to stick out his bat as he sprinted in. The commentators 
certainly didn’t pick up on it. “He hit them,” was Michael Slater’s first take, 
“but I think he’s got there.” Nor did the umpires. Aleem Dar had his back 
turned because he was still running across to get square on to the stumps. So 
he called for the TV replay. And it was only then that it began to become clear 
exactly what Bavuma had just done. “This is sensational fielding!” said Shane 
Warne on the second viewing. “Wow!” cried Slater as he saw it in slow motion.

Sign up to the Spin
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>
A fine piece of fielding, whether a catch or run-out, makes for a good meme. 
So this clip has been seen hundreds of thousands of times since as it spread on 
social media. It never gets less impressive. A quick flick through the archives 
to find something comparable turns up Mohammad Kaif’s dismissal of Nick Knight 
during India’s match against England at the 2003 World Cup 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vs4gLaXPpZY>. Where Bavuma was off balance, 
Kaif was perfectly poised. He dived over the ball, swept it up in his right 
hand as he swooped towards the stumps and let go his throw while he was still 
horizontal in the air. Kaif was closer in than Bavuma but square on, so only 
had a single stump to aim at.

Both belong in the highlights reels of the best run-outs in recent memory. 
Along with, in a short list of personal favourites,Greg Blewett’s throw from 
long-off to get Sadagoppan Ramesh <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CPm14iYEOxE> 
as he came back for a third run in a match at Adelaide, Ricky Ponting’s 
underarm toss from silly pointto dismiss Geraint Jones 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wBpzmA8TTR0&t=0m34s> in his final Test innings, 
Jones too busy staring at the umpire to notice that his back foot had drifted 
out of its ground, and, of course,Jonty Rhodes’ famous foot race against 
Inzamam-ul-Haq <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tMHpZpwvPdM>, finished in a 
headlong dive for the stumps, the ball held out ahead of him like the nose cone 
of a jet plane.

Fielding is the area of the game that has improved more than any other in the 
last decade, after years in which its evolution lagged behind those of the 
other disciplines. Time was when, as Donald Bradman wrote, “too many players 
regard fielding as a necessary chore in cricket instead of as an art and 
delight in itself”. He could never understand that view. And said that “when I 
first entered big cricket I can honestly say I enjoyed fielding more than 
anything else”. He loved the long chases around the boundary and found “a real 
thrill in a dash around the fence which culminates in a one-handed save and a 
return right over the middle stump.”

The lackadaisical approach Bradman bemoaned often meant that the one area in 
which a weak team could outperform their opponent was in the field. Bradman 
recalled South Africa doing exactly that when they toured Australia in 1952-53. 
“They were not a great side in batting or bowling but they practised fielding 
with fanatical zeal.” Duncan Fletcher used a similar strategy when he led 
Zimbabwe to the 1983 World Cup, where they beat Australia. “We were the best 
fielding side in that tournament,” said Dave Houghton. “Before we went, Duncan 
told us we might not be able to compete with the bat and the ball but we would 
definitely be the best fielding side.”

In T20, when a team only has 120 deliveries to work with, it’s never been more 
important to save every run, or take every catch. Modern players may not match 
the practice routine of the ‘Demon’ Spofforth, who once explained his own fine 
fielding by saying “I made a boy throw stones into the hedge and as the 
sparrows flew out I caught ‘em”, but they do now drill every last conceivable 
detail of fielding, from relay catches to diving throws. There’s precious 
little slack for a poor fielder, when even fast bowlers have no excuse for 
stopping the ball with a boot.

But despite that, as Bradman had it, “some fellows are blessed with a 
marvellous ball sense which the rank and file just cannot emulate” because “if 
there is one department of cricket where sheer natural ability is self-evident, 
I believe it to be fielding.” And as the overall standard of fielding has 
improved, the fact that Bavuma’s little bit of clock-stopping brilliance still 
stands out as it does only shows how extraordinary it was.

This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribejust visit this page and follow the instructions 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=90a09297d7f566898e97c084a09a04853d254072596b521d6e6e0e2487f85395>
.
 