
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has announced an 
embarrassing retreat from the US after pouring £1bn into a bid to take on the 
mighty Wal-Mart in its own backyard. The supermarket group's deputy chief 
executive, Tim Mason, who heads the loss-making US Fresh & Easy chain, is to 
quit the company after 30 years.

The UK's biggest retailer confirmed on Wednesday it was launching a "strategic 
review" of the US business. The chief executive, Phil Clarke, who took over 
from Sir Terry Leahy last year, said that while all options were under 
consideration it was "likely, though not certain" that Tesco will quit the US 
entirely.

He said it was clear Fresh & Easy "will not deliver acceptable shareholder 
returns on an appropriate timeframe in its current form". The group had in 
recent months received "a number of approaches" from parties interested in 
buying all or part of Fresh & Easy, or in partnering with Tesco to develop the 
business. He promised an update when the group presents its full-year results 
in April.

Mason, once seen as a candidate to replace Leahy, will quit the group 
immediately. Clarke said he had "played an important part in our success over a 
30-year career with the company, and he leaves with my thanks and good wishes".

News of the end of Tesco's American dream came as the group reported another 
disappointing set of sales figures. Underlying sales in the UK fell by 0.6% in 
the third quarter, with Clarke describing the performance of the general 
merchanside division as "not good enough". Its figures lag well behind rival 
Sainsbury's, which recently reported a 1.7% increase and has been gaining 
market share.

Despite the gloomy trading news, Tesco shares jumped 4% on Wednesday morning 
to 340p as analysts welcomed the US move.

Unions in the US expressed anger over the fate of Fresh & Easy, which they 
said could have been avoided. Pat O'Neill, United Food and Commercial Workers 
union vice-president, said: "Thousands of Tesco workers at Fresh & Easy stores 
in the US now face their holiday season filled with uncertainty and fear over 
whether their jobs and their stores will be there in the new year.

"These job losses could have been avoided if Tesco had chosen to engage with 
community stakeholders and its customers to address the many underlying 
problems and warning signs of the troubled Fresh & Easy model."

He called on Tesco to include all community and labour stakeholders in the 
review process.

Tesco had hoped to build Fresh & Easy into a business as big as its core UK 
chain. The first Fresh & Easy opened amid much fanfare five years ago and there 
are about 200 stores in southern California and Nevada.

But Tesco's plans were far more ambitious. Within weeks of the first store 
opening, in Hemet, east of Los Angeles, Fresh & Easy bosses were voicing 
ambitions to have 1,000 stores across California and then taking Fresh & Easy 
to the east coast.

The retailer built a vast warehouse, complete with America's biggest expanse 
of solar panels to help power it, and a food factory next door to make the 
ready meals that UK shoppers buy by the million but were almost unknown in the 
US.

The plans came after two years of intensive research that involved Tesco 
sending senior executives from the UK to live with Californian families, assess 
the way they shopped and ate, and to build secret test stores.

But their research proved faulty. Almost every aspect of the shops, from their 
interior decoration to the pack sizes and self-serve tills have been changed. 
Fresh & Easy also opened as the subprime mortgage crisis and subsequent 
economic downturn took hold, hitting US consumer confidence and spending power. 
The chain has also faced opposition from US trade unions.

The business is estimated to have cost Tesco nearly £1bn in investment and 
accumulated losses. It lost £74m in the most recent six months.

Tesco, which employs nearly 300,000 staff in the UK and operates more than 
3,000 outlets, has had a grim 2012. In January, after a poor Christmas last 
year, Tesco was forced to issue its first warning of falling profits for two 
decades. Its shares have fallen 19% this year.

Last spring, Clarke launched an overhaul of the British business and is 
pouring £1bn into revamping the stores, sharpening prices and improving 
products. He is scaling back store openings and said there would be very few 
new superstores as shoppers increasingly move online for fashion and homewares. 
Clarke said that "apps are the new high street".

Tesco has problems in other parts of its global operations. Its mainland 
European stores have been hit by the eurozone crisis while in Korea it is 
facing a £100m hit to profits as a result of new laws that limit trading hours. 
China is growing far less rapidly than expected.

One leading City analyst downgraded the firm and urged investors to sell Tesco 
shares. Caroline Gulliver of Espirito Santo said a survey carried out for the 
bank made "worrying reading". The survey showed that only 29% of shoppers now 
choose to make most of their purchases at Tesco, compared with 35% last year. 
"Rather than seeing improvements, UK consumers perceive that Tesco's offer is 
becoming less competitive on price and quality," said Gulliver.

A survey published on Tuesday by Kantar Worldpanel showed Tesco's market share 
has slipped to 30.7% from a peak of nearly 32%. The retailer is losing out to 
Waitrose at one end of the price scale and to discounters like Aldi at the 
other. The Aldi chain has 10% more shoppers than a year ago, who are spending 
17% more.
 