
Well, no one saw that coming. If the outlook for Tesco was grim less than six 
weeks ago,when the grocer ousted chief executive Phil Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/21/tesco-boss-philip-clarke-quits-profits-warning>
, issued its second profit warning of the year and described trading conditions 
as "weak" – it is now a whole lot worse.

The retailer on Friday issued a third, and thumping, profit warning in eight 
months, taken the axe to its dividend and its spending plans, and announced it 
is sending for the cavalry. This will take the shape of new chief executive 
Dave Lewis (hired from Unilever and with zero experience of running shops) 
earlier than expected. Instead of joining in October he will now have his feet 
under the desk at Tesco's Cheshunt HQ on Monday morning.

The shares – already down a third in the past year – are down more than 5% as 
investors react to the bad trading news and, in particular, the dividend cut. 
At around 6% the yield had been one of the few attractions for shareholders. 
The shares are now trading at their lowest level since September 2003.

What has gone wrong? In short, there is a revolution under way in the grocery 
business andTesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has taken way 
too long to wake up to that fact. Complacency and arrogance set in, and the 
current problems are the result.

The discounters and upmarket rivals – Aldi, Lidl and Waitrose – are eating 
Tesco's breakfast, lunch and tea. Shoppers are moving away from the grocer's 
vast out-of-town stores in droves, as they find better prices and easier ways 
to shop - the high street and on their sofa with an iPad.

The UK's biggest retailer is bleeding sales. Only this week new data from 
Kantar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/27/uk-grocery-market-growth-price-inflation-supermarket>
 – regarded as the gold standard in the supermarket business – showed Tesco's 
sales down 4% in the past three months compared to a year ago.

Its market share is now 28.8% – still vast, but down from 30.2% a year ago. In 
a £175bn market that is a huge decline, and has happened at a worryingly fast 
rate.

In detail, Tesco has slashed its guidance on trading profits for this year to 
£2.4bn-£2.5bn, 30% down year on year. The half-year dividend payout has been 
scythed by 75%, saving £280m. Capital expenditure – mainly IT upgrades and the 
expensive new store refits, which Clarke insisted were essential to improving 
performance – is being scaled back by £400m a year to no more than £2.1bn. This 
will provide Lewis with a useful cash buffer to make changes and invest in 
price cuts, especially if the dividend cut is repeated at the full year, which 
would save £900m.

It will be far from easy for Lewis, however. He faces the mother of turnaround 
challenges. Tesco is a vast supertanker and it will take a long time to change 
direction. He faces issues in almost every one of the dozen markets where Tesco 
operates, from Turkey to Thailand, but it is the UK, which still generates two 
thirds of group profits, where he must first focus.

As chairman Sir Richard Broadbent made clear on Friday, nothing will be 
sacred. In the grocer's statement to the stock exchange, Broadbent said: "The 
board's priority is to improve the performance of the group." He added that 
Lewis "will be reviewing every aspect of the group's operations" and 
considering "all options that create value for customers and shareholders".

Analysts immediately speculated that could mean hiving off the Asian division 
as a separate business, quoted in Hong Kong. But it is in the UK where his 
priorities must lie. He needs to sort out the brand. What does it stand for 
now? He needs to revamp the marketing – the price promise, which offers 
shoppers reductions if they can buy cheaper elsewhere, serves only to tell 
customers that Tesco may not be the wisest choice of shopping destination.

Lewis must find a way to reverse the trend of shoppers drifting away from 
out-of-town stores and provide a reason for them to return. That probably means 
substantially lower prices (and lower profits). He needs to decide whether to 
keep the Clubcard, which was once viewed as a hugely powerful tool but has been 
devalued by constant tinkering.

Lewis must also beef up his management. The latest trading update indicates 
that large parts of Tesco's top team are too wedded to the past. He needs new 
talent. And he needs to tackle all of this while the discounters continue to 
turn the screw. Both Aldi and Lidl have recently outlined major expansion 
plans. The former is spending £20m on a new advertising campaign. Christmas is 
now on the horizon in the grocery business, and Lewis's priority is to somehow 
arrest the decline – fast. If he cannot, Friday's profit warning will certainly 
not be the last.
 