
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> will on Wednesday signal an 
embarrassing retreat from the US after pouring £1bn into a bid to take on the 
mighty Wal-Mart in its own backyard.

The UK's biggest retailer will announce it is launching a "strategic review" 
of its loss-making US chain, Fresh & Easy. Such reviews usually mean a sale or 
outright closure.

The review has been ordered by Tesco's chief executive, Philip Clarke, who 
took over from Sir Terry Leahy last year. Tesco had hoped to build Fresh & Easy 
into a business as big as its core UK chain. The first Fresh & Easy opened amid 
much fanfare five years ago and there are now about 200 stores in southern 
California and Nevada.

But Tesco's plans were far more ambitious. Within weeks of the first store 
opening, in Hemet, east of Los Angeles, Fresh & Easy bosses were voicing 
ambitions to have 1,000 stores across California and then take Fresh & Easy to 
the east coast.

The retailer built a vast warehouse, complete with America's biggest expanse 
of solar panels to help power it, and a food factory next door to make the 
ready meals that UK shoppers buy by the million but were almost unknown in the 
US.

The plans came after two years of intensive research which involved Tesco 
sending senior executives from the UK to live with Californian families, assess 
they way they shopped and ate, and to build secret test stores.

But their research proved faulty. Almost every aspect of the shops, from their 
interior decoration to the pack sizes and self-serve tills have been changed. 
Fresh & Easy also opened as the subprime mortgage crisis and subsequent 
economic downturn took hold, hitting US consumer confidence and spending power. 
The chain has also faced opposition from US trade unions.

The business is estimated to have cost Tesco nearly £1bn of investment and 
accumulated losses. It lost £74m in the most recent six months.

Clarke will confirm the details of the review as he unveils what City analysts 
believe will be a gloomy trading update for the past three months.

The group is expected to say like-for-like sales, which exclude business from 
new stores, fell by up to 1% on the same period a year ago. That figure 
includes the effect of inflation, so the real decline is greater. It compares 
with a 1.7% increase recorded recently by rival Sainsbury's.

Tesco, which employs nearly 300,000 staff in the UK and operates more than 
3,000 outlets, has had a grim 2012. In January, after a poor Christmas last 
year, Tesco was forced to issue its first warning of falling profits for two 
decades. Its shares have fallen 19% this year.

Last spring Clarke launched an overhaul of the British business and is pouring 
£1bn into revamping the stores, sharpening prices and improving products. He is 
scaling back store openings and said there would be very few new superstores as 
shoppers increasingly move online for fashion and homewares. Clarke said that 
"apps are the new high street".

Tesco has problems in other parts of its global operations. Its mainland 
European stores have been hit by the eurozone crisis while in Korea it is 
facing a £100m hit to profits as a result of new laws that limit trading hours. 
China is growing far less rapidly than expected.

One leading City analyst downgraded the firm and urged investors to sell Tesco 
shares. Caroline Gulliver of Espirito Santo said a survey carried out for the 
bank made "worrying reading". The survey showed that only 29% of shoppers now 
choose to make most of their purchases at Tesco, compared with 35% last year. 
"Rather than seeing improvements, UK consumers perceive that Tesco's offer is 
becoming less competitive on price and quality," said Gulliver.

A survey published on Tuesday by Kantar Worldpanel showed Tesco's market share 
has slipped to 30.7% from a peak of nearly 32%. The retailer is losing out to 
Waitrose at one end of the price scale and to discounters like Aldi at the 
other. The Aldi chain has 10% more shoppers than a year ago, who are spending 
17% more.
 