
The papers today were full of judgments and revelations culled from Tony 
Blair's political memoir, A Journey. But what about its style? Sources close to
Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> say that he is 
proud of his prose. The leak suggests that he wants us to notice how, as well 
as what, he writes. "Le style est l'homme même," declared the Comte de Buffon. 
Is Tony Blair's style his true self? It is not the Oxford-educated 
public-schoolboy, or the dapper Inner Temple barrister. But it is the man he 
made himself into: people-friendly Tony, ready with a language that anyone can 
get.

Blair confesses that most political memoirs "are, I have found, rather easy to 
put down". This one will be different. In his acknowledgements the author 
mentions that he "wrote out each word on hundreds of notepads".

This is handmade prose. Some slabs that might as well have been cut and pasted 
from policy documents, but most is new-minted and his own. It is chatty, 
surprisingly direct, and unafraid of cliche. He strains at leashes, finds 
issues a minefield, and avoids comfort zones (though not in his diction).

Speeches do or don't go down a storm. Measures only scratch surfaces. Dealing 
with a legal problem, his mentor Derry Irving "was like the proverbial dog with 
a bone". Recalling John Major's pained grace in defeat, "I paid fulsome tribute 
to him the next day (though I'm not sure that didn't rub salt in the wound)". 
Blair's happiness with a verbal commonplace blinds him to the misuse of 
"fulsome" (= excessively flattering). Sometimes his unmisgiving readiness with 
a cliche is painful.

Gathering to a judgment on Princess Diana, he comes up with: "She captured the 
essence of an era and held it in the palm of her hand."

But mostly it is cheerily fluent.

It is a distinct anti-literary style. Sentences begin "Funnily enough …", or 
"By the way…" , or "Needless to say …". He loves those redundant locutions (if 
it is "needless", why say it?) that your English teacher told you to excise. He 
rebuts arguments in bar-room manner. "Complete baloney"; "It's bunkum"; "That's 
cobblers" (the latter excited by the suggestion that politicians used to be 
nobler). His judgments are qualified with idiomatic self-deprecation – "maybe 
that's paranoia!", "Silly, isn't it".

It is all about being colloquial: favourite phrases are "as I say" and "as I 
used to say". Blair likes to write as if he had the reader with him (on that 
sofa?). So, for instance, he recalls his reaction to euphoria of Labour 
supporters on election night. "I know this sounds completely bizarre but I even 
became slightly irritated by it all."

Remembering how Tony Benn convinced Labour Callaghan had lost to Thatcher 
because he had been too rightwing, he shakes his head. "Weird, I know, but 
true."

He cannot always keep it up: some passages on Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> have notably strained syntax. But 
mostly he can, contriving a style to offend any purist and yet keep you 
reading. It does sound like him.
 