
I first went to the Ginstitute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/oct/19/taste-test-gin>
 in 2012. Back then, it was a tiny room above a pub on Portobello Road, west 
London, where a handful of people could squeeze in to gen up on gin. After 
decades in vodka’s shadow, gin was finally starting to come back into fashion. 
This diminutive drinking den was run by four evangelical ex-bartenders who were 
flogging their new London dry, named after the road on which it was distilled.

Fast-forward five years, and gin is massive – and so is the Ginstitute. In 
December, it moved a few doors down into a gorgeous new four-storey gin palace, 
the Distillery. Tasting and distilling now take place in the basement; there is 
a sleek cocktail bar, the Resting Room, on the ground floor; a bright G&T 
emporium, GinTonica, above; and three bedrooms at the top. It is London’s first 
gin hotel, and I couldn’t wait to check in.

My friend and I went straight to the three-hour Ginstitute Experience, a 
gallop through the long history of gin. We were led into a cosy wood-panelled 
room lined with collectors’ gin bottles and first-edition cocktail books, and 
handed a tom collins (gin, lemon, sugar). At £110, this experience isn’t cheap, 
but the “Ginstructor” doesn’t stint on drinks: two cocktails, two G&Ts, 
numerous tastings, a bottle of Portobello Road gin to take away and, best of 
all, the chance to blend your own.

We started with a base gin containing four essential botanicals. Then, after 
tasting lots of single-flavour distillates, from Yorkshire Gold tea to 
asparagus, we each picked up to six varieties to make a bespoke gin. After some 
exhaustive tasting to choose the perfect botanicals (I plumped for pink 
peppercorn, bitter orange and lavender), and samples of everyone else’s 
creations, I was glad I didn’t have far to go for a lie down …
 Twist in the ‘tail … G’Vine Nouaison gin, Floc de Gascogne vin de liqueur and 
plum bitters served with tonic and garnish 
Checking into our hotel room was more like crashing at a cool friend’s flat: 
high ceilings; mid-century modern furniture; a Rough Trade-curated vinyl 
collection including Bowie, the Smiths and the Stones; coffee-table books on 
Annie Leibovitz and Alexander McQueen. There were old-fashioned cocktail prints 
on the wall, and a huge vase of dusky pink roses and inky tulips. The beautiful 
bathroom tiles, powerful shower and Neal’s Yard smellies almost made up for the 
lack of a bath.

In-room provisions included another bottle of gin each – taking our tally to a 
healthy six bottles – and a mini bar stocked with freshly made cocktails: more 
tom collins,negroni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/may/06/negroni-tour-london-booze-trips-cocktails>
 (my favourite) and martini. The mirrored antique drinks cabinet held the 
correct glasses for each drink; ice was delivered to the door.

After a rest and some much-needed fresh air, we staggered down to dinner. The 
Resting Room serves British dishes such as ox tongue, wood pigeon or venison 
(small plates £6-£11, sharers £18-£28). It was tempting, but we opted for 
GinTonica instead, which has a Basque-inspired tapas menu (£3-£15) alongside a 
list of 100 gins, served in enormous copa de balon glasses. I loved the 
Cantabrian anchovies, grilled prawns, braised pig cheeks andpan con lardo (pig 
fat on toast) – well, we had to soak up all that gin somehow. My memories of 
the pecan parfait are a little hazy, but I’m pretty sure it was delicious.

Breakfast will be served in the Resting Room when the guestrooms officially 
open on 23 January, from healthy options (five-grain porridge with caramelised 
figs) to bacon butties.

After collapsing into bed in a gin-fuelled fug, I awoke to the blare of a 
saxophonist busking outside the window, and hordes browsing Portobello Road 
market. This is Hogarth’s Gin Lane, 2017 – and while it might look more 
civilised, it’s just as likely to leave you with a hangover. There was only one 
solution: hair of the dog. Mine’s a red snapper, AKA a bloody mary with – what 
else? — gin. Cheers!
• The Ginstitute Experience, dinner and accommodation were provided by the 
Distillery (020-3034 2233,the-distillery.london 
<http://www.the-distillery.london/>); doubles £150 B&B, including two bottles 
of gin and three cocktails for two

Ask a local

 Breakfast at the Tin Shed 
Hannah Sharman-Cox, founder of DrinkUp.London <https://drinkup.london/> and 
Portobello resident

• Eat 
I love Tin Shed <http://thetinshedbakery.squarespace.com/>, a little French 
bakery tucked off All Saints Road. Its breakfast is particularly delicious and 
there’s a hidden terrace downstairs which is a suntrap in the summer.

• Shop 
On Goldborne Road is Lali Shop <https://www.facebook.com/LaliShopLondon/>, a 
boutique filled with beautiful things. There are clothes, hats, jewellery and a 
few pieces of homeware – it’s an inspiring place.

• Drink 
I’ve been drinking at Crazy Homies <http://crazyhomies.com/> for as long as 
I’ve lived here (15 years) and met so many friends just sitting at the tiny 
bar. The Mexican food is great too.
 