
In the days after we have voted to leave Europe I am still searching in my 
mind, as are millions like me, to work out what went wrong.

This does, I think, have something to do with children and family, because it 
has to do with education which is one of the main factors that fuelled the 
anger and resentment that led the overwhelming number of white working-class 
Brexiteers to utter the shout of anger that they did.


The Brexit vote was at least partially fuelled by a resentment about elites, 
particularly the private and London metropolitan school elite who have reaped 
disproportionately the benefits of globalisation through their entry into key 
jobs at the higher end of society while their lifestyles have been subsidised 
by cheap global labour at the other end of the social spectrum.


Yes, the immigrants got the blame from the Brexiteers – but that’s perhaps 
because the Labour party and Conservative party alike have chosen to put class 
to one side in politics and concentrate instead on matters of identity, so long 
as that identity isn’t one of Englishness, which is what, oddly enough, most 
English people consider to be important.


Thus the discourse has not been about lifting working-class people into the 
elites. The language has been about lifting people from other disadvantaged 
groups – based around ethnicity, gender and sexuality, which are much more 
comfortable for politicians to talk about as they don’t require the 
redistribution of wealth, only a change in attitude, which doesn’t require the 
raising of taxes.


In a large number of white English working-class areas, the chances of joining 
these elites have crumbled. At the same time, the mantra that is recited in our 
schools and through society generally is “you can do or be anything you want if 
you work hard enough”. This is a lie we tell our children, and a huge one.


Yes, the world has changed massively, and university is no longer reserved for 
the privileged few. But nevertheless, according to all the statistics,social 
mobility has receded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/13/decades-of-educational-reform-no-social-mobility>
 a long way from the high watermark it was at when I left school in the 1970s. 
This is one of the reasons the working class, in their inchoate rage, decided 
to leave the European Union. Because whatever the facts of the matter, they 
felt abandoned.


Some two decades ago, I received a heartbreaking letter from one of my fellow 
pupils at the working-class school I attended. This chap was genuinely one of 
the funniest, cleverest people I have ever known. We often hung out together 
kicking cans on the streets on the outer fringes of west London – although we 
never talked about what we were “going to do” when we left school. The letter 
he sent me said something like this: “We never really had a chance, did we? But 
you did it – and you’re doing it for us all. We’re proud of you.” He finished 
by mentioning that he was now working in a carpet warehouse somewhere.


That was the fate of many of my working-class contemporaries from schooldays. 
If professional success was beyond the imagination of most of the children of 
my generation, I can’t imagine how it is nowadays for some teenager in 
Bradford, Wigan or Clacton. Most of them have no bloody chance, to tell the 
truth, and the more we utter that modern trope “you can be whatever you want” 
the more we lie to them and the more they, and their parents, look for someone 
to blame. In the case of last week, this turned out to be theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and the Westminster elites.

My four daughters were all in tears on Friday. They did not understand why the 
English had voted so comprehensively against a continent that they consider 
themselves to be a natural part of. The answer has to be because most children 
haven’t been as lucky as them. And someone, somewhere, has to pay. Sadly, it’s 
going to be them – and their generation generally.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter> 

 