
In a neat illustration of why video content is busy replacing the journalistic 
written word, this piece should really open with a shot of me staring dolefully 
ahead for the next, let's say, minute and a half. I would not speak. You would, 
however, hear me breathe. Eventually, moving with glacial slowness, a large dog 
would trudge into the corner of the frame. The dog would then sit in front of 
me, adjusting itself with almost impossible torpor. The camera would remain 
static. Three further minutes would pass. I might, at some stage, cough.

That said, seeing as it takes so much longer to produce, there's something 
fitting about using old-fangled text to pay tribute to those films best defined 
by their lack of action; the largely silent and most of all slow, built not 
around the eventful but the stationary and monosyllablic. Such thoughts have 
been at the forefront of many minds this week as a result of the US release of 
The Limits of Control, the latest feature from eternal hepcatJim Jarmusch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jim-jarmusch> – an impeccably blank crime 
mystery that's being hailed as a small triumph as it returns its maker to the 
more circuitous end of his oeuvre, the muttered sprawl of Dead Man rather than 
the talking shop of Coffee and Cigarettes.

In particular, Spout Blog picked up as symbolic of the film's approach 
<http://blog.spout.com/2009/05/04/jarmusch-cribs-from-tildas-state-of-cinema/> 
a line uttered by one of its principals, Tilda Swinton (and apparently drawn 
from a real-life speech she once gave). "Movies are like dreams you're never 
really sure you've had," her character announces. "Sometimes my favorite films 
are the ones where people sit there and don't say anything" – after which, of 
course, she doesn't say anything. It's a mission statement that's music (slow, 
droning music) to the ears of those of us who feel that the less is ostensibly 
happening on-screen, the more is generally achieved: less camera movement, less 
cutting, less plot, less dialogue.

For me, I've always felt that was at least partly a response to having watched 
too many movies in the 90s, an era with way more than its fair share of 
indie-boy yapping and maniacal editing. But whatever the cause, I came to love 
the static composition, the mumbled exchange, scenes unfolding in stately 
minutes, not frantic nanoseconds. A sense, in short, of the hypnotic: the 
beauty ofTarkovsky's Stalker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/feb/06/andrei-tarkovsky-stalker-russia-gulags-chernobyl>
, Terrence Mallick's Days of Heaven, even Gus van Sant's Gerry, a film often 
snippily dismissed but actually its director's most wholly satisfying work. And 
there's also, of course, the film-maker to whom Gerry was one long valentine: 
Béla Tarr, Budapest's master of the meditative, the seven-hour Sátántangó still 
his masterpiece, but each of his films from Damnation onward typifying what was 
once dryly referred to as the "cinema of patience".

Not that patience always greets such projects. I well remember seeing the 
haunting Russian thriller The Return in a largely empty cinema some years ago 
and having its gauzy naturalism interrupted half an hour in by a man a few rows 
ahead growling with angry bemusement: "When the fuck is something is going to 
happen?" Few things, it seems, can provoke as much hostility in the cinema as 
apparent dead air on screen. But that's just the product of our having been 
brought up with the numbing frenzy of mainstream film. We're not used to movies 
that give us space to think – for films to reflect the essential truth of 
conversation, that the interesting bits often sound inconsequential, and the 
real revelations come when no one's saying anything.

And without words to distract us, we're left alone with the image – the longer 
it stays there, unmoving or repeating, the more transcendent the effect. Forced 
to do without an endless series of new sensations, the mind starts to whirr – 
you in the dark, it up onscreen, and the mystical alchemy of your imagination 
binding with it, the purest interactivity there is. Some people will realise 
they adore that, of course, while others will find it violently uncomfortable. 
Either way, if the question for Tarr or Mallick or Jarmusch is, "When the fuck 
is something going to happen?", the answer will be: it already is.
 