
The ending of more than 500 years of naval shipbuilding in Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/06/bae-closure-portsmouth-shipyard-jobs>
 will inevitably lead to laments about Britain's industrial decline.

This was an industry that at its peak built great ships such as the Queen Mary 
and HMS Dreadnought, constructed in Glasgow and Portsmouth respectively in the 
early 20th century.

The boom lasted well beyond the second world war. According to consultancy 
IHS, 134 vessels – 1.47m gross tonnes of shipping – were produced in the UK in 
1976. But competition from Japan, South Korea and now China has taken its toll, 
with the industry producing just four ships in 2011. Even Royal Navy tankers 
are being built in the vast shipyards of South Korea now.

Conversations with veteran industrialists about the state of shipbuilding 
today do not yield whimsical reminiscence of the good old days. Instead they 
produce regrets that tough commercial decisions – of the kind that saw France 
and Germany aggressively pursue markets such as nuclear power or premium cars – 
were not made in Britain in the 70s and 80s. Sir John Parker, the former chief 
executive of Harland and Wolff, the much-diminished Belfast shipbuilder, said 
the industrymissed an opportunity in the Thatcher era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/10/britains-last-few-shipbuilders-course-fiscal-storm>
.

"One of my big industrial disappointments or even failures is that I failed to 
persuade the government of the day that there was a big future in building 
cruise ships. Whoever used run-of-the-mill bulk carriers or tankers drifted to 
the lowest-cost country. So how you survived in higher-cost countries was more 
sophisticated ships like cruise ships. I saw that there was going to be a lot 
of growth in cruise ship building so we demonstrated that this was a real 
growth industry. And nearly 25 years on, those forecasts would have 
underestimated the demand." Thus the industry drifted to the east.

A shipbuilding industry remains in the UK, although it will be even smaller in 
the wake of Portsmouth and the winnowing down of what remains on the Clyde.

According to the UK Marine Industries Alliance, the wider UK sector employs 
nearly 90,000 people with a turnover of nearly £10bn.

Some of it is envied abroad. Dorset-based Sunseeker, a maker of luxury yachts, 
was bought for £320m by China's second richest man in June. And these are the 
niches that the industry occupies: bulge-bracket naval work that has just been 
dealt a ruinous blow; and specialist work like Sunseeker.

Parker's regret is that the UK did not spot the big opportunities in the 80s 
and, backed by government support, claim them for its own. This applies to 
every British industrial sector under Thatcher, Major and Blair.

It is also worth being hard-nosed about Portsmouth, Scotstoun and Govan. These 
yards have produced state-of-the-art work in the HMS Queen Elizabeth and HMS 
Prince of Wales aircraft carriers and the manufacturing in their cavernous 
yards is an impressive site to behold. But these were sites dependent on one 
buyer: the British taxpayer. So when the £5.4bn carrier programme ended, job 
cuts were inevitable.

This should be borne in mind if you walk down the Clyde, towards Dumbarton, 
from Glasgow's Riverside Museum and its collection of shipbuilding memorabilia. 
The walk encompasses the still-active Scotstoun plant and the derelict, 
undeveloped sites that once surrounded it, including the John Brown yard that 
launched the Queen Mary. It would have been a different sight if successive 
governments had guided the shipbuilding industry to a sustainable future.
 