
An agreement this week to release €10.3bn of bailout money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/eurozone-officials-hope-to-give-greece-next-tranche-of-bailout>
 to Greece was, in comparison with past negotiations, straightforward. That 
does not reflect well on the European officials and international creditors 
involved. It is a measure of how long the crisis has gone on and how low 
expectations have fallen.

The achievement is in postponing a dispute between eurozone disciplinarians 
and pragmatists at the International Monetary Fund. Hawkish Europeans, chiefly 
Germany, take the view that softening conditions imposed on Athens undermines 
the financial credibility of the currency union. The IMF calculates that Greece
cannot service its debts on the current trajectory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/23/imf-warns-eu-bailout-greece-debt-relief>
; that even heroic efforts of fiscal tightening would not yield sufficient 
revenue and might suffocate the economy instead. The current bailout terms 
envisage Greece reaching a budget surplus of 3.5% of GDP. The IMF thinks 1.5% 
is a more plausible figure and wants “reprofiling” of Greek debts – easing the 
overall burden and softening the interest rate.

This week eurozone ministers and officials agreed to take the IMF’s point but 
not to act on it yet. That doesn’t sound like much of a compromise but 
acceptance even just in principle that Greece will need debt leniency is more 
significant than it sounds. As in any European wrangle, domestic politics looms 
large and different nations have incompatible perspectives. For politicians in 
Berlin, the issue is framed in terms of hard-working German taxpayers being 
asked to transfer their grandchildren’s future inheritance to Greeks who 
frittered away their own savings and lied about it in their national accounts. 
In that environment, Germany’s ruling CDU party cannot afford to be seen going 
soft onGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> ahead of federal 
elections next year. In Athens it feels a lot more like Germany using its 
financial muscle to exert control over the European periphery, smashing the 
Greek economy on the ideological altar of austerity.

Tempers are not as high as they were when the crisis boiled over last summer. 
The Greek government has introduced painful measures – tax rises and pension 
reforms – dutifully taking its creditor-prescribed medicine, while also 
managing a frontline in Europe’s migration crisis, which adds hugely to the 
social and economic burden on a fragile state. Those sacrifices are noted in 
Berlin and elsewhere, as is the need to restore something of the spirit of 
mutual understanding in a European project that is being tested by 
unprecedented centrifugal forces. All parties in this week’s discussion 
recognised, for example, the need to avoid a pyrotechnic crisis that would 
thrill those urging British voters to flee the EU.

Eurosceptics see the Greek crisis as the expression of inevitable conflict 
between nations locked uncomfortably in a supra-national cage, but that is a 
misperception. Those tensions have always existed and EU institutions have been 
remarkably good at managing them. The underlying problem in this case is a 
tension between two different priorities in sustaining the European project – 
one that puts the emphasis on financial rules and another that tilts the 
emphasis towards political solidarity. To succeed, the EU obviously needs both. 
But as the debt crisis drags on, and weaves itself into other crises, it seems 
increasingly clear that the fraying political bonds are the greater threat. 
Curiously it is the IMF that appears to understand this better than the 
eurozone leaders. The path towards flexibility with Athens is not easy for 
Germany’s leaders to walk, given the domestic pressures they face. But it is 
hard to see another route back to Greek recovery and eurozone stability.
 