
Like a lot of people, I’m really hanging out for the next episode of true 
crime podcastSerial <http://serialpodcast.org>. Sarah Koenig, an alumnus of 
legendary NPR showThis American Life <http://www.thisamericanlife.org>, has 
done for podcasts what HBO did for television: adapted a format for longform 
storytelling, giving it new life.

Her investigation of the 1999 death of 17 year old Baltimore teenager Hae Min 
Lee, though, is also a valuable demonstration of journalistic practice. 
Koenig’s interviews with Adnan Syed, Lee’s convicted killer and ex-boyfriend, 
and her conversations with other key witnesses, are conducted and presented in 
a particular style: she’s not necessarily doing gonzo journalism, but her style 
is a thorough eschewal of “just the facts” reporting.

Rather than adopt the neutral, authoritative voice of hard news, which seeks 
to make the author as invisible as possible, Koenig’s narration is peppered 
with acknowledgements of her own thoughts and feelings. In episode one, she
talks about her emotional response 
<http://www.thisamericanlife.org/radio-archives/episode/537/transcript> to 
meeting Syed in prison for the first time:

“[Adnan] has giant brown eyes like a dairy cow. That’s what prompts my most 
idiotic lines of inquiry. Could someone who looks like that really strangle his 
girlfriend? Idiotic, I know.”

By allowing the audience access to this reaction, and letting us know that she 
second-guessed it, Koenig is narrating herself into a particular role. This 
serves two functions: firstly, we know that she’s a self-aware observer capable 
of reflexively assessing her own judgements. We trust her to present this 
disturbing story in a fair way, because she’s capable of accounting for her own 
biases. It’s not that she’s centering herself, or being solipsistic, which is 
the key difference between gonzo and what Serial is. Rather, she acknowledges 
and accepts the inevitably dialogic process of any media, and in doing so, 
anticipates the ways her listeners will respond to what she’s saying.

Secondly, she provides a level of procedural insight that straight reporting 
is specifically formulated to minimise. News is supposed to be the outcome of 
the process Koenig is letting us in on. News takes for granted that its 
audience will assume the journalist has exercised their best judgement to 
arrive at a version of events. Since Koenig is essentially re-opening a closed 
murder case, we are going on this journey with her. The decision to structure 
Serial as a realtime account of Koenig’s detective work, instead of waiting 
until she’s cracked the case to examine what went down, forces us to become 
detectives with her.

This is what makes Serial so addictive, and so intellectually fascinating. Is 
Koenig as undecided as she makes out, or is she withholding her own judgement 
on the case for narrative effect? Whether or not you believe her guilelessness, 
one of the valuable results of this approach is that it invites us to consider 
how we relate to traditional sources of journalism. It’s a different approach 
to objectivity, and in some ways it undermines the very idea that we should 
simply trust journalists to decide what’s important behind the scenes.

On an even more meta level, Koenig gives us an explanation of why she chose to 
focus on this particular event rather than another:

“If you’re wondering why I went so nuts on this story versus some other murder 
case, the best I can explain is this is the one that came to me. It wasn’t 
halfway across the world or even next door. It came right to my lap.”

Which, again, invites us to think of what’s left out of the news. Why do media 
outlets report some things and not others? We usually only receive insight into 
this calculus when someone stuffs it up in an obvious way, either by covering 
something that’s considered unworthy of being news, or by blatantly ignoring an 
event or set of facts that we think the public has an interest in knowing 
about. Media tends to give these kinds of post-hoc explanations only under 
duress. The very act of acknowledging that journalists and editors’ reasoning 
is still subject to average human fallibilities disrupts the principle of 
reporters as neutral conveyers of fact.

Koenig is choosing to show us this sausage factory, giving us a transferrable 
set of tools that we can take with us and use to be more thoughtful critics of 
the fourth estate. The murder case is enthralling by itself, but the real 
public service she’s providing is running the world’s most accessible media 
studies course.
 