
Hometown: New York.

The lineup: Kembrah Pfahler (vocals).

The background: This week, our temporary boss Antony Hegarty wanted us to 
interview the five people that he'd chosen as his New Bands of the Day for 
extra insights and info and stuff. We have diligently done this, with one 
exception: today's star-in-waiting, the Voluptuous Horror of Karen Black, with 
whom we have been in email contact but were unable to speak to in time for this 
column. And we wanted to make this clear, that we had tried to talk to Kembrah 
Pfahler, the woman behind the band in question, in case you assumed we were a 
bunch of wusses who couldn't quite stomach engaging in conversation with this 
force of nature, this fearsome creature of the night.

Not that we don't have good reason to be scared. This is, after all, a 
musician, actress and multimedia performance artist who as a kid attended a 
nursery school where there were rumoured to be satanic cults, afterwards 
confessing that she was pissed off that there actually weren't; who appeared in 
a Calvin Klein "heroin chic" ad campaign that led to dope dealers on her block 
in New York naming a strain of junk after her; who has been a wrestler and 
appeared in numerous Super 8 horror and fetish movies; who was mugged to within 
an inch of her life but survived; who mimes onstage fornication with a skeleton 
symbolising her deceased boyfriend and other such transgressive acts including 
cracking paint-filled eggs on her vulva; who has cavorted in the recording 
studio with notorious coprophiliac GG Allin; who was into body mutilation and 
dysmorphia and so wanted to challenge preconceived notions of female sexuality 
that she SEWED UP HER VAGINA.

For someone so attracted to the irresistible nature of the horrible – what one 
commentator labelled "abhorrent sublime" – Kembra's band, the Voluptuous Horror 
of Karen Black, so-named because one of her favourite movies is the eponymous 
actor's 1975 film Trilogy of Terror, aren't the uneasy listening experience you 
might imagine. They're a theatrical glam-punk-metal unit who, to match the 
Rocky Horror-style teased black bouffant wigs, blacked-out teeth, black 
stiletto boots, black underwear and nude ladies painted blue, pink and yellow, 
play standard-issue riff'n'roll that nods to everyone from Suzi Quatro to 
Siouxsie Sioux, Alice Cooper to Marilyn Manson. The Voluptuous Horror ... are 
purported to be converts to a movement known as "anti-naturalism" and they've 
got an album bearing that phrase, but they don't sound especially transgressive 
or perverse, which is fine – just think of their music as a way in, an access 
point, to an art netherworld so out-there it prompted one onlooker to hail the 
band's live extravaganza as "an unholy stage show of such immense 
countercultural gravity that I just want to scream 'Hail Satan' at the top of 
my lungs".

The buzz: "An incredible artist and performer." 
<http://www.lipsticktracez.com/reggie/2008/08/kembra-pfahler-and-the-voluptu.php>

The truth: She makes Lady Gaga look like Lady Madonna. Not Madonna the disco 
singer, Madonna the biblical icon.

Most likely to: Make Roman Polanski proud.

Least likely to: Make Mia Farrow proud.

What to buy: There are at least three albums to sample on Spotify.

File next to: Elvira, Siouxsie, Marilyn Manson, Diamanda Galás.

Links: http://www.myspace.com/vhokb <http://www.myspace.com/vhokb>.

Monday's new band: Paper Crows.
 