
Hours before New Hampshire’s primary voters made Donald Trump the favorite for 
the Republican presidential nomination Tuesday night – I can’t really believe 
this even as I type it – the US supreme court reminded us of why the upcoming 
presidential election is so important. On a party-line vote, the court 
temporarilystopped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/09/climate-change-supreme-court-barack-obama-plan>
 Barack Obama’s clean power plan from going into effect. This decision could 
well portend a future one that will have devastating consequences – not only 
for the climate but for the state of our lawmaking process.

The decision also underscores the urgency of the November elections in two 
ways: it will be a choice between a candidate who supports taking action 
against climate change and one who believes it should be ignored, and it will 
present a choice between a president who believes that the federal government 
has the authority to effectively regulate and one who believes that the supreme 
court should arbitrarily throw monkey wrenches into the political process.

The clean power plan 
<http://www.vox.com/2015/8/3/9090453/obama-climate-plan-full> is a set of 
regulations designed to reduce carbon emissions in the face of climate change. 
In addition to improved fuel economy standards for vehicles, the Environmental 
Protection Agency announced carbon dioxide emissions standards that would, 
barring major technological advancements, make coal-fired power plants nearly 
impossible to build. These regulations would not, in and of themselves, save 
the planet, but they represent an important step.

But 29 states 
<https://www.edf.org/sites/default/files/content/2016.01.26_wv_et_al._scotus_stay_application.pdf>
, mostly led by Republicans, took the issue to the courts. A lawsuit arguing 
that the regulations are illegal is currently pending at the DC circuit court 
of appeals, which is likely to hear the case in June. In the meantime, the 
supreme court’s stay Tuesday means that the regulations will not go into effect 
at least until the lower court issues its ruling in the fall, and most likely 
means that they will not go into effect before the upcoming presidential 
election (assuming the supreme court decides to keep the stay in effect while 
deciding whether to take the case itself).

Because of the ruling, the court might be able to kill the clean power plan 
without even ruling on it. If the Republicans win the White House, the 
regulations would never go into effect, because the incoming president would 
reverse Obama’s executive order. Admittedly, a new Republican administration 
could rescind the regulations anyway, but it is more difficult to stop a 
program that is in effect than to stop one from being implemented in the first 
place.

Either Democratic candidate would support the CPP, but there’s at least a 
chance that the supreme court will find that the regulations exceed the 
authority of the executive branch and still get rid of them.

None of this means there are good arguments against the legality of the CPP. 
As Harvard law professors Jody Freeman and Richard Lazarus, haveexplained 
<http://today.law.harvard.edu/is-the-presidents-climate-plan-unconstitutional/>
, the plan should be upheld – in particular, because the constitutional 
arguments against it are absurd.

One of the arguments against the CPP is that the regulations constitute a 
“taking” without fair compensation from coal companies, which would violate the 
fifth amendment. If taken seriously, this argument from the libertarian fringe 
would render most of the contemporary regulatory state unconstitutional. As 
Freeman and Lazarus observe, not “even one single Justice in more than two 
centuries of cases [has] endorsed such a reading of the fifth amendment”. It’s 
probably a non-starter even with the Roberts court.

Energy interests also argue that the CPP, which involves cooperation between 
federal and state officials, is a constitutionally impressible coercion of 
state officials. This is based on a couple of controversial supreme court 
decisions that have prohibited the federal government from “commandeering” 
officials of state governments. It’s avery weak argument 
<http://grist.org/climate-energy/constitutional-scholar-laurence-tribe-sells-his-soul-to-big-coal-makes-terrible-arguments/>
 in this context, although the high court’s conservatives have bought similarly 
weak federalism arguments in the past.

The most likely path by which the supreme court could attack the CPP would be 
to argue that it exceeds the authority given to the executive branch under the 
Clean Air Act. In theory, this would allow Congress to change the law to permit 
the executive branch to enact necessary carbon regulations. While superficially 
more modest than a constitutional ruling, as long as Republicans control the 
House of Representative it would guarantee that these needed regulations would 
not go into effect even with a Democrat in the White House.

Even if the court ultimately upholds the regulations and the Democratic party 
retains the White House, the decision to stay the CPP from going into effect 
will delay regulation that is urgently needed. At worst, it will tie the hands 
of the government and prevent it from addressing one of the most urgent 
problems facing the country and the world, based on arguments that constitute 
far-right crackpottery.
 