
What is it? A 40-minute glimpse into a dark world, lit up by the tireless 
efforts of an incredible group.

Why you’ll love it: Love is not the word. This is a film you need to see to 
begin to understand day-to-day life in war-torn Syria. A documentary crew 
follows the White Helmets, a group of volunteer rescue workers with branches 
all over the country, who risk their own safety to pull fellow citizens from 
bomb wreckage.

Hands reach through smoke to grab scared children from rubble in the 
half-light. It is relentless and also an incredible editing job as the 
narration-free footage gives a visceral sense of the widespread trauma. You 
follow the rescuers with no need to ask questions. You can see the necessity of 
what they are doing and the dreadful circumstances under which they’re doing it.

The White Helmets hurtle around the streets, pointing their van towards every 
new mushroom cloud on the horizon, dedicated to pulling their stricken brothers 
and sisters from the remains of hospitals and markets and cafes. The attacks 
are daily and target civilian life at its most mundane: shoppers shopping, 
workers working.

You see hints of the men’s own families, toddlers left at home not knowing if 
their fathers will come back, brothers killed in attacks even while their 
sibling is hurtling towards another explosion across town. Crackly mobile phone 
conversations, a lifeline or not, depending on the news at the other end of 
them.

In a moment of quiet, the men sit on the floor sharing a meal, food halfway to 
their mouths when they hear the roar of military aircraft overhead and dash for 
the door. They rush towards the scene of a barrel bomb attack, black smoke 
rising into the sky. These are usually rusty barrels, filled with explosives 
and anything from nails to chlorine, pushed out of the back of government 
helicopters.

Crying kids stumble out into the street and babies with bleeding heads are 
carefully handed from one man to another. They won’t leave a bombsite until 
they have accounted for everyone. The determination is total.

The pace of the footage is dizzying, the action chaotic and yet the message 
clear. To tell a story in these circumstances is not only impressive but 
important. Everyone here is risking their lives to pass it on.

A tiny baby, only a week old, is born a second time; still alive after 16 
hours under rubble, the child is dragged through a narrow passage made in the 
dust by a frantic volunteer. The “miracle baby” becomes a talisman of hope, 
another reason for them all to keep going despite the nature of their task; 
like a child patiently standing up dominoes while a bully follows behind, 
knocking them over.

Their belief in better times is genuine, but where does the hope come from? In 
a once-colourful city bleached grey by dust, they live on the rush of another 
life saved.

A little boy they had previously rescued visits their training camp with his 
thankful mother, and one of the men places the distinctive white helmet on the 
kid’s head. The boy looks up, delighted. This is their hope.

Where Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix>.

Length 40 minutes.

Stand-out episode It’s a one-off.

Also watch The Islamic State (Vice on YouTube) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AUjHb4C7b94>, Rise of the Islamic State: 
Losing Iraq <http://www.pbs.org/video/2365297690/> (PBS.org).
 