
Jeff Sessions 

US attorney general

Jeff Sessions confirmation hearing to shine light on history of racism claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/jeff-sessions-confirmation-hearing-attorney-general-racism>
Background


Jeff Sessions was nominated by Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-racial-slur>
 to become the most senior law enforcement official in the US after being the 
first sitting US senator to endorse Trump for president in 2016. The 
70-year-old former federal prosecutor and state attorney general has 
represented Alabama in the upper chamber since 1997.

Sessions, a law-and-order conservative, would as attorney general be 
responsible for implementing the draconiancriminal justice agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-criminal-justice-reform>
 on which Trump campaigned. Both men have been dismissive of bipartisan efforts 
to pass reforms to help reduce prisoner numbers. They have also been sharply 
critical of the Black Lives Matter protest movement and its campaign against 
deadly shootings by police.

Claims of prejudice and racial insensitivity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/jeff-sessions-confirmation-hearing-attorney-general-racism>
, which Sessions denies, have dogged his career. In 1986, the Senate blocked 
his nomination by President Ronald Reagan to a federal judgeship after hearing 
testimony about racist remarks he made to colleagues, as well as a failed 
voter-fraud prosecution that he brought against black civil rights activists.

Key points to watch for

 * Race and civil rights: Sessions is sure to come under intense questioning 
over his record regarding African Americans. Democratic senators on the 
judiciary committee are likely to ask why a man viewed as too racist for the 
1980s should be approved 30 years later for the job of overseeing the 
enforcement of civil rights laws in the US. 
 * Criminal justice reform: Sessions last year helped block a bipartisan 
congressional plan to reduce “mandatory minimum” prison sentences and make 
other changes to the federal prisons system. Senators will want to know what he 
and Trump intend to do about the country’s high rates of incarceration and 
recidivism. 
 * Use of force by police: Sessions has described Black Lives Matter as 
“really radical” and blamed the protest movement for a spike in violent crime 
in some US cities. He has consistently attacked justice department 
investigations into troubling practices in local police departments, which the 
Obama administration opened in cities such as Ferguson, Missouri. Sessions may 
well face questions on whether too many people are killed by police. 
Key moments from the hearing

 * Nominee for attorney general says that groping a woman without her consent, 
as Trump boasted in leaked recording, “clearly” amounts to sexual assault. 
 * Sessions says he would be prepared to prosecute “the president, his family 
and associates” for connections to Russian hacking if charges against them were 
warranted. 
 * Sessions says he “does not support the idea” of the Muslim ban proposed by 
President-elect Donald Trump, and that waterboarding of suspects by US forces 
would be illegal. 
 * Sessions promises that he would recuse himself from any Department of 
Justice investigations of Hillary Clinton due to past political comments. Also 
says: “This country does not punish its political enemies.”

 * Amid protests, Sessions also attacks claims against him of racism as 
“damnably false charges”, and pledges to protect minorities and women. 
4.50pm: Sessions declined to say whether or not he agreed with Trump’s false 
claim <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/802972944532209664> that 
Trump would have won the presidential election’s popular vote in addition to 
the electoral college “if you deduct the millions of people who voted 
illegally”.

Under pointed questioning from Senator Al Franken of Minnesota, Sessions said: 
“I do believe we regularly have fraudulent activity happen during election 
cycles.” Authoritative studies have concluded that voter fraud is, in fact, 
close to nonexistent.

Franken, who earlier noted that Sessions had exaggerated the extent to which 
he was involved in civil rights prosecutions 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/jeff-sessions-says-he-handled-these-civil-rights-cases-he-barely-touched-them/2017/01/03/4ddfffa6-d0fa-11e6-a783-cd3fa950f2fd_story.html?utm_term=.05e0dc0d4b04>
, went on the attack against the Alabama senator’ssupport for the Supreme 
Court’s dismantling 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/jeff-sessions-has-spent-his-whole-career-opposing-voting-rights/>
 of a central component of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which Sessions called 
“good news for the South”.

Franken also coolly dismissed an earlier remark from Cruz that essentially 
amounted to telling Democrats to not ask Sessions tough questions. Cruz said he 
feared proceedings might become “ugly with accusations that don’t belong in 
this hearing”. Defending aggressive questioning, Franken told Cruz: “That’s our 
job.”

4.05pm: No real surprise, but Sessions outlined the standard Republican take 
on the second amendment of the US constitution, which he said he shared.


“I do believe the second amendment is a personal right,” said Sessions. “It’s 
a historic right of the American people, and the constitution protects it and 
explicitly states it. It’s just as much part of the constitution as the other 
great rights and liberties that we value.”

Sessions also said that American citizens could be detained indefinitely 
without charge in the US during a time of war. “These individuals would have to 
be proven to be connected to a designated enemy of the United States,” he said.
Controversial Obama-era laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/15/americans-face-guantanamo-detention-obama>
 appearing to codify the government’s authority to do this have come under 
legal challenge.

3.06pm: Following some dense legal discussions, Leahy woke up those drifting 
off by raising the subject of Trump’s notorious remark, in a leaked 2005 
recording, that as a celebrity he was free to “grab [women] by the pussy”. 
During the campaign, Sessions appeared to cast doubt on whether this would 
constitute sexual assault.Leahy on Tuesday gave him another chance.

“Is grabbing a woman by her genitals without her consent sexual assault?” Leahy
asked.Sessions replied: “Clearly, it would be.” Asked whether he would or could 
prosecute a president found to have done this,Sessions said: “The president is 
subject to certain lawful restrictions, and they would be required to be 
applied by the appropriate law enforcement official if appropriate, yes.”

Leahy also asked Sessions to assure senators that he would not permit the NSA 
to resume the mass collection of Americans’ electronic communications in spite 
of new laws passed following the disclosures in documents released by Edward 
Snowden. “I do not believe that the statute can be disregarded and it should be 
followed,”Sessions said.

2.12pm: Proceedings were interrupted again just as Texas senator and failed 
Republican presidential candidateTed Cruz began his questioning of Sessions. At 
least two protesters chanting “Black Lives Matter” were ejected from the room. 
“Free speech is a wonderful thing,”Cruz said after proceedings continued. 

Cruz then continued an extended diatribe, accusing Barack Obama and former 
attorney general Eric Holder of “politicizing” the justice department. “I take 
today as a moment of celebration,”Cruz said of Sessions’s nomination. “The 
reason I am so enthusiastically supporting your nomination is that I have every 
confidence you will follow the law faithfully.”Cruz then asked a series of 
soft-ball questions on how Sessions would “restore integrity” to the department.

12.03pm: Under questioning from Senator Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island, 
Sessions avoided giving a personal view on whether waterboarding amounts to 
torture. But, he noted, Congress has said that it does. “It is absolutely 
improper and illegal to use waterboarding,” he said. “I used to teach the 
Geneva conventions and the laws of warfare as an army reservist,” he added.


Whitehouse went on to ask whether Sessions would be prepared to prosecute “the 
president, his family and associates” if inquiries into Russia’s interference 
in the US presidential election led to charges against them being warranted.
Sessions effectively said yes. “If there are laws violated, and they can be 
prosecuted, then of course you’d have to handle that in the appropriate way,” 
he said.

11.20am: Sessions, who last year voted against a measure outlawing a ban on 
people entering the US based on their religion, joined Trump in walking back 
the president-elect’s campaign pledge to bar all Muslims from coming into the 
country.


Under questioning from Democratic senator Patrick Leahy, Sessions said: “I 
believe the president-elect has subsequently to that statement made clear the 
focus should be individuals coming from countries that have a history of 
terrorism.”

Sessions said that while he believes that “many people do have religious views 
that are inimical to the public safety of the United States”, at the same time, 
“I have no belief, and do not support the idea, that Muslims as a religious 
group should be denied admission to the United States”.

10.45am: Under questioning from Senator Chuck Grassley, Sessions makes 
headlines by promptly promising to recuse himself from any justice department 
investigations of Hillary Clinton’s private email server or the Clinton 
Foundation, due to his past political remarks on the subject. He also says: 
“This country does not punish its political enemies, but this country ensures 
that no one is above the law.”


Feinstein elicits assurances from Sessions that in spite of his personal 
political views, he recognizes that the US supreme court rulings allowing 
same-sex marriage and protecting a woman’s right to an abortion are the laws of 
the country. “I will follow that decision,” he says of both cases, while 
reiterating his view that the 1973 ruling in Roe v Wade was unconstitutional.

10.15am: Jeff Sessions gave robust opening remarks 
<https://www.judiciary.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/01-10-17%20Sessions%20Testimony.pdf>
, in which he defended his law-and-order conservatism while dismissing 
allegations of racism against him as “damnably false charges”. He was quickly 
interrupted by protesters loudly chanting: “No Trump, no KKK, no fascist USA” 
and calling Sessions a racist.

Sessions said: “I abhor the Klan and what it represents, and its hateful 
ideology.” He denied ever condemning the activities of the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) as “un-American” or describing a 
white attorney in Alabama as a race traitor.

In comments that were not included in printed remarks published before the 
hearing, Sessions promised that he understood the ills that racial 
discrimination and prejudice had inflicted on “our African American brothers 
and sisters”.

He continued by saying he would work to protect LGBT people and women who are 
victims of assault and abuse.

Before this, however, Sessions went on the offensive against the record of the 
Obama administration. Citing recent spikes in violent crime in some cities and 
the heroin epidemic that has afflicted several regions, Sessions painted a grim 
picture of a country needing rescue. “These trends cannot continue. It is a 
fundamental civil right to be safe in your home and your community,” he said.

He accused the administration of abandoning police officers amid national 
criticism over their use of force. “In the last several years, law enforcement 
as a whole has been unfairly maligned and blamed for the unacceptable actions 
of a few bad actors,” he said.

Still, in apparent recognition of concerns about Trump’s intentions, Sessions 
said of the Attorney General: “He or she must be willing to tell the President 
‘no’ if he overreaches. He or she cannot be a mere rubberstamp.”

“I understand the absolute necessity that all my actions must fall within the 
bounds of the constitution and the laws of the United States,” said Sessions. 
“I am ready for this job.”

10am: Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, the most senior Democrat on the 
Senate judiciary committee, gave a powerful opening statement in which she 
raised deep concerns about the prospect of Sessions serving as Donald Trump’s 
attorney general.

Citing President-elect Trump’s campaign threat to use the Department of 
Justice to go after his opponent, Hillary Clinton, Feinstein told Sessions his 
loyalty must be “to the people and the law, not the president”. She said 
Sessions must assure senators that he can “dispatch himself from the president 
and from his record” and enforce the law “fairly, evenly, without personal 
bias”. “Will he be independent of the White House? Will he tell the president 
no when necessary?” Feinstein asked.

Feinstein said that Sessions’ “extremely conservative agenda” had seen him 
vote against – and speak enthusiastically against – the notion that the US must 
not block people’s entry to the country on the basis of their religion. He 
voted against immigration reform and against giving some legal status to the 
children of undocumented immigrants, which he called a “reckless proposal for 
mass amnesty”. He voted against banning illegal torture, said Feinstein. He 
voted against a law against hate crimes, saying in 2009: “Today I’m not sure 
women or people with different sexual orientations face that kind of 
discrimination. I just don’t see it.”

In a sharply critical closing section, Feinstein said: “We cannot ignore that 
there are deep concerns and anxieties throughout America. There is a deep fear 
about what aTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> will bring in many 
places and this is the context in which we should consider Senator Sessions’s 
record.

“Communities across this country are concerned about whether they will be able 
to rely on the Department of Justice to protect their rights and freedoms. 
These freedoms are so cherished. They are what make us unique among nations.”






 