
In some senses our job is similar to that of a journalist investigating and 
holding Guardian News and Media (GNM) to account for its actions and words. For 
sustainability reporting, this role is often referred to as providing 
assurance. We are acting as a trusted third party to reassure GNM and its 
stakeholders that the sustainability report is balanced and the claims it 
contains can be substantiated.

We undertake our work using a set of widely recognised guidelines and 
requirements known as the AA1000 Assurance Standard (2008). This lays out 
commonly agreed expectations for how we should go about our assurance work, and 
it integrates with a sister standard, AA1000 AccountAbility Principles 
Standard, that sets out how GNM should prepare the report. The core 
expectations from GNM are contained in three principles that we check against:

Inclusivity: engaging with stakeholders and involving them meaningfully in 
GNM's sustainability approach

Materiality: identifying the most important issues to GNM and its stakeholders

Responsiveness: taking action on the most important issues and communicating 
those actions.

In essence, this means checking that the right issues are covered in the 
report and that GNM is doing something about each of these issues.

We also check that the information in the report is right – so we check the 
data and claims made about achievements and performance. If GNM says – 'we are 
the world leader' – we want to see evidence to support this.

We could spend our entire time checking absolutely everything and very 
thoroughly. In reality this would take a huge amount of resources, so we use 
the AA1000 Assurance Standard (2008) to guide us on how much checking to do. 
Our work is designed to achieve a 'moderate' level of assurance against the 
principles and performance information (mainly data) - this is known as 'Type 
2' assurance. A moderate level means we don't check everything; we take a 
sampling approach, focusing on the most important issues and using our 
professional judgment to decide where to focus our efforts. It means that we 
can't say with certainty that everything is correct, although the risk that we 
would miss a significant error is relatively low.

This year we checked a range of claims throughout the report. We also checked 
the most important performance data in the Operations, People and Targets 
sections of the report.

This work involved interviews with senior management of the organisation, 
including board directors, at Kings Place. We independently researched what 
issues might be important to GNM and its stakeholders. We reviewed the report, 
and, having identified the claims and selected data reported, reviewed evidence 
to support these. We did not review the preparation of financial information 
reported for GNM as part of the Guardian Media Group's Annual Report.

Web pages within our assurance scope are indicated by the 'Assured by Two 
Tomorrows' logo. In addition we may comment on individual pages posted to the 
sustainability website during the year.  Where data and claims within these 
additional articles have been checked they include our logo and a comment.

Responsibilities of the directors of GNM and of the assurance providers
The directors of GNM have sole responsibility for the preparation of the 
report. We were not involved in the preparation of any part of the report. Our 
statement represents our independent opinion and is intended to inform all of 
GNM stakeholders including management. We adopt a balanced approach towards all 
GNM stakeholders.

Our team included Jason Perks, Mark Line, Dick Dalley, Elvin Ozensoy and 
Judith Murphy, selected to provide the breadth and depth of expertise needed to 
cover the issues. It is important that we are independent. We have advised GNM 
in the past on its approach to responsible paper sourcing. This role moved 
primarily to one of assuring the sourcing data three years ago – which we view 
as fully compatible with our overall assurance role.

We confirm that we have no other work with GNM and have no relationships with 
significant stakeholders that might compromise our independence. We also follow 
our code of conduct for assurance. Details of our team's experience can be 
viewed on our website www.twotomorrows.com.

Our conclusion and observations using AA1000AS

Based on the work we did we have not found any evidence to suggest that the 
report does not properly describe GNM's adherence to the principles of 
Inclusivity, Materiality and Responsiveness. Our statements in each section of 
the report website provide a number of observations and recommendations. In 
addition some specific observations on each principle are given below:
Inclusivity

GNM's Open Journalism approach clearly places stakeholders at the heart of its 
editorial content and commercial strategy, which we see as a leading example of 
inclusivity.

We are pleased to see results from the Readers survey. It will be helpful to 
hear how the results of the Readers survey, showing differences between online 
and paper readers views, are considered as GNM continues its journey to Digital 
First.

It is a positive development that an employee survey was undertaken during 
summer 2012 – the first since 2009. Understanding employee opinions and 
concerns is even more important during periods of major change so it's 
heartening that GNM is now committed to ongoing six monthly surveys. We look 
forward to the results being published once they are available.

Materiality

The report covers the majority of issues a media organisation would be 
expected to include.
This year GNM continued to strongly align the commercial strategy with 
editorial's open journalism approach. With this, ensuring clear rules are 
implemented around differentiating the editorial and commercial content becomes 
more material to GNM and we're pleased to see this is addressed through the 
revisions to the editorial Code of Conduct.
Given the increasing importance of freelancer writers to GNM it would be 
useful for the report to describe more on how this group of stakeholders are 
being included in the Living Our Values strategy.

Responsiveness

The report describes GNM's actions in each area of the business, focussing on 
the most material issues.

GNM's coverage of key news stories that align to sustainability values 
continues to be a key highlight this year, as well as the way in which the 
coverage was developed through collaboration with stakeholders.

Good progress was made on achieving the retained sustainability targets and we 
are pleased to see the number of targets has reduced to a more appropriate 
number to actively manage for the 2012/13 year. We recommend these action 
plans, and the director's objectives, move towards more quantifiable targets in 
future that reflect the 2015 strategy and planned KPIs.

Last year we stated that 'The business strategy would benefit from more 
overtly showing how GNM is responding to sustainability questions within its 
digital first strategy'. The commercial sections have explained further how the 
Open strategy links to sustainability. There remains a need to continue to 
develop and explain the link between the business strategy and the 
sustainability strategy.

Performance Information

We checked performance claims from all report sections and data from 
respective sections outlined as above and where errors were identified these 
have been corrected. Based on the work undertaken to check the data and other 
performance information we have not found any evidence that GNM's performance 
is not properly reported.

We used the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) Quality of Information 
Principles as Criteria for evaluating performance information.

GNM has made further progress towards the goal of reporting comprehensive data 
that reflect the significant environmental impacts of the business. We have 
previously highlighted the lack of data about the impacts of digital 
publication – an area that many media organisations struggle to address and 
quantify. So it is particularly pleasing to see the SYMPACT project start to 
bear fruit with the publication of an estimated carbon footprint for the 
guardian.co.uk web-site. This is a difficult area to tackle and GNM deserves 
credit for generating some tangible numbers, albeit estimates at this stage.

Ultimately, the goal should be to understand and quantify digital impacts, at 
least to the same level as GNM currently achieves for its paper publications, 
and then to set meaningful improvement targets. There is still a long way to go 
to get to this point and GNM should maintain its drive for digital 
sustainability, reflecting the direction that the business is taking.

Last year, we commented on the lack of print site waste management data and so 
it is good to see some reported this year. At present it is not possible to 
give a comprehensive breakdown by waste category for each site, which would 
improve the clarity of reporting for next year.

Collecting data is not an end in itself, but a means of measuring performance. 
Once again GNM is able to demonstrate performance improvements in energy use, 
water consumption and waste recycling in the areas where there is direct 
management control. This is a reflection of the continuing efforts of staff at 
the editorial offices and print sites to implement improvement initiatives 
day-to-day.

Jason Perks
Sustainability Services Director
Two Tomorrows (Europe) Limited
London
October 2012


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Two Tomorrows (Europe) Limited is part of DNV, a global provider of services 
for managing risk, helping customers to safely and responsibly improve their 
business performance. www.twotomorrows.com
 LoV_assurance_logo Photograph: Guardian  