
Why did Ann Clwyd get such an easy ride during her appearance at the Chilcot 
inquiry this week, from both m'luds and the media? Clwyd is at least as 
complicit as her former bossTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> in the dissemination of tall 
tales designed to justify the attack on Iraq.

Clwyd is Labour MP for Cynon Valley and head of Indict, a group that 
campaigned for many years for the arrest and punishment of Saddam Hussein and 
his cronies under international law. On the eve of the Iraq War – 18 March 2003 
to be precise –Clwyd wrote an article for the Times 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/thunderer/article1120757.ece> in 
which she claimed that Saddam had a people-shredding machine.

Apparently the Ba'athists would dump their opponents into a machine "designed 
for shredding plastic", and later put their minced remains into "plastic bags" 
so they could eventually be used as "fish food".

It gets worse: apparently these unfortunate men were put into the shredder 
feet first so that they could briefly behold their own mutilation before death.

Not surprisingly, Clwyd's shocking claims spread around the world like a 
virus. The then prime minister of Australia, John Howard, talked of Saddam's 
"human-shredding machine" in a speech justifying his decision to send troops to
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. Paul Wolfowitz, the Bush 
administration's hawkish deputy defence secretary, expressed his admiration for 
Clwyd's article and a link to it was posted on the US state department's 
website. Numerous pro-war journalists repeated Clwyd's claims.

There was only one problem: there was no strong evidence, and there still 
isn't, that Saddam had anything like a people-shredding machine.

When I investigated this story 
<http://www.lewrockwell.com/spectator/spec239.html> for the Spectator and the 
Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/feb/25/iraq.iraqandthemedia>
 in early 2004, I found no convincing evidence that such a medieval-sounding 
contraption ever existed.

It seems Clwyd based her story on the uncorroborated claims of one individual 
from northern Iraq. Neither Amnesty International nor Human Rights Watch, in 
their numerous investigations into human rights abuses in Iraq, had ever heard 
anyone talk of a human-shredding machine.

Worst of all for Clwyd, I interviewed one of the Iraqi doctors whose grisly 
job was to examine the bodies of executed prisoners at Abu Ghraib, where the 
shredder was allegedly based, and he said no prisoner was ever killed by being 
shredded. And for the record, he really hated the Ba'athist regime.

It's worth remembering the role that Clwyd's claims played back in mid-March 
2003. There was widespread opposition to the war, as evidenced by the 
million-strong march in Hyde Park in February 2003.

People were already asking questions about the "dodgy dossier" and Blair's 
claims about WMD. The story of the shredder seemed designed to jolt us all out 
of our stupidity and convince us to back the government's war against evil. As 
the headline on Clwyd's article in the Times put it: "See men shredded, then 
say you don't back war."

The shredder story was used in a last-ditch effort to change people's minds. 
As Trevor Kavanagh at the Sun rather wishfully argued: "British resistance to 
war changed when we learned how sadist Saddam … fed dissidents feet first into 
industrial shredders." If Blair's dodgy dossier was cynically used to drum up 
support in the run-up to the invasion, then Clwyd's shredder story was 
cynically used to batter the last bit of war-scepticism out of the British 
public.

And yet Clwyd has not been subjected to anything like the same level of media 
criticism as Blair has been. This points to a problem with the way we remember 
the Iraq war. In the mythical version of events that is being promoted by the 
media off the back of the Chilcot inquiry, Blair, and his evil sidekickAlastair 
Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, 
single-handedly duped the cabinet, parliament, the media and some of the public 
into supporting the war.

The truth is that it wasn't only Blair who was spreading tall tales, and much 
of the media wasn't nearly as critical as it should have been of the Bush/Blair 
drive to war. Clwyd's appearance at the Chilcot inquiry was an opportunity to 
remind ourselves that Blair was not a superhuman warper of rational-mindedness 
and that the Iraq-related hysteria spread far beyond his coterie of advisers. 
Unfortunately, we've wasted this opportunity.
 