
There are few things I depend on in the kitchen more than garlic. Salt and 
pepper, perhaps. Butter and lemons are in the frame. But garlic stands shoulder 
to shoulder with such essentials, able to enhance and define, to add both 
sweetness and savour. None of its allium relatives – onions, shallots, chives – 
does quite the same things in quite the same way.

It's a shame, then, that we so often settle for second-rate garlic, and that 
we overcook it – or even overuse it. Adding too much is sometimes a way to sell 
garlic a little short.

Garlic's indispensability has lulled us into thinking of it as a sort of 
long-life standby. But in fact it is a fresh, seasonal vegetable that will 
behave in very different ways depending on how you treat it.

Crushing raw garlic breaks down its cells and releases eye-watering sulphurous 
compounds. It needs to be used with care but can have a wonderful effect. Add 
just a scrap to dressings or yoghurty dips to give a breath of heat and acidic 
definition.

If you are not adept at crushing garlic with a knife, there's no reason to 
shun the much-sneered-at crusher. An even easier option is a fine grater, which 
will produce a little heap of pureed garlic with no trouble at all.

Sliced or chopped garlic is less fiery. Cooked gently in oil, it releases that 
lovely sweet richness crucial for rounding out stews and soups. This warmth is 
a consequence of garlic's abundant natural sugars. But these are also 
responsible for its propensity to burn. If you are frying garlic, do so with 
the gentlest of touches. Imagine you are merely giving it a hot bath. As soon 
as the oil starts to fizz, it's a matter of seconds until the garlic begins to 
brown and you'll start tasting an undesirable bitterness. It's often wise to 
cook garlic with a wetter ingredient, such as onions or tomatoes, to prevent 
this.

And then there's roasting garlic whole – a simple procedure (slice off the top 
of a whole bulb, trickle with oil, wrap loosely in foil, bake at 
190-200C/375-390F/gas mark 5-6 for about 45 minutes) that completely changes 
its character, making it mild and sweet. You can squeeze out the gooey golden 
flesh and squish it on to meat or fish, or roasted root veg, like a garlicky 
ketchup.

But even roast garlic is occasionally disappointing. It can be bitter or 
insipid. That happens when you use bulbs that have been stored too long and are 
beginning to think about reproducing. Once it starts to develop little green 
shoots, your garlic is really a goner. If the shoot is tiny, halve the clove 
and nick it out with a knife. But if the garlic smells stale, bin it.

This is the best time to buy the homegrown crop, following the late summer 
harvest. Look for plump, hard cloves that completely fill their skins, and use 
them quickly. It's best not to store garlic for too long in the fridge, as this 
can affect its flavour and stimulate germination. A few days in the fridge are 
preferable to a warm, steamy kitchen, but ideally keep your garlic somewhere 
cool and dry, in a container that allows air to circulate. The best way to 
experience garlic at its freshest is to buy it every few weeks – and use it all 
the time.

Six-hour spiced lamb with 40 cloves of garlic

Lamb and garlic are always winning partners. Serves 6-8.

1 shoulder of lamb (or hogget or mutton), on the bone, around 2kg
4-6 heads of garlic (depending on size), broken into cloves

For the spice mixture
2 tsp cumin seeds
2 tsp fennel seeds
2 tsp coriander seeds
2 tsp caraway seeds 
10-12 black peppercorns
2 tsp sweet paprika
Pinch of cayenne pepper
¾ tsp salt
2 tbsp olive oil

Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/gas mark 7. Heat a dry frying pan over a medium 
heat. Add the cumin, fennel, coriander and caraway seeds and peppercorns, and 
toast until fragrant – about a minute. Transfer to a mortar and use a pestle to 
pound to a fine powder. Combine with the paprika, cayenne, salt and oil.

Put the lamb in a large, deep roasting tin. Use the tip of a sharp knife to 
score the meat – just a few millimetres deep. Tip the spice mixture over the 
joint and massage it in, including the underside, working it into any crevices.

Roast in the hot oven for 30 minutes. Baste the lamb with its juices, then 
pour a glass of water into the tin (not over the meat). Cover with foil, return 
to the oven and reduce the heat to 120C/250F/gas mark ½. After five more hours, 
take the lamb out and scatter the whole garlic cloves into the lamb juices. 
Cover the dish again and return to the oven for a final hour, by which time the 
meat should be extremely tender and the garlic soft and sweet.

Pull the lamb into pieces with a knife and fork, and dish up with the garlic 
cloves. Skim off the fat from the pan juices and trickle over the meat some of 
the dark, meaty liquor that remains. Accompany with something that will soak up 
the juices – mash, couscous, bread – and a big bowl of green salad.

Beetroot with garlic and walnut dressing
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's beetroot with garlic and walnut dressing: A 
joy. Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
This is based on a recipe from US food writer Mark Bittman 
<http://markbittman.com/>. Serves 4 as a starter or side.

For the beetroot
1kg small beetroot, about the size of golf balls
4 garlic cloves, skin on and bashed
4 sprigs of thyme
3 bay leaves
Sea salt and black pepper
3 tbsp olive oil
Chopped parsley, to serve

For the dressing
6 tbsp olive oil
6 garlic cloves, peeled 
75g walnuts
Lemon juice

First, roast the beetroot. Preheat the oven to 200C/395F/gas mark 6. Scrub the 
beetroot, then place in a baking tin. Add the garlic, thyme and bay leaves, 
season and trickle over the oil. Mix well, then cover with foil. Roast until 
tender – about an hour, though it could take longer, depending on the size of 
the beetroot. They're cooked when a knife slips easily into their flesh. Leave 
to cool a little.

Heat the oil for the dressing in a small pan over a low heat. Add the garlic 
and cook very gently for three to five minutes, until it starts to soften. Now 
add the walnuts and cook for another few minutes. Transfer to a food processor 
and blitz to a coarse puree. Season with lemon juice, salt and pepper.

Ideally while still warm, peel or rub the skins off the beetroot and slice 
them into slender wedges. Add the walnut dressing and toss gently to distribute 
it. Taste and add more salt, pepper and lemon juice as needed, then scatter 
with parsley and serve.

Runner beans stewed with garlic

This simple but amazing dish is from my friend Sarah Raven. Serves 4.

500g runner beans, de-stringed
2 garlic cloves, finely chopped
Knob of butter
1 tbsp rapeseed or olive oil
Salt and pepper

Chop the beans into small pieces, on the diagonal. Put in a large pan with the 
garlic, butter, oil and 3-4 tbsp water. Heat until steaming.

Cover the pan, leaving a slight gap, and stew very gently over a low heat for 
about 30 minutes, until the beans are completely tender. Stir occasionally and 
add a little more water if needed. Uncover for the last few minutes of cooking, 
so most of the water can evaporate. Season well and serve hot or warm.

Squid with garlic, chilli and lemon

Fabulously fast. Serves 4 as a starter.

4-5 small/medium squid (750g-1kg total), cleaned, tentacles cut off and 
reserved
2 garlic cloves, finely chopped
Finely grated zest of 1 lemon
1 medium-hot red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped
1 tbsp olive oil
Salt and pepper

Cut open the squid bodies. Using a lightly serrated knife, score the inside 
surface into a diamond pattern, without cutting right through. Cut each body 
into two to four pieces.

Combine the squid pieces and tentacles with the garlic, lemon, chilli, olive 
oil and seasoning. Heat a grill pan or heavy frying pan until really hot. Add 
the squid pieces, diamond side up, and the tentacles. Cook for one minute, then 
turn over. Cook for a minute more. The squid pieces will curl up, so flip them 
one more time if necessary to cook through, but don't cook for more than four 
minutes in total. Serve immediately with lemon wedges and salad or chips.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ. 
 