 The worst scenes of violence in the miners' dispute broke out at the Orgreave 
coking plant near Rotherham, Yorkshire, yesterday with cars being burned, 
stones, bricks and bottles being hurled, and policemen lashing out with 
truncheons. The battle lasted for 10 hours of horrific clashes. At the end 93 
had been arrested and 79 injured - 51 of them pickets and 28 police officers.
Among the injured was the miners' president Mr Arthur Scargill who was 
detained in Rotherham Infirmary last night for observation. His condition was 
not serious and hospital staff said he was suffering from head, arm and leg 
injuries. He was taken to hospital amid conflicting versions of how his 
injuries were sustained.

Mr Scargill said he believed he was struck by a police shield from behind. The 
assistant chief constable of South Yorkshire, Mr Tony Clement, said he was 
standing only a few yards from the miners' president and saw him fall on a 
railway banking. He said Mr Scargill struck himself accidentally against what 
looked like a railway sleeper. Another account came from a miner, Mr Stephen 
Hallow from Silverwood Colliery, who said that the police charged towards them. 
He said he saw Mr Scargill on the floor out of the corner of his eye. As far as 
he was concerned he had been given a "good leathering".

Police riot squads were used and several mounted police charges were made. 
Throughout the day missiles of every size and type were hurled towards police 
lines. At one point the police said that two petrol bombs had been thrown. It 
seemed later that these had been canisters or bottles filled with diesel fuel.

Miners began converging on the plant at 3am yesterday. Some had travelled from 
Scotland, Wales, the North-east of England as well as Yorkshire. At one stage 
they practically overwhelmed police units. There were pitched battles inside 
the coking plant for the first time since picketing began, and the frustration 
on both sides spilled over into sickening scenes of miners being batoned and of 
police being attacked with bricks, slivers of glass as well as the containers 
of fuel.

Although the police lines eventually held, officers did react violently. 
Truncheons were drawn and used on individuals by snatch squads. The barrage of 
rocks, bricks and glass was kept up for hours. For most of this time policemen 
stood with riot shields to fend off the missiles. Charges were also made 
against the pickets with policemen lashing out with truncheons. Mr Clement said 
later that it was a miracle no one had been killed.
 