
Not that long ago the beaches of Turkey, Egypt and Tunisia were popular 
holiday destinations for families taking their summer break. But after a series 
of terrorist attacks, northern Africa and the near east are no longer options 
for many families who want to remain closer to home – and safer.

The increased popularity of destinations such as the Spanish costas, the south 
of France and the Portuguese Algarve has put pressure on availability for 
families, according to Bob Atkinson, head of travel at price comparison website
TravelSupermarket.com <https://www.travelsupermarket.com/>. “This follows a 
surge in demand for safer resorts, following terrorist attacks in Turkey, Egypt 
and Tunisia,” he said.

So what are the options for families who have not yet booked their holidays 
for this summer when the most popular destinations are beyond their budget? (
All prices as at time of writing)

Ridesharing offers a cut-price ticket to Europe, but not many Britons use it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/12/ridesharing-cut-price-ticket-europe-car-sharing>
Under another sun

The price of a week in Mallorca at this late booking time can add up. Seven 
nights with Thomson holidays at the three-star Playas de Mallorca in Santa 
Ponsa, departing on 16 August, will cost a family of four £2,500, flying from 
Gatwick.

An alternative sun destination, for both availability and cheaper price, is 
Cyprus. One week at the self-catering three-star Kefalonitis Hotel Apartments 
in Paphos costs £1,762 for a family of four, departing from Stansted in mid 
August, booking withOnTheBeach.co.uk <https://www.onthebeach.co.uk/>.

Malta gives families another option for a Mediterranean break and again at a 
cheaper cost than Mallorca. Seven nights at the Hotel Kennedy Nova in coastal 
Gzira will cost a family of four £1,812, booking withExpedia.co.uk 
<https://www.expedia.co.uk/>. Potential saving circa £700

Holidaying at home

While Cornwall is renowned for its spectacular coastline, pounding surf, 
pasties and cream teas, in summer it is also infamous for blocked roads, hordes 
of tourists, and for many a long journey home.

A week in Lanroc House, Port Isaac, a holiday cottage with sea views, sleeps 
four, but costs £1,179 from the middle of August, according toCottages.com 
<http://www.cottages.com/>.

There are of course equally captivating parts of coastal Britain, such as 
Northumberland, with sandy, uncrowded beaches and historic sites though it may 
not always have the weather that makes the south west so attractive. The 
Coracle, a converted fisherman’s cottage sleeping four in Seahouses, costs £746 
for the week beginning 13 August. And if the weather does turn, castles such as 
Bamburgh and Warkworth are options away from the beach while Harry Potter fans 
will want to head inland to Alnwick castle, which stood in for Hogwarts in the 
movies.

A short flight to Derry and a drive west over the border gives tourists the 
rugged and sparsely populated beauty of County Donegal. When the sun shines, 
the numerous beaches come into their own while inland, rugged mountains give 
opportunity for walkers. A week in Lakeview Lodge will cost around £300 peak 
season, viaDonegalCottageHolidays.com <http://www.donegalcottageholidays.com/>. 
Potential saving circa £400

South of France alternative

Although the French Riviera retains the chic allure that has made it so 
desirable, in reality it can be expensive and crowded. Eurocamp Holidays are 
currently charging £1,578 for one week from 1 August for family of four at 
Domaine des Naiades, midway between Saint Tropez and Saint Maxime.

A more adventurous alternative is the Netherlands, which is closer, flatter 
and more cyclist-friendly, though lacking the weather of the Côte d’Azur. One 
week at the Landal Dunimar holiday park, 40km outside of Amsterdam, booked 
through Hoseasons costs £606 for a family of four on 1 August. Daytime return 
ferry sailings with car from Harwich to Hook of Holland with Stena Line cost 
£360 through TravelSupermarket. Dubbed “the flower resort of Europe”, 
sunflowers abound all summer.Potential saving circa £1,000

The insiders’ guide to finding a cheaper holiday in 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jan/04/cheap-holiday-guide-2016-insider-travel-tips>
Outside Turkey

Turkey’s tourist economy has been decimated as a result of tourist attacks. In 
March, five people were killed as a result of a suicide bombing in Istanbul, 
six days after an explosion in Ankara left 37 people dead.

As political tensions continue, holiday bookings are down 50% on 2015. A 
typical holiday for a family of four would see them stay all-inclusive for a 
week at the three-star Club Tuana Park resort in Dalaman, departing on 5 August 
from Gatwick, coming in at £2,704 withThomas Cook <https://www.thomascook.com/>.

Not a great distance away is Crete where one week at the three-star Bali Beach 
Village costs a family of four £1,586 all-inclusive, with flights leaving 
Gatwick on 5 August.

An unconventional alternative is Bulgaria. Seven nights at the Aqua Bevis 
Hotel at Sunny Beach, with its massive waterpark, would cost a family of four 
£2,348 withFirstChoice.co.uk <http://www.firstchoice.co.uk/>. Potential saving 
circa £1,100

Other than Amalfi

The Amalfi Coast offers sheer cliffs, pastel-coloured fishing villages, grand 
villas and terraced vineyards – and the demand from tourists that accompanies 
the attractions. Seven nights half-board at Hotel Royal Palm in Ischia would 
cost a family of four £2,254 flying from the East Midlands on 22 July, booking 
withTravelRepublic <https://www.travelrepublic.co.uk/v2/> via TravelSupermarket.

Although established as a beach destination, Croatia does not have the same 
profile among many holidaymakers as its near neighbour. A week at the Remisens 
Villa Else in Lovran on the Adriatic for a family of four costs £1,805, flying 
from Birmingham on 16 August, via TravelSupermarket.

Alternatively, the walled city of St Malo makes a great starting point to 
explore the rugged Brittany coastline and a week in the Corsaires corne de cerf 
hotel in the heart of the old town would cost a family of four £563 through
Booking.com <http://www.booking.com/> from 22 July. Fly to nearby Dinard 
Bretagne airport with Ryanair.Potential saving circa £450

East of Paris

After the Euro 2016 final on 10 July, demand can be expected to remain high in 
the summer months. Two standard returns on the Eurostar from London Waterloo 
cost £208 on 4 August, returning three days later, while three nights at the 
Belle Epoque era Normandy Hotel near the Louvre cost £330 on Booking.com.

Looking east could provide the solution. Riga, the capital of Latvia, may not 
be as grand as Paris, but is admired for its medieval old town and art nouveau 
architecture.

Three nights in the imposing four-star Astor Riga hotel cost £221 in early 
August with low-cost Ryanair flights from East Midlands, Leeds Bradford, London 
Stansted, Glasgow and Manchester.

Or maybe Polish classical beauty, Krakow where three nights at the Hotel 
Pollera in early August costs just £204 for a double room.Potential saving 
circa £100

BUDA BEATS BARCELONA

Although a weekend taking in Gaudí’s architectural genius and strolling down 
Las Ramblas sounded like a perfect summer break for Alex Harvey and his partner 
Beth Higham, the price did not.

During peak season in August the price of a trip to Barcelona was well outside 
the budget of what the young couple from Tunbridge Wells could afford.
 Alex Harvey and his partner Beth Higham. 
“A three-star hotel well outside the centre cost up to £250 a night, taking 
the total cost to around £1,500 for four nights,” said Alex, who works in 
insurance.

Instead, they decided to look east for an alternative. Using a barometer of 
city costs from the Post Office, they found that by going a little further, 
their costs would drop. Destinations such as Warsaw, Vilnius and Budapest cost 
half the price of Barcelona, Amsterdam or Dublin.

So instead of the bustling food markets of Barcelona, they found themselves 
overlooking the Danube in the four-star Prestige Hotel in Budapest.

“It was absolutely beautiful, just 200 metres from the river and the Chain 
Bridge, and only cost around £85 a night,” said Alex.

Flights with EasyJet cost £250, bringing the total bill for travel and 
accommodation to a fraction of what they would have spent in Spain.

“A three-course meal with steak, wine the full works cost just £35 for two,” 
Alex said. The 35-minute return airport taxi transfer cost just £35 and they 
bartered down the fare on the hop-on, hop-off tourist bus. “We paid £30 each 
for four days and were able to use it as a taxi service.”

Overall, the weekend came in at £750.
 