
The best one-year savings bonds pay depositors just 2% interest. Locking your 
cash away for five years would earn you around 3%. However, you can pick up 4% 
in dividends a year from funds of shares – and, like deposit accounts, put them 
in a tax-free Isa. If you are prepared to take on the risk of investing in 
funds for an income, what should you buy, and how?

This week wealth manager Sanlam issued its income study, naming the good, the 
bad and the ugly of income funds for small investors. Top of its list is the 
Chelverton UK Equity Income fund, which has a current dividend yield of 4.4% a 
year. Over the past five years, for every £100 invested it has paid a total 
dividend of £36.50 – far outstripping the amount savers could earn from their 
cash on deposit. Chelverton is a “boutique” investment management operation 
that specialises in investing in small and medium-sized companies.

Next on its list of top performers is Unicorn UK Income. This fund is 
currently yielding 4.1%, and over three years has turned £100 into £176.50 
(with dividends reinvested); however, be warned that it primarily focuses on 
higher-risk UK smaller companies.

What about the ugly funds? The bad news is that a lot of big funds from 
well-known providers are failing to cut the mustard, says Sanlam. It has just 
blacklisted two big funds, the Newton UK Income fund and Jupiter Income (£2bn).

The glaring omission from the study is Woodford Equity Income, as Sanlam only 
examines funds with a five-year record. Neil Woodford launched his fund just 
over a year ago, with more than £6bn – and his early investors have enjoyed an 
extraordinary first year.

Woodford Equity Income has shot to first place among all 82 equity income 
funds in the UK over one year, returning 20.6% compared with the average of 
7.5%. This figure assumes dividends were reinvested along the way. Woodford 
says he aims to produce a 4% dividend income each year, although it is far from 
guaranteed; his first income distribution worked out at 3.2%. But few investors 
will be quibbling given the huge outperformance.

But the Woodford fund is not for ethical investors who want to avoid putting 
their money into tobacco or arms companies. Imperial Tobacco, British American 
Tobacco and Reynolds American (which sells Camel, Pall Mall and Newport 
cigarettes in the US), are all in Woodford’s top 10 holdings. So is BAE 
Systems, the largest arms producer in the UK.

If you are after a UK equity income fund that is managed ethically, the choice 
is limited to F&C Responsible UK Income, Henderson Global Care UK Income, and 
Jupiter Responsible Income. Of the three, the Henderson fund has performed best.

Note that financial advisers tend to recommend “actively managed” funds rather 
than ones that track indices, which have much lower charges. It is perfectly 
possible to buy a UK index fund that pays out a dividend, usually half-yearly. 
All the major index groups – Vanguard, BlackRock, L&G, Fidelity and HSBC – 
offer FTSE 100 trackers which currently yield a dividend income of around 
3.5%-3.6%. If you buy an index fund from Hargreaves Lansdown, for example, you 
will pay HL’s “platform” charge of 0.45% plus the index fund charge of around 
0.1%, adding up to a total of 0.55% a year. If you buy Woodford Equity Income 
at HL, the total charge is 1.05% a year.

• How to invest Fund supermarkets are the best place to start. These are 
platforms on which investors can manage investment Isas, funds and pensions all 
in one place. They compete around price and add-on services, such as research. 
Guardian Money has previously recommended iWeb, which charges £5 per 
transaction. But it has introduced a £200 account opening charge, which makes 
it much less attractive to small investors. Others that we like are i.nvest at 
alliancetrustsavings.co.uk, Hargreaves Lansdown at hl.co.uk, Fidelity’s fund 
supermarket at fidelity.co.uk or Cavendish Online at cavendishonline.co.uk. In 
each case, aim to pay no more than just over 1% a year in total for an actively 
managed fund and 0.5% for an index. The Lang Cat has a useful guide to costs 
and charges atlangcatfinancial.co.uk 
<http://langcatfinancial.co.uk/white-paper/come-and-have-a-go-too/>.
 