
At the beginning of The OA (Netflix), the mysterious new drama created by and 
starring Brit Marling, a woman runs across a busy road while cars swerve and 
beep. It’s a bridge, in fact: she reaches the edge, climbs the barrier and 
jumps.

Not to her death, though (and later we’ll be questioning what death is and 
what it might mean when it occurs). Now she’s in hospital, and an older couple 
turn up and say she’s their daughter Prairie. She doesn’t recognise them until 
she feels the woman’s face, and says: “Mum?” Because when she went missing 
seven years ago, she was blind. Now, she can see.

A lot has happened in those seven years, and in Prairie’s whole life, in fact. 
She was once a seeing Russian girl called Nina, who had an oligarch daddy and 
eerie premonitions of her own near-death experience.

Without giving too much away, just in case you haven’t already binge-watched 
the lot, Nina’s/Prairie’s/The OA’s path follows an indistinct and disputed 
frontier between life and death, forking off into parallel realities and 
dimensions. There are angels, nosebleeds of doom, purgatories, stories within 
stories, questions about consciousness, nightmarish experiments, subterranean 
incarcerations and celestial escape portals that can only be opened by 
harnessing the power of movement.

It’s like Stranger Things meets The Missing meets Twin Peaks meets Glee meets 
Westworld. Some – conspiracy theorists, etc – will probably find clarity and 
confirmation. Even the uber-grounded and the ultra-cynical will find parallels 
in their own universe: Guantánamo,Ariel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/10/michelle-knight-ariel-castro-how-i-survived>
, psychosis and mental illness, plus some of the awful things that happen in US 
high schools.

Certainly it’s a thing of gargantuan imagination and ambition, both seductive 
and infuriating. I was sucked in, almost reluctantly. Then brought back with a 
jolt by lines of claptrap: “to exist is to survive unfair choices” or 
“knowledge is a rumour till it lives in the body”. And when a character called 
Scott says, “Oh God, honestly, go fuck yourself” (to his fellow prisoners, 
though I imagined he was saying it to the drama in which he was imprisoned), I 
found myself shouting: “Yes!”
 