
The American summer tradition of clearing out of cities for the beach every 
weekend is at odds with an equally strong tradition of avoiding inconvenience. 
But for some reason the beach always wins.

New York City's summer is vile. But you won't find me anywhere else | Samantha 
Gillison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/26/new-york-city-summer-vile-heat>
Six hours on the road with small children in the back? No problem. A two-hour 
tailback? Just part of the package. A three-hour journey out of Penn Station to 
East Hampton, on a train so crowded you have to stand the whole way? Deal with 
it.

I have, in my nine years in the US, done every one of these journeys multiple 
times and now approach the summer with a certain dread. Granted, unlike in 
Britain, where you can stand up for hours on a train to get to a beach that 
looks like a large mudflat, at least the sand on Long Island is pretty. The 
dunes are pristine, the weather is hot and, if you trudge far enough from the 
path, you don’t have to see another human for hours.

But the ratio of travel to down time would put a bank holiday fanatic to 
shame. What is this? Perhaps it’s a Gatsby thing: the romance ofleaving the 
city in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/28/summer-new-york-city-hot-smelly-wonderful>
 ingrained into folklore as the only way to Enjoy Yourself. Or perhaps it has 
to do with the fact that the standard amount of annual leave in the US is two 
weeks, turning summer weekends from relaxed opportunities to do nothing to the 
only time to cram a change of scene under your belt.

This weekend, we made a conscious decision to try, however long the drive 
took, to mentally recategorise it not as a pain in the neck barrier between us 
and the beach, but an exciting part of the weekend. We made multiple stops. We 
pretended the slow-moving traffic was gently relaxing.

It kind of worked. At the very least, not railing against how miserable it was 
made everyone happier. And with the temperature inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> hitting 40C, there was something 
to be said for being in an air-conditioned car for six hours. Maybe it is, 
after all, the journey that counts.

Apps v maps

For directions in the car, I used Waze, the satellite navigation app that 
directed Israeli soldiers into a Palestinian area, leading to a gunfight, 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle_east/battles-erupts-after-israeli-soldiers-follow-apparent-gps-error-into-palestinian-zone/2016/03/01/940307ef-503f-4a98-8abb-01cf6357a850_story.html>
 several months ago, but works fine for the outer regions of New York. While 
you drive, Waze crowdsources updates about speed traps, breakdowns and bad 
traffic on the road, all of which pop up in real time in the graphic, and which 
the app factors in to reroute you mid-journey.

In order to use this feature, however, you must have an almost superhuman 
ability to overrule natural instinct – to let it guide you down unknown back 
roads and on huge detours, trusting the superior smartness of its algorithm. 
There comes a point on every trip when, I have discovered, I lose my nerve and 
overthrow the machine for a familiar route. It probably takes longer to get 
there, but the fightback has to start somewhere.

Ribs on the road

As a kid, one of the biggest treats of summer travel used to be pulling in at 
a Little Chef on the motorway, and a vague thrill lingers on whenever we stop 
off at a TGI Fridays. No matter how bad the food, the romance of the service 
station always had the power to make it taste great, particularly in the US, 
where weird pies and large portions can still trigger the open-mouthed tourist 
in me.

But at the weekend, the ribs tasted like sandpaper, the wings, under the 
sauce, glowed pallid white and the car next to ours in the parking lot bore a 
Trump bumper sticker. Finally, my Pollyanna-ism had found its outer limits.
 