
The remarkable story in the latest Mother Jones 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/06/cca-private-prisons-corrections-corporation-inmates-investigation-bauer>
 about life in the American private prison system helps us think through a 
remarkable US election – and, more generally, the death spiral in which the 
liberal left seems to have trapped itself.


Australian journalist Shane Bauer’s 35,000 word piece chronicles four months 
spent undercover as a guard in the Winn Correctional Center in Louisiana, a 
medium security prison holding 1,500 inmates, most of whom are black. It’s an 
astonishing piece of reporting that reads almost like dystopian science fiction.

What’s that got to do with the US election? 

In a much-read article from last year, Ta-Nehisi Coates noted 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/10/the-black-family-in-the-age-of-mass-incarceration/403246/>
 that “the United States now accounts for less than 5% of the world’s 
inhabitants – and about 25% of its incarcerated inhabitants. In 2000, one in 10 
black males between the ages of 20 and 40 was incarcerated – 10 times the rate 
of their white peers. In 2010, a third of all black male high-school dropouts 
between the ages of 20 and 39 were imprisoned, compared with only 13% of their 
white peers.”

Both parties have contributed to the rise of the so-called prison industrial 
complex. Yet it’s a matter of historical record that it was a Clinton who 
really sent the carceral state into overdrive.

What Trumpism means for democracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/02/donald-trump-means-for-democracy-trumpism-super-tuesday>
In her seminal The New Jim Crow, Michelle Alexander quotes the Justice Policy 
Institute’s assessment: “the Clinton Administration’s ‘tough on crime’ policies 
resulted in the largest increases in federal and state prison inmates of any 
president in American history”. Clinton also massively reallocated resources 
away from welfare and towards prison, cutting funding for public housing by 
$17bn and increasing funding for corrections by $19bn, “effectively making the 
construction of prisons the nation’s main housing program for the urban poor”. 
Hence Alexander’s grim assessment: “Clinton – more than any other president – 
created the current racial undercaste”.

As First Lady, Hilary Clinton actively contributed to her husband’s 
increasingly punitive regime. “We need more police, we need more and tougher 
prison sentences for repeat offenders,” she famously explained. “The three 
strikes and you’re out for violent offenders has to be part of the plan. We 
need more prisons to keep violent offenders for as long as it takes to keep 
them off the streets.”

Even more importantly, Bill Clinton won office at a time when liberals and 
progressives were embracing (at first reluctantly and then with unabashed 
enthusiasm) free market nostrums that, after the Soviet collapse, were 
presented not as theories or policies but scientific truths, as immutable as 
gravity.

It’s worth noting, then, that Winn Correctional isn’t merely a prison. It’s a 
private prison, part of a $3bn industry that the Clintons helped create. As a 
result, Bauer’s piece isn’t just an account of jail brutality but is also an 
indictment of neoliberal politics.

The jail’s located near Winnfield, a small community impoverished in an almost 
textbook fashion. As is so often the case, the only places locals can find jobs 
are the Wal Mart, the lumber mill and the prison.

Bauer is snapped up with no qualifications (“If you are breathing and you have 
a driver’s license and you’re willing to work, then we’re willing to hire 
you”), given cursory training (in which he’s coached to meet the already 
rock-bottom requirements) and then put in charge of prisoners.

At that time, Corrections Corporation of America was earning $34 from the 
state of Louisiana for each inmate with whom it was entrusted. The profit 
principle meant, of course, it did everything possible to reduce costs – in 
particular, skimping on staffing, maintenance and services. Bauer earns $9 an 
hour for shifts that run for 12 hours. Most prison programs had been cut, 
meaning that the inmates simply sat in their cells most days. Guard numbers 
were so low that correctional employees relied on prisoners to run the 
facility. State supervision was minimal, with employees routinely skipping 
mandatory checks and faking their reports. He writes of guards simply watching 
as prisoners try to kill each other. He reports endemic sexual violence and 
horrific neglect, including one inmate losing his legs and his fingers to 
untreated gangrene despite repeatedly begging for help.

But if the prisoners were brutalised, so too, were their keepers.

In some respects, that’s what’s so striking about his article: the jail sounds 
like any other huge corporation (except with more violence), a place of 
systematic corruption and dysfunction, where the management tries to boost 
failing morale not by improving anything but through inane motivational mantras.

For many progressives, it’s almost unthinkable that voters might choose a 
boorish hatemonger like Donald Trump overHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, a woman who possesses 
all the conventional attributes of a successful politician.

A Trump victory would be, they say, apocalyptic.

What Bauer’s piece reveals is that, for some Americans, the apocalypse is 
already here – and it owes far more to Clintonite liberalism than to 
Trump-style populism.

It’s worth, then, thinking about the evolution of progressive ideas, in the 
US, in Britain and here in Australia.

Perversely, after the disintegration of actually-existing-socialism wiping so 
much of the left’s intellectual slate clean, liberals and radicals often proved 
themselves servicing unfettered capitalism than conservatives, who still clung 
to older traditions, customs and prejudices.

In Australia, for instance, Labor did much of the work of neoliberal reform, 
with Hawke and Keating embracing what was then called “economic rationalism”. 
Everywhere, activists of the seventies often became the enthusiastic 
technocrats of the eighties and nineties, an evolution that entailed merely a 
slight repurposing of their rhetoric. Reform and modernisation, flexibility and 
accountability, even (from some of the more excitable ideologues) disruption 
and revolution: such were the slogans of neoliberalism’s glory days.

But the old facade hid a very new content. Most obviously, the protagonist in 
the narrative of progress was no longer the people but the market. And, even as 
the old bureaucracies were dismantled, new bureaucracies emerged, with experts 
and advisers and other savants appearing to interpret precisely what the 
economy demanded of its minions at any given time.

Will 'Trumpism' replace conservatism?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/19/donald-trump-republican-party-election-conservatives>
The rise of this technocratic administration corresponded, for various 
reasons, with the decline of the traditional outlets in which the popular will 
had once been expressed. In fact, the two tendencies combined in a kind of 
vicious circularity. Once upon a time, the trade unions and the political 
parties and even the churches provided an obvious ladder for the ambitious and 
to climb. Their slow decay accentuated the power of the technocrats in 
government and the private sector, even as the increasingly evident power of 
the technocracy contributed to the decay of the public sphere.

When the economy necessarily determines policy, why waste time with 
conferences and branch meetings and the other rituals of old fashioned 
political engagement democracy? You don’t lobby the seasons to change, you 
don’t protest at the ebb and flow of the tides. Once the market’s entirely 
naturalised, what’s the point, other than nostalgia, of a trade union or a 
pressure group?

In Australia, for instance, the decline of trade unionism isn’t simply a 
matter of shrinking memberships. It’s the withering of a whole culture that, no 
so long ago, enabled millions of ordinary people to exert at least some control 
over their workplace and their society.

But for the new mandarins, the shrinkage of such bodies doesn’t matter. On the 
contrary, it was all to the good, since it allowed the duly qualified experts 
to do their thing undistracted – and they had the business of governance 
entirely under control.

Until, suddenly, they didn’t.

Assessments of neoliberal policy vary greatly according to your perspective. 
Damon Hininger <https://www.cca.com/executive-leadership>, the CEO of 
Corrections Corporation of America, no doubt thinks private prisons do a great 
job. Then, again, he earned $3.4m in 2015.

Something similar might be said about the European Union. Certainly, whatever 
the else the EU represents, it isn’t democracy, at least not in the way the 
left has traditionally understood the term. On the contrary,as Richard Tuck says
 <https://www.dissentmagazine.org/online_articles/left-case-brexit>, “popular 
politics is precisely what the EU was designed to obstruct” since “like 
independent central banks and constitutional courts, its institutions are 
essentially technocratic”.

The people of Greece know what he means: that country was blessed with a close 
up view of an unelected council of ministers subjecting an entire population to 
market discipline.

But if you wanted to object to this new order – a new order deliberately 
structured to deprive you of any voice – how might you do so? Blinded and 
enfeebled, Samson welcomed the opportunity to bring the whole damn temple down 
on himself, since by so doing he could take out a few of his enemies.

The voters of Britain followed his example.

That’s not to suggest that Brexit represented an anti-capitalist protest – at 
least not in any simple way.Richard Seymour’s probably right 
<http://www.leninology.co.uk/2016/06/eu-referendum-vote.html> to say that, 
though the vote can’t be reduced to racism and nationalism, racism and 
nationalism are how it was organised and recruited and directed – and, as a 
result, how it will be experienced.

But what follows from that? We’re presented with two choices. The left can try 
to understand the alienation and frustration so palpably revealed, and by so 
doing redirect it away from the demagogues of the right. Or it can conclude 
that the problem lies with the people themselves – and double down on the 
business of managing them.

Unfortunately, an awful lot of progressives seem to be plumping for option B.

Take the all too common response to Trumpism: a denunciation of ordinary 
Americans as slackjawed morons and incorrigible bigots, rubes too idiotic to 
see through The Donald’s carnival barker routine. Yet, while racism certainly 
enthuses some Trump supporters, others embrace his anti-PC shtick as a 
metonymic rejection of a Clintonite liberalism that paid lip service to 
diversity and multiculturalism and so on even as it devastated the communities 
of the poor.

Keith O’Brien recently 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/06/coal-country-democrats-donald-trump-2016-213988#ixzz4CjazdOka>
 toured the American Rust Belt speaking to blue-collar workers who were 
contemplating going Trump, simply because their towns are falling apart and the 
organisations and insitutions they once relied upon have collapsed. That 
doesn’t mean Trumpism represents a working class insurgency, nor that Trumpite 
racism isn’t a threat. But O’Brien’s unemployed coal miners clearly won’t be 
soothed by more slick political PR. On the contrary, they like Trump’s 
brashness precisely because it upsets the establishment culture that they 
loathe.

Yet many on the liberal left have responded to Trump’s populism by digging in 
behind politics-as-normal, a strategy that seems almost calculated to flop.

Why I will be leaving Brexit Britain | Oliver Imhof
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/why-leaving-brexit-britain>
 Brexit, too, seems to be reinvigorating the project whose failure it so 
palpably demonstrated. Like an aircraft spiralling into the sea, the process 
possesses a self-reinforcing logic of destruction – ex-radicals embrace 
technocratic elitism out of despair at the masses; that despair increases as 
the masses demonstrate their hostility to technocratic elitism.

If, the argument goes, the people of Britain reject the undemocratic 
institutions of the EU, that proves they can’t be trusted with democracy. 
“Since ancient times,”explains Harvard University’s Professor Rogoff 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/brexit-democratic-failure-for-uk-by-kenneth-rogoff-2016-06>
, “philosophers have tried to devise systems to try to balance the strengths of 
majority rule against the need to ensure that informed parties get a larger say 
in critical decisions …”

It’s a traditional argument of the right, an entirely conventional fear of the 
ignorant masses and an entirely conventional plea for their stewardship by 
their betters. But over the last few days, it’s been articulated again and 
again by liberals desperately floating ideas as to how a clearly expressed 
popular sentiment might be overturned.

Nothing could be more disastrous.

If we’re ever to get out of this mess, progressives need to throw the reset 
switch. How is it possible that a billionaire bigot can present himself as the 
voice of the people, a brave truthteller speaking up for the little guy? How 
have we allowed xenophobes and racists to posture as advocates for democracy? 
How did the left get manoeuvred into taking responsibility for the failures of 
a market system against which it once defined itself?

 We should not give an inch to the bigotry resurging in both Britain and the 
US, just as we shouldn’t give any ground to the anti-immigrant xenophobes in 
Australia. But to fight their hatred, we must – as a matter of urgency – 
articulate a progressive opposition to the conditions breeding such deep 
alienation.
 