
The benefit sanctions system is a damaging, expensive failure. Churches, as 
well as charities, see daily the human cost of this failure in people left 
without enough money to buy the very basics of life. The recent National Audit 
Office report has now shown that taxpayers also bear a financial cost for this 
failure (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/no-evidence-welfare-sanctions-work-says-national-audit-office>
, 30 November). There is no evidence that the UK sanctions regime is 
cost-effective. In 2015 our reportTime to Rethink Benefit Sanctions 
<http://www.church-poverty.org.uk/rethinksanctions/report/reportpdf> revealed 
that each day 100 people unfit for work because of mental health problems 
received a sanction – mainly for missing appointments with work programme 
providers.

We have seen the harm these sanctions caused and have met people who were 
scarred by their experiences. The NAO now tells us that, on average, these 
sanctions actually reduced people’s short and long-term job prospects and led 
to reduced earnings for those who subsequently got work. The government has 
repeatedly stated that sanctions improve employment prospects. The NAO 
confirmed that the Department for Work and Pensions had no direct evidence for 
this. Moreover, we now know that the DWP held data that could show whether the 
sanctions system was working or not. Not only did the department fail to 
analyse this data, it refused to share it with other researchers. It also 
discouraged its contractors from assisting these researchers. In effect the DWP 
appears to have deliberately made itself blind to the failures of the sanctions 
regime.

As church leaders we are deeply concerned that without proper investigation of 
the consequences harsh punishments are given to people in already difficult 
circumstances. We again add our voices to the many government, charity, church 
and parliamentary bodies calling urgently for a full independent review of the 
benefit sanctions regime.
Alan Yates General assembly moderator, United Reformed Church
Rev Dr Richard Frazer Church and Society Council convenor, Church of Scotland
Rev Lynn Green General secretary of the Baptist Union of Great Britain 
Right Rev John Davies Bishop of Swansea and Brecon
Rev Dr Roger Walton President of the Methodist Conference
Rachel Lampard Vice-president of the Methodist Conference
Niall Cooper Director, Church Action on Poverty

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 