
Circuit court opinions are not generally prime-time fodder, but presidential 
primary season provides exceptions to many rules. During Tuesday’sRepublican 
debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/11/trumps-still-sexist-carson-called-isis-losers-but-poor-debates-arent-hurting-the-frontrunners-yet>
, moderator Maria Bartiromo asked Donald Trump about a circuit court opinion 
from earlier in the week. Trump was unable to contain his glee.

“I was so happy when I saw that decision came down,” Trump exclaimed. “It was 
an unbelievable decision.” If you have been following Trump’s campaign, you 
won’t be surprised to know that the decision was about keeping Latino 
immigrants from staying here.

The fifth circuit court of appeals upheld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/10/obama-administration-seeks-supreme-court-ruling-on-key-immigration-action>
 a district court ruling Monday holding unconstitutional an executive order by 
President Obama that would allow undocumented immigrants to stay if they meet 
several conditions, such as having children who are American citizens, called 
the Deferred Action to Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents 
(Dapa) memo.

The three-judge panel split on predictable party lines, with the two 
Republican-nominated judges finding against Obama’s executive action and the 
lone Democratic nominee on the panel dissenting.

The dissent, by Jimmy Carter nominee Carolyn King, made a stronger argument 
despite not having the votes to carry the day. She emphasized that Congress has 
provided the resources to deport only a small fraction of the people who are in 
the United States illegally, instead delegating decisions about deportation to 
the Department of Homeland Security. The argument against the administration, 
in a nutshell, is that Dapa’s selective enforcement and prioritizing some 
deportations over others is making new law and therefore usurping Congress. But 
the executive order is not usurping Congress because, for all intents and 
purposes, it reflects the policy established by Congress.

The Dapa memorandum “is the inevitable upshot of decades of congressional 
appropriations decisions”, King observes. It’s hard to argue that an executive 
order exceeds the authority of the executive branch when it reflects decisions 
that Congress has explicitly and implicitly required the executive branch to 
make.

But regardless of whether you agree with King or the majority, there are only 
nine votes that count. Which brings us to the question of how theUS supreme 
court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> will deal with this 
issue.

The four Democratic nominees on the court are mortal locks to uphold the order 
if they agree to hear the case, and three Republican nominees (Justices Antonin 
Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito) mortal locks to find the order 
illegal. So as with many such cases, it will come down to chief justice John 
Roberts and justice Anthony Kennedy, and before oral argument I wouldn’t even 
venture a guess about how they would rule.

But the timing of the fifth circuit’s ruling makes it likely, though not 
certain, that the supreme court will hear the case this term. Generally, 
mid-to-late November is the latest that someone can file an appeal and have it 
heard before the supreme court’s term ends in late June. As Ian Millhiser of 
ThinkProgresspoints out 
<http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2015/11/09/3720857/the-obama-administration-just-lost-a-massive-immigration-case-thats-actually-good-news-for-obama/>
, the last case the supreme court heard in its previous term – the landmark 
same-sex marriage decision Obergefell v Hodges – was an appeal filed on 14 
November.

If the court decides not to hear the case next term, the delay would 
perpetuate the uncertainty facing a large class of undocumented immigrants that 
will not be deported but are not eligible for key benefits like driver’s 
licenses that Obama’s executive order is attempting to alleviate. And of 
course, a policy that has not been put into effect would be easier for a new 
Republican administration to change.

If the court does take the case, however, it is overwhelmingly likely that a 
ruling will not be handed down until late June. It will come down, therefore, 
with the presidential campaign well under way. Trump will probably not be the 
Republican nominee, but his presence will have made immigration an important 
issue and also will have probably required the Republican candidate to have 
committed to a relatively extreme position on immigration.

However it decides, the supreme court will make clear the stakes of the next 
election, as the next president will have to either decide whether to continue 
Dapa or figure out how to act if it’s been struck down. Politically, a supreme 
court decision in June would probably be good news for Hillary Clinton either 
way. But whether good news is coming for more than 4 million undocumented 
immigrants is far less clear.
 