
The shadow prisons minister, Jenny Chapman, 41, has valuable insights rarely 
afforded to politicians with her brief. As a 19-year-old assistant psychologist 
on work placements from university, her job included helping to run anger 
management, social skills and anti-bullying groups in high-security prisons.

“I was a bit naive. My dad was worried about my safety. He was quite 
unimpressed with my decision but I felt completely safe in there. I enjoyed it 
and found it really fascinating and rewarding, so much that I actually filled 
in the forms to apply for a job as a prison officer on the accelerated 
promotion scheme,” Chapman recalls.

However, she got such a taste for politics after taking a part-time job in her 
local MP’s office in Darlington that Chapman ended up succeeding Labour’s Alan 
Milburn in the 2010 general election. But once at Westminster, she asked to 
become the party’s lead on prisons.

“This was the only job I really wanted,” she says. “It sounds cheesy, but I 
wanted to be in a position where I could make a long-term difference in an area 
I have a real interest in.”

Chapman’s prison work experience took place during the early 1990s when 
Michael Howard was home secretary and his hardline ideology led to a huge rise 
in prisoner numbers, rock-bottom morale among prisoners and staff and multiple 
problems from which campaigners say the prison system has never really 
recovered. “I remember people in HMP Frankland saying it was just politicians 
talking nonsense. I don’t think the impact was properly appreciated.”

Labour’s proposals are fiddling while the prison estate burns | Letter: 
Frances Crook of The Howard League for Penal Reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/25/labour-proposals-fiddling-while-prison-estate-burns>
She says she abhors the way that since then successive politicians have used 
prisons for political gain with no thought to the long-term consequences. “I 
think it’s irresponsible when big statements and promises are made, as it 
implies there are simple solutions to a very complicated problem and does more 
harm than good. That’s not the sort of politician I want to be.”

Chapman thinks the justice secretary, Chris Grayling, thought he could make 
himself look tough on his way to a bigger cabinet job. “He probably hoped he’d 
be home secretary by now, but that’s looking less and less likely,” she says.

“I don’t think he understood the incentives programme that was already there 
[to reward prisoners’ good behaviour] and he has just created a heap of other 
issues for himself, a whole load of nonsense that prison governors have to then 
manage which has been destabilising and has actually harmed rehabilitation for 
many people. Reoffending figures are higher than ever, especially among young 
offenders. I don’t think he has got the outcome he hoped for at all.”

If she’s in charge of prisons after the election, what changes would she make?

“One of the key areas to improve is around leadership and the management of 
prisons,” Chapman replies. “Governors need to be in post for a lot longer than 
the average three years or so. And when the Prisons Inspectorate comes and says 
you’re doing a bad job, and evidences that, and you continue to a bad job, why 
are you still in your job? That wouldn’t happen in any other walk of life.”

She would also like to see a board for each prison, like a hospital trust, 
made up of representatives from relevant organisations: training providers, the 
local authority, health, housing, and other agencies that are needed to support 
people upon release so they don’t go on to commit more crimes. The board would 
be responsible for appointing the governor and the contract would be with the 
board and the governor would be held to account and managed locally. “That way 
we would have more continuity of leadership. If you don’t have it at the top 
there is no way you’re going to get it with staff on the shop floor,” she says.

Now in some prisons you’ve got a lot of experienced, savvy inmates being 
locked up by kids off the street.

Chapman has raised concerns about the shocking levels of violence in prisons 
following the reduction in the number of prison officers by almost a third in 
the past three years. “We need to take on more graduates as officers”, she 
says. “Young people I speak to want a career that is rewarding, people-based, 
and has an outcome that benefits wider society. We should be encouraging them 
to join the prison service – with the right level of support and training it’s 
a great job. The pressure the system is under now is making the job such a 
miserable one for so many officers.”

“The government has made a complete hash of it in making so many redundant, 
now they are begging them to come back. I see adverts in petrol stations asking 
if anyone wants to work in a prison, so now in some prisons you’ve got a lot of 
experienced, savvy inmates being locked up by kids off the street.”

Chapman is vague about the role of the private sector in delivering more 
“supersized jails” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/18/chief-prison-inspector-review-super-jails>
, and“secure colleges” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/17/fortified-school-education-young-offenders-glen-parva>
 for young offenders under a Labour government, but says: “Experience tells us 
that prisons on that scale do not do the job of reducing reoffending 
effectively”. For locked-up children she believes regular contact with the 
family is key, so “putting them all together in one place far away from home is 
wrong”, she says.

Earlier this month contracts to manage probation services involving the 
supervision of 200,000 “medium- to low-risk” offenders were handed over to 21 
community rehabilitation companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/29/justice-probation-contracts-private-companies>
. Would she cancel this privatisation programme? “I’d scrap that in a 
heartbeat,” but she adds pragmatically, “this government has signed long 
contracts with the providers and it would cost far too much money to try and 
reverse it.”

For Chapman, those who are victims of people coming out of prison deserve 
better and the people who work in prisons deserve somewhere that’s safe to do 
the job the taxpayer pays them to do. She says: “I really want to get this job. 
I want to do the right thing and when I’m finished I want to feel that I did 
all I could to make a difference.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 41.

Lives Darlington.

Family Married, two sons.

Education Hummersknott School, Darlington; Brunel University, BSc psychology; 
Durham University, MA medieval archaeology.

Career 2011-present: shadow minister, prisons and probation; 2010-present: 
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP, Darlington; 2007-10: 
councillor, Darlington borough council and lead member for child services; 
2003-10: stay-at-home mum; 1997-2003: constituent assistant, Darlingon; 1993-5: 
prison psychologist, HMP Frankland and HMP Dartmoor.

Public life Patron, YMCA (Tees Valley).

Interests Baking, walking, scrabble.
 