
The development of online professional networks is an excellent example of how 
Guardian News & Media can make money and do good.

There are now 15 professional networks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>, covering many areas that 
are core to social and environmental justice, such as the social enterprise, 
social care, local government, education and sustainable business.

They provide insight, analysis, best-practice knowledge, jobs, training and 
career advice to their professional community, based on our open journalism 
philosophy.

The networks achieve this in various ways including news updates, blogs from 
our community members, comment pieces from our expert panels, interviews with 
sector leader, live Q&As and debates, conferences, roundtables and networking 
events.

The networks also promote jobs relevant to that industry, allowing the 
networks to become a one-stop shop for business professionals.

Our communities are engaged through our own platform and numerous social media 
sites. We have more than 100,000 engaged Twitter followers and many more users 
on Facebook and LinkedIn.

Each network also condenses information on a specific topic, relevant to that 
industry through the use of content hubs, which are sponsored. There are now 30 
commercial relationships with external partners.

New networks launched in the past year have included the Guardian Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network>, Culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network>, and Guardian 
Students <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network>. Other networks 
cover a range of topics, including public leaders, volunteering and healthcare. 

The success of the professional networks has seen membership subscription more 
than quadruple in the past 12 months to almost 170,000 members.

Members receive weekly newsletters as well as discounts to events and seminars 
and an ability to contribute to the ongoing development of the networks through 
participating in quarterly surveys, and specialist content and careers advice.

Surveys across the networks are a new initiative that has already seen 
outstanding results. Twenty two surveys conducted so far have included 
questions on topical issues such as the London riots and the Health and Social 
Care Act, as well questions regarding jobs and events – all enabling members to 
tell us what they would like to see more of on the networks as they move 
forward.

Each month, the professional networks have more than 2 million page views and 
more than 1 million unique visitors. They have also been developing a strong 
international membership and supported a number of large international events 
this year, with various teams visiting Brazil, New York and Europe. 

Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sustainable-business>

Guardian Sustainable Business (GSB), one of the professional networks, is 
striving to be the world's leading platform for progressive business to engage 
with the sustainability agenda.

We recognise that the Guardian platform gives us unique means to explore the 
complexities of the role that business plays in society.

The website seeks to walk the tightrope of showing where good practice exists 
and showcasing leading-edge thinking, while constantly challenging business to 
be more courageous in creating change.

Key to our growth is the community we build and interact with GSB now has more 
than 10,000 members and regularly sees 120,000 monthly unique users, up from 
50,000 at the beginning of the year.

The GSB sponsorship team has focused on commercial partnerships that build 
integrity and trust with both our commercial customers and audiences. They 
actively approach companies that have the best reputations for leadership and 
pioneering change, as opposed to organisations that have committed substantial 
budgets for greenwashing or superficial public relations campaigning.

These commercial partnerships range from editorial partnerships, conferences 
and awards to webinars, supplements and podcasts.

This has allowed us to build a community of progressive sponsors and 
advertisers who have in turn attracted other like-minded businesses to work 
with us. Our readers have also responded positively, engaging regularly with 
sponsor-generated content and live debates.

An example of the collaborations we have forged is the partnership with 
Unilever, which is a leader in the field of sustainability.

Our brief was to develop content around the issue of sustainable lifestyles 
and thelevers that affect behaviour change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/unilever-five-levers-for-change>
. One aspect of this project was an event that we live broadcast to 55 
countries, pulling in business leaders and global sustainability experts from 
around the world. This was followed by a crowd-sourcing initiative to develop 
ideas to encourage consumers to take shorter showers and save water and energy.

Alongside our online content we have developed several mechanisms for 
professional development, such as quarterly free conferences and seminars. We 
also organise annual awards to help drive the agenda by inspiring companies to 
act.
 