
Sam Mendes's American Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-beauty>
 had a resounding triumph at Sunday night's Academy Awards, winning Oscars for 
best picture, actor, director, original screenplay and cinematography. The 
awards demonstrate Hollywood's novel eagerness to be beguiled by a smart, 
literate script with classy performances from intelligent grown-ups.

The success is encouraging, in that it siphons attention away from sentimental 
shlockers like The Green Mile, with its questionable take on race, and The 
Cider House Rules, with its bizarre pseudo-issues. But it is depressing that 
brilliant nominees vanished utterly from the radar: there was nothing for 
Michael Mann's stunning The Insider, Spike Jonze's direction of Being John 
Malkovich or Tom Cruise's acting in Paul Thomas Anderson's Magnolia, movies 
that are genuinely challenging and experimental in form and tone.

The Oscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> showered on Mendes's 
stylish and exhilarating film are none the less a heartening riposte to 
dumbing-down and juvenilisation in commercial American cinema. But they also 
show that in this film Hollywood feels it has an almost perfect combination. 
There are modish art-house qualities in moderation, a pinch of indie-ness 
flattering for the Academy's amour propre, and a daring and seductive style 
that can plausibly showcase both middle-aged sexuality in menopausal revolt and 
the creamy yearnings of young love. (At some unconscious level, the Academy 
will have had a shrewd appreciation that candid topless scenes for Thora Birch 
and Mena Suvari have done box office no harm.)

American Beauty also maintains the astringency of satire. But although its 
felicitous title is shaded with irony, it conveys an essentially comforting 
endorsement of the mother country and its warm-hearted family values. American 
Beauty pulled off the clever trick of soothing and reassuring the Academy's 
conservative sensibilities - and perhaps members even heard a ghost of Frank 
Capra's It's a Wonderful Life in Spacey's this-is-where-I-live voiceover.

It is another blow on behalf of elder statesman Steven Spielberg and his 
DreamWorks SKG behemoth. Who could have guessed we would hear the F-word and 
the C-word in a DreamWorks picture? His choice of Sam Mendes now looks 
inspired, and the meeting he engineered between the young British stage 
director and the veteran American cinematographer Conrad L Hall looks set to 
pass into Hollywood legend. Mendes's award for direction is the most thoroughly 
and conspicuously deserved of the list.

Perhaps what put American Beauty ahead of The Insider, The Sixth Sense, The 
Cider House Rules and The Green Mile is that, for all the dark suburban 
weirdness, this was the film with the clearest, strongest account of 
conventional romantic love. This is what appeals most to the Academy's palate 
and the cinemagoing public: not botched abortions, ghosts, nicotine 
enhancement, or criminals bursting into flames in the electric chair. The 
Insider, for example, was notable in that there is no sex interest or sex 
dilemma of any sort. Al Pacino is a middle-aged guy happily married with 
grown-up children to an intelligent non-babe his own age, and Russell Crowe 
plays an intellectual and a scientist whose agonies are not of the heart. 
Perhaps the Academy just likes that most classical narrative template of all: 
the story of love.

The male actor winners give pleasingly intelligent turns: nobody deserves 
promotion to the A-list more than Kevin Spacey, and his delivery of the line in 
American Beauty about missing the James Bond theme night on TV deserves some 
sort of award all on its own. (Again, for technical expertise and depth, my 
vote would go to Russell Crowe, but no one could quarrel with Spacey that 
much.) But Michael Caine's supporting actor award for The Cider House Rules is 
a bit baffling. This is an actor with weight and presence, an actor with great 
technique, often overlooked on account of typecasting. His Dr Larch has 
twinkling charm, but this is not an outstanding performance from Caine, who was 
much better in Hannah and Her Sisters and in Educating Rita. Caine's award 
shows the striking new readiness of the industry and the American public to 
accept Brits in American roles with American accents, but his accent is 
outrageously bad, especially considering that Crowe showed how to do a much 
more convincing one, and transform himself physically into the bargain.

 One of the big disappointments of the evening was how lacklustre the female 
acting awards were. Angelina Jolie is an intelligent performer with sexiness 
and style, but there is the sinking feeling that she won best supporting 
actress for Girl, Interrupted because she plays someone in a psychiatric 
hospital - and playing someone (notionally) mentally ill can often be a free 
ride to acting plaudits. Jolie was actually better in the more enjoyable, less 
pretentious Pushing Tin, and she was easily outclassed by Catherine Keener in 
Being John Malkovich.

And for best actress we got Hilary Swank - someone pretending to be a man. A 
lanky, short-haired boyish presence, and someone whose repudiation of her 
female identity leads to disaster. A dull and callow choice, an almost 
insulting choice, compared with the powerful and vibrant women like Janet 
McTeer in Tumbleweeds, Julianne Moore in The End of the Affair and Annette 
Bening in American Beauty. These are real, grown-up women, dramatising strong 
female roles with passion and intelligence. But the Academy had no appreciation 
of their power, and went for someone without crow's feet instead. This omission 
testifies to something immature, obtuse and testosteroney in the Oscar taste.

Once again, Colin Welland's 1981 cry about the British coming sounds faint. 
Mendes and Caine are associated with two intensely American films, and their 
awards are light years away from an endorsement for our lottery-funded native 
industry. Solomon and Gaenor was an honourable runner-up to Almodovar's 
outstanding All About My Mother in the best foreign film stakes. Topsy-Turvy, 
Mike Leigh's fine film about the genesis of Gilbert and Sullivan's Mikado, took 
two well-deserved Oscars for costume and make-up, but these look like the 
Academy's dutiful, uncomprehending nod to something heritage and picturesque. 
The fact that Topsy-Turvy had no nominations in the categories of acting, 
direction or cinematography hints at an Academy prejudice that this is 
Masterpiece Theater stuff, which but for a technicality would go in the foreign 
language section.

Ultimately, for all the hype and the over-hype, the most incredible story of 
Oscar night 2000 is still Sam Mendes, the young director who has leapt to the 
very top of the movies with his very first jump. In fact, Mendes's training in 
the distinctively British culture of subsidised theatre - and the 
awe-inspiringly intelligent way he was able to modify this training for film - 
are the only things Brit patriots can feel warm about.
 