
Those of you unfamiliar with the Old Testament will most likely know the 
teachings of Ezekiel from Pulp Fiction. There, Samuel L Jackson solemnly 
intones that prophet’s words before clipping some kids: “The path of the 
righteous man is beset on all sides by the inequities of the selfish and the 
tyranny of evil men.”

 In The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>, there is a new 
Ezekiel: not a prophet trapped in Babylonian bondage, but a former star of 
community theatre playing the role of king of an apparently thriving community 
in post-zombie apocalypse USA. He’s a compelling character, with lavish 
dreadlocks, Shakespearean regal patter and – nearly forgot – a tiger on a chain.

This last trapping of kingly power, as you might expect, impresses his 
subjects who believe the hokum that he wrestled the big cat into submission. 
The truth – that Ezekiel was a zookeeper who found the injured beast alone in a 
pen after the zombie outbreak and tended it back to health and thence obedience 
– is, to my mind, hardly less far-fetched.

No matter: who doesn’t like watching a CGI tiger? That said, the Life of Pi 
set the bar high: put a tiger on a raft with a boy on the Indian Ocean, then 
see what happens. What a premise! Shiva, King Ezekiel’s noble pet, has its work 
cut out to eclipse that performance.

This new Ezekiel is beset like his predecessor by inequities of the selfish – 
not least having to produce weekly truckloads of goods for Negan’s darkly evil 
gang the Saviours, who we saw at work last week, torturing and murdering 
members of Rick’s crew for the best part of 45 minutes. After that scarcely 
watchable episode, this more contemplative one was a blessed relief.

But here’s the twist: when King Ezekiel and his horse-riding 
breastplate-wearing henchpersons (who look like Game of Thrones extras duded up 
in 21st-century US Army surplus) supplied Negan’s hoods with the carcasses of 
eight Kingdom-reared pigs as their weekly tribute, little did the Saviours know 
the horrible truth. Those pigs had been reared on zombie flesh.

I didn’t pay attention in Nutrition 101, but my guess is that King Ezekiel was 
subtly trying to slay his oppressors with this grotesque pork. It was, perhaps, 
his application of what the other Ezekiel said in the Bible about striking down 
“with great vengeance and furious anger those who would attempt to poison and 
destroy my brothers.” Except now it’s Ezekiel who’s doing the poisoning.

 It’s the return of Carol The Dissembler, who we last saw with her brutish 
husband. Photograph: Fox 
 When world-weary Carol was brought by Morgan to Ezekiel’s court to recuperate 
after serial unpleasantnesses involving the tyranny of evil men, she was 
sceptical about the Kingdom, but initially confided her doubts only to Morgan. 
I enjoyed the resulting return of Carol The Dissembler, who we last saw with 
her brutish husband, smiling impossibly sweetly as she receives the Kingdom’s 
bounty. “Breakfast cobbler! It’s like flavour on top of flavour!” she exclaimed 
cod-enthusiastically after being offered a meal by an underling. “We were 
eating possums out there…” She was faking it, of course. Really, she thought 
the Kingdom was a joke, a cosy lie that distracted King Ezekiel’s subjects from 
the unbearable reality of human life that has become nasty, brutish and – most 
likely – short.

What made this episode so effective was that both Carol and Morgan arrived at 
the Kingdom beset by their own existential crises. She was despairing over life 
– what is the point of surviving if it just brings more killing and death? He 
was wondering if he could – and indeed should – rejoin the path of non-violence 
after recently killing one of the Saviours to stop him murdering Carol.


In a particularly fine scene, Ezekiel called Carol on her despair. He told 
Carol the Dissembler that he recognised her type. “What’s that saying,” he 
asked her. “Never bullshit a bullshitter?” He realised she despised the 
Kingdom, but thought she needed to understand how it works before passing 
judgment. The marvellous Khary Payton as King Ezekiel, flitting between 
speeches that were more Merrie England than post-apocalypse Georgia (“We have 
matters of great import to attend to”) and then into down-home demotic (“I 
faked it till I made it”), explained that his kingdom worked on the principle 
of the Platonic noble lie. He had no real royal lineage, no true heroic 
exploits – but none of that mattered if he was to be an effective ruler. Why? 
“People want someone to follow. It’s human nature. They want someone to make 
them feel safe.”


And so he did: Ezekiel even arranged the slaughter of the pigs out of his 
subjects’ earshot so the squeals didn’t freak them out. And he didn’t confide 
the truth about the compromising deal he’d cut with the Saviours. He was, or at 
this point seemed to be, a good man. As the other Ezekiel put it: “Blessed is 
he, who in the name of charity and good will, shepherds the weak through the 
valley of darkness, for he is truly his brother’s keeper and the finder of lost 
children.”

This latter-day Ezekiel, then, ruled a kingdom that is an oasis of seeming 
civilisation walled against the surrounding barbarism. It had allotments, 
livestock, a little school, a choir, even fruit baskets to welcome guests like 
Carol. In this year of Bob Dylan becoming Nobel laureate, how fitting that the 
Kingdom’s choir was rehearsing his Bobness’s Don’t Think Twice, It’s All Right, 
that song of farewell to a lover who wasn’t all that.
 Carol and Morgan both arrived at the Kingdom beset by their own existential 
crises. Photograph: Fox 
The choir sang “It ain’t no use to sit and wonder why, babe.” Quite so: ain’t 
no use wonderin’ – just get on with living. Perhaps that was why Morgan found a 
role at the Kingdom, training a young man called Ben in aikido, this martial 
virtuosity with a staff and – perhaps – in his code of never killing humans.

Carol refused to be so readily co-opted into the Kingdom. “You’re a joke,” she 
sneered at Ezekiel. “Out there it’s real.” Perhaps. But, suggested Ezekiel, 
life must be about more than mere survival if it is worth living. Or as he put 
it: “Where there’s life, there’s hope – heroism, grace and love.” Those are the 
necessary fictions, perhaps, that make human life liveable. He invited her to 
stay, since “Hope is what you’re walking away from. I embraced the 
contradiction. Maybe you could.”

But, apparently, Carol didn’t. At the end of the episode, Morgan took her to a 
house where she planned to live a life of bitter renunciation on her own. Like 
the freewheelin’ Bob Dylan in that song the choir was rehearsing, Carol was off 
on the dark side of the road.

And then, rather wonderfully, there was a knock at her door, followed by a 
feline growl. It was Ezekiel and Shiva, come to pay their respects. Clearly 
Carol hadn’t moved that far away from the liveable lie that is the Kingdom.

Perhaps, we hope, Carol hasn’t given up on hope. Plus, maybe – or maybe I’m 
wrong – the King’s visit had more than neighbourly intentions. Ezekiel had 
brought a pomegranate. “You really gotta try one of these,” he said, 
suggestively. We could do with a nice romance to make season seven’s current 
bleakness more palatable.


 Would-be words of wisdom

 “The pessimist looks down and loses his head. The optimist looks up and loses 
his footing. The realist looks forward and adjusts his path accordingly.” King 
Ezekiel, explaining his philosophy to Morgan.

“People can’t show you the way. You have to find it yourself.” Morgan, 
explaining his philosophy to Ben.

“The Dead are Alive. Best not the Alive be Dead.” The slogan painted on the 
walls of the canteen in the Kingdom.

 