
A fortnight before the American opening of The East 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155708/east>, its star, co-writer and 
producer was wandering the streets of New York in her pyjamas. "Can't sleep," 
tweeted Brit Marling. "Feeling something extreme but on what side of the 
spectrum?"

It's a typical question from an atypical actor. Two years ago, the 
then-unheard-of 27-year-old from Chicago stoleSundance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/sundancefilmfestival> with a double whammy of 
sci-fi mumblecore. Robert Redford saw Marling excel inSound Of My Voice 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147252/sound-of-my-voice> and Another 
Earth <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/143611/another-earth> (which she 
also co-wrote and produced) and instantly signed her up to star in his 
directorial return The Company You Keep. She now has six studio features on the 
go.

"I'm ill-equipped for this interview," admits Marling, her soft hazy wisp of a 
voice drifting down the line from Bucharest. She's been flown out to Romania at 
short notice to replace Olivia Wilde on civil war epic The Keeping Room. "It's 
been a very aggressive physical and emotional endeavour so far."

Her candour is not entirely unexpected. Marling regularly opens up on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/britmarling>, sharing insights such as: "I feel badly 4 
ppl who have never had their hearts broken or been fired or had an epic fail – 
they don't know what they are missing." Or: "meeting time sex legend: coffee = 
i want 2 talk but i don't want 2 have sex. drinks = i don't want 2 talk that 
much, i just want 2 have sex." Or simply: "Take me serious."

She talks of her career as if it were a happy accident, yet it's anything but. 
She grew up nomadically, her father chasing real estate work across the east 
coast. She majored in economics at Georgetown University, before spending her 
graduation summer interning as an analyst at Goldman Sachs. They were impressed 
enough to offer her a job, but she turned it down. "It seemed as if the Type-A 
life meant you had to be complicit in something," she says of the career path 
she almost took. "You have to put the blinders on and not ask questions. I felt 
I was being told: 'This is what it means to be successful. This is what it 
means to be happy. And this is what it looks like.' I would have been cruising 
for a mid-life bruising."

'As a kid, I was going to the cinema and not seeing the type of women I saw 
every day in my own life. I think about what a struggle it is to be a young 
girl in this world, and it makes me determined to play interesting women'

Marling moved to Cuba for a year, but the lure of LA brought her back; she 
drove there in a station wagon across America with Mike Cahill (Another Earth 
director and ex-boyfriend) and Zal Batmanglij (big brother ofVampire Weekend 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/vampire-weekend>'s Rostam and director of 
Sound Of My Voice and The East). "My parents were really worried," she revealed 
in a speech at her old university last month. "We were moving to Hollywood to 
make movies, with no contacts and no money." Six months in, they were surviving 
on lentils every night. She was offered roles in horror films – "being chased 
around by chainsaws" – but rejected them, preferring to co-write her own films 
with each flatmate.

"As a kid, I was going to the cinema and not seeing the type of women I saw 
every day in my own life," she says. "I think about things my little sister has 
to deal with, the struggle it is to be a young girl in this world, and it makes 
me determined to play interesting women. I have a hard time being a part of, or 
even thinking about, an image system that has oppressed women."

In The East, Marling poses the question of what it means to live an 
accountable life. She plays a practising Christian and private security 
operative charged with infiltrating a shadowy eco-anarchist commune. Led by
Alexander Skarsgård <http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/alexander-skarsgard>
's brooding leader and Ellen Page's committed disciple, the group only venture 
from their hiding place to commit eye-for-an-eye attacks against plutocratic 
corporations guilty of gross negligence. Marling is sent in to destroy them, 
but her perspective shifts and her morals align as she begins to fall for 
Skarsgård. "I don't think I directed their relationship well enough, actually," 
says Batmanglij. "The chemistry between them was so strong. They committed and 
believed in the characters. That really comes out in the sex scene, I think."

"There's a profound loneliness to people who live by the depth of their 
convictions," Marling says of The East's central relationship. "The couple 
recognise that in each other."

Inspiration for the film came from the summer that Marling and Batmanglij 
spent living as freegans: freezing their bank accounts for 10 weeks, they slept 
rough, hopped trains and ate from rubbish bins. Batmanglij says they did it 
because they felt "angry and frustrated" at the world around them. "I can't 
make sense of the times we live in," he adds. "It's a shallow, strange time. I 
don't feel nourished by it. Out on the road, I found myself shocked at how 
alien normal life suddenly seemed."

Marling was equally invigorated by the experience. "We spent time with people 
who live simpler, more community-based lives, who share things with and are 
accountable to each other. One night, everyone stripped naked and got into a 
fountain in the rain. It was a different way of seeing the world; suddenly you 
see everything as public space waiting to be reclaimed."

'All my films are love stories, but not obviously so… It's more to do with the 
fear of revealing oneself honestly to someone'
 Brit Marling in The East. Photograph: Myles Aronowitz 
She tells another story about waking up one morning on a city rooftop, 
surrounded by other travellers. "It was really early. Across the way in a 
skyscraper was a guy in a suit, sitting at his desk on a conference call. I was 
rolling up my sleeping bag and we caught each other's eye. There must have been 
six feet between the buildings, but the gap between our lives felt massive."

But given the duo's middle-class backgrounds and obvious safety nets, how big 
was that gap really? How committed is Marling to the freegan cause? The East is 
a neat and provocative thriller, but its social message is hobbled by a high 
regard for youthful angst; Freud would be weak-kneed at the number of parental 
issues present here. At its worst, The East is guilty of other-life tourism, 
taking advantage of a cause without committing to it, using environmentalism 
and corporate crime merely as convenient catalysts for the characters' internal 
quarter-life crises. It's a green film by a green writer.

But The East also fits into a pattern, one that has existed since Marling's 
first script, The Dreams Of Spies. In each of her films, she has created 
relationships held hostage by questions of identity and threatened by the fear 
of discovery. In Another Earth, she befriends a man after killing his family in 
a drunken hit-and-run. In Sound Of My Voice, she plays a cult leader who 
seduces journalists with claims that she's from the future.

"All my films are love stories, but not obviously so," she says. The East has 
been interpreted as a comment on her own life – the outsider infiltrating the 
system and bending it to her will – but Marling reckons it's "more to do with 
the fear of revealing oneself honestly to someone. It's easier to take on a 
cover identity, and if that cover identity is rejected then you – who you truly 
are – remains intact. Maybe on some level it's all connected to the idea that, 
if you go in honestly and you're seen as who you are, that might not be enough."

Perhaps the girl who graduated top of her economics class, who told Goldman 
Sachs she wanted to be an artist, who thumbed her nose at Hollywood to make her 
own films, isn't as confident as you might think. As Marling says, it's 
probably best to "Take me serious".

The East is in UK cinemas now
 