
Not enough of us make pies these days, yet there are few things more 
satisfying and crowd-pleasing than bringing a dish of golden-crusted goodness 
to the table. And it's not hard, just a matter of making a fine filling and 
good pastry.

The key is to lavish a bit of love on that filling; the crust is a crowning 
glory, not a place to hide. Most meaty pie fillings are essentially stews, so 
make them the best stews they can be, slow-cooked, well-seasoned and saucy.Fruit
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fruit> fillings are compotes that 
need to balance sweetness and acidity; you can also make them aromatic with a 
bit of spice or herb. Fish pie fillings can suffer from over-cooking, so put in 
the fish raw and insulate it with a sauce, so it stands up to the heat and time 
needed to render the pastry crisp.

Pastry's the crucial wrapping, so do make your own, if you have time. For 
pastry that cracks and crumbles beneath your knife, and melts in the mouth in a 
burst of buttery loveliness, you need the real deal, made with good flour, 
excellent butter and little else. A food processor or mixer with a pastry 
attachment gives consistent results, but trusting your own fingertips gives 
ultimate satisfaction.

Cold pastry into a hot oven is the trick: it leads to a quick "setting" of the 
dough, trapping the fat within, rather than letting it ooze out greasily. Chill 
your pastry until you need it, cool your filling before you assemble the pie, 
and set the oven to at least 190C/375F/gas mark 5.

Attend to these simple details, and you'll soon be living the life of pie.

Curried smoked haddock pasties

A pasty is a great way to show off your mastery of homemade rough puff pastry. 
These are smoky, rich and delicious. Serves four.

2 tbsp rapeseed or sunflower oil
1 thumb-sized piece fresh ginger, peeled and finely chopped
2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped
½ tsp ground coriander
½ tsp ground cumin
½ tsp ground turmeric
1 large onion, peeled and finely sliced
2 tsp medium-hot curry powder
100ml double cream 
30g sultanas
6 dried apricots, quartered
1 tbsp chopped coriander
300g smoked haddock fillet, skinned and cut into chunky cubes
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the rough puff pastry
300g plain flour
Pinch of salt
150g chilled, unsalted butter, cut into small cubes
Beaten egg, to glaze

For the pastry, mix the flour and salt, add the butter and toss to coat in 
flour. Add just enough iced water (about 150ml) to bring it together into a 
fairly firm dough, and shape the dough into a rectangle. On a well-floured 
surface, roll it out in one direction, so you end up with a narrow rectangle 
about 1cm thick. Fold the farthest third towards you, then fold the nearest 
third over that, so you have a rectangle made up of three layers. Give it a 
quarter turn, and repeat the rolling, folding and turning five more times. Wrap 
and chill in the fridge for 30-60 minutes.

Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5. Use parchment to line a baking tray 
with a lip (just in case some butter leaks out of the pastry).

Now for the filling. Heat the oil in a pan over medium heat, add the ginger, 
garlic and spices, and fry for 30 seconds. Stir in the onion and curry powder, 
and fry gently until soft. Add the cream, bring to a simmer and cook for a few 
minutes, until thick. Remove from the heat, stir in the sultanas, apricots and 
coriander, season, then set aside to cool before adding the fish.

Cut the pastry into four and roll out each to 4mm or so thick. Cut out four 
18cm circles, and place a pile of the filling on one half of each circle. Brush 
the edges of the pastry with water, bring the other half over the filling and 
crimp together the edges.

Place on the baking tray, brush with egg and bake for 35-40 minutes, until 
golden and steaming hot all the way through. Eat warm or cold.

Steak and kidney pie

It's a classic for a reason. Serves six.

1kg beef skirt or chuck steak, cut into 4-5cm chunks
Up to 30g plain flour, well seasoned 
400g beef kidneys, cored and cut into chunks
A little oil
1 glass red wine
1 onion, peeled and sliced
1 tbsp tomato ketchup
1 tsp English mustard
1 bay leaf
About 750ml beef stock (or water)
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
350g open-cap mushrooms, thickly sliced
Rough puff pastry (see previous recipe), made with 400g flour and 200g butter, 
chilled

Heat a little oil in a large frying pan over a medium-high heat. Toss a couple 
of handfuls of the beef in the seasoned flour, shake off any excess, brown all 
over in the hot pan and transfer to a large saucepan. Repeat with the remaining 
meat and the kidneys, adding oil as needed.

Deglaze the pan with the wine, scraping up any crisp bits, and add to the 
meat. Add a little more oil to the pan and sweat the onion for a few minutes, 
until soft. Add to the meat, then add the ketchup, mustard, bay leaf and just 
enough stock barely to cover the meat. Bring to a tremulous simmer and cook for 
90 minutes, until the beef is fairly tender but not quite finished (skirt may 
take a little longer than chuck).

Check the seasoning, then leave to cool. The filling can now be chilled for a 
day or two, or frozen. If using the mushrooms, before you make up the pie, fry 
them in a little oil for a few minutes to let the juices run, then add to the 
filling.

Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5. Cut the pastry into two, about 
two-thirds and one-third. Roll out the larger piece and line a lightly greased 
pie dish (about 1.2 litres). Roll out the smaller piece to form a lid. Spoon in 
the meat: it should be at least level with, and preferably a little higher 
than, the top of the dish. Ladle in enough juices to come 2cm short of the top 
of the dish.

Brush the edges of the pastry base with egg yolk, lay on the lid and crimp 
together the edges. Brush with more egg, and cut two vent holes at both ends of 
the pie. Bake for 50-60 minutes, until golden brown, leave to settle for around 
15 minutes, then serve with mash, greens and English mustard.

Bramley apple pie
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's bramley apple pie: 'One of our finest 
traditional puds.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
With just apples, sugar and pastry, this remains one of our finest traditional 
puds. Serves six.

1kg Bramley apples
150g caster sugar, plus more to finish
2 tbsp ground almonds (optional) 
1 star anise pod or ½ tsp cinnamon (optional)

For the sweet shortcrust 
300g plain flour
50g icing sugar
175g cold butter, cut into small dice
1 egg yolk
About 4 tbsp cold milk (or water) 

For the pastry, put the flour and sugar in a food processor and blitz briefly 
to combine. Add the butter and blitz until the mix resembles breadcrumbs (or 
rub it in by hand). Add the egg yolk (save the white) and just enough water or 
milk to bring it together, then knead lightly into a ball, wrap and chill for 
30 minutes.

Heat the oven and a metal baking sheet to 220C/425F/gas mark 7.

Peel and core the apples, and slice thinly into a large saucepan. Add the 
sugar and two tablespoons of water. Add the spice, if using. Bring to a simmer 
and cook gently, stirring often, for 10 minutes, until the apples start to 
break up but are not yet mushy. Leave to cool.

Cut the pastry into two, about two-thirds and one-third. Roll out the larger 
piece and line a 4cm-deep 24cm pie dish (metal or enamel give a crisper 
finish). Scatter the almonds over the base, if using: they're not essential, 
but they help avoid a soggy bottom. Tip the apple into the pastry-lined dish 
(leave the star anise pod in).

Roll out the remaining pastry and brush a little water around the rim. Place 
the lid over the filling, trim off any excess and seal the edges. Lightly beat 
the reserved egg white and brush over the pie, then sprinkle generously with 
caster sugar (mixed with a good pinch of cinnamon, if you've used some in the 
pie). Cut a couple of small slashes in the top. Put on the hot oven sheet, bake 
for 10 minutes, then reduce the heat to 180C/350F/gas mark 4 and bake for 30 
minutes more, until a rich golden brown. Leave to sit for at least 15 minutes 
before serving, with cream, custard or ice-cream.

• Go to rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> for the latest news 
from River Cottage HQ.
 