
Small events can take on great significance. One sleepy summer nine years ago, 
the French bank BNP Paribas suspended trading in three of its money-market 
funds. The announcement caused a tremor in financial markets, but raised barely 
an eyebrow elsewhere. Little more than a fortnight later, trading was resumed. 
Maybe, just maybe, someone at BNP thought that would be the end of the story. 
They can’t have thought that historians would take that initial announcement on 
7 August 2007 as the start of the credit crunch. The suspension of trade was 
such an unusual move, and came as the worries over subprime mortgages had built 
to a critical point. Trust in the financial system eroded, then crumbled 
entirely.

Negative iniquity – subzero interest rates would hit the poor hardest | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/negative-iniquity-subzero-interest-rates-would-hit-the-poor-hardest>
The historic slump that followed has helped produce all kinds of 
unforeseeables: Britain’s exit from the EU, the ascent of Nigel Farage, Jeremy 
Corbyn’s leadership of the Labour party. And perhaps, just perhaps, the next 
chapter began this week, withan innocuous-seeming letter from a high-street 
bank to its customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/natwest-paves-way-for-introduction-of-negative-interest-rates>
.

Again, it does not seem like much: NatWest writing to small-business account 
holders to outline a change in terms and conditions. The language is the usual 
bank anaesthetic, but its implication is truly historic: “Global interest rates 
remain at very low levels and in some markets are currently negative … this 
could result in us charging interest on credit balances.” The state-owned bank 
is preparing hundreds of thousands of shopkeepers and manufacturers for their 
interest rates to fall below zero. It may well be that a small firm keeping 
£1,000 at their local bank could soon see that deposit shrink to £999 or even 
less. And if today it is small businesses, tomorrow it may be households 
storing a lot of money at their banks. Since the crash, savers have lost out – 
but never in modern British history have they actually faced negative interest 
rates.

Just why this should be is not hard to fathom: faced with a stalling world 
economy, central banks are cutting their rates below zero. If, for argument’s 
sake, Santander wants to store £1,000 with the European Central Bank for a 
year, it will find that in 2017 it draws out only £996 – because Frankfurt now 
has an interest rate of -0.4% for commercial bank deposits. At the Swiss 
National Bank, it’s even worse: -0.7%. Next Thursday, the Bank of England is to 
cut rates below 0.5%, perhaps even to zero. Beyond that lies the uncharted 
territory of negative rates. Since Brexit Britain is very likely to go into 
recession soon, Mark Carney and his colleagues will be right to cut rates, but 
the implications of “minus money” are huge and uncertain. Japan has had 
negative interest rates for months and low rates for decades – neither seems to 
have pulled it out of its slump. It may be that in the credit-happy 
Anglo-American economies, shoppers will take the fact that their savings are 
now shrinking as a cue to splash out on a new conservatory. Since easy monetary 
policy has already sparked a boom in ultra-cheap mortgages, another cut may 
mark a last hurrah for the housing bubble.

But there is one important point to make: minus money will affect Britons very 
differently. Negative rates fall hardest on the grey-haired rich. For the young 
or the insolvent they may mean little. They could be destabilising for 
financial institutions. Banks rely on rates to make returns. As the former Bank 
of England rate-setter Charlie Bean has written in a recent paper for The 
Economic Journal, pension funds will struggle to make adequate returns, while 
fund managers will borrow a lot more to make profits. Mr Bean says: “All of 
this makes a leveraged ‘search for yield’ of the sort that marked the prelude 
to the crisis more likely.” This is not comforting but it is highly plausible: 
barely a decade on from the crash, we may be about to repeat it. This comes 
from tasking central bankers with keeping the world economy growing, even while 
governments have cut spending. From small announcements, large consequences can 
follow.
 