
Perhaps you’ve seen the photos of what the future of air travel might be. I 
have, and frankly, I’m terrified.

The aircraft of the future isn’t significantly different to the current model 
– on the outside at least. Passengers will still be crammed into a ridiculous 
tin can that moves through the clouds filled with people’s hopes and dreams. 
And after a few hours of plane food, some pretty interesting smells as well.

Rest assured the discomfort of air travel will never change. The future of 
flying sees a visual shift.It has no windows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/26/innovations-windowless-plane>
. This new (lack of) vision is not the work of a comic nerd who miraculously 
madeWonder Woman’s invisible plane 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Invisible_plane> come to life. Invisible planes 
will always seem like a good idea until someone has to go to the toilet and 
drop their duds for the world to see at 30,000 feet.

No, in the new planes the entire surface of the interior walls features a 
real-time projection of the sky outside. Except when the plane is hurtling 
through a storm at 600km an hour. That’s when the backup tape kicks in. 
Obviously.

The reason given for taking away our (air)portholes is purely economic. No 
windows means less weight in the fuselage, making them cheaper to fuel and fly. 
So, it’s not really about us. Guaranteed, though, it will be sold to us that 
way. The advertising images will have travellers so happy in their magic flying 
cloud they don’t notice the turgid coffee breath of the guy next to them or the 
constant elbowing by the lady in a parachute tracksuit who insists on getting 
up and stretching every half hour to ward off deep vein thrombosis.

And the bonus for the airlines? Not giving humans real windows into the real 
world outside encourages ignorance, thus making us far easier to control. The 
effect will not be dissimilar to that other place with no windows and no 
natural light but a whole lot of fake, painted sky: Las Vegas casinos.

In terms of sedating the masses, then, it’s no windows for a win. But the 
designers clearly haven’t thought this one through properly. A beautiful sky 
projected on a flat canvas looks great on paper, until humans bring their shit 
with them. Travel will always be a big, smelly, uncomfortable mess. No amount 
of scenic fairyfloss floating around little Tarquin, who’s standing up in one 
of those baby baskets howling his heart out – FOR SEVEN HOURS – will make the 
trip easier on anyone.

By taking our windows away, any last drops of the romance of flying will 
finally be squeezed out of the slowly dying beast. All those lovely memories of 
faces glued to tiny holes trying to get a final glimpse of a lover or family 
members before departing will be redundant.

Waving a teary goodbye is the backbone of movies and romance novels because it 
hurts exactly where it should. At a very human level. Goodbyes are the hardest 
things.

Besides, I like my little plane windows and so does this guy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/oct/18/jim-darlings-window-seats-for-magical-flights>
. Drinking a glass of almost undrinkable white wine while resting my head on 
the plastic and watching the world I live in – only in miniature – sure feels 
like freedom (as jumping out of planes does for other people).

Please don’t take that away to replace it with some sort of videogame 
simulacrum. Sometimes it’s nice to peer out of a porthole and see the reality 
and to deal with all the emotional baggage that doing so dredges up, rather 
than cover up with some fake happy clouds from a pretend place. I can get that 
kind of view elsewhere.
 