
Today, tomorrow, and probably all this weekend, Britain risks doing a good 
impression of a nation taking leave of reality. Britain’s relationship withthe 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> is a very 
important public issue. But amid the mounting frenzy about David Cameron’s 
negotiations in Brussels and the egotism ofBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/17/eu-referendum-david-cameron-boris-johnson-talks-downing-street>
, whose narcissism has become a serious public menace, some perspective is 
needed. If ever Robert Burns’s plea for the gift to see ourselves as others see 
us would be handy, this is such a time. Without that, it is tempting to pull up 
the duvet. But that is not the action of the rational beings we surely remain 
capable of being.

So here are six big things about Britain and Europe that were true last week, 
are still true today, and are likely to remain true in the future. Against all 
six, the Brussels summit breathlessness, the Conservative Eurosceptic 
over-excitement and the rightwing press hysteria should be judged, preferably 
calmly, once the dust has settled and storm Boris has blown itself out for a 
while.

First, the UK’s relationship with the EU is not the most important question 
facing this country. That accolade could go to the widening inequality gap 
between the classes, regions and generations, to the pressures of an ageing 
society, to the fraying of the ties that bind the UK together, the impact of 
China’s economic expansion and slowdown and the waning of confidence in 
representative democracy after the global financial crisis. In a more serious 
polity, these would be the questions needing renegotiation, not the EU.

Second, the UK relationship is not the most important challenge facing Europe 
either. That collective issue is migration, which is driving everything else, 
and ought to be the focus of all European efforts in foreign and internal 
policy. Or it could be the policy distortions caused by Germany’s eurozone 
austerity mantra. Or the threat from Putin’s Russia. Or the growing divide 
between the EU’s rich west and north and its poor south and east. Or the terror 
threat. Or the relationship with Islam. Compared with any of these, Britain’s 
grievances are secondary.

Third, Britain is fated by geography, history, culture and commerce to have an 
involved and complex relationship with Europe. We do not stand alone. That has 
been true in war and peace, for richer or poorer, for at least 3,000 years and 
counting. That’s not going to change. The real question is whether that 
relationship is a good or a bad one; not whether it is perfect. In a minor key, 
it’s whythis week’s negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/17/merkel-eu-uk-germany-national-interest-cameron-justified>
 matter too.

Fourth, as long as Britain is part of the EU it makes sense to form alliances 
and behave as a committed partner, not as the whingeing club bore. That doesn’t 
mean instantly signing off on everything. There is a lot wrong with the EU, 
much of which is the legacy of the precipitate drive towards political union in 
the 1990s. But on things like security, migration, climate change and open 
markets, Europeans are still likely to be safer, stronger and more prosperous 
because of the common EU project. It is in our interest to make these things 
work. European courts and the European parliament can sometimes overreach, but 
law and accountability are things that matter.

Fifth, neither the Tories nor the rightwing press really speak for modern 
Britain. Though the Conservative party can famously adapt well and Mr Cameron 
is a more respected prime minister than his enemies would like to think, parts 
of the Tory party still yearn for a halcyon imperial-era British greatness or a 
foreigner-free Britain. They have no useful answers to any of the questions 
that matter. Parts of the press drive this fantasy in reckless and disgraceful 
ways. There will be a lot more of that soon. Whether it really changes people’s 
votes is a moot point. But to shout more loudly against the EU does not make 
the message in any way more true.

And finally, sovereignty matters. Nation states are often arbitrarily defined 
by war, religion and culture. Their borders have changed in the past and will 
change again. Their autonomy has been much reduced in the globalised economy 
and their laws by international norms and treaties. They are generally stronger 
in alliances than out of them. But they remain the bedrock of the international 
order and they are the prime political loyalty for most of their inhabitants. 
In most of Europe, and certainly in Britain, the wish to feel in control of 
one’s own nation is a resilient reality. In our view, that wish is entirely 
compatible with membership of the EU, which has benefited Britain. Amid sound 
and fury, that must now be put to the verdict.

• This article was amended on 18 February 2016 to add the word “that” to the 
last sentence in the first paragraph, and correct the spelling of “benefited” 
in the last paragraph.
 