
I was lucky at school – I had fantastic French and German teachers. Mrs 
Barnes, Mrs Ralton and Miss Myers were incredibly dedicated: I broke my femur 
just before my A levels and they came round to my house to make sure I was up 
to date with all my revision. They also made learning a language fun in the 
classroom. That's so important, because if the teacher isn't encouraging, you 
can be sitting there terrified. What I learned from them was you just have to 
be willing to speak and never be afraid to make mistakes.

When it became obvious from my grades that I should apply to university, 
somebody told me: "Do the degree you love". Originally I was intending to do 
French and German but I enjoyed history and wanted to incorporate that as well 
so I chose European Studies and German at Keele university. Knowing a country's 
history tells you an awful lot about the language and the culture of the 
languages you're learning.

A year on, the Erasmus programme in Frankfurt meant my German had to improve 
fast. It was a big step up to attend university classes in German: the 
standards of universities there are phenomenal and at first it was a real 
challenge.

By the time I graduated I didn't have any real idea of a career path, but I 
had always wanted to work in the travel industry, so straight after my exams I 
wrote to about 100 different airlines and tour companies, pushing my fluent 
German and good level of French.

My first job was in the schools department at Kuoni: we ran battlefield 
history tours in northern France, art trips and language trips, so booking and 
co-ordinating these meant using my French and German every day with our 
suppliers – although there's always the temptation not to, because people in 
the travel industry tend to have very good English!

I then worked for 13 years at the tour operator, Discover the World, in 
various departments ranging from wildlife tours to polar cruises, booking all 
aspects of people's holidays. At that age, I hadn't done a lot of traveling 
myself and was getting a huge kick out of talking to people in the Bahamas, the 
Azores, all over the world really. I was working my way up from doing the 
bookings to managing the programmes, and deciding what tours to run, as well as 
researching new tours in countries like Iceland.

My most thrilling travel experience? Antarctica, no question. To sell the 
polar regions you have to go there, and in 2003 I went on one of our Antarctica 
cruises. You feel you really are an explorer – you can have all types of 
weather and there are lots of different species of penguins. And then there are 
the seals and whales: everyone on the ship was mesmerised.

It was on that cruise that I came across a base called Port Lockroy. It's now 
run by the UK Antarctic Heritage Trust: it's just a small cabin on a piece of 
land the size of a football field. The trust took over from the British 
Antarctic Survey in looking after the base, and had realised that their 
scientists at the base weren't necessarily the best people to show visitors 
around the site: boats are coming from all over the world, and you need 
languages.

I'm a bit handy with a hammer and don't mind the cold so it didn't take much 
thinking. I gave up my job and did my first season there, and when I got back 
to the UK the recession had hit. You're totally protected from current affairs 
out there, so I hadn't realised the full impact of the global crisis. Two years 
on, I was hankering to go back and got the job of base leader. The Antarctic 
Heritage Trust recruit every year and they'd never send a team with no French 
or German. We were four women: as well as me there was another Brit, a German 
and a Finn who spoke goodness knows how many languages. I spoke English and 
German, and learned a bit of Spanish which really helped, because the Chilean 
and Argentine navies would drop in – something to do with four women at the 
base, perhaps!

Funnily enough, you don't feel trapped at all: you're going onto the ships 
when they come in and in a season we saw 14,000 people from all over the world: 
rock stars, politicians, yachties, very rich people, those backpacking their 
way round the world. The people really make it – I particularly remember a 
group of French yachtsmen who came to the base in the Sixties when it was in 
rack and ruin; they came back, these old men – it was a real expedition for 
them, and they brought their sons.

I got back from the Antarctic two years ago, after working on a cruise ship as 
a naturalist and member of the expedition team. I do really miss it. There's a 
big culture shock when you get home. It's like having two different lives. 
Walking through Guildford high street, I found myself being bombarded with 
marketing – it was all about slim women and sex, the kind of image you want to 
portray and what your life should be about. In Antarctica, you live out of a 
box in very simple way. It's about the fundamentals of surviving: no running 
water, blizzards, winds, and yes, sunny T-shirt days – and most of all, valuing 
the people you meet and work with and depend on.

Without languages, working for a tour operator would probably never have 
happened, and certainly I'd never have lived in Antarctica. As a young person, 
living abroad shows a lot about character and resilience, and learning 
languages creates an attitude too. It's about respect, that you're taking the 
trouble to learn how to communicate in another person's language and not do the 
easy thing of just depending on English.
 