
Single mother Jo Kerwin has come to dread going to her local shops, as they 
fill up with tinsel and "must-have" toys. "It is really depressing. I just hate 
it," she says. "You go into the shop and see everything full of Christmas and 
the children come home from school saying 'so and so is getting this for 
Christmas … I just cannot bear to think about it."

Kerwin, who lives in Tunbridge Wells, Kent, is worrying about how she will pay 
for all the seasonal extras for her three sons, aged between nine and 13, when 
her finances are already stretched to breaking point. She will benefit from the 
increased personal allowance, which will rise to £10,000 in April next year, 
but there was little else for her in the chancellor's statement this week.

She is not alone. A survey by the campaign group Gingerbread shows three in 
four single parents feel worse off than a year ago, while two in three expect 
things to get worse next year.

"I can relate to that," says Kerwin. "You go through really dark days." She is 
going through a bad patch at the moment, having just been handed a £350 bill to 
repair her car, following an earlier £80 bill. Now she doesn't know where she 
will find the cash. "Any spare money literally goes on bills. I don't have any 
spare money to treat myself. I don't go out. The boys don't get to do much."

Kerwin set up a furniture and furnishings business last year, after giving up 
her nursing job. But although she has always loved doing up "shabby chic" 
French-style furniture, turning her hobby into a business was never her plan. 
Rather, it was the least-worst option when she was confronted with a sudden 
spike in childcare costs. Sometimes, she earns as little as £20 a week, topped 
up by tax credits. "I am probably worse off than some people on benefits." 
Working from home, she only switches on the heating in the evening when her 
children are there. Her shopping list is pared back to the bare necessities: 
she has cut back on fruit and only buys meat on special offers. But the hardest 
thing is not being able to give her children all the toys their friends have.

"My parents split up when I was about 12 - I know only too well how it feels 
not to have anything."


Case study 2: the pensioner

 Steve and Silke McNair-Wilson say their tight finances have barely improved. 
Photograph: Martin Godwin 
Retired geography teacher Steve McNair-Wilson, 67, admits his "tight" finances 
have barely been improved, but also feels very disappointed that a statement 
littered with so many references to young people has offered them no extra 
financial help.

The father of four – who lives with his wife, Silke, in Clacton-on-Sea, Essex 
– had expected to be financially better off after he retired in 2006.He says 
now: "I would describe things as tight. We've always lived frugally, but I am 
shocked to have so little disposable income. We can just about pay our bills 
but there are few luxuries or treats."

There was little in the autumn statement to give him any comfort. "It's all 
smoke and mirrors," he said. "I'm really not impressed by the state pension 
going up by £2.95 a week from next April. I was offered the opportunity to make 
voluntary national insurance contributions to boost my pension pot when I 
retired. That's not new."

The £1,000 transferable tax allowance for married couples from April 2015 
would leave them better off by about £200 year, he says, "but what is the point 
of that? Younger people like my daughter would really benefit from it, but 
wouldn't get it as she and her boyfriend are not married."

The couple run a "reliable and fuel-efficient" Toyota Avensis estate. The 
cancellation of the planned petrol tax rise of 2p a litre next year will save a 
little, but McNair-Wilson adds: "I thought it was supposed to discourage us 
from driving and help save the planet? What's happened to the green agenda?"

Soaring fuel and food bills have been one of the biggest financial pressures 
on the family's budget, and last winter, when it was particularly cold -and the 
house was crammed with visitors over Christmas - they calculated they were 
shelling out £18 a day to keep warm. "When you are on a finite budget that - 
with rapid inflation - can really make a huge difference," he observes.

Now he draws his teacher's pension, the state pension and the proceeds from 
two small private pensions which are "worth nothing", while Silke still works, 
giving private lessons in German and music - usually enough to cover the 
family's food bills. Their youngest daughter Hannah - aged 22 and a recent 
graduate - lives with them and has a temporary Christmas job working in a shop 
on little more than the minimum wage.

As a teacher who suffered from what he considers to be the many bad decisions 
during the Thatcher years, and seeing the very poorest children he taught 
getting disproportionately poorer – McNair-Wilson is particularly disappointed 
by the lack of financial help for younger people like his daughter. "The 
removal of employer national insurance contributions for those under 21 will 
help big supermarkets like Tesco, but it won't help university graduates who 
are usually over 21, who have built up huge debts, and who, like most other 
young people, are scraping along on 'zero hour contracts' and the minimum 
wage," he says.

Autumn statement main points: Pensions

The state pension age will rise to 70 for today's young adults, the chancellor 
confirmed, although the changes won't affect anyone currently under the age of 
50,. It has already been announced that it will rise to 66 by 2020 and 67 by 
2028. Now it is projected that it will hit 68 by the mid-2030s and then 70 
three decades later.

The move was welcomed by the Institute of Directors, whose pensions adviser 
Malcolm Small said: "It's time to get real. The country needs to get used to 
the terms of this debate, as it isn't going away. In 1948 the state pension age 
was set at 65 when average male life expectancy was 66. Three out of four men 
did not make 65. Today, five out of six men will live to 65, and will live an 
average of 21 years in retirement with many living far longer than that. The 
IoD has long called for a rise in state retirement age to 70. Today's 
announcement is a start but future chancellors will have to go further."

But Mark Stopard, of annuity provider Partnership, said: "Someone who is 35 
now could conceivably need to work for eight years longer than one of their 
parents before they receive a state pension. This seems a heavy burden for a 
generation that arguably is finding it tougher to buy their first home, secure 
a career and is more indebted than many of the baby-boomers."

Chancellor George Osborne confirmed that the basic state pension, currently 
£110.15 a week, will rise by 2.7% to £113.10. There are also some complicated 
changes to pension tax reliefs that come into force in April next year, which 
will hit the better-off. The maximum amount that anyone can put into a pension 
and earn tax relief in any one year will be cut from £50,000 to £40,000, while 
the total amount that someone can save over their lifetime into a pension and 
enjoy tax relief will be cut from £1.5m to £1.25m.

Income tax


The personal allowance, which is the part of earnings on which there is no tax 
to pay, rises from £9,440 to £10,000 in 2014 in a move that Osborne says will 
take as many as three million people out of the tax net. But some of the tax 
giveaway will be clawed back by a further reduction in the starting point for 
the 40% tax rate, which will come down from £32,010 to £31,865 to tie in with 
the introduction of the £10,000 allowance. Add in the £10,000 allowance, and it 
means you start paying 40% tax on earnings above £41,865. Since becoming 
chancellor, George Osborne has increased the number of 40% taxpayers from three 
million to nearly four million, and the reduced starting point for the tax is 
expected to drag in a further 400,000 people.

Allowances are then in line to rise by the consumer prices index, starting in 
2015-16. But the starting band for 40% tax will only go up 1%, which will draw 
even more people into the higher rate.

The top rate of tax came down from 50% to 45% in April this year, and from 
April 2014 it will remain at that level on incomes above £150,000.

The higher personal allowances previously available to older people are being 
phased out. If you were born before 1948 you have a £10,500 personal allowance, 
rising to £10,660 if you were born before 1938. But these have been frozen, and 
with the standard personal allowance now at £10,000 and rising by CPI, they 
will soon be worth nothing.

Married couples


The chancellor announced further details of the new tax break for married 
couples and civil partners. The plan is to make up to £1,000 of a person's 
income tax personal allowance transferable between adults who are married or in 
a civil partnership, so long as the higher-income adult is a basic rate 
taxpayer, starting in April 2015. The typical saving is expected to be around 
£200 a year. For example, let's say a man earns £30,000 and his wife earns 
£6,000 a year working part time. Her personal allowance is expected to be 
around £10,230 in the year the policy is introduced. As she is not using it all 
she can transfer £1,000 of it to her husband, lowering his tax bill by up to 
£200 a year because he'll now not have to pay 20% tax on that £1,000. This 
saving works out at £3.85 per couple per week. The value of the allowance 
tapers out once the lower earner starts earning more, and it will not be paid 
if one of the couple earns more than £42,000.

Energy bills


The chancellor confirmed that the eco charges that make up around £50 of a 
typical dual-fuel bill will be switched into general taxation. Those households 
that have seen their suppliers hike bills already (such as British Gas) should 
see a £50 cut. Other providers say they had already factored a reduction in eco 
costs into their (lower) bill increases.

Fuel duty


The planned 2p a litre hike in fuel duty was postponed once again. This time 
last year a litre of unleaded cost around 136p, but has since come down to 
below 130p, so motorists are significantly better off. Motorists will be able 
to spread the cost of taxing their car over 12 months, by paying monthly by 
direct debit – although at a 5% extra cost. They will no longer be sent a paper 
tax disc to display in their cars. Currently drivers can be fined £200 for 
failing to display a disc, even if they have bought one and it has been lost in 
the post.

But the relative benefit of cheap LPG is set to be eroded, with a new formula 
for tax which will add 1p a litre each year for the next 11 years. Meanwhile, 
rail travellers will see a small benefit, with future price rises pegged to 
inflation rather than inflation-plus-1%.

Isas

The limit for an investment Isa rises in April 2014 to £11,880 from £11,520, 
while for cash Isas it will be £5,940 from £5,760. The Junior Isa and Child 
Trust Fund limits will both be increased to £3,840.
 