
A Was For Ample Bosoms. Fashion pages announced Breasts Are Back, as though 
they had been away on a recuperative holiday. The nation's collective bosom was 
becoming progressively bigger, said bra manufacturers, thanks to the Pill and a 
better, bolstering diet. Models flexed their pecs to fill fashionable bustiers 
and corsets, while the lesser-endowed majority stood by and sulked. 
Busts-U-Liked: Madonna, La Cicciolina, Dianne Brill.Air Wear Soles: The 
idiosyncratically chunky Doc Marten sole rendered a yobbish gait highly 
desirable. Young, impressionable feet were spared the corns and blisters and 
bunions that were part and parcel of the winkle-picker era, but carpets paid 
the price. DM soles left complicated indentations on the shag pile and parents 
despaired. Boot Boys: Alexei Sayle, Bros.

B Was For Barbour Jackets. Worn by urban pretenders to a rural lifestyle, they 
were accessories to a jeep, a tweed cap and a wife called Caroline for braying 
property developers from SW3 who had never set foot on a grouse moor in their 
lives. Very nearly as fraudulent as mountain bikes, whose Lycra-clad, Guardian 
bag-toting owners would balk at anything steeper than a 1:10. Barbour idols: 
the Queen, Alan B'stard, Michael Heseltine.

C Was For Casuals. Usually called Wayne, Duane, Dean or Gary. They dressed 
like wannabee Dads in pastel sweaters. Farah slacks and gold jewellery. 
Affected dubious haircuts with side partings and disproportionately long, 
floppy fringes, and crammed grubby white towelling socked feet into burgundy 
coloured leatherette loafers. Casually hard: Paul Weller, Gary Crowley. Later 
Eighties: Barry from EastEnders, Harry Enfield.
Cornish Pastie: generic name for popular men's shoe that folded over and made 
the foot look like the above or, flicking further through the recipe book, like 
an ill-assembled apple turnover. Pioneered a 'natural', spectacularly unsexy 
look for men's shoes, involving crude stitching and moulded soles. Nasty Pastie 
protagonists: maths teachers countrywide.

D Was For Desert Boots. Once the preserve of myopic students in duffel coats 
and flared cords, Clarks' desert boots were rendered fashionable by a new 
advertising campaign involving morose models and big-budget locations. 'There 
is only one desert boot,' the caption brooded. The reborn version even came in 
gold leather. Desert brats: New Men with papooses, mature students, the cast of 
Love Story.
Dayglo: against a backdrop of pasty British complexions and sky the colour of 
tripe, fluoro pink, orange and lime had limited appeal. Nevertheless, an 
abundance of acrylic Dayglo cast an eerie glow over the trash shops of Oxford 
Street. Swedish students sprayed neon stripes and blobs on to their hair and 
hung around in gangly clumps down Carnaby Street. Dayglo later reappeared as 
one of the colourings in Pot Noodle.
 Fluoro sine qua neon: Keith Haring, Cindi Lauper.

E Was For The Emanuels, the trollish looking designer couple responsible for 
the Princess of Wales' wedding dress. The intentionally crumpled taffeta dress 
prompted commentators to ask such questions as Why wasn't it ironed? Didn't it 
have about it the look of a severely man-handled paper bag? Whatever it was, 
there was a lot of it it was still coming out of the horse-drawn carriage long 
after Diana had disembarked. To Di for: a thousand slavish Sharons copied 
Diana's wedding look, as they did her flicked 'n' sprayed hairstyle, her twin 
stripes of blue eyeshadow and her coy peeking-out-from-under-the-fringe smile.
Elephant Cord, the type of thick corduroy favoured for trousers worn by 
journalists, writers and other shambling types. Areas of wear dictated status: 
faded knees, shameless grovellers threadbare pockets, cocksure slouching worn 
seat of pants, power lunches. Popular because they last about 100 years and 
project an air of cuddly approachability while disguising the real beast 
within. Usually accessorised by raddled jumpers, tweed jackets, lopsided 
haircuts. Desired effect - contrived uncontrivedness. Cord blimey: most of the 
male staff of most newspapers most of the time.

F Was For Furry Backpacks masquerading as animals. Aim: to create the illusion 
that the wearer was giving a piggyback to a passing koala bear, monkey or 
absurd approximation of Mickey Mouse. Appealing to skiing bimbettes in pink 
anoraks who, when at home, cram their bedrooms full of Snoopys, wear matching 
slippers and have a Garfield spread-eagled inside the back window of their car 
(alongside the 'I love my Mini' sticker). Fatuous-fur fans: Sharons at Val 
d'Isere and spoilt brats with ringlets in Knightsbridge.

G Was For Gel. Tactility was never a prerequisite of Eighties hairstyles, 
which were artificially sculpted into punkish shards and stiff waves. There 
followed mousse, grease, KY jelly, sugar, soap and even glue. Ludicrous TV 
advertisements promoted the importance of vertical hair for men and women, 
especially the scrunch-dried, fried noodle effect that a skipload of mousse 
could achieve. Gel-set: Bananarama, most Radio One DJs.Green Wellies: granted 
the status of thoroughbred amongst wellington boots, the green wellie was 
considered more, well, grown up than its black shiny, rainbow striped and 
Paddington-inspired counterparts. Knee-deep in snob value, it came to symbolise 
middle-class, second home-owning Archers fans with a part-time social 
conscience and aspirations to a Green lifestyle. Stick the boot in: Jilly 
Cooper, Captain Mark Phillips.

H Was For Hypes: Next Directory, New Age, Christian Lacroix. The expensively 
produced Next mail-order catalogue boldly claimed to be able to change the 
home-shopping habits of a nation weaned on zip-up Crimplene pinafores and dodgy 
shirt-waisters. Its launch courted extensive puffs from fashion editors keen to 
support cheeky-chappie George Davies. New Age sounded bold, optimistic, sexy. 
All about crystals, self-discovery, ephemeral plinky-plonky music and white 
clothes. As a marketing device it's failsafe, but what does it all mean? 
Christian Lacroix: heralded as a Messiah figure, come to save the fashion 
industry from terminal dullness. Has about him the appearance of a Mafia 
hit-man. The fashion press confused being rich, French and exotically named 
with possessing talent. Designed some of the ugliest clothes of the decade. 
Expensive ugly clothes at that. Firing on all cylinders: Lynne Franks PR.Huskies
, sleeveless quilted waistcoats integral to the appalling Sloane Ranger look. 
Worn by strapping, horsey girls aged 20 going on 53. Other components: striped 
shirts, a tame string of pearls, impenetrable pleated skirt, blue tights and 
prissy shoes. Printed headscarves optional. Thick ankles mandatory. Sloane 
Ranger - the concept: Princess Diana.

I Was For Insults. Hell hath no fire like a fashion luminary scorned. Elle 
magazine renamed Azzedine Alaia Has-Been Alaia and promptly got banned from all 
his shows. Ines de la Fressange, the Chanel girl, accused Karl Lagerfeld of 
being petty, jealous and of displaying his 'Kaiser side' (when he objected to 
her modelling for the bust of Marianne). The Observer asked Jeff Banks, 'Would 
you buy a suit from this man?' (George Davies) and Banks replied, 'No, I 
wouldn't, because his suits don't fit.' All good, feisty stuff.In and out lists
. In a decade supposed to be brimful of choices, In and Out lists suggested 
that choice was fine, as long as you made the right one. It was the 
playing-with-words decade. Important, definitive words followed by a resolute 
full stop. Favourite device of ad-men. Even if the word wasn't in the least bit 
clever or funny. In and Out lists started off as fun and became minutely, 
frighteningly exact. For example: Out, Life In, Death Out, In In, Out. 
Confusing, maybe. Irritating, yes. Compulsive, certainly. In and Out lists: In, 
Tatler Out, You magazine.

J Was For Jelly, ludicrous name given to plastic sandals popular in the early 
Eighties. In hot weather they would melt and turn feet into squelching slabs of 
flesh that adhered like Dr Who-ish suckers to steaming urban pavements. 
Jelly-lovers: impoverished art students in second-hand Fifties dresses.

K Was For Kissing which became the loveless handshake of the Eighties. Before, 
a nod of recognition or a warmish smile made do. Suddenly kissing became the 
obligatory form of greeting in fashion and media circles. To avoid smudged 
make-up and giving the impression you cared too much, it was important to peck 
only the air in the area approximating the cheek. The code was complex: the 
fashionable number of kisses went from two to three to one then back to three 
over again over a five-year period. Consequently there was a lot of launching 
oneself into a second or third kiss only to find the recipient had walked off.
Kisser's nose was an Eighties affliction - often the whole ritual was so 
ill-choreographed that it resulted in painful head-on collisions. Puckered-up: 
everyone in fashion, advertising and publishing.

L Was For Legwarmers, worn by the cast of Fame and nauseating groups of ballet 
students hanging out in Covent Garden. Likely to jump onto car bonnets and 
break into song at any minute. Mostly entirely ineffectual, legwarmers 
concertianed around the ankles like old men's combinations with perished 
elastic. Fashionable to wear them stacked up in lurid stripes. Spawned 
armwarmers and willywarmers. Legwarmer queens: Jane Fonda, Jennifer Beals, 
Debbie Moore.

M Was For Music. This was a decade when music and clothes were inextricably 
linked. A few designers ventured into the world of pop with varying degrees of 
success. Mainstream hits: Sade and Corinne Drewery of Swing Out Sister (both 
ex-St Martins fashion students). Don't give up your day-job: Jean-Paul 
Gaultier, Pam Hogg.

N Was for Niche Marketing: Sock Shop, Tie Rack, Blouse House, Suit Rack and 
Knickerbox - chains with endless branches that made shopping almost 
idiot-proof. Niche marketeers: Anita Roddick, Sophie Mirman. New Romantic, a 
style that looked especially ridiculous on men, who wore a combination of 
frilly shirts, Elizabethan ruffs, ill-applied lipstick and knickerbockers. It 
was the imperfection of what was a potentially prohibitively expensive look 
that made it funny. Football socks did for 18th-century hose, Mum's old blouse 
improvised for a bit of something frilly around the neck. Knickerbocker 
Glories: Steve Strange, Spandau Ballet.

O Was For Oh Darling, fashion catchphrases shrieked at high pitch and with 
maximum insincerity. Let's lunch. You're so thin. Divine. Totally. Seriously. 
Fabulous. Very you. Very late-Eighties. Very Nineties. To die for. How are you? 
(And not sticking around for an answer.) Really? No. (As in yes.) Yes. (As in 
no.)

P Was For Pussy Bows, useful device for disguising turkeyneck syndrome. 
Margaret Thatcher wore them hoping they would project an air of kittenish 
coquetry in head-and-shoulders photos. Eight out of 10 pussy bow owners loved 
Thatcher style and sales of lookalike blouses at BHS and M& S rocketed. Then 
came the overhaul and her bows were dropped (so did her voice) in favour of 
power dressing. You could launch a Cessna light aircraft off her Aquascutum 
shoulders. Pussies Galore: air hostesses, Thatcher, Edwina Currie.Peroxide Crop
: the white-blonde toilet brush effect popularised by Jean-Paul Gaultier, Annie 
Lennox, Bros.Ponytails: it was deemed 'creative' for advertising executives, 
art directors and film types to have dandruffy bundles of hair trickling down 
their necks and on to the collars of their Armani and Gualtier suits. 
Ponytails: Steve Woolley, Karl Lagerfeld.

Q Was For Queen Mum's frocks, which seemed to become more and more 
horticultural in their inspiration as the Eighties progressed.

R Was For Reebok. No one ever dared say that it was ugly - bulky and lacking 
in aerodynamism. With its superfluous flaps, logos, Velcro, corrugated sole and 
snub toe, it was a three-piece suite of a shoe, and pioneered sports footwear 
as convetable fashion item. Popular with New York working women for swift 
passage to the office. Then it took to the streets as pivotal element in the 
black dance music inspired, sportswear-led trend for young street clothes in 
the Eighties. Fleet of foot: Spike Lee, Melanie Griffiths, Martin Amis.

S Was For Snow Washed Denim. Not just faded, mildly distressed or stone 
washed, this was mechanically pulverised until a mottled, marbled effect was 
achieved. Generally regarded as the most appalling bastardisation of denim 
since Sixties floral inserts and Seventies stretch denim. In the Eighties it 
smothered market stalls and gave them an unpleasant diseased look.Striped shirts
 were worn as a badge of bankability by City oiks with Golf GTIs, red braces 
and a mock mock-Tudor shoebox on the Isle of Dogs. An even worse version was 
the striped shirt with white contrast collar. Stripe me: Gordon Ghekko, Ralph 
Halpern.

T Was For Timberland Boots which became popular as the neurotically-trendy 
began to reject DMs in favour of something a little more rustic. Boots for 
walking: Italian Paninari, avant-garde lumberjacks.

U Was For Union Jack Boxer Shorts, natural habitat Euston Station, waiting for 
trains to away matches. Worn unhampered by anything as sissy as trousers, Union 
Jack boxers were no respecters of cold climate nor, indeed, the aesthetic 
sensibilities of fellow travellers. Underwear As Outerwear: Vivienne Westwood 
put bras on top of blouses, the dance craze promoted knickers on top of tights, 
long johns and vests were worn as part of the neo-peasant hardtimes look, and 
corsets and general deshabille was rife in the late Eighties. Undies on top: 
Superman, Madonna.

V Was For Velour Tracksuits, close associates of the white stiletto and 
onesided ponytail, lurking in the small ads and leisure wear departments. 
Colours: bright yellow, shocking pink. Often sported a V-neck and babies' 
vomit. Velour vixens: Sharon and Shell from East Enders.Visible Knicker Line: 
the tight, clingly Lycra years, ski pants, dancewear and Azzedeine Alaia 
clothes made knicker-wearing prohibitive as never before. The ridgeless knicker 
awaits invention. VKL, Anneka Rice, Tony Blackburn.

W Was For White Stilettos which got whiter and higher as you went East. They 
danced round handbags in discos with single-word names like Whispers and 
Kisses. They were never accompanied by tights, but by a single gold ankle chain 
and just-shaved legs with terminal gooseflesh. Heels: Samanatha Fox, anyone 
called Tracey or Sharon.

X Was An Xtremely Trendy Letter to incorporate into names like Department X 
(Next mega-store), Club X (Channel 4 TV), Channel X (independent production 
company).

Y Was For Y-Fronts. After the appalling lack of support given to men by boxer 
shorts, good old dependable Y-fronts clawed back some street cred, especially 
when they had designer labels like Nikos and Calvin Klein. Meat and two veg: 
John Cleese.

Z Was For Zloty: it became very trendy to go to Poland, talk to a few 
impoverished teenagers and pretend there was a cult in old men's macs and work 
boots happening there. Poles apart: freelancers for Sunday papers.
 