
I wrote 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/great-malaise-global-economic-stagnation-by-joseph-e--stiglitz-2016-01>
 at the beginning of January that economic conditions this year were set to be 
as weak as in 2015, which was the worst year since the global financial crisis 
erupted in 2008. And, as has happened repeatedly over the last decade, a few 
months into the year, others’ more optimistic forecasts are being revised 
downward.

The underlying problem – which has plagued the global economy since the 
crisis, but has worsened slightly – is lack of global aggregate demand. Now, in 
response, theEuropean Central Bank (ECB) has stepped up its stimulus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/european-central-bank-cuts-deposit-rates>
, joining the Bank of Japan and a couple of other central banks in showing that 
the “zero lower bound” – the inability of interest rates to become negative – 
is a boundary only in the imagination of conventional economists.

Negative interest rates: what you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/negative-interest-rates-what-you-need-to-know>
And yet, in none of the economies attempting the unorthodox experiment of 
negative interest rates has there been a return to growth and full employment. 
In some cases, the outcome has been unexpected: some lending rates have 
actually increased.

It should have been apparent that most central banks’ pre-crisis models – both 
the formal models and the mental models that guide policymakers’ thinking – 
were badly wrong. None predicted the crisis; and in very few of these economies 
has a semblance of full employment been restored. The ECB famously raised 
interest rates twice in 2011, just as the euro crisis was worsening and 
unemployment was increasing to double-digit levels, bringing deflation ever 
closer.

They continued to use the old discredited models, perhaps slightly modified. 
In these models, the interest rate is the key policy tool, to be dialed up and 
down to ensure good economic performance. If a positive interest rate doesn’t 
suffice, then a negative interest rate should do the trick.

ECB launches bold measures including negative interest rate to boost eurozone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/european-central-bank-cuts-deposit-rates>
It hasn’t. In many economies – including Europe and the United States – real 
(inflation-adjusted) interest rates have been negative, sometimes as much as 
-2%. And yet, as real interest rates have fallen, business investment has 
stagnated. According to the OECD, the percentage of GDP invested in a category 
that is mostly plant and equipment has fallen in both Europe and the US in 
recent years. (In the US, it fell from 8.4% in 2000 to 6.8% in 2014; in the EU, 
it fell from 7.5% to 5.7% over the same period.) Other data provide a similar 
picture.

Clearly, the idea that large corporations precisely calculate the interest 
rate at which they are willing to undertake investment – and that they would be 
willing to undertake a large number of projects if only interest rates were 
lowered by another 25 basis points – is absurd. More realistically, large 
corporations are sitting on hundreds of billions of dollars – indeed, trillions 
if aggregated across the advanced economies – because they already have too 
much capacity. Why build more simply because the interest rate has moved down a 
little? The small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) that are willing to borrow 
couldn’t get access to credit before the ECB went negative, and they can’t now.

Simply put, most firms – and especially SMEs – can’t borrow easily at the 
T-bill rate. They don’t borrow on capital markets. They borrow from banks. And 
there is a large difference (spread) between the interest rates the banks set 
and the T-bill rate. Moreover, banks ration. They may refuse to lend to some 
firms. In other cases, they demand collateral (often real estate).

Bank of Japan launches negative interest rates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/16/bank-of-japan-launches-negative-interest-rates-yen-markets>
It may come as a shock to non-economists, but banks play no role in the 
standard economic model that monetary policymakers have used for the last 
couple of decades. Of course, if there were no banks, there would be no central 
banks, either; but cognitive dissonance has seldom shaken central bankers’ 
confidence in their models.

The fact is that the eurozone’s structure and the ECB’s policies have ensured 
that banks in the underperforming countries, and especially in the crisis 
countries, are very weak. Deposits have left, and the austerity policies 
demanded by Germany are prolonging the aggregate-demand shortfall and 
sustaining high unemployment. In these circumstances, lending is risky, and 
banks have neither the appetite nor ability to lend, particularly to SMEs 
(which typically generate the highest number of jobs).

A decrease in the real interest rate – that on government bonds – to -3% or 
even -4% will make little or no difference. Negative interest rates hurt banks’ 
balance sheets, with the “wealth effect” on banks overwhelming the small 
increase in incentives to lend. Unless policymakers are careful, lending rates 
could increase and credit availability decline.

There are three further problems. First, low interest rates encourage firms to 
invest in more capital-intensive technologies, resulting in demand for labour 
falling in the longer term, even as unemployment declines in the short term. 
Second, older people who depend on interest income, hurt further, cut their 
consumption more deeply than those who benefit – rich owners of equity – 
increase theirs, undermining aggregate demand today. Third, the perhaps 
irrational but widely documented search for yield implies that many investors 
will shift their portfolios toward riskier assets, exposing the economy to 
greater financial instability.

What central banks should be doing is focusing on the flow of credit, which 
means restoring and maintaining local banks’ ability and willingness to lend to 
SMEs. Instead, throughout the world, central banks have focused on the 
systemically significant banks, the financial institutions whose excessive risk 
taking and abusive practices caused the 2008 crisis. But a large number of 
small banks in the aggregate are systemically significant – especially if one 
is concerned about restoring investment, employment, and growth.

The big lesson from all of this is captured by the familiar adage, “garbage 
in, garbage out.” If central banks continue to use the wrong models, they will 
continue to do the wrong thing.

Of course, even in the best of circumstances, monetary policy’s ability to 
restore a slumping economy to full employment may be limited. But relying on 
the wrong model prevents central bankers from contributing what they can – and 
may even make a bad situation worse.
 