
Travellers come to Orkney for the tranquillity, the standing stones or the 
exotic wildlife. It is probably fair to say that no one goes there for the 
nightlife. On a blustery Saturday evening at Kirkwall harbour, the sole 
nightclub on the islands has a poster advertising an Iron Maiden tribute band. 
A pair of bouncers, in the absence of people to bounce, stand watching seagulls 
wheeling over Scapa Flow.

It wasn't always like this. In the 1940s, the local youth, along with hundreds 
of servicemen stationed on the islands, flocked to the Golden Slipper, Orkney's 
most notorious house of ill-repute. Located on the outskirts of the ancient 
settlement of Stenness, the Golden Slipper was essentially the front room of 
the house belonging to Willie Farquhar, who would jovially dispense illicit 
whisky to all-comers in chipped tea cups. When the premises were finally closed 
down by the authorities in the 1960s, Farquhar was described in the local paper 
as Orkney's answer to Al Capone.

Now the legend of Willie and his riotous shebeen-cum-speakeasy has been 
resurrected in a community play, Tales from the Golden Slipper, with words by 
the playwright Alan Plater and music by Orkney's most celebrated resident 
composer,Peter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-maxwell-davies>. The play forms the 
centrepiece of Kirkwall's St Magnus festival, this year celebrating its 30th 
anniversary.

The festival was founded by Davies and the distinguished Orcadian poet George 
Mackay Brown, a regular at the Golden Slipper. "George had a fund of stories 
about Willie's place," says Davies. "By all accounts, it was dark and filthy, 
with an old bus-seat in place of a sofa. But, like any place where people 
gather on the islands, it was absolutely alive with music. I had thought of 
creating a musical work based on the Golden Slipper some years ago. But it was 
Alan Plater's interest that gave the project dramatic shape."

Plater is a regular visitor to the islands and acquired the status of an 
honorary Orcadian when he adapted George Mackay Brown's novel Greenvoe as a 
community drama for the St Magnus festival in 2000. The production went on to 
become a hit at the Edinburgh festival. Two years later, Plater wrote a second 
play, Barriers, for the same company, which told the story of Italian PoWs 
shipped to the islands to build the vast concrete defences surrounding Scapa 
Flow.

"This place lives and breathes stories," says Plater. "Anyone who wants a 
part, I write one for them. You only have to shake a copy of the Orcadian [the 
weekly local newspaper] and ideas for plays fall out." Even so, Plater takes 
issue with the paper's account of Farquhar's appearance before local 
magistrates, which described him as Orkney's Al Capone. "I think he was 
actually closer to being Orkney's Sir John Falstaff," he says. "He was more of 
an old-fashioned lord of misrule than a hardened criminal. And people really 
adored him - he was, as Shakespeare's fat knight says, 'not only witty in 
myself, but the cause of wit in other men'."

George Mackay Brown's memoirs bear out the image of Farquhar as a much-loved 
figure of fun. "He was like a toby jug come alive," Brown recalled. "He wore a 
cloth cap and an apron so greasy it shone like a dark mirror. He seemed 
delighted to see everyone, he agreed with everything that was said to him, he 
was all benignity and good fellowship." Nor did it seem to strike anyone as 
much of a contradiction that Orkney's principal bootlegger was also an elder of 
the kirk; indeed, he would cycle there every Sunday and distribute 
contraceptives to the young men of the congregation on the way home.

Farquhar's status as a local legend was further enhanced when, in March 1940, 
he became one of the first civilian casualties of the second world war. A 
German plane, returning from a raid on Scapa Flow, jettisoned its bombs and 
killed a young man only yards from the Golden Slipper's door. Farquhar himself 
suffered 38 shrapnel wounds, and proudly told anyone who would listen that this 
had been the exact number of hostelries in Stromness before it had been 
declared a dry parish in 1922.

His house, a narrow, slate-roofed structure, still stands on an unmarked 
junction on the shore of Loch Stenness, within sight of the neolithic standing 
stones. It is now in private hands and shows no outward sign of its former 
notoriety, though some members of the cast are old enough to have memories of 
the place.

Naisme Flett, who has appeared in all three of Plater's Orkney plays, 
remembers taking shelter in the Golden Slipper as a girl. "Willie used to let 
schoolchildren sit in his front room while waiting for the school bus," she 
says. "He used to put out sweets and lemonade. But my mother warned me on no 
account to touch the pies."

Ultimately, it was a technicality relating to sanitation - or lack of it - 
that led to Farquhar's open house being shut for good in the 1960s. For many 
years, he had managed to stay one jump ahead of the law: one raid broke down 
when the chief constable's daughter was discovered to be among the revellers. 
When he was finally brought to court, he explained the presence of several 
cases of whisky under his bed by saying he had been celebrating the end of the 
war. The prosecuting counsel pointed out that the celebrations had been going 
on for 20 years.

The demise of the Golden Slipper makes for a rather sad tale. Farquhar 
reluctantly resigned his kirk eldership and did not long survive the closure of 
his business, if indeed it was a business to begin with. "You might think that 
liquor in such a perilous unlicensed situation would be expensive," wrote 
Mackay Brown. "By no means. The general impression is that Willie made hardly 
any profit, if at all."

Yet the profit motive has never been particularly prevalent on Orkney. As 
Maxwell Davies says: "When we started the St Magnus Festival 30 years ago, 
Benjamin Britten wrote to warn me that you can't expect much in return from a 
rural arts festival other than a lot of grief."

Today, the St Magnus festival has grown to encompass a highly successful 
international conductors' programme and remains the place where Maxwell Davies 
prefers to premiere many of his works. "What astonishes me about Max," says 
Plater, "is that he's just as happy composing a few traditional jigs and reels 
for a little local play of mine as writing for the world's great ensembles. But 
nobody writes community plays to become rich. We do it because we're proud to 
have this extraordinary community accept us as one of their own."

And as Flett says: "Being up on stage, with everyone playing instruments and 
enjoying themselves, reminds me just how Willie's shebeen used to be in the old 
days. It's a shame when things like that are forced to close - but the very 
fact we're doing this play shows that Willie won in the end, didn't he?"

Tales from the Golden Slipper is at the Orkney Arts Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, Kirkwall, on Friday and Saturday, 
and at Stenness School on June 29. Box office: 01856 871445. It will also 
feature at the Edinburgh festival from August 13-17.
 