
“The government’s response will close an industry and sport that had been 
central to working class culture in NSW …”


That’s the Sydney Morning Herald reporting on greyhound racing.

But what, precisely, is working class culture? How should progressives relate 
to it in an era in which the inner city suburbs once most associated with blue 
collar occupations are changing beyond recognition?

It’s not a simple question.

“Greyhounds,” notes Jeff Collerson 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/sport/more-sports/jeff-collerson-nsw-government-greyhound-ban-is-an-elitist-and-heartless-decision/news-story/0bbd7d7327bc8acd8e2e782f47bcd8ed>
 in an impassioned defence of the sport in the Daily Telegraph, “have always 
given pleasure to working-class citizens.”

That’s certainly true. But there’s more to the argument than that. After all, 
the vast majority of Australians work for a living – and that means that all 
mass culture depends, almost by definition, on working class consumption.

Or, to put it another way, any popular recreation gives pleasure – merely by 
virtue of its popularity – to working class citizens.

Greyhound racing is the great leveller. Banning it hurts hard working men and 
women| Katrina Hodgkinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/greyhound-racing-is-the-great-leveller-banning-it-hurts-hard-working-men-and-women>
Australian Rules Football depends on the ordinary people trooping into the 
stands each week. But if footy’s part of working class culture, what about the 
movies? After all, Hollywood would go bust if everyday folk stopped buying 
tickets. We could say the same about comic publishers and big museums and 
computer game developers: they all rely on workers.

Right now, for instance, it’s probably safe to wager that more working class 
kids are chasing Pokemons than watching dog races.

In any case, successful cultural forms become – again, almost by definition – 
big business, something that complicates matters further. In a legal sense, the 
“owners” of culture will always be businessmen, not fans. Hip hop performers 
might arise from the ghetto but record company executives live in penthouses.

Culture-as-industry thus presents obvious problems for culture-as-class- 
expression.

Throughout the 20th century, activists in the labour movement spearheaded many 
cultural interventions, some of which still reverberate today.

In August 1950, for instance, Frank Hardy’s Power Without Glory was celebrated 
at the Athenaeum Gallery in Melbourne’s Collins Street, with what was 
purportedly the first ever book “launch” in Australia. The novel – a 
thinly-veiled expose of political corruption – had been printed 
surreptitiously, its pages collated and compiled by volunteers from the trade 
union movement. By September, Smith’s Weekly declared that “all Melbourne is 
talking about Power without Glory” with book sellers reporting “all-time record 
sales for any local or overseas book”.

Hardy’s success inspired the Australasian Book Society, a co-operative 
publishing and distribution project with close links to the trade unions. Joe 
Waters, one of its founders, explained its genesis:

 It was this eagerness of workers, waterside workers, meat workers, everybody 
you can think of, ordinary people wanting to read Power Without Glory, which 
did impress me more than anything else. It seemed to me that there were new 
fields opening up for writers and book publishers.

At its height, the ABS was distributing new novels to some 3000 (mostly 
working class) members – a remarkable figure for the small Australian market 
and a significant contribution to literary life at a time when few commercial 
publishers would consider local novels (and almost none would accept books 
discussing sex or radical politics).

Labour movement activists played equally important roles in championing other 
cultural forms initially frowned upon by a conservative mainstream. Australian 
jazz, for instance, owes a great deal to the efforts of the young communists of 
the Eureka Youth League, who staged the first ever Australian Jazz Convention 
in 1946, at a time when the right-wing Argus fulminated against the new fangled 
jukebox for attracting teenagers to taverns: “First they go innocently to play 
the juke box, then they start to drink; then heavens know what!”

Likewise, today’s massive Melbourne International Festival stems from an event 
staged in 1952 by the Australian Council of Film Societies, a group so closely 
linked to the Communist Party that ASIO put the first festival under immediate 
surveillance. “The overall picture of the Film Festival,” an agent reported, 
“appears to show that communists, communist sympathisers and communist 
organisations were very much in evidence …”

But who today thinks of film appreciation as a working class hobby?

The greyhound controversy provides an interesting illustration of why the 
class label remains attached in public consciousness to some cultural 
activities and not to others.

Labour historian Paul Tracey contends 
<http://asslh.org.au/hummer/vol-2-no-10/dogs/> that the way we think about 
greyhounds stems from the tumult taking place in NSW in the 1920s and 30s. 
Specifically, the rise of “tin hare” racing coincided with the rise of Jack 
Lang, the Labor radical lauded by supporters as “greater than Lenin”. Dog 
racing acquired its reputation because Lang championed it as part of his 
populist program.

“Lang’s hammering of the theme,” Tracey says, “that the workers’ greyhound 
racing was being attacked while the rich continued to enjoy their racing 
without state or moralist interference fitted neatly with the reality of 
depression age politics when workers bore the brunt of economic conditions and 
social criticism.”

That history makes the defences of greyhound racing mounted by Barnaby Joyce 
and other National Party MPs 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/barnaby-joyce-links-nsw-greyhound-racing-ban-to-labors-live-animal-exports-controversy-20160712-gq4flw.html>
 seem quite odd: these are not exactly people you’d associate either with 
libertarianism or Langite Laborism.

But if we look more closely, there’s something else going on. 

Take, for example, the Daily Telegraph’s Miranda Devine’s intervention. She 
makes a point oflauding what she calls 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/rendezview/why-have-we-let-vegans-with-piercings-destroy-greyhound-racing/news-story/7059d515558ea90be78364e13d0c9606>
 the “culture that greyhounds represent – of male battlers in regional 
Australia hanging onto their dignity, whose main social interaction is a night 
at the doggies” and contrasting that with the sensibilities of those she holds 
responsible for the ban: “vegan GetUp! Activists … with nose piercings and 
psychological hangups.”

Certainly, there are strands of class-based moralism running through green 
politics today (think of Richard di Natale’s embrace of so-called sin taxes 
like the proposed levy on sugary drinks – a measure that reeks of tut-tutting 
paternalism). And there are legitimate questions to be asked about the job 
losses attendant upon Baird’s policy.



You can see how greyhound racing has become talismanic for rightwing pundits: 
not because it signifies the mainstream of working class life but precisely 
because it doesn’t.As sports historian Steve Georgakis argues 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/steve-georgakis/why-the-dogs-turned-men-into-monsters/>
, it’s “assumed a mythical aspect of an ever-disappearing ‘old’ Australian way 
of life … ‘A night at the dogs’ represent[s] a step back into time.”

Race night at Wentworth Park: greyhound owners begin the long goodbye
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/14/greyhound-ban-it-will-break-our-hearts-if-we-have-to-stop-racing>
 All too often, that’s what media valorisations of “working class culture” 
entail. Even when well intentioned, they’re generally tinged with a 
paternalistic nostalgia, with workers featuring as cloth-capped relics of a 
vanishing past. We don’t hear about the trade unionists fighting with Frank 
Hardy to distribute an important novel. Instead, we’re presented with working 
class people as an endangered species, requiring the benevolent protection of 
sympathetic politicians or journalists.

Which is not to say that there’s nothing to be learned from the history of the 
working class. During Lang’s second term as premier, he became an emblem of 
resistance to the austerity measures being implemented in the midst of an 
economic crisis. His rise and fall thus poses some remarkably contemporary 
issues for ordinary Australians, whether their noses are pierced or not.

But to address those debates, you need to shift from talking about about 
working class culture to talking about working class politics – a very 
different matter entirely.
 