
It began in 2007 when I was on a tour to promote my worldwide bestseller, 
Thrive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/04/critical-eye-books-review-roundup>
, in which I let the little people in on some of the secrets of the fabulously 
successful. I had just spent the morning in Washington withHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, before giving a lecture 
to several thousand entrepreneurs, when my phone rang inviting me to give a 
television talk in Seattle that evening. Even though I was as dog tired as only 
the world’s busiest and most important woman can be, I said yes. Back home in 
LA the following morning, tragedy struck. I fell over and slightly grazed my 
elbow.

“Help!” I wailed helplessly, while answering some very important emails on my 
BlackBerry. My daughter came running. “What’s the matter?” she said, looking 
very bored. “I’ve got Fomo.” “What’s that?” “It’s fear of missing out, you 
idiot. And it’s got so bad, I’m now not sleeping at all well, which is why I am 
so critically injured.”

On my way home from the ER, where a doctor applied a plaster to my 
life-threatening wounds, I resolved to write another book to help all the 
little people who might find themselves in the same situation. Well, obviously 
not exactly the same situation, as I was one of the world’s most successful 
businesswomen runningan internationally famous website 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/> named modestly after myself, but as near to 
it as other people could realistically expect to get. And the book I was going 
to write was about sleep, because it was clear to me people weren’t getting 
nearly enough.

At first, I found it very hard to give myself permission to sleep, as I was 
under the impression that the world might literally stop spinning if I was not 
awake. “How am I going to make sure everyone keeps reading my modestly named 
website?” I wept to my therapist. “Perhaps you could carry on doing what you 
always do,” she replied helpfully. “Just get a load of people to supply the 
content for nothing. And when you wake up, there will be lots of people still 
reading your modestly named website.”

So this is my gift to all of you. Follow my advice and you can rise above 
mediocrity to just above mediocrity. First, though, I want to explain my 
extensive research into sleep. As far as scientists can tell, humans have 
always spent some of their lives asleep. This shows that it is very important 
for our survival. However, we haven’t always slept in the same way. In the 
early days, humans used to sleep outdoors or in a cave. Now people sleep in 
luxury, emperor-size beds with white cotton sheets with a thread count of 
1,200. At least I do. So that shows people have changed their sleeping habits.

Now for the really scary bit. Not sleeping enough gives you cancer, 
Alzheimer’s and heart disease. Fact. According to research conducted by 
Professor Ken Snore of the University of Palm Springs, every person who is 
diagnosed with cancer, Alzheimer’s and heart disease has reported that at some 
point in their life they have felt a bit tired and rundown due to lack of 
sleep. That categorically proves a link between sleep and death. Doctor Doreen 
Doze of the DunstableSleep <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sleep> 
Laboratory has also conducted extensive clinical trials to prove that people 
who drive when they are tired are more likely to spontaneously combust.

Getting enough sleep is vital to our physical and spiritual wellbeing. Working 
too hard is one of the deadliest afflictions to hit American society. Literally 
every day, hundreds of thousands of people are dying by falling off buildings 
through tiredness. And for what? I have come to learn that less is sometimes 
more. When I’m trying to chat to a world leader, have lunch with the CEO of one 
of the world’s biggest tech companies (Bill, I’m thinking of you!), book my VIP 
ticket on the first Virgin Galactic flight and edit my modestly named website 
all at the same time, I’m letting myself down. The trick that I have learned is 
that I can now do all these things in my sleep. Aren’t I amazing?

People often say to me: “I’m not nearly as good as you at multitasking, 
Arianna. How can I fit some sleep into my hectic schedule?” To them, I always 
say: “It’s OK to nap.” That’s right. If you need a quick snooze, have one. 
That’s why I am calling for the UN to make it compulsory for all workplaces and 
schools to provide beds for their employees and students.

But now, forgive me. I am spent. Having given so much to you, I must give 
something back to myself. So I am going for a lie-down. Watch and learn. First 
I switch off my TV and phone, then I summon my little Peruvian friends to play 
some of their haunting melodies on their pan pipes. And If I’m still not asleep 
inside 10 minutes, I’ll just read this book.

Digested read, digested: The Huffington Four-Poster

 