
‘In the grand ballroom at the top of the Eiffel Tower, the red velvet curtains 
part and, suddenly, the giant On Air sign above the stage lights up …” And so 
beginsThe Orbiting Human Circus (of the Air) <http://orbitinghumancircus.com/>. 
If you like your podcasts strange, this new offering from the stable that 
brought you the darkly funnyWelcome To Night Vale 
<http://www.welcometonightvale.com/> is just the vintage-sounding oddball you 
need.

At first, it seems to be an old-fashioned variety show set in Paris, but it 
quickly switches to something more.Neutral Milk Hotel’s Julian Koster 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/68796-neutral-milk-hotels-julian-koster-starts-podcast-ft-tim-robbins-mandy-patinkin/>
 is the hapless Julian the janitor, whose voice crackles with heartbreak and 
determination to get up on stage. “Even in his fantasies, he ruins everything,” 
laments the narrator. “Who is this personality who cannot resist the bright 
lights of the stage, the beautiful, shining microphones, the hypnotic pull of 
laughter and applause … who has gone so far as to imagine a narrator to keep 
him company, announcing the events of his life as if he was the star of screen, 
stage and story?”

Julian is unfazed. “You make me sound like such a freak,” he says. “Everybody 
should have a narrator.”

This isn’t so much a podcast as a carousel of weirdness – and one that takes 
only a few minutes to hypnotise you. There’s a glamorous stage director 
arranging German shepherds, an “extraordinary singing saw” and ventriloquism 
lessons. There’s a vintage feel, with grand narration and the crackling of 
old-time sounds. It’s hard to know exactly what’s going on, but it feels as if 
many mysteries will unfold later. At less than half an hour long, there’s 
enough intrigue to feed your appetite for the next instalment (new episodes are 
promised fortnightly).

Welcome to Night Vale was surreal enough, but The Orbiting Human Circus (of 
the Air) takes strangeness to another level, especially when the tone suddenly 
changes as a “real” story cuts in. No spoilers, but it involves someone getting 
eaten. Who knows what to expect from the next episode?

If you like this, try: Welcome to Night Vale, you weirdo.
 