
For too long, global corporations have been able to use elaborate avoidance 
mechanisms to get out of paying their fair share of corporate tax. So last 
week’s ruling from the European commission that theIrish government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/02/irish-government-appeal-against-apple-13bn-tax-bill-european-commission>
 must recoup €13bn (£11bn) in back taxes from Apple should be unreservedly 
welcomed.

Apple, which the European commission revealed paid an effective corporation 
tax rate of just 0.005% on its European profits in 2014, is far from the only 
culprit.Amazon paid just £11.9m in tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/24/amazons-uk-business-paid-119m-tax-last-year>
 in the UK by routing its £5.3bn of British sales through its Luxembourg 
subsidiary. Google similarly paidjust £20.4m tax 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-35381130> despite UK sales of £3.8bn in 
2013.

At the root of the problem is the out-of-date international tax system, 
developed almost a century ago. Over time, it has become increasingly exploited 
by multinationals to shift profits to tax havens: in 2012, US multinationals 
shifted more thana quarter of their profits 
<http://www.taxjustice.net/scalebeps/> to avoid tax. In the meantime, the share 
of government revenue from corporation tax has fallen in countries such as the 
US and the UK.

These arrangements may be strictly legal, but they fail basic tests of 
economic and social justice. The bigger a company, the more aggressive it can 
be in lobbying tax authorities. In Apple’s case, it struck a deal with the 
Irish government that allowed it to allocate its European profits to a shell 
company not registered for tax in any country. This is not only unfair to 
smaller companies that have to pay tax; it is bad for economic growth, allowing 
corporate giants to entrench their position, impeding innovation and 
competition.

Tax avoidance breaks a fundamental social contract: companies that draw on 
public investment in skills and infrastructure to make vast profits should put 
something back. Why should Amazon make barely any contribution to Treasury 
coffers while its vans use UK roads and it employs workers whose education was 
paid for by the British taxpayer? Even worse, these tech giants extract profit 
without paying tax in some of the world’s poorest countries.

The answer ultimately lies in wholesale reform of international tax rules, so 
that multinationals are obliged to pay tax based on some measure of economic 
activity in each country, whether sales, employment or assets. But while there 
have been some fledgling steps in the right direction by the OECD, the body 
responsible for international tax rules, we remain a long way from such a 
comprehensive reform. International tax reform remains subject to lobbying by 
powerful corporate interests, meaning it is proceeding at a glacial pace.

The EU has played a more activist role: it was at the forefront of important 
rule changes that cracked down on global tax avoidance in the late 1990s and 
the European parliament has consistently pushed for greater transparency. The 
commission has developed proposals for reforms that would see companies pay tax 
relative to the level of economic activity in each EU country.

Its proposals illustrate how international co-operation can increase a 
country’s tax sovereignty. By developing international agreement around the 
principle, companies pay tax on the basis of their economic activity, taxed in 
a way and at a rate to be determined by national governments; this system 
avoids countries getting trapped in a race to the bottom on corporation tax. It 
takes power away from corporations and puts it back in the hands of the nation 
state.

The great irony is that just as the EU is starting to make inroads on this 
issue, Britain has voted to leave, based on old-fashioned arguments about 
national sovereignty that make little sense in the modern world. Global 
challenges such as tax avoidance, climate change and microbial resistance are 
borderless and cannot be addressed by nations acting alone. In light of this, 
perhaps it is unsurprising that some of the most vocal proponents of Britain 
leaving the European Union have argued that the Irish approach of low 
corporation tax and sweetheart deals could providea model for the UK economy 
post-Brexit 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3766848/Furious-MPs-urge-Theresa-advantage-EU-s-Mugabe-like-Apple-tax-ruling-attracting-tech-giants-Britain-Brexit.html>
.

Despite George Osborne’s noises about a new “march of the makers”, the Irish 
approach is a direction in which we have been quietly heading for some time. 
His time at the Treasury was marked by steady cuts to corporation tax – at 
great expense – at the same time as the government cut investment allowances 
and subsidies for R&D. The government hasdone precious little 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/31/observer-view-on-corporate-tax-google>
 to pursue tax avoidance domestically and has been a significant block to 
international tax reform at the OECD and EU. Theresa May and Philip Hammond 
have done little to signal that they will deviate from this approach.

But it is a blind alley for Britain. As Fintan O’Toole argues elsewhere in 
this newspaper, the Irish approach was a strategy of last resort for a tiny 
economy in dire straits. It could not work for Britain. No significant economy 
has achieved growth by slashing corporation tax: countries that have enjoyed 
the greatest economic success have done so by creating the conditions in which 
high-growth businesses can flourish, driving innovation and creating jobs. And 
the world is changing as we move towards greater tax transparency and companies 
are more aware than ever of the reputational damage of avoiding tax.

Moreover, is this really the future we want for British business in a Brexit 
world? One that is based on attracting corporate giants with accounting fiddles 
designed to help them cheat not just our near neighbours, but developing 
countries, out of their fair share of tax. Not to mention cheating Britons and 
the state by deliberately reducing the amount they pay to the state, money that 
will be lost to our roads, schools, hospitals. As O’Toole makes clear, in an 
age of inequality and financial uncertainty, this approach is not tenable. We 
are witnessing a rise in populist anger precisely because “elites” are seen to 
be playing by different rules. Fairness is at the heart of a stable society. It 
is not at the heart of Apple’s tax deal in Ireland.
 