
Tales of Barclays bankers playing fast and loose, circa 2011, lack shock value 
these days. After Libor rigging, forex rigging, and four other serious 
disciplinary breaches by the bank since 2009, we’re numb. But the latest 
addition to the portfolio of naughtiness shouldn’t be missed. The Financial 
Conduct Authority,whacking the bank with a £72m penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/26/barclays-fined-72m-elephant-deal-fca>
 for failing to run checks on a group of “politically exposed persons” wishing 
to transfer £1.88bn in a hurry, tells a cracking tale.

See the bankers salivate as they eye the rewards that will come with this 
“elephant deal”. One manager wants to “race this through”. One thinks they 
could be on to “the deal of the century”. When the client demands strict 
confidentiality, on pain of £37.7m in compensation if names leak, the Barclays 
managers deem electronic record keeping to be too risky and buy a physical safe 
to store hard copies. “Few people inBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> knew of the existence and 
location of the safe,” says the report.

None of those entertaining details directly worry the FCA. The regulatory 
breach lay in failing to check properly how the clients got their fortune in 
the first place. Barclays didn’t follow its own rules even though there were “a 
number of features of the business relationship that indicated a higher risk of 
financial crime”.

Some of the bank’s attempts at due diligence were almost comical. One 
explanation of the clients’ wealth said it came from “landholdings, real estate 
and business and commercial activities”. As the FCA notes drily, “this was 
wholly inadequate and virtually meaningless in the context of the due diligence 
that Barclays was required to undertake”. Overall, Barclays “failed to minimise 
the risk that it may be used to facilitate financial crime”.

The only feature missing from the FCA reports is names. We don’t know which 
Middle Eastern ruler (that is the City’s best guess: the Arab spring was 
happening at the time) was willing to pay Barclays £52.3m to transfer £1.88bn 
in a complex deal involving “multiple jurisdictions, offshore companies, a 
trust and several temporary bank accounts in different currency denominations”.

Nor, more importantly, do we know which individuals at Barclays were involved. 
The FCA, after a run-in with the courts, is obliged to remove job titles from 
its reports to prevent individuals being identified, or guessed at. Thus 
“senior management” is the stock phrase in this report. Nor is the FCA allowed 
to say whether it is investigating individuals with a view to imposing fines or 
bans from the City – but it would be astonishing if it isn’t.

Whiplash specialists get a bump

Buckle up, Slater & Gordon shareholders: George Osborne has driven his 
ministerial Jag into your rear end. Shares in the Australian legal outfit, big 
in whiplash claims over here, crashed 50% as the chancellor said he would 
reform “the compensation culture around minor motor accident injuries”.

Few hearts will bleed for the lawyers. As many have observed, Britons must 
have the weakest necks in Europe if all those claims for whiplash are genuine. 
Whiplash, in many instances, has become a racket in which too many outfits – 
claim management firms, repair garages and car rental firms, not just lawyers – 
have an interest.

Osborne’s preference for a system that obliges insurers to meet genuine 
medical bills, while still allowing severe claims to go to court, will be 
cheered by most drivers, provided the promised £40-£50 fall in the cost of an 
annual motor policy arrives promptly.

But before the industry celebrates, it should ask itself why the whiplash 
epidemic broke out. The main reason is that most insurers were idle and 
short-termist. They judged it cheaper to pay, say, a suspicious £2,000 claim 
than defend it at a cost of, say, £2,200. With greater determination, the 
industry could have helped itself.

An indirect reason is that insurers have their own devious habits. As 
everybody should know by now, it invariably pays to question your renewal 
quote. The first price is a try-on – it’s what the insurer hopes to get away 
with. Underhand pricing tactics and fraud are very different things, obviously. 
But if you treat your customers like fools …

Tesco keeps its powder dry

Still on ambulance-chasing matters, on Thursday Tesco agreed to settle for 
$12m a class action arising from last year’s overstatement of profits. The 
action was brought on behalf of holders of Tesco’s American depositary 
receipts, the US equivalent of the UK-listed shares, and was always deeply 
unpleasant. One set ofTesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> 
shareholders was hoping to gain at another’s expense.


In an ideal world, Tesco would have fought the action and won. In practice, 
you can’t blame the company for ridding itself of a distraction. Let’s hope the 
relatively small size of the cheque deters those lawyers hoping to launch a 
similar action in the UK and Europe. Tesco’s overstatement of profits is best 
left to the Serious Fraud Office to probe.
 