
Paris, Venice, Prague ... Belfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast>? 
Gulp. The capital of Northern Ireland is unlikely to be a city that people 
instantly think of when planning a romantic weekend away. But now that The 
Merchant Hotel has opened, maybe they should.

It's not just the hotel, which is only Belfast's second five-star 
establishment. Wandering about the regenerated area by the river Laggan and 
into the Cathedral Quarter, it's clear the city has moved on from the 
depression of the Troubles and into a bright new economic dawn: there are acres 
of plate glass set into spankingly modern architecture, lots of twinkly 
lighting, wide-open plazas, soaring public artworks, funky bars on little 
cobbled streets and towering over it all, vast cranes building yet more new 
developments.

Mind you, I wasn't that keen on leaving the hotel, which is a wonder in its 
own right. Heaven only knows how many millions it has cost to transform the 
derelict interior of the Grade A-listed building that used to be the Ulster 
Bank headquarters, but the answer can't be far off 'an awful lot'.

The marketing blurb calls it 'Belfast's first truly grand hotel', and to be 
honest, I didn't bother scouting around the city for anything better. A 
gleaming black Bentley does airport transfers by prior arrangement, and once 
guests have emerged from its soft leather interior, anyone feeling a bit 
peckish after an arduous journey can progress in stately fashion up sweeping 
stone steps and into a restaurant that is opulent beyond the bounds of reason, 
though thankfully, not beyond the bounds of taste.

During the daytime, a graceful atrium lets light flood into the grand entrance 
room which is decorated in crimson, gold, black, mocha and burnt orange. At 
night, the lighting is mysterious and intimate. The room I stayed in - alone, 
sadly - was a triumph of the traditionally sumptuous combined with flashes of 
contemporary styling, and would be the perfect setting for a classy seduction. 
Anyone you brought here would know you'd spent some serious dosh, and given 
that the mattress was a foot thick and splendidly soft and bouncy, clearly some 
thought had been given to making sure that the rooms were, er, up to the job.

Dinner that evening veered between scrumptious - most of it - and viciously 
sour - the "trio of tamarillo" for pudding - which meant that my friend was 
immediately required to share his. However, the service from every single 
member of staff was perfectly judged and beautifully friendly. And that is 
worth remarking on, because service is often something that money can't buy, no 
matter how much you're willing to pay.

The Merchant Hotel (028 9023 4888, themerchanthotel.com 
<http://www.themerchanthotel.com>). Bed and breakfast in a deluxe double costs 
from £220 per night for the room; special offer on certain dates in May of £120 
per night, or £395 for two nights B+B plus one dinner for two. Suites from £290 
to £600 per night.

Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com/en/book/index.asp>) and Air 
Berlin (airberlin.com <http://www.airberlin.com/site/index.php?lang=eng>) have 
flights between London airports and Belfast, while BA Connect (ba.com 
<http://www.ba.com>) operates six flights a day between Manchester and Belfast 
City Airport. All-inclusive return fares start from £50; the airline also 
operates four flights a day between Birmingham and Belfast and return fares 
start from £52.
 