
The test of a great film is not its relevance to world events. La Belle et la 
Bête doesn't suffer for its lack of insight into Libyan mission creep; The 
Shining needs no message about the Portuguese bailout. But now and then one of 
cinema's true moments of genius is brought to mind by the nightly news – and so 
it's been recently with Stalker, Andrei Tarkovsky's unshakable science-fiction 
masterwork, a film that ever since the crippling of theFukushima nuclear power 
plant 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/apr/07/japan-fukushima-plant-new-quake?intcmp=239>
 has, for me, been a mournful companion to the crisis.

Because if the exact nature of this most beautifully cryptic of films will 
always be open to debate, it will also be forever linked with Chernobyl – 
Tarkovsky's 1979 vision of the eerie, depopulated "Zone" on at least one level 
an uncannily prophetic vision of the "zone of alienation" thrown up around the 
ruined reactor number four after its conflagration seven years later. So 
lately, for all the repeated assurances that nuclear history isn't repeating 
itself, I've found it impossible not to see the dying concrete husk of 
Fukushima 1 and picture the forsaken world of Stalker as the conclusion.

Re-watching the film again now (always a joy), the echoes come thick and fast. 
If the Zone with its untamed fauna and totemic black dog prefaced Chernobyl's 
slow return of its site to the wild then that, too, would seem the likely fate 
for the land around Fukushima – the abandoned pets and farm animals already 
loose in streets from which people have vanished, a new contender for 
Tarkovsky's title of"quietest place in the world" 
<http://www.dotspress.com/fukushima-a-ghost-town/771590/>. The plant itself, 
meanwhile, finds its mirror in the vast, brooding power station from which the 
three protagonists set out on their uncertain voyage of discovery. And most 
striking of all, there's the invisible but all-pervasive danger at every step – 
radiation in the Chernobyl reading of the movie – and the jarringly primitive 
measures taken to combat it, in the film metal bolts attached to strips of 
bandage,at Fukushima sawdust and shredded newspaper 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/apr/03/japanese-officials-nuclear-radiation-crisis>
.

Off-screen, the resonances keep up. After all, Stalker, like each of its 
director's films, was the work of a man whose interest in Japanese culture fell 
somewhere between keen and obsessive. Not only was there an abiding passion for 
the work of Kenji Mizoguchi and Akira Kurosawa (to whom I've even seen it 
mooted that an "AK" chalked on a wall in an early scene of Stalker was a 
tribute), but there was also a fascination with haiku, the enigmatic lessons of 
which seep into Stalker at every turn. Elsewhere, the Japanese connections were 
still more clearcut: the famed highway sequence of Solaris, probably the most 
wildly hypnotic five minutes of film I've ever seen, was shot in Tokyo's 
Akasaka district, from whereBritish reporters wrote last month of stripped-bare 
supermarkets and contagious fear of radioactive dust clouds 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/japan/8384529/Japan-earthquake-as-radioactive-wind-blows-Tokyo-watches-and-waits-in-fear.html>
.

But Stalker itself had a catastrophic history. While it's a well-known part of 
the film's legend that it had to be shot twice after the original film stock 
was ruined in the lab, it's less talked about that the entire production had by 
then already had to vacate its original location in northern Tajikistan after a 
major earthquake. Touched as such by disaster in its early life, the film would 
end up embraced by it. While the last month saw Tokyo's drinking water deemed 
unfit for children, the toxic legacy of eventually filming near a chemical 
plant outside the Estonian capital of Tallinn has been blamed for killing both 
lead actor Anatoli Solonitsyn and in 1986, just a few months after Chernobyl, 
Tarkovsky himself. Earlier this week it would have been his 79th birthday – 
there could hardly be a better moment to raise a glass.
 