
Today, no facts, no hearsay, no tenacious gripping of far-from-convincing 
evidence, and frankly, not much evangelical Christianity. This is a huge 
relief. TheAlpha course <https://www.theguardian.com/global/series/alpha-male> 
this week takes us far from the crutch of historicity and into the realm of 
prayer.

We begin, as we do each week, with a talk from Toby, and as ever it is 
engaging stuff. We discuss the meaning of words such as "amen" and the use of 
the Aramaic word that Jesus uses to describe God: "abba". It means "daddy" or 
"papa", and we talk about how this childlike language reflects the relationship 
we can have with God. I wonder what Freud would make of that.

We break down the Lord's prayer line by line. This is a perplexing exercise. 
Like every person above a certain age who went to a Christian-ish school, I can 
vomit forth the Lord's prayer quicker thanUsain Bolt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/usainbolt> can do his thing. Having 
regurgitated it pretty much every school day from the age of five, I'm not sure 
I have ever considered what any of the words mean. This, yet again, galvanises 
my emerging belief that Christianity relies heavily on being culturally 
ingrained, but only superficially analysed by the flock.

The Alpha course <http://uk.alpha.org/> likes to state that many more people 
pray than are Christians. There is a forceful emphasis on the notion that 
Christianity is a "relationship with God". But I don't know what that means. 
Prayer, Toby says, coupled with reading the Bible, is the best way to nurture 
this relationship. He tells us that we are "hardwired for prayer". Now, there 
certainly is plenty of scientific research into theneuroscience of religiosity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2006/aug/30/medicalresearch.neuroscience>, 
but it is a murky, new and difficult field. And I'll be damned to fiery Hades 
if I'm going to accept this assertion from a vicar, albeit an extremely bright 
one. The press, understandably, love the science of religious belief, and love 
to repeat the meme that we are "hardwired for religion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/sep/04/religion.uk>". My problem with 
this is that I most certainly am not.

The discussion moves away from what prayer means in religious terms, and into 
how it actually works. Toby tells us ofWilliam Temple 
<http://justus.anglican.org/resources/bio/61.html>, the archbishop of 
Canterbury during the second world war, who once said, "When I pray, 
coincidences happen, and when I don't pray, they don't."

Temple's maxim, as any first-year psychology undergraduate knows, is willing 
submission to the quintessentially human characteristic known as "confirmation 
bias <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confirmation_bias>". Simply, we tend to 
notice things that affirm our prejudices and tend to ignore or forget those 
that don't. Everyone does it, and astrologers have wrested a multibillion-pound 
business out of this human foible. When we split into groups, discussion about 
this phenomenon dominates, as it seemed rude to simply interrupt Toby when he 
was talking and tell him that his answered prayers were simply a psychological 
quirk. And besides, very little I could say or show would alter his faith that 
his prayers are sometimes answered.

It's all too easy to write off prayer as simply pointlessly talking at ghosts. 
Certainly, ignoring well-understood phenomena such as confirmation bias and 
blindly believing that prayer results in increased coincidence is silly. But 
the truth is that I, and I guess most people, don't spend nearly enough time 
simply being quiet and still and thinking in peace. Prayer has no external 
effect, just like blowing candles on your birthday cake doesn't. But that 
doesn't mean there is no value in it. The humility of asking for help is a 
thing to be cherished, even if that is simply giving yourself the space to work 
things out for yourself. The flipside to this is when just listening to the 
thoughts in your head results in justification for hideous acts. So when 
Lucinda, an almost-Christian from an evangelical family, specifically raises 
this week's titular question, Toby's answer is a sentiment that I like, but one 
that is rare in religion: "I don't know. You have to work it out for yourself."

I'm not feeling any closer to JC after six weeks on this course, and I'm not 
getting sucked in. I don't think anyone is, yet. The numbers have dwindled to 
six after six weeks. When I check against the official Alpha doctrine, and 
compare our discussions to the books and DVDs that are part of the curriculum, 
but which we don't use, ours are far more freeform and interesting. But I felt 
very positive about this session. There was none of the futile grasping at 
unexceptional evidence for extraordinary claims. Instead there was a sense of 
how being calm and still can help you sort out your thoughts. This moment was 
lost, like tears in rain, when a smelly drunk burst into the church and growled 
at us for not being more welcoming to him. Next week, Toby notes, we'll lock 
the door.
 