
I suppose that whether this article prompted by the Charleston shootings feels 
topical enough will depend on whether America has another mass shooting before 
it goes to print. If you’re in the US, there’s a fair chance it will seem dated 
because you are actually being gunned down as you read it, so I’ll try to get 
straight to the point. It’s surely worth wondering whether it’s time to retire 
the flag that has for so long been a rallying point for racists and murderers, 
the stars and stripes. There’s a genuine question to be asked here: what 
responsibility does the US state bear for the Charleston shootings when racist 
murder seems to be part of its policing strategy and most of its foreign policy?

Occasionally I wonder whether at some point in the past 100 years the US gave 
the rest of the world a safe word and we’ve simply forgotten it. Or maybe we’re 
just saying it wrong (Aluminium? I’m sure you said it was aluminium ...) 
Hillary Clinton has been speaking out againstthe “racist terrorism” of Dylann 
Roof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/23/hillary-clinton-charleston-shooting-racist-terrorism-ferguson>
 despite being the architect of the US military intervention in Libya. The US’s 
record of invasions, assassinations and government overthrows is racist, I 
think. Imagining that you can kill people and seize control of their resources 
without believing them to be inferior requires a certain amount of intellectual 
flexibility. The same sort of intellectual flexibility that allows people to 
express grief for the migrants who drown in the Mediterranean and hatred for 
the ones who survive.

To replace the Confederate flag with a Pride flag won't fix American racism | 
Linda Chavers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/29/confederate-flag-pride-flag-fix-racism>
Part of the American mindset comes from the fact that the US was formed 
through the racist murder of indigenous people. The reason that whole country 
is such a horror story is that the entire thing is built on an Old Indian 
Graveyard. I worry that perhaps white America wants to believe that its racial 
fault lines only run as deep as the Confederate flag. Hence the current uproar 
at names of southern civil-war generals being on street signs while the faces 
of slave owners are still on the currency.

Of course not everybody gets behind the US’s view of itself, which is why it 
is the world’s largest producer of propaganda. Last year’s biggest movie,
American Sniper <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>, was billed 
as the story of the US army’s deadliest soldier, which must have felt pretty 
galling for the guy who dropped the bomb on Hiroshima. It was basically Star 
Wars from the point of view of one of the stormtroopers, and the director 
(Clint Eastwood – I’m not even joking) encouraged us to get behind the idea 
that you should take moral decisions when women and children are in your 
crosshairs, rather than long, long before. You got the feeling that the clunky 
scene explaining that sniper Chris Kyle’s unit painted skulls on their gear as 
a tribute to the Punisher was necessary in case viewers made the more logical 
supposition that it was a tribute to the Waffen-SS.

Hundreds honour Charleston church shooting victim Myra Thompson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/29/hundreds-honour-charleston-church-shooting-victim-myra-thompson>
There are many indicators of advanced civilisations, but unthinking hero 
worship of the military isn’t one of them. The US, like the UK, has been forced 
to move away from a conscription army and now has a mercenary army. It’s the 
reason you don’t get war poets any more.

Indeed, before Britain feels too superior, we should perhaps remember that 
Roof’s main problem here would have been feeling torn between quite a few of 
the main parties at the last election. We live in a country where posting 
“Let’s riot or something bruv!” on Facebook will get you a couple of years in 
prison, while writing a column saying we should bomb Syria is practically an 
entrance exam for public intellectuals. Of course, it’s never phrased as a plea 
to kill shepherds in pursuit of our geopolitical interests. By the time it hits 
the broadsheets, it’s a plea to arm moderate rebels (they’ve got a moderate 
vision of the country’s future and they’re going to kill until they get it!). 
It’s a humanitarian intervention. We’re not fighting wars for control of 
resources. We’re not the aggressor in countries such as Iraq, we’re actually 
defending Iraq. From the Iraqis. The most obvious anti-war argument that none 
of this has ever worked just doesn’t seem to come up.

Gun control won't prevent another Charleston-style shooting, says Jeb Bush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/28/gun-control-wont-prevent-another-charleston-style-shooting-says-jeb-bush>
Of course our governments are just trying to protect us from terror. In the 
same way that someone banging a hornets’ nest with a stick is trying to protect 
us from hornets. Maybe I’ll even give them the benefit of the doubt and concede 
that they are just naive do-gooders trying to bring the world peace and 
stability through the medium of high explosives. What gets me is that the new 
dirty word in the west is “radicalisation”, as if radical change wasn’t 
obviously needed; as if the status quo has any decency, or is even survivable. 
It’s not actually difficult to see solutions to the US’s problems: children can 
do it, until we educate them out of it. Internationally, I propose the radical 
step of not trying to solve complex political problems with 1,000lb bombs; 
domestically, I propose they start addressing inequality by paying reparations 
for slavery. I’m well aware that in a society where war and discrimination are 
now almost entirely normalised, both options sound like madness.
 