
Kevin Spacey <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kevinspacey> is about to 
take a vacation, his first in nearly two years. Three days after closing on 
Broadway in his acclaimed revival of Eugene O'Neill's four and a half hour 
marathon The Iceman Cometh, he bounces into one of his favourite Los Angeles 
haunts, a restaurant on Sunset Boulevard he would rather remained nameless, a 
place to meet and greet and hang out, where the waitresses know him by his 
first name and he enjoys them well enough to be inclined to joke and flirt.

'Make me one of those iced, swirly, frothy frappuccino mocha things,' he says 
to a young woman dressed modishly in black. 'What? What? Why do I make you 
laugh so much?' he says in a soft, deadpan voice, because she does, indeed, 
seem to be giggling, helplessly. 'Am I so funny?'

This is not at all the Spacey we know from his various screen personae: the 
creepy, criminal mastermind Keyser Soze masquerading as a whining gimp in The 
Usual Suspects (a turn for which he won an Oscar in 1995), the demented serial 
killer who outwits both Brad Pitt and Morgan Freeman (two guys who usually 
never lose) in Seven, the bitter loser squabbling and sniping with Judy Davis 
in The Ref, or supercilious, faggy murderer Jim Williams in Midnight in the 
Garden of Good and Evil. In the flesh, Spacey is much more high-energy and 
high-spirited and odd.

He is wearing sharp black trousers and a crisp, white, button-down shirt with 
a Pentel pen in the pocket. With his round, almost anonymous face, he looks 
both bland and groomed, like an accountant about to take a vacation, except for 
the black baseball cap that says 'NYU Film'. Which is to say that Spacey does 
not at first strike you as an actor at all - a considerable irony, because he 
is the consummate actor of his generation, an actor right down to the fibre of 
his no doubt immaculate cotton socks.

He moves with Japanese neatness and almost feline delicacy. He has a scar 
above the lid of his left eye, the result of an altercation with a cat named 
Prince Albert when he was growing up just over the hill from here, in the San 
Fernando Valley.

Spacey takes gum from his mouth, places it with exquisite deliberation in the 
centre of a spotless white ashtray and eagerly hits the mark about his new 
movie American Beauty, co-starring Annette Bening and directed by first-timer 
Sam Mendes (the young English director whose work for the stage includes the 
recent London and New York runs of Cabaret and The Blue Room ).American Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-beauty> is the buzz film, having 
been described by Steven Spielberg as the best thing he has seen in years, and 
a reminder of why he himself wants to make movies - giddy praise indeed, even 
if Spielberg's Dreamworks company did produce the picture.

In talking about American Beauty, for once it is right to use superlatives. 
This film is howlingly funny, but not a comedy. It ends tragically, yet reminds 
us of the beauty of life. It centres on the disintegration and renaissance of 
an executive, Lester Burnham (Spacey), and his relationship with his wife 
(Bening, who lets rip in ways both hilarious and terrifying). Although Lester 
whacks off in the shower, lusts and drools over his daughter's sultry best 
friend and blackmails his boss when he is fired, the film concerns itself as 
much with suburban morality and teenage angst as it does with the male 
menopause.

American Beauty will, I think, quickly find itself in the category of 
masterpieces such as The Graduate, One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest and Ordinary 
People. It is emotionally spacious, perfectly modulated and seems likely to 
redefine Spacey's career and kick it on to another level.

'Kevin has been pigeonholed as a Machiavelli, the cleverest man on screen,' 
says Mendes. 'Here he plays a man who's blind to the world and outrageous and 
foolish and charming by turn. This is a very different part for him because 
audiences can love his character while being shocked by what he does. I think 
Kevin realised right from the start how big a moment this would be in his 
career if it worked.'

In the restaurant, Spacey removes his baseball cap, revealing thinning black 
hair. At 39, he conducts himself with the relaxed confidence of a man quite 
aware of the fact that he's really hitting his stride these days. 'People tend 
to want you the way they discovered you, and I got dissolved in very dark 
parts. It's been the greatest thing in the world to me when I've heard people 
say about American Beauty, "I never thought he could do this." Well, I can do 
it and I've been trying to tell people for years.'

He first read TV comedy writer Alan Ball's screenplay in the summer of 1998, 
when he was still playing in Iceman in London. 'I knew that it was sensational, 
ahead of its time on so many levels that are relevant to the world we find 
ourselves in as we walk into the millennium. To me, the whole film is about 
perception and how easy it is to misperceive or to perceive only what you care 
to perceive. People ask, "How does a thing like Columbine, Colorado, happen?" I 
think this movie answers that question. It's right there in front of us. There 
are usually unnoticed goings- on between families and neighbours and co-workers 
that are subterranean truths once you examine them.'

At which point Spacey, examining me examining his tongue nervously fretting at 
his lip, excuses himself and bolts out to his car to apply something to an area 
that, he tells me, got burned windsailing. Keyser Soze windsailing? Kevin 
Spacey, the Valley boy turned Julliard graduate and archetypal New York theatre 
figure windsailing? It does not seem to fit, but then for years journalists 
have been trying to work out who Spacey really is.

There's the mysterious issue of his real name, for instance - Kevin Fowler. 
Where does the Spacey come from? He is not letting on, and Internet speculation 
is rife. The game took an unpleasant turn a couple of years back when a 
magazine article centred itself on another rumour, that Spacey is gay. He 
bounds back up the stairs from the car park and sits again, lip duly salved. I 
ask what impact the piece had had on him and his career.

He accepts the question graciously but becomes animated, leaning back in his 
chair and waving his arms, as though the memory - whatever he may say to the 
contrary - stings. 'It didn't impact on me at all. It had nothing to do with 
me. People say they're appalled about my private life being dragged through the 
pages of a magazine. I was laughing with Ed Norton about this recently, because 
my private life wasn't put out there at all. My private life was intact. That 
was just presumption, rumour, based on nothing.

'If you come to me and say, I hear you're a bigot, I hear you're a paedophile, 
I hear you cheat on your taxes, you bet your ass I'd stand up and defend myself 
because those are things I don't want to be associated with and I find 
reprehensible. But what's wrong with gay people? Why should I be pressed to 
stand up and say I'm not one of them?'

Spacey may choose not to take journalists on a personal journey of his 
experience, but when you meet him, he is much funnier and more intimate than 
expected. After acting in high school, and while he was at Julliard, he began 
his professional career as a stand-up comedian, doing impressions. During the 
lunch, chatting away, picking at the salmon he has ordered from the still 
giggling waitress, his voice takes on the tones of some of those he has admired 
or met or worked with. In front of my eyes, he becomes Johnny Carson, Katharine 
Hepburn, John Gielgud, Danny DeVito, Jack Lemmon and Al Pacino.

These last two have become his career guides, as well as close friends. He 
still has the photograph Lemmon signed for him as a child, and it was Pacino 
who gave him his first big break in the movies in Glengarry Glenross and later 
invited him to be his co-conspirator in the Shakespeare documentary Looking for 
Richard. Spacey both acted in the film and tagged along for the ride, sitting 
off camera while Pacino conducted his interviews with scores of noted 
academics, directors and actors. Now he speaks of both Lemmon and Pacino with a 
humour and warmth that borders on veneration, giving a glimpse of the Spacey 
who once was, and to some extent still is, the nerdiest of theatre fans.

It occurs to me, putting aside all consideration of who he is as a private 
indi vidual, that this is who Kevin Spacey is becoming as an actor - a shotgun 
marriage of two great performers and stars who seem, on the face of it, 
improbable bedfellows - Jack Lemmon and Al Pacino.

'He's a strategist as an actor and, like Lemmon, he doesn't look like a film 
star,' agrees Mendes. 'While we were shooting American Beauty , we talked a lot 
about The Apartment and the way Lemmon made that character so real and normal, 
right down to the way his hair changed through the course of the movie - 
becoming both more and more distressed and yet more and more true to his inner 
self. Kevin's concentration is like a laser beam. And like Pacino, you always 
feel certain he's going to find those moments that will make the hairs stand up 
on the back of your neck.'

Spacey has worked extremely hard during these past two years, turning his 
career in this new direction that seems to fit so well. In between productions 
of Iceman in London and New York (where he lives with his dog in a small 
Greenwich Village apartment), he shot three movies back to back - American 
Beauty, Ordinary Decent Criminal , based on the life of Irish gangster Martin 
Cahill, and The Big Kahuna , produced by his own Trigger Street Productions, a 
$2 million movie about two salesmen, in which he stars with a pal from LA 
Confidential, Danny DeVito.

He has his own company to do low-budget films that will both bolster his 
credibility and keep him topped up with a supply of good parts should the 
studio well run dry. He is already talking about a screen version of Iceman, 
and foresees a small run of films based on plays, because the material is to 
hand and he sees a ready way into it.

'I'm just as susceptible as anybody to the things that pull and tempt you,' 
Spacey says. 'You have to seek out those things both in terms of people and 
material that are sincere and driven by a similar sensibility to your own. 
Pretty obviously I'm not only interested in making lots of dough and being 
famous. As far as Hollywood goes, I don't want to contribute to the problem, 
whatever I perceive the problem to be.'

What does he perceive the problem to be? 

'Oh, it's massive. It's massive and it's ugly,' he says with a big grin, too 
smart, too damned relaxed to be drawn into a harangue about the ills of the 
movie industry. He's at a happy place in his career and, besides, he is about 
to go on vacation.

So Kevin Spacey calls over the waitress and asks for another iced, swirly 
mocha thing.

What they said... what he did

'One of the year's finest pictures... by turns hilarious, painful and brutally 
frank. Kevin Spacey practically glows with vulnerability. His portrayal of the 
beleaguered suburban male of the species is achingly tender.' Washington Post

'Unsettling, unnerving, undefinable, American Beauty is a blood-chilling dark 
comedy, a strange, brooding and very accomplished film. Kevin Spacey is superb 
as Lester, whose wife and daughter consider him "this gigantic loser". There 
definitely is a hell of a picture here.' Los Angeles Times

' American Beauty is a triumph - adult, smart, involving, stylish. Spacey 
powers the movie, not only sympathetic as the rebellious suburbanite but also 
very vulnerable.' New York Times

 A Bug's Life (1998) Spacey voices Hopper, the nasty, one-eyed leader of the 
grasshoppers.

 The Negotiator (1998) Spacey plays the Chicago police force's toughest 
negotiator, Chris Sabian.

 Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil (1997) Spacey plays Jim Williams, a 
rich, Gatsbyesque mystery man on trial for murdering his male lover.

 L.A. Confidential (1997) Spacey plays charismatic, corrupt cop Jack Vincennes.

 A Time To Kill (1996) Spacey plays tough defence attorney Rufus Buckley. 

 Seven (1995) Spacey plays zealously moralising serial killer John Doe. 

 The Usual Suspects (1995) Spacey plays mysterious crime mastermind Keyser 
Soze.

 Glengarry Glen Ross (1992) Spacey plays a salesman under pressure in a 
Chicago real-estate office.
 