
The new series of 24 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/24> – 
officially titled, for reasons that aren’t immediately apparent, 24: Legacy – 
represents the biggest risk in the show’s history. It’s bigger than Nina 
killing Jack’s wife, or Jack’s dad blowing up on an oil rig. It’s bigger than 
the move to London, bigger than the decision to cut each series down to 12 
episodes and bigger than any number of hokey subplots where a mountain lion 
terrorises a teenage girl for LOLs.
 Your new beloved psychopathic superhero … Eric Carter, played by Corey 
Hawkins. Photograph: FOX 
Because in 24: Legacy, Jack Bauer is nowhere to be seen. It’s someone else’s 
voice gravely intoning when the following will take place. It’s someone else 
driving like a maniac while yelling about moles. There’s shooting and torture 
aplenty, but Jack Bauer – my beloved Jack Bauer, my reluctant psychopathic 
superhero Jack Bauer – is entirely out of the picture. That’s an incredible 
risk for 24 to take.

Reader, the risk paid off. I’ve seen the first Jack-less episode of 24: 
Legacy, and I am here to tell you that it is incredible.

Now, a quick caveat. You’ll probably only agree if you liked all the other 
seasons of 24. In my book, thanks to its format and movie star lead and endless 
dramatic rug-pulling, 24 deserves to be recognised as one of the shows that 
helped transform television from cinema’s poor cousin into the most creatively 
satisfying medium in entertainment. I love how gonzo 24 is. I love the constant 
march of plot, so relentless that the show usually ends up throwing itself 
under its own wheels to service the story. I love the blood and the death and 
the soft perimeters and the damnits. 24, no matter how improbable it gets, is 
my show.

If you disagree – if you’ve never got on with 24, or checked out when Jack 
chopped Chase’s arm off, or pedantically wondered when anyone went to the 
toilet – 24: Legacy is not for you. It is exactly the same as Kiefer-era 24. 
There are terrorists, there’s a presidential candidate, there’s a mole and, at 
the centre of it all, there’s a hero who seems reluctant to save the day even 
though his heart yearns for the binary clarity of violent justice.
 The first episode is 24 by numbers … there are terrorists, there’s a 
presidential candidate, there’s a mole and there’s a hero who seems reluctant 
to save the day. Photograph: Michael Becker/FOX 
The first episode is 24 by numbers. Our new hero – Eric Carter, played by 
Corey Hawkins – is in witness protection after helping to kill an Osama bin 
Laden analogue. Some terrorists come for him in revenge, and it seems likely 
that they did so on the orders of someone at CTU. Carter can trust nobody, but 
he’s got a gun and a friend with a surveillance drone, so the game is on.

It all unpacks in such a hurry, kicking into high gear with a breathless home 
invasion scene less than 10 minutes in, that you don’t have time to miss Kiefer 
Sutherland. When the pace eventually drops (at least as much as 24 will allow 
it to) you might find yourself yearning for the moments of shy sincerity that 
occasionally punctured Bauer’s bravado. However, even then you can’t deny that 
it’s refreshing to have a newcomer like Hawkins at the helm. By the end of the 
last series, Jack had lost everything. He’d been physically and emotionally 
brutalised to the point that he was just a scar, an unfeeling weapon light 
years from his family-man origins. He had no stakes left.

Carter, though, has everything to lose. He’s a real person with a wife, 
friends, and a life that he’s come to rely on. There is not a chance that he’ll 
still have all three by the end of these 12 episodes, but that’s probably the 
point.
 Everything to lose … Carter is a real person with a wife, friends, and a life 
that he’s come to rely on. Photograph: John P Fleenor/FOX 
Oh sure, if we’re nitpicking then I could point out the handful of undeniably 
cringeworthy moments in the pilot. The exposition, so artless that a senator 
basically introduces himself by saying “I’m a senator”. The improbable tech. 
The teen subplot that feels precision-designed to infuriate viewers.

But that’s part and parcel of 24. If you’re a fan you’ll have long ago 
accepted these flaws as part of the show’s charm, just as you’ll be braced for 
the inevitable episode where the show gets itself in a tangle and has to kill 
off its primary antagonist to get things moving again, or Tony Almeida being 
played with enough ambiguity to get the writers out of a hole four episodes in.

I started watching 24: Legacy with a huge amount of trepidation in my heart. 
But by the end of the episode, where almost every single cast member gets a 
close-up of them looking away suspiciously, just in case they turn out to be 
the mole, I was all but punching the air with delight. 24 – my stupid, 
wonderful 24 – is back. Wild horses couldn’t stop me from watching this.

24: Legacy starts on Fox in the US on 5 February after the Superbowl, and in 
the UK at 9pm on 15 February.
 