
Patricia Asio is 13 and is coming to the end of her primary schooling, two 
years ahead of her peers. In her last exams, she attained the second highest 
grade. Such achievement in Ogwolo school in the sub-county of Katine is 
remarkable, and it owes much to the work of the African Medical and Research 
Foundation (Amref) over the last three years. The school has benefited from new 
desks, books and classrooms.

In virtually every hamlet scattered across the sub-county there are now 
heartening stories such as that of Patricia. In Ominit, a new borehole saves 
women such as Edith Apiango a 4km walk through an often flooded swamp to 
collect water. Apiango knew that the swamp water was dirty and gave her 
children diarrhoea; once, it nearly killed her small son. The gratitude of the 
women at the new water sources around Katine is overwhelming; they know all too 
well that the clean water which gushes from the pump has saved young lives. 
After malaria, dirty water (and the infections it brings) is the biggest killer 
of children under five.

These are the heartwarming stories of individual lives that have been 
transformed in a remote rural community in north-easternUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> over the past three years. They 
bring to life the reports and evaluations which have tracked the implementation 
of a development project focusing on five aspects of deprivation: health, 
education, water and sanitation, livelihoods and governance.

In this supplement, reporters have returned for a final assessment of what has 
been achieved since the Guardian's editor, Alan Rusbridger, launched the 
project in October 2007 and appealed to the generosity of Guardian readers. 
Barclays pledged to match-fund donations up to £1m and, with the help of Care 
International, added a microfinance strand to the project. Farm-Africa was 
brought in to provide agriculture expertise. Our team tells the story of how 
this expertise and your money have wrought change for a community of 29,000 
Ugandans.

Read how 150 village savings and loans associations have been set up in 
Katine. With a starting membership fee of just 8p, residents have had access 
for the first time to small loans. Some have borrowed to set up small 
businesses, others to pay for medicines. In one year, a total of £22,482 has 
been banked.

Hear how a grain store has been built and a co-operative established to market 
farmers' agricultural surplus, ensuring they get a better price. Learn how 
farmers have been trained to use a new, disease-resistant strain of cassava.

More than 7,000 malaria nets have been distributed to families with small 
children, and village health teams (VHTs) have been instrumental in more than 
doubling the immunisation rate, to above 90%. The testing rate for HIV/Aids has 
increased nearly fourfold.

These are the facts and figures a donor needs to be reassured money has been 
well spent, but the binding element of this project was subtler, something 
harder for journalists to report on, and it will be crucial to the long-term 
sustainability of the project. Every one of the achievements listed above has 
necessitated slowly building up the community's ability to organise and run 
itself. Over three years, a network of committees has been nurtured: VHTs, 
parent-teacher associations, water source committees, farmers' groups, 
parent-teacher associations, and village savings associations.

Each group has been trained, with chairs appointed and basic equipment, such 
as bicycles, provided. VHTs have been taught basic diagnostic skills, how to 
gather data and how to spread the word throughout the community about hygiene, 
handwashing and how to dig pit latrines. It's the essence of development: 
giving people the skills to help their communities, encouraging leadership so 
they can interact and lobby their political representatives in local 
government. This work of building relationships and helping communities to 
tackle their own needs was particularly pressing in Katine. The area had 
experienced decades of violence and instability, most recently in 2003, when 
the rebel Lord's Resistance Army swept through, leaving a legacy of bitterness 
and suspicion.

This community rebuilding is essential to the project's sustainability. The 
water source committees will determine whether the boreholes are well 
maintained and repaired on time. Can they collect the small water user fees for 
the repair fund? Will the VHTs still be supervising the immunisation of babies 
in five years' time?

The Guardian's day to day reporting of the project on its dedicated website – 
www.theguardian.com/katine – comes to an end today, but Amref will stay for 
another year to consolidate and strengthen the community structures. We will 
periodically return to see how well they last and whether the Katine project 
achieves the ultimate measure of success: sustainability.

The project has also pioneered a new model of reporting on development and 
aid. Every aspect of the venture has been exposed to public scrutiny – the 
budgets, the reports and the evaluations. In addition, two Ugandan journalists 
have been based in the community, filing frequent progress reports. The result 
is a remarkably detailed account of how aid and development work; of what goes 
wrong and what succeeds, warts and all.

Readers have learned of the very high costs of the new school building in 
Amorikot, a strike by the VHTs when their modest remuneration was cut, and 
villagers' loss of confidence in the water quality of the new boreholes. 
Visitors to the website have asked tough questions and have made very clear 
their disappointments and frustrations. Villagers in Katine have added their 
voices, explaining what they think the project should do. Amref and Farm-Africa 
staff have explained what they were doing and why.

The website offers an extraordinary picture of the ups and downs, strains and 
stresses of a development project. Most importantly, it has set a new standard 
for telling the complex story of how communities can change. This task was part 
of the original ambition outlined by Rusbridger, who pointed out that some 
stories are crucial but lack the drama or crisis to push their way into the 
headlines. It is in the detail of these slow-moving stories that the huge 
issues of development and environment emerge. How doesAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> feed its growing population? How 
will the burden of disease be eased in a continent where millions of children 
never reach their fifth birthday?

The project has won several awards that recognised the unique collaboration 
between its partners. It has won admiration for pioneering unprecedented 
transparency, a model which many believe will influence the increasing desire 
among donors to know exactly where their money has gone and how it has been 
used.

Lastly, a personal note from those involved in the project. Not one of us who 
has visited Katine over the last three years has returned untouched. Each of us 
has memories of the warm welcome we received, the friendships made, the dignity 
we witnessed in lives full of hardship. Our hearts have been inspired by the 
sheer delight of the children we have encountered. The aim was to change a 
village, but we found ourselves changed in the process. Thank you, Katine.
 