
Tony Abbott’s back, baby.

Well, maybe not quite. Still, for the first time, a conservative pundit has 
touted an Abbott restoration as a more-or-less serious prospect.

Last week, Troy Bramston outlined 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/columnists/troy-bramston/federal-election-2016-abbott-ready-if-turnbull-stumbles/news-story/222b3b4b1f32921ea8a22151df30c9c6>
 a potential pathway for Abbott’s return. If Malcolm Turnbull loses on 2 July – 
an outcome that, while still unlikely, seems more plausible with each passing 
day – he’ll be out on his ear. Who will succeed him? Bramston dismisses both 
Julie Bishop and Scott Morrison as unviable, and the rising crop of Liberal 
aspirants as raw and untested.

That’s why, he says, amid the recriminations, it might be once more time for 
Tony.

Australian election 2016: Malcolm Turnbull defends Julie Bishop over 
superannuation – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/31/australian-election-2016-independents-spark-up-on-qa-live>
“[W]ith the party reeling from defeat and there being no obvious leadership 
successor,” Bramston argues, “all eyes will be on the re-elected member for 
Warringah.”

Make of that what you will. 

But the speculation, in and of itself, draws attention to an astonishing 
transformation playing out before us, as a Labor-style civil war simmers in the 
Liberal ranks.

Remember, Abbott won office on the basis of Labor’s turmoil. His awareness of 
the disastrous consequences of the Gillard-Rudd conflicts (Australia, he said, 
couldn’t afford “another three years like the last six”) meant that, even as he 
left the Lodge, he pledged “no wrecking, no undermining, and no sniping”.

Since, then, however, he’s wrecked and undermined and sniped like the best of 
them, as the man who promised to replace Kevin Rudd gradually becameKevin Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/kevin-rudd>.

How is this possible? How can the Liberals, after watching the Gillard-Rudd 
melodrama, have decided to stage their own version?

It’s a question that seems particularly moot because we’re accustomed to 
understanding parliamentary conflicts as shaped, first and foremost, by the 
deliberate political choices of the leaders. Most political commentary in 
Australia takes the individual as the primary unit of analysis: political 
junkies have, for instance, been preparing themselves for the 2016 election with
David Marr’s biographical essay on Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/i-have-a-clarity-of-purpose-how-bill-shorten-bounced-back-and-made-labour-the-modern-party>
 and Annabel Crabb’s account of Malcolm Turnbull’s life and career.

The approach is so normalised that it’s not seen as a particular methodology, 
so much as simply the way the world works. That’s what makesthe study of Paul 
Kelly’s writing 
<https://overland.org.au/previous-issues/issue-199/feature-sean-scalmer-and-jackie-dickenson/>
 by the academics Sean Scalmer and Jackie Dickensen so interesting.

They note that Kelly’s extraordinarily influential books (The March of 
Patriots, The End of Certainty, The Hawke Ascendancy etc) depend on a certain 
kind of historiography, one they trace back to the Insider series produced by 
John Gunther in the 1930s. Those books were assiduously imitated in Australia 
by Warren Denning, Alan Reid, Laurie Oakes and other writers; they remain, 
whether recognised or not, the template for a great deal of contemporary 
political writing.

Gunther made no secret of his orientation. He wrote about personalities 
because, he said, they were “newsy”. He presented the political struggles of 
his day as clashes between individual politicians – and that gave his books an 
easily-assimilated narrative arc. In essence, they were written according to 
the structure developed and popularised in the 19th century novel, in which the 
protagonist’s character determines his fate.

Paul Kelly’s work is similar. Like Gunther, he provides an “insider’s 
perspective”, predicated on special access to the politicians in question. More 
importantly, as Scalmer and Dickensen explain:

a general view is evident across [his] many texts. The ‘most potent mixture’ 
for ‘political upheaval’ is not, according to The Hawke Ascendancy, economic or 
social dislocation but a force apparently more elemental: ‘power rivalry’ fed 
on ‘personality conflict’. Contexts are only lightly sketched. This is 
political history as a chronicle of great, flawed individuals and of the world 
that they make. The rest is background.

The methodology shapes the messy business of contemporary politics into the 
kind of narrative we all know best: a story about individuals deliberately 
shaping the world around them.

But recent political history demonstrates the problem with this old-fashioned, 
“Great Man” style of historiography. Think of Kevin Rudd. Today, most 
commentators attribute Rudd’s downfall at least in part to his temper and the 
control freakery that made his office dysfunctional.

Yet if you look back at articles written when Rudd’s popularity was at its 
height you’ll find widespread admiration of the PM’s work ethic and discipline. 
For politicians, “personality” and “character” manifest in political outcomes: 
the same trait that seems disastrous when they’re doing badly will manifest as 
a self-evident strength when they’re polling well.

More importantly, the strange repetition of Labor’s turmoil in the Liberals’ 
ranks reminds us that individuals are often steered in particular directions 
(even against their will) by forces that aren’t necessarily apparent to them. 
No one in the Liberal party has looked at the Rudd-Gillard experience and said, 
“Gosh, we should replicate that!”

And yet here we are, nonetheless.

Politicians make their own history but they don’t do so under circumstances of 
their own choosing.

Throughout the 20th century, the ALP possessed an obvious social base. It was 
a mass party, built upon hundreds of local branches. Even more importantly, it 
rested upon the trade unions, the most significant participatory organisations 
Australia has ever known. As for the Liberal party, it emerged to provide a 
conscious conservative counterweight to the ALP. That goal necessitated and 
facilitated the construction of a similarly loyal constituency among opponents 
of the Labor program.

The political landscape today looks very different. Both parties have been 
hollowed out; neither possesses a mass membership or a sizeable number of 
activists. The branches are largely defunct and the conferences staged 
primarily for the media. Trade unionism has withered, with the great majority 
of workers now entirely unorganised.

In the 21st century, it’s by no means clear who the political parties 
represent or what function they serve.

At the same time, the so-called economic “reform agenda” (lovingly chronicled 
in Kelly’s work) has fostered a deep disengagement from the political process 
in particular, and the public sphere more generally – a disengagement 
manifesting itself as a prevailing apathy, occasionally punctuated by sharp 
eruptions of anger.

In that context, you can see understand the common pattern of recent years, in 
which a tremendously popular new leader is appointed to general acclaim … and 
then immediately begins to flounder. The problem’s not with the individual in 
question. It’s that circumstances like these simply don’t give rise to a Hawke 
or a Menzies. Lacking a stable social base, politicians struggle to formulate 
coherent platforms, let alone implement substantive policies.

Furthermore, in an era in which politicians are widely despised, the incumbent 
will always be at a disadvantage next to the challenger, who looks good simply 
by not being in power. The removal of Abbott by Turnbull seemed, for a while, 
like a winning move for the Liberals, just as the replacement of Rudd by 
Gillard appeared a no-brainer to the Labor strategists. But Turnbull’s 
popularity has been on the fritz ever since – again, precisely Gillard’s 
experience.

Back in the day, deposed leaders would generally quit parliament because they 
knew that the party’s stability made a return implausible. Today, the opposite 
applies, with the brevity of political honeymoons now providing an incentive 
for the defeated to stick around. If Turnbull had immediately established 
himself as a great statesman, Abbott would have long since slunk out of 
parliament. Like Bramston says, Abbott’s prospects for redemption depend 
entirely on Turnbull’s failure.

'I have a clarity of purpose' – how Bill Shorten bounced back and made Labor 
modern | David Marr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/i-have-a-clarity-of-purpose-how-bill-shorten-bounced-back-and-made-labour-the-modern-party>
As for Turnbull, he knows as well as anyone the damage that his inability to 
articulate a small-l liberal program is doing to him. Rudd’s decline began when 
he retreated from his signature commitment to climate action – and now 
something similar’s happening to Turnbull. But the Liberal PM lacks the social 
base that would allow him to reshape a divided party in his image.

That failure allows Abbott – bolstered by his cheer squad in the Murdoch press 
– to understand his own maneuvering less as an exercise in wrecking and more as 
a rescue expedition: pretty much on the same basis as Rudd presented his 
operations against Gillard.

It’s completely delusional, of course. But the more the Liberals flounder, the 
more credible the Abbott case seems.

Turnbull’s still the favourite for 2 July and a big win might convince Abbott 
to quit parliament altogether. But, even then, nothing fundamental will be 
resolved. The structural problems remain, no matter who’s in the Lodge. There’s 
every reason to expect the same scripts to keep playing, even as the cast 
changes.
 