
In the years that we have known each other, she has never asked me an opinion 
about her brother’s cancer, so when she finally asks if I will talk to him, I 
can’t help but say yes. I have heard about his trajectory over several months – 
how he has tried one chemotherapy after another, how he is becoming 
increasingly fatigued, and worryingly, how much time he has spent in hospital 
lately, fighting one or the other complication of treatment.

“I wish we knew what the future holds,” she says, overcome by emotion.

My heart melts at her predicament.

Her brother calls me.

“The oncologist has put chemotherapy on hold while the lung specialist treats 
my pneumonia,” he says uncertainly.

“That’s a good thing,” I reply.

“Does my chemo sound right to you?”

Invoking cancer and stress in the same breath is not the same as blaming the 
victim | Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/28/invoking-cancer-and-stress-in-the-same-breath-is-not-the-same-as-blaming-the-victim>
“I can assure you it’s what most oncologists would use.”

“I just can’t seem to hold my own - there’s always some problem.”

“I can see, and I am sorry.”

He goes through a charge sheet of ill-controlled symptoms, chief amongst them 
pain. The knowledgeable way in which he touches on targeted therapies, clinical 
trials and also his evident frailty tells me he is more educated than many 
other patients, yet he can’t seem to see that four lines of failed 
chemotherapy, each bout of weight loss and each unit of blood transfusion add 
up to a serious downturn in his prognosis that needs considering.

A discussion about his prognosis would be the entry point to a range of 
conversations about the futility of further aggressive chemotherapy, the value 
of palliative care and his wishes for care at the end of life but although he 
is receiving the best drugs on offer, what seems to be missing is an 
articulation of the goals of care at this last stage of his illness.

Having seen many patients die under a cloud of misinformation or worse, no 
information, I find the revelation upsetting but I recognise my bystander 
status. Also, I don’t know what serious news his oncologist might have shared. 
So in the end my growing concern manifests as a mild injunction: “Talk to your 
oncologist about the big picture – ask him to help you understand the future 
because it will help you make important decisions.”

His answer leaves me speechless: “He is not that kind of an oncologist.”

The authors of the influential Support study 
<http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=391724> concluded as far 
back as 1995 that “the most fundamental choice that patients with incurable 
cancer face – the decision between life-extending therapy and comfort care – 
may be highly influenced by their understanding of their prognoses.”

Other studies have followed, including one in the New England Journal of 
Medicine <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1204410#t=article>showing 
that more than two-thirds of patients with advanced, incurable, cancer 
mistakenly believed their chemotherapy was being given with curative intent.

In the author’s blunt but memorable conclusion, “a focus on chemotherapy was 
the instrument that facilitated prognostic misunderstanding.” In other words, 
when oncologists shift the conversation from one of prognosis to that of drug 
options and treatment schedules, there is a missed opportunity to provide 
holistic care.

That study changed my thinking, but as a new study in JAMA 
<http://oncology.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2533530> reveals, the 
vexed matter of oncologists and their discussion of prognosis shows little sign 
of being settled.

In the study, 236 cancer patients were asked: “What do you believe the chances 
are that you will live for two years or more?”

Their 38 oncologists were asked: “What do you believe are the chances that 
this patient will live for two years or more?”

Some 68% of patients rated their two-year survival discordantly from their 
oncologist. A staggering 89% of these patients were not aware that they and 
their oncologist held different opinions of their prognosis, and nearly all 
were more optimistic than their oncologist, despite the oncologist believing 
that a “completely thorough” discussion had occurred.

Most patients with an inaccurate estimation of their prognosis said that they 
desired palliative care input when they neared the end of life but if they 
didn’t appreciate their prognosis, they might easily miss the opportunity and 
keep receiving aggressive treatment.

I found this study elegant, brave and, to be honest, worthy of the headlines 
it will probably never make as long as a new drug discovery waits in the wings. 
The patients deserve credit for answering a confronting question about their 
mortality and discovering that they were mostly wrong. The oncologists deserve 
praise for participating in a study they probably expected to highlight a 
failing that they share with the wider profession.

In the wake of such studies, oncologists are left to rue many things, 
including poor communication, denial by the patient and collusion, where the 
oncologist and patient have an unspoken agreement to avoid certain topics. 
Tellingly, there is also evidence to suggest that patients perceive oncologists 
as better communicators when they deliver optimistic news.

No one doubts that each side faces its own challenges to discussing prognosis 
and then, its consequences, but if medicine is to make good its promise of 
patient-centred care, the barriers must be broken.

Seven million people die of cancer each year, the majority in the developing 
world. Unfortunately, some things in medicine change so slowly that many more 
will die while doctors debate the best way to deliver bad news. Where 
chemotherapy is unavailable and you need connections to get morphine, 
communicating prognosis seems an even lower priority. Elsewhere, in spite of 
the rhetoric, communication skills training is typically a low institutional 
priority.

 But to a great many oncologists around the world, getting communication right 
is becoming personally significant. Most say they don’t deliberately withhold 
bad news or worse, fabricate good news, but if our patients claim they’re in 
the dark, we all have some soul-searching to do.

When care collides with cost: an oncologist's dilemma | Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/10/we-cant-ignore-a-young-womans-plea-for-a-rare-cancer-drug>
Patients themselves shouldn’t underestimate their power to nudge change. No 
doctor doubts the imperative to keep up with the science of medicine; a 
stronger individual and community expectation is required to finesse the art of 
medicine. Patients are entitled to honest, prognostic information that is 
delivered with sensitivity and empathy – it should be no less an expectation 
than informed consent about surgery or open disclosure of a medical error.

But patients who want to know the truth must be prepared to hear the truth, 
and not conflate bad news with an incompetent doctor, which is the fear that 
sets many doctors back when it comes to giving any kind of bad news.

Importantly, patients should know that misconceptions regarding prognosis 
transcend the boundaries of age, gender, education and income. You can be 
educated, wealthy and conversant with your oncologist but still be unaware of 
your prognosis. And if you happen to be non-white or non-English speaking, you 
are especially likely to be in the dark.

 The desire for a dignified and peaceful death is natural and universal but we 
know that there is substantial disparity in how people experience end of life 
care - this is something we can collectively change. Since we are just as 
likely as the next person to not know our prognosis, it must be our common 
mission to improve truth-telling in medicine.
 