
Another set piece from the chancellor last week, and another rise in the 
personal allowance. The Conservatives now push this policy with the same zeal 
as Nick Clegg – and on the same basis. It would,George Osborne said, 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/chancellor-george-osbornes-autumn-statement-2014-speech>
 “support people of all ages in work”, and then give a special boost to the 
low-paid by “taking them out of tax altogether”. What a pity that this is a 
monstrously wasteful way of achieving both these things.

It is not only the coalition that imagines that cutting Britain’s main 
progressive tax is the best way to help the poor. A neurotic impulse drives 
Labour to propose bringing back a 10p tax band that Gordon Brown introduced and 
then abolished. This does virtually the same as a higher allowance, but would 
apply to a pathetic slice of income – perhaps just £300 – and complicate the 
system in the process. Ukip would hike the allowance further still, and – like 
the Tories – would chuck in extra tax cuts further up the scale.

So, what’s not to like? First, with Mr Osborne proposing to roll back the 
state to the 1930s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/autumn-statement-2014-george-osborne-spending-cuts>
, this is no time for any giveaways. Taxes are bound to rise after the 
election; cutting them beforehand is fraudulent. Second, as theResolution 
Foundation points out 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/publications/missing-the-target-tax-cuts-and-low-to-middle-income-britain/>
, the money overwhelmingly misses the proclaimed “low earners” target. The 
bottom half of families would divvy up just a quarter of the Labour and Lib Dem 
largesse, which falls to a fifth under the Ukip and Tory plans. Higher income 
brackets walk away with most under every party’s plan, and indeed the 
chancellor last week took care to ensure that higher-rate taxpayers would gain 
the most. As for his line about “people in work”, recall that personal 
allowances apply to unearned income too. Cutting national insurance provides a 
ready alternative means of backing those who toil. But, as income tax is 
reduced on investment returns and buy-to-let rents, this levy is entirely 
neglected.

The cost to the exchequer of raising allowances since 2010 is now £11bn and 
counting. This cavalier squandering of scarce public funds has done next to 
nothing for the pretended aim of easing the poverty trap. For many low earners 
there is a serious problem. It really can be a tough call as to whether or not 
it’s worth working. But this is, overwhelmingly, because of the withdrawal of 
benefits and tax credits – not income tax.

The big idea here is supposed to be Iain Duncan Smith’s universal credit. This 
was never a complete answer, even in theory, and in practice it is proving 
shambolic. TheOffice for Budget Responsibility 
<http://cdn.budgetresponsibility.independent.gov.uk/December_2014_EFO-web513.pdf>
 noted last week that it was now assuming “further delays” in the reform, 
“reflecting the optimism bias in past rollout plans”. Even if the thing was 
working as intended, it would automatically gobble up 65% of any income tax cut 
handed to many claimants on modest pay. One answer to that is to boost the 
so-called “work allowance”, so that claimants can earn more than now before 
this claw-back starts. But what did Mr Osborne do last week? He froze this 
allowance, allowing inflation to eat it up.

Where rewarding work is concerned, Westminster has now lost all interest in, 
well, what works. The obsession with income tax cuts is cynical, costly and 
stupid.
 