
Native Americans have often held intersex, androgynous people, feminine males 
and masculine females in high respect. The most common term to define such 
persons today is to refer to them as "two-spirit" people, but in the past 
feminine males were sometimes referred to as "berdache" by early French 
explorers in North America, who adapted a Persian word "bardaj", meaning an 
intimate male friend. Because these androgynous males were commonly married to 
a masculine man, or had sex with men, and the masculine females had feminine 
women as wives, the term berdache had a clear homosexual connotation. Both the 
Spanish settlers in Latin America and the English colonists in North America 
condemned them as "sodomites".

Rather than emphasising the homosexuality of these persons, however, many 
Native Americans focused on their spiritual gifts. American Indian 
traditionalists, even today, tend to see a person's basic character as a 
reflection of their spirit. Since everything that exists is thought to come 
from the spirit world, androgynous or transgender persons are seen as doubly 
blessed, having both the spirit of a man and the spirit of a woman. Thus, they 
are honoured for having two spirits, and are seen as more spiritually gifted 
than the typical masculine male or feminine female.

Therefore, many Native American religions, rather than stigmatising such 
persons, often looked to them as religious leaders and teachers. Quite similar 
religious traditions existed among the native peoples of Siberia and many parts 
of Central and southeast Asia. Since the ancestors of Native Americans migrated 
from Siberia over 20,000 years ago, and since reports of highly respected 
androgynous persons have been noted among indigenous Americans from Alaska to 
Chile, androgyny seems to be quite ancient among humans.

Rather than the physical body, Native Americans emphasised a person's 
"spirit", or character, as being most important. Instead of seeing two-spirit 
persons as transsexuals who try to make themselves into "the opposite sex", it 
is more accurate to understand them as individuals who take on a gender status 
that is different from both men and women. This alternative gender status 
offers a range of possibilities, from slightly effeminate males or masculine 
females, to androgynous or transgender persons, to those who completely 
cross-dress and act as the other gender. The emphasis of Native Americans is 
not to force every person into one box, but to allow for the reality of 
diversity in gender and sexual identities.

Most of the evidence for respectful two-spirit traditions is focused on the 
native peoples of the Plains, the Great Lakes, the Southwest, and California. 
With over a thousand vastly different cultural and linguistic backgrounds, it 
is important not to overgeneralise for the indigenous peoples of North America. 
Some documentary sources suggest that a minority of societies treated 
two-spirit persons disrespectfully, by kidding them or discouraging children 
from taking on a two-spirit role. However, many of the documents that report 
negative reactions are themselves suspect, and should be evaluated critically 
in light of the preponderance of evidence that suggests a respectful attitude. 
Some European commentators, from early frontier explorers to modern 
anthropologists, also were influenced by their own homophobic prejudices to 
distort native attitudes.

Two-spirit people were respected by native societies not only due to religious 
attitudes, but also because of practical concerns. Because their gender roles 
involved a mixture of both masculine and feminine traits, two-spirit persons 
could do both the work of men and of women. They were often considered to be 
hard workers and artistically gifted, of great value to their extended families 
and community. Among some groups, such as the Navajo, a family was believed to 
be economically benefited by having a "nadleh" (literally translated as "one 
who is transformed") androgynous person as a relative. Two-spirit persons 
assisted their siblings' children and took care of elderly relatives, and often 
served as adoptive parents for homeless children.

A feminine male who preferred to do women's work (gathering wild plants or 
farming domestic plants) was logically expected to marry a masculine male, who 
did men's work (hunting and warfare). Because a family needed both plant foods 
and meat, a masculine female hunter, in turn, usually married a feminine 
female, to provide these complementary gender roles for economic survival. The 
gender-conforming spouse of two-spirit people did not see themselves as 
"homosexual" or as anything other than "normal".

In the 20th-century, as homophobic European Christian influences increased 
among many Native Americans, respect for same-sex love and for androgynous 
persons greatly declined. Two-spirit people were often forced, either by 
government officials, Christian missionaries or their own community, to conform 
to standard gender roles. Some, who could not conform, either went underground 
or committed suicide. With the imposition of Euro-American marriage laws, 
same-sex marriages between two-spirit people and their spouses were no longer 
legally recognised. But with the revitalisation of Native American "red power" 
cultural pride since the 60s, and the rise of gay and lesbian liberation 
movements at the same time, a new respect for androgyny started slowly 
re-emerging among American Indian people.

Because of this tradition of respect, in the 90s many gay and lesbian Native 
American activists in the United States and Canada rejected the French word 
berdache in favour of the term two-spirit people to describe themselves. Many 
non-American Indians have incorporated knowledge of Native American two-spirit 
traditions into their increasing acceptance of same-sex love, androgyny and 
transgender diversity. Native American same-sex marriages have been used as a 
model for legalising same-sex marriages, and the spiritual gifts of androgynous 
persons have started to become more recognised.

Walter L Williams is the author of The Spirit and the Flesh (Boston: Beacon 
Press) and is Professor of Anthropology, History andGender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> Studies at the University of 
Southern California. His most recent book, Two Spirits: A Story Of Life With 
The Navajo is out now
 