
Amateur psychologists listening to Radio 4 will have registered little 
surprise at Simon Cowell's recent choice of a mirror as his desert island 
luxury. Likewise, linking a luxury iron and ironing board to the programme's 
presenter for the past 18 years may not have proved much of a stretch.

On Sunday Radio 4 listeners will hear Sue Lawley ask her final castaway, actor 
Joan Plowright, for the eight musical choices, one book and one luxury item 
with which she would choose to be cast adrift. Then Lawley herself will leave
Desert Island Discs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/desert-island-discs> for uncharted 
waters, handing over to Kirsty Young.

The combination of Lawley, a former news anchor and a household name since the 
1970s, and the venerable 64-year-old radio show has been in many ways the 
perfect match. It allowed Lawley, 60 last month, to extend her career well 
beyond those of many of her contemporaries and secured the future of the 
programme following the relatively brief and turbulent tenure of Michael 
Parkinson.

When she took over in 1988, there were plenty of people who questioned whether 
the show could survive at all without Roy Plomley, the man who created it and 
presented it for the first four decades of its existence. "If I had felt 
honoured at being chosen as a castaway, I felt ennobled when I was told that 
the job of presenting it was mine," Lawley later wrote.

To the strains of The Sleepy Lagoon, Lawley will probe Plowright in her 
trademark style. Private Eye editor Ian Hislop has compared it to lying on a 
psychiatrist's couch, while the author Alexander McCall Smith said it was like 
a trip to the dentist - scary but ultimately painless: "The anaesthetic began 
to wear off. My jaw was only mildly numb. I had barely felt the drill."

But Lawley's own tongue in cheek choice of an iron as luxury item - she is 
always immaculately turned out - and her favourite pastimes, which include 
skiing, walking, travelling and playing bridge, play up to her schoolmarm 
image. In this week's Radio Times, Helen Mirren refers to her as "the iron fist 
in the velvet glove".

Less charitably, others accuse her of taking herself too seriously, detecting 
more than a hint of snobbery in her treatment of some guests. None, however, 
doubt her steely professionalism or commitment to hard work. Sir Trevor 
McDonald picks out "thoroughness of research" as her defining characteristic.

Born and educated in Dudley, she long ago made a decision to shed her Midlands 
accent in favour of today's clipped tones. Michael Buerk recalled in his 
autobiography how Lawley, "making a pit stop on the race track to stardom" as 
they shared a house in Cardiff while working on the South Wales Echo, explained 
the transformation during her time at Bristol University. "Her best line was 
that she had come to the Echo with a low second in English and a first in 
received pronunciation," he wrote.

Her early career was defined by ruthless ambition and former colleagues remark 
on her networking ability, although she inevitably put noses out of joint on 
the way. Yet friends insist she is able to puncture any charges of pomposity by 
laughing at herself and has a wicked sense of humour.

After two years at BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Plymouth, she 
joined Nationwide, the programme with which she was associated for more than a 
decade. The show is fondly remembered for mixing items about skateboarding 
ducks with moments such as the onscreen ambush of Margaret Thatcher, when 
Lawley allowed a caller to press on with her line of questioning over the 
sinking of the Belgrano as the then prime minister grew rattled.

In the mid-1980s Lawley made a rare misstep when she was persuaded to try a 
Saturday night chatshow but felt ill at ease and left viewers unimpressed. 
Desert Island Discs offered an ideal escape route. Given that she famously 
quizzed Gordon Brown on his sexuality, she jealously guards her own privacy. 
She has been married to her second husband, Hugh Williams, a former BBC 
executive, since 1987, and has two grown-up children from her first marriage to 
solicitor David Ashby.

Despite the usual newsroom gossip, she has maintained a separation between her 
personal and professional life. "She has not had any interest at all in turning 
herself into a celebrity," says Mark Damazer, who first worked with her 22 
years ago on the Six O'Clock News and is now controller of Radio 4. Former and 
current BBC colleagues uniformly praise her work ethic. Damazer said it was her 
time-consuming devotion to the job that ultimately led to her decision to stand 
aside.

Lawley is likely to continue broadcasting in some form but also wants to 
travel and has hinted she may move into business. Whatever she does, she is 
unlikely to drift quietly into retirement. Roger Bolton, ex-Nationwide editor 
and now a Radio 4 presenter and TV executive, suggests: "Once you've done 
Desert Island Discs for as long as she has, most dining companions are going to 
seem terribly dull by comparison."

The CV

Born
 1946 in Dudley, West Midlands

Education
 Dudley girls' high school and University of Bristol (BA hons modern languages)

Family
 One son and daughter with first husband, now married to Hugh Williams. Lives 
in London and Devon.

Career
 Trainee reporter on the Western Mail and South Wales Echo 1967-70, freelance 
reporter and subeditor at BBC Plymouth 1970-72. From 1972, was a presenter on 
BBC Nationwide for 12 years. Joined Tonight in 1975. In the 80s, read the Nine 
O'Clock and Six O'Clock News. Has presented Desert Island Discs on BBC Radio 4 
since 1988. Chaired the BBC Reith lectures for last four years, and is a 
director of English National Opera. Awarded OBE in 2001.
 