
The most obvious benefit of internet banking is the convenience of being able 
to do your banking when you want to, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, saving 
time and effort.

Internet banking should also help you keep more up to date with your finances 
because transactions are usually updated in real time. For example, if you pay 
in a cheque, the cleared funds will show on your computer at the same time as 
it shows on the bankÕs computer, usually within three to four days. If you have 
paid in money at your branch, this should be recorded instantly.

Transferring funds should be easy too. If youÕre overdrawn on your current 
account and the cash machines wonÕt give you any money, you can log into your 
savings account, transfer the required amount and then go straight back out to 
get it from the cash point.

With many banks you can pay bills online too, although you may have to let the 
bank know the details of bill payments you will usually be making from the 
account. However once this is done, simply logging on, selecting the correct 
supplier, and entering the amount you wish to pay will ensure your bills are 
paid on time. In many cases, you can select a date in the future that you wish 
the payment to be made, so you can go on holiday and not worry about getting 
your phone cut off.

Similarly, some banks let you download your account information from the 
internet into a number of financial software packages such as Microsoft Excel.

However, there can be drawbacks to online banking.

Security is by far the biggest concern surrounding internet banks, with 
consumers worrying that hackers will get into their account and spend their 
money.

Banks are adamant that the sites are secure, but while there have been no 
reports of large-scale theft, there have been plenty about unwitting surfers 
stumbling across other peoples financial details.

Consumer groups have asked the bank to provide a guarantee, similar to the 
Direct Debit guarantee, promising to return any funds straight away and 
investigate afterwards in the event that money does go missing from your 
account. Unfortunately, banks have refused, raising suspicions that they donÕt 
trust their own security systems. After all, if they did, they would have no 
qualms about providing the guarantee, the consumer groups say.

One of the biggest day to day problems with internet banking appears to be 
access. You might find it difficult to get on to the internet at certain times 
of day, especially during a weekday evening, when internet use is very high.

The speed with which you access your account will also depend on the amount of 
memory your computer has, or the speed of your modem connection. Also, if your 
computer develops a fault you will have to resort to the telephone or branch 
until it is fixed. The banks' computers themselves are also prone to failure 
and you could find yourself unable to access your account through no fault of 
your own. Sometimes your bank may need to shut down its website for maintenance 
from time to time, although this is usually carried out during the night.
 