
Every police force still needs to make spending cuts every year for the next 
four years, the home secretary,Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, is to tell police chiefs.

She is to warn police forces on Tuesday that the chancellor’s unexpected 
decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/autumn-statement-spending-review-2015-george-osborne-key-points-live>
 last month to protect overall spending on the police does not amount to a 
reprieve from making further savings or “let them off the hook” of introducing 
further major reforms.

“We must redouble our efforts, force a more urgent pace, and deliver a more 
radical and more sustained period of police reform than we saw even in the last 
parliament,” May is to tell a police reform summit.

“Because with protected funding comes an even greater responsibility to spend 
every penny of taxpayers’ money wisely, and to drive better value at every 
step.”

Theresa May warns police: cuts mean 'fewer people, fewer buildings'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/10/theresa-may-police-cuts-fewer-people-fewer-buildings>
The past five years have seen spending cuts of more than 18% with the loss of 
more than 17,000 police officers and a programme of changes including the 
introduction of police and crime commissioners.


Immediately after the autumn statement, the home secretary wrote to chief 
constables pointing out that the “protected police spending settlement” meant a 
1.3% cut in Whitehall funding in real terms over four years. The difference is 
to be made by increasing the police precept on council tax bills by 2% and by 
£5 a household a year more in the 10 forces with the lowest precepts.

But she made it clear that the forces would have to make further savings to 
pay for centrally funded increases to link up the emergency services and drive 
closer collaboration between police forces in areas of specialist capabilities 
such as firearms, cybercrime and child sexual exploitation. This will include a 
50% increase in the number of police armed-response vehicles and an increase in 
counter-terrorism response officers.

She outlined further reforms including workforce changes to ensure police 
officers focus only on “core policing tasks” with greater use of volunteers, 
more joint working between police and fire services, reducing police detention 
of mentally ill people and new powers for police and crime commissioners over 
fire brigade and police complaints.

In her speech, May is expected to confirm that some specialist units, in areas 
such as firearms, financial crime or cybercrime, will be transferred to 
regional units or to the National Crime Agency.


She will say the spending settlement will give the police an extra £900m in 
cash terms by 2019-20: “That is on top of the £1.9bn of savings you are already 
planning to make … and the £2.1bn you hold in reserves. It represents – quite 
simply – a massive investment in the future of policing in this country.

“But neither I, nor the public, will have any sympathy for those who complain 
about budget cuts – as some of you have continued to do in the past couple of 
weeks. Because as I said two weeks before the spending review, it is not in 
spite of the need to find savings that we have been able to reform policing, 
but because of them.

“And to those who think the spending review gives you breathing space to relax 
the reforms we started five years ago, you could not be more wrong.”

The home secretary is to set out next the grant allocations for each 
individual force for 2016-17: “But I can tell you now that – just as you had 
planned to do a month ago – every force will still need to make savings year on 
year.

“So this settlement is not a reprieve from reform. It does not let you off the 
hook or mean you can slow the pace of change. Nor does it insulate you from the 
need to look for further efficiencies.”







 