
True-crime podcasts have been a winning genre in 2016, with impeccable 
storytelling from series such as Serial, Criminal and Unsolved.

Now a new British podcast, They Walk Among Us 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/they-walk-among-us-uk-true/id1155846302?mt=2>
 (iTunes), retraces some of the UK’s most intriguing crimes. Don’t be fooled by 
the understated and businesslike style of mysterious narrator, Benjamin: these 
stories unfold in a sinister and often surreal way.

What is chilling about They Walk Among Us is its focus on cases that are close 
to home; its tales are simultaneously unexpected yet familiar (all have been 
headline-grabbers). It is co-written by husband-and-wife teamBenjamin and Rosie 
<http://theywalkamonguspodcast.com/about/> (we are not given their last names), 
who are obsessed with true crime and record the show in their bedroom. The 
opening episode tells thetale of Sadie Hartley 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-lancashire-37037527>, who died after 
being stabbed on her doorstep. It is painstakingly well researched, recounting 
the backstory of Sarah Williams, who was found guilty of the murder. Portrayed 
in the media as a “bunny boiler”, she became infatuated with Hartley’s husband, 
Ian Johnston, after a fling and left a tangled web of explicit texts, menacing 
letters and damning evidence. It is the stuff of 9pm TV drama, except it is all 
real.

Some of the crimes covered are more unusual, such as the case of “canoe man” 
John Darwin, who faked his own death, and the 1971 Baker Street bank robbery. 
One of the strangest (and most famous) stories involves the disappearance of 
nine-year-old Shannon Matthews, whose mother, Karen, faked her abduction. That 
episode looks at how horrifying the experience was for the frightened child. 
When the police found Shannon hidden under a divan in a house less than a mile 
away from her home her words were heartbreaking: “Stop it, you’re scaring me.”

As well as laying out the facts, They Walk Among Us brings its stories up to 
date: Karen Matthews was released from prison and assigned a new identity in 
2012, and the search left West Yorkshire police with a bill for £3.2m. The 
fascination with these cases is understandable, but it is those with a good 
dose of “it could happen to you” that are the real stuff of nightmares. This a 
cult hit, and with six episodes to devour, an addictive one.

If you like this, try this… The Untold
 