
Forget the problems England have on the left side of midfield, or Sven's 
quandary over whether to play Nicky Butt or Frank Lampard at the base of his 
diamond. The truly pressing selection issues this June concern the rival Euro 
2004 squads at the BBC and ITV. The imminent retirement of ITV's fading doyen 
of the sports desk, Des Lynam, only adds further spice to the battle for 
ratings bragging rights.

In addition to flushing plastic football fans from the woodwork, international 
football tournaments provide armchair supporters with the increasingly rare 
opportunity to see the two main terrestrial broadcasters go head to head. And 
with Sky Sports publicly insisting that UK Speedway is this summer's main 
sporting attraction (thanks to their lack of rights), this European 
Championship is shaping up to be a ding-dong local derby.

The two sides have dipped into the transfer market to secure big-name 
signings. ITV have filled the cavernous void left by erstwhile spokesman for 
racial equality Ron Atkinson, opting for experience in the shape of three 
former England managers, Sir Bobby Robson, Graham Taylor and Terry Venables. 
Presumably, the post's more recent incumbents, Kevin Keegan and Glenn Hoddle, 
were omitted for not knowing the first thing about football.

The BBC, meanwhile, have gone for a combination of beauty and the beast in 
their recruitment policy, signing up the occasional Tottenham midfielder Jamie 
Redknapp to divert attention from the asymmetric face of Birmingham boss Steve 
Bruce.

Of course, it will be more than just the talking heads that decide the outcome 
of this televisual clash of the titans. The set designs have traditionally set 
the tone with the BBC going for understated, Ikea chic to match the chinos and 
cheese of Gary Lineker, while the ITV have favoured Jackson Pollock armed with 
a pastel airbrush to complement the more earthy charms of Gabby Logan, Andy 
Townsend et al. So, in keeping with the pre-match TV build-up, let's have a 
look at the strengths and weaknesses of the respective studio squads.

Presenters 

ITV 

Des Lynam:  An ironic arch of the eyebrow is no longer enough to disguise the 
fact that Des is bored with his lot. Euro 2004 will be his swansong, so let's 
hope he leaves us in style. 7/10

Gabby Logan: The golden girl of ITV Sport appears to have seen off the 
fast-improving Matt Smith in the chase for Lynam's chair. Impressive knowledge, 
good looks and a blokey rapport with her panellists make Logan, nee Yorath, a 
fitting heir to the man who was known for being smoother than a cashmere 
codpiece. 7/10

BBC 

Gary Lineker: The jug-eared erstwhile goal-hanger has grown into his role as 
the BBC's football anchorman despite the fact that his head appears to be 
shrinking in inverse proportion to his on-screen stature. 8/10

Ray Stubbs: Gurning away with the startled expression of an overfed bunny in 
the headlights, Stubbs has been the butt of Mark Lawrenson's arch barbs on the 
Football Focus sofa in recent years. He remains an effective workhorse in the 
mould of Steve Stone. 6/10

Star pundits 

ITV 

Terry Venables: Now that he appears to have given up on football management, 
nightclubs and inventing wigs attached to hats, Venables can concentrate on the 
one thing he still excels at. His mahogany suntan will more than make up for 
the missing Ron Atkinson and when on form he is capable of reducing complex 
tactical nuances into comprehensible soundbites. Expect open collars and 
jewellery. 7/10

Andy Townsend: The former Republic of Ireland international has become ITV's 
main pundit since escaping the dreaded Tactics Truck and making his wet-look 
barnet a fixture on The Premiership's panel. Some poor choices in jackets 
offset his undeniably confident and knowledgeable demeanour in front of the 
cameras. 8/10

Sir Bobby Robson: The septuagenarian knight's knowledge of world football is 
unsurpassed, which makes it even more annoying when he can't remember the names 
of the players he's talking about. A national treasure, Robson will likely win 
over the doubters with his boundless enthusiasm and endearing cock-ups ("The 
lad Mickey Rooney has been smashing up front for England"). 7/10

Ally McCoist: The Scot is without doubt the most amusing man in either squad, 
but whether his match analysis is on a par with his one-liners remains open to 
debate. Sure to be sporting pastel. 7/10

Robbie Earle: Underrated in his playing days at Wimbledon, Earle has been a 
mainstay for ITV since the contract for Premiership coverage was wrested from 
the BBC. Likable and tactically astute, the dapper Duke should see plenty of 
airtime at Euro 2004. 8/10

David Pleat: Although Tottenham's recent caretaker manager is an astute 
summariser, he looks like Jim Rosenthal's long-lost dad and should be kept away 
from the studio - at least before the watershed. 6/10

Danny Murphy: Described by one Kop wag as a "Merseybeat ball bag" after his 
cameo appearance on the scouse cop show, the Liverpool midfielder is an 
erudite, if rather surprising, addition to the ITV squad. He should bring a 
practical understanding of the modern game that is unmatched by his colleagues. 
6/10

Graham Taylor: Described by his England players as Mogadon for the length and 
content of his team talks, Taylor has shed his Turnip alter ego and become a 
man respected for his unfailing dignity under fire. Some decent showings as a 
co-commentator on Five Live cannot conceal the fact that he looks like Frank 
Sidebottom. 6/10

Jim Beglin: Another panellist who is improving with every showing, the former 
Liverpool full back has served a long apprenticeship on local and national 
radio and looks at home alongside his more illustrious colleagues. Very much 
ITV's equivalent of the chronically underrated Gerry Armstrong on Sky Sports. 
8/10

BBC 

Alan Hansen: A man so obsessed with defending that he probably lines up his 
bacon and eggs in a flat back four, with the extra insurance of mushroom 
sweeper, Hansen is the laconic king of alliteration - "Pace, passing, 
penetration" is one of his favourites. The Lee Van Cleef of punditry likes 
nothing more than leaning back on the sofa and changing the course of the 
conversation with one expertly judged crossfield question. Guaranteed to wear 
black. 9/10

Ian Wright: Rescued from his latest light-entertainment cul de sac, Wright 
will bring patriotism and passion to coverage of England games. One of the 
highlights of his infrequent appearances is the footage of him going mad in the 
studio when England score. 6/10

Steve Bruce: If his managerial record is anything to go by expect Bruce to up 
sticks and join ITV halfway through the tournament. The bent-nosed Brum boss 
will enjoy bouts of old-boy bonhomie if he is paired with former United 
teammate Peter Schmeichel. 6/10

Peter Schmeichel: The star-jumping, one-time custodian of the onion bag has 
proved to be a surprisingly capable pundit, even if he is a little too 
susceptible to the charms of Prince of Wales check for his sports jackets. 8/10

Mark Bright: Although he is billed as a co-commentator, Bright is likely to 
battle his way into the BBC's studio starting line-up. An excellent performance 
in the England v Japan warm-up game saw him tell it like it is. Definitely one 
for the future. 8/10

Peter Reid: Rumours that Reid is a Sky Sports plant, primarily because his 
prominent left ear doubles as a satellite dish, remain unconfirmed. The scouser 
with the penchant for compensation pay-offs does succeed in injecting the salty 
flavour of the dressing room to the BBC's coverage. 6/10

Jamie Redknapp: Probably too nice to make it to the very top, injury-prone Mr 
Louise Nurding is sure to be a hit with the ladies this summer. He sported an 
array of massive shirt collars during the last World Cup and will doubtless 
lead the fashion stakes this time around. Earnest. 7/10

Mark Lawrenson: The comedy moustache has gone but Lawrenson still pouts like a 
disco diva in a hissy fit. He sounds like Jimmy Somerville on helium but is 
worth his place, if only for the goading of chipmunk-like Ray Stubbs. 7/10

Garth Crooks:  Now something of an institution, Crooks has perfected the art 
of lurking in the tunnel and asking questions of such length that the player 
has time to shower, change and have a post-match pint before he is required to 
answer. Priceless. 4/10

Final score 

BBC: 75/110 

ITV: 77/110
 