
Netflix

Bloodline

Betrayals, secret children and murdered mainstays: how will this tangled, 
vicious family drama move on after the punt it took at the end of its first 
season? Via a new black sheep, of course, in the shape of Danny Rayburn’s son, 
Nolan, whose wrong ’un status is signposted by his piercings and smoking. As we 
rejoin the Rayburns, John (Kyle Chandler) is desperate to establish limits to 
any investigation into recent events. But will he compromise whatever 
professional integrity he still possesses? Tense, densely plotted and twisty, 
even if it’s hard to root for anyone involved.

Available from Friday

BBC3

United States Of Hate: Muslims Under Attack

A worthwhile if depressing film documenting the rise of Islamophobia in the 
US. The San Bernardino shootings are the starting point and the Brussels 
attacks the coda. In between, we meet lone wolf bigots such as Robert (whose 
boneheaded protest group, Bomb Islam, basically just stand outside mosques 
hurling abuse) and the more organised BAIR (Bureau of American Islamic 
Relations) who are armed and aggressive. We also meet a heroic imam who reaches 
out to people who hate him. But even so, it’s hard to emerge with any real 
sense of optimism.

Available from Tuesday <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer>

Netflix

Chef’s Table

A second series of irresistible food porn from Netflix. This series profiling 
the most brilliant chefs currently walking the earth begins with Alex Atala, 
who is currently wowing the foodies of São Paolo. Further episodes celebrate 
the revolutionary likes of Ana Ros in Slovenia and Dominique Crenn in San 
Francisco.

Available from Friday

All4

Magnifica 70

Off to 1970s Brazil this week in the company of Walter Presents. It turns out 
it wasn’t all lavishly talented footballers and caipirinhas on the Copacabana. 
There was dictatorship, censorship, sexual exploitation, violence and sleaze, 
too. This series – which explores the making of kitschy soft porn flicks in the 
name of freedom of expression – comes on like a weird, alluring hybrid of The 
Lives Of Others and Boogie Nights. Promising.

Available from Friday <http://www.channel4.com/on-demand>

Podcast

Freakonomics

Steven D Levitt and Stephen J Dubner’s book Freakonomics sold millions of 
copies with a populist take on economics. This long-running podcast continues 
this approach to enjoyable and informative effect. The latest edition concerns 
the winning of games. Journalist Tom Whipple has written a book about systems 
that can ensure dominance in everything from hangman to rock, paper, scissors. 
But what was the outcome when Dubner took him on?

Available now <http://freakonomics.com/>

Amazon Prime

Mr Show With Bob And David

This oddball US comedy might have been relatively selective in its appeal in 
the mid-90s. But its alumni have distinguished themselves since. Bob Odenkirk 
and David Cross star as the now commonplace but then groundbreaking 
semi-fictionalised versions of themselves. Guests included Sarah Silverman and 
Jack Black.

Available now
 