
 Netflix

Lady Dynamite

 This peculiar but queasily hilarious sitcom could well end up being the TV 
buzz show of the summer. It’s certainly hard to think of anything else quite 
like it. She’s explored her issues repeatedly in her standup and now 
effervescent US comedian Maria Bamford has made a small-screen comedy about her 
real-life mental breakdown. Mitch Hurwitz of Arrested Development and South 
Park’s Pam Brady are involved in production and writing, but even given this 
level of pedigree on board, Bamford’s brittle, fragmented and utterly unique 
performance
is the real hook. 

Available from Friday

 BBC iPlayer

Bodyhack: Metal Gear Man <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer>

 James Young lost an arm and a leg in a tangle with a DLR train. But this keen 
gamer’s story had a twist. After a collaboration with gaming company Konami, 
James now sports a custom-made bionic arm modelled on Metal Gear Solid 
character Snake. This intriguing film follows James through his recovery period 
as he comes to terms with his new body, tests out his cyborg limb and shows it 
off at a body hacking convention (also present: a man calling himself 
“Upgrade”). An uplifting slice of future-shock.
Available from Wednesday

 All4

Celeb Dishes: The Food That Made Me 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/celeb-dishes-the-food-that-made-me>

 How did Alex James transition from Blur bassist to Master of Cheese? What’s 
Gizzi Erskine’s spag bol trick? Is there anything Tom Daley wouldn’t do for 
chocolate cake? This web-only series is on hand to answer all of your food and 
celebrity-related questions.

Available now

 YouTube

#HoodDocumentary <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=165R9OWugAk>

 If you’re eagerly awaiting the return of People Just Do Nothing, this slight 
but likable webseries might just tide you over. Kayode Ewumi is RS, a hapless, 
self-described “triple threat” whose rapping and dancing is every bit as dismal 
as his acting. The mockumentary format feels like it’s probably on borrowed 
time but RS’s bathetic introduction to his manor has some amusing moments.

Available now

All4


The Invisibles 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/walter-presents/videos/all/the-invisibles-eduard>

 The whistlestop tour of niche world television offered by C4’s Walter 
Presents platform continues with another intriguing drama, this time from the 
Czech Republic. The Invisibles are otherwise known as Aquarians. They’re a 
secret society of people with the ability to survive underwater. When one of 
their number unwittingly exhibits his gifts after a failed suicide attempt, 
their existence is suddenly in danger of becoming common knowledge. Can they 
keep their secret
from the media and the authorities? 

Available now



 