
Rob Delaney, London
 Rob Delaney 
You find a lot of stand-ups on Twitter these days, using the deliberately 
constrictive medium of 140 characters to hone their one-liners (if you don't 
follow them already, check out the feeds of Gary Delaney and Peter Serafinowicz 
for a ready supply of priceless stuff). Filthy Bostonian Rob Delaney's in a 
slightly different category, though – he's a comedian who owes his big break 
entirely to his judicious, frequently disgusting and hilarious tweets. In the 
last few years he's been frequently dubbed the funniest man on Twitter, and 
he's now coming over here to prove he can cut it on stage too. He's certainly 
not the kind of performer to find favour with the fainthearted, thanks to his 
love of gratuitous sexual imagery, celebrity insults and all-round 
taboo-smashing, and it's no surprise that he's highly-rated by the likes of 
fellow filthmeister Frankie Boyle. But there's an edge of playful silliness in 
Delaney's stuff that's often absent from the (no less amusing) clanking comedy 
fist of Boyle, and means that he delivers much more than simple offensive shock 
value.

Soho Theatre, W1, Mon to 6 Oct; Bloomsbury Theatre, WC1, Thu & Fri

Tony Law, London
 Tony Law 
Recognition's been a long time coming for unique Canadian comic Tony Law, but 
an Edinburgh comedy award nomination this summer means his own particular brand 
of sanity-mangling surrealism could finally be getting the respect it deserves. 
He's long been a favourite with lovers of properly alternative comedy (and 
scene godfather Stewart Lee) but this could be his opportunity to break out to 
a wider audience. On stage, he's an ever-changing, hard-to-contain force of 
nature, with his manic physicality mirroring his seemingly uncontrolled thought 
patterns. You can never tell what's coming next, as Law leaps between different 
topics and different comedy styles. He's in London this week for a run of his 
garlanded Edinburgh show – plus a special performance at connoisseur's comedy 
night Knock2Bag in Shepherd's Bush.

Bar FM, W12, Wed; Soho Theatre, W1, Thu to 6 Oct

Brighton Comedy Festival <http://brightoncomedyfestival.com>
 Josie Long. Photograph: Idil Sukan Draw 
The regional live circuit may be struggling in the recession, with some clubs 
reducing the number of nights they offer and others closing altogether, but 
Brighton's managing to hang on to its reputation as a thriving comedy town. The 
proof is to be found in the now annual Comedy Festival, bringing residents of 
Sussex by the sea the chance to enjoy two weeks packed with shows from 
award-winning acts. This year's programme features already celebrated shows 
from the likes of Tim Key andJosie Long 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/josie-long>, plus an opportunity to be among 
the first to see the keenly awaited all-new hour from Inbetweeners star Greg 
Davies. The festival proper gets under way this coming Friday, with an all-star 
gala in aid of local HIV/Aids charity Sussex Beacon, with guests including Alan 
Carr, Seann Walsh and Jo Brand.

Various venues, Fri to 20 Oct
 