
It’s Obscene! (Tuesday, 4pm, Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 
4) is Matthew Syed’s counterblast in the face of the prevailing wisdom that 
today’s sportspeople are massively over-compensated. He argues that, where 
football is concerned, the huge sums paid to top Premier League players is 
simply a case of the market operating efficiently. Joey Barton correctly points 
out that only a small number of players get this kind of money. The majority of 
players are happy if they cover the mortgage. Writer Hunter Davies, who went 
inside Tottenham Hotspur in 1971 for the first and last fly-on-the-wall account 
of the workings of a football club, notes that in those days none of the 
players had agents and hardly any had need of an accountant. Syed provocatively 
argues that one area of sport where the market is not operating efficiently is 
tennis, which has no business paying the top women the same as the top men. 
Side note: you might have assumed it was no longer acceptable to soundtrack any 
programme about money with the Pink Floyd song of the same name. You’d be wrong.

Of all the formats BBC radio employs to ensure that you’re never more than 
half an hour away from hearing the same two-dozen comics and presenters 
chatting companionably with each other, Women Talking About Cars (Wednesday, 
6.30pm, Radio 4) is one of the easiest to forgive. In this episode presenter 
Victoria Coren Mitchell takes Olivia Colman through all the cars she has owned 
or driven in her life. These include her early Morris Minor, which she named 
Moomin. She claims to have fixed the rotor arm of said vehicle with nail 
varnish, which can’t be in the manuals. What’s valuable is the light shed on 
aspects of her life that have nothing to do with cars, such as the fact that 
even Colman, seemingly one of the most in-demand actors in the UK, can expect 
to be out of work for half of the year.

For those who have already finished Netflix’s The Crown there could surely be 
no better accompaniment to a darkening December afternoon than two-part drama 
Abdication (Thursday & Friday, 2.15pm, Radio 4). In the first of these, Jim 
Broadbent plays Stanley Baldwin and Hugh Ross is Archbishop of Canterbury Cosmo 
Lang, the two main political players in the constitutional crisis of 1936. Most 
of their discussion of these great affairs takes place at Lambeth Palace 
because the cellar is better stocked there. The second play is set in France as 
Frances Barber as Wallis Simpson tries to persuade Edward VIII, played by 
Anthony Calf, that they can get by without bothering to get married.

Julian Barnes is in the essay slot, talking about Changing My Mind (Weekdays, 
10.45pm, Radio 3). There’s a nice exchange with his hairdresser, when he told 
her he had a special birthday coming up. “Sixty’s the new 50,” she said. “The 
problem is,” he countered, “70’s the new 68.”
 