
A flight I was due to go on from Manchester to Hamburg in June was cancelled 
as I was going through security. EasyJet took five of us to a hotel in Leven in 
Flintshire for a flight from Edinburgh to Hamburg the next day.

The following morning the taxi easyJet had promised did not turn up. I paid 
£60 for a replacement for the five of us and we arrived at the airport just 
before the check-in desk was due to close – only to be told thateasyJet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> had overbooked the flight and 
two of us had to stay behind.

EasyJet then offered guaranteed seats on the first flight from Gatwick the 
next day and flew me and a stranded German doctor from Edinburgh to London for 
another overnight stay. The next day I had to pay for a taxi to Gatwick because 
the check-in time was too early for the hotel’s courtesy bus. At the airport we 
discovered that our flight had again been cancelled and no alternatives were 
available that day.

At our own expense we took a train to St Pancras and then the Eurostar to 
Cologne, where the German doctor hired a car and drove us to our destinations. 
On my return home, I claimed a refund of my expenses, which amounted to around 
£170 excluding my original air fare.

In September, easyJet finally emailed me saying that my fare had been refunded 
(which it was) and that a cheque for £167.98 would be posted. A month later, 
when the money had not arrived, easyJet then said that a reduced amount of 
£97.98 would be sent, with no explanation. Now I’ve been told it won’t 
reimburse the taxi fares because the receipts are “dated after the disruption 
date”. I pointed out the dates are between the original cancelled flight and 
the final abortive attempt to fly us out of Gatwick.

The German doctor, who travelled with me, has also been refused a refund of 
his expenses, including the Eurostar ticket and car hire.NS, Bristol

In my many years as a consumer columnist I’ve never come across a journey as 
botched as this one.

EasyJet tells me your first flight from Manchester was cancelled due to an air 
traffic control strike in France that caused mayhem across Europe. It’s 
extraordinary that at no point were you given that explanation.

As a knock-on from the strike, it says, ensuing flights were extra busy, which 
is why your alternative departure from Scotland was overbooked. Then, on your 
final attempt, the departure was cancelled due to crew sickness.

“While we have standby crew, the disruption caused by the French strike meant 
we were unable to cover this flight,” it says. “Air traffic control strikes 
rose to unprecedented levels this year which affected all airlines.”

It’s debatable whether the strike, common among air traffic controllers, would 
count as an “extraordinary circumstance” under EU rules on compensation 
payouts. This would exempt easyJet from having to pay compensation for the 
first cancellation, and the other two affected flights would not be eligible 
because you were effectively booked on them for free.

However, five months on, and only after we intervene, the airline admits that 
your experience was “extremely unfortunate” and decides to pay the statutory 
sum for denied boarding plus £100 goodwill. It also promises to reimburse your 
expenses.

Rejoicing would be premature, however. The cheque that finally arrives falls 
£70 short of the promised £283.70 and you are told your expenses claim is being 
“assessed”. Back to the press office, which promises all will be well. One day.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 