
Day 4

A whole day travelling round Katine visiting old friends – wonderful. I come 
away with a record load of gifts – a basinful of shelled groundnuts, four 
oranges, two eggs, a watermelon and a hen.

This last I couldn't believe was for me. When the children were catching it, I 
was afraid it was going to be cooked for me. Worse – it ended up flapping 
around the jeep. I managed to give it back, though, explaining that we are not 
allowed to take them on planes.

First, I saw Mary Amulo, who once tried to give me her baby son. She said it 
was like handing him over to a richer relative to bring up and not a big deal 
at all. I would bring him to visit. Hard to imagine anybody parting with their 
child, but I think she genuinely thought he would have a better life – and so 
would the rest of the family through my support and later, his.

The extended family in Uganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> is a 
financial as much as an emotional network. Anybody with a job can expect to to 
tapped for help by every relative, however remote. John Bosco, my driver, has 
10 children in his Soroti house (his real home is in rural Katine), only four 
of whom are his. The rest are nieces and nephews whom he looks after and who 
get the chance of schooling in town.

Mary has been very unwell, she and everybody else tells me. Malaria and 
pneumonia are part of it but I have a bad feeling there may be more. She has 
been complaining of pains in her side since the baby was born nearly two years 
ago. We take her for yet another check-up at the health centre. There are 
drugs, so anybody with a problem will be turning up.

Then I saw Sister Josephine, the leader of the traditional birth attendants, 
whom the government has now banned from working. It's the first time I've seen 
her out of uniform. I arrive at her compound and the children fetch her from 
her garden, as everybody calls their vegetable plots. She is 78, her back is 
now crooked and yet she is still digging the earth.

She says she dreamed about me. That's alarming! She has officially stopped 
delivering babies. She was very unhappy when she was escorting a pregnant woman 
to the health centre so that the midwives could deliver her, and was shouted at 
by one of the medical staff, who said she would get seven years in jail. Hardly 
the treatment she deserves after all the help she has given her community.

Among the others I visited was Ida, a young girl I saw two years ago in a huge 
and ragged family, who said she was turned away from school for not having a 
uniform but wanted to be a doctor. I got her a uniform which cost a couple of 
pounds in the market and now she is in the last year of primary school. She's 
still bright-eyed and smart and was 8th in the class (out of nearly 100) last 
year.

This time she said she wanted to be a nurse. Her expectations are lowered, or 
unfortunately tempered with realism. Her father has 28 children. Even John 
Bosco, my driver, snorted in disbelief and talked about it for miles. Ten other 
babies died, as did one of this man's three wives.

I asked the father whether he was going to have any more children and he said 
he didn't want any more. No sign of him doing anything about it, though – both 
wives were holding small babies. Bosco told me he'd never heard of a vasectomy, 
but he said a man would never consent to an operation. And a woman cannot get 
contraception unless her husband goes with her.

Day 5
 Back to work? Village health teams in Katine, seen here waiting to receive 
gumboots from Amref, may be close to ending their strike. Photograph: Joseph 
Malinga 
Last day in Katine, though I hope not the last ever. I try to see Loyce, a 
former nurse who owns a drug shop in Tiriri, just down from the health centre. 
When there are stock-outs (drug deliveries), she gets a lot of business. The 
medical staff tell patients what to buy, including fluid for intravenous drips, 
canulas and and quinine for severe malaria. The drips are hung up in the ward 
on wire coat hangers attached to window frames above the beds.

Today, though, Loyce is in town, as she was yesterday, so I'm out of luck. It 
looks to me as if business may have suffered in Tiriri high street (a small row 
of lockable shacks with rusting corrugated iron roofs). The wonderful new road 
has bypassed it completely so they have no passing trade. It used to bustle. 
Now it looks like one of those deserted streets in the windy Wild West when 
everybody in town has hidden because the bandits are coming.

I chat to some women at a new borehole installed by the African Medical 
Research Foundadtion (Amref), and they are hugely grateful for their clean 
water. Everybody I have spoken to has said how much the project has achieved 
and how grateful they are – even those who go on to voice a complaint or ask 
for more. I don't think it's just politeness.

I am slightly worried, though, by the sense from everyone that the project is 
ending. In fact, there is another year to go and plenty more work to be done. I 
keep saying this to people. It's so easy to get into winding-up mode instead of 
remaining innovative and enthusiastic. ,

It's also important that people in Katine really believe they can take things 
on by themselves – that they don't have to depend on Amref. A PTA chairman said 
they were worried about what would happen to the community centre with its 
computers in the project office. He is on the committee that is supposed to 
oversee it. I suggested they should start negotiating right now.

I have a chat with the project manager, who says they are now proposing to pay 
the VHTs a small allowance again – probably Ushs 3,000 (about 85 pence) and a 
snack. Let's hope that does the trick and solves the dispute that caused them 
to strike. Then we head back to Kampala. I've got lots to write and loads of 
memories. And a sackful of groundnuts in my luggage.
 