
The Cook Who Changed Our Lives
6.30pm, BBC2

Throughout the 1970s and 80s, food writer Anna Del Conte brought proper 
Italian dishes to British dining tables; as superfan Nigella Lawson says, it’s 
“essentially a crime” that her cookbooks aren’t found in more households. In 
this mouthwatering treat, the sprightly 91-year-old talks a spellbound Lawson 
through a classic ragu (“The water you cook pasta in must be as salty as the 
Mediterranean”) and more.Ali Catterall

Who Do You Think You Are? 
8pm, BBC1

Now likely to be for ever overshadowed by Danny Dyer’s sublime journey into 
his unfathomably regal provenance, avuncular “My arse!” enthusiast Ricky 
Tomlinson takes a tumble down his own rabbit hole of genealogy. What it lacks 
in rug-pulling revelations, it more than makes up for in genuinely moving tales 
of poverty, religious divisions and generations of grafters making their way in 
Liverpool’s docks. Superb.Luke Holland

The Secret Life of the Zoo at Christmas 
8pm, Channel 4

As everyone knows, a lack of human traits doesn’t mean Santa will desert you. 
Stockings stuffed with goodies have been hung out for Chester zoo’s Sumatran 
orangutan family, but little Indah decides to open the lot. A loophole in the 
naughty list system, there. Sun bear couple Toni and Millie go full Den and 
Angie, their relationship hitting snowy rocks; might a trial separation make 
each bear’s heart ache for their bae?Mark Gibbings-Jones

Close to the Enemy 
9pm, BBC2

Conclusion of Stephen Poliakoff’s seven-part drama set amid the febrile 
political turbulence of post-second world war London. This is – obviously – a 
promising milieu for a screenwriter: a world to be remade, rules to be 
rewritten and so forth. It has been generally well-acted by a top-drawer cast, 
but there remains a strange blankness to it, personified by Jim Sturgess as 
diffident spook Callum Ferguson, neither hero nor antihero – which may, of 
course, be the point.Andrew Mueller

Extraordinary Weddings 
9pm, ITV

This series’s charm is in how misleading the title is. David from 
Gloucestershire found new love with Nicky after being paralysed from the chest 
down; Ellen from Leicestershire decided finally to marry her long-term partner, 
Ian, when she received a diagnosis of terminal bone cancer. Neither predicament 
is, sadly, all that unusual. What matters is how much the ritual of publicly 
declaring love means to the participants.Jack Seale

Troy: The Highwire 
9pm, E4

Very much in the recent tradition of David Blaine and Dynamo – right down to 
the “Oh my God, how did he do that?!” responses you never used to get with Ali 
Bongo and David Nixon – Troy Von Scheibner is the latest young street magician 
to repackage ancient tricks with a hip, tattooed sheen. In this one-off, he 
sets himself the challenge of learning how to walk the tightrope in just two 
months, in order to perform an illusion while in mid-air. Reckon he will manage 
it?David Stubbs

Celebrity Juice: Xmas Gogglyboxers 
10pm, ITV2 

Taking the pith: here’s a second helping of highlights from Keith Lemon’s 
chaotic panel show, presented via an appropriately strained framing device. 
Along with team captains Holly Willoughby and Fearne Cotton (plus regular 
panellist Gino D’Acampo), Lemon impersonates the couch critics of Channel 4’s 
Gogglebox, adding a layer of panto meta-commentary to what is essentially a 
clips compilation with a makeup budget.Graeme Virtue

Film choice


Alan Partridge: Alpha Papa (Declan Lowney, 2013) 11.05pm, BBC2

Steve Coogan returns as Norfolk’s self-deluded radio host, blagging on to the 
big screen via this funny siege thriller. Partridge’s marriage and career are 
unsurprisingly down the drain, but when a shotgun-toting, newly sacked 
colleague (Colm Meaney) takes the staff of North Norfolk Digital hostage, 
Partridge sees the chance to make his name as a negotiator. It’s his finest, 
most hypocritical hour, in East Anglia’s Ace in the Hole.Paul Howlett

Today’s sport


Serie A football: Fiorentina v Napoli Coverage of the Italian top-flight match 
from Stadio Artemio Franchi (kick-off 7.45pm). 7.30pm, BT Sport 1

Rugby Union: Grenoble v Toulouse Coverage of the French top-flight encounter 
at Stade Lesdiguieres. 7.40pm, Sky Sports 2

NFL: Philadelphia Eagles v New York Giants Action from the NFC East clash in 
New Jersey, where week 16 gets under way. 1.30am, Sky Sports 1
 