
Who Do You Think You Are?
8pm, BBC1

Investigating your family tree is no mean feat when you don’t have a surname, 
but “pop star Cheryl” (nee Tweedy, later Cole and Fernandez-Versini) bravely 
takes on the challenge. With a dad who is “geordie to the core”, her journey 
begins in Newcastle. While Cheryl’s sweet, soft tones could send even the most 
dedicated genealogy fan to sleep, there is a world of sailors and strong women 
to be uncovered in the north-east and beyond.Hannah Verdier

Close to the Enemy 
9pm, BBC2

Waiting for the strands of Stephen Poliakoff’s ambling saga to entwine? Keep 
waiting. The penultimate episode continues to play like a pile of interstitial 
scenes from several different, handsomely filmed, wartime dramas. Among the few 
characters who further their narrative are the increasingly frayed Victor 
(Freddie Highmore) and his brother Callum (Jim Sturgess), who is anguished by 
Victor’s antics but doesn’t seem bothered by much else.Jack Seale

Vienna: Empire, Dynasty and Dream 
9pm, BBC4

Second instalment of Simon Sebag Montefiore’s terrific three-parter recalling 
Vienna’s centuries as Europe’s cultural and political capital. This episode 
recalls the Hapsburgs’ peak: the golden age following the defeat of the 
Ottomans in 1683, when their city flourished on all fronts, give or take the 
odd occupation by Napoleon. To a soundtrack of Beethoven and Mozart, they sowed 
the seeds of modernity – and their own demise.Andrew Mueller

The Young Pope 
9pm, Sky Atlantic

And so, we must say farewell for now to the elegantly chain-smoking Pope Jude 
Law I, as the first season of Paolo Sorrentino’s fine series bows out with a 
double bill. As a paedophile case rages on and a cache of letters relating to 
Pius XIII (Law) emerges, the pontiff prepares to make a momentous public 
appearance. As ever, Diane Keaton’s presence reminds us of its subtle nods – in 
tone, pace and gravitas – to The Godfather.David Stubbs

Xmas Excess: Parents Splash the Cash 
8pm, Channel 5

Last year, Emma Tapping made news (well, the Mail) for having the temerity to 
Instagram a photo of her Christmas tree, buried in £1,500-worth of pressies for 
her kids. This almost entirely meritless documentary follows her doing her 
seasonal shopping, while also introducing us to Irene, wife of an oil tycoon, 
who spends filthy great wodges on chintzy jewellery for her brood. So far from 
educational it could even make you forget a few things.Luke Holland

Grand Designs: House of the Year 
9pm, Channel 4

The wait is over, as the Royal Institute of British Architects’ house of the 
year 2016 is set to be revealed in this final episode of the series, but 
there’s still time for a quartet of properties to duke it out for the remaining 
place on the shortlist. Tonight’s contenders for the grand prize include an 
open-plan family residence located on a former allotment, and a dwelling 
constructed on urban wasteland from red tin pods.Mark Gibbings-Jones

Netanyahu at War 
9pm, PBS America

For decades, Benjamin Netanyahu cultivated a paranoid, pessimistic view of his 
country’s place in the Middle East. This film documents his lifelong battle – 
as soldier, politician and eventually, prime minister – to defend and expand 
Israel. It also serves as an intriguing insight into Barack Obama’s foreign 
policy – there was conspicuously little love lost between the pair. Like most 
PBS films, it’s comprehensive, almost to a fault.Phil Harrison

Film choice

The Ghost (Roman Polanski, 2010) 1.05am, Film4

Polanski channels the edgy suspense of earlier works such as Knife in the 
Water and Frantic in this polished screen version of Robert Harris’s novel. 
Ewan McGregor plays a writer ferried into a wintry Martha’s Vineyard to ghost 
the memoirs of Blairish former PM Adam Lang (Pierce Brosnan), who is struggling 
to defend his dodgy record. There’s a gnawing sense of physical danger in what 
is an expertly crafted thriller.Paul Howlett

Live Sport

Snooker: Scottish Open Day four from the Emirates Arena in Glasgow. 11.45am, 
Eurosport 1

Championship Football: Coventry City v Sheffield United Coverage of the game 
from the Ricoh Arena. 7.30pm, Sky Sports 1

Test Cricket: India v England The concluding Test of the series begins at MA 
Chidambaram Stadium in Chennai. 3.30am, Sky Sports 2
 