
The critic - Rachel Cooke

Picture a seven-year-old girl. She is called Margaux. She likes ice-cream and 
gum balls, though only red ones. She dislikes puzzles and the scary-looking 
jokers in a pack of cards, which she insists be removed before any game is 
played. Now picture her lover, Peter. Yes, you read that right. Her lover. He 
is 51 years old, and a self-taught locksmith. He has limp, grey hair, cut in a 
bowl, and a collection of exotic pets. One of these pets is a cayman, "part 
alligator, part crocodile". The cayman, living in captivity in the oppressive 
fug of Peter's apartment, is tiny, just half the size of Margaux's arm. But his 
owner likes him that way. For Peter, small is beautiful. He would like Margaux 
to stay small, too. Her birthdays make him more than usually tearful, for they 
remind him – as if he needed reminding – that she is rapidly approaching the 
end of what they both think of as her "nymphdom".

If you want to know more about Margaux and Peter's 15-year relationship – 
conducted in full view of a number of perfectly sentient adults, it ended only 
when Peter killed himself by jumping off a cliff – then you should head out to 
your local bookstore and reserve a copy ofTiger, Tiger, surely the most hyped 
memoir that 2011 is likely to produce (already sold to 20 countries, this is a 
book, its publisher insists, which "has to be talked about"). But, first, have 
a think. Howmuch more do you want to know? Or, to put it another way, how much 
more can you take?

There is plenty to unsettle and upset in Tiger, Tiger, not least those 
sentient adults, seemingly complicit in Peter's crimes in the interests of an 
easy life. But the most troubling thing by far is the attitude of its author, 
Margaux Fragoso, who is determined to spare us absolutely nothing, and so 
details not only every dubious "tickling game", but also such things as the way 
Peter's penis looks, his fondness for frottage, and the reasons why they were 
never able to enjoy full intercourse. Is this, as some American critics have 
politely suggested, a sign of her great survivor bravery? I'm not sure. It felt 
as blank as pornography to me – and the more it went on, the more convinced I 
was that only a voyeur or a pervert could admire it. Can Fragoso write? Yes. 
But not so well that you would read her for her style alone.

Inevitably, I've already heard Tiger, Tiger described as "Lolita, from 
Lolita's point of view". But this is lazy. When Margaux and Peter read 
Nabokov's novel together, he is upset that "Lolita didn't really love Humbert", 
a reaction that convinces poor Margaux she can be the best "nymph" ever, as 
loving as she is loved. Why does she need this love? Because she is otherwise 
entirely without affection.

The book is set in Union City, New Jersey, where Margaux lives with a mother 
who is mentally ill and a father who is distant and furious, and it is this 
home life – brutal and mean – that drives her into Peter's arms. She sees him 
at the swimming pool, splashing around, and asks if she can join in. 
Thereafter, she is smitten. He is so kind. A curious man-child who at first 
asks very little from her – even later, his line when it comes to sexual 
favours is "only if you want to, sweetheart" – Peter tunes into her likes and 
dislikes with exquisite enthusiasm, with the result that she comes to see him 
as a soul mate. The unwavering laser of his attention makes her feel wanted and 
alive. In a prologue to her story, the adult Margaux writes that spending time 
with a paedophile "can be like a drug high". In her own case, it was a drug she 
was unable to give up.

All this is beautifully done: a dark door unlocked with the snugly fitting key 
of experience. But still, something salacious lurks here, too. Whydid Fragoso 
include such graphic intimacies? It seems to me that there are only two 
possibilities. Either the post-traumatic stress disorder she describes in an 
afterword has left her so numb, so utterly anaesthetised, that a part of her is 
still unable to grasp what adult-child sex means in the real world – in which 
case, a kindly editor should have stepped in and saved her from herself.

Or, she knows exactly what she is doing, and a part of her relishes these 
passages: their power to horrify and, perhaps, their power to thrill, to shift 
books. Naturally, I am unable to judge her on this score. But reading her 
memoir made me feel exploitative, prurient and sometimes rather sick. Is this 
cowardice on my part? No. Contrary to what Fragoso's supporters seem to 
believe, a desire not to have certain images imprinted on your mind isn't at 
all the same thing as burying your head in the sand and hoping that child abuse 
will simply go away.

The psychologist - Oliver James

I will be surprised if many readers of this book enjoy it, find it 
enlightening or recommend it to their friends. That is not because of the 
sexual explicitness. Exaggerated by publicity-seeking publishers, the intimate 
details should not disgust or trouble most adults, although there is more 
information than we need (Nabokov's restraint in this area remains the standard 
for how much is required for us to get the gist).

No, the difficulty is really that Fragoso has simply not created a memoir 
which is compelling to read or contains any deeper message (and I suspect it 
would have been the same had she told the same tale as fiction). The main 
emotions it evokes are depression and, occasionally, the feeling of being the 
voyeur of a lot of domestic nastiness.

A brief afterword offers this justification for the book: "By setting down the 
memories I've worked to break the old, deeply rooted patterns of suffering and 
abuse that have dogged my family through the generations." Doubtless this is 
sincerely meant.

It might be that she was also impelled by a desire to launch a literary career 
through a shocking idea: that a vulnerable, emotionally needy girl could feel 
love (though not sexual desire) for a man who sexually exploited her for a 
decade from the age of seven. Unfortunately, that is all she offers, a 
no-holds-barred account of the relationship.

In writing books for the public, it is not enough to just make others feel as 
depressed or empty as you. This is a sorry tale which just makes you feel... 
sorry. If her motive truly was to break destructive patterns, good luck to her, 
I hope she succeeded. By all means write it out for herself. Why do we need to 
hear the story?

The model for how to convert the lead of horrendous maltreatment into the gold 
of valuable literature is Edward St Aubyn's Melrose books, the final volume of 
which,At Last), is eagerly awaited in May. Its central character, Patrick 
Melrose, was abused by his father, a man of appalling sadism and some 
psychopathy. St Aubyn has stated that his father also abused him in real life.

However, the books go far beyond this maltreatment, subtly exploring Melrose's 
mother's motives and confronting questions of importance to everyone. They show 
how all of us are either robotically reproducing or reacting against the care 
we received. Whether from affluent or poor homes, whether hideously mistreated 
or just averagely neglected, this is the human predicament. In a triumphant end 
to the books, St Aubyn provides a moving and optimistic basis for seeking real 
independent volition. By contrast, Fragoso offers us undigested fact. In being 
so frank, perhaps she feels relief. But she simply transfers the damaged 
feeling from herself to the reader.

Of course it is a massive task to do anything else if you have been abused. As 
the Human Genome Project is proving, genes play little role in severe mental 
illness, and it is clear from this book that, at times, Fragoso was made 
schizophrenic by the abuse. There are 14 different studies showing that at 
least half of people diagnosed with this problem suffered abuse. On average, a 
woman who suffered it when young possesses 5% less of a crucial part of the 
brain for emotional regulation (the hippocampus) than an unabused woman.

There are similar findings for maltreatment in the histories of people with 
personality disorder and depression. But whatever the form that the subsequent 
emotional distress takes, alas, just evoking it in others does not make for 
enlightening or readable books.

If writing it all down helped Fragoso to break the cycle, great. But in 
needing to share it with us in this form, you cannot help feeling she still has 
much work to do on herself.

Oliver James's latest book, How Not to F*** Them Up is out in paperback

The survivor - anon

Why anyone would read Tiger, Tiger of their own volition is beyond me. When I 
was invited to review it I did what I think anyone would: shrink internally and 
shudder. Sexual abuse is a harrowing topic and, as a victim of it, my initial 
response was to feel culpable and apologetic for the book's existence. I've 
never read about abuse before: it is something that happened to me that can't 
be undone and the less I allow it to affect my life and to define who I am the 
more power I have over it.

As I read it, clenched, I went through myriad emotions: outrage, repulsion, 
sadness, grief, empathy, anger. The only redemptive feeling it prompted was 
admiration for Fragoso's unwavering candour: she is a talented writer and her 
memoir is executed without judgment or shame. But Fragoso's portrayal of 
herself seems almost completely defined by Peter's idolisation of her. I felt 
she was objectifying her child self in the descriptions of how imaginative she 
was and how conscious she was of her sensuality. That Peter has infected her 
self-image in this way sickened me more than the deeply disturbing graphic 
sexual content.

At points in the narrative, I felt it was an affectionate commemoration of 
Peter and a startling study of Stockholm syndrome. Perhaps the most significant 
thing about it is that every adult in Margaux's life is complicit in her abuse. 
By telling her story I do think, to some degree, she empowers victims of sexual 
abuse by forcing the world to bear witness.

But who are these willing witnesses? Who is it written for? Herself, as a 
cathartic act of self-empowerment? Fellow victims? Paedophiles? Or those people 
with a morbid fascination for perverts? It is a truly horrible read. As Peter 
insinuates himself into Margaux's affections, I was in the grip of suspense, 
awaiting the inevitable abuse of trust. And this is what I found distasteful – 
the sensationalism which will undoubtedly sell many copies.

The real question is whether this book is necessary. Victims shed their 
victimhood by voicing their experience. I, too, write to cope but I want to 
create things of beauty that defy the ugliness of abuse. I'm pleased Fragoso 
has spun her flax into gold, but the cynic in me can't help but feel it was, in 
part, published to capitalise on the inevitable controversy, thereby continuing 
the cycle of exploitation.
 