
My wife calls me from outside a butcher’s shop to shout at me for being 
American. “This is your stupid holiday,” she says.

“This was your stupid idea,” I say. “And anyway, Thanksgiving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/thanksgiving> was yesterday.”

My wife’s idea to invite friends and family with American connections round on 
the Sunday following Thanksgiving means that there are no turkeys left in 
London, apart from the one they are presently holding to ransom in the 
butcher’s shop she is outside.

“I’m sure the price has gone up while I’ve been standing here,” she says.

“Just get it, and we’ll never do this again,” I say.

In the 25 years I’ve lived in the UK we’ve celebrated Thanksgiving perhaps 
three times, and it has never come off well. On this occasion we’ve invited 
more people than we have chairs.

My wife comes home with several bags of shopping. In one I find two small 
pumpkins.

“What are these for?” I say.

“Your stupid pumpkin pie,” she says.

“I wrote tinned pumpkins on the list,” I say.

“They didn’t have any,” she says. “Where do you think you live?”

I stare at the pumpkins. They have stickers on them that say “edible”. It 
strikes me this is not much of a claim to make on behalf of your produce. I 
know that theoretically a pie may be derived from these pumpkins, but the task 
seems monumental – like making marshmallows from a marsh full of mallow. I 
don’t even like pumpkin pie.

My wife is jamming four enormous stalks into a narrow vase. Something about it 
looks wrong.

“What are those?” I say.

“Amaryllises,” she says. “Pretty.”

“They’re huge,” I say.

Early Sunday morning I begin the process of turning pumpkins into pie. I look 
up a recipe and discover that we have precisely none of the other ingredients. 
I cut open the pumpkins and scoop out the guts and seeds.

Behind me there is an enormous thud, followed by a splash. My feet leave the 
floor, and the cat runs from the room.

“Something terrible has happened,” I tell my wife, who is still in bed.

“What?” she says, opening one eye.

“Your amaryllises have been sucking up water all night, through the force of 
capillary action. At a precise point they became top heavy enough to crash to 
the floor, vase, water, everything. Ruined.”

“You love telling me bad news, don’t you?”

“You should have seen this coming,” I say.

I lose an hour making tiny surgical collars out of cardboard for my wife’s 
broken-necked flowers. Then I go to the shop to buy everything else I need. 
When I return the house smells of burning pumpkin. I go upstairs to wake the 
youngest one.

“Get up,” I say. “It’s Fake Thanksgiving.”

“What is that smell?” he says.

“Pumpkins roasting,” I say. “Doesn’t it smell edible?”

An hour later I am contemplating my assembled pumpkin pie. The filling is the 
colour of loft insulation.

“Are you sure about that?” my wife says.

“I think baking will help,” I say.

It is possible, I discover, to both undercook and overcook the same pumpkin 
pie. After an hour it still isn’t done. I try to protect the scorching top with 
different configurations of foil, and as a result I have burn marks on my 
knuckles. Eventually I surrender.

“It may not be done,” I say. “But at least it’s over.” The top of the pie is 
now the colour of fire-damaged leather.

“When do I serve that thing?” my wife says.

“At the end,” I say. My wife looks at the pie.

“Are you telling me that’s a pudding?” she says.
 