
Do media outlets bear responsibility for their output? In practice, there 
doesn’t appear to be a definitive answer to this age-old question.

Some like to make much of that publish-and-be-damned maxim, arguing that there 
may be consequences but hell, as long as it’s factual, where’s the problem?

Others, aware that those consequences could be life-threatening, are willing 
to engage in what they would regard as sensible self-censorship.

So, for example, when reporting suicide it is now generally accepted, in 
Britain at least, that newspapers should not publish the exact methods on the 
grounds that it might lead to copycat actions. Editors believe that, in so 
doing, they are acting responsibly in the public interest.

Now consider a somewhat different scenario. The term originally used by the BBC
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to describe the terrorist organisation 
operating in Iraq and Syria was “Islamic state.”

Following criticism by MPs in June 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/29/bbc-to-review-use-of-islamic-state-after-mps-protest-against-term>
, who said the name had the effect of legitimising the group, the corporation 
decided to refer to it as the “so-called Islamic state”, which it now does as a 
matter of routine.

The BBC’s change of policy suggests that, in taking the criticism on board, it 
accepted that there could be consequences in sticking to its original 
description.


Gradually, the simple prefix of “so-called”, which struck me as bizarre when 
first used, has seeped into the consciousness. I think it has helped to 
deligitimise Isis.

I was reminded of it when reading a comment in an Irish Times article 
yesterday, headlined “Dissident republicanism’s 20-year escalation 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/dissident-republicans-still-haven-t-gone-away-you-know-1.2759505>
”.

After a lengthy assessment of the continuing threat of “IRA splinter groups”, 
the writer quoted an academic, Jonny Byrne of Ulster university:

“We need to stop legitimising their [dissident] actions through the language 
of the past such as the description of paramilitary assaults. Anywhere else 
this would be referred to as gangsterism. Nobody yet has framed or articulated 
the political thought or rationale for dissident activity”.

In other words, by referring to “dissidents” - disparate overlapping groups 
that useIRA <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> or similar in their 
self-descriptions - media outlets are investing them with an undeserved 
political raison d’être. The dissident tag imbues them with a spurious 
legitimacy. It embellishes them with a political veneer

In fact, their politics - such as they are - are virtually impossible to 
fathom. I accept that they want a unitedIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, but the route they have chosen to 
take to secure it - pursuing a war discontinued 20 years ago by the former 
Provisional IRA - makes no sense whatsoever.


It ignores the political reality of the peace process. It is also undeniable 
(look at the voting figures) that these groups have no validity in the eyes of 
the overwhelming majority of the nationalist population, let alone the unionist 
population, inNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

They have killed people. They have sown discord. And it must be conceded that 
they have managed to recruit alienated, unemployed youth, often by suggesting 
thatSinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>, in sharing 
power at Stormont and in having eschewed violence, now represents “the 
establishment.”

This travesty of the truth has been given force by the way in which these 
groups have been represented in the media as alternative political entities 
rather than, echoing Byrne, gangsters.

I could take his argument a stage further by suggesting that the references by 
newspapers and broadcasters to these groups as IRA dissidents or, more usually, 
“dissident republicans”, has had an insidious consequence.

It has tended to tarnish the standing of, for want of a better phrase, 
mainstream republicanism. At best, this has been unconscious. At worst, it has 
been deliberate because Sinn Féin has few friends in the media.

But let’s accept for the purposes of this argument that it has been by 
accident rather than design and return to the central, substantive point. Media 
outlets should take a leaf out of the BBC’s book.

I suppose it might make a difference to adopt the BBC formula by renaming 
these anti-peace groups as “so-called dissidents” or “so-called republicans”. 
But that would still endow them with an unmerited political dimension. In the 
circumstances, gangs and gangsters is better. Better to criminalise rather than 
politicise.
 