
Every Father’s Day or Mother’s Day, when our children are required for a few 
hours to acknowledge their parents’ unstinting efforts on their behalf, I am 
asked by one of them, usually resentfully: “Why isn’t there a children’s day?” 
The answer reliably comes back: because every day is children’s day. Then I 
found out there is a children’s day after all –National Children’s Day on 15 May
 <http://www.nationalchildrensdayuk.com/>.

Doubtless the idea of this day is to bring attention to those children who 
suffer hardship and neglect. However, I have a suspicion that were my nine and 
13-year-old daughters to find out about this occasion they would simply assume 
they were going to be entitled to some extra privileges. Nevertheless, I was 
somewhat encouraged to learn from the press release that it was going to “raise 
awareness about the importance of adult wellbeing … adult happiness … and 
[adult] mental health in the UK”.

Adult happiness – there’s a concept I could embrace. However, it sits uneasily 
with the rest of the release which announces that the way we are to achieve 
“adult wellbeing” and (apparently incidentally) produce “heartful and mindful” 
children, is to “enjoy” informal activities such as “a playing out day for 
local families, carrying out daily random acts of kindness during the week, 
holding a street party, and ‘a go home on time’ week for working parents to 
spend time with the family.” Which sounds a lot more like simply more fun for 
the kids to me.

I may be sounding a trifle sour at the moment. This is because a few days 
before writing this column a couple of things happened that made me slightly 
less mindful and heartful than my darling children. As a family we tookThe 
Complete Walk 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/theatre/whats-on/special-events/the-complete-walk>
 of Shakespeare’s plays along the South Bank in London and after an hour or so 
we reached a screen with chairs in front. My wife and two younger daughters 
found chairs, but I couldn’t see one.

A little weary, I asked Louise, my nine-year-old, to let me sit down (I am 60, 
not incidentally) and to sit on my lap. She did so, but a minute later decided 
she wanted her chair back. I refused. As a result I was turned on as if by a 
trio of velociraptors, not only by Louise, but my wife and older daughter, who 
both insisted I was being unconscionably selfish. The atmosphere remained 
frosty for some time and I found myself looking forward to the catharsis I 
might get seeing the excerpt from King Lear.

On the tube home, a young couple got up to give their seats to two kids who 
looked about seven. It seemed strange to someone of my generation. Once upon a 
time it was normal practice for children to give up their seats for adults.

The most important shift in power in the last few generations is the welcome 
historical movement away from men towards women. It may be that the shift in 
power from parents towards children is part of the same phenomenon. But this 
worship of children does seem to be bordering on the perverse to me – much as I 
adore my own.

Perhaps now that we have given up on political ideology, romance and God, 
children are the last place we can go where we might find some kind of 
religious relationship. For it seems that they have indeed become objects of 
our veneration. If so, they are better idols to worship than an almighty God, 
or Karl Marx or a passing romantic fancy. But that doesn’t mean that sometimes 
it feels like they get spoiled rotten. That is to say, as a worshipper myself, 
I sometimes to lose my faith.

I only hope my children will find the heartfulness and mindfulness to forgive 
me.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 