
It’s Saturday night! Sequins. Cuddly Toys. Will.I.Am. Some Channel 5 list 
programme about the best list programmes. Light entertainment larks all round. 
But wait, who’s that shadowy figure in the distance? It’s acting’s Tom Hardy, 
standing over a pasty-looking corpse, his face set to maximum brood. “Forgive 
me father, for I have indeed sinned,” he growls at his real-life dad. Given he 
will later pay someone to exhume the same father and have a rummage through his 
innards, we should maybe take him at his word.

That Taboo airs after a show where Gary Barlow casts a Take That musical is 
one of the more curious pieces of TV scheduling of recent times. A period saga 
set in grimy 1800s London, it’s less Ant & Dec, more pustulent acrimony. But it 
is just as daft…

Related: From Peaky Blinders to Taboo, how TV’s history man is shaking up 
period drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/01/steven-knight-peaky-blinders-taboo-risky-period-drama>

Hardy, who created the series with dad “Chips”, stars as James Kaziah Delaney, 
an adventurer who has returned to England after a sojourn spent doing terrible 
things in deepest Africa. While there he seems to have acquired an accent 
pitched somewhere between Bill the Butcher, Toast of London and Zippy from 
Rainbow. Delaney’s back in Lahndan Taahn to settle his shipping-magnate pa’s 
affairs. Really though he’s back to investigate the shady circumstances 
surrounding his death, and wreak revenge on those he believes carried it out. 
The shadowy forces of the East India Company, led by Jonathan “High Sparrow” 
Pryce, is in his sights.

Pryce and associates would do well to avoid Delaney, who could be accurately 
described as a “right mardy sod”. Rumours swirl about his past, which included 
snapping the necks of army officers and going full Revenant on a bear in 
Chancery Lane. In the present, Delaney is mainly restricted to stomping round 
the city in a ridiculous fur coat, top hat and handlebar moustache, looking as 
if he’s trying to find the nearest cereal cafe. You do get the sense he’s going 
to go full Ronnie Kray at some point soon, though. “I have sworn to do very 
foolish things,” he mutters, foreshadowingly. Later, he threatens to send a 
brothel madam’s henchmen’s testicles to her in a little bag. Most people just 
say it with flowers...

As you might have surmised, we’re a long way from the petticoats and Poldarks 
of much period fare. Like a GCSE history teacher gleefully recounting 
stomach-turning Jacobite execution techniques,Taboo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/taboo> is desperate to let everyone 
know that the past wasn’t boring but was instead an edgy place, full of 
proto-Tony Sopranos and “adult themes”. (It’s no coincidence that the show’s 
writer, Steven Knight, is also responsible for Peaky Blinders, in which Hardy 
has also starred). Yet too often, this darkness lurches into parody. The camera 
hovers over shots of animal entrails; one character introduces himself by 
casually uttering, “The dogs here live off the flesh of suicides jumping off 
Blackfriars Bridge.” At times it feels more like an OTT episode of Inside No 9 
than a weighty drama.

Presiding over all this silliness is Hardy, a man who has rarely encountered a 
piece of scenery he didn’t want to immediately chew. “I wanted to play Bill 
Sykes, Sherlock Holmes, Hannibal Lecter, Heathcliff , Marlow… just every 
classical character in one,” he has said. He has certainly crammed every 
personality defect possible into Delaney. Daddy issues, anger issues, 
nightmarish flashbacks of his time in Africa: you name it, he’s tortured by it. 
The result is like Oliver Reed rocking up in Hollyoaks: a character so out of 
sync with his surroundings that you wonder, when he barks about removing 
people’s nadgers, why everyone doesn’t just burst into howling laughter. If 
nothing else, Hardy is entertaining. Perhaps Taboo is perfect for Saturday 
night after all.

Saturday, 9.15pm, BBC1
 