
The Italian poet, novelist and screenwriter Tonino Guerra, who has died aged 
92, brought something of his own poetic world to the outstanding films he 
co-scripted with, among others, Federico Fellini,Michelangelo Antonioni 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2007/jul/31/obituaries> and Francesco Rosi, but 
also many non-Italian directors includingTheo Angelopoulos 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/jan/25/theo-angelopoulos> and Andrei 
Tarkovsky. Perhaps his most creative contribution was to Fellini's colourful 
account of life in a small coastal town in the 1930s, Amarcord (1973), of which 
he was truly co-author, because the film reflected their common experiences 
growing up in Romagna.

The two were born in the region a couple of months apart – Fellini in Rimini 
and Guerra in Santarcangelo, in the hills above the Adriatic resort, the son of 
a street vendor father.

Guerra's own "amarcord" ("I remember" in dialect) is scattered over many books 
of poetry and short stories. He first started writing poetry in dialect when 
interned in a prison camp in Germany, after being rounded up at the age of 22 
with other antifascists from Santarcangelo. To pass the time he told his 
companions stories: when he came home in 1945 he found a publisher for a book 
of them, I Scarabocc (Cockroaches, but also "scribblings").

He became a schoolteacher, moving to Rome only when he was 30. He met Elio 
Petri, the future director of Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion 
(1970), who was working as assistant to Giuseppe De Santis. Petri and Guerra 
were sent to the Abruzzi mountains to find out about wolf-hunting. Though they 
discovered that wolf hunters no longer existed, De Santis went ahead anyway 
with the film, Uomini e Lupi (Men and Wolves, 1957), which gave Guerra his 
first screenwriter credit.

His friend Fellini was preparing La Dolce Vita, but they were not yet destined 
to work together. Guerra instead worked with Antonioni on L'Avventura (1960). 
In the preface to his published screenplays, Antonioni wrote about his 
scriptwriters on that film, Guerra and Elio Bartolini. "Tonino, who is closer 
to me, is a poet who writes in dialect; [Bartolini] is a novelist. They are 
very different ... [Tonino and I] have long and violent arguments ... and that 
makes him all the more helpful."
 Tonino Guerra in 2004. Photograph: Franco Origlia/Getty Images 
Guerra was to collaborate with Antonioni on the screenplays of La Notte (The 
Night, 1961), L'Eclisse (Eclipse, 1962), Il Deserto Rosso (Red Desert, 1964), 
Blow-Up (1966) and, later, The Mystery of Oberwald (1981), Identification of a 
Woman (1982) and Beyond the Clouds (1995). Remarking on the criticisms often 
made of the dialogue in Antonioni's films, Guerra was to say: "They were only a 
comment on the images. In the end, the best lines we'd written would get lost."

Guerra also co-authored Petri's first two films, both small jewels, 
L'Assassino (The Assassin, 1961), and I Giorni Contati (Counted Days, 1962). 
The decade also saw him working on the script of Vittorio De Sica's Marriage 
Italian Style (1964) and the first of several films he co-scripted for Rosi, 
C'Era una Volta (More Than a Miracle, or Cinderella Italian Style, 1967), with 
Sophia Loren and Omar Sharif. They went on to include The Mattei Affair (1972), 
Lucky Luciano (1973) and Cadaveri Eccellenti (Illustrious Corpses, 1976).

It took till 1973 for Guerra to work with Fellini, on Amarcord. The novel of 
the film was published under both their names, but was clearly penned by 
Guerra, and in it one detects the writer's contribution on the level of 
reminiscence in mood and language. It was a unique occasion for 
director-scriptwriter empathy. They worked together again on And the Ship Sails 
On (1983) and Ginger and Fred (1986). Fellini wanted him to collaborate on City 
of Women, but at that time, the late 1970s, Tonino had fallen in love with 
Lora, the Russian woman who was to become his wife, and was commuting between 
Rome and Moscow.

Guerra's "Russian period" thus began. He had first met Tarkovsky at Venice in 
1962, when the then young Russian director shared the golden lion for his debut 
film, Ivan's Childhood. Guerra invited him to come to Italy, but only in 1980 
was he allowed to travel abroad. For RAI-TV they made a documentary travelling 
roundItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, Tempo di Viaggio (Voyage 
in Time), and this was the starting point for Nostalgia (1983), an 
Italian-Soviet co-production. Tarkovsky depended much on Guerra's collaboration 
as his Italian guide, but the film's complexities, both in their positive and 
negative aspects, reflected the director's personal identity crisis as a 
prospectiveémigré.

With Angelopoulos he found another director with whom he shared "ideas on life 
and art". Again, there was great chemistry between them, the Greek maintaining: 
"Tonino has been my psychoanalyst for 20 years."

Their first film together was Voyage to Cythera (1984), followed by The 
Beekeeper (1986) and, completing the "trilogy of silence", Landscape in the 
Mist (1988), then The Suspended Step of the Stork (1991), The Gaze of Ulysses 
(1995) and Eternity and a Day (1998). The story of The Weeping Meadow (2004) is 
told against the three decades of Greek history up to the end of the civil war 
in 1949, while The Dust of Time (2008) has Willem Dafoe as a Greek-American 
film-maker exploring his family's story over half a century and several 
countries.

The last of Guerra's more than 100 credits was for Everybody's Fine (2009), a 
remake set in the US of Stanno Tutti Bene (1990), about a Sicilian father 
visiting his children on the mainland.

In the late 1980s, Guerra scripted films from two of his stories for directors 
from his part of Italy, who made them there: Gianfranco Mingozzi, Il Frullo del 
Passero (The Sparrow's Fluttering), with Philippe Noiret; and Ottavio Fabbri, 
Viaggio d'Amore (Journey of Love) with Omar Sharif. Around that time Guerra 
retired to a Romagnan village. For his 80th birthday, many of the directors he 
had worked with and a delegation of musicians and dancers from the Bolshoi 
Theatre gathered to fete him and Lora, who survives him, along with their film 
composer son, Andrea.

• Tonino (Antonio) Guerra, screenwriter and novelist, born 16 March 1920; died 
21 March 2012
 