
On paper, it sounded appalling. There were times when one sensed that the BBC, 
which had bought it in and placed it on the schedules, rather wondered about
Borgen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/dec/13/best-tv-2013-borgen>
’s potential appeal. But by the end of its first broadcast on BBC4, the Danish 
drama series’ politicians were probably more popular than their real-life 
British equivalents.

So what made viewers swoon for Birgitte Nyborg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/feb/01/sidse-babett-knudsen-borgens-appeal>
, the pragmatic leader of a centrist party who, not unlike the show itself, 
subtly charmed her doubters? The same performance that swung it for Borgen’s 
fictional voters: her remarkable performance in a televised election debate. A 
debate, it bears emphasising, as we prepare for ITV’s seven-party extravaganza 
tonight, that also included a similar number of party leaders and gave each of 
them the opportunity to convince voters of their appeal.

Nyborg’s trump card, having listened to her opponents – including the Greens 
and the rightwing Freedom party, alongside parties from the across the spectrum 
– was to chuck away the script. “All of us here have become ever so 
professional,” she said, explaining her decision to divert from her prepared 
speech. “If we’re to create a new Denmark together, we have to invent a new way 
of communicating and of doing politics.”

Nyborg’s trump card, having listened to her opponents, was to chuck away the 
script

Her way was to issue a rallying call based on discussing immigration and 
growing economic inequality. “To believe that the free market is the best cure 
for social inequality is like believing that cars will cure the climate 
crisis,” she declared. “It’s not good enough.”

It seems unlikely that would be the kind of killer line to woo British voters 
– although I’d love to see someone try it. And of course the fictional Borgen 
debates came scripted and with a convenient tendency to over-explain each 
politician’s position so viewers could easily place them on the spectrum. They 
tended not to head off on boring tangents. (Although, believe me, there were 
certainly moments.) But it would be naive not to think that those taking part 
in the British debate will be just as aware of their audience as the writers 
who scriptedBorgen <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/borgen>.

Critics of ITV’s full-representation debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/27/the-next-tv-election-debate-will-be-messy-just-like-britains-politics>
, which will pit Natalie Bennett, Leanne Wood, Nick Clegg, Nigel Farage, Ed 
Miliband, Nicola Sturgeon and David Cameron against each other, say that away 
from the confected Danish TV studio, this multi-headed discussion will be 
chaotic. That we will learn little because the important politicians will not 
be properly called to account, and too much time will be spent listening to 
irrelevant arguments from irrelevant parties. That as a result we’ll turn off.

And it could be the case that the seven candidates generate so much noise that 
we can’t really hear what any of them have to say and zone out. (Although if 
they do, surely the problem lies with them, not ITV.) But the format feels 
pretty strong: four topics, with time for each leader to speak and to answer 
questions from the studio audience. And if you can persuade more than half a 
million people to watch a subtitled, fictional, Danish political debate on a 
Saturday night and not have them punch their own eyes out with boredom, you 
have to presume they can cope with actual real British politicians discussing 
an actual real British election.

As for the claim that the views of smaller parties are basically irrelevant 
because, regardless of their share of the vote overall, in the vast majority of 
constituencies they stand no chance of winning a seat, it surely only 
highlights that perhaps the thing in need of urgent reform is not this 
television format but our electoral system.

More to the point: have we forgotten what the first of the 2010 British TV 
debates did for the man who was the least likely star? Nick Clegg didn’t 
exactly have a Birgitte Nyborg moment – going completely off-script, joking 
about how the election had made her fat, promising a new kind of politics that 
actually engaged with voters rather than gave spin-doctored answers – but his 
positioning of the Liberal Democrats as a fresh alternative to two tired old 
parties wasn’t far off. Certainly it transformed his party’s fortunes. This 
full-spectrum TV debate offers smaller parties a unique chance to break through 
in the same way.

And in doing so, they also call the two main parties to account. A wider 
debate inevitably means there will be less time for grilling Cameron and 
Miliband on the nitty-gritty of their plans. But it hardly means that either of 
them are off the hook. As loyal Borgen viewers will know, leaders made by 
televised debates can also be undone by them; like Birgitte, those who once 
triumphed at the podium can also crumble.
 