
 On sex

"Sex" doesn't make it into the index of A Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/a-journey> – other than when suffixed with 
"offenders register" – but it throbs throughout many chapters of the book.

Things you never wanted to read about Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> number one: him "devouring" 
Cherie's love in the bedroom of their Islington townhouse on the night he 
decided to run for the Labour party leadership in 1994.

"That night she cradled me in her arms and soothed me; told me what I needed 
to be told; strengthened me; made me feel that what I was about to do was 
right," squelches Blair. "On that night of the 12th May, 1994, I needed that 
love Cherie gave me, selfishly. I devoured it to give me strength. I was an 
animal following my instinct, knowing I would need every ounce of emotional 
power to cope with what lay ahead. I was exhilarated, afraid and determined in 
roughly equal quantities."

We know their love was physical – and potent. Leo, after all, was born in 2000.

But Cherie wasn't the only object of Blair's fervour. At one point, back in 
1994, the former PM insists he and Gordon Brown had eyes only for each other. 
"Our minds moved fast and at that point in sync. When others were present, we 
felt the pace and power diminish, until, a bit like lovers desperate to get to 
love-making but disturbed by old friends dropping round, we would try to bustle 
them out, steering them doorwards with a hearty slap on the back."

And before Gordon came Amanda Mackenzie Stuart, Blair's first girlfriend, the 
first female ever admitted to the sixth form at Fettes College.

In a passage he may well have pinched from a Mills & Boon novel, Blair gushes: 
"You know the first person you ever fall in love with; you know the incredible 
outpouring of desire, the overwhelming sense of something unique, 
inexpressible, inexplicable and even at points incomprehensible, but so 
thrilling, uplifting, your heart pumping and soaring?"

But Blair does not just ruminate on his own sensuality. Explaining why his 
friend Bill Clinton is not a serial sex pest, Blair says he is "convinced that 
[Clinton's] behaviour arose in part because of his interest in and curiosity 
about people. In respect of men, it was expressed in friendship; in respect of 
women, there was potentially a sexual element. I doubt he is much different 
from most of the male population."

He repeatedly demonstrates that he is the archetypal red-blooded male. 
Describing how he first met his future special adviser, Anji Hunter, Blair 
writes: "We had known each other since the age of 16 when I had tried climbing 
inside her sleeping bag at a party in the north-west of Scotland (without 
success!).

"She had looked after me at university, turned up in my life again when I was 
an MP and had been with me ever since. She was sexy and exuberant and used both 
attributes to devastating effect."

Later, recalling John Prescott's affair with his secretary, Tracey Temple, 
Blair hypothesises why women find politicians sexy.

"It's a strange thing, politics and sex. People have often said to me that 
power is a kind of aphrodisiac, and so women – politics still being male 
dominated – would come on to politicians in a way they would never dream of 
with anyone else. I supposed it must be true since, let's face it, politicians 
are definitely on the debit side of the good-looks ledger."

Helen Pidd

On Diana

"We were both in our ways manipulative people," Blair writes, "perceiving 
quickly the emotions of others and able instinctively to play with them."

As well as admitting a strong personal fondness for Princess Diana – "I really 
liked her and, of course, was as big a sucker for a beautiful princess as the 
next man; but I was wary too" – Blair saw her as encapsulating the political 
sea change that swept the country in 1997: "Whatever NewLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> had in part," Blair writes, "she 
had in whole."

But Diana was, writes Blair, "an unpredictable meteor" who burst into the 
royal family's "predictable and highly regulated ecosystem". Her death, three 
months after Blair entered Downing Street, was "menacing" for the royal family.

But it was Diana's relationship with Dodi Fayed that concerned Blair. The last 
time they met was in July. "It had not been all that easy," he writes. During a 
private walk in the grounds of Chequers Blair told Diana that he felt her 
relationship with Fayed "was a problem".

"This was not for the obvious reasons, which would have made some frown on 
him; his nationality, religion or background don't matter a hoot to me. I had 
never met him … so if you ask me, well, spit it out, what was wrong, I couldn't 
frankly say, but I felt uneasy," he writes.

Diana didn't like Blair's interference – "I could feel the wilful side of her 
bridling" – but by the end of the conversation they were again on a "warm and 
friendly" footing.

Despite their personal relationship, Blair admits that from the moment he was 
told of her death, he was "trying to work out how it should play".

"I know that sounds callous," he reveals. "I was genuinely in grief … but I 
also knew that this was going to be a major national, in fact global, event 
like no other … I had to work out how it would work out."

Blair is candid about the tension of the days immediately following Diana's 
death: "Throughout, we were walking a tightrope, thinner and more frayed by the 
day, between organising everything to go well and 'cashing in' or exploiting."

He admits that the now-famous phrase he used the next day, "the people's 
princess", now seems like something from "another age. And corny. And over the 
top. But at the time, it felt natural."

Amelia Hill

On John Prescott

"John Prescott always bought something unique to the Labour party, and to the 
government," Blair says of his deputy. "He could be maddening; he could be 
dangerous; he could be absurd; he could be magnificent. But dull, placid, 
uneventful and forgettable were words that would never be associated with him."

With his "swaggering blunderbuss approach", Blair admits, Prescott could never 
be described as a "safe pair of hands". If anything, the deputy prime minister 
was a "brake on New Labour". But he was also an important, authentic link with 
Labour's union roots, and he had something else that Blair valued: "In a tight 
spot, I thought you could count on him," he writes. "On the basis of the 
tiger-shooting analogy (would you venture into the jungle with this person?), 
he passed muster." Blair later found that he could no longer count on the 
support of the deputy prime minister – and also that, by the end of 2006-07, 
Prescott was "agitat[ing] strongly for me to go". In the spring of 2007, he 
told Blair that he would resign if the prime minister remained.

Blair admits Prescott's inverted snobbery and "old-fashioned" attitudes 
towards women. "His foibles were usually on the endearing end of the spectrum – 
though some women I know strongly disagree with that assessment," Blair writes. 
"He was definitely old-fashioned, not great at working with a certain type of 
middle-class woman, and though sound on the policy on gay rights was led more 
by his head than his heart, if you know what I mean.

"He was also completely paranoid about smart, young, well-spoken intellectual 
types. With these, he was like a pig with a truffle. He could smell out … a 
snub at a thousand paces; and once smelt, he would charge after it with quite 
shocking abandon."

Amelia Hill

On Carole Caplin

Though Blair is unwilling to apologise for going to war in Iraq, he is happy 
to admit he got it wrong overCarole Caplin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/carole-caplin>, the goat's-milk-drinking 
lifestyle guru whose association with a conman engulfed his family in a 
damaging personal crisis.

The couple's relationship with Caplin was not the mistake, however; Blair 
writes in his memoirs that she was "a good friend and reliable confidant" for 
his wife, and helped him stay in shape when "fitness became more of a 
preoccupation".

Where he erred was in not openly acknowledging Caplin when her employment with 
the Blairs became public in 1994, just before the Labour party conference.

Cherie Blair had taken on Caplin to "remake her image: get fit, look good, 
carry herself like the well-known figure she was becoming".

The Sun got wind of it – and got hold of nude pictures of Caplin, which it 
published under the headline "Secrets of Blairs' Girl Friday".

Blair says that in retrospect he should have "acknowledged" her and been open 
and supportive. "Instead, entirely understandable given our nervousness about 
our position and how she was bound to provoke controversy, we hid her away in a 
safe house. But, of course, it only increased the fascination about her."

The interest never went away, and eight years later, Caplin's links to the 
family caused a deep crisis when it emerged that her boyfriend, Peter Foster, 
was a conman with a criminal conviction for, among other things, conspiring to 
supply a special weight-loss drink that turned out to be tea.

The problem was, Foster had helped Mrs Blair buy two flats in Bristol when the 
Blairs' son Euan was at university there. When the Daily Mail called Blair for 
a comment, he denied Foster had ever been involved.

This, writes Blair, was because the paper had phoned for a comment at the last 
possible moment the day before publication. Blair says he called his wife and, 
in a rush, got "the wrong end of the stick".

The denial fuelled the flames of what inevitably came to be known as 
Cheriegate. "My close office were, it is fair to say, intrigued but generally 
dismayed by Carole," he writes. "Alastair [Campbell] was convinced she would 
sell her story. She never did. Whatever indignity was visited on her, she 
remained dignified. Contrary to the image assiduously and malignly created for 
her, she was kind, decent, hard-working and, above all, brilliant at what she 
did."

Helen Pidd

On David Miliband 

David Miliband might have looked "about 12" when Blair made him head of policy 
after winning the election in 1997, but he was nonetheless perfect for the 
role. The young leader in waiting was, says Blair, "really clever, plainly, and 
with good party politics".

Blair admits leaning heavily on "detailed policy discussions" with Miliband 
when writing articles in the early years about the New Labour project and then 
working closely together again when writing his speeches in the lead-up to the 
2001 election. Miliband is the narrow favourite to be Blair's successor-but-one.

Miliband is largely absent from the rest of the autobiography. There are no 
personal reminiscences or fond memories of shared experiences. He describes 
Miliband as a politician with "clear leadership qualities" and goes out of his 
way to emphasise how he smoothed the path the younger man might tread towards 
the ultimate goal.

In May 2007, Miliband asks Blair about challenging Brown for the leadership 
when Blair stood down. "I think you might win, not obviously, but very 
possibly," Blair replied. "I didn't blame him at all [for not standing], but I 
did say he should be prepared in case the issue arose again, sooner than we 
might think."

Of the other Labour leadership candidates, Diane Abbott is not mentioned at 
all and Andy Burnham only once. Ed Miliband is mentioned five times, 
perfunctorily. "I've had some harsh things to say about Ed Balls," Blair says 
of Brown's right-hand man. "I thought he behaved badly at points, and was wrong 
on policy – but I also thought he was really able, and a talent that any 
political party should be grateful to have."

Amelia Hill and Andrew Sparrow

On foreign policy

Globalisation has made military intervention in rogue regimes overseas more 
necessary than ever, Blair argues. Not toppling Robert Mugabe, the president of 
Zimbabwe, is one regret voiced by the former prime minister.

His belief that Iran needs to be confronted in its nuclear ambitions and as a 
last resortprevented by force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/sep/01/tony-blair-west-use-force-iran-nuclear-weapons>
 shines through. The experience of Iraq and Afghanistan has not diminished his 
commitment to taking on opponents.

His appetite for international affairs, he admits, has been sharpened by his 
role as a mediator in the Middle East. "Personally I have never felt a greater 
sense of frustration or indeed a greater urge to leadership," he writes in his 
postscript.

But it was the Balkans that formed the crucible for his new policy of liberal 
interventionism. "My awakening over foreign policy was … abrupt," he explains. 
"It happened over Kosovo."

Distinctions between foreign and domestic policy are breaking down as 
consequence of globalisation, he maintains. Television news beams foreign 
crises into every living room. "The world [is] interconnected not just 
economically or in self-interest but emotionally, the heart as well as the 
head."

Looking back he admits he was surprised: "The 1997 campaign was fought almost 
exclusively on a domestic policy basis. If you had told me on that bright May 
morning as I first went blinking into Downing Street that during my time in 
office I would commit Britain to fight four wars, I would have been bewildered 
and horrified."

Foreign policy based on "narrow self-interest" is outdated, he asserts. 
"Global alliances [have to] be … based on shared global values." That 
realisation has resulted in the undermining of the old political divisions of 
left and right.

"We ended up in the bizarre position where being in favour of the enforcement 
of liberal democracy was a 'neoconservative' view and non-interference in 
another nation's affairs was 'progressive'."

Kosovo was his first test. The "ethnic cleansing" and killings "completely 
changed my own attitude to foreign policy", he writes. While Europe stalled, in 
favour of pacification rather than resolution, Blair was "extraordinarily 
forward in advocating a military solution".

On Iraq, he insists that he never regarded those who opposed war as "stupid or 
weak-minded".

About 9/11, he concedes that "I misunderstood the depth of the challenge … If 
I had known then that a decade later we would still be fighting in Afghanistan, 
I would have been profoundly disturbed. I hope I would have still taken the 
same decision, both there and in respect of Iraq."

Blair is uncompromising in the face of the dangers he perceives from Iran, 
discussing them in the context of the growing danger that terrorists will 
obtain nuclear weapons.

"It is America that leads the challenge to Iran and its nuclear ambitions," he 
says. "But let us be frank: Iran is a far more immediate threat to its Arab 
neighbours than it is to America … That's why Iran matters. Iran with a nuclear 
bomb would mean others in the region acquiring the same capability; it would 
dramatically alter the balance of power in the region, but also within Islam."

Owen Bowcott

On Bill Clinton

"We were political soulmates," Blair says of Bill Clinton, US president for 
most of his first term. "We shared pretty much the same analysis of the 
weakness of progressive politics. We were both quintessential modernisers …

"He was the most formidable politician I had ever encountered … as a political 
class act, I deferred to the master. He had it all."

When Blair visited Clinton in the Oval Office in 1996, just before his 
election campaign and the American president's re-election, he remembers 
"feeling very awed", hoping that the meeting wouldn't be too short – leading to 
headlines of "Blair snubbed" – and "praying" that the meeting would overrun. 
"But Bill couldn't have been kinder or more welcoming," he writes. "And it did 
overrun."

Amelia Hill

On George W Bush 

Critics of George W Bush are wrong to portray him as a "dumb idiot" who 
accidentally became president of the United States, Blair writes.

He says he felt nervous when Bush became president because they hailed from 
different political traditions. But Blair writes that he soon worked out a 
strong relationship with Bush, who he insists is far cleverer than his critics 
imagine.

"No one stumbles into that job, and the history of American presidential 
campaigns is littered with the corpses of those who were supposed to be 
brilliant but who nonetheless failed because brilliance is not enough."

Blair writes that people in Britain often do no appreciate the qualities that 
are required of a US president, who is, unlike a British a prime minister, a 
head of state. "To succeed in US politics, of that of the UK, you have to be 
more than clever. You have to be able to connect and you have to be able to 
articulate that connection in plain language."

Nicholas Watt

On Trident 

The Trident nuclear missile system, which the government wants to renew, is 
hugely expensive and its use as a weapon is "non-existent", Blair writes.

Readers, he says, might think he would have been certain of the need to renew 
Britain's nuclear weapons. However, in a remarkably forthright comment echoing 
a debate now about the wisdom and value of replacing Trident, Blair writes: 
"The expense is huge, and the utility in a post-cold war world is less in terms 
of deterrence, and non-existent in terms of military use."

He says he could see clearly the force of the "common sense and practical 
argument" against Trident. But in the end he thought giving it up would be "too 
big a downgrading of our status as a nation" and in an uncertain world "too big 
a risk for our defence".

Richard Norton-Taylor

On being PM

As he took to the podium at the Royal Festival Hall in the early hours of 2 
May 1997 for Labour's landslide victory celebrations, Blair decided that he 
felt fear because he knew he would be alone.

"As I took the steps up to the podium [at the Festival Hall] … I finally 
defined the root of fear that had been growing all day: I was alone," he 
writes. "There would be no more team, no more friendly clique, no more shared 
emotions among a band of intimates. There would be them; and there would be me."

Nicholas Watt
 