
'Surreal, utterly freaky': the Balmoral trip
 Princess Diana 
"Whatever New Labour had in part, she had in whole," Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> writes of Diana, Princess of 
Wales, whose death in a car crash in 1997 brought a nation on to the streets 
and provided the Labour prime minister with one of his most celebrated media 
opportunities: he stood outside his Sedgefield constituency church and dubbed 
her "the people's princess".

Blair's book gives an account of Diana's death and the turbulent public 
reaction to it, an account which, according to the Daily Telegraph, has been 
awaited with some concern by Buckingham palace. Such worries seem misplaced. In 
his interview with the Guardian this week Blair denied that Diana had been, in 
any sense, a New Labour supporter. "No, I'm not saying that. It's more in the 
sense that, at the time, in 1997, we very much captured the mood. But she was 
someone who had this extraordinary, intuitive ability to capture a mood," he 
said.

The book describes how Diana visited the Blairs at Chequers a few months 
before she died; Prince William and the Blair children played together there, 
and the prime minister and Diana had a private talk on a walk around the 
Chequers garden – which "annoyed" the princess. The cause of their disagreement 
is not revealed. Talking to the Guardian Blair has specifically denied that he 
warned Diana against marrying Dodi Fayed.

Blair reveals that Buckingham palace thought "people like me were a bit 
nouveau riche, a bit arriviste, a bit confusing and therefore suspect". He 
describes "the intriguing, the surreal and the utterly freaky" quality of his 
first summer visit to the Queen at Balmoral.

Campbell's asset: his great clanking balls
 Alastair Campbell 
Tony Blair's relationship with Gordon Brown may have been the most politically 
difficult of his time in Downing Street, but his relationship with Alistair 
Campbell was almost as complex, Blair's memoir reveals.

The former Daily Mirror political editor was always Blair's number one choice 
to head his media operation. He records making a special trip, while on holiday 
in France just after becoming leader in 1994, to persuade Campbell to sign up.

Campbell's principal attraction is memorably expressed. Campbell, Blair 
writes, had "clanking great balls" — an accolade shared only by Rupert Murdoch 
who also "had balls".

Campbell's success as press strategist gets plenty of praise from Blair. He 
was a key figure at his side for nearly a decade before stepping down in 2003. 
But Campbell could also be a liability, and Blair is strikingly ready to point 
the finger at his erstwhile consigliere.

Campbell is blamed for the counter-productive "march them to the cashpoint" 
speech on youth crime in 2000. "It went too far," Blair writes. By the end of 
Labour's first term, Campbell was "getting exhausted and ratty".

But it was the bitter row over the then BBC journalist Andrew Gilligan's 2003 
accusation that Labour — in effect Campbell as director of communications — had 
sexed up the Iraq dossier on Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction which 
drove the relationship into a more destructive direction. "I had, insensitively 
and foolishly, not quite appreciated the strain Alistair had been under," Blair 
writes. "He is, as I have said, a highly strung character." Elsewhere, he 
writes of Campbell reacting "like a mad axeman."

Campbell "erupted" on the day of the publication of the Hutton report. Blair 
had tried, he writes, to ensure that neither Greg Dyke, the BBC director 
general, nor Gavyn Davies, the chair of BBC governors, would be pressured to 
resign in the aftermath of Hutton.

To that end, Blair made sure Campbell, who by then had left Downing Street, 
deleted a call in his own post-Hutton statement, that "heads should roll." In 
the event, Campbell reinstated the call when he faced the media and the BBC 
bosses quit, doing lasting damage to Downing Street's relations with the 
corporation.

'If what we are fighting is not a war, what is it?'
 A Chinook in Afghanistan 
Others may have abandoned the language of the "war on terror" but Tony Blair 
is still more than ready to use it.

"If what we are fighting is not a war, what is it?" he asks in the final 
chapter of his new book, when he argues the case for continuing the campaign in 
Afghanistan "as long as is necessary".

Blair's continuing commitment to the Afghan war is in marked contrast to the 
increasing distance from it expressed by his two successors as prime minister, 
Gordon Brown and David Cameron, as well as by President Barack Obama.

Though Blair's continuing commitment to the Afghan campaign may not come as a 
surprise, his views on the renewal of Britain's Trident nuclear weapons were 
unexpected. "I hesitated over it," he reveals. "I did not think this was a 
'tough on defence' versus a 'weak or pacifist' issue at all," he writes. 
However, "in the final analysis I thought giving it up too big a downgrading of 
our status as a nation."

Wine and roses
 John Prescott 
 Tony Blair's memoir is one of the few political books to be at all open about 
some of the private pressures of Westminster life. Though Downing Street tried 
to suggest the prime minister did not drink alcohol Blair makes clear it could 
be a prop for him at the end of the day. "I was definitely at the outer limit," 
he writes candidly concerning advisable alcohol units. He also touches on 
another political taboo. "It's a strange thing, politicians and sex," he 
reflects, as he learns of John Prescott's affair. Of David Blunkett, who quit 
as home secretary after his relationship with Kimberley Quinn, Blair writes: 
"He picked the wrong woman … fatal in politics." Over Robin Cook's marriage 
break-up, he says: "The issue is not the fornication but the complication."
 