
Polly Toynbee <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/pollytoynbee>: This is a 
historic act of treachery

Was Tony Blair always really a closet conservative, or did he convert late in 
life? That's the puzzle ofA Journey 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/aug/31/tony-blair-gordon-brown-disaster>
. His final chapter, a postscript written after this year's general election, 
reads like a floor-crossing declaration of support for the coalition's economic 
policies. He utters no word of alarm at the coming cuts that will sweep away 
most of what he has achieved. In a vote of affirmation for the new government, 
he says his party deserved to lose for moving too far from his New Labour 
template: the people got exactly what they wanted in the Cameron/Clegg blend.

Is this just the "après moi, le déluge" satisfaction all leaders feel as they 
see their successors fail abysmally? Or does this reveal that a global free 
market, pro-financier, anti-redistribution heart always beat stronger in the 
Blair breast than any Labour sentiments? There were many on the left who called 
him Tory Tony long before 1997, got their disillusion in early, refused to vote 
New Labour at all and rubbished everything he did. Indeed he was always Third 
Way, but considering what his government did in that first term, he was no 
Tory. A £5bn windfall on the privatised utilities, the New Deal for the 
unemployed, Sure Start, child care, tax credits, devolution, the minimum wage, 
the human rights act – it was no Tory agenda. True, some were John Smith's 
promises – but they were Blair's achievements.

So what happened? A Journey is a re-writing of history, events seen through 
the rear-view mirror from a man who hitched his wagon to the Bush neocons and 
learned some of their tunes. This is history written from his new perch in 
several banking board rooms, claiming Labour lost because of the 50% tax on 1% 
richest of the population – a rare indisputably popular act by Gordon Brown. 
Now, oddly, he says he was "never a fan of tax credits", declaring no regrets 
about the unchecked soar-away boardroom pay. This is the globe-trotting 
retrospective view of one whose feet long left the ground inhabited by British 
earthlings. It isA Journey <https://www.theguardian.com/books/a-journey> 
rightwards of a man who was ever a creature of fashion, opportunist, agile at 
self re-invention. You can hear him ache with envy for Cameron's success.

The timing of this book – and its postscript – is a historic act of treachery 
to his party. When I said so in a broadcast this morning, his spin doctor was 
on the phone in minutes, denying the deadly timing was deliberate. The point is 
not the unlucky day ballot papers arrive on Labour doormats. The point is that 
this book should have been left until the hot politics had long gone cold, 
beyond doing damage to his party. It lacks the value of a contemporary record, 
a diary of his thoughts at the time. But nor does it have the perspective of 
political passion recollected in tranquility. Here is a snapshot of the present 
state of mind of a chameleon man of brilliant political skill, a three times 
victor, a travelling man on a journey rightwards.

Jonathan Freedland <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/jonathanfreedland>: What 
he learned in Northern Ireland about peacemaking

The former PM has certainly booked his place in history as a bringer of war, 
but he has another, opposite claim too: as a peacemaker. One of the less 
immediately eye-catching chapters in A Journey may also be one of its most 
impressive. It relates his experience as the central broker inthe Northern 
Ireland peace process 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/tonyblair+northernireland>.

There are some nice nuggets, including boyhood recollections of his first 
experiences "chasing girls" on holidays in Ireland and later, some colourful 
stories about the key players in Ulster politics. He tells how Ian Paisley once 
asked Blair if he thought God wanted the Democratic Unionist leader to do the 
key deal: the PM refused to act as a ventriloquist for the Almighty, deciding 
that "God was not a negotiator."

On the other side, there will be some eyebrow-raising from critics at Blair's 
description of Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness as men with "courage in 
abundance" – and at his conclusion that the relationship between Sinn Féin and 
the IRA "was a bit like that of the Labour leadership and the Labour Party NEC".

Blair, though, devotes most of the chapter not to mere storytelling or a plod 
through each of the multiple twists and turns of the decade-long peace process. 
Instead he offers 10 lessons he learned on the business of peacemaking, a kind 
of how-to guide, which he has devised in both Northern Ireland and as the 
Quartet envoy to the Middle East.

He writes that a basic framework of principle is essential, some agreed common 
ground to which the parties can be held. Blair had that in Northern Ireland but 
it's currently missing in Israel-Palestine. It's an obvious point but a 
powerful one.

He notes the importance of creativity in such high-stakes diplomacy, telling 
how one stalemate came down to the literal shape of the negotiating table: 
Paisley wanted the two sides to sit opposite each other, to convey that they 
were still adversaries; Adams wanted everyone to sit together, to show they 
were partners. Neither a straight nor a circular table would do. The Downing 
Street solution: a table in the shape of a diamond.

Blair also makes a nuanced case for "creative ambiguity", admitting that he 
sometimes strung along both Unionists and republicans, acting as middleman and 
passing on less than accurate accounts of what the other was saying. Those who 
have long branded Blair as Bliar will seize on this sentence: "Politicians are 
obliged from time to time to conceal the full truth, to bend it, and even 
distort it..."

Blair's most powerful point is that no peace process can succeed without 
"grip". Someone has to take charge and maintain it, day after day, even if it 
takes many years. The problem with Israel-Palestine is that "no-one has ever 
gripped it long enough or firmly enough... If it was gripped, it would be 
solved."

Even if as only a commentary on the sporadic nature of US involvement over the 
years, that is surely a shrewd observation. Together with several other of 
Blair's key ingredients for peace, it leaves one with a slight sense of despair 
for the people of the Middle East - and a kind of envy on their behalf for the 
people of Northern Ireland, that they clearly lack the conditions which made 
peace possible in that place, among them the presence of a broker as committed 
to a decade of daily engagement asTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> was.

Tom Clark <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/tomclark>: Blair has forgotten 
what being centre-left means

Tony Blair's journey started out with a small piece of plastic. New Labour 
printed five progressive yet prosaic promises on credit-sized cards – smaller 
primary classes and that sort of thing – to demonstrate its realistic optimism.

On the basis of a quick leaf through the book, let us imagine what quintet of 
goodies might adorn a new pledge card if the party Blair led now took his 
advice and became full-blooded New Labour, as he understands it.

1. Get state out of banking

2. Bomb Iran

3. Cut taxes on pay over £150,000

4. Repeal Freedom of Information Act

5. Kill foxes

OK, so I'm being a bit flip, but there's a real point here. Through A 
Journey's meditations on centre-left coalition building – some of it 
instructive – Blair has forgotten what being centre-left means. He is a 
political strategist in the same way that successful captains of industry are 
business strategists. It is more about Labour's market share and wrong-footing 
the Tories than high principle, asChris Mullin's new book 
<http://thebookbag.co.uk/reviews/index.php?title=Decline_and_Fall:_Diaries_2005_to_2010_by_Chris_Mullin>
 recalls in relation to locking up terror suspects for 90 days (foreign policy 
is different, but the less said there the better). Fixing policies round the 
politics, as opposed to the reverse, leads to the philosophical incoherence 
found in A Journey, where Blair emerges, for instance, as an instinctive 
liberal – except on law and order.

Blair aide Jonathan Powell is about to publish a book 
<http://www.politicos.co.uk/books/490808/Jonathan-Powell/The-New-Machiavelli/> 
that reflects on his No 10 days through the prism of Machiavelli. The man 
himself might well have done the same.

Michael White <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/michaelwhite>: Most PMs use 
drink as a prop

Tony Blair admits that he used drink as a prop and tucked it away to the 
"outer limit" of the recommended number of units a week 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/sep/01/tony-blair-book-diana-alastair-campbell>
. Wisely, he does not say whether he means 28 or 21 units – both are used – but 
notes that "everyone always lies" about what they drink anyway.

Should we be surprised? No, it's a very gruelling job and most PMs use drink 
as a prop except those – I can only think of Jim Callaghan offhand – who give 
it up for the duration. Harold Wilson always drank brandy before PMQs, and 
ended up drinking too much. Margaret Thatcher, a whisky drinker by choice (it 
was Denis who drank G&Ts), would occasionally drink quite early in the day – 
which is before lunch in my book – and also drank at night. In retirement, so 
stories suggest, she overdid it.

Did I ever see Blair the worse for wear? Of course not. I didn't see Charlie 
Kennedy the worse for wear and whenever I drank in his company – towards the 
end we were looking for signs of excess – he was always careful. Friends who 
knew Blair better noted that he could knock it back over dinner, and after. 
Mostly wine. Does it matter? That depends. Blair admits being torn between the 
benefits of relaxation and the loss of working time which drinking caused. On 
balance he opted to relax. But – as with driving – decisions taken in drink 
aren't always the best. It works out fine if the PM can hold their liquor, as 
HH "Squiffy" Asquith (1908-16) could not. Nor could Anthony Eden (1955-57), who 
also took pills. Winston Churchill, who became PM at the depth of Britain's 
crisis in 1940 – at the age of 65 – drank a great deal all his long life. "I 
took more out of alcohol than it ever took out of me," he explained.
 