
Despite predictions that Peter Mandelson beating him into print would damage 
sales of Tony Blair's autobiography, the former prime minister's book has 
trounced his erstwhile spin doctor's to become one of the fastest-selling 
memoirs ever – presumably pretty solid consolation for having had his
publication party at Tate Modern cancelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/sep/08/tony-blair-book-party-cancelled>
.

Blair's A Journey <https://www.theguardian.com/books/a-journey> sold 92,060 
copies in its first four days on sale last week, according to Nielsen BookScan 
– the best ever opening week sale for an autobiography since the book sales 
monitor's records began, in 1998, and well ahead of Mandelson's The Third Man's 
performance, which sold 14,960 copies in three days when it was published in 
July.

Although Blair cancelled a signing event at Waterstone's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/sep/06/tony-blair-cancels-london-book-signing>
 in central London scheduled for today, fearing protests, the bookseller 
nonetheless said A Journey had become its fastest selling autobiography ever, 
based on first-day sales. "It has been a phenomenal book for us – everyone has 
been talking about it and the proof is not in the protests but in the sales," 
said spokesman Jon Howells. "Overwhelmingly people have decided to make up 
their minds by reading the book, and we think sales will remain strong through 
to Christmas. There are few certain things in bookselling, but this is one – 
prime ministers' memoirs sell. One hopes David Cameron is keeping a diary."

Publisher Random House said it had already reprinted the autobiography six 
times, and that if trade paperback and Irish sales were taken into account, A 
Journey had sold in excess of 100,000 copies. "To have six figures is just 
brilliant. We had all hoped it would be a big seller and we're just delighted 
with how it's doing," said publicity director Charlotte Bush. "We're really 
hoping the book will carry on selling right through the Christmas period."

"I think its sales have taken most people by surprise," said Philip Stone, 
charts editor at the Bookseller. "And given just over £1.2m has been spent on 
the book in the UK alone, it's well on its way to earning off the big advance 
[reportedly £4.6m] Random House allegedly paid to him."

As well as seeing off competition from Mandelson, Blair's first week sales – 
equivalent to 4p in every £1 spent at UK booksellers last week – also beat John 
Major's first-week sales for My Autobiography (5,415), John Prescott's for 
Pulling No Punches (1,202) and David Blunkett's for The Blunkett Tapes (769), 
said Stone. "And perhaps most importantly, he has bragging rights in the Blair 
household – Cherie's Speaking for Myself sold 3,877 in its first week," he 
added.

But Blair hasn't taken the very top spot: The Bookseller estimates that 
Margaret Thatcher's memoirs The Downing Street Years sold 120,000 copies in its 
first week on sale – it was released before official sales records began. David 
Beckham's autobiography My Side sold 86,100 in just two days in 2003, and Stone 
points out that A Journey has some way to go before it reaches the levels of 
Dan Brown, whose The Lost Symbol sold more than half-a-million copies in its 
first week on sale, or JK Rowling, whose Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows 
put a record 2.6m copies through tills in just one day.
 