
8.01pm: The interview is over. And that's it from me. Twelve hours of Tony 
Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> is enough for anyone. 
I'm off home for a drink. I might even manage three glasses of wine. Blair's 
probably got a point about moderate alcohol dependency (see 10.59am), although 
any journalist who cited drinking half a bottle a night as evidence of a 
worrying alcohol habit would probably be laughed out of the profession. One 
theory I heard today was that this shows Blair has been spending too much time 
in America, where they tend to be a bit more puritanical about these things.

Thanks for the comments.

7.56pm: Marr asked Blair how many properties he now owns. Eight? Nine? Blair 
said reports of his wealth were "crazy". Marr asked the question again but, as 
Blair was pausing, Marr threw out a second question, about Blair's wealth, and 
Blair responded with a point about being a "public service person". He never 
answered the property question. Shame. John McCain was once famously tripped up 
when he was asked a question like this andhe had to admit he did not know the 
answer. <http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0808/12685.html>

7.49pm: Marr has just deployed a good line in the interview.

A lot of people would say, well, it's absolutely clear, your vision is 
actually of a mostly conservative politician, and your journey has been from 
somebody who thought he was a Labour politician to someone whose realised 
actually he's not.

Blair denied that; he said he was progressive. He listed various policies, 
like the minimum wage, devolution and equality for gay people. Marr said David 
Cameron would support these too. Blair replied: "Why should we then say we're 
like him, rather than he's trying to get on our territory?"

7.45pm: Marr has started the third, and final, section of his interview. He 
introduced it with a short video mentioning the way Blair travels the world 
making money. At Coffee House Fraser Nelson has recently put upan ingenious 
post arguing that Blair's book is designed to promote the interests of "Blair 
Inc". <http://www.spectator.co.uk/coffeehouse/6243443/blair-for-sale.thtml>


One of the most revealing sentences in Blair's book is what he says about 
Condoleezza Rice. "She is a classic example of the absurdity of people with 
experience and capacity at the highest level not having big political jobs 
after retirement from office," he writes. "But that's another story!" Indeed it 
is. It's the cover story of tomorrow's Spectator.

Blair has evidently long regarded it as "absurd" that clever, talented people 
like him should leave the world stage simply because an ungrateful electorate 
has had enough of them. Read between the lines of his book, and you can see a 
manifesto for the need for a Blair figure in this globalised world of ours. And 
that is what this memoir is really all about. It's is not about score-settling, 
or making money. It's not about self-vindication. What he's up to is far more 
clever - he's using his memoirs to build Blair Inc and he has put together an 
extraordinary business model.

7.40pm: Blair does not criticise the coalition in this interview (see 7pm) and 
he says he does not want to make life difficult for David Cameron. But, in his 
comments on Afghanistan, I thought I heard I faint suggestion that he thinks 
Cameron is in too much of a hurry to get out. (Cameron has virtually committed 
himself to withdrawing troops by 2015.) "I think it's perfectly sensible to set 
out plans for troop draw-down provided it's geared to ..." Blair said, tailing 
off before he finished the sentence.

7.33pm: Blair has just told Marr that there was a discussion at cabinet about 
the attorney general's legal advice about Iraq. But that's not the way Clare 
Short remembers it. She told the Chilcot inquirythat she was "jeered at" when 
she started asking questions about it. <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/8492526.stm>

7.26pm: David Miliband has had all day to produce a response to Blair's 
comments about him (see 9.13am and 7pm) and it's a good one. At the Channel 4 
debate, according to a tweet from PoliticsHome, 
<http://twitter.com/politicshomeuk/statuses/22730344970> Miliband said:

I look forward to the day when Tony Blair says he's a Miliband-ite rather than 
people asking me if I'm a Blair-ite.

7.21pm: Marr asked Blair about his admission that he was willing to tell lies 
to keep the Northern Ireland peace talks going at one point (see 12.56pm). 
Blair responded with a fairly typical resort to euphemism. "Occasionally it 
[the truth] was stretched pretty far, yeah," he replied.

7.15pm: They've just covered FoI now. Marr said many people on the left would 
be "aghast" to hear him criticise FoI. "I'm sorry about that," said Blair - 
sounding not remotely sorry - "but they've got lots of reasons to be aghast at 
me." Blair has got to the stage now where he doesn't seem to mind being a 
bogeyman to the Guardianistas. If anything, he seems to relish it.

7.05pm: The Marr interview clashes with the Channel 4 Labour leadership 
debate. If you've had your fill of Tony Blair, you can catch up with the 
Channel 4 debatehere. 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/articles/politics/domestic_politics/labour+leadership+live+debate+on+channel+4/3758487>

Back on BBC 2, Marr and Blair are talking about the so-called Granita deal. 
Marr says, rightly, that it happened "everywhere but Granita", the Islington 
restaurant where Blair and Brown met for dinner in 1994 shortly before Brown 
announced that he would not fight him the Labour leadership.

There's more about this on this blog at 11.59am.

7.00pm: Here are the highlights from the Andrew Marr interview. The interview 
has just started, but the BBC released a 36-page transcript earlier. Many of 
Blair's comments repeat points that he made in the book. Here are the fresh 
ones.

• Blair seems to acknowledge that he's backing David Miliband in the Labour 
leadership contest. When Marr says it's "fairly obvious" who Blair is backing, 
Blair replies: "I know, and it may be fairly obvious, and I'm not saying it 
isn't, but I'm not [revealing who I'm supporting]. Blair also says Miliband is 
"very much his own man".

• Blair declines to criticise the coalition government. Asked what he makes of 
it, he replies: "Too early to tell." He also says he does not want to criticise 
David Cameron.

I don't want to cause trouble for David Cameron, actually ...I know how 
difficult it is [being prime minister] and I have a sympathy and respect for 
anyone doing it.

• Blair insists the West has to be willing to go to war with Iran. "It is 
wholly unacceptable for Iran to have nuclear weapons," Blair says. "I think 
we've got to be prepared to confront them ... if necessarily, militarily."

• He says the role of ideology in modern politics is exaggerated.

The big lesson that I learnt in that first term was that actually today's 
politics is a lot more to do with structural change, project management and 
delivery than it is to do with ideological fixations, left versus right, or the 
notion that you can, by edict from government, change things.

• He admits that he did not fully understand hunting when Labour first 
proposed a ban.

It was only when I got into the thing in a lot - in the detail, frankly, I 
should have done before, - that I started to understand that this was more 
complicated than a bunch of toffs running around hunting foxes.



• He says Labour should have not used sleaze as a campaign issue before the 
1997 election. It later backfired on Labour, he concedes. "There are certain 
bandwagons it's best to say no to."

• He says union leaders asked for more from the government than high-value 
donors.

I had far more trouble, if I may say this to you, with union leaders demanding 
something back than I ever did with high value donors.

5.27pm: Suddenly the Blair book has been overshadowed: William Hague has 
issued a long statement about the state of his marriage 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/sep/01/william-hague-denies-gay-rumours>
, strongly denying any improper relationship with one of his special advisers. 
It's a big story, but I'm Blaired out and I'll be leaving it to others.

I'll pick up this blog again at 7pm, when the BBC broadcast Andrew Marr's 
hour-long interview with Blair. Do come back here again then if you're looking 
for some reporting, comment and analysis.

In the meantime, here's an afternoon summary.

• Several Labour leadership candidates have responded to the publication of 
Tony Blair's memoirs by saying the party needs to move on. Ed Miliband said: 
"Most members of the public will want us to turn the page." And Andy Burnham 
said: "As ballot papers land, Labour should be looking to the future." Blair 
has not formally endorsed anyone for the Labour leadership, but it is assumed 
that he favours David Miliband and his advice for the party - including his 
belief that Labour needs to be "credible in its own right" and "flexible enough 
to attack the government from left and from right" - suggests that he thinks 
the other four candidates would not be able to win an election. But it is not 
at all clear what impact, if any, his comments will have on the contest.

• The Tories have welcomed Blair's comments about the economy. Lady Warsi, the 
Conservative chairman, has just issued a statement saying Blair's book shows 
the Tories are "winning the argument on cutting the deficit to get the economy 
moving".

That's it for now. See you at 7pm.

5.05pm: And now here's some reaction from the commentariat.

Here's the verdict from four Guardian writers - Polly Toynbee, Jonathan 
Freedland, Tom Clark and Michael White - atComment is Free 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/sep/01/tony-blair-memoirs-verdict>
. This is from Polly's piece.

 The timing of this book – and its postscript – is a historic act of treachery 
to his party. When I said so in a broadcast this morning, his spin doctor was 
on the phone in minutes, denying the deadly timing was deliberate. The point is 
not the unlucky day ballot papers arrive on Labour doormats. The point is that 
this book should have been left until the hot politics had long gone cold, 
beyond doing damage to his party. 
Julian Glover at Comment is Free 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/sep/01/tony-blair-book-gordon-brown>

 There is lots in the book to justify that old slogan the Democrats used 
against Barry Goldwater: "In your guts you know he's nuts." Brown was nuts, at 
least according to the Blair version (and he's surely right). 
Adam Boulton at the Sky blog 
<http://blogs.news.sky.com/boultonandco/Post:b8808a20-c25d-4a7a-b347-d4f45f563fae>

 The ex-PM wrote this autobiography himself, taking time off over the past 
three years (often in the Caribbean) to work on chunks of it out of sequence. 
What we get is the man we know: self–deprecating but steely, willing to admit 
tactical mistakes but unbending that his strategic vision was right. 
John Rentoul at the Independent's blog 
<http://blogs.independent.co.uk/2010/09/01/were-all-on-a-journey/>

"When it's said that I should have sacked him, or demoted him, this takes no 
account of the fact that had I done so, the party and the government would have 
been severely and immediately destabilised, and his ascent to the office of 
prime minister would probably have been even faster."

 The main interest at first glance is Tony Blair's explanation for why he put 
up with Gordon Brown's nonsense for so long. It all comes down to this: 
indent over 
Nick Robinson on his BBC blog 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/nickrobinson/2010/09/blair_and_brown.html> offers 
an apology

 I would like to apologise for my reporting of the relationship between Tony 
Blair and Gordon Brown in the years they were together in government. Some said 
it was tittle tattle, others that it was speculation, a few dared to suggest 
that it was fabrication. I now accept that I made mistakes. Things were worse - 
much worse - than I reflected at the time. 
Mehdi Hasan at the New Statesman blog says Blair is "dishonest" about Iraq 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/mehdi-hasan/2010/08/saddam-iraq-weapons-report>
.

James Kirkup at the Telegraph's blog 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/jameskirkup/100051993/tony-blairs-a-journey-reads-like-an-evangelical-self-help-manual/>
 says that often "it reads like a management school textbook written by an 
evangelical preacher".

4.46pm: And here's some Tory reaction.

Tory Treasury minister Mark Hoban

Tony Blair agrees, as we do, that public spending needs to be brought under 
control. He recognises actually that if the deficit remains high, that saps 
confidence and people think there are higher taxes round the corner. He has 
endorsed our view that we need to take action now to tackle the deficit and get 
the economy going. He is backing our view and coming out against his successor.

 [Blair] actually repudiates the Labour economic policy, the policy followed 
by Gordon Brown and the policies set out by the five Labour leadership 
contenders. We believe that the recovery should be led by the private sector, 
Tony Blair does. We believe that direct taxes should be competitive, that any 
increase in taxation should be through VAT, Tony Blair agrees with us. 
4.35pm: Now time for some reaction. Here, according to the Press Association, 
PoliticsHome 
<http://www.politicshome.com/uk/article/14071/reaction_to_blair_book_as_it_comes_in.html>
 (subscription) and Twitter, are some comments from Labour political figures.
 Diane Abbott. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Labour leadership candidate Diane Abbott on the BBC

 If I was David Miliband I would be asking Tony Blair for a period of silence. 
I think Tony Blair is 101% behind David Miliband because he sees David Miliband 
as the continuation. 
Ed Miliband, another Labour leadership contender
 I think it is time to move on from Tony Blair and Gordon Brown and Peter 
Mandelson and to move on from the New Labour establishment and that is the 
candidate that I am at this election who can best turn the page. I think 
frankly most members of the public will want us to turn the page. 
Andy Burnham, another Labour leadership contender

 I have huge respect for Tony Blair and everything he achieved for Labour. But 
I am saddened that he has chosen this day of all days to publish his book. As 
ballot papers land, Labour should be looking to the future. Instead, senior 
figures in our party are rerunning the battles of the past through this 
leadership campaign. Labour needs to leave all this behind. Members are fed up 
with it. Most are not Blairites or Brownites, Old or New Labour. They are just 
Labour. 
Alastair Campbell on his blog 
<http://www.alastaircampbell.org/blog/2010/09/01/marr-right-that-tb-book-like-no-other-prime-ministerial-memoir/>

 Some are trying to say that TB deliberately timed this to coincide with the 
Labour leadership ballot papers going out. I know for a fact he didn't, and 
would rather it could have been published on a different day. But the date was 
set before the leadership timetable was – and bear in mind it is being 
published in many countries and several languages simultaneously, which is not 
that easy to unplug. 
John Prescott, Labour's former deputy prime minister

 I hear Tony say we didn't continue with New Labour policies. Gordon continued 
these policies. He didn't disown them. 
Labour's Denis MasShane on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/DenisMacShane/status/22697575529>

 Blair supporter but am I alone in thinking this settling of scores demeans 
all involved? Yesterday's politics is yesterday's politics. 
Labour's Michael Meacher on a blog headed "Blair: memoirs of a certified 
delusional" 
<http://www.michaelmeacher.info/weblog/2010/09/blair-memoirs-of-a-certified-delusional/>


 Perhaps his biggest delusion is that is his claim that New Labour will come 
to be seen as a "great reforming government", when in fact history will judge 
it as a huge wasted opportunity between Thatcherism mark 1 and the Thatcherism 
mark 2 to which New Labour has now delivered us. It is however an enormous 
relief that on the very day the diaries are published the voting begins on a 
new Labour party leadership which will finally close the door on the tragedy of 
the Blair interregnum. 
Labour's Michael Dugher, who used to work for Brown in Downing Street

 I worked very closely with Gordon, I saw him with my own children and with my 
wife, and he could be enormously emotional and friendly and engaging in a quite 
natural way. I always thought he struggled to do that in front of a camera. I 
think Tony Blair was a much better actor than Gordon Brown and maybe in this 
modern media age that counts for something. 
Former Labour cabinet minister John Reid

 What this book is about is politics. It is the simple proposition that New 
Labour not only has a record to be proud of but, as long as it stayed New 
Labour - that is related not only to the disadvantaged but to the achievers, to 
the broad swathe of working people who wanted a better life for themselves and 
their families - they would succeed, but if they moved away from that they 
would lose. 
Labour's Tom Harris on his blog 
<http://www.tomharris.org.uk/2010/09/01/the-strange-consistency-of-polly-toynbee/?utm_source=>
 There are still many, many Labour Party members who remember Blair as an 
election-winning genius who, in office, was popular for an awful lot longer 
than he was unpopular. For those who want us to return to government sooner 
rather than later, Blair's book will be a reminder that opposition doesn't have 
to be permanent, and that great things can be accomplished by a Labour 
government, but only if we have a leader capable of appealing to voters beyond 
our own party's core. <  Ed Balls. Photograph: Oli Scarff/Getty Images  p> 
4.02pm: Earlier (at 10.02am) I quoted what Blair has to say about Ed Balls. But 
I missed the best passage, which I've just found. 
 Ed Balls was and is immensely capable intellectually and also has some of the 
essential prerequisites for leadership: he has guts, and he can take decisions. 
But he suffers from the bane of all left-leaning intellectuals. As I have 
remarked elsewhere, these guys never 'get' aspiration ... They would think that 
a person worried about their tax rates was essentially selfish, and therefore 
by implication morally a bit lost. 
3.53pm: I'm onto the postscript now. This is interesting.

• Blair suggests non-parliamentarians should be allowed to serve as ministers.

 The gene pool for ministers and MPs is now worryingly restricted. If this 
continues, it will not be long before we look at whether ministers really have 
to be drawn from the stock of MPs or Lords. 
Another former prime minister, John Major, has also floated the same idea 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2009/jun/30/non-parliamentarians-ministers>
.

3.39pm: I'm up to 2006 now. And there's a good line about the parliamentary 
Labour party.

• Blair criticises the parliamentary Labour party for not asking more about 
what a Brown premiership would involve.
 The PLP was divided, and perhaps for the first time the majority were for 
change. But change to what? To Gordon, for sure, but in order to do what? That 
they didn't know, and in what I thought was an extraordinary and weird 
self-inflicted myopia, most of them didn't appear to want to ask. 
3.33pm: My colleague Hélène Mulholland has been looking in more detail at what 
Blair has to say about economic policy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2010/sep/01/tonyblair-past1>. As she 
points out, there are several passages in the book that may go down well with 
the Tories.

3.33pm: Blair says there was a stage when he stopped taking Brown's calls 
towards the end of 2005, when Blair was negotiating the new EU budget.

3.32pm: Blair says Ed Balls was pressing for more spending, and higher taxes, 
at the time of the 2005 election.
 Ed Balls was of the opinion that the public wanted even more spending and 
were prepared for the extra tax, by reference to polls that the Treasury had – 
which I said was nonsense. On these issues, the public fib. 
3.18pm: I knew that Blair described the Freedom of Information Act as a 
mistake in the book, but I've just read the key quote and, to use the sort of 
word Blair would himself, it's gob-smacking.

• Blair says "no description of stupidity" is strong enough to describe his 
support for Freedom of Information.
 Freedom of Information. Three harmless words. I look at those words as I 
write them an, and feel like shaking my head till it drops off my shoulders. 
You idiot. You naive, foolish, irresponsible, nincompoop. There is really no 
description of stupidity, no matter how vivid, that is adequate. I quake at the 
imbecility of it. 
When did you last hear a politician – or anyone, for that matter – say 
"nincompoop"?

Blair's complaint is that FoI is mainly used by journalists and that it 
inhibits candid, private discussion in government.

3.18pm: In 2003 John Prescott tried to broker a peace deal between Blair and 
Brown when he hosted a dinner for them at his Admiralty House flat. We knew 
this, but Blair has an interesting observation to make.

• Using Prescott as a "go-between" between Blair and Brown was a mistake, 
Blair says.
 I say this not because John was badly intentioned – on the contrary, he was 
only motivated by what he believed was good for the Labour party – but the 
trouble was he thought the policy differences between us were immaterial. He 
thought it was essentially personal. Because John had his own deep reservations 
about New Labour, they blinded him to the fact that the differences went to the 
heart of what New Labour was about. 
3.01pm: I've just skimmed the section relating to David Kelly and the Hutton 
inquiry. There's not much there that seems to be new, but Blair's verdict is 
worth noting.

• Blair admits his reputation never recovered from the Kelly affair.
 Probably my own integrity never recovered from it ... Before it, we were in 
error; after, we were "liars". 
2.54pm: In the Iraq section, Blair fills five pages with extracts from the 
report Hans Blix, the UN weapons inspector, presented in January 2003. He says 
that he quotes from the report at such length because he wants people to 
understand how Iraq was not complying with its WMD obligations.
 <  Dick Cheney, the former US vice-president. Photograph: Getty Images  p> 
2.45pm: We've done George Bush and Donald Rumsfeld (see 9.34am). But what does 
Blair have to say about Dick Cheney? Surely he doesn't have a soft spot for him 
too?
Blair says that Cheney is a hate figure on the left and that even people in 
the middle ground tend to "reach for the garlic" when his name is mentioned. 
"You have to go pretty far right to find Dick's natural constituency."

However, Blair then goes on to say that he believed that Cheney had "one 
central insight which was at least worth taking seriously":
 He believed, in essence, that the US was genuinely at war; that the war was 
one with terrorists and rogue states that supported them; that it stemmed from 
a guiding ideology that was a direct threat to America; and that therefore the 
only way of defeating it was head-on, with maximum American strength, with the 
object of destroying the ideology and allowing democracy to flourish in its 
stead. He would have worked through the whole lot, Iraq, Syria, Iran, dealing 
with all the surrogates in the course of it – Hezbollah, Hamas etc ... Of 
course, this attitude terrified and repelled people. But, as will be obvious 
from what I have written, I do not think it was as fantastical as conventional 
wisdom opined. 
But Blair says he does not agree with Cheney's stance entirely. Cheney wanted 
to defend America through hard power alone. Blair says that he (Blair) believed 
that Britain and America had to fight "at the level of ideas" too.

2.34pm: And here's another of Blair's pen portraits:

To succeed in US politics, of that of the UK, you have to be more than clever. 
You have to be able to connect and you have to be able to articulate that 
connection in plain language. The plainness of the language then leads people 
to look past the brainpower involved. Reagan was clever. Thatcher was clever. 
And sometimes the very plainness touches something else: a simplicity that is 
the product of a decisive nature.
 One of the most ludicrous caricatures of George [Bush] is that he was a dumb 
idiot who stumbled into the presidency. No one stumbles into that job, and the 
history of American presidential campaigns is littered with the corpses of 
those who were supposed to be brilliant but who nonetheless failed because 
brilliance is not enough ... 
This passage is about Bush. But, of course, it's also about Gordon Brown too.
 <  Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images  p> 2.33pm: I've just read one of 
the passages on John Prescott. Blair's prose isn't masterly, but – from what 
I've read so far – his descriptions of character seem to be remarkably vivid 
and perceptive. Here's what he says about his former deputy: <  p>His foibles 
were usually on the endearing end of the spectrum – though some women I know 
strongly disagree with that assessment. He was definitely old-fashioned, not 
great at working with a certain type of middle-class woman, and though sound on 
the policy on gay rights was led more by his head than his heart, if you know 
what I mean. He was also completely paranoid about smart, young, well-spoken 
intellectual types. With these, he was like a pig with a truffle. He could 
smell out condescension, a slight, an air of superiority or a snub at a 
thousand paces.
2.09pm: The passage on the hunting bill is a treat.

• Blair admits he was determined to neuter the hunting bill. He says he 
accepted that parliament would vote for a ban, but he was determined to make 
the ban ineffective.
 In the end, there was a masterly British compromise – it was banned in such a 
way that, provided certain steps are taken to avoid cruelty when the fox is 
killed, it isn't banned. 
Blair says this enabled him to win a bet with Prince Charles that hunting 
would continue after the "ban". And he suggests that, when the police wanted to 
know if the government wanted the 2004 "ban" enforced vigorously, he told the 
Home Office that the answer was no.

1.53pm: Here's Blair on what happened the night his son Euan got arrested for 
drinking when he was 16. Euan came home at 1.30am.
 I got no sleep that night. Around 2.30am Euan insisted on coming into my bed. 
Alternately, he would go into a mournful tirade of apology and then throw up. I 
loved him and felt sorry for him, but had a police cell been available I would 
have been all for moving him in there. 
Blair says he only realised Euan was missing at around 11.30pm. He found out 
that Euan had been last seen heading for Leicester Square. Blair says he wanted 
to go to look for him himself, but realised that he could not and instead asked 
the policeman at the door of No 10 to do it for him.

1.45pm: According to PoliticsHome (paywall), the Tory Treasury minister Mark 
Hoban told the BBC that Blair in his book "repudiates Labour's economic policy, 
the one followed by Gordon Brown and the one set out by the leadership 
contenders".

I posted some of Blair's key quotes on this at 12.18pm. Here's another:
 What should we have done? As I suggested in my analysis of the economy 
earlier, in my view we should have taken a New Labour way out of the economic 
crisis: kept direct tax rates competitive, had a gradual rise in VAT and other 
indirect taxes to close the deficit, and used the crisis to push further and 
faster on reform. 
Of course, putting up VAT and moving "further and faster" than Brown on public 
service reform is now coalition policy.
 <  Photograph: the Guardian  p> 1.36pm: Back to the book. The passage on the 
Dome is fun.
• Blair admits that the Dome was a mistake.
 Unfortunately, one thing we had said "yes" to was continuing with the Dome. I 
think as bad decisions go, it wasn't a frightful one ... [The Dome] wasn't 
dreadful. It just wasn't brilliant ... In this day and age, it wasn't really a 
suitable project for government, and it never quite struck a note sufficiently 
attuned to the millennium. 
1.35pm: I won't bother typing out the passage about Blair trying to climb into 
Anji Hunter's sleeping bag, because Coffee House have put it up already, in a 
blogpost headed:Blair – the sex scenes 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/coffeehouse/6242543/blair-the-sex-scenes.thtml>. 
(It happened when Blair was 16; he was rebuffed.)

1.33pm: Prescott was followed on the World at One by Michael Dugher, a Labour 
MP who used to work as Brown's press spokesman at No 10. Kearney asked him if 
it was fair to describe Brown as someone with zero emotional intelligence. (See 
12.08pm.) Dugher said this was "probably slightly unkind".

1.24pm: John Prescott is talking about the book on the World at One. He's in 
full rant mode. He doesn't seem to like the book – the gist of his complaint is 
that Blair should be attacking the Tories, not his colleagues – but he calms 
down towards the end when Martha Kearney lets him talk about the time he 
punched a voter.

1.19pm: There's a full transcript of Martin Kettle's interview with Blair on 
our website now 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/sep/01/tony-blair-interview-full-transcript>
.

1.11pm: Here's Blair on Peter Mandelson's first resignation (the one inspired 
by the Guardian revelation about Mandelson not declaring his home loan from 
Geoffrey Robinson).
 This was not a story, it was a political assasination, done to destroy Peter; 
but it was done also to damage me and damage me badly, without any regard to 
the impact on the government. 
1.10pm: For the record, here are Blair's 10 steps to making peace.

1. Establish a framework of agreed principles.
2. Focus relentlessly on achieving your goals.
3. Accept that "small things can be big things".
4. Be creative. (See 12.56pm for one version of what this involves.)
5. Give the parties outside help.
6. Accept that peace is "a process, not an event".
7. Be prepared for disruption.
8. Recognise that leadership matters.
9. Accept that external circumstances must work in favour of peace, not 
against it.
10. Never give up.

12.56pm: I've only just taken a look at the Northern Ireland chapter. Blair 
concludes it with a lengthy section outlining his "10 lessons for peace-making" 
which looks fascinating. One of them contains a candid revelation.

• Blair admits he had to lie at one point in the Northern Ireland peace talks. 
The passage relates to talks taking place at the end of 2006.

 I took horrendous chances in what I was telling each the other had agreed to 
- stretching the truth, I fear, on occasions past breaking point - but I could 
see the whole thing collapsing because of the wording of an oath of office. 
Somehow, with creativity pouring out of every orifice, we got through it. 
"Creativity pouring out of every orifice"? I'm surprised that one got past the 
desk editors. You know what he means, but there must be better ways of putting 
it.

12.37pm: This is good.

• Blair admits he underestimated the amorality of some business figures.

 While the stories of my being dazzled by the wealthy are always ludicrously 
exaggerated (most of my close friends are not at all of that ilk), nonetheless 
I sometimes underestimated the ruthlessness and amorality that can go with 
moneymaking. 
12.34pm: Here's the passage on Bank of England independence that so annoyed 
Charlie Whelan (see 9.26am).

• Blair suggests he first came up with the idea of giving the Bank of England 
independence.

 I had been convinced long ago that for politicians to set interest rates was 
to confuse economics and politics ... Gordon had come to the same conclusion, 
and so when I suggested it, he readily agreed ... I allowed Gordon to make the 
statement [about Bank of England independence]. 
12.26pm: Here's Blair on PMQs:

 PMQs was the most nerve-racking, discombobulating, nail-biting, bowel-moving, 
terror-inspiring, courage-draining experience in my prime ministerial life, 
without question. You know that scene in Marathon Man where the evil Nazi 
doctor played by Laurence Olivier drills through Dustin Hoffman's teeth? At 
around 11.45 on Wednesday mornings, I would have swapped 30 minutes of PMQs for 
30 minutes of that. 
12.22pm: • Labour used to be like a "cult", Blair says.
 For several years, even before the 18 years in the wilderness, Labour was 
more like a cult than a party. If you were to progress in it, you had to speak 
the language and press the right buttons. It went on so long it became natural 
to those in the party. Even I had to learn to do it - not that well, I may say 
– but without doing some of it, you got nowhere. 
12.18pm: Back to the book. Here's another revelation from the 1994 
negotiations.

• Blair denies giving Brown total control of economic policy.

 At one point Peter [Mandelson] – who was by then trying to broker things in 
my favour – even submitted a paper to me that effectively ceded control of 
economic policy. The paper unfortunately survived; my response, which was for 
me unusually brusque, didn't. Close interaction, yes. Partnership, yes. Dual 
leadership, absolutely not. It gave rise to the myth that I was uninterested in 
economic policy. On the contrary, I was very interested. <  p> 12.08pm: We've 
had the Blair book for four hours now. I'm going to be bashing out the best 
extracts for the rest of the afternoon, and my Guardian colleagues are also 
poring over the book –you'll find all the latest stories on our website here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/tonyblair> – but first it's time for a 
lunchtime summary.
• Tony Blair has at last given a candid account of his relations with Gordon 
Brown. His 718-page autobiography, A Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/a-journey>, was released to the public at 
8am and it contains a withering assessment of Brown's political and personal 
skills. We knew that their relationship, particularly after 2004, was often 
dire. But Blair has now written about it at length. He confirms that he 
considered sacking Brown and he says that he predicted Brown's premiership 
would be a "disaster". Perhaps most damaging of all is his claim that Brown 
lacked "practical, on the ground, everyday-life conviction". Blair writes: "At 
this utterly crucial epicentre of political destiny, I discovered there was a 
lacuna – not the wrong instinct, but no instinct at the human, gut level. 
Political calculation, yes. Political feelings, no. Analytical intelligence, 
absolutely. Emotional intelligence, zero."

• Blair has come close to backing the coalition government's economic policy. 
While all the Labour leadership candidates are criticising the government for 
trying to cut the deficit too quickly, Blair suggests this is a mistake. "If 
Labour simply defaults to a 'Tory cutters, Lib Dem collaborators' mantra, it 
may well benefit in the short term; however, it will lose any possibility of 
being an alternative government ... We should also accept that from 2005 
onwards Labour was insufficiently vigorous in limiting or eliminating the 
potential structural deficit ... Labour has no option but to be credible in its 
own right. That means, as I say, having a coherent position on the deficit."

Blair is not endorsing any candidate in the leadership contest, although you 
don't have to be Vernon Bogdanor to work out that he will be backing David 
Miliband if he votes (andMartin Kettle, who interviewed him, thinks he will be 
voting 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/sep/01/tony-blair-a-journey-interview>
). However it is not clear whether Blair's silent endorsement will help or 
hinder Miliband's chances.

• Gordon Brown has not responded. The BBC have been doorstepping his home in 
Fife, but Brown has not responded. Some of his allies have been describing 
Blair's account as "one-sided", and Charlie Whelan has rejected Blair's claim 
that Bank of England independence was his idea, but generally the Brown machine 
seems to have concluded that silence is the most dignified response.

11.59am: And here's Blair on the supposed "deal" he struck with Brown when 
Brown decided not to challenge him for the leadership in 1994.

• Blair says he had an "understanding" with Brown in 1994 about Brown 
succeeding him.
 There was a proviso, however, which later became the subject of much debate 
and acrimony: just as I would help him succeed, so he would work properly with 
me, accepting that while leader, I would lead, so to speak. At that point, it 
didn't seem much to ask or hard to give, either way. Though there was never a 
deal in the sense that his standing down was contingent on my agreeing to help 
him come after me, nonetheless there was an understanding of mutual interest. 
Had you asked me then what I would do and what might happen, I would have said 
I would do two terms and then hand over. 
11.36am: Blair claims he had some kind of premonition of John Smith's death. 
He recalls being in Paris with Cherie the weekend before John Smith died. He 
woke up and told her:
 If John dies, I will be leader, not Gordon. And somehow, I think this will 
happen. I just think it will. <  David Cameron and Tony Blair in 2006. 
Photograph: Jonathan Buckmaster/PA Archive/Press Association Ima  p> 11.29am: 
Blair does not write a great deal about David Cameron, but he says this about 
his view of Cameron in 2007:  David Cameron was clever and people-friendly, and 
I thought he had some real steel to him, but he had not gone through the 
arduous but ultimately highly educative apprenticeship I had gone through in 
the 1980s and early 1990s. 
11.27am: In the final chapter Blair comes close to endorsing the Tories on 
domestic policy.

• Blair says the Tories will be "at their best" when they don't have to 
compromise with the Lib Dems in certain policy areas.
 The real challenge for the coalition will be simple: the Tories and the Lib 
Dems don't really agree. In many areas of domestic policy, the Tories will be 
at their best when they are allowed to get on with it – as with reforms in 
education. They will be at their worst when policy represents an uneasy 
compromise between the Old Labour instincts of the Lib Dems and the hard 
decisions the Tories will instinctively want to take. <  Princess Diana and 
Dodi Fayed in 1997. Photograph: Patrick Bar-Nice Matin/AP  p> 11.12am: There's 
a good line in the Diana chapter about Dodi Fayed.
• Blair warned Princess Diana about her relationship with Fayed, Blair reveals.
 He says that he bought the subject up when Diana visited him at Chequers in 
July 1997, a month before her death. Blair says he thought her relationship 
with Fayed was a "problem". She was not happy about that.

Blair says his objection to Fayed had nothing to do with his nationality or 
religion. He had never met him.
 For all I know he was a good son and a nice guy; so if you ask me, well, spit 
it out, what was wrong, I couldn't frankly say, but I felt uneasy and I knew 
some of her close friends – people who really loved her – felt the same way. 
10.59am: Ministerial memoirs are prized for their "revelations" but often the 
revelations in a book like Blair's aren't revelations at all. The most 
interesting sections of the book appear to be those that deal with his 
relationship with Brown. But we all knew that, towards the end, it was 
terrible. What's new is that Blair is talking about it candidly for the first 
time.

There are also non-revelatory revelations. For example, I thought Blair would 
criticise Donald Rumsfeld. But he hasn't (see 9.34am). That, in itself, is 
telling.

But the book does contain proper revelations too, and the most surprising 
relates to Blair's drinking. Towards the end, Blair started to worry about his 
drinking. This is what he says about his intake.
 By the standards of days gone by I was not even remotely a toper, and I 
couldn't do lunchtime drinking except on Christmas Day, but if you took the 
thing everyone lies about – units per week – I was definitely at the other 
limit. Stiff whisky or G&T before dinner, couple of glasses of wine or even 
half a bottle with it. So not excessive. I had a limit. But I was aware it had 
become a prop. 
Actually, there's another revelation in there. Blair drank G & T. Not 
particularly Labour, is it?
 <  Brown and Blair. Photograph: the Guardian  p> 10.42am: I've found the 
passage where Blair describes his relationship with Brown as being like that of 
lovers (see 10.19am).
When I heard it, I thought Andrew Marr was exaggerating. But he wasn't.

• Blair says he and Brown had such a close relationship they were "a bit like 
lovers".
 Our minds moved fast and at that point in sync. When others were present, we 
felt the pace and power diminish, until, a bit like lovers desperate to get to 
love-making but disturbed by old friends dropping round, we would try to bustle 
them out, steering them doorwards with a hearty slap on the back. 
In the same paragraph Blair uses a similar analogy when describing the 
conversations he had with Brown in 1994 about standing for the leadership after 
John Smith's death.
 The conversations were of a nature difficult, but they were not hostile, 
bitter or even unfriendly. We were like a couple who loved each other, arguing 
whose career should come first. 
10.31am: And here's Blair on Guantánamo Bay. He says it was a policy that was 
"both understandable and, done in a different way, justifiable". The detainees 
could not be tried in a court of law, but many of them would have posed a 
threat if released, he says. But the policy was implemented "in the most 
provocative way possible, as if we deliberately sought to alienate liberal 
opinion rather than to face up to the reality of the dilemma for our security".

10.27am: Here's what Blair says about George Bush.

• Bush was "a true idealist" and a man of "genuine integrity", Blair says.

He was, in a bizarre sense (bizarre because it appears counterintuitive), a 
true idealist.

 I was asked recently which of the political leaders I had met had most 
integrity: I listed George near the top. In what was a fairly liberal audience, 
some people were aghast. Others tittered, thinking I was joking. But I meant 
it. He had genuine integrity, and as much political courage as any leader I 
ever met ... 
Blair says Bush was an idealist because he was genuinely committed to 
extending democracy.

10.19am: Another mini-revelation: Blair kept a diary, intermittently, between 
1983 and 1985. I've been looking for the passage that Andrew Marr has 
mentioned, where Blair describes his relationship with Brown in the early days 
as being like that of lovers. I haven't found it yet, but I have turned up this 
passage.
 Rereading the [diary] entries now, it is so plain from the outset Gordon had 
a tendency to look for a way of reframing the question rather than acknowledge 
the need for the hard answer. He was brilliant, had far more knowledge of the 
party than me, with an acute and, even then, well-honed tactical brain; but it 
operated essentially within familiar and conventional parameters. 
10.09am: I'm looking for something else, but I've just found this.

• Blair tips Douglas Alexander as a future leader. "He had a great way with 
words, a really first-class intellect and could have been (and maybe still can 
be) an outstanding leader."

10.02am: And here's what Blair says about two of the other Labour leadership 
candidates. First, Ed Balls:
 I've had some harsh things to say about Ed Balls – I thought he behaved badly 
at points, and was wrong on policy – but I also thought he was really able, and 
a talent that any political party should be grateful to have. 
Andy Burnham gets one mention, in a list of "good promotions of younger 
people".

Diane Abbott isn't mentioned (although Blair did say in his Andrew Marr 
interview that any of the candidates would have his full support as leader – 
adding, with laughter, "even Diane").
 <  Photograph: Akira Suemori/AP  p> 9.55am: I've covered Blair's comments 
about David Miliband (see 9.13am). What does he say about Ed (left)?
Not a great deal. There are five references, and most of them are routine – Ed 
gets named alongside other Brown aides – but there is one that is complimentary 
about the man who might become next Labour leader.
 [Brown] played along with the policy part of "Pathways to the Future" [a 
review of UK strategic priorities] and intermittently he switched on, yet I 
knew that behind the scenes his folk – with the exception of Ed Miliband – were 
denigrating it as a vanity project and treating it with scorn. 
That's right. Blair did write "folk". The book has a colloquial tone 
throughout.

9.46am: And while we're on the subject of leftie hate figures, what does Blair 
say about Rupert Murdoch? That he liked him.
 I thought Rupert an enigma, and the more I got to know him, the more I 
thought so. In the end – and I'm aware of the shrieks of disbelief as I write 
this – I came to have a grudging respect and even liking for him. 
If you follow the Murdoch references in the index, you'll also find a 
mini-revelation.

• Murdoch intervened to stop John Reid standing against Gordon Brown in 2007, 
Blair suggests. Here's the quote:

 There was no contest for the leadership. John Reid could have stood, but the 
Murdoch papers, I fear at Rupert's instigation, just wrote him off, though John 
was obviously more in tune with Sun readers than Gordon. <  Photograph: Jim 
Watson/AFP/Getty Images  p> 9.34am: Who was to blame for Iraq going wrong? We 
could debate that for ages, but Donald Rumsfeld (left), the former US defence 
secretary, usually comes near the top of any list. He insisted on fighting the 
war with a relatively small force, which meant that the Americans did not have 
enough troops on the ground to keep the peace once the main conflict was over, 
and he binned – literally – the state department's carefully-prepared plans for 
reconstruction.
But you would not guess this from reading Blair's book. There are only four 
mentions of him in the index and the only mildly critical comment is one about 
the "cock-up" he made when he said the US could go to war without Britain.

9.26am: Charlie Whelan, Brown's former spin doctor, has responded to the book 
on Twitter <http://twitter.com/charliewhelan/statuses/22686740996>.
 <  p>Brr Brr phone keeps ringing. All about some book. Latest call from hack 
says Blair claiming it was his idea to make Bank independent! LOL
Blair does indeed claim this. In the book, he says he had decided independence 
was a good idea. "Gordon had come to the same conclusion, and so when I 
suggested it he readily agreed."

In a separate Twitter post he says anyone looking for a good book should try 
Harold Larwood by Duncan Hamilton, which he says is a must for cricket fans.

9.20am: You will have noticed by now that there's strong strain of "I told you 
so" in the book. Blair acknowledges this himself.
 There's nothing worse than, "Oh, if only he had listened to me" rubbish, and 
so, after trying valiantly not to fall into self-justifying mode – a bane of 
political memoirs, I fear – it's a pity I have. 
9.13am: This is from the passage relating to 2007.

• Blair told David Miliband that he could beat Brown if he stood against him, 
Blair reveals. He says Miliband asked his advice about a leadership challenge 
in May 2007. "I think you might win, not obviously, but very possibly," Blair 
replied.

• Blair believes Miliband now has "clear leadership qualities". Blair says 
that Miliband was "fundamentally uncertain" in 2007 about whether he wanted the 
top job. But Blair also says: "Two years later he would be a different calibre 
of politician, with clear leadership qualities."

Blair says "two years later". But we're reading this more than three years 
later. Is that sloppy editing? Or does it mean that Blair thought Miliband 
should replace Brown in 2009, before the general election?

More on David Miliband:

• Blair says he advised Miliband in 2007 to prepare for a leadership contest.
 I didn't blame him at all [for not standing], but I did say he should be 
prepared in case the issue arose again, sooner than we might think. 
• Blair says he knew that a Brown premiership would be "a mess".
 I thought by then [early 2007] that a) it was going to be a mess, not quite 
New Labour, not quite not; and b) as a result, Gordon's self-evident personal 
drawbacks would very quickly mean he was under pretty brutal attack for which 
he was not psychologically wired. 
9.01am: My colleague Polly Curtis has just tweeted this 
<http://twitter.com/pollycurtis/status/22687955990>:
 <  p>Blair's book has more pics of him with clinton than with Brown or Cherie 
8.57am: Here are two of the key passages about Gordon Brown:

• Blair says he felt "sorry" for Labour as Brown prepared to replace him.
 In a curious way, I felt sorry for the party and I more or less remained like 
that up to the point of departure. By then, I had come to the clear and settled 
view that unless Gordon spelt out whether he was New Labour or something 
different - and defined the something different - it was going to be a disaster.
• Brown was "strange", Blair says.
 I could see Gordon's enormous ability, extraordinary grasp and unyielding 
energy, and realised they were all big qualities in a leader. Unfortunately, 
what I had also come to realise was that those qualities needed to be combined 
with a sure political instinct in order to be fully effective. And that 
instinct comes from knowing what you truly believe, not vaguely or at a high 
level of generality or "values", but practical, on the ground, everyday-life 
conviction. And at this utterly crucial epicentre of political destiny, I 
discovered there was a lacuna – not the wrong instinct, but no instinct at the 
human, gut level. Political calculation, yes. Political feelings, no. 
Analytical intelligence, absolutely. Emotional intelligence, zero. Gordon is a 
strange guy. But by the end I had come to see that this was not the fundamental 
problem. (He had and has a sort of endearing charm in the strangeness.) The 
fundamental problem was the he simply did not understand the appeal of New 
Labour, in anything other than a polling, "strategy", election-winning sort of 
way. 
This seems to be remarkably harsh. Blair comes close to saying that Brown 
doesn't believe in anything, which is one of the most damning remarks you can 
make about a politician.

It's not clear yet whether Brown's allies are going to respond to any of this 
today. So far, we don't seem to have heard a peep from them.

8.36am: Bloomberg's Rob Hutton was on the Today programme this morning. He 
said that he had seen a copy of the book – he did not say where he got it – and 
he's filed various stories this morning, including one saying that Blair in the 
book saysBritain "elected a Tory version of New Labour" in May this year 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-08-31/blair-backs-cameron-program-slams-strange-brown-for-failings-in-memoir.html>
.

Curiously, the wording seems to be slightly different in the version they have 
handed out this morning. This is what Blair says:
 What the public ended up doing, in that remarkable way they have, is electing 
the government they wanted. They were unsure of the Tories, so they put a 
strong Lib Dem showing alongside and urged them to get together. They elected 
what they want to be a Tory version of a centrist government (whether they get 
that is another matter!) 
I've only glanced at the book so far, but I can already see that Blair is fond 
of using the exclamation mark. Perhaps that's why some colleagues who have 
studied the text more closely have been sniffy about his prose. On the Today 
programme this morning Justin Webb said the press reports suggested Blair 
"can't write for toffee".
 <  Index entries from Tony Blair's A Journey about Gordon Brown. Photograph: 
Andrew Sparrow/guardian.co.uk  p> 8.28am: I'm back from Random House, with the 
718-page copy of A Journey on my desk. Where to start? You look in the index, 
of course. Gordon Brown's entry is huge. You can get a flavour of what it's 
like from some of the entries (above).
7.30am: Tony Blair's long-awaited autobiography, A Journey, is being released 
at 8am. I'll be in the queue at the Random House HQ on Vauxhall Bridge Road in 
London waiting to pick up my copy. But we've already got a pretty good idea 
what's in it.

The publishers released some lengthy extracts to the media yesterday (but with 
a stipulation that only a few hundred words could be quoted in full). They're 
now available in full on thetonyblairjourney 
<http://www.tonyblairjourney.co.uk/extracts> website. You can read the 
introduction and passages on Northern Ireland, on reform, on Gordon Brown and 
on Iraq.

Blair has also given an interview to the Guardian's Martin Kettle and Martin 
reports that Blair "came to the view that Gordon Brown would be a disaster as 
prime minister and that Labour could not win the 2010 general election".The 
Guardian's splash story is here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/aug/31/tony-blair-gordon-brown-disaster>
, theinterview is here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/sep/01/tony-blair-a-journey-interview>
, and the Guardian'sfull coverage of the Blair book today is here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/tonyblair>.

The BBC has had an interview too. Andrew Marr conducted it and it's already in 
the can. It is not being broadcast in full until 7pm tonight, but the BBC has 
already started broadcasting a few clips and you can read some excerptson the 
BBC's website <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-11139978>.

Finally, the Daily Telegraph has seen a foreign language copy of the full 
book. The paper says it reveals thatGordon Brown in effect blackmailed Blair 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/politics/tony-blair/7974336/Tony-Blair-Gordon-Brown-tried-to-blackmail-me.html>
 when Blair was prime minister by threatening to trigger a Labour inquiry into 
the cash-for-honours allegations if Blair did not drop his plans for pension 
reform. (Blair refused, and there was a Labour party inquiry.) The Telegraph 
also says that Blair writes about his growing reliance on alcohol.

I'm just about to start my own journey to Vauxhall Bridge Road and as soon as 
I get hold of my copy of the book I'll start blogging the rest of the 
highlights. I'll be providing full coverage of the book, and of reaction to it, 
throughout the day and I'll still be here to cover the Marr interview as it is 
goes out tonight.
 