
It was more than a publishing event. The launch of Tony Blair's memoirs, A 
Journey, became the text through which a whole host of people could examine a 
whole host of subjects. Like a sacred text, with added gush,A Journey swiftly 
became all things to all people. Here's what it tells us about:

'Excessive' drinking (Blair admitted to the occasional half bottle of wine a 
night)

"One theory I heard was that this shows Blair has been spending too much time 
in America, where they tend to be a bit more puritanical about these things."

Andrew Sparrow, Guardian blog

Blair Inc

"It's not about score-settling or making money. It's not about 
self-vindication. He's using his memoirs to build Blair Inc and he has created 
an extraordinary business model."

Fraser Nelson, Coffee House blog

How the Tories are right 

"Tony Blair agrees, as we do, that public spending needs to be brought under 
control. He recognises that if the deficit remains high, that saps confidence 
and people think there are higher taxes round the corner. He has endorsed our 
view that we need to take action now to tackle the deficit and get the economy 
going. He is backing our view and coming out against his successor."

Mark Hoban, Conservative Treasurer

The Labour Leadership campaign

"If I was David Miliband, I would be asking Tony Blair for a period of 
silence. I thinkTony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> is 
101% behind David Miliband because he sees David Miliband as the continuation."

Leadership contender Diane Abbott

The revival of the word nicompoop

"Freedom of Information. Three harmless words. I look at those words as I 
write them and feel like shaking my head till it drops off my shoulders. You 
idiot. You naive, foolish, irresponsible nincompoop. There is really no 
description of stupidity, no matter how vivid, that is adequate. I quake at the 
imbecility of it."

Tony Blair, A Journey

Credit for the Bank of England's independence

"Brr Brr phone keeps ringing. All about some book. Latest call from hack says 
Blair claiming it was his idea to make Bank independent! LOL"

Ex-Gordon Brown spin-doctor Charlie Whelan
 