
Tony Blair's autobiography has jumped up the Amazon bestseller chart since it 
wasannounced yesterday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/aug/16/tony-blair-british-legion-donation>
 that all proceeds from the book will be given to the Royal British Legion.

The charity dismissed suggestions that it may miss out 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/politics/tony-blair/7949199/Questions-over-size-of-Tony-Blairs-book-royalty-donation-to-Royal-British-Legion.html>
 on the advance paid to Blair, reported to be £4.6m, if the former prime 
minister fails to sell enough copies of A Journey.

"There is absolutely no doubt about it whatsoever," said a spokesman for the 
Legion. "It is categorically part of the deal that has been done, we are 
getting the advance and any royalties that come on top of that."
 The cover of Tony Blair's book A Journey. Photograph: John Swannell 
The book was hovering below 50th place in Amazon.co.uk's bestseller chart at 
the weekend but by this morning it had moved into seventh spot with two weeks 
to go before publication, sitting ahead of already published bestselling titles 
by authors including Dan Brown, Stephenie Meyer and David Nicholls.

Waterstone's said it had also seen a significant increase in pre-orders for 
the book, up almost 400% since it announced last Thursday that Blair would be 
signing copies at its Piccadilly branch on 8 September.

"We have had a huge amount of interest," said Jon Howells, a spokesman for the 
chain. "It's the first memoirs of a prime minister since John Major, which was 
over 10 years ago. These books are important books: they come along very rarely 
and are by their very nature controversial."

It was announced yesterday that Blair is to donate the proceeds from the 
memoir to the Legion's Battle Back Challenge centre for injured troops 
returning from the frontline.

Chris Simpkins, the director general of the armed forces charity, said he was 
delighted to accept the "very generous" offer – the largest in the 
organisation's history. But some families who have lost loved ones in the 
conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan greeted the move with suspicion.

Rose Gentle, an anti-Iraq war campaigner whose 19-year-old son, Fusilier 
Gordon Campbell Gentle, was killed in Basra in 2004, said she was pleased 
injured troops would benefit but said it would not change the way she felt 
about Blair.

"I have spoken to other parents and everyone is agreed that this doesn't make 
any difference. It is OK doing this now, but it was decisions Blair made when 
he was prime minister that got us into this situation. I still hold him 
responsible for the death of my son."

It is understood that Blair has signed over all rights connected with the book 
in perpetuity – including any money that may be made in subsequent television 
or film deals. A source with knowledge of the agreement said: "It is 
everything. There is no wriggle room whatsoever."

Industry insiders say Blair may struggle to sell enough books to earn back the 
£4.6m advance, but publishers say he will not be asked to return the money. The 
publisher John Blake estimated thatA Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/a-journey> would have to sell more than a 
million copies to break even, "and very few books do sell a million – I would 
be amazed if they ever earned the advance back."

But he added: "Publishers just don't ask for advances back – they're our risk, 
something we have to take on the chin if a book doesn't work."

Success or failure will depend to a large extent on how well the book does in 
the US market. Bestsellers there can easily top a million copies – Sarah 
Palin's memoir, Going Rogue, sold 300,000 copies in its first day on sale; Bill 
Clinton's My Life sold 400,000 in its first 24 hours. Margaret Thatcher's The 
Path to Power, seen as hugely successful in the UK, has sold around half a 
million hardbacks to date.
 