 On the way ... the cover of The Journey 
Tony Blair's memoirs, signed for an estimated £5m almost three years ago 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/oct/26/uk.books>, will be published in 
September, Random House announced today, promising a "frank, open and 
revealing" account of the former prime minister's life.

In a statement issued by the publisher, Blair said he had "really enjoyed" 
writing the book. "I have tried to write a book which describes the human as 
much as the political dimensions of life as prime minister," he said. "Though 
necessarily retrospective, it is an attempt to inform and shape current and 
future thinking as much as an historical account of the past. Most of all I 
want readers to have as much pleasure reading it as I had writing it." Blair 
will promote his memoirs with a national and international tour on its release 
in September, four months after the expected date of the next general election 
in May.

The autobiography, to be called Tony Blair: The Journey, will be published by 
Random House Group imprint Hutchinson, priced at £25, with an audiobook read by 
Blair himself, and an ebook edition, out at the same time, along with American 
and Canadian editions from Knopf and Knopf Canada.

Gail Rebuck, who heads up Random House and who is also married to Blair's 
former pollster Lord Gould, said the book would "break new ground in prime 
ministerial memoirs just as Blair himself broke the mould of British politics". 
She called the book "frank, open [and] revealing", and said it was "written in 
an intimate and accessible style". "As an account of the nature and uses of 
power, it will have a readership that extends well beyond politics, to all 
those who want to understand the challenge of leadership in today's world," she 
added.

Blair refused to disclose the advance he received from Random House when he 
signed a deal with the publisher for the memoirs in 2007, but publishing 
experts said at the time that it could be worth as much as £5m.

The former prime minister is also set for significant royalty earnings: 
Margaret Thatcher's memoir The Path to Power sold an estimated 500,000 copies 
in hardback when it was published in 1995, according to the Bookseller, while 
John Major's autobiography sold over 200,000 hardbacks for an advance of around 
£1m. Waterstone's said it expected strong sales for the memoirs. "This is a 
book that people have been anticipating since the momentTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> left office, and should be the 
bestselling political memoir since Margaret Thatcher's," said politics buyer 
Andrew Lake. "It's fascinating that 2010 will be bookended by two controversial 
political books, one about the latter years of the Government [Observer writer 
Andrew Rawnsley's The End of the Party], and one by the man that delivered New 
Labour to the country in the 1990s."

Whether the timing is right for Blair's autobiography remains to be seen, 
however. According to a select committee report into government memoirs in 
2006, "it is in the financial interest of memoir writers to get their accounts 
published as soon as possible, and to ensure that they are titillating". The 
select committee said it was told by Sir Simon Jenkins "that he could remember 
very well a certain chancellor of the exchequer, who shall be nameless, 
inquiring as to what his memoirs might be worth and the answer was: 'A quarter 
of a million tomorrow, £100,000 next week, £10,000 two months from now. How 
fast can you write them?' It was as simple as that - because there were going 
to be no sales two months from then. It is show business."
 