
'I was sure God would want peace'
 Ian Paisley. Photograph: Bruno Vincent 
Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> advised Ian 
Paisley to "let God guide him" in the final stages of the Northern Ireland 
peace negotiations which led to the historic power-sharing agreement between 
the Democratic Unionists and Sinn Féin in 2007.

As prime minister, Blair was wary of talking about his Christian faith on the 
advice of Alastair Campbell, who famously said: "We don't do God."

But in his chapter on Northern Ireland Blair writes that he held long 
discussions about faith with Paisley, who co-founded the DUP and led it until 
2008.

Blair writes that his meetings with Paisley in his Downing Street "den" dealt 
with Northern Ireland "at a spiritual rather than a temporal level". At one 
point Paisley gave him a prayer book for his youngest child, Leo. Of one such 
meeting, he writes: "Once, near the end, he asked me whether I thought God 
wanted him to make the deal that would seal the peace process. I wanted to say 
yes, but I hesitated; though I was sure God would want peace, God is not a 
negotiator. I felt it would be wrong, manipulative, to say yes, and so I 
couldn't answer that question, that only he could and I hoped he would let God 
guide him."

Blair also writes of strong relationships with Sinn Féin leaders Gerry Adams 
and Martin McGuinness, even admitting he developed a soft spot for them. "They 
were an extraordinary couple," he said of the two men, who have been at the 
highest levels of republican movement since the early 1970s. "Over time I came 
to like both greatly, probably more than I should have, if truth be told … They 
were supreme masters of the distinction between tactics and strategy. They knew 
the destination and they were determined to bring their followers with them, or 
at least the vast bulk of them."

A large part of the British intelligence community believes there is no 
distinction between the leadership of Sinn Féin and the IRA, Blair writes. But 
he says the relationship was more complex in a telling analogy: "I came to the 
view that the SF/IRA relationship was a bit like that of the Labour leadership 
and the Labour party NEC [national executive committee]: yes the leadership is 
powerful, yes it usually gets its way, but not always and rarely without a lot 
of persuasion and negotiation."

'Except on law and order, I'm by instinct a liberal'
 John Maynard Keynes, whose principles Blair praised. 
The giants of liberal thinking are praised by Tony Blair. He offers support 
for their philosophy in every area but one.

"Except on law and order I am by instinct a liberal," he writes, praising 
Lloyd George, Keynes, Beveridge and Roy Jenkins. He says his liberalism 
explains why New Labour redefined the role of the state to give individuals 
greater control over their lives. "It seemed inconceivable to me that any 
modern idea of the state could be other than as an enabler," he writes.

But, drawing the line at law and order, he strongly defends his "respect" 
agenda and plans for identity cards. He even comes close to understanding the 
way in which the IRA kneecapped drug dealers and beat up rapists. "I could tell 
that for the first time he might warm to republicans," Blair writes of a 
constituent's reaction when he outlined the IRA's approach to dealing with 
antisocial behaviour.

The former prime minister says it was important to introduce special laws to 
deal with antisocial behaviour because the individual crimes were too small to 
warrant major police effort. But he says people "reasonably" objected to the 
new laws because "they did involve short-cutting traditional procedures".

Blair dismisses objections to ID cards on civil liberties grounds as "absurd". 
The cards were necessary; they would help deal with illegal immigration and aid 
transactions that were the "warp and woof" of life. "I could envisage that it 
might take time. The civil liberties argument I thought a little absurd – many 
well-functioning democracies have identity cards and the information stored [on 
them] is less than most supermarkets have."

'We said, forget structures. That was bunkum'
 Early New Labour approach to education focused on literacy and numeracy. 
Photograph: Graham Turner 
New Labour's approach to reforming Britain's public services was "bunkum" in 
its early stages in government, according to Tony Blair.

In a searing description of mistakes made in the early years, the former prime 
minister writes that his government lost ground by believing initially the key 
was "standards not structures".

He refers to the early approach to education, which focused on raising 
standards in literacy and numeracy. In later years, Labour did focus on 
structures – such as setting up academy schools – as the best way of raising 
standards.

Blair writes of his earlier approach: "We were saying, forget about complex, 
institutional structural reforms; what counts is what works, and by that we 
meant outputs.

"This was fine as a piece of rhetoric; and positively beneficial as a piece of 
politics. Unfortunately, as I began to realise when experience started to shape 
our thinking, it was a bunkum as a piece of policy. The whole point is that 
structures beget standards. How service is configured affects outcomes."

One of the greatest battles was over tuition fees. "It aroused unbelievably 
tenacious dissent," he says of the fees, which he accepted after it became 
clear British universities were losing out to those in the US. "Those who paid 
top dollar got the best," he writes. "Simple as that."
 