
The publication of Tony Blair's memoirs has caused anger and resentment, with 
the former prime minister accused of "self pity" and of making a "mockery" of 
his own government.

His claim to have shed many tears over the deaths of British soldiers in Iraq 
has been particularly badly received, with the father of one dead serviceman 
accusing him of making "a cynical attempt to sanitise his legacy".

Union chiefs went on the attack over the book within hours of its going on 
sale.

Bob Crow, general secretary of the Rail, Maritime and Transport union, said: 
"This book is the predictable wallowing in self pity and self promotion of a
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader who squandered a 
golden opportunity to tackle the inequalities in our society.

"Blair could have taken the side of millions of working people against the 
greed and corruption of the bankers and speculators. Instead, he sided with the 
rich, and his legacy will always be of a warmonger whose instincts are to 
follow the trail of cash."

Tony Woodley, joint leader of the Unite union, said: "No matter what Tony Blair
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> says in his book, Britain 
lost faith in New Labour. The Iraq war is a stain on this nation, and New 
Labour pandered to the casino capitalists in the city."

Reg Keys, whose son, Tom, was killed in Iraq, said: "The tears he claims to 
have shed are nothing like the tears I and my wife have shed for our son. They 
are nothing like the tears that tens of thousands of Iraqis have shed for their 
loved ones. They don't even come close to it. They seem to me like crocodile 
tears. It is a cynical attempt to sanitise his legacy."

One of Blair's biggest regrets is bringing in the Freedom of Information Act, 
designed to make public bodies more transparent – because of its being used not 
by "the people" but by journalists who use it as a "weapon", he says.

Heather Brooke, the FOI campaigner who pressed for MPs' expenses to be made 
public, said today: "Freedom of information is the single thing that does the 
most to ensure governments are working efficiently for the majority of the 
people and not a privileged few. It is the friend of those politicians who work 
diligently for their constituents and with an eye for value for money, and the 
enemy of those who go into politics to accrue their own power, privilege and 
wealth.

"They say power corrupts, which I guess must be why one of Labour's greatest 
achievements – bringing in the FOI law – is seen by its former leader as a 
failure."

On the issue of hunting, other campaigners said Blair's "change of heart" over 
the ban on hunting with dogs – prompted while on a holiday in Tuscany – ignored 
volumes of evidence from his own government inquiry.

John Cooper QC, chairman of the League Against Cruel Sports, described Blair's 
admission as remarkable, adding: "It is alarming in the extreme that the prime 
minister should respond to the proper passage of an Act through parliament by 
not encouraging its enforcement. He is sailing perilously close to perverting 
the course of justice."

Douglas Batchelor, the league's chief executive, said: "Thankfully the police 
ignored any instruction to ignore the law, and there's an average of one 
conviction every fortnight. People hunting illegally are being brought to 
justice, and one of the biggest successes of this Act is that it makes 
criminals of those hunters who break the law. The sad thing is that Blair's 
admission that he tried to sabotage the legislation will further denigrate the 
public's view of politicians.

"Quite what the blood sports lobby, which spent years printing car stickers 
saying 'Bollocks to Blair', will make of this remains, to be seen."
 