
The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Saturday April 7 2007

Alejandro Jodorowsky <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alejandro-jodorowsky>
, originally described below as "the Argentinian-Jewish-Mexican-French 
film-maker", is in fact from Chile and not Argentina. The rest is accurate. He 
has at different times taken Mexican and French citizenship. This has now been 
corrected.




One of my favourite photographs of all time shows four directors at the Cannes 
Film Festival in 1971, all dolled up in their wildest afghan-and-ascot, 
hairy-hippy finery, and all of them on the cusp of what should have been 
majestic, transformative, transgressive careers in cinema that by and large 
never came to fruition. It was not to be - if only it had been.

Three of them made masterpieces of varying kinds: Kenneth Anger radicalised 
mainstream cinema from his burrow in the avant garde underground; Dennis Hopper 
gave great service in the form of Easy Rider and the underrated The Last Movie, 
and Donald Cammell's Performance is one of the four or five most challenging 
and audacious movies ever made in Britain.

The fourth is the Chilean-Jewish-Mexican-French 
visionary-film-maker-comic-book artist-psychotherapist Alejandro Jodorowsky, 
the one who promised the most, but found himself battered and broken by many of 
his film-making experiences. And although he kept making films, he was often 
stymied by his producers and by his own vaulting creative ambitions. That said, 
his work from the late 60s and early 70s, now finally available after three 
decades of disputes with the films' present owner, the Beatles' notorious 
manager Allen Klein, make one wish that someone had given him a hands off, 
no-cash-limit deal like the one Terrence Malick once had with Paramount.

The evidence of El Topo, The Holy Mountain and Fando Y Lis suggests that we 
have lost three decades of a truly brilliant and demented genius - and really, 
that's the only kind of genius worth knowing.

If only he'd been able to consummate his freeform adaptation of Frank 
Herbert's Dune, which was scheduled for production in 1975, but never came 
together. His insanely great cast was supposed to include (deep breath...) 
Orson Welles, Salvador Dali, Mick Jagger, Alain Delon, Geraldine Chaplin with a 
screenplay by Dan O'Bannon and sets by HR Giger. People involved with the 
aborted production later claimed that many of the movie's set-designs and other 
ideas later ended up in Star Wars, and certainly the presence of Giger and 
O'Bannon in the credits of Alien suggest that a lot of Dune's creative visual 
excess was rechannelled by Ridley Scott. But each lacks the minatory excesses 
that made El Topo such a cult smash as the 1970s kicked in.

In the years since then, Jodorowsky has made a movie or two, none a patch on 
his early work, and when he's not doing oddball things like presiding over the 
secular wedding of loyal fan Marilyn Manson, he pours his creativity into comic 
books that require no budgets and can be ruined by no producer. His creative 
spirit, even at 78, remains undimmed but, oh, I wish they'd could have let him 
make a film a year for that whole period. The world would be a wiser, wilder 
place indeed.
 