
Losing your chief executive is bad enough. But for Toshiba, which has just 
admitted to a billion-dollar inflation of its profits since 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/21/toshiba-boss-quits-hisao-tanaka-accounting-scandal>
, the news could get worse. In the wake of the resignation of Hisao Tanaka last 
week, it has restated historical profits and as a result may have to close or 
sell its PC business, where sales have been sagging over the past five years, 
and which was one source of the overstatement.

The losses there could have been piling up for some time. And few would be 
surprised by Toshiba’s likely exit from PCs, which have become a shrinking 
business increasingly dominated by a handful of players that extract economies 
of scale – and all the available profits. “The PC market in recent quarters has 
been a bloodbath,” says Tim Coulling, senior analyst at tech consultancy 
Canalys. “Typical mainstream PC makers expect low single-digit percent 
operating margins. It’s razor-thin. If you get to the low-cost machines, then 
they’re scrabbling for dollars on products.”

The squeeze on margins is so fierce that even Lenovo, the world’s largest PC 
maker, tried to boost profits by bundling a software program called Superfish 
on some of its PCs. It said the aim was“to improve the [user’s] shopping 
experience” <http://news.lenovo.com/article_display.cfm?article_id=1929>. 
Instead, itexposed users to a security risk – potentially revealing bank 
transactions, for instance – 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/19/lenovo-accused-compromising-user-security-installing-adware-pcs-superfish>
, and had to uninstall it. It is whispered among some analysts that only the 
preinstallation of third-party antivirus programs – which try to get users to 
sign up to subscriptions – keeps some PC makers afloat at all, owing to the 
fees they receive from antivirus software firms.

It was the PC business that triggered the current turmoil at the Japanese 
giant, after an internal auditor asked in late January to look at the accounts 
for the company’s laptop business. That eventually concluded with an 
examination by an external panel, whose 294-page report noted “inappropriate 
accounting” in various business segments, including those “relating to 
component transactions” in the PC business.

In a statement on 21 July 
<http://www.toshiba.co.jp/about/ir/en/news/20150720_1.pdf> it said that 111bn 
yen (£580m) of assets in the PC business in the past six financial years were 
“under consideration” for re-evaluation. That could affect its financial 
results, which will be finalised by 31 August. But even in its most recent 
quarterly report, before any restatement, Toshiba said that its PC business 
recorded restructuring costs of 46bn yen in the previous three quarters, and 
that otherwise it “would have recorded positive operating income over three 
consecutive quarters”. Coulling remarks that Toshiba’s traditional PC market 
share has been “on the slide for a number of years”.

The truth may be that Toshiba’s PC business was far from profitable. Even 
thoughToshiba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toshiba> is the world’s 
seventh- largest PC maker, shipping about 22m computers in 2014 according to 
analysis company IDC, it is struggling, along with a dwindling group of others 
outside the top six manufacturers – Lenovo, HP, Dell, Asus, Acer and Apple – to 
eke a profit from a sector that has deflated dramatically.

The worldwide PC market has fallen back so far from its peak in 2011, when 
361m units were sold, that analysts now doubt it will pass 300m units this 
year. That is despite the launch this Wednesday of the new version of 
Microsoft’s Windows, which has traditionally increased PC sales.

But whereas 20 years ago Windows 95 was launched amid midnight store openings, 
a Rolling Stones-themed ad blitz and a Bill Gates-led roadshow, this time it 
will happen silently. Millions of PCs will be updated for free via the 
internet. Neither analysts nor the chipmaker Intel, which provides the 
essential chips for PCs, expects a significant rise in sales.

The PC business is shrinking because the market is saturated, and has moved to 
a replacement phase where sales come only from switching old PCs with new 
models. With about 1.5bn PCs in use around the world, split roughly 
half-and-half between businesses and consumers, people now tend to spend money 
on smartphones or tablets, and delay replacing their PC.

As sales have dropped, the big six have been increasing dominance through 
using their scale to buy components more cheaply and dominate sales to 
retailers and businesses. Since 2011, their share of the PC market has grown 
from 60% to 71%. More importantly, the “others” in the business have seen the 
total number of PCs they ship more than halve, from 36m per quarter in mid-2011 
to 17.4m in the quarter from April to June. And as that tide goes out, the 
minnows are increasingly exposed. As Coulling points out, they are being 
squeezed for profit because the success of Windows has brought with it the 
commoditisation of PCs, and constantly falling prices. Since 2010 the world 
average selling price for a PC from the big five Windows PC makers – excluding 
Apple – has dropped from $600 to $500, and dragged profits down with it. 
Companies and consumers are generally unwilling to splash out $1,000 or more on 
ultrathin laptops, touchscreen models, or devices that can double up as PCs or 
tablets, which yield more profit.

The odd one out is Apple, which commands premium prices for its computers – 
averaging over $1,200 (£775) for more than a decade – and yet has seen its 
market share rise steadily for 10 years, even while the rest of the market has 
commoditised. Why? “Because it’s not just a hardware player. They make the 
hardware and have their own operating system, so you either buy a Mac or 
don’t,” says Coulling. Some analysts estimate Apple’s operating margin on its 
Macs at more than 15% – which suggests it grabs more than half of all the 
profits in the whole PC industry.

The pressure on the rest has told in different ways. Dell went private in 
September 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/12/michael-dell-buys-back-pc-company-founded>
 as it tried to focus more on software and services and play down its PC 
business, which is still the world’s third largest. Japan’s Sonywithdrew from 
PCs altogether in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/06/sony-vaio-laptop-losses-bravia-tv>
, unable to make its well-regarded but expensive Vaio line profitable amid 
falling sales. Samsung withdrew from Europe last autumn, and now concentrates 
on South Korea, the US, Brazil and China, while Fujitsu concentrates on Japan 
and Germany.

Loren Loverde, senior PC analyst at IDC, says that beyond Samsung and Fujitsu, 
the two companies ranking below Toshiba, “most vendors are specialised in a few 
countries, or specific vertical [market], and volume is more volatile. They 
certainly feel the pressure from the large players.”

With the dollar strong, and the market still falling, Toshiba’s exit might 
only be a matter of time. But that still leaves the others to compete for its 
tiny share. So it looks bleak for the “others”? “Yes,” says Canalys’s Coulling. 
“That’s a fairly widely held view within the industry.”
 