
Japanese group Toshiba has confirmed that it is in the final stages of 
securing a majority stake in a British nuclear power consortium, bringing a 
further boost to the UK's ambitious nuclear programme.

Toshiba's chief executive, Hisao Tanaka, said an agreement to take a 
controlling shareholding in the NuGen consortium could be in place as early as 
January. NuGen is a joint venture between Spanish power company Iberdrola and 
French utility firm GDF Suez that is developing a plant at Sellafield in 
Cumbria, where the owners plan to build 3.6 gigawatts of nuclear capacity on a 
disused reactor site.

Confirming that Toshiba will also buy part of GDF Suez's 50% stake when it 
acquires Iberdrola's 50% shareholding, Tanaka said: "We want a majority to move 
forward. So we would want to take some of GDF's share, but have them remain as 
an operator." He added that securing a long-awaited majority holding in the 
NuGen consortium would guarantee a $14bn (£8.5bn) deal for Toshiba's 
Westinghouse unit to supply three reactors for the project.

Toshiba is keen to kickstart an ambitious reactor building programme that 
stalled after countries around the world –led by Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/31/hinkley-point-german-greens-no-nuclear-policy>
 – froze nuclear expansion plans and tightened regulations in the wake of 
Japan's 2011 disaster at Fukushima.

Its domestic rival, Hitachi, has bought the Horizon project which intends to 
build two nuclear power stations, in Anglesey and Gloucestershire.

Britain is one of the few countries pressing ahead with nuclear plans in spite 
of the safety fears raised by Fukushima. The government's determination to make 
nuclear a central part of its energy strategy was confirmed two months ago when 
ministers approved a deal with France's EDF Energy to build the £16bn Hinkley 
Point nuclear power plant in Somerset. Analysts at Liberum Capital said state 
guarantees on electricity prices offered to EDF in order to secure the deal 
could prove to be "economically insane". The European Union has also weighed 
into the nuclear subsidy debate bylaunching an investigation into whether the 
Hinkley deal broke state aid rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/18/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-subsidy-european-commission>
.

Iberdrola, which is selling assets to reduce debt, said this week that it has 
agreed to sell its 50% in NuGen to Toshiba for £85m, subject to final 
approvals, terms and conditions.

Tanaka said a majority stake was necessary to make progress on the project, 
where delays have frustrated the UK government, sources say, as it pushes 
through its own ambitious nuclear programme to replace new reactors. A 
controlling stake would allow Westinghouse, 87%-owned by Toshiba, to supply 
three of its AP1000 reactors for the site. After building the reactors, Toshiba 
would reduce its stake, Tanaka said.

"We are thinking about an exit, but we haven't decided anything yet," he said. 
"We will reduce our majority stake over time. We are a plant provider, not a 
nuclear power provider."
 