
Like all Chileans, Crabby spoke in a singsong way, her voice vibrating in her 
nose. She laughed at everything, even celebrity deaths, and made cruel jokes. 
She drank red wine until she collapsed in snores, only to wake up barefoot 
because someone had stolen her shoes. She ate empanadas and sea urchin tongues 
in green sauce seasoned with fresh, extra-hot chili. Whenever the cops beat a 
“political agitator” to death, she turned a blind eye, pretending not to 
notice. Actually she wasn’t Chilean but Lithuanian.


She landed in Valparaíso when she was two, pulled along by her mother, a fat 
redhead who spoke only Yiddish, and her father a tall (almost seven-foot), 
skinny fellow as light on his feet as a bird. His profession was the most 
pedestrian imaginable: callus remover. Using prayer, he made the calluses on 
people’s feet fall off. Since his name was Abraham and his wife’s name was 
Sarah, he dreamed—for too many years—of having a son he could name Isaac, which 
in Hebrew means, “he laughs.” After anguished efforts, ten months of gestation, 
anemia, forceps, a cesarean, a strangling umbilical chord, Sarah finally gave 
birth to a daughter. Abraham stubbornly insisted on naming her Isaac, but very 
early in life, even before she began to walk, the girl would burst into an 
angry fit of wailing the instant she heard that persistent “Isaac.” Only a 
teaspoon of honey would calm her down.


Alejandro Jodorowsky: 'I am not mad. I am trying to heal my soul'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/23/alejandro-jodorowsky-film-danza-realidad>
Intelligent, she could read by the age of four. She rejected the Ladino 
translation of the Torah, so her first book was Paul Féval’s The Hunchback. She 
so adored the character Henri de Lagardère that she began to walk hunched over, 
her legs spread, the tips of her shoes pointing in opposite directions, and her 
arms bent at right angles. No one bothered to correct her posture. The only 
thing they did manage to do was nickname her “Crabby.” She tossed out “Isaac,” 
which would have destined her to suffering the world’s laughter, and instead 
identified with her nickname, accepting the idea of being an aggressive crab 
separated from others by a hard shell.


By the time she was eleven, she’d broken a dozen classmates’ noses, so no 
school would accept her. Between his murderous chanting away of calluses and 
his davening in the synagogue, Abraham had no time to worry over his daughter’s 
education. Crabby’s school was the street. She learned a series of professions, 
among others: re-selling cheap watches for three times their original price 
under the pretext that they were stolen, painting the hooves of the horses used 
by funeral parlors black, washing and combing the dogs of high-class 
prostitutes, and manufacturing “smuggled whiskey” out of tea, crude sugar, and 
drugstore alcohol. When she was thirteen, she lost her father and menstruated 
for the first time. She mounted his unvarnished wood coffin as if it were a 
horse and rode along, staining it red. Sarah, seconded by her instantaneous new 
husband, kicked her out of the house.


I am a wound awaiting the gaze of another in order to heal. A frog who will 
never turn into a princess.

Crabby, her face transformed into a bitter mask, set out on a tour of Chile, a 
country as long, thin, and foreign as her father. She ended up in the north, in 
Iquique, a bone-dry port, where the workers in the nitrate and copper mines 
would come down from the mountains to spend their weekly salary without 
noticing the rotten dog stench that poured out of the fishmeal plants and 
infected the streets. Crabby began to work as a maid in the Spanish Club, an 
“Arabian-style” building designed by an architect whose only knowledge of Islam 
came from the illustrations in the expurgated nineteenth-century French 
translation ofThe Thousand and One Nights. Since her hunchback gait upset the 
members’ stomachs, the management dispatched her to the lavatories. After a 
year, she began to sprout a beard. Unwilling to obey the requests of the 
Aragonese manager, she refused to shave. When the requests were accompanied by 
grimaces of disgust and insults, Crabby presented her resignation in the form 
of a punch that sent the brash Aragonese rolling down the stairs. She also beat 
up two waiters who had the misguided idea of avenging the manager, who lay on 
the Churrigueresque tile floor howling in pain from some broken ribs. While 
working in the lavatory, she had made and saved money selling the honorable 
members cocaine cut with talcum powder. She used her capital to set up a shop 
for buying and selling gold. She also became the local dentist. After the 
drunken miners had spent all they’d earned in six months on a weekend orgy, 
they would line up outside her little shop insisting on selling her the gold 
crowns that adorned their teeth so that they could go on drinking.


Two years went by, two years of drought. Then, suddenly, the mountains 
awakened wearing clouds for hats. The sky turned black, thunder roared, 
lightning flashed, and a deluge commenced with raindrops the size of pigeon 
eggs. The tempest went on for three days without stopping. No one could go out 
because the drops were so forceful they punched holes in umbrellas. Locked away 
in her shop, in the semi-darkness, with no more beer to drink, Crabby suddenly, 
and for the first time in her life, realized she was alone.


Lennon, Manson and me: the psychedelic cinema of Alejandro Jodorowsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/nov/14/alejandro-jodorowosky-el-topo> 
The skeleton of her solitude appeared before her: impersonal, heavy, and cold. 
And then she saw flesh gather around those bones, forming a body for which she 
felt not the slightest tenderness. It reacted to her disdain by tightening 
itself around her from her stomach to her throat to deliver her a dull, 
constant pain. It was like having her soul pierced by a nail, in the depths of 
a world transformed into jelly, where she was sentenced to drown for all 
eternity. “Who am I? Can someone tell me? How could they, since no one has ever 
seen me? It hurts, it hurts! I am a wound awaiting the gaze of another in order 
to heal. A frog who will never turn into a princess. A freak, who when she 
wants to give, only gives the gift of disgust. The world’s indifference is my 
punishment!” She clung to the wall, sliding left and right, absorbing the 
darkness of the place through every pore until she felt she was black, a shadow 
that wanted to cry like a dog in the absence of a body to master it.

The drops exploded noisily on the tin roof. Nevertheless, a scream, so 
high-pitched that it became a long needle, pierced the rain’s atrocious 
drumming. Only a completely feminine throat could howl like that. Crabby, not 
knowing why, felt herself the mother of that female under threat of death and, 
waving the iron bar she used to frighten off hostile drunks, ran out onto the 
street.


A mantle of gray mist hid the sky, forming thick folds. In the distance, a 
pale phantom began to take shape. It came toward her, running, a woman with 
extremely white skin, as white as flour, salt, marble, a shroud, or milk. It 
passed through the wall of water and fell into Crabby’s arms, shaking like a 
wounded albatross. It was as tall as her father, with powerful legs and 
buttocks and enormous breasts; she was very young, but her mad blinking 
revealed, beneath white eyelids, the pink irises of an old woman. The howling 
wind tangled her long white hair, baring a shoulder that had received a deep 
bite. Sniffing excitedly, foaming at the mouth, growling, three Asiatic monks 
wearing saffron robes ran toward them. The white woman hid behind Crabby’s 
back, using her as a shield.


Crabby whirled the iron bar. “Hold it right there, you fucking Chinamen! One 
more step, and I’ll smash your skulls.” The monks stopped for an instant, never 
taking their eyes off the marmoreal flesh the skinny body of her defender could 
not hide. Then they revealed the hands they’d been hiding in their sleeves. 
Thirty long fingernails, as sharp as knives, whistled menacingly. Crabby, 
unable to stop the attack, smacked her bar on the street: “May the devil 
swallow them!” With a colossal roar, the earth obeyed. A crack opened, and the 
mad creatures fell howling into the abyss. The enormous maw, now satisfied, 
closed. The rain stopped, the sun came out, ready to reign for another couple 
of years, and to celebrate the return of light, thousands of small parrots, 
forming a multicolored cloud, chorusing syllables Crabby interpreted as 
“Albina, Albina, Albina…”


The enormous woman, expressing her gratitude in infantile sobs, gave no sign 
of leaving. There seemed to be no other place in the world for her but Crabby’s 
arms and bosom. Crabby led her into the shop, sat her down in the armchair, 
and, with a tenderness never before seen in her, began to clean out the bite.


Translated from the Spanish by Alfred MacAdam

*****

Albina and the Dog-Men hits the bookstores today. You can find the US edition 
here <http://www.restlessbooks.com/bookstore/albina-and-the-dog-men>, and the 
UK editionhere 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376809/>. 

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 * Alejandro Jodorowsky was born to Ukrainian Jewish immigrants in Tocopilla, 
Chile. From an early age, he became interested in mime and theater; at the age 
of twenty-three, he left for Paris to pursue the arts, and has lived there ever 
since. A friend and companion of Fernando Arrabal and Roland Topor, he founded 
the Panic movement and has directed several classic films of this style, 
including The Holy Mountain, El Topo, and Santa Sangre. A mime artist, 
specialist in the art of tarot, and prolific author, he has written novels, 
poetry, short stories, essays, and over thirty successful comic books, working 
with such highly regarded comic book artists as Moebius and Bess. Restless 
Books will be publishing three of Jodorowsky’s best-known books for the first 
time in English: Donde mejor canta un pájaro (Where the Bird Sings Best), El 
niño del jueves negro (The Son of Black Thursday), and Albina y los hombres 
perro (Albina and the Dog-Men).

 * Alfred MacAdam is professor of Latin American literature at Barnard 
College-Columbia University. He has translated works by Carlos Fuentes, Mario 
Vargas Llosa, Juan Carlos Onetti, José Donoso, and Jorge Volpi among others. He 
recently published an essay on the Portuguese poet Fernando Pessoa included in 
The Cambridge Companion to Autobiography.
 