
A transgender woman has been found dead in her cell at an all-male prison in 
the third apparent suicide by a trans prisoner in little over a year.

Jenny Swift was remanded into HMP Doncaster in South Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> in November after being charged 
initially with attempted murder. She was found dead five weeks later on 30 
December.

A friend said Swift, 49, had asked to be placed in a women’s prison and had 
become miserable, sad and ill after being refused female hormones in HMP
Doncaster <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/doncaster>.

The friend, who wished to remain anonymous, told the Sheffield Star 
<http://www.thestar.co.uk/news/transgender-woman-remanded-into-doncaster-men-s-prison-on-attempted-murder-charge-found-hanged-in-cell-1-8318245>
 that Swift had been taking female hormones for three years as part of her 
transitioning process but was not provided with the same medication in prison.

“She kept asking for the hormones and they said she would get them but she 
never did. I phoned up and explained that she needed them too,” the friend 
said. “Jenny said that not having them was making her legs shake, making her 
feel sad and ill – she said it was like coming off drugs. It made her 
miserable.”

The friend told the Guardian that some prison staff had addressed Swift as 
“mister” and that she walked into the jail naked because she refused to wear 
male clothes.

Two days before she died, Swift told her friend there were other trans inmates 
at HMP Doncaster but she was struggling without her medication.

“She had been trying her best to keep her feminine side but she mentioned in 
prison that she could feel the testosterone in her body and she felt sick. It 
was making her cringe inside,” the friend said. “If she had her hormones and 
the correct tablets she would still be here. I know that for certain.”

In a letter Swift sent from prison, she described how she had been taunted by 
other inmates and wanted to be moved to an annexe holding other trans people.

The letter said: “You know who I am banged up with? All sorts but fuck ’em 
all. I am Jenny Swift, I am proud to stand my corner anywhere I need to.”

The friend demanded an investigation into Swift’s death, which she said “could 
and should have been prevented”.

“I want there to be a massive investigation because this happened twice before 
and it shouldn’t be happening,” she said. “Yes, my friend did wrong, but she 
was more vulnerable in prison in that wing than she was in the general 
population.

“I think transgender people need their own wing and she should have been 
provided with her hormones.”

It is understood that she had been using non-prescription drugs when she 
arrived at the prison and had been in contact with HMP Doncaster’s healthcare 
team about the medication. Another source denied that she had been refused a 
move to a female prison, and said those discussions were ongoing when she died.

In late 2015 two transgender women were found dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/01/second-trans-prisoner-joanne-latham-apparently-takes-own-life-in-male-jail>
 in men’s prisons in the space of a month.

Andrew Neilson, the director of campaigns at the Howard League for Penal 
Reform, said: “We have seen a number of transgender deaths in prisons, which 
prompted a recent review by the Ministry of Justice into how transgender 
prisoners and their needs can best be met.

 “Investigations into this latest death will no doubt look at how Jenny Swift 
was placed in custody and whether Doncaster as a men’s prison was the right 
place for her to be. While transgender people may have particular 
vulnerabilities, we should bear in mind that suicide and self-injury affect all 
prisoners.

“Last year saw the highest number of suicides in prison on record, at a rate 
of one prisoner every three days. There are broader issues around overcrowding, 
understaffing and an impoverishment of prison regimes which must also be 
addressed.”

Swift, from Liverpool, was remanded in custody on 17 November after being 
charged with stabbing 26-year-old Eric Flanagan at a property in Balby, 
Doncaster, two days earlier. After Flanagan died on 15 December, police passed 
the case to the Crown Prosecution Service to upgrade the charge to murder.

One in four prisons in England and Wales are holding transgender inmates, 
according to figures released by the MoJ in November. It said there were 70 
inmates living in, or presenting in, a “gender different to their sex assigned 
at birth” and who had had a “case conference”.


A spokesman for the MoJ confirmed Swift’s death and said the MoJ was aware 
that she was transgender when she was remanded into the category B private 
men’s prison at Doncaster. No explanation has been given for the decision to 
place her there. He said the prisons and probation ombudsman had opened an 
investigation.

The spokesman said: “Self-inflicted deaths are a tragedy and mental health in 
custody is taken extremely seriously. We have a range of measures already in 
place to help support prisoners suffering from these issues.

“But we recognise more can be done. That is why we have allocated more funding 
for prison safety and have launched a suicide and self-harm reduction project 
to address the increase in self-inflicted deaths and self-harm in our prison.”

A Prison Service spokesperson said: “HMP Doncaster prisoner Jenny Swift was 
found unresponsive in her cell at 12.40am on Friday 30 December. Prison staff 
and paramedics attempted CPR but she was pronounced dead at 1.10am.

“As with all deaths in custody, there will be an independent investigation by 
the prisons and probation ombudsman.”

A spokesman for the ombudsman said: “We are sorry to be informed of the death 
of Ms Swift at HMP Doncaster, and can confirm that an independent investigation 
has begun. We will be in contact with Ms Swift’s family and will try to address 
any questions they may have.

“Our independent investigation will aim to identify the full circumstances of 
the death and whether there were any failings in Ms Swift’s care. Where 
possible we will identify lessons to be learned and make recommendations to 
help prevent similar deaths in future. We also share any findings with the 
coroner to assist with their inquiries.”

In November 2015, Vicky Thompson, 21, was found dead in HMP Leeds in Armley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/20/government-provide-transgender-prisoner-numbers-vicky-thompson>
 after telling friends she would kill herself if she was sent there. Later that 
month Joanne Latham, 38, from Nottingham,died in Woodhill prison in Milton 
Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/01/second-trans-prisoner-joanne-latham-apparently-takes-own-life-in-male-jail>
.

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 