
The Millets sales assistant could tell I had never been trekking before. All 
those hopelessly naive questions about thermal underwear, mosquito repellents, 
mountain walking sticks, waterproof wear, boots and rucksacks gave the game 
away. At home, I stuck everything into the rucksack (including the instructions 
on how to pack it properly), strapped and belted on the unwieldy shapeless 
result before walking towards Leeds station looking like John Bunyan's pilgrim. 
Halfway up some steps, I realised I had mistakenly packed, rather than 
pocketed, my senior rail card. I unstrapped my right arm, the rucksack swung 
rapidly to my left; I lost my balance, and fell back down the steps. How was I 
going to negotiate the Himalayas?

I thought back to the eagerness with which I had drunkenly agreed to spend a 
few days trekking on the Afghan border after an encounter with Jonny Bealby, 
owner of adventure company Wild Frontiers, at the Groucho Club. There was no 
turning back now.

Members of the Wild Frontiers team met my dawn flight at Islamabad airport. 
Jetlagged and saturated with perpetual intramuscular fixes from nicotine 
patches, I prepared myself for the 16-hour drive to the Afghan border. The 
first stop was Peshawar. I hadn't been there for more than 20 years but 
remembered where Salim, an old friend of mine, kept a gun shop, one of his many 
businesses. An older and more dignified Salim sat outside the shop, which 
hadn't changed in any way. We hugged. It took him less than a minute to embark 
on his favourite pastime, giving informed monologues about politics and spies. 
The Wild Frontiers team listened with undisguised interest.

'DH Marks, I heard you were in my country. There have been great changes since 
your last visit.' He stuck a small piece of hashish into my pocket. 'So, would 
you like to buy a gun?'

'No thanks, Salim. I'm not returning to Heathrow with one of those.'

'I can arrange delivery.' Salim was laughing, but I am still not sure if he 
was joking.

Next stop was Dir, a city not known for its excitement. At the Dir Hotel, 
Jonny was standing with a tour group comprising two men and 11 women.

'You never told me you were running a white slave racket, Jonny.'

'It's normal, Howard, we always get far more women than men.'

I filed that in a few memory cells.

'See the jeeps? Here comes Muftah. He's in charge of all five.'

Muftah, a magnificent looking northern tribesman, sidled up to the car, shook 
my hand and gave me those 'I know you smoke dope' eyes. I smiled, equally 
knowingly.

We set off in Muftah's jeeps, which soon stopped at a police checkpoint. I 
felt an odd mixture of nostalgia, déjà vu and nausea as the cops inspected us. 
Muftah started shouting. Suddenly, the cops commanded us to follow them. 
Another police truck joined the rear.

'Are we getting busted?'

'No, the exact opposite,' laughed Jonny. 'The Pakistani police are escorting 
us for our safety.'

'Do they escort all tourists coming here?'

'They use their discretion. With this many women, they would obviously say yes 
- for a variety of reasons.'

The convoy of Muftah's jeeps and police trucks scrambled up the 
weather-ravaged road to the Lowari pass, where the grass began to turn into 
ice. A one-roomed kitchen-cum-restaurant with a prayer mat and smoking area 
welcomed us at the summit and served us bhindi curry and tea, which hit the 
spot.

Then Muftah's jeeps swooped down through about 50 horseshoe and hairpin bends; 
bizarrely and beautifully painted trucks, moving like snails, crawled up in the 
opposite direction. The slopes were littered with the wrecks of ramshackle, 
overloaded and incompetently driven buses and trucks that had fallen off the 
road into ravines. I started to feel scared - or was it delayed altitude 
sickness, or was I just knackered? Or stoned? A few of the police escort in 
front were sitting on a bench in the back of their truck, their rifles 
pointing, albeit nonchalantly rather than deliberately, straight at us. I felt 
worse.

Hot shafts of blinding white light streaked into my eyes and woke me up. I 
could hear running water. I couldn't remember going to bed, but had woken up in 
a well-appointed wooden summerhouse. I opened the door and walked into a 
tastefully landscaped ornamental garden. In the distance, but so big it seemed 
to be right there, was the white mass of Tirich Mir (King of Darkness), so 
named because of the size of its shadows. At 7,700 metres, it is the governor 
of the Hindu Kush. I was looking at the largest density of mountains in the 
world, which hid valleys so isolated that until recently each was a separate 
kingdom. Memory kicked in. I had arrived here last night after a 16-hour drive.

I joined the group for breakfast and learnt that we were staying at the 
residence of Maqsood ul-Mulk, Prince of Ayun, a charming, intelligent host 
whose family have ruled Chitral for ages. He was taking us to the local school 
later in the morning.

After lunch, there were three options - a short trek in the Hindu Kush, a long 
trek in the Hindu Kush, or going to Chitral to watch a polo match. I did not 
find the choice difficult.

Muftah parked our jeep at Chitral's Mountain Inn, which had been open since 
1968 when its guests were mainly hashish-hungry hippies on the Paradise Trail 
from Europe to Asia. I got out and walked through the town centre. Guide books 
warn of unseen eyes observing and weighted whispers winding their way to the 
police, Pakistani secret service, MI6, the CIA and the Taliban.

Symptoms of ferocious hostility, however, seemed to be confined to the Chitral 
polo ground, where tension, excitement and euphoria often far exceed the 
heights reached at Wembley. I took my place in the stand, leant on a handy 
metal pole and began taking photographs of the furious match. Within a minute, 
the metal pole emitted a deafening ring: one of the polo players had completely 
mishit the puck, which had struck the pole two inches from my face. The trek 
options would have been safer.

To help me recover from the shock, Muftah drove me to the Hindu Kush Heights 
hotel for a refreshing drink and stretch of the eyes. It's owned by Maqsood 
ul-Mulk's cousin, Prince Siraj ul-Mulk. Robert De Niro and Pakistan's 
President, General Pervez Musharraf, have stayed there. So did Winston 
(grandson of the PM) and Luce Churchill, who wrote in the visitors' book 10 
years ago: '...so glad that the Churchills and ul-Mulks are no longer at war'.

The Afghan border was a few miles to the west, just the other side of my final 
destination, the valleys of the Kafir Kalash (the name translates as 'infidel 
wearers of black'), once part of an area known as Kafiristan, the setting for 
Kipling's The Man Who Would Be King. A century ago, all the Afghan Kafirs were 
forcibly converted to Islam (the alternative was execution) and their homeland 
became Nuristan (Country of the Enlightened), a province of Afghanistan.

Gentler attempts were made to convert Kafirs living in today's Pakistan, but 
their resistance has ensured the continuation of their own pagan religion, 
culture and habits. Despite its association with Islamic fundamentalists, 
Pakistan allows freedom of religion. There are churches, at least one 
synagogue, Hindu temples and pagan sacrificial altars. Next morning, Muftah's 
jeeps snaked from Ayun to Kafiristan, ending up on a rough surface chiselled 
into the mountainside, barely wide enough for a car, impassable for part of the 
winter, and intermittently blocked for the rest by avalanches of stones and 
rubble caused by melting snow.

We entered the Rumbur Valley, one of three inhabited 'Black Infidel' valleys. 
Giant walnut trees bowed down over fast-flowing streams, grapevines trapped 
mulberry and apricot trees in their webs, evergreen oaks and Himalayan cedars 
enveloped the 2,000-metre summits, and lush fields of vegetable and cereal 
crops carpeted the rugged valley floor.

The Kalash men wear regular and unassuming shalwar-kameez, the same as their 
Muslim neighbours. They manage the livestock, mainly goats, taking them up the 
mountains for several months to produce milk and cheese. The women wear 
nun-like black woollen robes tied with black sash belts. Strings of 
multi-coloured beads hang from their necks, five plaits of hair lie generously 
under a regal headdress sown with rows of cowrie shells and bright buttons, 
topped with a massive red woollen ball.

They dance by stomping and shuffling their way through an intricate series of 
cartwheels and polka-step circles. Drums and handclaps provide the rhythm; 
flutes, shrill penny whistles and catcalls the accompaniment. The women till 
the land, pick the fruit and prepare the food. Both sexes are heavily into 
their surprisingly palatable and strong red wine. Most have fair skin and blue 
eyes and are shown by DNA studies, linguistic similarities and historical and 
oral traditions to be descended from the armies of Alexander the Great.

As we approached, several people on the roadside came running up screaming, 
'Jonny Taliban. Jonny Taliban!'

'Aren't you worried by that nickname?' I asked Jonny.

'It's a bit unnerving I know, Howard, but Taliban actually means a seeker of 
the truth. I feel honoured.'

Saifullah Jan, the first Kalash man to be educated outside the valley (a 
year's law course in Peshawar) and chief representative for the people, lives 
in the village of Balangaru. He is a champion when it comes to protecting the 
Kalash timber, walnuts (their main source of protein), land and grazing rights. 
Our guesthouse is also run by Saifullah; previous guests include Michael Palin 
and virtually every anthropologist who has visited the valley.

I dumped my bags and went for a stroll through the village. A maze of channels 
consisting of wooden aqueducts, stone buttresses and mini-canals distributed 
roaring torrents of water, providing laundry areas, sanitation and 
hydroelectric power (from dusk to dawn only). A water-driven barley mill and 
row of granaries stood next to houses, which are built of wood, mud and stone 
in such a way that the balcony of one is the roof of another. I carried on to 
the sacred sanctuary. Surrounded by trees and geometrically designed wooden 
statues, dried branches lay ready for ignition on the bloodstained altar.

Bashali (inhabited by women while menstruating or giving birth) feature 
predominantly in Kalash culture. I had assumed that bashali were male-crafted 
prison-like institutions. Back at Saifullah's guesthouse, Jonny put me right. 
Kalash women are tough as old boots, athletic, fashion-conscious and incredibly 
beautiful. They work in the fields wearing elaborate dresses sparkling like 
rainbows, each individually designed and made by the wearer to express her 
personality and creative powers. Bashali exist because women want them.

'Anyway,' said Jonny with a glint in his eyes, 'a Kalash lady is joining the 
group for dinner tonight. You can ask her.'

Halfway through a goat-and-vegetable curry, we were joined by a woman clad in 
Kalash clothes. She was Japanese.

Either sex may marry a spouse of any nationality or religion. Bigamy, though 
rare, is allowed. Akiko Wada, our dinner guest, had married a man from Rumbur 
and divorced him, but remains fully integrated into the community.

At the core of all Kalash cosmology are the concepts of onjesta and pragata 
energies. Nangar Dehar, the greatest Kalash shaman and initiator of most Kalash 
rituals, entered a trance and shot two arrows, one red, one black. The black 
arrow's landing place was to be the sacrificial altar and centre of onjesta 
energy, to be visited by only men; the red arrow's, the bashali and centre of 
pragata energy, to be visited by only women.

All life forms, places and objects are accorded measures of onjesta and 
pragata. Generally, wine, water, holy sites, men and goats head the onjesta 
list, while women, Muslims and chickens are the main carriers of pragata. There 
is communal concern to keep the equally important energies separate. When women 
attend the bashali, their men do their normal daily tasks. In the bashali women 
can be creative and resolve personal issues without the stress of village life.

'You have any questions for me?' Saifullah asked, pouring me a huge glass of 
wine.

'Are you really descended from the Greeks?' 

'I hope not. It is not the only theory. I'd prefer my ancestors to be Italian.'

'But what we call Italy today used to be part of Ancient Greece.'

'I think it's better if we're Italian. I don't know why.' Further questions 
revealed that there were no prisons or police in the valleys. And no written 
laws, or written language.

'Our spiritual leaders, kazis [judges], maintain our legends. They can recite 
or sing all 4,000 of them. They will teach their sons to do the same. The 
shaman communicates with our gods to find out what needs to be done and informs 
us.'

'What if a Kalash does something that is obviously wrong, like killing someone 
or stealing goats?'

'It never happens. It couldn't.'

'But if it did?"

'We would ask the shaman what to do.'

'What might he instruct?'

'To sacrifice an animal, so the village eats well, and we can all get drunk.'

I began to understand, or thought I did: there was no good and evil, just 
onjesta and pragata and their tricky identification and management.

Yet more wine landed on the table. Full of mirth, we drank ourselves under it 
and squatted on the grass.

'It's a strange one, Jonny; peace, tranquillity and merriment on the front 
line.'

'I know, I was here on 11 September 2001, but didn't find out anything about 
the twin towers until 10 days later. These valleys protect you from everything, 
especially yourself. It is a pity you leave so soon. Did you know the Kalash 
don't have a word for goodbye? They never leave here; otherwise they lose their 
identity.'

'I'll be back, Jonny.'

'I know. You must go for a trek next time. Maybe over that mountain there to 
Afghanistan.'

Essentials 

Howard Marks travelled with Wild Frontiers (020 7736 3968; 
www.wildfrontiers.co.uk <http://www.wildfrontiers.co.uk>). The next trip to 
Pakistan is the 18-day Hindu Kush adventure which departs on 4 September and 
visits the Hindu Kush, Kalash Valleys, Hunza and the Karakoram Highway.

The price is £1,600 including all accommodation, guides, meals and transport 
but not flights. British Airways (0844 493 0787;www.ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) 
flies to Islamabad with fares from around £550. There is also a Pakistan tour 
departing 2 October.
 