
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will continue 
to face serious and unprecedented conflicts of interest as US president if he 
merely steps aside from running his businesses, legal and ethical experts said 
on Wednesday.

Former White House ethics counsels and anti-corruption activists said Trump’s 
claim that he would soon take himself “completely out of business operations” 
would do little on its own to prevent his financial interests interfering with 
his duties to the public as president.


Teen becomes seventh 'faithless elector' to protest Trump as president-elect
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/faithless-electors-electoral-college-donald-trump>
“It is not enough unless he is going to sell the businesses,” said Richard 
Painter, a chief ethics counsel to President George W Bush. Painter said Trump 
risked violating the US constitution if he retained ownership of his vast 
network of companies.


Concerns persist that Trump’s adult children, who are advisers to their father 
and executives in his corporation, will continue blurring lines of interest 
between the White House and Trump Tower. Norman Eisen, a former ethics counsel 
to Barack Obama, said the family could only avoid scandal by establishing an 
“ethics firewall” separating the two.


All 16 Democratic members of the House of Representatives judiciary committee 
wrote on Wednesday to congressman Bob Goodlatte 
<https://democrats-judiciary.house.gov/news/press-releases/after-vague-trump-tweets-house-judiciary-democrats-press-hearing-trump-conflicts>
, the Republican committee chairman, to request hearings on the rules on ethics 
and conflicts of interest “that may apply to the president of the United 
States”.


Trump said in a series of tweets 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/803926488579973120> early on 
Wednesday that he was scheduling a press conference for 15 December “to discuss 
the fact that I will be leaving my great business in total”. He said it was 
“visually important” that he avoid conflicts of interest.


While he gave no further details of how the arrangement would work, Trump’s 
reference to recusing himself from “operations” was in line with a previous 
statement that he planned to transfer the day-to-day running of the Trump 
companies to his adult children.


But Eisen said Trump would continue to hold financial interests “that will 
sometimes conflict with the public interest” unless he sold his corporate 
holdings and gave up control of his wealth. “In order to avoid conflicts, he 
must also exit the ownership of his businesses through a blind trust or 
equivalent,” Eisen said in a statement.


Simply knowing that he owned multimillion-dollar assets such as hotels or golf 
courses in foreign countries would keep alive the appearance of a conflict of 
interest when Trump came to dealing with these nations as president, according 
to several experts.


The federal agency responsible for preventing conflicts of interest among US 
officials joined those urging Trump to sell his business interests. “As we 
discussed with your counsel, divestiture is the way to resolve these 
conflicts,” a spokesperson for the office of government ethicssaid in a tweet 
to Trump <https://twitter.com/OfficeGovEthics/status/804020923800158209>.

As president-elect, Trump has quickly raised concerns by mixing business with 
his public position. Hecomplained to Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/trump-british-allies-against-windfarms-golf-courses-scotland>
, a member of the European parliament and the leader of the UK Independence 
party until this week, about wind farms spoiling views in Scotland, where Trump 
owns a golf course.

Trump also met Indian business partners at Trump Tower between interviews with 
candidates for his cabinet. Dozens of foreign diplomats attended a corporate 
sales pitch at Trump’s new hotel in Washington DC.


Experts said the second problem posed by Trump’s apparent plan was that his 
children Ivanka, Donald Jr and Eric serve as close political advisers to their 
father as well as executives at the Trump Organization. A continuation of this 
arrangement would result in at least the appearance of blurred interests 
between the White House and Trump’s companies.


In the past few weeks, Trump has allowed Ivanka, his executive vice-president 
of development and acquisitions, tojoin his meeting with Shinzo Abe, the 
Japanese prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/japan-confidence-trump-president-shinzo-abe>
. Donald Jr, who holds the same corporate title as his sister,held private 
discussions 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-jr-held-talks-on-syria-with-russia-supporters-1479920753>
 on the conflict in Syria with diplomats in Paris.

“He should start by having the children step away from the transition, not to 
mention from participating in his own meetings with foreign leaders,” said 
Eisen. “Without an ethics firewall that is set up at once and continues into 
the administration, scandal is sure to follow.”


Ethics campaigners agreed. “As long as the Trump children run the family 
business and/or maintain a significant ownership stake, while also remaining 
enmeshed in White House business as they plainly will be, the conflicts will 
continue,” said Robert Weissman, the president of the Public Citizen advocacy 
group.


Another former ethics counsel to a Republican president, who did not wish to 
be named in order to avoid angering the president-elect, said Trump had a 
“moral obligation” to rid himself of conflicts of interest and must go out of 
his way to show he was doing so.


“In order for the public to be satisfied that he’s acting in their interests 
and not his own, we need to establish some kind of ongoing watch,” said the 
former counsel, who suggested a special commission or new disclosure regime.


Trump has noted publicly that there are no laws forbidding a president from 
having conflicts of interest. But attention has fallen on the emoluments clause 
of the constitution, which bars public office holders from receiving payments 
from foreign government officials.


Painter, the former ethics counsel to Bush, said Trump risked violating the 
clause on several fronts if he retained his corporate holdings.


“Foreign diplomats staying in hotels, parties thrown by foreign governments in 
hotels, loans from the Bank of China, rent paid by foreign governments and 
companies controlled by foreign governments in office buildings, etc,” Painter 
said in an email.


Jack Marshall, an attorney and the founder of ProEthics, an ethics 
consultancy, said there was no satisfactory end in sight because there was no 
practical or realistic way for Trump to truly separate himself from his 
business interests.

“It’s impossible,” said Marshall. “There is no solution and we are going to 
have to live with these conflicts of interest. There’s nothing he can do at 
this point to really make them go away. When you elect Trump, you get conflicts 
of interest.”

 