
In 2017, how might progressives win?

Even posing the question feels odd – almost a category error – since “winning” 
scarcely exists as a referent in so much of progressive practice.

The late Peter Cook used to perform a sketch in which he played a leftie 
working for the media empire of Lord Beaverbrook (think Rupert Murdoch).

Cook assures his friend that he remains as radical as ever.

“There are about 10 of us on the paper, young, progressive, liberal people who 
don’t believe a word we are writing, and whenever the old man has a party – a 
cocktail party – we all gather together down the far end of the room and drink 
as much as we can – we really knock it back – we drink and drink and drink – 
trying to break him from within; then – quite openly, behind our hands – we 
snigger at him.’

The friend looks doubtful: “Well, it doesn’t seem very much to me – sniggering 
and tittering.”

“A titter there, a titter here,” says Cook. “It all adds up.”

Climate deniers, conspiracists and one-percenters: Trump's cabinet of 
characters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/donald-trump-cabinet-climate-deniers-conspiracy-wealth>
That’s very familiar today.

On the left, we spend our time calling out and shutting down, lolling and 
meming and dropping mics.

But winning? What does that even mean?

Let’s put the problem another way.

Traditionally, progressives defined themselves, at least in part, by a desire 
for change. The right defended the status quo; the left agitated to overthrow 
or at least ameliorate it. Progressives sought progress, movement, 
transformation, forcing the old to give to the new until we’d built a modern 
Jerusalem.

The instability of 2016 will continue. You can feel it everywhere: all that is 
solid preparing to melt into air.

With change so palpably afoot, this should be our time.

So why isn’t it?

Fresh Brexit challenge in high court over leaving single market and EEA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/fresh-brexit-challenge-high-court-leaving-single-market-eea>
In 1939, WH Auden wrote The Unknown Citizen to satirise the managerial 
revolution already then under way. Today, the poem reads like an eerie 
anticipation of liberal incredulity at Brexit and Trump and the other recent 
upheavals.

Was he free? Was he happy? The question is absurd:
Had anything been wrong, we should certainly have heard.

In theory, progressives recognise the necessity of fundamental social change. 
In practice, we’ve responded to explosive manifestations of discontent with a 
mixture of fury and disbelief, aghast not just at the reactionary sentiments 
expressed but at the very existence of a dissatisfaction about which we knew 
nothing whatsoever.

All over the world, pollsters report deep unhappiness with the institutions of 
liberal capitalism. Yet somehow the left – a movement dedicated to social 
transformation – has become the defender of a status quo that no one much else 
likes.

Francis Adams was also a poet (though far less distinguished than Auden).

In 1889, he explained his parallel career as an activist:

“Five years ago, I broke up my health in the struggle then just beginning to 
organise the unskilled London labour. It seemed a failure. But I never 
despaired, or saw cause to despair. There was a splendid foundation of hate 
there. With hate, all things are possible.”

It’s difficult to imagine a progressive saying that today: the formulation 
sounds more like a grab from one of those well-coiffured Nazi boys currently 
clinging to Trump’s coattails.

Actually, though, Adams was a gentle and sensitive man, a rare opponent of the 
anti-Asian racism dominating the Australian labour movement. What he meant was 
that the London workers found their situation intolerable – and their justified 
anger fuelled the New Unionism that transformed British politics.

Well, there’s a splendid foundation of hate today, too – and if we don’t build 
something positive from it, the edifices that will inevitably emerge will be 
very ugly indeed.

Unfortunately, so much of what passes for activism now centres on an 
individualised moralism, less about changing the world than about making 
yourself feel (or perhaps sound) good while all about you everything remains 
exactly the same.

In 1959, Raymond Williams described the seemingly insurmountable gulf between 
the progressive intellectuals of his day and the great bulk of the population. 
“Nothing,” he wrote, “has done more to sour the democratic idea among its 
natural supporters, and to drive them back into angry self-exile, than the 
plain, overwhelming cultural issues: the apparent division of our culture into, 
on the one hand, a remote and self-gracious sophistication, on the other hand, 
a doped mass.”

Since, then, of course, that division has only widened.

The academic Colin Crouch 
<http://www.fabians.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Post-Democracy.pdf> 
describes a tendency to “post-democracy”, in which “public electoral debate is 
a tightly controlled spectacle, managed by rival teams of professionals expert 
in the techniques of persuasion, and considering a small range of issues 
selected by those teams [while] the mass of citizens plays a passive, quiescent 
part, responding only to the signals given them.”

We all know exactly what he means.

But that’s why it’s worth rereading Williams.

After all, many progressives reacted to Brexit and to Trump by demanding more 
rather than less state control over the citizenry. Aghast at the reactionary 
ideas that emerged during those votes (the misogyny, the xenophobia, the 
outright racism), they concluded that ordinary people couldn’t be trusted and 
needed better, more efficient management from the political class.

To put it another way, confronted by widespread hatred for “post-democracy”, 
they doubled-down on the “post’ bit rather than the “democracy” aspect.

Williams suggests a very different orientation.

“So who then believes in democracy?” he asks. “The answer is really quite 
simple: the millions … who still haven’t got it where they work and feel. 
There, as always, is the transforming energy … ”

He sees the resistance to top-down management, the desire for self-expression 
and self-determination in the workplace and the school and the home, as an 
opportunity for the left, not a threat.

“The business of the socialist intellectual is what it always was: to attack 
the clamps on that energy – in industrial relations, public administration, 
education, for a start; to work in his own field on ways in which that energy, 
as released, can be concentrated and fertile.”

It’s a challenging formulation as we approach 2017, flying in the face of 
what’s become progressive common sense: the condescending conviction that only 
enlightened liberal stewardship stands between civilisation and the hordes of 
tabloid-reading Morlocks.

But Williams recognises that, too.

“The technical means [of facilitating participatory democracy] are difficult 
enough,’ he says, “but the biggest difficulty is in accepting, deep in our 
minds, the values on which they depend: that the ordinary people should govern 
… ”

That’s not to deny the genuinely disturbing racism manifesting in the US and 
acrossEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. On the contrary, 
it’s to suggest a strategy – or at least the raw beginnings of one – to combat 
it.

Williams’s point is that a left orienting to participation, to mass 
involvement and to democracy stands a better chance of overcoming the 
demagoguery of the far right through what he calls “the transforming energy” of 
the masses, since people exercising some control over their workplaces, their 
universities, their homes and cultural lives are less susceptible to the 
imaginary “solutions” of scapegoating and bigotry.

No one can offer a blueprint for activism in 2017. The only certainty in times 
like this is that certainties will be confounded. Nonetheless, it’s difficult 
to believe that, in societies governed by some of the least popular leaders on 
record (from Trump to Turnbull), the next 12 months won’t bring further 
eruptions of discontent.

How then will we respond? The temptation will be, once again, to defend 
liberal values by reinforcing the institutions of liberalism. But that’s not 
going to work. Quite simply, progressives must discover progress. Rather than 
buttressing a moribund status quo, the left needs to place itself on the side 
of change. That’s how we win – by reclaiming the notion of a better future from 
the reactionaries and demagogues.
 