
Paul O’Grady’s For the Love Of Dogs New Year Special 
8pm, ITV

Another pupdate from Battersea Dogs & Cats Home, in a show built on two 
elements that are impossible to dislike: slow-mo shots of fetching, slobbering 
and begging, and O’Grady performing improv comedy miniatures. Plus, the final 
reveals of adorables taken in by delighted new owners from around the country 
are heartwarming without being too cloying, as O’Grady tells the stories of 
some of his favourite Battersea pooches.Jack Seale

Yellowstone: The Wildest Winter 
9pm, BBC2

The temperature can vary by around 80C over a year, and it sits on top of 
enough magma to fill the Grand Canyon 11 times over. So Yellowstone Park is 
bound to boast some interesting flora and fauna. This three-part series begins 
in winter when grizzlies wrestle bison corpses out of frozen lakes, and owls 
hunt through the crisply bitter nights. It all looks utterly gorgeous. Kate 
Humble presents, in suitably awed and breathless style.Phil Harrison

Robson Crusoe: A Surprising Adventure 
9pm, ITV

No, this wasn’t hatched by Alan Partridge and put in a memo to Lynn. This is 
happening. Since he was 11, Robson Green has dreamed of living on a desert 
island. Now, four decades on, he gets his chance, as he’s plonked in the middle 
of the South China Sea, with cameras recording his reactions. Will it live up 
to his explanations? Hard not to believe that the badly punning title came 
first and the “lifelong dream” second.David Stubbs

Celebrity Big Brother: Live Launch 
9pm, Channel 5

The theme for this 19th series is “All Stars Versus New Blood”, as half the 
slebs have lived this nightmare before. Raising the question: who’d be 
damaged/needy/vainglorious enough to enter the house of horror yet again? At 
the time of writing, Katies Price and Hopkins (one-time winner and runner-up 
respectively) and irritant-stirrer extraordinaire Perez Hilton are rumoured to 
be among them. Let the Hunger Games begin!Ali Catterall

Tattoo Fixers 
9pm, E4

The nation’s most regretted inkings are once again paraded on telly as the 
Fixers return for 2017. Whether you accidentally got Lionel Richie’s head 
tattooed on your chest or an ill-advised poo emoji on your back, they have the 
solution (after they’ve guffawed in your face). This week, Sketch gets a visit 
from John, whose enthusiasm for extraterrestrials has landed him with a bad 
tat. And Jay gets a visit from a man with a small but embarrassing problem.
Hannah Verdier

Revolting 
10pm, BBC2

Heydon Prowse and Jolyon Rubinstein of The Revolution Will Be Televised return 
with another satirical sketch show. Brexiteers, hippies, CEOs, Corbynites, 
Blairites and millennials are all trolled on the street by characters such as 
rightwing journalist Dale Mailey and Ukip campaigner Denis Pound, who finds 
some deeply disturbing ideas for policy from folk on the streets of Loughton in 
Essex. There’s a Day Today vibe, but with a fraction of the laughs.Ben Arnold

Vice Does America 
10.30pm, Viceland

Vice’s honest/amazed takes make it just the right organisation to report on 
the US election. Here, the engaging trio of Abdullah Saeed, Wilbert L Cooper 
and Martina De Alba commence a presidential-themed road trip from California to 
Washington DC. They start by gathering wisdom from an Obama impersonator, 
before moving into the belly of the beast via “super-super rightwing 
libertarian nutjob” Cliven Bundy.John Robinson

Film choice

Cliffhanger (Renny Harlin, 1993) 10.10pm, ITV4

Rocky in the Rockies: Sylvester Stallone is a mountain rescuer tangling with 
crooked John Lithgow (affecting a slightly effete British accent) and his gang 
who have crash-landed with a stash of ill-gotten cash high up in the 
treacherous peaks. Die Hard 2 director Renny Harlin arranges some impressive 
dangling-man heroics, and if it doesn’t scale the highest heights, it’s still 
among Sly’s best ventures outside the boxing ring.Paul Howlett

Live sport

T20 International Cricket: New Zealand v Bangladesh The opening fixture in a 
three-match series from Napier. 6am, Sky Sports 1

WTA Tennis: Brisbane In the lead-up to the Aussie Open, the Brisbane 
International begins. 9am, BT Sport 1

Premier League Football: Bournemouth v Arsenal Coverage of the top-flight 
fixture (kick-off 8pm). 7.30pm, Sky Sports 1
 