
Match Of The Day Live; Euro 2012 Live
4.15pm, BBC1; 7.15pm, ITV1


And so a summer of international sporting derring-do kicks off with the 
humdinger that is … Poland v Greece. As you'll recall – unless you dozed off 
during the final – the Greeks bored their way to victory in the 2004 
tournament. Co-hosts Poland, meanwhile, haven't played a competitive game for 
two years. The last match between these two, in March 2011, ended 0-0. Gary 
Lineker has the unenviable task of making this encounter sound exciting. Later, 
on ITV1, Adrian Chiles sinks his teeth into the more appetising prospect of 
Russia v the Czech Republic.Sam Richards

Alan Carr Summertime Specstacular
9pm, Channel 4


It's a two-hour live show presented by a "national treasure", with "national 
treasure" guests, celebrating our "national treasures". If you're already 
getting jaded by this summer's incessant wheeling out of forgotten athletes and 
coronation chicken, this is probably not for you. Carr will be joined by David 
Walliams, the cast of Made In Chelsea and, er, Justin Bieber. They'll compete 
to prove how game for a laugh they are in a series of sketches and turns.
Clare Considine

Punk Britannia
9pm, BBC4


This week, the series moves towards 1976-78, when punk created moral panic in 
a Britain lost in a torpor of "browns and oranges", as John Cooper Clarke puts 
it. John Lydon, who's never really stopped snarling, is among those recounting 
the rise of the Sex Pistols. Punks faced opposition, often violent, from rival 
Teddy Boys, the police and Welsh religious zealots alike. But these years also 
saw the emergence of characters like Siouxsie Sioux and the late Poly Styrene, 
celebrated in an excellent Arena documentary which follows at 11.30pm.David 
Stubbs

Episodes
10pm, BBC2


In an offering with a whiff of mid-season drift about it, the (mis)adventures 
of the team behind Pucks! continue. For Carol, this means being assertive and 
insisting that Merc marks the fifth anniversary of the couple's affair. A 
weekend away beckons, good news for Merc's wife Jamie as she and Matt LeBlanc 
plan "48 hours of the dirty stuff". Elsewhere, Sean's Facebook ineptitude 
brings Matt's stalker, the improbably named Labia, back into the actor's orbit.
Jonathan Wright

Dexter
10pm, FX

It seems like the producers of Dexter have given up on even trying to play 
fair and instead are concentrating on throwing as much nonsense on to the 
screen as possible, assuming that this will confuse and distract the viewers 
enough for this dud of a season to limp across the finish line. But almost 
every bold move they make is immediately undone by a huge plot hole, such as 
the manner in which Dexter saves the day tonight. He lays himself wide open to 
discovery yet this is never seized upon. Still, on the plus side, it's nearly 
over.Phelim O'Neill

30 Rock
10.30pm, Comedy Central

Not so much a sitcom, more a 22-minute peg for still-impressively waspish 
one-liners, 30 Rock moves towards its season mid-point with a rematch between 
Jack and his teen nemesis Kaylie Hooper (Chloë Moretz), who helped cause a 
national incident on the final of America's Kidz Got Singing. Elsewhere, the 
still-ghastly Jenna tries to boost her public popularity by becoming a mother. 
Liz, as ever, offers her full support. "Adoption? That child is better off in 
Somalia. It could be a pirate. Or a warlord's concubine."John Robinson
 