
Leonardo Live
7pm, Sky Arts 1


On the eve of one of the biggest-ever exhibitions of his work at the National 
Gallery, Tim Marlow and Mariella Frostrup offer a guide to the Da Vinci works 
on display. Although he's as much renowned for his speculative science 
nowadays, this exhibition will focus on his paintings and drawings, and his 
drive to convey some notion of perfection in human form. A good way to catch 
the show, especially as the real thing will probably feel like shuffling 
through a train station at rush hour.David Stubbs

Sorority Girls
9pm, E4


Somewhere between Tool Academy, Geordie Finishing School For Girls, Ladette To 
Lady and Gossip Girl sits this new reality show, in which Leeds University 
students have to prove their feminine charms in order to join a squeaky clean, 
American-style sorority. There are plenty of amusing clash-of-cultures 
observations, as the US sisters look on in horror at the pierced and pissed UK 
girls. But the competition element is brutal, and there's one glaring question 
left unanswered: why on earth do they want to be part of such a dry, 
conservative institution in the first place?Rebecca Nicholson

The Office: An American Workplace
10pm, Comedy Central


Dunder-Mifflin is now a subsidiary of Sabre Corp. The Scranton office is being 
kept running as it is, bafflingly, the most profitable. Greeting them into the 
new order, Sabre send down a hilariously vague Christian Slater-hosted 
corporate video and an even more hard-to-fathom executive, Gabe (Zach Woods, 
playing more or less his character Chad from In The Loop). All this is too hard 
for Michael to process so he travels to the home of his recently deposed boss, 
David Wallace, hoping his old nemesis can help. For viewers though, all this 
change is invigorating.Phelim O'Neill

My Transsexual Summer
10pm, Channel 4


Much like Seven Dwarves, this documentary has been sold on the "shock" element 
of its subject matter, when in fact it's sensitive and funny rather than 
exploitative. Seven transgender people, at various stages of their transitions, 
meet at weekends at a "retreat" house to hang out, support each other and talk 
about things they've never really been able to share before. What they get from 
the experience is quite incredible, though be warned, this doesn't shy away 
from explicit surgery.RN

Imagine: Simon & Garfunkel – The Harmony Game
10.35pm, BBC1


The title here is at least partly ironic: in 1969, as they worked on Bridge 
Over Troubled Water, Paul Simon andArt Garfunkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/art-garfunkel> were about to end their 
creative partnership. You'd struggle to learn exactly why from Jennifer 
Lebeau's documentary, though, perhaps because of the duo's close involvement in 
the film. Frustrating, but what you do get is a look at how they crafted their 
final studio album. Confirmation, if needed, that it's fiendishly complicated 
to make simple pop music that endures.Jonathan Wright

True Blood
11.10pm, Channel 4


After finding the mushy remains of his lover on the living room floor, King 
Russell of Mississippi is on the warpath. Eric, responsible for said mushy 
remains, has fled back to the comparatively sedate Bon Temps, but it isn't long 
before the shadowy forces of The Ministry come a-knockin. Bill and Sookie's 
relationship woes seem comparatively dull, despite a risque shower scene. 
Business really picks up in the episode's denouement, where Edgington gives a 
terrifying demonstration of his powers.Gwilym Mumford
 