
Two men have been found guilty of trying to join Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> fighters in Iraq, while a third has 
been convicted of attempting to keep their plan a secret.

Aras Hamid, 26, and Shivan Azeez Zangana, 21, who goes by Azeez, were both 
convicted of preparing acts of terrorism, while Hamid was also found guilty of 
assisting another in commission of terrorist acts. Ahmed Ismail, 19, was 
convicted of failing to disclose information about acts of terrorism.


At the start of their trial at Kingston crown court on Monday, the prosecutor 
Robin Sellers told the jury the three men were involved in a “concerted 
attempt” to leave the country and further terrorist activities either 
themselves or by aligning themselves underIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>.

He said Hamid played the leading role and was the common link between the 
other two and, while all three were “Kurdish in origin”, Ismail had been 
naturalised and was a British citizen.

The offences took place over a relatively short period of time in mid-2016 and 
included a meeting between Ismail and Hamid in Coventry on 10 May.

Three days later, a number of people called 999 to express fears that Azeez 
was planning to leave the UK, prompting the authorities to try to locate him.

Azeez left his brother’s home in Sheffield the same day and met Hamid in 
Birmingham, with the pair later visiting a travel agent to buy a plane ticket 
for Azeez to travel to an airport in Iraq from Gatwick.

On 17 May, officers from the West Midlands counter-terrorism unit (WMCTU) 
found the pair sleeping as they executed a warrant at the Al Noor mosque in 
Birmingham in the early hours of the morning. The police arrested Azeez and 
seized items from Hamid.

Hamid was detained two days later when he was discovered hiding in the back of 
a lorry travelling on the A2 at about 2am.

“The crown says he was trying to leave the UK covertly [by] in effect being 
smuggled out,” Sellers said.

The court heard that Ahmed Ismail’s brother, Mohammed Ismail, travelled to 
Syria to fight with Isis in 2014 and Ahmed is believed to have originally 
intended to travel with Hamid and Azeez, but changed his mind after concerns 
over his brother’s status with his superiors within the militant group, who 
suspected his brother of being a spy. Ahmed Ismail was arrested on 22 May.

Hamid, of no fixed address, was also convicted of having a false Bulgarian 
passport after pleading guilty to the offence at an earlier hearing. He, Azeez, 
who is from Sheffield, and Ismail, from Coventry, will be sentenced on 3 
January.

The head of WMCTU, Ch Supt Sue Southern, said: “As a result of enquiries, 
counter-terrorism investigators discovered Hamid’s instrumental role in 
organising travel plans for himself and Azeez for preparation for acts of 
terrorism. We also uncovered examples of Hamid’s extreme ideology and 
radicalisation and the pivotal role he played in orchestrating the travel plans 
for himself and Azeez.


“Evidence shows Ismail, a local student, was in contact with Hamid and was 
well aware of plans to travel to the conflict zone.

“There is always a danger that people travelling to Syria and Iraq will be 
trained and come back and be a threat to the UK. We also need to be aware of 
the far-reaching effects on local communities and the families of those 
involved.

“If anyone is concerned that a friend or family member is thinking of 
travelling to Syria it is very important that they tell us as soon as possible. 
Police and other agencies can offer support to help safeguard those who are 
vulnerable to radicalisers.”
 