
Cut off Michael Bisping at the neck and you will likely find that he is still 
goading you to come back for more as his head goes rolling across the floor. He 
is a man who absolutely will not quit. Which is why, at the age of 37, he has 
become the first Briton to win a UFC world title and,in defending it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/bisping-retains-title-in-thriller>
 in the early hours of Sunday, the first person to win 20 fights in their UFC 
career. Two days before his latest middleweight victory, against Dan Henderson 
at the Manchester Arena, Bisping was asked why he is still fighting after all 
this time. The money, he said, and more than that, he just loves the buzz he 
gets when he wins. “It’s a great feeling. Anyone that’s ever won a fight knows 
that.”

We can only guess exactly how good Bisping felt after beating Henderson. 
Nobody got a chance to ask, because he was sent straight to the hospital. He 
had predicted that there would be “a few sore heads on Sunday morning”, but 
however much anyone drank, nobody can have had a bigger headache than the one 
he must have been suffering. Henderson caught him flush, twice, with his lethal 
overhand right, a punch so famous that it has its own nickname: the H-Bomb. 
Henderson, 46, retired right after the fight. It possibly was not a personal 
decision so much as a public demonstration of the USA’s continuing commitment 
to strategic nuclear disarmament.

Bisping beats Henderson on points to retain title in thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/bisping-retains-title-in-thriller>
Henderson did not have to go to the hospital but may have called in at a local 
stonemasons so they could smooth off the chips Bisping’s kicks left in his 
granite edges. “Honestly,” Henderson said afterwards, “I didn’t feel hurt once 
in that whole fight.” He felt like he had won but had the good grace to say: 
“Unfortunately not everyone saw it that way,” and leave it at that. It is not 
the damage done that the judges reckon, but the number of clean shots landed. 
And, just as he did against Anderson Silva in Londonearlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/04/the-fight-game-reloaded-how-mma-conquered-world-ufc>
, Bisping won on points because he kept pecking away.

Some argue Bisping got the benefit of the doubt because both these close 
fights were in Britain. If they were home decisions, he certainly earned them. 
Against Silva, he recovered from being knocked out by a flying knee at the very 
end of the third round. Against Henderson, the bell was no help and he had to 
fight his way up off the ground against an opponent who fell on him like a 
hungry bear on a side of cold salmon. Winning, as all Rocky fans know, is not 
just about how hard you hit but how hard you can get hit and keep 
moving forward.

By that measure, there are not many tougher athletes than Bisping in Britain 
right now, nor, perhaps, any who better prove the truth of George MacDonald 
Fraser’s dictum that what we call bravery is actually “half panic, half 
lunacy”. Bisping really deserves to be better known. You could not exactly call 
him unsung, not after 16,000 fans joined together in one long and raucous 
chorus of “Stand up, if you love Bisping!” at 5am on a Sunday morning, but he 
has achieved so much that if he lived in another country, or practised another 
sport, he surely would be a household name, his battered mug splashed across 
the front pages of Monday’s papers.

The British fighters who come after him may achieve exactly that, given that 
their sport is now being broadcast by BT and covered by the BBC. Over the last 
15 years the UFC has been moving inexorably into the mainstream, though its 
progress in Britain has been slower going than the organisation imagined. In 
2001, the two Vegas casino kingpins Lorenzo and Frank Fertitta bought the 
business for just $2m. This summer, they sold it for $4.2bn, to WME-IMG, the 
mega-agency that runs, among many other things, Miss Universe, New York Fashion 
Week and the Professional Bull Riders rodeo. And in November, theUFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> will finally hold a fight night in New 
York, at Madison Square Garden, having recently overturned a longstanding ban 
in the state.

Those who know say WME-IMG is still trying to figure out exactly what it is it 
has bought 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-06/goldman-sachs-said-to-receive-fed-warning-over-ufc-buyout-debt>
. But it is immediately clear what the UFC has got out of the deal. Just this 
month, it was announced that 23 celebrities 
<http://www.espn.co.uk/mma/story/_/id/17674749/ufc-owner-talent-agency-wme-img-enlists-celebrity-group-investors>
 had invested in the UFC, for, according to reports, a minimum stake of 
$250,000 apiece. Among them are the chat show hosts Conan O’Brien and Jimmy 
Kimmel, a handful of Hollywood celebrities, such as Ben Affleck, Mark Wahlberg, 
and some sports stars, Tom Brady and the Williams sisters. All, of course, 
WME‑IMG clients.

WME-IMG describes itself as “the nexus of sports, entertainment, and fashion”. 
A key part of the UFC’s appeal is the way in which it straddles sport and 
reality TV, which it uses to build emotional ties between the fans and the 
fighters. Bisping got his break on season three of the UFC show The Ultimate 
Fighter. And this, his second fight with Henderson, came about because of the 
rivalry the two men developed during season nine. They coached opposing teams 
and then fought each other at UFC 100, in 2009. Henderson flattened Bisping 
with (what else?) that patented punch of his, in one of the most famous, and 
humiliating, knockouts in UFC history.

Seven years later, Henderson is not even among the UFC’s top 10 middleweights. 
There are higher-ranked fighters who deserved the title shot he just got. But 
he has the backstory and the UFC decided this was the fight people most wanted 
to see. It was not just selling the sport but the storyline it had presented on 
TV. As WME‑IMG’s CEO, Ari Emanuel,told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/10/fashion/fashion-week-spring-2016-reinvented.html>
: “When we look at the world, we see fashion, sports, movies, TV, books: they 
are all just different aspects of global entertainment consumption.” Some fight 
fans will hate the fact but the UFC will fit right in. Norman Mailer described 
boxing as a 20th-century art. The UFC is a very 21st‑century concoction.
 