
Children in Katine's primary schools are finding themselves in even larger 
classes than usual this term.

The Ugandan government has dealt a cruel blow to the sector by stopping the 
secondment of teachers from government schools to non-government-funded 
community schools. 

For instance, in Katine sub-county, Soroti district, where the Guardian and the
African Medical Research Foundation (Amref) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/amref/> are supporting a community 
development project 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/>, a third of 
schools will lose teachers and in most cases that includes, at a day's notice, 
both heads and deputies.

"I cannot believe it," said Michael Emiru, deputy head of Kadinya community 
school for the past six years. Gaunt and worn, he was sitting in the shade of a 
tree leafing through the P5 teachers' handbook from which he had been working 
only that afternoon. "I was telephoned this morning [8 September] and told to 
report to my old school on Monday."

The first any Katine school knew of the edict, which came in a government 
circular issued back in May, was when they attended a training session, 
initiated by Amref, for teachers and parents involved in school management on 
the Wednesday before term began.

For some years the district education office in Soroti has been supporting the 
large number of non-government community schools in the district by providing 
them with teachers, often at a senior level, from government schools. It was 
recognition that universal primary education could only be a paper promise 
unless parents themselves set up schools. There was simply not enough space for 
all the primary-age children to go to government schools, nor funds to build 
new ones.
 All change: deputy headmaster Michael Emiru at Kadinya primary school, 
Katine, north-eastern Uganda Photograph: Graeme Robertson 
In Katine, five of its 15 schools are paid for by the community. And aross 
Soroti district, according to assistant director of education Charles Okiror, 
about a fifth of all primaries are community-funded.

In an area as poor as Katine, it is often a real sacrifice to send children to 
school at all. All parents have to find thousands of shillings each year for 
uniforms, exam fees and exercise books. At community schools they have to find 
as much again to pay fees that in turn pay the teachers. That can be another 
Ushs 6,000 a term. Most families have three or more children in school at any 
one time.

Without community schools the Ugandan government could not boast so proudly 
<http://www.monitor.co.ug/News/-/688324/848940/-/c6yaj0/-/index.html> of its 
successful introduction of universal primary education (UPE) in 1997. Yet it 
does nothing to support them and even bars their staff from government-funded 
training sessions. They have the same relationship to government schools as 
private schools do in the UK – except it is nothing to do with class or 
ambition. Without community schools, millions of children would have no schools 
to go to.

Many parents in Katine find it hard to understand why, if they lived a few 
miles away, they could send their children to a government school and yet get 
no support to send them to a school they can feasibly reach. It seems like an 
entirely arbitrary penalty on a community that has traditionally viewed 
education with suspicion.

It comes as an additional blow when Katine's five community schools are 
struggling to hang on until they are recognised – or coded, in the official 
language – by the government. Last year's application was messed up by the 
district, Charles Okiror now admits. "We submitted the applications late and 
without enough information."

And his protestations that he is confident that all five will be recognised by 
next July are immediately undermined by his admission that the government will 
never code more than one school in a parish.

Three of Katine's five community schools are in one parish, Olwelai, where the 
only government school, with more than a thousand pupils, is already grossly 
overcrowded.

Okiror talks of turning the community schools into satellites of the nearest 
government school, a good idea but not one likely to be accomplished overnight.

The abrupt removal of key teaching staff will be a disastrous blow to morale 
for parents who struggle so hard to send their children to school, and for the 
children who will find themselves in larger classes in a school without a 
leader. And for some families, it will be one more reason not to bother with 
the expense of it all, and revert instead to traditional ways.

• This article was amended on 20 September 2010. The original said that Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> was following Zimbabwe in banning 
untrained teachers. This has been corrected.
 