
In 1997 Uganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> introduced free and 
universal primary education. Enrolment rose from 2 million to 7 million by 2000 
and the country's achievement was touted around the world as a great 
development success story.

However, it was evident from very early on that finding extra, well-qualified 
teachers in a country where 50% of the population is under the age of 15 was 
going to be a challenge, as was providing the infrastructure to match the 
sudden increase in student numbers.
 
And so it has turned out <http://www.eldis.org/id21ext/e1lb1g1.html>. Student 
pass rates have fallen and rates of transition to secondary school are also 
sliding. As standards fall in public education, a social divide is emerging 
between the public and private sectors, with private schools being regarded as 
offering a significantly better education. According to Lawrence Bategeka, from 
the Economic Policy Research Centre, a Ugandan thinktank, around 90% of current 
university students in Uganda were taught in private schools. Moreover, as 
private schooling is not profitable in rural areas, the urban-rural divide is 
opening up as well.

Many governments have to make a trade off between universality of provision 
and standards. It is easy to provide quality education just to a select elite, 
as happened in many wealthy countries until around 100 years ago.

I asked Bategeka whether it was a mistake to open the school gates to millions 
more children when Uganda was obviously not ready to teach them. Wouldn't it 
have been more sensible to increase enrolment more gradually, in line with the 
realistic possibilities of infrastructural and teacher development?

Bategeka thinks the policy could have been implemented better, but he does not 
believe it was a mistake to introduce it. Despite the inevitable concerns about 
standards, there are still millions of children attending school who otherwise 
wouldn't have been, which means they are learning, and that the culture of 
universal education is being ingrained into society for the first time, he 
says. On the back of the policy, the Ugandan government has now introduced 
universal secondary education to encourage more pupils to continue their 
schooling.

Uganda offers an important lesson in development. Sometimes taking a radical, 
and un-costed, step will be reckless and lead to financial problems and even 
disaster. But sometimes doing so constitutes the kind of historic leadership 
required of a head of state, not throwing caution to the wind, but refusing to 
wait until all the elements are perfectly in place before thrusting a country 
forward. Ugandan president Yoweri Museveni did it in 1997 and, for all the 
problems, I imagine the country is grateful.
 