
UK households have been paying too much for their water supply because the 
industry’s regulator which was set up to protect consumers has consistently 
miscalculated price limits, according to a highly critical report from MPs.

Ofwat, the body set up to regulate the privatised industry, has overestimated 
the costs and financing of water companies when carrying out its statutory 
duties, the public accounts committee has concluded.

As a result, the committee said water firms have gained at least £1.2bn over 
five years to 2015 from bills being higher than necessary, while domestic bills 
have climbed to £396 a year.

UK households owe record £2.1bn in water bills
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/01/uk-households-owe-record-21bn-in-water-bills>
 Meg Hillier, the committee’s chair, said the idea that the very body 
responsible for protecting the rights of customers making such basic mistakes 
will outrage the public. “Ofwat was set up to protect the interests of 
customers, most of whom have no choice over who supplies their water yet must 
pay bills typically running to hundreds of pounds. Many householders will 
therefore be appalled to learn these bills could have been smaller had Ofwat 
adopted a different approach to setting price limits for water companies,” she 
said.

“This approach must be reviewed as a priority. We are also calling for greater 
transparency over windfall gains made by water suppliers, and more effective 
action to see these gains passed on to customers. These and other concerns set 
out in our report represent significant and pressing challenges for Ofwat. It 
must move swiftly to develop and present clear plans to achieve a better deal 
for customers, both now and in the years ahead.”

The committee of MPs said Ofwat, set up to protect the interests of consumers, 
had consistently overestimated companies’ financing and tax costs when setting 
price limits.

The National Audit Office examined the profits of water companies last year 
and found that they had benefited from lower than expected tax and borrowing 
costs after a cap on tariffs had been fixed by Ofwat. As a result, companies 
made windfall gains of at least £1.2bn between 2010 and 2015 from bills being 
higher than necessary, the report said.

Water companies' £800m windfall not passed on to consumers, says watchdog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/14/water-companies-windfall-not-passed-on-to-customers-bills-national-audit-office>
The committee found that Ofwat’s efforts to ensure these gains were shared 
with customers “secured limited results that varied significantly” from company 
to company.


Financial support for struggling customers also varied substantially, 
according to the report. The committee said it was also concerned that 
customers in areas of water scarcity were paying to develop expensive new 
capacity despite the possibility of water trading with other companies being 
more cost-effective.


It has urged Ofwat to review how it sets allowances for companies’ cost of 
debt and corporation tax, and report publicly on how it intends to improve its 
performance.
The water industry in England and Wales was privatised in 1989 and currently 
includes 18 large independent, privately owned companies who are monopoly 
suppliers to 22m households.

The average household bill for water and sewerage was £396 in 2014-15. This 
represents a 40% increase in real terms since privatisation, though most of 
this rise took place in the first five-year period 1990-1995.

Ofwat’s chief executive, Cathryn Ross, said she would consider the points made 
by the committee’s report. “PAC’s comments on gains relate to decisions Ofwat 
made six years ago. Since 2012 we’ve stressed that customers are having a 
really tough time, and stepped in to claw back £435m from companies. We then 
challenged companies to reduce bills further, resulting in £3bn of savings, 
which will mean bills fall 5% in real terms over the next five years. Service 
will continue to improve and we will have kept bills below inflation over two 
decades.

“Yet it’s no time for complacency. We’ve made changes so that companies become 
more transparent and resilient. And plan more changes to help create a sector 
customers can trust. That means making companies more efficient, more 
accountable and much better at responding to what customers want. In the last 
decade we have clawed back 800 million from companies’ shareholders, where they 
have let customers down. If companies don’t step up, we’ll step in.”
 