
A group of 50 leading refugee charities and aid agencies has condemned the 
government’s record on the refugee crisis, describing the support offered by 
the UK as “not enough – not even close”.

In a letter to the prime minister before two crucial international refugee 
summits, which Theresa May is due to attend, the charities state that the 
global response so far has been inadequate.


“Of course, the commitment by David Cameron to resettle 23,000 refugees by 
2020 is a welcome step in the right direction. But it is not enough – not even 
close – as hundreds of thousands of refugees remain in desperate need,” the 
letter, signed by Oxfam, the Children’s Society and Christian Aid, among 
others, states.


The charities call on the UK government to adopt three commitments during next 
week’s talks in the US, requesting that the UK should take a leading role in 
“developing a humane, coordinated international response to the millions 
fleeing crisis”, offer safe passage to more refugees, in part by removing 
obstacles to family reunification, and commit to providing better support for 
those refugees who reach the UK so they can rebuild their lives here.


May is due to to attend the UN Summit for Refugees and Migrants 
<http://refugeesmigrants.un.org/summit> next Monday and the US Leaders’ Summit 
on Refugees <http://www.state.gov/p/io/c71574.htm> on Tuesday.


The letter is designed to showcase the strength and unanimity of feeling among 
relevant organisations before arefugee solidarity march 
<http://swruk.org/refugees-welcome-here-2016/#details> scheduled to take place 
in central London on Saturday.


Kate Allen, the director of Amnesty International, one of the letter’s 
signatories, said: “History will judge us for our failure to deal with the 
global refugee crisis. Instead of focusing on putting up more barriers to keep 
people out, the UK must urgently provide the safe and legal routes refugees 
fleeing violence and persecution desperately need.”


The chief executive of the Refugee Council, Maurice Wren, said: “The prime 
minister has the chance to lead by example – by offering more refugees safe 
passage and encouraging other countries to do the same. The time for 
prevarication and evasion is over; world leaders must make sharing 
responsibility for protecting refugees their number one priority.”


World leaders attending Monday’s refugee summit will consider how best to 
respond to “an unprecedented level of human mobility”, with an estimated 65 
million people forcibly displaced in 2015, including 21 million refugees. They 
will discuss signing up to a draft declaration that acknowledges that refugees 
are facing a “desperate ordeal” and pledges that the international community’s 
challenge is “above all moral and humanitarian”.

“We are determined to save lives” and “combat with all the means at our 
disposal the abuses and exploitation suffered by countless refugees and 
migrants in vulnerable situations”, the draft document states.

The letter to the prime minister 
<http://www.refugeecouncil.org.uk/latest/news/4764_britain_must_act_on_refugee_crisis_or_be_party_to_failure>
 reminds her that a year ago 100,000 people marched through London to register 
their dismay at the death of Alan Kurdi, the three-year-old Syrian boy who 
drowned as his family fled to safety, “sending a clear message that this 
country must not stand by while children drown in Europe’s seas”.


The continuation of the crisis, a year later, reflects “the inadequacy of the 
international community’s response until now, and its failure to address the 
root causes”, the letter states, adding that unless constructive action is 
taken by the government “we too will be party to that failure”.

A government spokesperson defended the government’s record, stating: “This 
government has been at the forefront of the international response to the 
humanitarian crisis in Syria. We have pledged £2.3bn in humanitarian aid to 
Syria and neighbouring countries and providing nearly £70m in response to the 
Mediterranean migration crisis.”

 