
"I could see our correspondent making febrile notes.... he recognises there 
are some good stories there…" says Alan Rusbridger in this short film about our 
citizen reporting training programme at Activate South Africa.

He was referring to our Africa correspondent, David Smith. This of course was 
a comment made in jest by Alan- but what this does demonstrate, on a serious 
note, is that there is a wealth of stories out there we could be telling.

I wrote before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/blog/2014/jun/12/marginalised-voices-telling-a-story-only-they-can-tell>
 about our plan to run citizen reporting training programs for marginalised 
voices. The first with communities from all over South Africa in the run up to
Activate <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-johannesburg> 
Johannesburg a few weeks ago, an event where we showcase our Open Journalism 
approach.

People came in with burning social issues that, perhaps, the national media 
were overlooking. Twenty attendees from Lesotho, Durban, Cape Town, Soweto and 
Johannesburg, attended a grueling Two-day training workshop, to help turn them 
into "citizen reporters”. The training covered storytelling, evidence-finding, 
verification and ethics, social media and ways to connect to us directly 
through our digital platforms such asGuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/>.

Tough stories were brought to the workshop. We heard about lives wrecked by 
the DIY drug “Whoonga”, the townships' secret rent boys, the plight of HIV 
orphans in Lesotho, the impact of gentrification in central Johannesburg and 
the community health impact of development in Durban.

During the two days of training we helped the group shape their story ideas in 
order to be “pitched" in a compelling and robust way to Alan and David. The aim 
was that the Guardian would investigate and cover some of what came up.

Directly after the session, however, Alan thought that all five stories, with 
development, could be run in the Guardian. Now contact has been made, David 
plans to investigate what these new "citizen reporters" have brought to our 
attention.

One thing in particular surprised me about the pitching session at activate– 
it was attended by most of South Africa’s national press. One journalist came 
up to me at the end and asked, “Are these stories the Guardian has first rights 
to cover? Because these are stories we should be covering really.” The answer 
is of course not. What’s important is that the stories get told.
 