
The River Lea, north-east London, and a dredger is doing its thing. Dredging. 
Oh dear, I think I know where it’s going, this being the return of Chris Lang’s 
crime dramaUnforgotten (ITV). Yes, here’s a suitcase, pulled from the mud after 
God knows how many years. The workers prise it open …

Jesus! Did you pack this yourself, sir? Although there is no one around to 
ask. Finding out what is packed in it, who packed it, when and why, is down to 
DCI Cassie Stuart (Nicola Walker) and DI Sunny Khan (Sanjeev Bhaskar), who are 
both excellent.

It is a body, of course, though barely recognisable as one. He (it turns out) 
is in the foetal position; possibly because, other than chopping it up, it is 
the only way to get a body into a suitcase. If you are looking for positives to 
take from a suitcase ending, there is a certain symmetry to it – you finish as 
you began. Anyway, there is not much in the way of flesh; instead, the skeleton 
is covered in a thin white waxy film. It is a process known as saponification, 
helped by the chemical makeup of the River Lea and the fat content of the 
person; basically, he has been turned into soap.

Now for the other stuff. In the Cotswolds, a worried mum, also a police 
officer as it happens, and nearing retirement, has a drink with her son, who 
pretends not to be lonely. In Brighton, a gay couple are in the process of 
adopting a little girl. In London, two sisters, both of whom live in the shadow 
of the Shard, although one more opulently than the other, are not behaving in a 
very sisterly way. And, in Salisbury, an inspiring teacher applies for a 
headship.

As he did in the first series of Unforgotten, Lang will take these apparently 
disparate strands, attach them (blue gloves on, please) at one end to our soapy 
suitcase corpse, and weave them into a picture that makes sense. Last time it 
was done with incredible dexterity and imagination, and it shows all the signs 
of being done that way again. Already, at the end of this first episode, a 
corner of the picture, the one with the Cotswolds mother and son, is beginning 
to emerge.

I like so much about Unforgotten. That it is not trying to be too smartarse 
(Sherlock?) clever. Or Scandi-bleak. Cassie and Sunny aren’t tortured geniuses 
with dark secrets. They have their relationship/family troubles (who hasn’t?), 
but they work well together. They are credible, real and, refreshingly, they 
are really into what they do; it rubs off, I am enjoying the procedural police 
work, too, finding out about old pagers and watches.

But it is also very human, and it never lets you forget that the slimy chap is 
not just a case in a case; he was also someone’s husband, father, son and 
friend. I am excited to find out how it all weaves together, to see the 
completed picture. I also care.

In Spies (Channel 4), 16 volunteers are put through tests to find out if 
they have what it takes to be in the intelligence services. A lot of inner 
confidence, no need for lots of public praise or recognition, an interest in 
other people and the ability to get into other people’s minds and to blend in, 
of course, according to the former spies – Control – who are overseeing 
procedures. Actually, there are 15 volunteers, because one of the 16 is a mole 
from Control, inevitably. (You would think they would have suspected that: I’m 
not hopeful about this lot.)

Spies is made by the same people who made the addictive SAS: Who Dares Wins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/18/sas-who-dares-wins-review-andrew-marr>
, and follows a similar formula. But it is less successful televisually because 
watching hard men being broken in special forces training is more fun than 
seeing people try to come up with convincing cover stories or trying to follow 
a man around Brixton. The tests are based on real intelligence officer training 
exercises, which does give the whole thing authenticity, but it seems that 
real-life spying is not The Night Manager.

Nice location for their base, though: a disused, Soviet-looking, concrete 
industrial facility, the identity of which is not disclosed, although my 
intelligence reveals that is Fawley power station near Southampton. From where 
it is probably possible to make out – even spy on – the real No 1 military 
training establishment along the coast at Stokes Bay …

Hey, I’d be better at this than any of these clowns. Come on, I’m ready, tap 
me on the shoulder, someone. Or however it’s done these days – probably a 
direct message on Twitter.
 