
It was good to see the majority of you on board with the first episode, even 
though it was heavy on setup, light on payoff. The tempo picks up nicely in 
this episode, with plenty of revelations, intrigue and potential motive to bury 
a young man under a building.


The investigation

“Let’s start making connections,” Sunny tells the troops as the excavation of 
the Jimmy Sullivan case begins in earnest. Cassie travels up to Liverpool to 
visit Jimmy’s Irish mother, Maureen Sullivan. A grisly, abusive marriage to 
Jimmy’s father ensured a miserable upbringing for the boy, and his departure to 
London was to escape his father’s fists as well as to earn enough cash to 
secure Maureen’s exit. The moment the letters home from Jimmy stopped she knew 
something wasn’t right. There’s excellent, quietly powerful work from Frances 
Tomelty in these scenes – solid weight behind Cassie’s belief that as long as 
there’s someone around affected by it, murder stays murder.

Sir Philip Cross

Sir Philip doesn’t suffer fools, or indeed anyone, gladly – even if they 
happen to be his son. He refuses Josh permission to put his name on his 
letterheads as he regards his new associates as no better than criminals.

He should know. When DCI Kendall visits local face Brian Kendrick, he 
remembers the “cocky little runt” Frankie C quite well. In addition to his 
fabled market stall days, he was a driver for East End villains the Fenwicks. 
It’s enough to bring Cassie and Sunny round to interrupt his morning swim, 
something he’s not too crazy about. Jimmy’s photo sparks an immediate flashback 
to greeting him in a pub, though he tells the police he has no clue who he is. 
The moment the Fenwicks are mentioned, the temperature immediately plummets – 
the no-comment face comes on, they are ushered out and Sir Philip starts 
lawyering up. Not sure exactly what this looks like, but it’s not innocence.


Liam Gough certainly isn’t giving him a pass. The Whitehall kingmaker makes it 
clear Sir Philip had no right keeping his connection to the Fenwicks from him. 
With Sir Philip already announced as entrepreneurship czar, the government 
can’t unring that particular bell, and won’t take kindly to being made a 
laughing stock.


“It’s not up to you to decide what is or isn’t fucking important,” Gough 
chides him.

But when Gough tries to put him in his place Sir Philip cuts up a little 
rough. It may be a while since he’s been called it but Frankie C is always 
there, bubbling just under the surface for anyone taking liberties, real or 
imagined.

Lizzie Wilton

More shocking is the revelation that the likable, friendly Lizzie Wilton was 
once violent, racist Beth Laws. The faded SKINS tattoo on her hand bears 
witness to her unlikely past, as does her old landlady Mrs Leeming. She 
remembers Beth and her bovver-boy lover, Vincent Erskine, quite well. In her 
time as the better half of the skinhead Bonnie and Clyde, Beth racked up eight 
convictions including a racially motivated ABH on a Caribbean man, committed 
with Erskine.

All this takes the cops back to White City to visit Liz at the football club. 
Once again, the photo produces a quick flashback and an even quicker denial. 
That’s Jimmy – the boy no one can forget, and whom no one wants to remember. 
Lizzie’s memory seems a bit dicey all round, but the ever-efficient Cassie is 
on hand to help. She tells her Mrs Leeming’s recollections of the Skinhead 
Couple From Hell and reminds her of her criminal record.


“How could I be a racist?” asks Lizzie. “You’ve seen my husband.” 

Now’s probably not a good time to start pitching for the ethnic minority vote, 
Lizzie.

Robert Grieves

The great Saint Gildas community hall heist of 2015 may not be Brink’s-Mat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/jun/08/ukcrime>, but it is likely to cause 
a few waves here. It doesn’t take a genius to smell there’s something off about 
it, particularly when Robert appears to hock his wife’s ring without her 
knowledge. Whatever went on, he is able to phone Geoff to tell him that the 
missing £2,000 has been transferred back to the diocesean accounts. It was a 
simple accounting error by the wife, he assures him. It’s a weight off Geoff’s 
mind – and ours.

No such luck for Robert, whose anxiety levels shoot through the roof when 
Geoff mentions the police are seeking him in connection with a historical 
crime. And just like the others, he remembers Jimmy, too. After that, he visits 
a payphone and leaves a voicemail message for a woman called Jojo.


“I need to talk to you as soon as possible.” 

Let’s assume it’s the Jojo from Jimmy’s diary and wonder once again: what did 
Robert do?

Eric Slater

“You evil fucking beast! I know what you are. I know what you did!” 

It’s not Poirot but it’s a compelling j’accuse thrown at her husband by 
Claire. Of course it’s the dementia talking, but it feels that there is more 
than a grain of truth in her rantings.

When Eric reads about the discovery of Jimmy’s remains, he flashes back to a 
torrid sexual encounter between – who? It’s too fleeting to make out. With the 
cops discovering Eric’s past as a bookkeeper at Arlingham House, there’s more 
to be uncovered soon.


Notes & queries

Here’s a weird one. Cassie’s father dumps a load of her mother’s old letters 
on her before disappearing out for the evening. It looks like she will be 
joining the rest in uncovering some uncomfortable truths about her past.

“What, is she your bitch now?” The peer pressure that Curtis is already 
experiencing because of his relationship with Lizzie will only intensify if the 
skinhead years become public knowledge. Expect to hear more on this.

Is Robert’s money manoeuvring related to Arlingham House, or is it there just 
to illustrate a pattern of of reckless behaviour?

I think we’re going to get some more revealing outbursts from Claire but will 
anyone be listening?

Sir Philip is easily the meanest of the four. Robert, Lizzie and Eric seem 
fundamentally decent sorts, probably guilty of cowardice, keeping quiet or some 
other sins of omission. Only Sir Philip has the cold, fishlike eyes of a killer.

So what’s the betting on who the killer is and why? Let us know below the line.
 