
There is currently no shortage of commentators staring in the rear-view mirror 
and finding post-facto clarity in the ascension of President-elect Trump. I 
offer myself as Exhibit A.

Those who saw the train wreck approaching come to the post mortem with a 
little more credibility. None more so than Robert Reich who in January wrote a 
piece entitledWhy the White Working Class Abandoned the Democratic Party 
<http://www.alternet.org/economy/robert-reich-why-white-working-class-abandoned-democratic-party>
.

The former Labor Secretary in the first Clinton White House pointed the finger 
at both Bill Clinton and Barack Obama for welching on campaign promises to make 
it easier to form unions. He argued the failure to honour these pledges had 
contributed to the decline in union numbers from 24% of the private sector in 
1992 to just 12% today.

Democrats once represented the working class. Not any more | Robert Reich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/democrats-working-class-americans-us-election>
The decline in union membership not only made it harder to fight the forces of 
neo-liberalism that created the populist backlash through less secure jobs and 
lower incomes. It has also made it harder to organise these workers politically 
and get out to vote when it mattered.

Well before Trump’s hostile takeover of the Republican Party, Reich predicted 
the conditions were open for a candidate to draw workers away from a Democratic 
Party that had been a willing architect of so many of these people’s 
difficulties.

Reich’s latest book Saving Capitalism is essential post-election reading: he 
dissects how the fundamentals of capitalism (the rules of market power, 
patents, contracts, bankruptcy and monopolies) have been rewritten over the 
past 30 years for the benefit of the very, very rich.

But the sting in his analysis is how this shift in power has been allowed to 
occur – the increasing sophistication around the corporate lobbying machine and 
the decline of what Reich calls the “countervailing power” of the rest of 
society.

Reich argues this countervailing power existed in the unions, business 
association and community groups that people used to belong to that organised 
at a local level to demand their interests be recognised and balanced the 
demands of capital.

Countervailing power also existed in the grassroots bases of the political 
parties, that kept representatives anchored to their community.

As these groups have become weaker with fewer people joining, political 
parties have become corporate fundraising machines, driven by the interests of 
their new constituency with the only truly effective political activism now 
coming from the top down.

Findings in this week’s Essential Report 
<http://www.essentialvision.com.au/membership-of-groups> confirm the decline in 
countervailing power is not a purely American phenomenon.
Are you currently a member or have you ever been a member of any of the 
following groups? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1X7NYHIEiGvwwKg4Jt5ju3cKGXtEKK-Cm7_7S39iDxkE>
While the decline in membership of unions is well documented, these figures 
show they are not alone in experiencing declining density levels.

From churches to sporting clubs, school councils to environmental groups and 
of course the disappearing political party – on every category there are more 
people who had previously been a member than are members now.

More than half of the respondents say they are currently not a member of any 
organisation on this list, while a quarter say they have never been a member of 
any of these organisations.

Ask people why they are not joining and the plot thickens.
Do you agree or disagree with the following statements? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1rAFunxB8tzYmSathW_fhL_lGOJD4YwJtuozZrX7oaaQ>
Half of all respondents say they don’t have the time to spare outside home and 
work duties. More than one third say irregular hours mean they can’t commit to 
organisations.

These inhibiters – reduced job security and longer workers hours - are part of 
the vicious cycle of the reduced power of working people to actively pursue 
their interests.

The responses also pick up a sense of inevitability in the decline of 
countervailing power – with nearly a half saying they just aren’t joiners, even 
while they accept the decline in groups is not a positive development.

In the absence of traditional member-based structures some have put their 
faith in online communities to fill the void, with its click-tivism, viral 
memes and data-driven micro-targeting taking politics to a higher level of 
sophistication.

There are committed and smart activists doing their best to create online 
structures that can exercise countervailing power but the challenges are 
profound and fundamental.

A Get Up! email petition is not the same as coordinated campaign by a 
representative member-based organisation, nor is a Facebook group fuelled by 
the same power dynamics as a bricks and mortar community group.

To avoid the American nightmare, Australia needs solidarity | Van Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/to-avoid-the-american-nightmare-australia-needs-solidarity>
This might sound analogue – but virtual networks have been found wanting when 
it comes to winning on the issues that matter: from climate change to asylum 
seekers, the noise has not translated into positive change.

Yes, they have been useful vehicles for building coalitions in support of the 
issue of the day, but then they are on to the issue of tomorrow with equal 
levels of energy and outrage.

That’s why a strong trade union movement – and industry associations, 
environmental groups and churches too – not only promote the interests of their 
members but make the broader society more stable and resilient to populist 
disruption.

It’s also why the Turnbull government fixation on weakening the CFMEU through 
the ABCC and making the obligations of union officials akin to professional 
company directors has a broader political significance.

If Reich is correct, a society that doesn’t find ways for citizens to be 
active through organised structures is a vulnerable society. And if you want a 
true act of resistance in these Trump-ian times, a first step might be to join 
something. Anything.
 