
Last week, GCSE results  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/live/2016/aug/25/gcse-results-day-2016-uk-students-get-their-grades-live>
were delivered to schoolchildren all over the country. The great middle-class 
sausage machine opens its maw – next A-levels, then university and onwards 
until the Elysian Fields of a profession or a desk job. Two of my four children 
have been through higher education and I expect the other two will do the same. 
However, the magical power of academic qualifications may be overstated. A 
recent Aviva survey showed thatmore than a third of graduates regret going to 
university 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/10/more-than-a-third-of-uk-graduates-regret-attending-university>
.

My own experience of university, as a mature student in the 1980s, led me to 
discover something very important about myself – namely, that I was not nearly 
as clever as I thought I was. I found my three years at the London School of 
Economics a mortal struggle against the limitations of my own intellect and my 
rather inadequate state education (I had two poor A-levels).

Perhaps this is what a lot of those regretful students feel – that they were 
led into doing something they were fundamentally unsuited for, just to fit in 
with society’s norms and expectations. I went to university not to get a job or 
because I was expected to, but because I had a curiosity that sometimes outran 
my intellect.

So, given my own struggles, should I be so keen to put my own children through 
the same experience? It’s a difficult question. I had a breakdown after 
university and was depressed much of the time I was there, partly (but not 
solely) because of the rigors required of me. I wasn’t unusual – in 2014-15,
more than 43,000 students received counselling at Russell Group universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/13/tuition-fees-have-led-to-surge-in-students-seeking-counselling>
.

What I wanted was not to “get” anything, but to train my mind to think more 
clearly – to give me the tools to analyse information. To this day, I do not 
know if the process was a success. It did teach me, however, a very useful 
truth, one that university was once meant to inculcate – how little I knew, 
indeed, how little could be known. In short, I spent the three years exploring 
the vast chasm between belief and knowledge. And that was truly valuable – 
certainly if you wanted to be a novelist.

This profound negative no longer appears to be a stated function of higher 
education – understandably, as it would be quite hard to sell. The idea now is 
that as a consumer, you “get” something out of it – a cartload of facts, an 
increase in your pay packet, a sense of confidence, and expansion of contacts 
and experiences.

Perhaps you do get those things, but the humility that I always feel should be 
the result of higher education seems lacking. Maybe this is why so many 
children who go to university are disappointed and regretful – not because they 
had a bad experience, but because they were misled as to what they should have 
expected in the first place.

What some universities seem to offer, certainly in the humanities, is the 
illusion of knowledge, the vocabulary of intellect – and in the worse case, an 
inculcated view of the world rather than the ability to think for yourself. But 
maybe that’s because I know too much about French literary theory.

Having expressed these reservations, I cannot deny that my eldest children 
loved university and my youngest will undoubtedly follow in their path. I wish 
them well. But students should be in no doubt – university, as well as being 
expensive, can be painful and although you may get something valuable out of 
it, it might not be what you expect. University, particularly in the 
humanities, is, or should be, a door into doubt, not a leap into “knowledge”. 
And unless you understand that it is there to help you to frame questions, 
rather than to give you answers, the numbers of those disappointed with higher 
education is unlikely to fall in the near future.

@timlottwriter 
<https://twitter.com/timlottwriter?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 