
Six years ago this week, my mother died in a National Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Service hospital. She was 76 and 
had been admitted three weeks previously for an operation that could not be 
described as minor or routine, exactly, but which was not expected to result in 
her death; certainly not by her or by her family, and not by her doctors 
either. Surgically speaking, in fact, it went well, but there were 
complications, most significantly the respiratory problems that she developed a 
couple of days after the procedure.

When my father and I arrived to visit her that morning, we found her in severe 
post-operative pain; she was so distressed by it, and we by her distress, that 
her laboured breathing didn't seem the most important thing going on. My memory 
is of waiting for someone to arrive who had the authority to increase her pain 
relief; it seemed to take far too long. But I also remember a senior nurse who 
was concerned by her patient's decreased lung function and sent her for a chest 
x-ray.

My mother never returned to the ward, going instead to a high-dependency bed 
and then, very shortly afterwards, to the intensive care unit. That afternoon, 
I recall holding her hand while doctors fitted an oxygen tent like a spaceman's 
helmet over her head. If that didn't work to ease her breathing, they said, 
they would induce a coma and put her on a ventilator. It didn't.

We had to leave the ICU while she was put to sleep. One of my clearest 
memories is of pausing for a moment on my way out and turning back to look at 
her and of her, exhausted and in pain, weakly raising a hand in goodbye. When I 
think of that moment, the image seems almost cinematic, even archetypal; the 
brief farewell that prefigures the longer, final one.

My mother spent the rest of her life in the intensive care unit and most of it 
unconscious. She was never able to breathe unaided again, nor to speak or eat 
or drink. Despite sporadic, short-lived and appallingly hope-inducing 
improvements in her condition, her pneumonia triggered other crises in her body 
and eventually she wasn't able to withstand them further. She died on 14 
December 2006, at around 4pm (I used to know the time to the minute; now I 
would have to consult her death certificate).

When I left the hospital on the day she died, I felt that everything that 
could have been done for her had been done. I believed that every treatment 
option had been explored, every drug and therapy assessed and either deployed 
or rejected, indeed to the point of a doctor explaining to me – it hadn't even 
occurred to me to ask – why my mother would not survive a lung transplant. When 
the same doctor explained to me that my mother was going to die, and soon, he 
told me, gravely, how he regarded it as a personal defeat.

I have no way of knowing whether my family's experience of intensive care is 
typical. Common sense and the evidence of my eyes, though, tells me it wasn't 
unusual. During the two-and-a-half weeks that my mother spent in that hushed, 
semi-lit space, with its syncopated rhythms of care and catastrophe, there was 
time to notice some things: that the nurses rarely seemed to be still for a 
moment; that one of them rang in on her day off to see how my mother was; that 
in the moments after her death, another turned away to hide the fact that she 
was crying. It was no exaggeration then, and it is no exaggeration now, to say 
that the compassion and dedication of those doctors and nurses made the worst 
thing that has ever happened to my family easier to weather. I can only really 
speak for my father and me. But I hold to the belief that the same was true for 
my mum.

I am always more prone to tears at this time of year, but I doubt I was the 
only one to cry when the Labour MPAnn Clwyd  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/dec/04/ann-clwyd-husband-died-hen>
described the agony that she has suffered over the death of her husband. Owen 
Roberts died in University College Hospital in Wales in Cardiff in October, of 
hospital-acquired pneumonia. Clearly, his health was fragile; he had been 
suffering from multiple sclerosis for more than 30 years and his condition had 
deteriorated this year. He had used a wheelchair for the past two years; one 
must assume that his mobility was severely impaired.

So it was nearly unbearable to hear Ann Clwyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-clwyd> speak – as she did in 
interviews on the airwaves and in print and, perhaps most movingly, in an 
impassioned speech to the House of Commons – of her husband's tall frame 
crushed against the bars of a too-small bed, of his face painfully constricted 
by an oxygen mask, of his eyes and lips dried out by a fan that he couldn't 
turn away from. Perhaps most painful was her anguish over the fact that her 
husband, protected only by a thin cover, was cold. It is surely one of our most 
basic human impulses: keep babies, the sick and the dying warm.

Ann Clwyd has railed at what she calls the "almost callous lack of care" that 
her husband received; at how she feels he died "like a battery hen". She has 
related how, when she asked why he wasn't in intensive care, she was told there 
were others in a worse condition than he was; how his final moments came in a 
cramped and noisy ward, with no one but his wife seeming to pay any attention 
to him; how she is haunted by the questions she didn't ask, the almighty fuss 
she didn't make. In response, the hospital has invited her to meet them so that 
a "full and formal" investigation might take place.

It is not unusual for a bereaved relative to become preoccupied by, even 
fixated with, the circumstances of their loved one's death; to fret over what 
wasn't done, how things could have been different.

Despite all that I've written about my mother's death, I did exactly the same 
and I think now that it is a displacement technique. Whatever our rational 
minds might know, we torment ourselves with the possibility that we should have 
done better by our loved one; that we should have interposed ourselves between 
them and the end.

Ann Clwyd could not have done more for her husband than love him and she 
cannot do more now than register her outrage at the manner of his passing. If 
what she says is true – and what would it profit her to embroider? – then his 
nurses, his doctors and his health service have failed him and are doubtless 
failing others too.

Although I have never thought the way my mother died "lucky", I was always 
grateful that she was spared the business and the impersonality of an open 
ward. But that's wrong. Not everyone can die in intensive care. But wherever 
you die in a British hospital, your last hours should be as comfortable and 
peaceful as possible. If that's too much to ask, then we've gone seriously 
astray.

• This article will not be opened to comments
 