What was the official motto of Donald’s Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign?  
Make America Great Again.  We’re Gonna Build a Wall.  Only Trump Can Fix It.  I 
Moved On Her Like a Bitch, But I Couldn’t Get There. Complete the tweet, pt 1: 
“I refuse to call Megyn Kelly a bimbo, because that would not be politically 
correct …”  “… Instead I will only call her a lightweight reporter!”  “But you 
know what I mean!”  “You can draw your own conclusions, people!”  “Sad.” Which 
of the following is not a nickname conferred by Trump on an opponent during the 
campaign?  Lyin’ Ted Cruz.  Crooked Hillary Clinton.  Little Marco Rubio.  
Stupid Ben Carson. What is President-elect Trump’s secret-service code name?  
Combover.  Apprentice.  Mogul.  Tycoon. What is his wife Melania’s code name?  
Muse.  Model.  Michelle.  Martyr. Complete the tweet, pt 2: “Look where the 
world is today, a total mess, and ISIS is still running around wild …”  “The 
Pope just doesn’t get it!”  “I can fix it fast, Hillary has no chance!”  
“Although obviously it’s much more complicated than that.”  “Sad.” Trump has 
steadfastly denied the existence of global warming. Where, in May, did he make 
an exception?  In a speech delivered at a university graduation ceremony.  In a 
late-night tweet, subsequently deleted.  In a planning application for sea 
defences at one of his golf courses.  In a Fox News interview with Megyn Kelly. 
Which of the following is part of the statement released by Trump in the wake 
of the so-called “Pussygate” scandal, in which he was heard boasting of 
committing sexual assault in a 2005 recording?  “Obviously, I’m embarrassed and 
ashamed. It’s no excuse, but this happened 11 years ago – I was younger, less 
mature, and acted foolishly in playing along.”  “Bill Clinton has said far 
worse to me on the golf course – not even close.”  “The American people have 
more important things to worry about right now.”  “Anyone who knows me knows 
this isn’t me.” Complete the tweet pt 3: “Just tried watching Saturday Night 
Live – unwatchable! Totally biased, not funny and the Baldwin impersonation 
just can’t get any worse …”  “Things will change when I am president!”  
“#failingNBC going downhill fast!”  “No talent whatsoever!”  “Sad.” Thanks to 
the peculiarities of the US electoral system, Donald Trump gained the 
presidency even though his opponent won the popular vote. How many times had 
this happened before in America’s history?  Never.  Once.  Four times.  Seven 
times. How does Trump prefer to characterise an election result in which he 
triumphed in the electoral college but lost the popular vote by 2.8m?  “Just 
one of those things.”  “A respectable margin of victory.”  “A landslide.”  “A 
legally binding result.” Complete the tweet pt 4: “Nobody should be allowed to 
burn the American flag – if they do, there must be consequences …”  “Should be 
public order offence!”  “Perhaps fine or forfeit student loans!”  “Perhaps loss 
of citizenship or year in jail!”  “Freedom of expression is for losers!”  You 
got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  