
It's walnut time. As autumn deepens, these beauties are finally ripening. 
Walnut trees do not pepper our gardens as plentifully as, say, apples, plums or 
even hazels, but as we rediscover their charms, more and more of these lovely 
trees are being planted both domestically and commercially.

If you've got the space to grow a walnut tree (or two: they crop better if 
cross-pollinated), and intend to stay put for the next decade or so, bung it in 
this winter. You'll find the best croppers onMartin Crawford's list 
<http://www.agroforestry.co.uk>. They are a magnificent investment.

Meanwhile, visit a farm shop at this time of year and you've a good chance of 
finding English wet walnuts. You can also buy them online (trykentishcobnuts.com
 <http://www.kentishcobnuts.com>). Grab this home-grown harvest wherever you 
come across them: they are a short seasonal treat.

Wet walnuts might better be called "fresh". The shells are hard and look a lot 
like the "dry" walnuts on sale around Christmas. They might be less 
polished-looking, but the joy is on the inside: they are paler, plumper, their 
whorls less compact. In the mouth, they're tender and juicy, yielding rather 
than snapping with a crunch. The flavour is sweet and creamy.

The best way to enjoy them is to put a bowlful on the table with a few apples 
or pears, perhaps a wedge of cheddar or lancashire, and set to with your 
nut-crackers. The labour of liberating the kernels from their curved shell-beds 
is a sweet one, meditative and rewarding.

Any surplus wet nuts are fantastic in autumn salads, adding substance, texture 
and that very special flavour. Mingle them with something green and leafy, 
something salty (bacon, ham, cheese) and something fruity (apples or pears); a 
bit of celery crunch won't go amiss, either. Dress with a vinaigrette made 
creamy with a spoonful of mayo and/or yoghurt, and you have yourself a Waldorf 
variation par excellence.

Sadly, wet walnuts don't keep for more than a few weeks, so the bulk of the 
crop is kiln-dried and it's these crisper, drier walnuts that we buy the rest 
of the year. I use them liberally in both sweet and savoury dishes. They are 
the most interesting of nuts, with a little tannin in the kernel skin, and that 
creamy, oil-rich shortness that makes them so moreish. Chop them into a pasta 
sauce with olive oil and garlic (with parsley and cheddar, they make a great 
English pesto), or fold into bread dough with a few dried fruits for the 
ultimate tea loaf.

Chicory, ricotta, bacon and walnut salad 

This showcases the milky smoothness of wet walnuts, but it works a treat with 
dry, too. Serves four.

A trickle of olive or rapeseed oil
6 rashers streaky bacon, cut into thin lardons 
3-4 heads chicory
125g ricotta
200g shelled walnuts 

For the dressing
2 tbsp finely chopped parsley
1 tbsp baby capers, rinsed and dried
1 tsp English mustard
1 tsp honey
A scrap of garlic (¼ clove), crushed
2 tsp cider vinegar
5 tbsp olive oil
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Put a trickle of oil into a nonstick frying pan on a medium heat. Add the 
bacon and fry briefly until crisp. Set aside on kitchen paper.

Put all the dressing ingredients in a jam jar – add just a little salt at this 
stage, because the capers are quite salty – screw on the lid and shake to 
combine. Season to taste.

Arrange the chicory on plates. Dot the cheese on top, scatter on the nuts and 
spoon on the dressing. Sprinkle on some crisp bacon bits and serve.

Walnut and honey tart

In this scrumptious tart, super-sweet caramel is cut by the bitterness of the 
nuts. Serves four to six.

For the pastry
175g plain flour 
25g icing sugar 
Pinch of salt
100g cold, unsalted butter, cut into cubes 
1 egg yolk 
A little cold milk (or water)

For the filling
100g caster sugar
50g unsalted butter, at room temperature, cut into small pieces
150ml double cream, not fridge-cold
50g clear honey
¼ tsp fine salt
200g walnuts
Grated zest of 1 orange (optional)

For the pastry, put the flour, sugar and salt in a food processor and 
blitz briefly to combine (or sieve into a bowl). Add the butter and blitz 
again (or rub in with your fingertips), until the mixture resembles 
breadcrumbs. Add the egg yolk and just enough milk or water to bring the mix 
together into clumps – probably no more than a tablespoon or two – then knead 
gently into a ball. Wrap in clingfilm and chill for 30 minutes.

Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Roll out the pastry fairly thinly and 
use it to line a 20cm tart tin, letting the excess hang over the sides. Line 
with baking parchment and baking beans. Place on a baking sheet, bake for 15 
minutes, remove the parchment and beans, and bake for 10 minutes more, until 
the pastry is lightly golden. Trim the excess pastry from the sides.

For the filling, put the sugar in a pan over a medium-low heat. After a couple 
of minutes, it will start to melt at the edges. Swirl it gently as it liquefies 
and browns. (You can stir it a little, but be restrained or it may 
crystallise.) Cook for a minute or so, still swirling the pan gently, until you 
have a dark golden brown caramel.

Immediately remove from the heat, add the butter and let it melt: the caramel 
will bubble and steam. Gently stir in the melted butter, then add the cream a 
little at a time, stirring in each addition before adding the next, until you 
have a smooth sauce. Add the honey and salt. (If you have any crystallised 
lumps, pass through a sieve.)

Add the nuts and orange zest, if using, to the sauce and pour it into the 
pastry case. Bake for 20 minutes, until the caramel is bubbling and the walnuts 
toasted. Leave to cool, and serve in slices topped with a dollop of crème 
fraîche or Greek yoghurt.

Apple snow with walnut shortbread 
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's apple snow with walnut shortbread: 'Perfect 
partners.' Photograph: Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
Apple snow is an old-fashioned concoction of apples, sugar, egg and cream. 
Salty-sweet, crumbly walnut shortbread (use "dry" walnuts) is the perfect 
partner. Serves four.

500g cooking apples
75g caster sugar
Grated zest and juice of 1 lemon
1 large egg white
150ml double cream

For the shortbread (makes 15-20 biscuits) 
100g walnuts
100g soft unsalted butter
50g caster sugar
100g plain flour
¼ tsp salt
A little demerara sugar

First make the shortbread. Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Put the 
walnuts on a baking sheet and toast in the oven for five minutes, until just 
starting to colour. Leave to cool, then chop medium finely.

Turn the oven to 170C/335F/gas mark 3. Line a large baking tray with parchment 
paper. Beat the butter and sugar, sift in the flour and salt, add the walnuts 
and bring together with a spoon. Use your hands to bring the dough into a ball. 
Transfer to a floured surface and roll to 5mm thick. Cut into squares or use a 
6cm cutter to stamp out discs. Transfer to the tray, and bake for 15-20 
minutes, until just coloured on top and pale golden brown on the base. Sprinkle 
with demarara while still hot, then transfer to a rack to cool.

To make the snow, peel and core the apples and slice thin directly into a 
saucepan. Add 50g of the sugar, the lemon juice and zest, and 50ml water, bring 
to a simmer and cook for 15 minutes, stirring often, until the apples have 
broken down into a purée. (If you prefer, rub it through a sieve to create a 
completely smooth purée.) Leave to cool.

Whisk the egg white until it holds soft peaks, then add the remaining sugar 
and whisk until you have a meringue that holds soft peaks. Fold this lightly 
into the cold purée.

Whip the cream until it holds soft peaks, then fold into the apple, keeping as 
much air in the mix as possible. Spoon into four small dishes and refrigerate 
for an hour or so before serving with the shortbread. 

• River Cottage is offering Guardian readers the opportunity to join its 
two-day cookery school in November or December for a special autumn price; for 
details, go torivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> and use the promo 
code GUARDIAN75 when booking.
 