
A Democratic senator has accused Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> of using antitrust cases to 
disguise its own technology interests, the latest exchange in an ongoing tussle 
between American tech giants and European governments over privacy.

Virginia’s Mark Warner locked horns with former European digital commissioner 
Neelie Kroes, who appeared alongside him at the Consumer Electronics Show in 
Las Vegas. The senator questioned the motives behind the EU’s plans for
pan-European data privacy rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/16/eu-agrees-draft-text-pan-european-data-privacy-rules>
.

“The actions of the EU may have been industrial policy saying, ‘We want to try 
and support more European tech in the guise of anti-trust’, or for security 
concerns, saying, ‘We have to locate servers in certain places in terms of 
locating information’,” he said.

“That is more about 20th century nationalistic policy than about technology.”

Kroes headed the EU’s high-profile case against Microsoft, among others, 
during her decade-long tenure at the European commission, a case that set a 
precedent for the current antitrust investigation againstGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/15/google-faces-antitrust-action-from-eu-competition-watchdog>
. Microsoft was eventually fined a total of €1.64bn (about $1.8bn) for 
anticompetitive practices.

“I am a strong believer in competition,” Kroes responded. “You are not doing 
the best for innovation if you are a monopolist. Antitrust is not against the 
companies – that is not the goal. The goal is to give consumers the right 
products, in quality and price.”

“I was fighting like hell that it was European competition policy [not 
national policy], otherwise it doesn’t work.”

Google recently has stepped up its fight against the EU case, enlisting EU and 
US politicians and officials to lobby on its behalf,a Guardian investigation 
found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/17/google-lobbyists-congress-antitrust-brussels-eu>
.


Warner said regulation had created a business environment that had allowed 
innovative new sharing economy companies to develop but that regulation should 
be collaborative whether concerning security, privacy or the issues around 
wearables and health data.


“We could do more on healthcare reform by talking to tech companies than with 
some of the legislation we have done on the floor,” he said.


On the debates surrounding the exploding sharing economy, Warner said: “The 
gig economy is still early enough that if we challenge the tech community and 
not think about this as a traditional Republican v Democrat, right v left issue 
… we can find solutions outside Washington.”

“Folks want some social insurance … this is an opportunity to rethink the 
social contract between an employer and a person who works.”

Kroes said it was imperative that Europe protect labour rights in the face of 
gig economy firms, which she described as “an attack on democracy”. Describing 
the different social values between Europe and the US, she said that her 10 
years in Brussels and the Netherlands had confirmed the principle of protecting 
people.

Warner pointed to southern Virginia, traditionally an economy built on 
tobacco, textiles and furniture, as an example of a community that needed to 
share in the rewards of the growing tech industry. “We must make sure this 
transformation doesn’t just take place in vibrant communities … but that 
innovation is spread around the country and the world. The bubbling up of 
innovation needs to be dispersed.”

Warner also described America’s tax system as “dysfunctional” and said that 
with $18.5tn of debt, the US does not generate the revenues it needs to make 
investments in education and public infrastructure, which he said is at 
historic lows.

He also commented on immigration and criticised strict rules that prevent 
talented students from staying in the US after they complete their study.

“Immigration reform is essential for economic prosperity,” he said. “One thing 
that I hope we maintain is that no matter where you come from, America has 
truly been the one place where you can move here and become a first generation 
American.”

That would not be true in India or France, he said: “It is part of the secret 
sauce of our country.”
 