
The unexpected death of Antonin Scalia leaves the supreme court with only 
eight members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/14/supreme-court-vote-eight-justices-deadlock-nomination-scalia-obama>
 – and the potential outcomes of several pending cases hanging in the balance.


If the Democratic party controlled the Senate, Barack Obama would now be able 
to name a replacement, and those upcoming cases likely to produce a closely 
divided court would simply be held over until the new justice was confirmed.

But with Republicans in control of the Senate and openly proclaiming their 
refusal to confirm anyone nominated by Obama, it looks likely that there will 
be an eight-person supreme court until the end of 2016 – and possibly for quite 
a while longer.

This has major implications for several key cases the court has heard or will 
hear this term.

Some of them might be held over to the next term – although the intransigent 
attitude of Senate Republicans makes this less likely, since the court will 
probably be reluctant to let these cases remain unresolved through the whole of 
2016.

If the court hears a case and deadlocks at four between the liberal and 
conservative wings of the court - justice Anthony Kennedy is often seen as the 
swing vote between what was, before Scalia’s death, roughly speaking a court of 
four liberals and four conservatives – it can either hold the case over or 
reaffirm the decision of the lower court without creating a precedent, almost 
as if it had never heard the case.

Going through the big pending cases one by one, it is evident that liberals 
are generally going to benefit most from the closely divided court following 
Scalia’s death.

Unions

Friedrichs v California Teachers Association: After oral arguments in January, 
it seemed virtually certain that the supreme court would rule 5-4 that laws 
that require workers protected by public sector unions to pay dues for 
nonpolitical activities – ie collective bargaining – even if they decline to 
join the unionviolate the first amendment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/11/supreme-court-1977-ruling-non-union-worker-fees>
. Scalia’s death will probably mean a deadlock, and since the lower court ruled 
in favor of the union position, the California law will remain in place.Likely 
outcome: liberal win

Voting rights

Evenwel v Abbott: This case concerned how states count population for the 
purposes of districting. Texas wanted to change fromcounting total population 
to counting voters 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/09/us/politics/supreme-court-to-hear-arguments-on-one-person-one-vote.html?_r=0>
, which would leave minority populations potentially unrepresented. (Voters 
tend to be whiter and more affluent than the population as a whole, so the 
result of counting voters rather than population for districting would be to 
shift power from urban areas and minorities to whiter and more rural areas.) It 
was unclear after oral argument if there was a majority in favor of the state’s 
argument. Since the lower court upheld the use of total population, if the 
court deadlocks it will remain in place. There may also be five votes to uphold 
the use of total population. Likely outcome: liberal win, either way

Abortion

Whole Woman’s Health v Cole: This case concerns the constitutionality of 
Texas’sdraconian abortion restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/16/us-supreme-court-make-abortion-deciding-factor-2016-presidential-election>
, which if upheld would require most of the state’s already relatively small 
number of abortion clinics to close. If the Texas law is upheld in full, this 
would in effect overrule Roe v Wade, giving states a roadmap to ban abortion by 
making it impossible for abortion clinics to operate. Since there are at least 
four certain votes to strike down the law, this now won’t happen. It’s likely 
that Kennedy will provide a fifth vote to strike down at least some parts of 
the Texas law. However, the lower court ruled in favor of the state, so if 
Kennedy votes to uphold the law, creating a deadlock, it will be, at least 
temporarily, bad news for women living in Texas and the other states covered by 
the fifth circuit, although that would still not produce a national precedent.
Likely outcome: probable, not certain, liberal win

Class actions

Tyson Foods v Bouaphakeo: This case, which revolves around overtime pay, had 
the potential to make it much more difficult for employees to file class action 
lawsuits to challenge violations of their rights. The death of Scalia means the 
court will almost certainly deadlock, and the lower court held in favor of the 
workers.Likely outcome: liberal win

Contraception

Zubik v Burwell: This case deals with the application of the supreme court’s 
decision holding that requiring employers who raise a religious objection to 
provide contraception to women as part of employer-provided health insurance 
violated the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The federal government has 
attempted to compromise by arranging coverage independently if an employer 
sends a letter stating its religious objection. Some employers have held that 
even having to write that letter violates their religious freedom. It is 
possible that chief justice Roberts and/or justice Kennedy will find the 
government’s accommodation reasonable and provide a fifth vote to uphold it. If 
they do not, most but not all lower courts have found the accommodation 
acceptable.Likely outcome: messy, but probably at least a partial liberal win

Affirmative action

Fisher v University of Texas: This case returns to the question of whether 
affirmative action in public institutions of higher educationcan be 
constitutional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/09/supreme-court-affirmative-action-fisher-v-university-of-texas>
. Unlike the other cases, this will be heard by seven justices, because justice 
Elena Kagan has recused herself. Normally, the court would not create a major 
new precedent with only four votes, although it is legally authorized to do so. 
So this case is very likely to be held over for reargument, especially if 
Kennedy is disinclined to approve the University of Texas’s affirmative action 
program. There’s also some chance that Kennedy would provide a fifth vote to 
uphold it, although if it happened it would be the first time Kennedy has found 
an affirmative action program constitutional.Likely outcome: unclear

Immigration

US v Texas: This case deals with the legality of Barack Obama’s Deferred 
Action to Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents (Dapa) program, 
which explicitlyprotected certain classes of undocumented immigrants from 
deportation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/19/obama-deportation-order-immigration-policy-republican-party>
. Scalia’s death has less impact on this case than most others, since the lower 
courts held the executive order illegal. Either Obama will get five votes, or 
the program will not go into effect while he remains in office. Prior to oral 
argument, it’s very difficult to predict how the court will rule.Likely 
outcome: uncertain, but good chance of conservative win

Death penalty

Foster v Chatman: This case deals with a death penalty case in which a black 
man was convicted by an all-white jury afterblack jurors were systematically 
excluded by the prosecution 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/2015/11/argument-analysis-to-decide-or-not-that-is-the-question/>
. The oral argument suggested that the case may be sent back to the state 
courts to address a procedural question. If the court does decide on the 
merits, a deadlock would allow the conviction to stand, since the Georgia 
courts upheld it. However, given the extreme set of facts, Kennedy and Roberts 
would likely join the court’s four liberals to rule that the defendant’s 14th 
amendment rights were violated. Likely outcome: either returned on a 
technicality or liberal win

 