
Visited anyone recently and tried to use their microwave oven? Of all the 
familiar devices in a house, the microwave has long been the laggard in 
usability. The “science oven”, as it is so wonderfully described in the 
1970s-set filmAmerican Hustle, pre-dates the digital era (the first came out in 
1967); and the advent of programmes and digital buttons hasn’t helped much 
since. So when you buy one, or go to someone’s house and use theirs, you will 
almost certainly be confronted by an unfamiliar interface. How powerful is it? 
Do I have to set the heat or time first? If I have to press digital buttons to 
set the heating time, will it interpret them as hours? If I need to set a 
heating time of more than an hour, do I enter the minutes, or is there an 
“hour” setting?

Meanwhile, since the “science oven” came along, we’ve got used to smartphones 
and tablets whose interfaces have undergone a flurry of interbreeding. Even in 
rival mobile interfaces, you expect to find apps offered as an array of icons; 
to have notifications about events in a sliding layer at the top; and get easy 
access to key functions such as Wi-Fi and Bluetooth from any screen. If 
microwave interfaces had standardised to the same extent, we’d be able to 
operate almost any on sight. Instead, they still can’t tell whenyou’ve put 
metal in them <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eIGPvPRzEaQ>.

The extent of the variation was pointed out in a 2013 post that recently 
resurfaced in which bloggerTimothy Ellis wondered about the awfulness of the 
interfaces 
<http://timandjeni.com/blog/why-do-most-microwaves-have-such-a-terrible-user-interface/>
. He looked at an LG model with 31 buttons, and a Jenn-Air one with 34 buttons, 
“when all I want to do is heat up food for a specified time”. On the Jenn-Air, 
he noted: “The vast majority of the time, I use exactly two of these buttons: 
‘add 30 sec’ (which also starts the heat) and ‘Stop/Cancel’.” So 94% of the 
buttons are wasting space.

In some ways, microwave interfaces have gone backwards. Older models had two 
dials: power and time. They were intuitive: more clockwise, more power/time. 
Then digital timers arrived, as did tapping a button to enter time, rather than 
turn a dial. This favoured the cool factor over usability: a dial provides its 
own feedback and is easily grasped (literally and figuratively) by old and 
young.

The infatuation with digital became another part of the problem. A discussion 
on Stack Exchange 
<http://ux.stackexchange.com/questions/28006/why-do-microwave-oven-uis-fail> on 
the topic points to a book by Alan Cooper, who says that if you mix a computer 
with another thing, the result is still a computer. This leads to “feature 
creep”: Microsoft Office has a bazillion more options for formatting pages than 
you want, because someone somewhere might use it occasionally, so things such as
chaos defrost 
<http://eng.faq.panasonic.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/10689/~/what-is-chaos-defrost%3F>
 become a selling point. In fact, “chaos defrost” can cut defrost time by up to 
60%. Our microwave has it. But we bought it based on price and volume, not 
“features”.

In the end, I think there’s a simple reason why these interfaces have not 
merged more rapidly: life-spans. It’s not unusual for these machines to last 10 
or 15 years, their interfaces frozen in time, while designers think of smarter 
ideas. The “30 seconds” top-power button is becoming increasingly common, but 
it’ll probably be 10 years before you can go into someone’s kitchen and be 
confident of seeing it on the microwave. Sometimes, even great user interface 
ideas are held back by simple problems: the products just don’t wear out fast 
enough for new stuff to come through.

If you’ve ever complained about your smartphone’s short life, look at it this 
way – at least you’re not trying to operate it with an interface from 2005.
 