
Loyce Achao still has some doubts about the effectiveness of some of Amref's 
work in Katine. But in this, my final interview with Achao, retired nurse and 
former local councillor turned pharmacist and social worker, she sounds less 
critical than usual and more reflective, measured and appreciative of the 
project.

Seated on a mat on the backyard floor of her home in Atirir trading centre, 
she said: "The community has always complained that the impact has been so 
little; this is obviously because the sub-county is so wide and a dot in an 
ocean is not easy to recognise."

In the past, the fiercely independent-minded Achao, who rather unusually kept 
her marital home on separation from her husband, has mirrored complaints that 
Amref spent far too much time – and money – on trainings for categories like 
village health teams.

She still feels that some of the trainees have not done enough to reach every 
home to share their newly acquired knowledge and points out that community 
medicine distributors have no malaria medicines to distribute. But she is happy 
with construction of boreholes, building of classrooms and support for the 
health workers and health centres like Tiriri and Ojom.

Asked about the Guardian's involvement in the project, Achao says she had not 
seen a project with so much donor scrutiny. For her this showed that the donors 
were extremely interested in the plight of the people of Katine. "That is why 
they have taken trouble always to keep monitoring the progress of Amref's 
work," she said.

These days, Achao's drug shop is often closed; she is busy in her role as 
board vice-chair for Partners for Children Worldwide, a local organisation that 
helps vulnerable children, funded by ChildFund International. And she is 
getting tired of garden work.

"As you age you become weaker and you can't do agriculture; if I get money, I 
want to build my own business premises, so that I do not have to pay rent."

Achao wants to keep her drug shop and start a produce store - a venture that 
could be a money-spinner. The main road through Katine has been upgraded to 
tarmac, Atirir is set to be elevated to a township, and with a chance Airir 
will be reconnected, to the national electricity grid, she expects business to 
pick up.

"If there is peace in the country, and if the government sends us enough 
health workers and teachers, there will be development, because I think our 
people have realised the importance of educating their children," she said.

And her last word? Although the Guardian is winding up its day-to-day coverage 
of the project, she said: "Guardian journalists should not forget Katine; they 
should visit us whenever they are inUganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>."

Simon Edangat, farmer
 Simon Edangat, farmer, is particularly proud of a new joint farmers 
association he helps to lead. Photograph: Richard M Kavuma 
Simon Edangat studied only briefly beyond primary school because his father 
did not value education, but he now plays a starring role in his community and 
is passionate about taking his five children to school.

"Looking ahead, I have resolved that, whatever happens, I have to find the 
money to educate my children," says Edangat. "I stopped in primary seven but in 
today's world of technology, if I do not educate them, they will not be able to 
compete." He embraces the need for change and used the Katine media centre 
based in the office of the African Medical Research Fund to acquire an email 
address and take part in online chats on this website.

Edangat, 31, is the energetic, articulate vice-chair of the Katine Joint 
Farmers Association (Kajofa), chairman of Agora Arukaputa United Farmers Group,
Livelihoods <https://www.theguardian.com/katine/livelihoods> coordinator for 
Olwelai Parish in Katine and financial controller for Ogwolo community primary 
school, where his first-born daughter is in primary year four.

Like many here, he praises the Katine project for building classrooms and 
training teachers and managers, providing safe water, promoting hygiene and 
sanitation and supporting farmer groups in Katine's 66 villages.

He is especially proud of Kajofa, which may soon start buying and selling 
produce, using a 100-tonne store built by the project, with a view to making 
money for its members.

"Now we have this association and the produce store, and I can see that, even 
if the project leaves, we shall own that asset." Edangat himself owns 75 orange 
trees that he hopes will soon boost his family's income.

But in his view the project has failed on two big counts - failure to provide 
bulls and ploughs – crucial in opening up agricultural lands – and failure to 
sponsor orphans and other vulnerable children for school-related needs.

Edangat, who has already asked me twice when Amref's third-year report would 
be published on this website so that he could read it, believes the Guardian's 
involvement in Katine has benefited the community.

"Amref initially brought contractors from Kampala to build schools like 
Kadinya and Amorikot but when there were problems and the journalists got 
involved, that changed. Maybe that's why our people were involved in later 
constructions like the produce store here; and as you can see, they did a good 
job. It also helped local people to earn something."

And what lessons does he take from Katine? That village health teams, water 
source committees and farmer groups can do a lot once they are mobilised, 
sensitised and supported.

Richard Ewichu, priest
 Richard Ewichu, an Anglican priest in Katine, says most progress has been in 
education and water/sanitation but consultation with residents has been poor. 
Photograph: Joseph Malinga 
Leadership and passion are two key qualities that the Rev Richard Ewichu has 
brought to the project on behalf of his Katine parishioners, the real 
beneficiaries of three years of development work.

As the project nears the end of the Guardian's regular coverage, Ewichu, a 
priest with the Katine Anglican church picked out education and water as areas 
where most has been achieved. Even so, across the whole project, he says he 
still has major issues with the implementation process.

"Consultation has been very poor," he said. "It was not done well. For 
instance, the community has been kept aloof from most of the decisions. As 
beneficiaries we have not been given a chance to know what goes on in terms of 
budgets - how much was allocated to an item and how it has been spent. This has 
made the community very suspicious. And to me, that is where Amref failed."

"Where decisions are taken with less consideration of the community interests, 
less impact is usually felt since there is a tendency [among] beneficiaries not 
[to own] the project after the implementer leaves. Nonetheless, we are 
optimistic that the Katine project has laid a foundation which the government 
and other stakeholders would pick up from."

"We hope safe water coverage would reach all the 66 villages by the end of the 
project [in October 2011]. I also wish that the issue of lack of teachers' 
houses – affecting education standards in the area as teachers have to trek 
[from home] for long distances – would soon be addressed."

However, he praised the influential role the Guardian has played in both 
funding and monitoring the project. He said the paper's close presence and 
"constant tracking of activities using text, pictures and video" have played an 
important part in keeping the project moving forward.
 