
For Charles Eyagu, chair of the water source committee at the Aminit borehole, 
Ojom parish, theKatine community development project 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/> in 
north-eastern Uganda has achieved much but also left much work undone.

For him the project has had an impact on clean water supply but less on 
sanitation, health and livelihoods. "We are very grateful with what [the 
project] has done for us ─ especially in terms of providing us with water. We 
used to suffer a great deal, now we do not. We drink clean and safe water 
unlike before when we could take dirty water that caused most of us to fall 
sick. Now we even don't boil water."

Eyagu said the time spent and distance walked by residents looking for water 
has been reduced. At one time they might have had to walk up to 5km and then 
line up at a borehole for half a day. Women and girls walking long distances to 
open wells were sometimes attacked. But "this was no more," Eyagu said, with 
plenty of smiles, and listing off other project milestones such as the new lab 
at Ojom health centre, renovated schools leading to increased enrolment, the 
farmers' produce store and the village savings and loans associations.

But he did feel there were crucial needs that the project has not met. For 
instance, there is no road to Ojom health centre, not all families have 
latrines and there is no valley dam where animals can be watered. The project 
has failed to give local residents bulls as requested to ease farming 
activities in the community and, above all, it has failed to build teachers' 
houses, let alone renovate Obyarai and Olwelai primary schools as promised.

On the other hand, he said that although the project has not been able to meet 
local people's high expectations created earlier on, there is now at least 
something to build on. He praised the Guardian's involvement in the project, 
which has thown a spotlight on many activities implemented by theAfrican 
Medical Research Foundation (Amref) <http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/amref/> 
that might not otherwise have been open to public scrutiny. "In fact, [the] 
Guardian did well to follow its funds otherwise I do not know what could have 
happened," he said.

Eyagu's hope now is that more boreholes will be built by either Amref or 
another development partner to meet a high demand - and that a maternity ward 
will be built at Ojom to lessen the burden faced by women who currently have to 
travel to Tiriri health centre or Soroti regional referral hospital to give 
birth.

Naphtali Okello Elepu, retired prisons officer
 Naphtali Okello Elepu 
Retired prisons officer Naphtali Okello Elepu, famed for modern farming methods
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/video/2008/jun/03/video.livelihoods>, speaks 
with the unhurried authority that comes from being a respected, wealthy African 
elder. His youngest daughter graduated from Makerere University 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/2010/feb/02/brenda-achao-university-graduation>
 earlier this year; and when we met, he was due to travel 250km southward to 
Jinja, to meet a lawyer overseeing his rental properties there.

Elepu, 73, has been critical of his neighbours, especially men, for having 
enough money to drink alcohol for hours but "no money" to support their 
children's education or communal facilities like safe water sources. In fact, 
because of poor attitudes, Elepu doubted that the Katrine community partnership 
project would have a big impact. Now, however, reckons the old recipient 
mentality is starting to change.

"The change I have seen is that our people are becoming happy to be shown what 
to do and to participate in changing their conditions, so that Amref and the 
community are in partnership. And if they continue that way for some time, this 
place will change completely."

Elepu also sees people being more positive towards the maintenance of water 
sources built by Amref; in years gone by, NGOs had little success in setting up 
water source committees, he says. And from what he has heard, the village 
savings and loan associations are proving impressive.

"I hear talk about VSLA all the time," he said. "It has even awakened women 
who had never showed interest in businesses; they now save and borrow money 
from there and start small businesses and they make some money. I think this 
has been one of the best."

Elepu felt life has improved in Katine but feared further progress will be 
slow because of poor education standards.

"Many parents do not care very much about education," he said. Even though 
there is free universal primary education, he said "when a child has no 
exercise book or pen, many parents [still] just say, 'Ah, you go to school'."

For him, the success of the Amref project is partly due to the consistent 
presence of the Guardian: "But again, because of lack of sufficient levels of 
education, most people in Katine are not able to read what has been written 
about them in the media."

Jorem Eboku, Katine sub-county chairman
 Jorem Eboku 
As Katine's sub-county chairman, Jorem Eboku has played a significant role in 
the Katine project. He sits on the sub-county project management committee that 
oversees its implementation and has watched it notch up successes, particularly 
in community empowerment.

"At least people know their rights now," he said. "For instance, the local 
people can take [us] leaders to task to explain certain things that they are 
[not] clear about and also demand accountability [regarding] how their 
resources have been spent.

"Water coverage was very low before the project came [but] now coverage has 
reached 65% and we hope it would go to 85 percent as promised by the project. 
This means our people can afford to take safe clean water and avoid 
water-related diseases."

Also on his success list were new and renovated school buildings, raising 
school enrolment in both community and government aided schools and improving 
literacy rates with the wide distribution of textbooks.
Eboku praised the new produce store which would play a big part in improving 
farmers' livelihoods and the impact of the village savings and loans 
associations (VSLAs). "They are really working very well. We believe within the 
next few years most families in VSLAs would be able to sustain themselves."

Despite successes, however, the sub-county chairman picked out education as an 
area where Amref's input had failed to improve academic results."Take an 
example of the recent mock exam results where no one passed in grade one," he 
said. "The issue is on the quality of work done. A school like Amorikot was 
built but we are not sure whether it will last for many years."

On water provision, he said while residents now had more clean water sources, 
shoddy work was affecting more of them. "For example, the water jars were 
poorly constructed and this to me is a failure on the side of the project."

The other main issue was consultation. "The project tried but I feel they did 
not do much [about] consulting with the leadership and community members during 
the implementation process. Accessing [the] budget sometimes has been a real 
problem." He said this all translated into lack of transparency. The project 
had failed to meet the needs of the community after raising hopes when, for 
instance, Amref promised to renovate Olwelai and Obyarai primary schools.

Nevertheless, much was achieved by the significant role the Guardian played in 
both funding the project and following up to see where the money was going. 
"Without their support, the sub-county would have taken several years to reach 
the level it is at now - especially with our limited budget of UShs 33m [£9428] 
per year."

"We hope our people are really going to change in terms of development, given 
the so many trainings they received through the five components of livelihood, 
empowerment, education, health and water and sanitation," said Eboku. "We hope 
our children [will] now study because they have been motivated by the project 
and our planning process [will] actually change to meet the community's 
demands."

Teddy Akello, midwife
 Teddy Akello 
One of the most calming sights at Tiriri health centre IV – a place that 
conjures up memories of dying children and women, and long queues of patients 
without a doctor, essential medicines and sometimes even running water – is the 
enduring smile of midwife Teddy Akello.

Akello, 37, and her colleagues have to remain strong, explaining to attendants 
and women in labour that they do not have basics like gloves, razors or cotton 
wool and, sometimes, even painkillers. But Akello is a cheerful character. 
"Have you finally brought a contractor to repair our theatre?" she asked with a 
smile, as I arrived at her home where she was playing with her third child, 
five-month-old Nathan Amuku.

She hopes the operating theatre will be repaired soon as promised by Amref, 
but otherwise "as a health worker" she is "impressed" by the Amref project. It 
has trained health workers in HIV counselling, promotion of family planning and 
prevention of mother-to-child HIV transmission and has also trained traditional 
birth attendants and community vaccinators.

She is also happy with donations of mosquito nets to mothers and bed sheets to 
the maternity ward and supports Amref's community health campaign. "If 
sanitation and hygiene in the homes are poor, more people will fall sick and 
they will end up flooding us here in the health centre; so Amref has been doing 
preventive care for us."

Akello has worked Tiriri since April 2008 and hopes, if she has enough 
finance, to start studying for a nursing diploma or degree next year.

She believes the constant presence of Guardian journalists is one lesson the 
development world can take from Katine: "People [Amref] know that they must do 
things well, otherwise they will be reported on negatively and the whole world 
will know about it."

Two things, Akello says, are critical to Katine's future: "We have been 
sensitising the people about family planning and, if they take this seriously 
and they become committed to educating their children, things will really 
become better – but maybe in 10 years."
 