
The team who are already developing an air of Antonio Conte’s Undroppables 
cruise on. After fielding the samePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> selection for the sixth 
successive – and successful – time, Chelsea continued their revival as they saw 
off Tottenham, showing the mettle to muster a comeback after going a goal 
behind in the first half. Two of the players who have thrived most from the 
Conte redesign, Pedro and Victor Moses, supplied the goals to settle a riveting 
local tussle. After Manchester City and Liverpool had plundered points earlier 
in the day, nothing less than three would suffice to return to the top of the 
table. Chelsea reacted ruthlessly.

It left Conte with the air of a contented manager. He acknowledged the 
evolution that makes his team a different proposition in the high-intensity 
games to the side who capitulated against Liverpool and Arsenal. “Now we are 
another team compared to the Liverpool and Arsenal games,” he said. “If we were 
the same team we would lose this game, for sure. Now we have another type of 
confidence. I liked our reaction a lot. We won and I am pleased because it 
wasn’t easy.”

For Tottenham, defeat here to a long-term bogey side is nothing new but what 
must hurt is that for a spell their performance showed them at their best, with 
a refreshed appetite for the style that had them unbeaten in the Premier League 
until the winter chill had set in. History suggested that Stamford Bridge might 
be a test too far and what felt like a week of reckoning duly delivered two 
heavyweight blows. After tumbling out of the Champions League in midweek, 
Mauricio Pochettino’s men were punctured in the league.

The Tottenham manager managed to be frustrated and philosophical at the same 
time: “If you want to analyse the result,Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> win, congratulations. If you 
want to analyse the 94 minutes, Tottenham had a lot of positives. But in 
football you need to score. In football sometimes it’s difficult to explain but 
this is not difficult. They were clinical in front of the goal and we weren’t.”

After the smouldering volcano of this fixture last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/chelsea-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
, he had called upon his team to be “brave” and his players began as if that 
instruction was still ringing in their ears.

Keeping a semblance of self-control was imperative and they started by 
exerting important authority in midfield, pegging Chelsea back and keeping 
confident possession. Ten minutes in they soared in front. Mousa Dembélé worked 
the ball up the left and it was moved via Dele Alli to Christian Eriksen. The 
Dane saw a chink of goal to aim at. His thunderous shot was laced with curl and 
flew into the net. It was the first time Chelsea’s defence had been beaten in 
600 minutes.

Conte looked exasperated as his team could not get a foothold. The muscle in 
Tottenham’s midriff, with Dembélé and Victor Wanyama patrolling in front of 
Eric Dier and Jan Vertonghen, proved a meaty barrier. David Luiz mustered 
Chelsea’s first shot just before the half-hour mark, a whack of a free-kick 
that Hugo Lloris caught comfortably.

Tottenham’s dominance was such that they continued to create strong chances. 
After efforts from Kyle Walker, Harry Kane and Eriksen the visitors wondered 
how they were not even further in front as half-time approached.

Philippe Coutinho leaves Anfield on crutches but Jürgen Klopp hopeful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/philippe-coutinho-crutches-jurgen-klopp-hopeful>
What more devastating time for Chelsea to summon some inspiration. A minute 
before half-time all Tottenham’s hard work was speared by a moment of glorious 
individual skill. Pedro picked up possession 20 yards out and wrong-footed the 
Tottenham defence with a touch that had a dash of Cruyff turn about it. The 
Spaniard bent his shot into the top corner with a flourish.

Off the hook after a pretty uncomfortable first 44 minutes, Conte delivered 
some choice words at half-time. Chelsea came out with enhanced determination 
and were soon ahead. They pressed the ball off Tottenham and broke with intent. 
Eden Hazard invited Diego Costa to drive forwards and he capped a bullish and 
clever run with a killer pass to Moses, whose shot squirted off Lloris and 
Vertonghen on the way in. The pendulum had swung. Chelsea’s energy levels 
suddenly made Tottenham look ponderous. It spoke volumes about how the balance 
of the game shifted that both Chelsea’s wing-backs had so much more room to get 
involved.

Although Tottenham tried to manufacture a comeback of their own, Chelsea’s 
second-half solidity was a far tougher nut to crack. Conte’s Undroppables 
cherished their win. Tottenham’s pain was palpable.

Conte tried hard to deflect any title talk at this stage. “It is not right to 
talk about this,” he said. “We have a long way in front of us. It’s important 
to stay humble and continue to trust in our work. Today we won a game against a 
really strong team. Tomorrow it’s important to think about the next game, 
against City, another very strong team. We have to continue to work. We don’t 
forget that against Arsenal and Liverpool we lost.”

In attitude and application, Conte’s Chelsea are a force to be reckoned with.

Chelsea 2-1 Tottenham Hotspur: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/26/chelsea-v-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-live> 