


1. Midland Grand Hotel (now St Pancras Renaissance), London

In 1865, as building continued at its new St Pancras station, the Midland 
Railway Company asked architects to submit designs for a 150-bed hotel. One of 
them got overexcited and came up with something far bigger and grander. He 
still got the job, and George Gilbert Scott's salmon-pink gothic fantasy (built 
1868-76) has entranced generations of Londoners ever since. Repurposed, 
neglected and almost demolished in the 20th century – John Betjeman said it was 
"too beautiful and too romantic to survive" – the restored building now 
combines homes and a 244-bedroom Marriott hotel.

020 7841 3540 



2. Manningham Mills, Bradford

This handsome Italianate building, designed by local architects Andrews and 
Pepper, was once northern England's biggest textile mill, with a remarkable 
109,000 sq m of floor space. Completed in 1873, its most striking feature is 
its 78m high chimney, which can still be seen from almost anywhere in Bradford. 
It is now being converted into flats.

Not open to the public



3. Palace of Westminster, London 
<http://www.Parliament.uk/visiting/visiting-and-tours/tours/>

People often vastly overestimate the age of the Palace of Westminster, but 
this gothic masterpiece was completed as recently as 1870. Work on the 
limestone structure had begun 30 years before, under Charles Barry and Augustus 
Pugin, neither of whom lived to see their work through. Pugin felt they could 
have done better, dismissing it as "all Grecian … Tudor details on a classic 
body".



4. Boundary Estate, London

The UK's first council estate opened in 1900, on the site of the East End's 
Old Nichol slum, where life had been "one painful and monotonous round of vice, 
filth and poverty", in the words of the Illustrated London News. London county 
council stepped in, and the clean, redbrick tenements, designed by the LCC's 
socialist architect Owen Fleming are impressive enough nowadays, but at the 
time it was a glimpse of a brave new world.

Not open to the public



5. Castell Coch, near Cardiff

Built on the ruins of a medieval castle in the 1870s, this fantasy was 
supposed to follow 13th-century fashions. However, architect William Burges 
admitted that the towers' conical roofs were "utterly conjectural". Yet they 
were "picturesque" – and wasn't that the whole purpose of the gothic revival?

01443 336000 



6. Albert Dock, Liverpool <http://www.albertdock.com>

Home to the largest group of Grade-I-listed buildings anywhere in Britain, 
Albert Dock opened in 1846 with the Prince Consort himself guest of honour. The 
complex was a rare combination of utility and beauty with its monumental 
cast-iron pillars and walls of brick, granite and sandstone. Jesse Hartley and 
Philip Hardwick's wood-free designs not only cut the risk of fire, they made a 
statement about Liverpool's power.



7. Keble College, Oxford <http://www.keble.ox.ac.uk>

William Butterfield's gothic confection, half seat of learning, half Black 
Forest gateau, has divided residents ever since its completion in 1870. While 
Butterfield claimed he "had a mission to give dignity to brick", students from 
St John's College reportedly formed a secret society to demolish it, one red, 
white or blue brick at a time.

01865 272727



8. Palm House, Kew Gardens, Surrey <http://www.kew.org>

Very big plants need a very big greenhouse. This wonder of Victorian 
engineering, built by Richard Turner from Decimus Burton's designs, has an 
unobstructed span of 15.2m, with the pillars that traditionally support a roof 
replaced by wrought iron ribs. Completed in 1848, the Palm House was a big 
influence on Joseph Paxton's Crystal Palace.

020-8332 5655



9. Manchester Town Hall

Completed in 1877, this grand building cost the best part of a £1m and still 
looks a million dollars, with its sandstone facade and lavish trimmings, which 
include murals by Ford Madox Brown. Alfred Waterhouse saw off more than 130 
other architects to win the commission, for a difficult triangular site.



10. St Vincent Street church, Glasgow

Alexander Thomson, a Scottish architect too little known outside his own 
country, designed three extraordinary Presbyterian temples for Glasgow. One is 
now a ruin, another was destroyed in the second world war, but this survivor at 
St Vincent Street, with its slender cast-iron columns and soaring roof, 
welcomes worshippers in a space that is both exotic and awe-inspiring. 
Completed in 1859 in the Greek revival style, it also shows Assyrian and 
Indian influences.

Visits by arrangement: contactus@greekthomsonchurch.com 
 