
All architecture is a conversation about the nature of space. But for the 
Victorians it was a meditation on the meaning of time, too. In each bridge, 
church and terrace built during the reign of the great queen, you can see a 
negotiation with what has gone before.

Nowhere is this more apparent than in the early Victorians' attitude to the 
buildings they inherited from their grandparents. The sight of street after 
street of regular, flat-fronted Georgian housing seemed not only dreary but 
downright dangerous. Had not the French Revolution been partly born of just 
such a rationalist impulse to legislate irregularity out of existence? Far from 
being evidence of a pleasing rationality, all that mild unbroken brickwork 
served as a chilling reminder of a neighbouring chaos that might spread at any 
moment.

One way of ensuring that didn't happen was to put God – not some milksop 
supreme being but a proper, stormy God – back into buildings. The chief prophet 
of this newly Christianised architecture was John Ruskin, who championed 
a return to the gothic vocabulary of the pre-Reformation period. All those 
yearning spires, expressive arches and gurning gargoyles in evidence at 
Salisbury and Ely seemed to speak of divinity as a force of nature. The most 
famous essay – Charles Barry and Augustus Pugin's Palace of Westminster – was 
followed by George Gilbert Scott's Albert Memorial and William Butterfield's 
red and white bricked Keble College, a streaky-bacon love song to one of the 
century's most influential high churchmen.

But by the time Keble College opened its doors in 1872, God was increasingly 
on the run, chased out of many educated homes by the work of Charles Darwin. 
The neo-gothic style, however, proved itself equal to the temples of the new 
secular age. The Midland Grand Hotel – the face of St Pancras station – is one 
of the finest gothic revival buildings in existence. Manchester Town Hall, 
meanwhile, disguised its status as a civic Johnny-come-lately with a facade 
that wouldn't look out of place on a 13th-century church of the Flemish school.

Victorian architecture, though, was not simply an exercise in archaising. The 
Great Exhibition of 1851 telegraphed to the world that Britain led the way in 
all that was new, too. Joseph Paxton's Crystal Palace was a wonder of modern 
engineering – plate glass bolted together by cast iron to create a vast 
segmented umbrella under which mature elm trees, as well as teeming crowds, 
nestled happily. Ruskin hated it, comparing the Palace to a giant greenhouse; 
the Palm House at Kew will give you a sense of what it might have been like.

As well as bragging about Britain's pole position in the race for modernity, 
the Great Exhibition also exposed the nation's taste-makers to visual 
vocabularies from around the world. Moorish domes and spiky towers became just 
the thing for public buildings such as the Alhambra Palace in London's 
Leicester Square, or the oriental public baths in Leeds. Later, in the 1870s, 
with the French no longer Britain's naturalenemies, Second Empire architecture 
became popular, with its telltale mansard roofs, dormer windows and bracketed 
balconies.

That, though, was for people with money. For everyone else something with a 
higher density was required. This was the era of the working-class terraced 
house, tightly packed for factory workers in northern towns, though more 
generously spaced for London's lower middle classes with perhaps an additional 
flourish in the form of a bay window.

These runs of domestic architecture tended to be in either the gothic or the 
classical style; it all depended which pattern book had been studied, which 
decorative bits and pieces purchased in bulk. Reacting to this careless 
pastiche, by the 1870s William Morris and his fellow Arts and Crafters evolved 
a cottage style that favoured an appreciation of the materials and processes 
involved in building homes that were useful, beautiful but, above all, honest.

As the examples of Morris, Ruskin and Paxton suggest, Victorian thought about 
architecture was shot through with a morality that assumed that good buildings 
made good people. The problem was that no one could agree on what a good 
building looked like. The result, as far as the many detractors were concerned, 
was a mash-up: a gothic pointed window there, a Palladian column there, a bit 
of Queen Anne by way of distraction. Yet with the passage of time, we are today 
more likely to regard 19th-century architecture with a respect born of 
recognition. For the Victorians, just like us, sought to make their world anew 
at a time when every possible style seemed already to have been exhausted.

• Kathryn Hughes is a historian specialising in the Victorian era
 