
Fraudulent or reckless company directors could be forced to compensate 
creditors under proposals to be announced byVince Cable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable>.

The business secretary will set out plans to increase trust in UK business in 
a speech on Monday morning at theLondon Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup>. In a 
discussion paper entitled Transparency and Trust, Cable will suggest a range of 
options including ordering negligent bosses to pay compensation to creditors 
left out of pocket by their actions and disqualifying directors who are banned 
outside the UK.

Sectoral regulators such as Ofgem and Ofcom, the watchdogs for the energy and 
communications industries, could be given the power to disqualify directors.

Cable will also follow up recommendations by the parliamentary commission on 
banking standards, which stated that the main responsibility of bank directors 
should be to ensure the safety and stability of their firms. In an email to 
business bodies before his speech, the Department for Business, Innovation and 
Skills said it would look at "whether to amend directors' statutory duties in 
key sectors such as banking".

In an interview with the Sunday Telegraph, Cable indicated that the failure to 
punish executives in the wake of the banking crisis had undermined public faith 
in regulation of company directors.

"I think the public are a little baffled by the current regime," he said. 
"There is an issue around the people who used to run Lloyds and RBS, and there 
is a worry about how the system operates."

However, Cable said the proposals would not result in retrospective action 
being taken against Fred Goodwin, the former chief executive ofRoyal Bank of 
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, and 
James Crosby, the former boss of HBOS. Both lost their knighthoods in the wake 
of the near-collapse of the banks they once ran. Cable said: "We don't want to 
get into a situation where we're penalising good business people who take risks 
but whose business fails for whatever reason."

People who operate "rogue companies" or are involved in "serial failure" 
should be punished through disqualification, Cable added.

Nonetheless, the pre-speech briefing to business bodies states that errant 
directors could be offered a way back into corporate life through education or 
training to "equip them with the skills they need to go on to run a successful 
company". The business department bans about 1,200 company directors a year.

The transparency element of Cable's proposals includes measures to strip away 
concealed ownership of companies, such as requiring businesses to hold 
information on their owners and controlling shareholders. This will include 
tackling the issue of bearer shares, which confer ownership without requiring 
the holder of the shares to be identified in public, and the use of nominee 
directors, who can be a cover for the real owner of a business.

Although the paper sets up a wide-ranging discussion and consultation with 
business bodies, it is unlikely that any of the proposals will find a place on 
the statute book before the 2015 general election.

This month the government was accused of missing an opportunity for radical 
City reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/08/bankers-jail-misconduct-george-osborne>
 when it failed to back key recommendations from the commission on banking 
standards, including an overhaul of how the Bank of England is managed and 
tightening a measure of capital called a leverage ratio.

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chaired the commission, said reforming 
the culture of banking required the implementation of the full suite of 
recommendations. He said: "On an initial reading, the government's response 
appears to fall short on a number of important points." The government 
recommendations from the commission report will be included in the banking 
reform bill being debated in parliament.
 