 Police today fired tear gas and rubber bullets at Hindu militants attempting 
to hold a banned gathering in Ayodhya, the Indian city at the heart of a decade 
of religious violence in the country.
The fighting, which included mob members striking out with metal rods, lasted 
for a half hour, then police took away the Hindu nationalists in buses, 
estimating that more than 600 were arrested.

One Hindu mendicant, called a sadhu, stood near the area addressing the 
gathering. "Now is the time for all Hindus to stand up together," he said. 
"Every Hindu should make a bomb in his home."

The angry crowd was part of a movement that demands the right to build a 
temple to the chief Hindu god, Rama, at the site of the 16th century Babri 
Mosque that was torn down by a similar mob in 1992.

"You see this is what they do in the name of God," said VK Agarwal, deputy 
inspector-general of police in Faizabad, the nearest large town toAyodhya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya>.

Ayodhya, 300 miles east of New Delhi, has become a religious flashpoint since 
the destruction of the mosque triggered a year of Hindu-Muslim violence that 
killed 2,000 people acrossIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.

Hindu hardliners believe Muslims built the mosque on the site of an earlier 
Hindu temple honouring Rama. Muslims say there is no proof and oppose Hindu 
plans to build a temple there.

The clash with police occurred near a residential area called Karsavekpuram 
"volunteers' village". There, Hindu artisans gather from across the country to 
lend their stone-carving and brick-making skills to the effort to prepare the 
structure for the temple they intend to build at the disputed site.

There was no trouble this morning near the actual disputed site, a closely 
guarded hillock surrounded by wire fences protecting a small Rama idol under a 
tent.

Most of Ayodhya was quiet, which is normal. Religious tolerance is so 
ingrained in this crowded city - where 200,000 people live among 6,000 temples 
- that Muslims sometimes shower flower petals on Hindus as they march through 
town with their idols.

Its Hindus and Muslims attend each others' schools, go to each others' 
weddings and even help celebrate each others' religious holidays.

"Right up until today, we don't see someone as a Hindu or a Muslim," said 
Mohammed Idris, a member of the city's small Muslim minority, who runs a school 
where 75% of the students are Hindu. "We don't fight with each other here."

Many of Ayodhya's residents believe the rally's organisers are seeking 
political influence. The Hindu nationalist coalition that rules India came to 
power in the aftermath of the mosque's destruction.

"These people are out to destroy the concept of India," said Gyan Das, a Hindu 
priest at Ayodhya's temple to the monkey god Hanuman. "If we carve out a nation 
for the Muslims, and one for the Sikhs, and one for the Christians, then what 
is left of India?"

Mr Das pledged his support, and the support of more than 400 other priests at 
the temple, to defend Ayodhya's estimated 7,000 Muslims.

The government of Uttar Pradesh state, where Ayodhya is located, deployed 
7,000 police and paramilitary troops, and arrested 17,000 people during the 
past week to stop the gatherings.

They were enforcing a court order to maintain peace in the town and prevent 
religious activity at the disputed site until a long legal fight over the 
property is resolved.

Leaders of the World Hindu Council, who have acknowledged that their members 
tore down the mosque, had issued barely disguised threats of violence if they 
were not allowed to hold a religious ceremony at the site.

"The Rama disciples have come here peacefully," Ashok Singhal, a World Hindu 
Council leader, told reporters in Ayodhya shortly after his arrest. "As soon as 
they arrive, if they are hit with sticks and treated without mercy, then 
demonstrations should be held all over the country against those responsible 
for the ruthlessness."
 