
It was a visit to a high-security prison in Australia and an encounter with an 
Australian transport company employing former prisoners some years ago that 
persuaded SirRichard Branson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/richard-branson> of the merits of 
employing ex-offenders.

In October 2011, with a host of other high-profile chief executives, he called 
on more UK companies to employ people with criminal convictions. Prisons, said 
the letter to the Financial Times, were harbouring “a large number of potential 
superstars who get ignored by employers because of their criminal record. It 
makes sense for UK companies to recruit these individuals and to make use of 
their skills and enthusiasm.”

At the time, Branson said he was determined that Virgin companies would 
actively seek to employ suitable ex-offender candidates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/nov/15/richard-branson-champions-employment-ex-offenders>
. Four and a half years later, Virgin Trains West Coast’s employment programme 
for ex-offenders has trained and placed 25 candidates in full-time jobs with 
the company (five others dropped out after deciding that they “didn’t fit”). 
“It’s about giving people the dignity of work,” Branson explains when we meet 
on one of his trains at London’s Euston station.

Richard Branson champions employment of ex-offenders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/nov/15/richard-branson-champions-employment-ex-offenders>
But 25 ex-offender employees – or less than 1% of a workforce of 3,500 – 
doesn’t seem that significant after four and a half years. Although its 
ex-prisoner recruitment programme has been running for much longer – more than 
a decade – the Timpson Foundation employs around 400 ex-offenders in its key 
cutting an shoe repair shops – about 10% of the workforce. “We don’t call 
anyone an ex-offender or an ex-prisoner – we call them Timpson foundation 
colleagues,” says James Timpson, its chief executive. His figures for 
reoffending among that group are impressive: “We only know of seven who have 
reoffended out of 750 plus who have joined us.”

Branson points out that Virgin doesn’t know how many ex-offenders it employs 
across the group. “Where it is not required, we do not screen job applicants 
for criminal records, and I’m quite happy we don’t,” he says. “So, Virgin 
businesses may already employ far more than the 25 people that are currently in 
Virgin Trains’ specific ex-offender employment programme.” Virgin Trains plans 
to employ a further 10 ex-offender recruits by April and, he says, and the plan 
is to reach 10% of the workforce in the years to come.

Tammy Moreton, 23, is one of the 25 employees. She says when she sat in her 
prison cell following an arson conviction in July 2012, her future looked 
bleak. She was no stranger to prison. After leaving school, the daughter of a 
single mum joined the army. It didn’t work out as she had hoped. Discharged 
soon after her passing-out parade, she says she “got into the wrong crowd, met 
the wrong people – old friends who were into drugs and alcohol”.

A string of convictions including assault, criminal damage and harassment 
followed, which took her in and out of prison. But four years ago, she decided 
to change. “It wasn’t getting me anywhere, and I really wanted to try and live 
a proper life,” she says.

In prison she met a mentor, Marie-Claire O’Brien, who went on to establish her 
own charity,New Leaf,  <http://newleafcic.org/about-us-2/>which guided Moreton 
on to a transport services course run by the Prince’s Trust. This led to work 
experience with Virgin Trains and the eventual offer of an apprenticeship in 
customer services. The training included role-playing with “customers” and 
interaction with real rail travellers at Crewe station.

Candidates are selected by their ability, skills and creativity, and 
apprentices serve an average of 18 months. Moreton has now been working full 
time for eight months, checking tickets on trains and helping to train other 
recruits in the use of ticket-inspection scanners.

Branson says of Moreton: “She had a really tough upbringing, spent some years 
in prison and is now working in our fraud department, which is great … She’s 
one of our best employees, an extraordinary person, willing to get out and talk 
about [her past]. There are some people who want to keep it quiet and that’s 
fine.” He says he hopes the numbers of ex-offenders employed by Virgin Trains 
will “increase quite dramatically”.

Kathryn Wildman, Virgin Trains’ lead recruiter, says: “It’s all about giving 
hope. They have done their time, paid their penalty. Now we have to give them a 
chance. You can’t put a price on hope.”

It incredible how few people who are given work when they get out of prison 
reoffend
Richard Branson 
Although Branson has recently said Brexit will cause thousands of job losses, 
he doesn’t expect it to have an impact on this scheme. “I’ve long encouraged 
the Virgin businesses to look at ways of providing training and employment to 
ex-offenders and others from disadvantaged backgrounds,” he says.

“Virgin Trains West Coast has been pioneering the concept, and I hope others 
will follow. While businesses everywhere are trying to come to terms with the 
outcome of the EU referendum, I don’t see how it will have an impact on these 
efforts. An investment in diversity and inclusion is an investment that will 
pay off for any business.”

Having said in 2011 that ex-offenders would be considered on merit for any job 
within Virgin companies, including aircraft cabin crew and catering and 
clearing on trains, Branson wants to roll out the scheme. “We have started 
conversations with the Virgin businesses to encourage employing ex-offenders as 
part of their diversity and inclusion agenda, and I’d like to see openness 
across all job categories where we can legally hire ex-offenders,” he says. 
“But this must be a structured process, and I’m happy to see that Virgin Trains 
are working on relevant guidance that we can share with the other businesses.”

Statistically, it is just incredible how few people who are given work 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/217412/impact-employment-reoffending.pdf>
 when they get out of prison reoffend, says Branson (in a Ministry of Justice 
2013 study, 18% of those with a job on release reoffended, whereas 43% of those 
who had no job reoffended). “If you’re dumped outside a prison with no money, 
you hitch-hike home. Most companies won’t take you on because of your prison 
record, it’s almost inevitable that you’re going to go down the wrong path.”

But with a new justice secretary, it is unclear how committed the government 
is to improving job opportunities for ex-offenders like those taken on by 
Timpson and Virgin. When he was justice secretary, Michael Gove gave a firm 
commitment to reforming the prison system and to increasing the use of release 
on temporary licence (Rotl) so that more prisoners could be allowed into the 
community to work earlier. This year, he said: “Offenders have completed 
plumbing and heating qualifications under Rotl and now unblock U-bends for a 
living. We have turned out gym instructors, barbers, chefs, landscape 
gardeners, builders – even locksmiths and a parliamentary researcher. The 
number of prisoners to benefit from Rotl has fallen by 40% since 2013. So I 
think now is the time for a change.”

Asked if the new justice secretary, Liz Truss, would continue Gove’s reform 
agenda, a Ministry of Justice spokesman said: “Work to reform our prison estate 
remains a top priority. The secretary of state will set out her priorities in 
the coming weeks for reform of the justice system.”

Branson is keen for other firms to employ more former prisoners. Today Virgin 
launches itsbusiness toolkit 
<https://www.virgintrains.co.uk/about/social-responsibility/workplace> to 
advise other employers on the merits of hiring former offenders.

It’s about giving everyone the benefit of the doubt, Branson says. “Everyone 
deserves a second chance in life.”
 