
January 1 1960 may have been a routine hangover for the rest of the world, but 
for me it was crucial. It was the day I became officially self-employed and 
publicly declared myself a writer. Though I didn't realise it at the time, I 
was doomed to be a gritty northern surrealist ever after. The 1950s bear sole 
responsibility for this aesthetic stance (and it doesn't half make your eyes 
water). My new play, The Last Days of the Empire, is the latest manifestation.

The decade was a time of sublime confusion: social, cultural, musical and 
political. A perfect example of this took place in 1956, during the Suez 
adventure. A student protest demo took place in Newcastle. A couple of dozen 
people paraded a few yards through the campus, but the march was broken up by a 
gang of reactionaries from the engineering department before it reached the 
main road.

In the time-honoured journalistic phrase, "scuffles took place" and there was 
a picture on the front page of the local paper. Involved in the scuffle was 
Jack, an abstract painter from the art school. Jack and I were sometimes 
confused because we were good friends and shared the habit of shaving only once 
a term without ever ending up with a beard. Several people saw Jack's 
photograph, assumed it was me and complimented me on my willingness to scuffle 
for my principles, even though at the time I had been playing snooker in the 
students' union.

In many ways this incident defined my political future: a tendency to be 
credited with a greater degree of radical activity than I actually deserve. In 
the event, Anthony Eden went the way of all prime ministers, and I still talk a 
better game of snooker than I play.

As a fledgling dramatist in the late-1950s, I was similarly confused. Long 
before I saw a play in the theatre, I was taken by my parents to the Palace in 
Hull to see Sandy Powell. This must have been around 1939, when Powell was 
arguably the most famous comedian of his time. He was also one of the first 
stars of the wireless, hence his catchphrase: "Can you hear me, mother?"

Though I was only three or four years old, I still retain the image of Sandy, 
dapper in his tuxedo, as he walked on stage. (Forty years later I worked with 
Powell on a BBC documentary. He was appearing in the summer season in Brighton 
and approaching 80. Still dapper in his tuxedo, he walked on stage with the 
splendid opening line: "I know what you're all thinking... 'Is he still 
alive?'" Then, as the tabs closed behind him, a half-turn and a throwaway: "Are 
they changing the beds?" Bliss.)

My lifelong obsession with comedians probably started with that first visit to 
the Palace. The great thing about obsessions, however, is that you can have as 
many as you like. Another came along when I was seven, on a family outing to 
the Tivoli in Hull (the "fishermen's theatre", as it was known). Topping the 
bill was Big Bill Campbell's Rocky Mountain Rhythm - a cowboy band, no less. 
Campbell, a man with a bronze complexion of a sort rarely seen north of the 
Humber, greeted us all with: "Howdy partners!" To me, it was a glimpse of 
paradise, though I wasn't quite sure how they could be full-time musicians 
playing twice-nightly variety in Hull as well as full-time cowboys.

This was all part of an amazingly fanciful version of what is now called world 
music: Macari's Dutch Serenaders, Troise and his Mandoliers and, most exotic of 
all, Felix Mendelssohn's Hawaiian Serenaders, who played sultry music of the 
South Sea islands. Mendelssohn was actually from north London, and his claim to 
be a direct descendant of the great composer didn't entirely square with the 
fact that said composer died childless. This sort of stuff hurls my senses into 
orbit and the only cure is to put it into plays.

What we suspected in those old variety theatres, though we didn't articulate 
it, was that the whole business was a charade - that the minute you set foot in 
the place, you were in a fantasyland where anything was possible, on the basis 
of a simple conspiracy between the audience and the performers. We conspired to 
see a universe that was not there. Shakespeare had known this centuries 
earlier, but we were too young and stupid to work that out.

When I first saw plays in the so-called legitimate theatre of the 1950s, they 
seemed much more solid and earthbound than what I could see at the Tivoli or 
the Palace. The plays were mostly set in the English home counties, and the 
characters would talk to each other in sentences and accents we had heard only 
from the officer class in war films. The dialogue sounded more like writing 
than talking; there were no songs, jugglers, unicyclists, performing seals or 
acrobats, and we were not invited to join in the chorus. The drama was either 
brittle or languid with none of the vitality of the variety theatre, where even 
the lousy acts had the energy of desperation.

Of course, John Osborne was flexing his muscles in the wings, preparing to 
give the theatre the biggest wake-up call of our times with nothing more lethal 
than raw emotion and an ironing board on stage. And didn't we need him? The 
first time we met, I said: "Everything's your fault."

The music of the decade was as messy as the politics and the theatre. Doris 
Day and Ruby Murray competed for our attention with Johnny Ray and Jimmy Young. 
Bill Haley hit the charts with Rock Around the Clock in 1954 and Tommy Steele 
emerged as the first English rocker. We jazz purists (I had signed up in 1951) 
regarded the whole genre with contempt. We reckoned rock was a passing fad, 
along with animal acts like the Singing Dogs and the Chipmunks (the latter's 
Alvin's Harmonica remains one of my top tracks of the period). I am not 
inventing any of this.

In every way, the 1950s gave us confusion, cacophony and daftness. Once into 
the 1960s, everything became clear. All you needed was love to give peace a 
chance and the revolution would take place a week on Thursday. Some of us had 
the vague idea that the merchants and moneylenders would leave the temple of 
their own free will, once the contradictions of capitalism had been explained 
to them. A woman from Grantham was looking on, taking notes and plotting her 
revenge, but we didn't know that either. Maybe that is why we need historical 
plays: to articulate what we didn't see at the time, and apologise if necessary.

The cute analysis says the 1950s were busy getting pregnant with the 1960s. 
Institutions that had seemed set in stone turned out to have fragile 
foundations. The British empire was disintegrating day by day. So was the 
tradition of twice-nightly variety. This was mainly the Queen's fault - 
ironically, since music hall has always been the royal family's favourite form 
of theatre. But for once the statistics don't lie. The coronation of 1953 was 
the first major event to attract a mass television audience. Millions sat down 
to watch and never regained the use of their legs. More theatres closed in 
coronation year than in any other year before or since.

The performers reacted with a characteristic blend of bravado and desperation. 
It must have been around this time that the word "gimmick" arrived in the 
language. Nude revues were one solution, complete with genuine art poses. At 
another extreme (there were many extremes), I saw the great Stanley Matthews at 
the Tivoli, demonstrating ball juggling and head tennis. He shared top billing, 
bizarrely, with Wee Georgie Wood. I still cringe at the memory.

In The Last Days of the Empire, the central characters, Mike and Peggy Gorman, 
are a double act of the old school who have reinvented themselves as joint 
leaders of Pedro Gonzales and his Caribbean Rhythm. Needless to say, nobody in 
the band has ever been within a thousand miles of the Caribbean (what you might 
define as Hawaiian Serenader syndrome), but the Gormans have achieved a stay of 
execution by writing a calypso that, in the weird way of life, has become a hit 
and kept them on the road for a few more years.

For a while, calypso was being punted as the Next Big Thing, partly in the 
wake of Mighty Sparrow's Cricket Lovely Cricket, written to celebrate a famous 
test victory by the West Indies over England at Lord's. People of a certain age 
still remember the chorus: "With those little pals of mine, Ramadhin and 
Valentine..."

I've always liked plays with songs in them. In 1995 I wrote Shooting the 
Legend, which became a hot-ticket show at theTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Royal, Newcastle. It was a serious 
study of the changing social mores of Tyneside but we still managed to 
accommodate a Tamla Motown medley, Tim Healy singing Mustang Sally, an audience 
singalong of Wor Nanny's a Mazer, a fine 19th-century music-hall song by Joe 
Wilson and a brass band. As a Geordie theatre-goer said to me one night: "Well, 
nobody's going to confuse you with Strindberg, bonny lad."

A bonus of this approach is that I get to share a credit and hang out with 
musicians - for The Last Days of the Empire, with the peerless John Dankworth. 
Parenthetically, and in the interests of boosting my self-esteem, my play 
Barriers hits the Edinburgh festival next month, with music by Peter Maxwell 
Davies. In both cases, it provides the worst-case scenario of hearing people in 
the bar saying: "Well, I quite like some of the music..."

Plays can only be born out of obsession, and I've bundled a lot into The Last 
Days of the Empire: comedians, old jokes, silly clothes, popular music, 
backstage gossip, professional musicians and my defining decade - a period more 
challenging and more fun than it gets credit for. Arcing over it is, 
inevitably, my long-term celebration of the dignity of failure. Winners are 
tedious, and winning, in any case, is a strictly temporary phenomenon. Mine is 
the drama of the old Third Division North, the losing semi-finalist, the 
fastest loser, the heroic variety acts who came on first after the interval. 
Henry V (or Hank Cinq, as Duke Ellington called him) is a splendid fellow but 
I'd rather go drinking with Falstaff's gang, especially if Feste's doing the 
cabaret and singing the blues at midnight.

Call the whole package, if you like, a love letter to a lost world. The 1950s 
were a bit of a shambles but, to paraphrase the great Max Miller: "You've got 
to admit, lady, we did have a go."

© Alan Plater <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater> 2003. The Last 
Days of the Empire opens at the Watermill, Newbury, on Wednesday. Box office: 
01635 46044. Barriers opens at Venue 45, Edinburgh, on August 11. Box office: 
0131-226 0000.
 