
UK voters will have to take ID to the ballot box at local elections in pilot 
areas under new plans to combat electoral fraud.

Chris Skidmore, minister for the constitution, announced the trials would 
start from 2018 after a report on voting fraud by SirEric Pickles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eric-pickles>, the anti-corruption tsar 
and former communities secretary.

Ministers will also consider Pickles’ recommendations about measures to check 
nationality of voters, creating safe zones around polling stations to stop 
intimidation, and ending vote “harvesting”, in which postal votes are submitted 
in bulk.

Some of the key recommendations under consideration include a ban on the 
handling of completed postal ballots by political campaigners, limiting it to 
family members or carers, and requiring people to reregister for postal votes 
every three years.

Although the scale of voter fraud is not thought to be widespread, the Cabinet 
Office said it was planning to bring forward new guidance for electoral 
registration officers who conduct the polls.

Voter fraud is a sensitive issue that needs addressing | Michael White
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/aug/12/voter-is-a-sensitive-issue-that-needs-addressing>
The pilots for ID in polling stations will be be conducted at the local 
government elections in May 2018. Voters in those areas will be required to 
bring ID to prove who they are before they can vote, to prevent anyone 
fraudulently taking another person’s ballot paper.

Local authorities will be invited to apply to trial different types of 
identification, including forms of photo ID such as driving licences and 
passports, or formal correspondence such as a utilities bill to prove their 
address, backed by a signature check.

Skidmore said: “The government’s view is that electoral fraud is unacceptable 
on any level. I want to protect the right of everyone to have their say and 
participate in our democracy. That is why the new measures we are announcing 
today will protect anyone who is at risk of being bullied, undermined or 
tricked out of their vote – and their democratic right.

“By eliminating fraud and tackling improper practices, we are ensuring the 
integrity of our electoral system, while building a clear and secure democracy 
that works for everyone.”

ID is already required at polling stations in Northern Ireland, where voters 
must bring an electoral ID card, but the rest of the UK is not considering 
introducing new forms of identification for voting.
 