
Nothing untoward happened. The heavens did not open as expected and dryness 
reigned. There was a slight feeling of drought about this game. Or perhaps it 
was that the floodgates did not open and the points did not come – just nine 
through penalties in the second half. There was plenty of thunder, but no flow.

Ireland, ravaged by injury to nine of their regulars, may consider this a draw 
earned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/07/ireland-wales-six-nations-match-report>
 rather than a precious home banker squandered. Wales may treat this as a point 
garnered rather than a grand slam spoilt. Since history shows that the away 
teams tend to win these games, they may well settle for disappointment.

There was no shortage of Welsh willingness to shift the ball to the wings. In 
the first half they made multiple charges through Liam Williams, George North 
and Jonathan Davies – 11 of them for a total gain of 108 metres. Ireland’s main 
thrust came from their combined back row – 26 charges for 47 metres. The Wales 
back row had just 11 runs, of which seven were by Taulupe Faletau, for 19 
metres. The outstanding Faletau improvised with great skill for his try after 
the ball squirted out of a scrum destined to be a concerted drive for the line.
 Ireland 16-16 Wales - Official extended highlights 
Ireland’s Jonny Sexton holds nerve to seal Six Nations draw with Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/07/ireland-wales-six-nations-match-report>
Ireland had identified from the start that they could make ground close to the 
rucks – hence the industry of CJ Stander. It helped them accumulate their 13 
points without reply. Conor Murray and the back row were making inroads with 
relatively risk-free probes. Jonathan Sexton was prepared to execute his 
trademark loops behind, but the greater damage was done with their short-range 
probes.

In fact, with Dan Biggar limping off on a heavily bandaged ankle it looked as 
if Wales might suddenly lose their shape. Chasing a game is not necessarily 
their speciality. Rhys Priestland is more at ease without tons of pressure on 
his shoulders. As it was, the replacement fly-half – without reproducing the 
sublime touches of four years ago when he passed Wales to victory – began a 
successful salvage operation. Calmly and studiously he continued to keep the 
ball alive by hand and gradually Wales began to reduce the deficit.

Keith Earls helped the cause with a tip-tackle on Liam Williams and the scrum 
made a robust case with the drives that led to the third reset from which 
Faletau scored. As theFrench team did not remember on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/06/france-italy-six-nations-match-report>
, the desire to run with ambition and adventure is made a whole lot more 
realistic if the forwards are in control.The second half was different. Perhaps 
there was too much passing, or too little variety to rest defences that are 
resolute to the point of being impenetrable unless made to re-adjust under 
duress.

Jamie Roberts flew up the line and made tackle after tackle, but so fast was 
the speed of the centre that somebody might have suggested that going somewhere 
other than in his direction might have been more profitable.

The game settled into what they seem to call an arm-wrestle.

Such manifestations of the old tribal rivalries of the Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> are not without their charm and 
their menace. It is what we have paid good money to see down the years. We 
loved nothing better than to see mates from Lions tours beat each other up.

We are supposed to be changing our ways, although the first weekend revealed 
that the speed of change may be more at a prop’s pace than George North’s. It 
may also be worth remembering that the All Blacks, who set the standards of 
invention that we must all replicate, began their World Cup campaign witha 
fairly flaky performance against Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/20/new-zealand-argentina-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
.

By the time we come to mid-March there will be excitement aplenty. The runs by 
Jonathan Davies and the surges by Robbie Henshaw will be improved by the 
freeing of the hands to give a little pass, by the instinctive awareness that 
Justin Tipuric and Simon Zebo are right on the shoulder in support. The grand 
plans need a bit of tweaking, but these are early days.

Murray and Gareth Davies had a good old personal duel that allowed them to be 
both spiky and silky in the same postage-stamp of space. The back rows gave 
nothing away and earned more of each other’s respect than they made true 
breaks. It was absorbing rugby; just not on the grand scale of entertainment.

When Lloyd Williams came on – he, the scrum-half of the cultured left boot 
that led to the try by Daviesthat beat England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/england-wales-rugby-world-cup-stuart-lancaster>
 – he might have upped the smoothness by using that foot to good effect. 
Instead he fluffed his first kick and Tomas Francis was penalised and Sexton 
equalled the scores. It was a day of imperfection and good intentions, of 
players having to grow accustomed all over again to the strains that go with 
playing on these stages.

Even the most experienced – Alun Wyn Jones and Roberts, Jamie Heaslip and 
Sexton – looked exhausted by it all. Grand plans for expansion sometimes have 
to give way to the business of surviving. Such a process is not with merit in 
its own right; theirs is not an easy way to make a living.
 