
The roof didn’t work. The symbol of the search for a brighter rugby, the very 
piece of kit that guarantees a patch of dry in a decidedly wet part of the 
world, seized up. It was theSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> all over – good intentions 
stuck. It didn’t matter that the sky overhead was clear on Friday night and 
that there was no real need for the mechanical aid in the first place; the 
Wales and France coaches wanted to guarantee conditions to match their 
ambitions … and something broke down.

For 50 years after becoming a force in the 1950s France churned out big, mean 
packs. French flair was the cry, the nation’s dream, but the reality was that 
the pack came first. They were horrible creatures, but their instincts to cause 
pain were softened by their presence in the beautiful game when it opened up, 
the Spanghero brothers flowing in and out of the three-quarters.

Wales power past France to stay on track for Six Nations success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/26/wales-france-six-nations-match-report>
The forwards of Wales no longer yield before the modern French packs. Gone are 
the days of massive inferiority at the scrummage, of being out-jostled at the 
lineout and scattered by the driving maul. Wales hold out, in the full 
knowledge that their own aerobic superiority is such that when the French wind 
has blown, there are rich pickings to be had.

On Friday they came earlier than expected, in the third quarter. The half-time 
6-3 became19-3 and the game was over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/26/wales-france-six-nations-match-report>
, allowing France to try to recapture the days of old with their driving 
lineouts. For Wales this was a chance to practise stopping what may well be 
coming their way at Twickenham next. They will be unhappy about their 
resistance against the maul from which the admirable Guilhem Guirado scored.

It wasn’t all about the maul. France made more than 20 passes out of contact 
against Wales, a sign that they are looking to be less coy with the ball. Their 
problem remains at scrum-half, by tradition the player that runs the game. 
France do not have a governor there. Sébastien Bézy and Maxime Machenaud are 
neat and compact, but they do not direct the whole. It means that nobody, until 
the late arrival of François Trinh-Duc, gave meaning to all the good intentions.

For as long as he has been in and out of the French team, Trinh-Duc has been 
the butt of all sorts of criticism. There was always something – a slightly 
mysterious “something” – for François to work on. Lately, the something has 
been a more straightforward matter of a leg injury, but his head has never been 
fully trusted by his coaches, in contrast to the high esteem in which he is 
held by the outside world.

He came off the bench on Friday and the game changed and not just because the 
maul began to move. Trinh-Duc gave the three-quarters direction and a pattern 
and a directness that had been missing. If France are to prosper, surely they 
have to shift the position of control from 9 to 10 and empower Trinh-Duc.

The problem, it seems, is that this responsibility sits uneasily in his mind– 
but it may be worth trying again. Anything has to be better than the conversion 
of Virimi Vakatawa from strike runner on the wing to supplementary forward, 
generally getting in the way at the breakdown.

Wales, too, have a little problem at scrum-half. Gareth Davies was lightning 
fast again on the break and deserved his man-of-the-match award. But those 
breaks apart, he’s trying to run too much – and kick. Dan Biggar should be 
controlling the game, but he was co-pilot on Friday night. Wales somehow have 
gone French, with the No9 running the show.

Was this more “welfare of the player” stuff? Protecting the 10 seems to be all 
the rage? Biggar would be the very first to say the last thing he wants is 
extra security. Any special attention paid to him by those that would do him 
ill is nothing but a compliment and he would invite them to do their damndest.

Such a plea for a little less worry includes asking the referees to stop being 
so careful. For the good of the game, let the game flow. A 10 in a game of 
flowing movement is safer than anywhere. Oxygen starvation among the hunters is 
his ally. Trying to push the Six Nations in the right direction isn’t all about 
moving the roof or shifting control from one half-back to the other; it is 
about interpreting the willingness of everybody to play without interruption.
 