
Despite this narrow defeat in Reading the Ospreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> are still flapping in the EDF 
Energy Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglowelshcup>. The onus was on 
London Irish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish> to win and deny 
their opponents a bonus point but they could only manage one half of the 
equation, having led 17-6 at half-time. The upshot for the holders is a 
semi-final against Gloucester in Coventry in March.

Irish will view this as a missed opportunity and the Wales coach, Warren 
Gatland, will not have been hugely enthused either. At least the arrival as 
replacements of the two international Joneses, Ryan and Alun-Wyn, was a major 
turning point but the Ospreys' first-half display was a horror show on a dank 
November afternoon. Gavin Henson was among those significantly below par and 
Gatland's side will not survive a similar performance against South Africa on 
Saturday.

An ankle injury suffered by the hooker Huw Bennett is a further concern and it 
represents the inevitable price to be paid when Gatland's players are required 
to front up the weekend before a major international, a situation now largely 
consigned to history in England. A sticky end also awaits this tournament, 
which is likely to be downgraded and played during the Six Nations from next 
season, but at least this particular contest proved a worthy one, with 
qualification in the balance right up to the closing seconds, as the Irish 
hurled themselves repeatedly at the Ospreys' defensive line.

Life would have been rather easier for the Exiles had the referee, Andrew 
Small, spotted the Ospreys centre Tommy Bowe illegally batting the ball dead 
with his hand at a key moment earlier in the second half. At the very least it 
was a penalty, at worst a yellow-card offence but, in fairness to theOspreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys>, it was far from the only disputed 
ruling in damp and slippery conditions. The Welsh region have now chiselled out 
some tangible reward - a losing bonus point or better - in the closing seconds 
of five games this season and here was another example of their resilience when 
not playing particularly well.

The Irish could easily have been out of sight by the hour. Topsy Ojo was the 
chief culprit. If an interception fumble just before half-time was a matter of 
regret, it was nothing compared to the chance which went begging when the 
excellent Peter Hewat engineered an overlap in his own 22 and floated a teasing 
pass out to his wing. Instead of catching it Ojo unaccountably opted for a 
mid-air fly-hack which immediately gave the Ospreys the ball. Within seconds 
Henson was sending a long ball out to Andrew Bishop, who put Nikki Walker over 
on the left. It was effectively a 14-point swing.

Another dropped interception, by Elvis Seveali'i, also failed to reward the 
glorious strike running of Seilala Mapusua and Sailosi Tagicakibau, try-scorers 
who should give England a hurry-up with the Pacific Islanders at Twickenham on 
Saturday.

Irish's director of rugby, Toby Booth, pronouncing himself "mystified" by the 
failure to penalise Bowe's indiscretion, also claimed a share of the blame for 
his side's failure to progress, having rested top players from the opening 
defeat against Worcester. "I didn't think it was realistic to fight on three 
fronts," he said, preferring to concentrate on the European Challenge Cup and 
console himself that Irish are competing consistently with "the upper echelons" 
in European club rugby.

All we can now hope for is that Shane Williams and co do not trot out for the 
semi-final in their latest change jersey, a vile concoction of pumpkin and 
elephant-grey better suited to scaring kids at Halloween.

London Irish Hewat; Ojo, Seveali'i, Mapusua, Tagicakibau; Geraghty (Catt, 60), 
Hodgson (Richards 74); Dermody, Paice (Buckland, 74), Rautenbach (Lea'aetoa, 
74), Hudson (Roche, 57), Casey (capt), Thorpe, S Armitage, Hala'Ufia.

Tries Mapusua, Tagicakibau. Cons Hewat 2. Pens Hewat 3.

Ospreys: Vaughton (Bishop, 39); Walker, Bowe, Henson, S Wiliams; Hook, 
Nutbrown; P James (capt), Bennett (Hibbard, 56), A Jones, Gough, Bateman (A-W 
Jones, 52), Smith (R Jones, 52), Holah, Tiatia.

Try Walker. Cons Hook. Pens Hook 4.

Referee A Small (London). Attendance 9,293.
 