
It’s a simple fact of the internet that whenever anything happens online, 
social media gurus will find a way to make it worse. Maybe one day science will 
build a drill powerful enough to explore the subterranean dirt kingdom from 
which they emerge, but until then we can only speculate. “Social media expert” 
is such a nebulous term that we must know them by their works, sort of like 
Satan. And what more perfect format to examine those works than theTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> biography?

If you use your real name online, your Twitter bio is one of the first things 
someone Googling you will come across (unless you’re really unlucky and they 
find your ancient LiveJournal instead). I’ve seen it likened to a resume, but 
its pithy format makes it closer to a 21st century business card. 
Traditionally, business cards were designed and produced according to the 
directions of one’s employer. A business card identifies someone as belonging 
to an organisation, and confers a formalised professional status based on that 
membership. Oh, right, John Smith, the director of industry down at Business 
Corporation. Those guys produce some great products and/or services!

The Twitter bio, by contrast, is supposed to be a reflection of your personal 
brand, the Trademarked You; rather than each of us being able to rely on the 
cachet of professional affiliation, we are each required to be our own public 
relations department.

Recognising this transfer of labour from organisations to individuals is 
crucial to understanding the true humour to be found in the Twitter bio. All 
the funniest examples of the genre conform to a standard format, which you can 
see generated ad infinitum on this generator site:What The Fuck Is My Twitter 
Bio? <http://whatthefuckismytwitterbio.com/> For example:

“Zynga warlock, virtual reality troll, gaming guru. Aspiring stand up comic.”

“Digital media editrix, digital strat executive, Facebook hacktivist. You must 
be the change you wish to see in the world.”

“Quora pundit, Chrome thought leader, creative captain. Freegan.”

And so on. Short phrases separated by commas, intending to convey a sense of 
value and distinction, but which actually make the person sound like they used 
a Twitter bio generator. Bonus points if it contains a dull, misattributed 
quote:

“App addict, medium engineer, CMS princess. ‘A journey of one million miles 
begins with a single step’ - Cicero.”

This is where the social media gurus come in. Most people can no longer rely 
on their company’s media department and business card division to promote 
themselves, but nor are they particularly adept atrunning their own PR game 
<https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/06/pink-collar/>, which is harder than it 
looks.

Social media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> experts have 
slid in to fill this gap, writing endless articles about Seven Reasons Your 
Twitter Is Killing Your Personal Brand, Five Ways to Take Your Twitter Bio To 
The Next Level, and Leveraging The Hair You Pull Off Your Hairbrush: It’s As 
Simple As Going Online. Webinars, books both paper and electronic, conferences: 
the personal branding business is enormous.

And it tends to churn out Twitter bios that look like they’ve all been written 
by the same person. Social media gurus themselves were pioneers in the art of 
the boring Twitter bio. One of my favourites read simply, “Comms. Marketing. 
Content. Digital. Consulting.” The negative space invites the reader to assume 
the guy was just too in demand to fill up the whole 160 characters. He’s 
probably floating in a pool somewhere with a constellation of interns orbiting 
him on inflatable dolphins, each with a separate digital device that they swap 
out every 20 minutes when hisPomodoro alarm 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pomodoro_Technique> goes off.

This state of affairs can seem paradoxical, if you take the social media 
guru’s self-description at face value. Why would you employ someone’s services, 
or take their advice, on composing a unique Twitter bio if it’s going to end up 
sounding like ... well, like a business card? But this is the point: as the 
modern business card, a Twitter biography must conform to a particular set of 
parameters in order to function. Setting your bio as something creative or 
absurd doesn’t give people any information about you, and most people wouldn’t 
do it for the same reason they wouldn’t give out a business card embossed with 
a single image of themselves juggling bananas.

Social media of all kinds demands that its users negotiate this tension 
between self-expression and self-promotion, if they’re hoping to use online 
space for both personal and professional reasons. Writing a Twitter bio is a 
kind of work, and it requires a skillset that many of us don’t have. Social 
media gurus are absurd and depressing, but we may as well complain about the 
wind: new demands placed on knowledge and service workers created a low 
pressure system into which something had to be pulled.

“The standardised Twitter bio is social media professionals’ greatest 
achievement.” - Queen Victoria
 