
The last of the National Football League’s three London games for 2016 had the 
least obvious marketing appeal. There was no great novelty to match the
inaugural visit to Twickenham last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/new-york-giants-los-angeles-rams-case-keenum-nfl-twickenham-london>
, none of the ‘home team’ narrative that can be spun each year when the Jaguars 
come to town. It was just two middling teams fighting to stay relevant this 
season.

Yet it was two teams who would go on to produce one of the best games London 
has seen. There have been plenty of high-scoring occasions here at Wembley and 
certainly some dramatic final acts. But for a blend of entertainment and 
quality Cincinnati Bengals’ 27-27 tie with Washington – the first stalemate in 
the 10-year history of the International Series – was equalled perhaps only by 
theMinnesota Vikings’ triumph against the Pittsburgh Steelers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/29/minnesota-vikings-pittsburgh-steelers-nfl>
in 2013.

There was a matchup to savour between two of the league’s truly elite talents -
Washington <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-nfl-team> cornerback 
Josh Norman and Bengals wide receiver AJ Green. There was late drama, 
inevitably, in what was the first London game even to reach overtime. And there 
was room for a new cult hero, as an undrafted rookie running back known to 
team-mates as ‘Fat Rob’ scored the first touchdown of his career.

Sloppy starts have been a hallmark of the International Series, a result of 
the jet lag that players must feel. We had heard familiar tales in the build-up 
to this game - Bengals quarterback Andy Dalton falling asleep on the bus ride 
to practice on Friday, whilst his 6ft 7ins left tackle Andrew Whitworth 
lamented the impossibility of a man his size doing the same on the flight over.

NFL wrap: Saints edge Seahawks as Brady and Pats continue ominous form
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/nfl-scores-seahawks-patriots-saints-bills>
But neither team looked groggy come kick‑off. On the first offensive play of 
the game the Washington quarterback, Kirk Cousins, rolled out of the pocket and 
zipped a tight spiral into the hands of the tight end Jordan Reed. It was the 
first act of a methodical 15-play drive that concluded with ‘Fat’ Rob Kelley 
plunging into the end zone from four yards out.

Few in the Wembley crowd could have known all that much about Kelley - making 
his first-everNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> start - but he is the 
sort of underdog that tends to go down well on this side of the pond. He seemed 
to have blown his shot at a pro career when he piled on 20lbs during his final 
season of college football at Tulane, after having sat out the previous year 
due to academic issues, but shed the weight in time to impress Washington’s 
scouts at a workout in March.

He signed soon after the draft and performed well enough in preseason to make 
the team’s final roster, but had only played sparingly before an injury to 
starter Matt Jones thrust him into a full-time role on Sunday.

Cincinnati, nominally the home team for this match, responded to Kelley’s 
touchdown with one on their own first possession. Alex Erickson’s 66-yard kick 
return set them up with a short field and the running back Giovani Bernard 
danced into the end zone seven plays later. A Washington field goal made it 
10-7 at halfway – with both teams also missing one long attempt each.

Seahawks' Earl Thomas penalized for hugging official after touchdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/earl-thomas-celebration-official-touchdown-penalty-flag>
Now the Bengals started to bare their teeth. Dalton, refusing to be 
discouraged by Norman’s exceptional coverage, started to sling the ball Green’s 
way. On another day the cornerback would have punished such audacity severely. 
Norman twice got both hands on passes but failed to intercept. Instead Dalton 
gave his team the lead on a 15-yard pass to the tight end Tyler Eifert, then 
extended it by taking the ball into the end zone himself on a bootleg run.

Washington needed to respond and they did. Reed displayed the athleticism that 
makes him such a rare talent as he took a short pass, carved through the heart 
of the defense and dived over the line for a 23-yard touchdown. Cousins then 
hooked up with Jamison Crowder for a 33-yard score.

That was the 100th touchdown in the history of the International Series. But 
these teams were not done yet. The Bengals got their noses back in front 
through a Jeremy Hill run before Washington drove down the field to tie the 
game with a field goal. There was no breaking this deadlock before the fourth 
quarter expired.

Wembley roared as both teams put together promising overtime drives, only to 
stall just short of field goal range. The crowd’s loyalties were divided, as 
they usually are in London, but most of all it seemed that nobody was quite 
ready to see this game end.

Mediocrity on turf: the NFL is stumbling, but will it recover?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/28/nfl-football-tv-ratings-drop>
Washington looked destined to bring the curtain down with a drive that 
resembled their very first – feeding ‘Fat Rob’ the ball as they marched down 
the field. There were cheers and jeers as Dustin Hopkins converted what he 
believed to be a game-winning field goal. But the Bengals had called for a 
time-out moments before the snap. Hopkins was obliged to repeat the attempt. 
This time he missed, wide left.

Just over two minutes remained on the clock. Time enough for Cincinnati to 
salvage a last-gasp victory? No, that would be too predictable a way for a game 
like this to end. Instead, Dalton coughed up a fumble. Washington recovered, 
but lacked the time for one last push. The game ended on a desperate Cousins 
Hail Mary that sailed out of bounds.

A tie will suit neither of these middling teams in their play-off push. But 
Wembley had a whale of a time.
 