
It was a glorious game, one to linger long in the memory. One also that will 
sorely test the kneading physios and soothing counsellors of both clubs this 
week. Bodies and minds after such an afternoon are bound to be in bits, and in 
the players’ recovery lie matters for reflection.

Unleashing the game of the season  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/wasps-exeter-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
with three rounds to go in the domestic Premiership and with both clubs in hot 
pursuit of home advantage in the play-offs – to say nothing of the Champions 
Cup semi-final that now awaits Wasps – invites a question even of the victors: 
how do you follow that? And of the losers: how do you recover from that?

Perhaps there is comfort to be had in remembering just how well they all 
played here. Far from reducing the level of risk in a game of such import by 
allowing the No8s, Thomas Waldrom and Nathan Hughes, to dominate possession, 
both teams set out to combine full-on thunder with flat-out width.

Chris Ashton scores vital late try for Saracens to beat Northampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/saracens-northampton-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
True, Waldrom scored two tries – the first his signature score from the back 
of a driving maul, the second with a slide from three metres out after a break 
that may not have been exactly searing but which roundly said yet again that 
there is so much more to Thomas the Tank than a roly-polyness exaggerated by 
cramming his head into a scrum cap – but there was deftness in the hands of 
Gareth Steenson and Henry Slade, gliding grace in the breaks of Siale Piutau 
and Elliot Daly.

Especially Daly in the turning point of the tie. The signs before it came were 
not good for Wasps. Harry Williams, a prop who last year was with Jersey, had 
kept Exeter well ahead after a try by Charles Piutau had threatened to cut 
right back the advantage earned by Waldrom’s first-half brace.Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> had stretched their lead to 13 
points after a penalty was given away by James Haskell, who was immediately 
withdrawn.

No, it was looking a little grim for Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps>. Exeter were going for the 
knockout score. Geoff Parling was denied when the pass to him from Olly 
Woodburn was called forward; the visiting forwards were straining on – over – 
the goal-line for a fourth try. Suddenly, though, the ball was lost and from 
behind that line, Daly set off, breaking two tackles, surging out of his 22.

It did not lead immediately to a try, but within a minute Charles Piutau was 
over, the full-back’s try converted by Jimmy Gopperth, who had not been 
infallible off the tee. Time was still against Wasps and the game entered the 
last minute. They hammered through their forwards and then went wide: Gopperth 
to Daly to Charles Piutau.

The conversion was difficult. Gopperth raised his arms before it sailed 
through, the last act of a remarkable game, one so good that it should help 
winners and losers put themselves back together for their remaining month of 
the season. It also sets up 1 May sweetly, a Sunday when they meet again in the 
Premiership.

Wasps C Piutau; Wade, Daly, S Piutau, Halai; Gopperth, Robson; Mullan 
(MacIntyre, 59), Festuccia (Johnson, 50), Cooper-Woolley, Launchbury, Myall (B 
Davies, 18), Haskell (capt; Young, 59), Smith, Hughes.

Tries C Piutau 2, Halai. Cons Gopperth 2. Pens Gopperth 2.

Exeter Turner; Nowell, Slade, Whitten (Campagnaro, 70), Woodburn; Steenson 
(capt), Chudley; Moon (Hepburn, 58), Cowan-Dickie (Yeandle, 66), Low (Williams, 
18), Lees (Welch, 56), Parling, Armand, Salvi (Ewers, 58), Waldrom.

Tries Waldrom 2, Williams. Cons Steenson 3. Pen Steenson.

Referee R Poite (Fr). Attendance 23,866.
 