
A new era but a familiar set of players, a surprisingly familiar formation, 
and a very familiar problem – what does Sam Allardycedo with the captain, Wayne 
Rooney? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/28/england-future-wayne-rooney-roy-hodgson>

The England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> manager had 
seemingly indicated Rooney would be deployed in his traditional position, just 
behind Harry Kane in a 4‑2‑3‑1 formation. It quickly became obvious Rooney was 
instead playing much deeper, tucked into a central-midfield trio alongside 
Jordan Henderson, with Eric Dier playing the holding role. It was, essentially, 
Rooney’s position from the European Championship in France.

Rooney believes that role suits him better at international level, and he 
concentrates mainly on switching play to the flanks, encouraging England’s 
full-backs forward with crossfield balls, which varied in quality. Allardyce 
said Rooney’s position was “wherever he wanted to be”, as if he had been 
afforded a completely free role. Throughout the first half England’s shape 
without the ball was that of a 4‑3‑3, meaning Rooney had much stricter 
defensive responsibilities than if he had played as the No10.

Adam Lallana’s last-gasp goal gives England victory over 10-man Slovakia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/slovakia-england-world-cup-2018-qualifier-sam-allardyce>
Rooney sometimes took up extraordinarily deep positions, at one stage dropping 
between England’s centre-backs and effectively becoming a sweeper. The main 
consequence was Harry Kane appeared extremely isolated throughout the first 
half, struggling to become involved in passing moves. The Spurs man’s movement 
in the inside-left channel was impressive, forcing theSlovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia> captain, Martin Skrtel, into a 
succession of fouls that eventually resulted in his dismissal.

For all the talk of Rooney’s free role, Allardyce evidently asked England to 
reshape at half-time: the formation seemed more 4-2-3-1, with Henderson and 
Dier the midfield duo and Rooney supporting Kane. Raheem Sterling and Adam 
Lallana, the two wide players, also switched flanks.

Skrtel’s dismissal meant Allardyce changed things quickly, introducing Dele 
Alli for Henderson but deploying him just behind his Tottenham team-mate Kane. 
Rooney dropped in alongside Dier, effectively playing his third role of the 
game. Judging a performance against 10 men is difficult but England were 
reasonably impressive in the final half hour, with the full-backs pushing high 
up the pitch.

Lallana returned to the left, drifting inside alongside Alli to provide clever 
link play from between the lines. Theo Walcott was introduced on the right to 
go in behind the defence, something Sterling needs to incorporate into his game.

It was a typical Walcott performance: consistently dangerous runs and 
frustrating end-product, but he provided England with another dimension, 
testing Slovakia’s offside trap. Daniel Sturridge, who replaced Kane, was less 
effective.

Lallana was a fitting matchwinner. England’s brightest player at Euro 2016, 
the Liverpool midfielder plays the game in a different manner to his 
team-mates, making clever runs to facilitate passing movements, linking play 
efficiently and offering a quick turn to ease past opponents. The one thing 
lacking from his game is goals but here he repeatedly offered a threat, hitting 
a post before finally being rewarded with his late winner.

On the basis of the past year, it is Lallana whom Allardyce should build his 
team around – he, rather than Rooney, boasts the intelligence required for a 
free role.
 