
‘We should miss Britain a lot. But Britain would miss the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> even more.” The speaker was a senior 
member of the Italian government, in response to a question about the attitude 
of Italians to the thorny issue of Brexit. The occasion was the annual Venice 
Seminar, where members of the Italian government speak frankly, but not for 
direct attribution, on the political and economic scene.

For many years the views expressed at those seminars about the Italian economy 
have been a triumph of hope over experience. For example, the Italian economy 
managed, after the initial impact of the great recession of 2008-10, to 
contract further in 2011 and 2012 when even the British economy was beginning 
to recover.

There was then a period of flatlining during which optimistic forecasts were 
offered to us, but never fulfilled, as Italians hung on to their substantial 
savings and spent little.

It now looks as though Italian “consumers” – ie citizens – are dipping into 
their savings and the economy is finally growing again, assisted by various 
measures which it is claimed have boosted confidence.

There is also, of course, the beneficial impact on real incomes of the lower 
price of oil. At a time when much of the gloom and doom emanating from Davos 
stems from the impact on the finances of oil-exporting nations, the bonus to 
oil-importing nations seems to have been underestimated.

I hope I am not alone in being slightly surprised that, after the serious 
recessions experienced in the west and Japan as a consequence of the two oil 
shocks of the 1970s – when huge increases in the price removed purchasing power 
and caused a serious inflationary spiral – the reverse movement in oil prices 
should also be considered an all-round disaster. There are winners and losers.

Apart from anything else, the impact on inflation is such that policymakers 
have a lot of scope to relax fiscal policy without in any way breaching their 
inflation targets. Italian ministers and officials are rightly calling for 
greater flexibility from Brussels with regard to fiscal rules on taxation and 
public spending. They feel they have gone a long way in meeting cries for 
“structural reform” of the economy, although there is no doubt plenty of scope 
for more. Meanwhile, as prime minister Matteo Renzi points out: “The EU 
fixation on austerity is actually destroying growth.”

The difference drawn by Italian officials between current attitudes towards 
the EU in the UK and Italy is between “Euroscepticism” in the UK and 
“Eurocriticism” inItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>. (Edward 
Heath, who, as prime minister, took us into what was then the European Economic 
Community in 1973, had another word to describe the anti-Europeans in his 
party: “Euroseptics”, pronounced with some venom.)

The Italian government is already preparing for a conference in Rome next year 
to mark the 60th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome in 1957. Amid 
the travails of countries such as Spain and Italy during an economic crisis 
caused by the financial crash and exacerbated by the structure of the eurozone 
and its policies, the continued devotion to the euro has often puzzled 
outsiders.

In that respect, it is interesting to see that our own prime minister, after 
some ambivalence, has adopted the view I first heard from George Soros: namely 
that by being a member of the EU but not of the eurozone or the Schengen 
agreement – passport-free movement in continentalEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – the UK has “the best of both 
worlds”.

More than 60 years have passed since the Messina conference of 1955, where the 
groundwork for the Treaty of Rome was prepared, but which prime minister 
Anthony Eden refused to attend. His more enlightened successors spent most of 
the 1960s and the beginning of the 1970s trying to persuade the French that we 
wanted to rectify Eden’s mistake. It is difficult for many of us who followed 
all the shenanigans – including the successive “No’s” from President de Gaulle 
– to believe that, at a time when there are so many pressing problems that 
require pan-European cooperation, the Conservative party should be so obsessed 
with Brexit.

From now until the referendum, the public are going to be bombarded with 
statistics from both sides. It will not be the end of the world if we leave, 
but it will almost certainly be the end of the UK, on the reasonable assumption 
that Scotland would want to break away. The idea that we should tear up treaty 
arrangements negotiated over decades, and then renegotiate from a position of 
bargaining weakness, almost beggars belief.

Moreover, it is an ill-founded scare story that if we remain in the EU we are 
destined to participate in a political union. The others know our position and 
accept it, but are quite happy to go along with a Cameron claim that this 
reality is the result of triumphant negotiations on his part.

There is endless reading available on the pros and cons of being in or out, 
but one highly readable book isBrexit 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/279455/> by Denis 
MacShane, who was minister for Europe in the Blair government. It is subtitled 
“How Britain Will Leave Europe” but that is a publisher’s come-on. MacShane 
hopes it won’t happen, but fears it will unless the pro-Europeans get their act 
together.

My own view is that the British remain essentially conservative with a very 
small “c” and, other things being equal, would balk at such a retrograde step. 
But the opinion polls are worrying for us pro-Europeans, and the prime 
minister, although now apparently having stood up to be counted, is terrified 
of how migration will affect public opinion.

I therefore draw solace from the fact that last week the odds at William Hill 
were 2-5 for a vote to stay in and 9-5 for Brexit. The big question is: will 
voters follow the money in the end?
 