
Black Americans are in challenging, critical times. We matter enough to sell 
out concert stadiums and win prestigious awards touting our intellectual 
prowess – asClaudia Rankine <https://www.theguardian.com/books/claudia-rankine> 
did this week, when she won the MacArthur genius grant. But we don’t matter 
enough to keep us from being murdered by the police. There is something 
devastatingly perverse about that fact.


Claudia Rankine’s win is one of the best things to happen to black folks in 
2016. Her award, along with those of her fellow black recipients in this year’s 
MacArthur crop – the art historian and curator Kellie Jones, the film-maker 
Barry Jacobs-Jenkins and the sculptor Joyce Scott – signals a moment of 
nationwide reckoning. It is also a reminder that we cannot – and will not – 
stand for the routine violence or the default dehumanization of black bodies.

Rankine is not just seeking to shift the cultural dialogue, although that is 
important too. She is “trying to change the discourse of black people being 
equated with criminality and murdered inside a culture where white fear has 
justified the continued incarceration, murder of blacks and other people of 
color”.

When Rankine won the grant, she told the Los Angeles Times she felt “the prize 
is being given to the subject” 
<http://www.latimes.com/books/jacketcopy/la-et-jc-claudia-rankine-20160921-snap-story.html>
of race. Rankine is perhaps the first black recipient to make resolutely clear 
that the subject of race is bigger than any given individual. It also makes the 
MacArthur Foundation a model for institutions prioritizing the need to 
deconstruct and decentralize whiteness in America – a construct which is 
directly linked to police killings.

I thought I was a gorgeous kid until I learned I was just 'pretty, for a black 
girl' | Rebecca Carroll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/04/i-thought-i-was-a-gorgeous-kid-until-i-learned-i-was-just-pretty-for-a-black-girl>
Rankine may use some of the MacArthur money for what she is calling the Racial 
Imaginary Institute. It’s a project that was in development before she won the 
award, which she says will be “an interdisciplinary arts and cultural 
laboratory for the dismantling of white dominance”. Amen.

In all of her work, Rankine reminds us that what black folks do as a culture – 
one that has never squandered anything, was never meant to be here, much less 
thrive and achieve – can be used to further the effort of cultivating a sense 
of agency without asking for permission. This is the very best of what Black 
Lives Matter and other black activists stand for: we are not here for the 
validation, we are here for each other – the living and the dead.


Long before she won the MacArthur, Rankine was an ambassador of this truth and 
visionary mandate. “Unlike earlier black-power movements that tried to fight or 
segregate for self-preservation,” Rankine wrote in an essay forthe New York 
Times last year 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/22/magazine/the-condition-of-black-life-is-one-of-mourning.html?_r=0>
, “Black Lives Matter aligns with the dead, continues the mourning and refuses 
the forgetting in front of all of us.”


And as we celebrate the successes of black culture luminaries like Rankine, 
who push past limitations, cast aside America’s glaring white gaze and exceed 
societal expectations, we continue to recognize our daily losses to the police 
and institutional racism everywhere. How poignant and essential, then, that our 
artists – the oracles of our magnificent, messy existence – build on this 
paradox in rigorous, centered and imaginative ways, every day.
 