
The government is right to have decided finally to close outdated prisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/09/city-centre-victorian-prisons-may-close-1bn-prison-reform-plans>
, some of which George Osborne described as “relics from Victorian times”. The 
plan is that over the next five years the old prisons will be sold for 
development and nine new prisons will be built at a cost of around £1bn. The 
new facilities will house up to 10,000 prisoners, and in the long run are 
projected to save around £80m a year. The Treasury says that the plans will 
make the prison system in England and Wales “fit for purpose in the 21st 
century”.

Much as the closure of the older corroding and socially corrosive prisons like 
Brixton, Wandsworth, Pentonville and Leeds should be welcomed, getting our 
prison system fit for purpose in this or any other century is going to take 
much more than the scrapping of old and the building of a few more new prisons.

Prison inspectors condemn squalid court custody suites
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/06/prison-inspectors-court-custody-suites-unsafe>
The good news is that for the first time in living memory we have, in Michael 
Gove,a justice secretary <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> who 
believes that prisons should be places of redemption. He understands that while 
there is no excuse for crime, “prisoners come – disproportionately – from 
backgrounds where they were deprived of proper parenting, where the home they 
first grew up in was violent, where they spent time in care, where they 
experienced disrupted and difficult schooling, where they failed to get the 
qualifications necessary to succeed in life and where they got drawn into 
drug-taking”. Gove understands the issues, that much is for sure – but does he 
understand the crux of the prison problem? Anyone going to jail in this country 
has to adapt to a cynical, corrupt, antisocial lifestyle which does little to 
encourage change in post-prison behaviour.

If the government truly wants to have a prison system fit for modern times, it 
should close every prison in the country, one by one. And rebuild with a new 
regime, in which there is no place for “prison language”, prisoner hierarchies, 
or antisocial behaviour. A prison is a valuable community resource, as much as 
a hospital or a school. The government needs to recognise this, not just by 
building a few new shiny jails, but by eradicating the pro-criminal culture 
that has dominated our prison system for far too long.

Hand on heart, I know that most of the people I served alongside in prison had 
the desire to change

Gove said: “Our streets will not be safer, our children will not be properly 
protected and our future will not be more secure unless we change the way we 
treat offenders, and offenders then change their lives for the better. There is 
a treasure, if only you can find it, in the heart of every man, said Churchill. 
It is in that spirit we will work.”

I met every type of offender during my 20 years in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/erwinjames> – I was one of the “worst of 
the worst”. I owe the fellow prisoners I left behind nothing, but, hand on 
heart, I know that most of the people I served alongside had the desire to 
change and live crime-free lives.

For some, the problems and issues they faced were so deep-rooted that progress 
was unlikely. But in the right environment and with the right attitude from 
government and society in general, rehabilitation was achievable for the 
majority. For so long we have just made it too hard for too many. If ever there 
was a time that our prison system was ripe for change, it is now.
 