
As one post summed it up, Andrew Mitchell managed only 12 answers to 76 
questionsduring a live online chat 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2010/sep/15/andrew-mitchell-online-chat#start-of-comments>
 on the Poverty Matters blog yesterday. It's not a great response. To be fair, 
Mitchell is pretty pressed; I was with him at the event organised by Bond with 
representatives of hundreds of aid agencies yesterday afternoon and he referred 
to working 18-hour days ahead of the UN summit next week. He's a busy man, but 
perhaps his department could manage to pick up on some of the questions he 
couldn't because they represented an interesting sample of what's bothering 
people on aid and development. Of course, there was a heavy contingency of NGOs 
represented in the thread but that is interesting because they were raising the 
issues on which they will be getting their supporters to engage.

So out of the sample, I would pick the following as key questions which Dfid 
needs to find a way to answer – and we'll ask them if they would like to do 
that.

1) India popped up several times. There has been much talk about the age of 
austerity and next month cuts will provoke huge political debate in the UK, and 
the pressure on Dfid to justify its ring-fenced budget will be intense. Already 
this debate is zero-ing in on India and the question as to why we are still 
giving aid to India when the country's economy is growing and developing a 
massive middle class. The fact that there are more poor people in India than in 
sub-Saharan Africa doesn't settle the argument. A lot of people are going to 
argue that it is up to India to decide how to distribute its growing wealth. I 
think this is going to be a big issue for NGOs who have spent a lot of time 
campaigning in recent years on increasing aid flows from the developed world. 
Will they have to shift that focus to the governments of developing countries 
to devote more resources to tackling poverty?

2) Andrew Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> has 
talked a lot about transparency at Dfid, so I would really have liked him to 
answer the question about whether he will follow the example of Eric Pickles 
and publish the entire Dfid expenditure in a spreadsheet-style format. Would 
Dfid care to clarify how they will be implementing greater transparency?

3) Another question that came up in various forms, including a very good 
question by Médecins Sans Frontières, is the issue of how closely British aid 
is being tied to our national security. The recent leaks claiming that all aid 
must contribute to British national security have made people clearly very 
nervous. At the Bond event yesterday, I noticed that Nick Clegg used a Tony 
Blair phrase "draining the swamp" to justify aid. This is the argument that one 
of the purposes of aid was to reduce tensions, potential conflict and 
extremism. The phrase has now become notorious in the US as a justification for 
its foreign policy. More clarification is badly needed from Dfid.

4) Finally, just to help Dfid out and reduce its workload. On the question 
about thevulture fund bill <http://www.jubileedebtcampaign.org.uk/?lid=2893>, 
perhaps I can answer. A vulture fund is a private equity fund that buys up the 
debt of poor countries and then tries to recoup the debt, often going through 
the courts to do so. But thebill did get passed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/apr/08/vulture-funds-developing-nations-debt>
 in the pre-election rush, despite some Tory backbench opposition.
 