 Andrew Lloyd-Webber, you've got a lot to answer for, I must admit, I never 
really liked your shows that much anyway. I mean Evita had some agreeable 
tunes, and Cats packed a choreographic wallop. Newest on the scene is Starlight 
Express, the show that gives you everything: musical banality teamed with 
choreographic fluff, mediocre talent teamed with enormous egos, sexism teamed 
with racism.
In Starlight Express the one and only black female is Belle, the Sleeping Car. 
She is past her prime, has fallen upon hard times and bemoans the fact that her 
customers now show her little tenderness: instead, they just' .. walk in and 
start undressing. .'It is extremely disturbing to find that in this country 
black women are pushed into these categories in real life, without social 
status, family background or even education being considered. For the 
uniformed, I regret to tell you that the categories are as follows: whores, 
former whores, possible whores.

It is sad, sickening even, that we could be constantly portrayed this way 
without question or disapproval. It is frightening to think of all those white 
faces in that darkened theatre who saw and silently accepted a damning 
stereotype without raising a middle class eyebrow. And it is surprising that in 
1984, with all the strides that supposedly have been made towards bridging the 
cultural gap, just how often and how continuously we face this sort of 
harrassment and how constricting it can be on one's life.

In the days before liberation and single's bars, any woman that went out by 
herself was considered 'fast loose looking for action.' Our male counterparts 
have now become more accustomed to our independence, however it is primarily 
white females who are applauded for making headway in a male-dominated world. 
Few black women receive such an accolade, the prevailing trend of though being 
that her achievements were more easily realised because she, like all 
stereotypical black women, is of inferior intelligence and her inherent easy 
virtue is the real key to her success.

I don't mean millions of white Britons watch Moira Stewart or Maggie Nelson 
(you do recognise their names, don't you?) reporting the news and wonder whom 
they slept with to gain their lofty positions. They represent part of the new 
breed of 'superwoman' who are more image than substance. Their celebrity status 
sets them apart from the likes of you and me.

What I do mean is your reaction to the well-groomed, self-assured black woman 
having dinner by herself. If you decide that she's there for any reasons other 
than hunger and a serious commitment not to cook, then it's about time you 
realised your own fears and prejudices. We do have as much right as anyone to 
dine out.

And what about those two young girls looking into that shop window. Can you 
honestly be so narrow-minded as to assume that they're there for the purpose of 
drawing attention to themselves and not merely to admire the latest styles? It 
is through your repeated errors in judgement, your incessant yet silent cry for 
us to explain our ever move, your insistence that we prove ourselves to your 
satisfaction that bigotry remains in full flower.

I spoke with 67 black women from all walks of life. Of that number, 43 of them 
confided with me that they felt that they had been sexually harrassed more so 
because of their complexion than their actual sex. I interviewed a 19-year-old 
clerical worker whose boss assumed that she was 'available' and also assumed 
that she would accept his advances. When she declined she was told bluntly. 
'All niggers are hot blooded, you all fuck like rabbits. What have you got to 
be so dammed proud of?' He then offered her money.

Presumably your theory is that since we're all sex-crazed simpletons, it's a 
natural, expected step for black woman to make sex a profession or at least use 
it to balance out the uneven hand that nature supposedly dealt us. It's hard to 
believe that this egregious typecasting is still practised but it is, 
religiously so.

Allison, who is 29 years old, engaged to be married and working as a computer 
operator told me of this incident: Walking up Holland Park Road on the way home 
from work, she passed two young white males, one of who quite loudly and 
deliberately said 'whore.' 'I was shocked. I was beyond shocked - and hurt, I 
spent many hours thinking that it was something that I had done, that it was 
somehow my fault, something I provoked. But I couldn't find a reason. There is 
no real reason for behaviour like that. Perhaps they just hated women, all 
woman - but I do feel they would probably have ignored a White girl walking 
home after a hard day at the office.'

Karen was in a pub talking with a white female friend. Her friend Marion is 45 
and manages an art gallery. Karen is 24 and works in a restaurant. 'Marion and 
I were sitting at the bar talking about paintings, I think. This couple came in 
thirtyish, trendyish, middle class with aspirations. They were friends of 
Marion's and we talked together for an hour, maybe longer.

'The next time I saw Marion she informed me that her friends had said that I 
was on the game. These people, that I have never seen before in my life had 
taken one look at an average black girl, no, average person, wearing no 
make-up, old jeans and a tatty jumper and decided that she had to be a 
prostitute. I was very hurt by this. I cried about it. I just kept thinking, 
'What have I done to deserve this?'

Upon leaving a West End wine bar after lunching with friends, Kim's 
taxi-driver automatically thought that she, like his taxi, was for hire and 
started offering her money. When Rachael arrived at her flat in Knightsbridge, 
her taxi-driver bade her to 'Be Lucky.' 'It was obvious to me that he could not 
believe that a black woman could afford a flat in that part of town and that I 
must be going to meet someone. It's sick, isn't it?'

Deborah was sitting upstairs on a number eighty-eight bus. She had two bags of 
shopping with her and in her own words, ' .. probably looked more harried than 
handsome.' A middle-aged white male sat down next to her, started chatting her 
up and tried to proposition her.

It would be so comforting to think that these are all isolated coincidences. 
It would be reassuring to feel that there really is racial harmony world-wide, 
that men and woman regard each other as equals that we've allayed our fears and 
gotten on with the business of life. Perhaps if these women had not all been 
black and had not all been insulted in the same way, if they hadn't all had 
people trying to drag them down to what is seen as a normal and acceptable 
level for black females, these occurrences could be taken as more sexism than 
racism. However, the ignorance of their harassers is prominent, their 
presumptiveness, incriminating. Together, these attitudes breed the way Hitler 
bred anti-Semitism, the way Reagan breeds the Red Scare.

April told me that after putting off the advances of a young man at work, he 
returned to his friends and said, 'Well, it's going cheap if any of you want 
it.' In another incident, Carol told me that a ' ... notoriously gossipy 
neighbour thought she'd do me a favour by telling me that she had heard that I 
had, every man in the area.' My boyfriend and I moved here two years ago and 
haven't ever been apart. I can't believe the ridiculous lies that some people 
come up with.'

Grace recounted how she happened to bump into a white male neighbour. 'This 
man, this moron, introduced me to his son who was visiting from South Africa, 
put my hand into his son's, said, 'Get on with it.', and walked away.'

Just now, miners who want to work have had to move away from their homes due 
to gross intimidation. They got tired of cowering in fear. Asian families in 
the East End still worry about going out at night. We, as black woman are 
cowering in another way - we are afraid - yes, afraid to mix socially with our 
non-black colleagues from work or our neighbours for fear that outside that 
small circle, we will be taken to be whores, moral delinquents, 'easy', or 
perhaps the operative word is 'easier', or simply socially substandard. These 
beliefs are clung to and unconciously practiced just as much a Benny Hill's 
silly, sexist views of woman are privately held as truths.

The danger lies in those who perpetuate these myths. Most do this out of 
ignorance. They know no black people or at best very few, and find this form of 
character assassination 'comforting'. It allows them a type of superiority so 
that they'll never to see the truth - that we're all equal. Others maintain 
this train of thought because they would like to believe that there is an 
entire race given to sloth and hedonism. These accusers are secretly envious of 
what they see as a life free of conventional moral restraints.

Angi told me, 'A 45-50 year old white woman saw me having a drink with my 
elderly white boss and said loudly, 'Of course she's on the game.' Her jealousy 
was written all over her face - her jealously of what she thought was going on.'

Many white males like to believe in black promiscuity simply because of the 
'forbidden fruit' theory, i. e. all black woman are very sexually active mother 
told me not to what would my friends, family, mates at work say. 'I had a black 
girl friend at one time,' Mike explained to me, 'and all I ever heard from the 
lads was 'Cor, Mike, how can you handle that? Don't think I could. Bet she's a 
goer.' It's easy to denigrate that which you secretly long for but don't have 
the courage to obtain.

However, these perpetrators of myths are neither horned beasts nor raving 
sociopaths. It could be your managing director at work, the barman at your 
local, the customer you sell insurance to, or even your MP.

There is no clear-cut answer, no obvious solution to this dilemma. The most I 
can do is offer a suggestion: that you, our persecutors, our self-appointed 
judges and juries, our character analysts, our slanderers, finally realise that 
we are all the same, for better or for worse. Any one black person has as many 
distinctive qualities as well as faults as any one White person. As women, we 
struggled for years to get the vote, to be granted equal pay, to be able to 
choose whether we want careers, marriages, or both. As black women, we're 
struggling even harder for the most basic of social acceptance and human 
respect. It's not an easy battle, but it beats hiding.

· This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 Years 
of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 