
The destruction of the Corkman Irish Pub in inner-city Melbourne should focus 
attention on what’s being done to Australia’s cities.

The hotel – once known as the Carlton Inn – dated back to 1857. A recent 
heritage report assessed it as “of historic and aesthetic significance to the 
City of Melbourne”.

Nevertheless, last Saturday, a team from Shaq Demolition and Excavation 
systematically reduced the pub – the oldest building in the suburb – to piles 
of unrecognisable rubble.

Back in 1878, the designer and poet William Morris bemoaned the architectural 
carnage under way in the London of his day.

Unions issue blanket ban on work at site of illegally demolished Melbourne pub
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/unions-issue-blanket-ban-on-work-at-site-of-illegally-demolished-melbourne-pub>
“Surely an opulent city,” he wrote, “the capital of the commercial world, can 
afford some small sacrifice to spare these beautiful buildings the little plots 
of ground upon which they stand. Is it absolutely necessary that every scrap of 
space in the city should be devoted to moneymaking …?”

The widespread horror at the Corkman’s destruction reflects a similar 
sentiment, a generalised belief that we all have a stake in the communities in 
which we live and in the streets on which we walk; that the significant 
architecture around us remains, in some sense, a collective possession and thus 
its fate affects all of us.

But such ideas are quite foreign to the imperatives reshaping our cities today.

In 2014, the Corkman sold at auction for $4.8m, a sum that, at $1,760,000 
above the stated reserve, reflected the extraordinary inflation of real 
property in the inner city.

Its purchasers presumably decided that, as owners, they possessed an absolute 
right to do whatsoever they pleased with their new acquisition. Yes, they 
understood they’d be fined for trashing the pub but they no doubt factored the 
likely penalty into their calculations as an externality and then figured 
they’d still come out in the black.

The planning minister, Richard Wynne, has blamed the demolition on “cavalier 
cowboy developers”. In one sense, he’s obviously right, given that Shaq 
Demolition lacked permission to destroy the hotel. In another sense, though, 
Saturday’s little manoeuvre reflected an attitude that’s depressingly 
mainstream.

After all, only a few weeks ago, Liberal senator James Paterson caused a stir 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/sell-blue-poles-and-end-public-funding-for-sport-and-the-arts-says-liberal-senator-james-paterson-20161006-grww1s.html>
 by proposing the liquidation of Jackson Pollock’s Blue Poles to pay government 
debt.

An alumnus of the Institute for Public Affairs, Paterson was, one assumes, 
less interested in actually flogging off the canvas than in propagandising a 
general principle: simply, that value (of a painting or anything else) should 
be assessed exclusively in dollars and cents.

Clearly, the owners of the Corkman agreed. For them, a rare example of 19th 
century architecture mattered only in so far as it might make them a buck.

Now, the free market system rests on the proposition that private greed 
collectively contributes to the public welfare. As Adam Smith famously says in 
The Wealth of Nations, “It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the 
brewer or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their 
own interest.”

Individual developers might thus seek nothing except their own profits but 
that, you see, doesn’t matter because, in aggregation, they’ll build a liveable 
city for us all.

Or so the theory goes.

In fact, the fate of the Corkman illustrates the reality of the process 
underway in Melbourne (and everywhere else).

It’s not simply that a historic building’s been lost forever. It’s also that, 
as everyone knows, the site will be eventually transformed into glitzy 
apartments that ordinary people will never be able to afford.

After all, as the TrustAdvocate blog notes 
<http://www.trustadvocate.org.au/the-life-and-death-of-the-corkman-hotel/>, 
demolition wasn’t the only threat to the Corkman.

“A pub is not just bricks and mortar,” it argues. “It’s a gathering place for 
a community.”

Or, to put it another way, the physical destruction of our suburbs generally 
follows what we might call their social destruction, as the places in which 
ordinary people once lived are transformed into sterile playgrounds for the 
super rich.

The blog cites a Melbourne University student quoted on a change.org petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/city-of-melbourne-resurrect-the-corkman-pub> in 
defence of the Corkman:

Yes, the reason why we all went there was because it was ludicrously close to 
the building in which we spent all of our other waking hours. But that 
closeness meant that everybody went there. And that everybody went there meant 
that a community existed. We all made great friendships while getting sloshed 
in the afternoon in that courtyard.

For the first half of the 20th century, Carlton was a slum – before, with the 
expansion of higher education, it became a home for students, bohemians and 
artists. Today, it’s priced out of the range of everyone except the wealthy.

Obviously, the imperatives of the market foster a certain kind of development, 
spurred by profit rather than need.

Again, Melbourne provides a striking illustration. Over the last years, a 
small army of the homeless has established semi-permanent encampments 
throughout the CBD.A recent study suggests 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-09/rough-sleepers-in-melbourne-up-74-per-cent-in-two-years-survey/7495502>
 that the number of people sleeping rough has increased by 74% compared with 
just two years ago.

The green bans remain a striking example of a collective response to what’s 
now known as gentrification

Yet the emergence of these cardboard shanties under bridges and in city 
doorways doesn’t correlate with any absolute shortage of housing in Melbourne. 
On the contrary, the city’s witnessing a frenzy of apartment construction, with 
high rise buildings creeping skyward almost everywhere. Yet a 2016 study by 
Prosper Australia found that many of the new buildings remain largely empty,as 
speculators bank on continually rising prices 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria/massive-number-of-melbourne-homes-are-lying-vacant-angering-homeless-agencies/news-story/86c1de02ada02dce7c9b1bca9f6b147d>
.

That’s why Malcolm Turnbull’s attempt to blame the shortage of affordable 
housing on trade unions is so risible.

“[Labor] doesn’t stand for the young couples that can’t afford to buy a house 
because the costs have been pushed up by union thuggery,”he declared this week 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/markdistefano/turnbull-housing-unions>, “or taxpayers 
that have to pay more to build every type of infrastructure.”

The implication is that, if bosses can keep their costs down, they’ll pass the 
benefits on to consumers and the wider society.

Of course, there’s no evidence for that at all. On the contrary, as Ralph 
Horne and Megan Nethercote argue 
<https://theconversation.com/life-in-a-windowless-box-the-vertical-slums-of-melbourne-41181>
, the economic bonanza being enjoyed by inner city property developers is 
resulting in the production of badly designed and overpriced “vertical slums”.

Moreover, the Corkman saga shows what the campaign to deregulate the building 
sector means for workers.

We now know that the late night destruction of the hotel proceeded despite the 
presence of potentially deadly asbestos in the site.

The presence of the carcinogen illustrates why safety remains such a 
preoccupation of those employed in construction – an industry in which,as Dave 
Noonan from the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union points out 
<https://sourceable.net/three-dead-construction-workers-in-four-days/>, three 
workers were recently killed within four days.

The union’s placed a so-called “green ban” on the Corkman site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/unions-issue-blanket-ban-on-work-at-site-of-illegally-demolished-melbourne-pub>
, in an echo of a very different approach to both heritage and housing 
affordability, pioneered by building workers themselves.

“Green bans” were a concept established by the NSW Builders Labourers 
Federation in the 1970s, in the midst of an earlier boom of inner city 
construction.

Under the leadership of charismatic activists like Jack Mundey, Joe Owens and 
Bob Pringle, the BLF melded the industrial orientation of the old left with the 
emerging sensibilities of the new left, pledging that its members’ labour would 
not be used to damage the city or its inhabitants.

As Mundey explained <http://dictionaryofsydney.org/entry/green_bans_movement> 
to the Sydney Morning Herald in 1972:

Yes, we want to build. However, we prefer to build urgently-required 
hospitals, schools, other public utilities, high-quality flats, units and 
houses, provided they are designed with adequate concern for the environment, 
than to build ugly unimaginative architecturally-bankrupt blocks of concrete 
and glass offices …

Though we want all our members employed, we will not just become robots 
directed by developer-builders who value the dollar at the expense of the 
environment. More and more, we are going to determine which buildings we will 
build … The environmental interests of three million people are at stake and 
cannot be left to developers and building employers whose main concern is 
making profit. Progressive unions, like ours, therefore have a very useful 
social role to play in the citizens’ interest, and we intend to play it.

Victoria plans harsher penalties for 'cowboy developers' after historic pub 
demolished
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/18/victoria-plans-harsher-penalties-for-cowboy-developers-after-historic-pub-demolished>
Before the BLF was deregistered in 1975 (after a concerted campaign from 
construction companies, the government and more conservative unionists), more 
than 40 green bans were imposed (in consultation with the community) to 
preserve parks, areas of bushland and historical buildings. It’s not an 
exaggeration to say that, without the bans, great swathes of Sydney’s heritage 
would have disappeared under the bulldozers.

In its most spectacular action, the BLF prevented a planned redevelopment of 
The Rocks, thus saving some of the oldest buildings in the city while 
protecting the interests of those working class families still resident in the 
area.

In keeping with the times, however, the NSW Baird government has recently 
undone much of this work,selling off hundreds of heritage homes in Miller’s 
Point 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/harbourside-properties-to-be-sold-off-by-state-government/news-story/ac1e08e17b2c46bf462593ee00307551>
 as well as the iconicSirius building despite intense public opposition 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/nsw-act/news/why-are-so-many-people-fighting-to-protect-sydney-eyesore/news-story/b4b5a3ff3abbd9df607e5e9b421b1034>
. As a result, working class people have effectively been evicted from this 
part of historic Sydney. The CFMEU imposed a green ban on the Sirius building 
in September in an attempt to prevent the building’s demolition.

Of course, it’s not possible to click one’s fingers and recapture the spirit 
of 1972.

Nevertheless, the green bans remain a striking example of a collective 
response to what’s now known as gentrification, an illustration that the 
protection of our common heritage can go hand-in-hand with the preservation of 
our communities.

The fate of the Corkman shows that we urgently need something similar today.
 