
Let’s start with the good news: our lives are getting longer, and quite fast. 
You can see it in thegraphs produced by the Marmot Index 
<https://www.instituteofhealthequity.org/projects/marmot-indicators-2015>, 
which plots health data against small geographic areas over time. In the decade 
to 2013, the average man added three years to his life expectancy and the 
average woman two and a half years. It’s startling to contemplate a tangible 
increase in longevity over such a short space of time, because our mental image 
of this process is long-term and linear.

Equally startling is the bad news. Inequality is also rising, and with it, 
inequalities of health. Sir Michael Marmot, who releasedhis annual report on 
the social determinants of health 
<https://www.instituteofhealthequity.org/Content/FileManager/Indicators2015/marmot-indicators-2015-background-document-final-26-11-15.pdf>
 in England on Friday, found that just under a quarter of English households 
don’t earn enough to live healthily. That has increased from 20% in 2008.

Marmot plots both life expectancy and the years you can expect to live free of 
a disability. As you would expect, people live longer in richer neighbourhoods. 
But the clearest inequalities are found when it comes to disability. A man in 
Blackpool – the poorest neighbourhood – could expect to live 55 years without 
disability. In Wokingham, the richest neighbourhood, you are, on average, going 
to reach the age of 71 – a difference of more than 16 years.

The starkness of the inequality poses the question: what should a modern 
welfare state do?

William Beveridge, scraping away at the draft of his 1942 report in the 
fragile opulence of Eltham Palace, listed “want, disease, squalor, ignorance 
and idleness” as ills to be remedied by a “comprehensive programme of social 
progress”. Given what the welfare state has become – a series of cash-strapped 
essential services plus highly conditional dole and disability payments – it’s 
interesting to followBeveridge’s original argument 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/19_07_05_beveridge.pdf>.

Giving people enough money to live on, Beveridge argued, was the foundation of 
everything else: health, education and sanitation could not be improved without 
abolishing “want”. This would be done through a contributory social insurance 
scheme: every employee pays in and, as of right, gets unemployment, disability, 
healthcare, child benefits and a state pension.

For Beveridge’s generation, the labour market had been a cruel switchback 
ride. Real wages were rising for those in work, but sudden and repeated 
joblessness, plus slum conditions, created large pockets of inescapable 
poverty. Today’s labour market is different: we’re good at creating low-paid, 
precarious jobs. And Marmot’s report claims to show this new “working poverty” 
is having a tangible downward impact on wellbeing and work-related illness.

A glance at last week’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/autumn-statement-spending-review-2015-george-osborne-key-points-live>
 shows how skewed away from the question of “want” – ie incomes – the welfare 
state has become. Almost everything ringfenced or protected is a service: the 
NHS, schools, policing or social care. The superstructure Beveridge conceived 
as rising atop a system of guaranteed incomes, we have, over the decades, 
turned into the structure itself. The amount spent on incomes for the jobless, 
low-paid and disabled is to be relentlessly borne down upon.

There is a logic to it. For a non-starving population, with the open sewers 
closed and the unsanitary homes demolished, redistribution best happens by 
giving free and equal access to otherwise expensive things: schooling and 
healthcare. There is a logic, too, in ringfencing the one cash benefit from the 
Beveridge era that is still protected: the state pension. If the population is 
getting older, then focusing more of social wealth on retired people in the 
form of cash makes sense.

But given the rise in working poverty, we’re in danger of creating a system 
that delivers the opposite of a “comprehensive policy of social progress”. The 
tough decisions on spending are taking resources very clearly from two groups: 
the young and the poor.

The Institute for Fiscal Studies produced a long-term impact graph 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/budgets/Budgets%202015/Autumn/Hood_Benefit_tax_credit_changes.pdf>
 of the Conservatives’ benefit changes, factoring inuniversal credit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/universal-credit> and other limits 
introduced last summer. It showed a pronounced negative impact on the poorest 
third of the population, who lose between 5-8% of their incomes due to the new 
welfare priorities. Analysis of the wider spending plans shows the amount of 
public money spent on the old and sick rises from 35% before the crisis to 42% 
by 2020.

It is very possible to be poor in the 21st-century welfare state. One in five 
children lives in poverty, and this decade will see the first rise in absolute 
poverty in a generation. For decade after decade, post-war governments have 
chipped away at the principle of social insurance: you pay your stamps, you get 
your cash benefits as of right. The result is a world-class health system 
struggling to deal with large-scale, growing ill health determined by poverty. 
Even if we all live longer, the poor live shorter lives and will spend decades 
in disability.

So what would a modern Beveridge write? I think he would reiterate that “want” 
– or poverty – is the basic evil that, if you don’t abolish, drags down all 
your attempts at making people healthier or better educated. It’s very obvious 
– to anybody who has been near a food bank, or a women’s refuge, or a probation 
office – that “want, ignorance, squalor, disease and idleness” still exist, at 
disgraceful levels, and in highly concentrated pockets. A 16-year gap in 
healthy life expectancy between Blackpool and Wokingham – towns a three-hour 
journey apart – would shock us into action if we really cared about it.

And here’s why we should care: health inequality follows a clear gradient 
path. If you break down the population into 5% chunks according to income, 
every one of these chunks is healthier than the one below them. The editor, on 
average, dies of heart attack later than the deputy editor. This is one of the 
clearest findings of Marmot’s and other epidemiological research.

So inequality is not just about rich and poor – it’s about the tilted playing 
field of life, and how to stop it getting steeper.
 