
Someone I know has been left disabled after participation in a clinical trial 
of an experimental drug. Advised that no conventional treatment existed for his 
rare multisystem disease, he deliberated before dipping his toe into the world 
of clinical trials.

After receiving one dose of the experimental drug, he told the principal 
researcher of new and troubling symptoms. The second dose greatly exaggerated 
his troubles. The drug was stopped but not before leaving him with profound 
nerve damage, chronic pain, and worse of all, the inability to use his dominant 
hand.

The patient alleges that the principal researcher did not take his complaints 
seriously, that there was a lack of good communication and that in the 
eagerness to enrol the patient, the process of informed consent was lax. An 
intelligent professional, he laments that had the rare but serious toxicities 
been explained better he would never have consented to the trial.

Clinical trial participants: guinea pigs or informed volunteers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/nihr-crn-partner-zone/2015/jun/18/clinical-trial-participants-guinea-pigs-or-informed-volunteers>
Having watched him caught between doing nothing and participating in an 
experiment, I feel very sorry that his choice led to an extreme outcome where 
his decline is now marred by depression and self-blame about having made a bad 
condition worse.

I have also come to admire his grace through an unimaginably difficult period. 
It would be fair to say that he is disillusioned and his trust in the clinical 
trials process has been fractured.

Recently, a prominent Australian trial was retracted by the Journal of the 
American Medical Association, a full two years after publication, when it 
emerged that the principal researcher had concocted patients and fabricated 
data about a common blood pressure drug and its impact on walking time in 
patients with peripheral vascular disease.

Given the high prevalence of cardiovascular disease, the impact of a positive 
study in a prestigious journal is substantial and wide-reaching. The finding 
was quoted more than 30 times. Many doctors may have read the original 
conclusion and modified their practice but failed to see the retraction, 
including one published more recently in the New England Journal ofMedicine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/medicine>.

The fraudulent actions of a lone researcher also left an entire institution 
shame-faced in its wake. For some, such accounts will cement their cynicism 
over clinical trials in medicine, often driven by big pharma and run by 
unscrupulous researchers who chase publishing fame over patient safety. More 
reasonable people will rightly bristle at this broad generalisation and point 
out the greater good from well-conducted trials which advance the cause of all 
patients.

We are by now familiar with the worldwide crunch in healthcare research 
funding even as we clamour for smart innovations and new discoveries. 
Publishing original research in top academic journals is a time-honoured way of 
gaining medical immortality, and in turn attracting better funding. Therefore, 
we should almost expect that despite ticking the boxes on research integrity 
and ethics there will be a subset of researchers who will try to outsmart the 
system. Many will be caught but unfortunately, some will escape detection and 
censure.

The hallowed mission of improved patient care sabotaged by arrogant and 
dishonest researchers is by now a familiar story, one that has institutions in 
knots over how to strengthen their monitoring systems. This is why I barely 
took notice of the words “research” and “concealment” in a journal I was 
reading recently. But I am glad I read on because the study shone light on an 
important but invisible aspect of clinical trials: deception by research 
participants.

The research referred specifically to healthy volunteers who are paid to 
compensate them for their time and inconvenience. (In trials involving real 
patients, there is typically no payment but travel costs and meals may be 
provided.)

By falsifying their account, participants undermine the integrity of the 
entire study by biasing the data.

The researchers studied 100 patients who had participated in at least two 
studies in the past year or at least four in the last three years. An 
astonishing three-quarters of subjects reported concealing some health 
information from researchers to avoid exclusion from enrolment in a study. 
One-third concealed health problems and use of prescription drugs and 20% 
recreational drug use. A quarter exaggerated their symptoms in order to qualify 
and perhaps more worryingly, 14% simply pretended to have a health condition in 
order to join the trial. 

These high figures were startling. Why did these participants lie? Was it the 
financial incentive, embarrassment about disclosing private information or 
something else? Was a trial their only way of seeking medical help or was there 
a distorted altruistic instinct at play? Would their CV be embellished by the 
mention of being a healthy volunteer in the cause to banish a disease? The 
researchers observed that the frequency and context of the behaviour were 
unclear. This study was small but there have been longstanding ethical concerns 
about paying people to participate in clinical trials.

An essay in the New England Journal of Medicine highlights an even more 
troubling side to the story. The writers observe that by falsifying their 
account, participants undermine the integrity of the entire study by biasing 
the data. 

Whether a trial is studying the efficacy of a test or the toxicity of a drug, 
participants who report their experience with anything less than total honesty 
can substantially alter findings, leading to the discontinuation of a valuable 
trial or conversely, continuation of an unsafe one. 

Serious toxicity can be attributed to the experimental medication when the 
culprit is an illicit drug or a drug interaction. Alternatively, a drug trial 
that mistakenly includes patients suffering from a given condition instead of 
healthy volunteers may be biased in favour of the drug. 

The authors recall the dramatic but cautionary tale of a participant who 
arrested and died during a sleep study due to an electrolyte imbalance thought 
to be related to the prescribed lithium when in fact it was caused by anorexia 
and self-induced vomiting. Had the patient disclosed her anorexia, the 
researchers would have excluded her from the study but directed her towards the 
help she needed.

The Martin Shkreli schadenfreude will pass when he wins like every other CEO | 
Chris Lehmann
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/17/martin-shkreli-schadenfreude-very-other-ceo>
Progress in medicine comes from standing on the shoulders of volunteers and 
patients who are by and large altruistic participants in research. But since 
less than 5% of the population participates in clinical trials, even a small 
number of dishonest individuals can sway results in significant ways to affect 
our health at a population level. And yet, evidence is our best friend when it 
comes to selecting the most appropriate antibiotic, the safest antipsychotic or 
the best surgical technique. 

Doctors <https://www.theguardian.com/society/doctors> must pause to think if 
the evidence-based treatment we think we are practising has been acquired from 
research conducted with total integrity. For researchers and ethics committees, 
this means intensive vigilance of institutional ethics. For clinicians, it 
means applying a ceaselessly inquiring mind to the reams of data thrust upon us 
everyday and not being afraid to acknowledge that in many areas of medicine, 
there is no one right answer.

And importantly, for patients, it means being unafraid of asking questions and 
having a curious mind about the strength of evidence a doctor’s advice is based 
on. With the power imbalance between doctors and patients this isn’t easy but 
more than ever, it’s necessary, and I think we have to enable our patients to 
do it. 

The patient I describe is dismayed at his experience of researcher misconduct 
and I hope he finds some consolation in an apology. Meanwhile, all of us, 
living with common conditions from blood pressure to depression, should be wise 
to the potential of healthy volunteer participants in clinical trials to impact 
the decisions made about our own health. For all our sakes, researchers and 
participants must strive for better. 
 