
It seems odd to hold a climate change conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
 at a time of year when everyone has just looked out their window and notched 
the thermostat up by two degrees. Change seems such a mild word for what’s 
going on. When we say that someone has “changed”, we usually mean that they’re 
drinking a bit more or less. We don’t mean that they’re lying stone dead under 
five miles of ocean on a rock that now hangs silently in the freezing vault of 
space.

An initiative was announced for a network of 120 countries to form a solar 
power grid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/india-set-to-unveil-global-solar-alliance-of-120-countries-at-paris-climate-summit>
, but I don’t think Scotland qualified. I’m not sure how much solar energy we 
produce, all I know is it’s way less than it takes to light a sky. Clean energy 
is always described as expensive and inefficient, but I suppose that if the 
price of the alternatives is extinction, we might just be measuring expense and 
efficiency wrongly.

The pope has said that Earth is nearing environmental “suicide”. Many leaders 
will question his right to speak on climate change – but to be fair, he’s the 
only one driving about in an electric van. Developing nations say that rich 
western countries aren’t doing enough to help them deal with the effects of 
climate change, but that’s not the case. We’re going to help them deal with 
drought by submerging them under the ocean.

As the temperature increases some people say it will be like boiling a frog, 
but surely in that analogy the frog doesn’t know that the temperature is 
rising. Humanity is fully aware but possibly just too depressed to do anything. 
It’s more like boiling a recently divorced 45-year-old man. There could be a 
plus side to the ice caps melting. Think of the interesting things you find 
when you just defrost your freezer; we could discover the first ever entirely 
breadcrumbed mammoth.

Pointing out that the Earth is our one home doesn’t seem to help. After all, a 
lot of us have got a room in our house that we gradually fill up with crap and 
can’t bear to go into. I suppose that’s just the developing world. There’s 
going to be a big rise in demand for electricity in the emergent nations. I 
guess spending 14 hours a day assembling our consumer goods was bound to put 
ideas in their heads. Many of you will be reading this on a tablet made by a 
Chinese teenager using rare metals that an African child has scraped off the 
side of a hill with a spoon, then sent halfway round the world to you so you 
can smugly talk about how little paper you now use.

Recently, Richard Branson signed an “Earth Statement” the same week he 
launched a new Boeing. I would say, “How can he keep a straight face?” but his 
face has never been straight: he looks like someone cast a baboon in a movie 
about Rolf Harris. Maybe it’s time we started looking at being pro-business and 
pro-environment as opposites. They might pay someone to smile at the front 
desk, but corporations don’t care if we live or die. Perhaps it’s time to look 
at insentient blueprints for making money and wonder if they really have 
people’s best interests at heart. Can the market, a mechanism dedicated to 
increasing consumption, tackle a problem that is essentially down to excessive 
consumption? Why not – after all, we’ve all been down an actual market and 
heard those cries of: “Strawberries. Don’t buy these strawberries! You don’t 
really need them, you’ll throw most away when they go mouldy after you forget 
to eat them, don’t buy these strawberries!”

We bailed out the banks. Now let’s bail out the planet | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/01/we-bailed-out-the-banks-now-lets-bail-out-the-planet>
Things will be terrible for the people who come after us. And they weren’t 
that great for the people who came before us either, as it was two degrees 
colder and there was no telly. Perhaps we’re all annoyed at climate change 
deniers because we know that the Earth is past the point of no return – we’re 
frustrated that they’re still at the denial stage of grief while we have moved 
on to bargaining. Things are so desperate that even our fictional dystopias may 
turn out to be fantasies. We imagine the Earth will sink gradually into chaos, 
but non-linear theories of global warming mean it might just be one afternoon 
of people screaming, then suddenly you disappear under a boiling, 100-mile-high 
wave of sewage flecked with famous landmarks from across the world; your mind 
finally silenced by the sudden arrival in the space previously occupied by your 
forehead of a shit-coloured Taj Mahal. In your final moments, you will probably 
feel cheated out of the many years you had hoped to spend watching a naked king 
in a leather crown as he staged mass hangings of poets in the echoing vaults of 
abandoned shopping malls.

I dropped in to see my friend the other day, and her four-year-old daughter 
opened with: “The world is dying!” in a very sad voice. I said something 
soothing. I wish I could remember what it was now. Soon she’ll learn that, 
outside of the occasional Illuminati photo opportunity such as Paris, it’s not 
really the sort of thing we find polite to talk about.
 