
Hospital 
9pm, BBC2

There’s no time for the staff of St Mary’s to indulge in Holby City-style soap 
shenanigans as they find themselves flat-out this week, with all 297 beds 
occupied and no new patients able to be admitted until the existing ones can be 
discharged. This is tough news for a young carpenter rushed in with what looks 
like a brain injury. Meanwhile, Dolly, 91, faces an uncertain future on being 
discharged. A grim and timely depiction of a system at perpetual breaking point.
David Stubbs

No Offence 
9pm, Channel 4

With Viv having hit a wall in the investigation of Nora Attah and the girls 
who died in last week’s devastating fire, she brings in her “weapon of mass 
destruction” to try to break the gangland kingpin. And, sure enough, cracks are 
soon beginning to form, not from Nora, but courtesy of son Manni. Meanwhile, an 
ex-con living with dementia tries to rob a bank that’s since been converted 
into a pub. But there’s more to this stick-up than meets the eye.Ben Arnold

Common Sense 
10pm, BBC2

In a seeming attempt to emulate Gogglebox’s off-the-cuff brilliance, this 
topical series featuring members of the public is filmed just a few days prior 
to transmission. Although previews are, as such, unavailable, expect the 
requisite mix of homespun wit and plenty of Trump and Brexit-themed gags. 
However, whether this lot have the unassuming comedic skills of Sandy and 
Sandra, let alone Scarlett Moffatt, remains to be seen.Hannah J Davies

Film 2017 
11.15pm, BBC1

An ongoing presenter vacancy and almost contemptuously late scheduling welcome 
the cinema review show back for its 47th year. Zoe Ball takes another turn in 
the guest-host seat, with resident critic Danny Leigh flanked by Empire’s Chris 
Hewitt. New releases to be assessed include award-chasing biopic Jackie, 
starring Natalie Portman; Dev Patel and Nicole Kidman in true-life drama Lion; 
and Split, M Night Shyamalan’s take on the bunker-hostage genre.Jack Seale

Timeless 
9pm, E4

The time-trotting tinkerers, continuing their quest to prevent a criminal 
mastermind creating chronological chaos, should have little trouble in this 
latest episode. With the wrongdoer’s whistle-stop tour taking in DC circa 1972, 
with Nixon grasping the reins of power, surely there isn’t much more that can 
go wrong? Rufus and Lucy channel Woodward and Bernstein’s investigative nous, 
but internal strife could prove their undoing as Flynn’s hidden agenda starts 
to show a shapely leg.Mark Gibbings-Jones

In Therapy: Lauren Goodger 
10pm, Channel 5

The endless cycle of a modern celeb career is something to behold. Reality TV, 
public trauma, tabloid scorn, a spell at rock bottom and, finally, mediated 
redemption. However much it pleads neutrality, this queasy series is part of 
the narrative; here, Towie’s Lauren Goodger opens up – to both a therapist and 
her fanbase – about childhood loss, relationship woes, eating disorders and 
more. Hopefully she feels better, but it’s grim viewing.Phil Harrison

Gaycation 
10pm, Viceland

Filmed last June just days after the shooting at Orlando’s Pulse nightclub 
that left 49 people dead and a further 53 injured, actor Ellen Page and 
film-maker Ian Daniel host a devastating special edition of their doc series 
exploring LGBTQ culture. The result – featuring interviews with survivors, 
activists and those who lost friends and family in the attack, all still 
processing their grief and shock – contextualises the headlines, prioritising 
victims over perpetrator.HJD

Film choice

The Way Way Back (Nat Faxon, Jim Rash, 2013) 6.55pm, Film4

Another slice of dysfunctional family life from the writers of The 
Descendants. It’s the story of 14-year-old Duncan (Liam James) who, while on 
holiday with his mother (Toni Collette) and her schmucky new boyfriend (Steve 
Carell), seeks refuge at the Water Wizz aquapark, managed by affable Sam 
Rockwell. It lacks the astringency of The Descendants, but it’s perceptive and 
funny.Paul Howlett

Chocolat (Lasse Hallström, 2000) 1.30am, Channel 4

In 1950s Gascony, the village of Lansquenet is a museum piece, preserved in 
staunch Catholic values by its stern mayor (Alfred Molina). Then in breezes 
Juliette Binoche’s Mme Rocher to turn the old bakery into a chocolate shop – 
and at Lent, too. There is a reactionary backlash, but her sweet wiles win over 
many of the villagers, not to mention handsome Gypsy Johnny Depp. Hallström’s 
adaptation of Joanne Harris’s bestselling novel grows sickly, but it’s hard to 
resist.PH

Live sport

Live snooker: The Masters Current world champion Mark Selby takes on Mark 
Williams. 1pm, BBC2

Africa Cup of Nations: Cameroon v Guinea-Bissau Four-time winners Cameroon 
take on the tournament newcomers. Gabon v Burkina Faso airs at 4pm. 6.45pm, 
Eurosport 1

FA Cup football: Plymouth Argyle v Liverpool Klopp’s men travel to Home Park 
for a third-round replay. 7pm, BT Sport 2
 