
In Plain Sight 
9pm, ITV


This well-crafted retelling of how serial murderer Peter Manuel – the “Beast 
of Birkenshaw” – terrorised Lanarkshire in the late 1950s concludes. Buoyed by 
his continued evasion of the law, the assured and cocky Manuel (Martin 
Compston) sets a foot wrong, meaning Douglas Henshall’s thwarted but 
ever-resourceful detective Muncie is finally able to close in. Had Manuel’s 
horrifying crimes been a work of fiction, they would scarcely be believable.Ben 
Arnold

Six Wives With Lucy Worsley
9pm, BBC1


Third and final instalment of Worsley’s attempt to shift some of the 
historical spotlight from Henry VIII to the unlucky women in his life. By 1540, 
Hank was well into his Fat Elvis stage with three wives to go: disastrous 
German signing Anne of Cleves, tragic teen Catherine Howard and canny court 
operator Katherine Parr. The conceit of inserting a costumed Worsley into the 
reconstructions is unnecessary, but consistently fun.Graeme Virtue

Inside Chernobyl’s Mega Tomb 
9pm, BBC4


Thirty years have passed since the Chernobyl disaster. But its consequences 
continue to resonate and will do so for the vast lifespan of the radioactive 
material the reactor contained. This documentary follows the construction of a 
36,000-tonne steel structure intended to entomb the ruins of the plant. In 
theory, it should make the area safe. But how safe is the process for the 
workers charged with installing it? Sobering.Phil Harrison

Quarry 
9pm, Sky Atlantic 


This promising new drama stars Logan Marshall-Green as Mac Conway, returned 
from Vietnam to Memphis in 1972 to a howl of protest following his apparent 
involvement in a massacre. Finding himself cold-shouldered by the community and 
let down by family, he is drawn into a network of violence also involving his 
buddy Arthur (Jamie Hector, Marlo from The Wire) and a mysterious figure known 
as The Broker (Peter Mullan). Bloody and brooding from the get-go.David Stubbs

The Ghost Army 
9pm, PBS America 


One of the more ingenious acts of deception in the second world war, The Ghost 
Army were a unit with a very particular brief: to fool Nazi intelligence into 
believing huge pockets of US forces in France were in a different location than 
they actually were. Fake radio transmissions, huge PA systems and even 
inflatable tanks were all part of a unique arsenal of illusion and skulduggery. 
An intriguing, if oddly bombastic, account.Luke Holland

Insert Name Here: Christmas Special 
10pm, BBC2


With the Beeb’s Bake Off all but over, Sue Perkins now has plenty of time to 
chair the new series of this wacky quiz show. Teams – led by professional 
know-it-all Richard Osman and panel game veteran Josh Widdicombe – are grilled 
on past and present celebrity trivia. Except, confusingly, all the celebs in 
question have the same name. Silly, semi-interesting and occasionally 
laugh-out-loud funny stuff.Grace Rahman

The Great Songwriters 
1.05am, Channel 4


Last in series for this show spotlighting the talents of writer-performers. 
Tonight it’s the madly prolific, often misfiring Ryan Adams, who made a couple 
of classic solo albums in the late 90s, since diluted by a wealth of rather 
more eccentric genre experiments and covers – such as his profile-boosting 
crack at Taylor Swift’s 1989. He’s not shy, so if you’ve doubted his talents 
thus far he may be able to talk you round. John Robinson 

Film choices


Paranormal Activity (Oren Peli, 2009) 10pm, Syfy
Like Blair Witch, Paranormal Activity employs that flickery digital camera 
technique to portray an evil presence in the home. Peli’s chilling tale finds 
it’s own dark corner, with Katie Featherston as a young woman plagued by the 
inexplicable. Micah Sloat is the sceptical boyfriend who sets up a digicam in 
their bedroom to record what goes bump in the night. The film moves through 
layers of menace and dread before a stunning conclusion.

To Have And Have Not (Howard Hawks, 1944) 7.05pm, TCM
This first on- and off-screen pairing of Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall 
adds romantic snap and crackle to Hawks and Hemingway’s heroics. Humph is Harry 
Morgan, a cynical charter boat captain not unlike Casablanca’s Rick Blaine. 
He’s steering well clear of the Nazis in occupied Martinique, making a good 
living taking wealthy clients on fishing trips, until Bacall turns up, 19 and 
electric in her screen debut as Slim. Walter Brennan is Harry’s rum-soaked 
buddy but, for all the clowning and cooing, it’s at heart a tough-nut thriller.
Paul Howlett

Sport


Cricket: Big Bash League 8.30am, BT Sport 2 Adelaide Strikers host Brisbane 
Heat.

World Darts Championship 7pm, Sky Sports 1 Day seven of the competition, 
featuring four first-round ties.


FA Cup Football: Newport County v Plymouth Argyle 7.30pm, BT Sport 1 
Seven-time cup winners Liverpool await the victors of this second-round replay 
(kickoff at 7.45pm).

 