
It is unusual to hear boos at full‑time only three games into the season, 
especially when West Bromwich Albion’s disgruntled fans had witnessed their side
collect a point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/28/west-bromwich-albion-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
 that took them into the top half of the table. But the booing was evidently 
about the style rather than their results, and this disappointing performance 
suggests that, at this stage, the Baggies are lacking a clear gameplan.

Tony Pulis <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tony-pulis> has rarely 
received rave reviews for his footballing philosophy; his Stoke City side 
became renowned for their emphasis upon long balls, long throws and hard 
tackles, while with Crystal Palace and West Bromwich he concentrated heavily 
upon defence. That remains his speciality – since taking charge at The 
Hawthorns in January 2015, only Arsenal and Manchester United have kept more 
clean sheets. Ben Foster never seemed likely to be beaten here.

West Brom’s need for new blood laid bare in dour draw with Middlesbrough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/28/west-bromwich-albion-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
The problem, inevitably, is Albion’s attacking. Their first booming long ball 
came in the opening minute, with the centre-back Gareth McAuley launching it 
downfield towards the powerful centre-forward Salomón Rondón. That appeared to 
set the tone for their performance, with the Venezuelan giving theMiddlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> centre-backs Daniel Ayala 
and Ben Gibson, both inexperienced at this level, an aerial test.

However, Ayala and Gibson emerged victorious: Rondón, amazingly, won only one 
of his 12 aerial duels against the two centre-backs, and when Albion played 
passes into feet, his touch was poor and possession was conceded cheaply. 
Besides, he rarely found team‑mates sprinting forward in support – Matt 
Phillips was quiet on the right, and while James McClean started well, going on 
one excellent diagonal run, he rarely offers a goal threat and his end product 
is highly inconsistent.

West Bromwich’s brightest moments came from two players making their full 
debuts. The left‑back Brendan Galloway, who joined last week on a season‑long 
loan from Everton, provided a refreshing change from Pulis’s policy of fielding 
four centre-backs, and burst forward with intent. He immediately made a good 
overlapping run, getting Ayala booked for a clumsy tackle, and later dribbled 
forward to test Brad Guzan with a low shot. The 18‑year‑old central midfielder 
Sam Field, meanwhile – a West Bromwich youth graduate – showed composure, 
comfortable receiving the ball in tight situations and playing passes with 
either foot.

For some West Brom fans there’s a bigger picture that won’t be fixed by one 
result | Stuart James
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/27/west-brom-fans-bigger-picture-middlesbrough-tony-pulis>
It is unusual to see Pulis fielding a young player, and equally rare for him 
to use a midfielder whose game is based around technical quality rather than 
physicality. Perhaps the use of these two suggests he is attempting to make 
Albion more eye‑catching and creative – but there is no evidence he is capable 
of creating successful sides in that mould. There was simply no discernible 
plan here, aside from some decent routines at set-pieces.

Middlesbrough were far from fluent, but Aitor Karanka had clearly asked his 
players to switch play regularly and work Albion from side to side. Boro 
switched play from one flank to the other 18 times, frequently changing the 
point of attack. Albion did that only twice, their approach play remaining 
extremely predictable and easy to defend against.

Last week, before the signing of Galloway, Pulis suggested Albion needed to 
recruit five more players before the end of the transfer window. It is 
difficult to imagine four others arriving by the end of Wednesday – but, more 
crucially, it’s not entirely clear what type of players Pulis wants, or what he 
is trying to build.
 