
England is at once the most inventive and the most traditional of the 
cricket-playing nations. The country that invented overarm bowling, helmets and 
the professional limited-over tournament is also deeply protective of the 
sustenance to be gained from the sport’s rich past. The result is a tension 
that can all too often paralyse the ability of English cricket to exploit its 
own innovations. History both inspires and gets in the way.

What better current illustration of this than the failure of the ECB to propel 
Twenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> cricket to the kind of 
box-office stratosphere that the IPL or the Big Bash have achieved? England 
hatched the goose, but the golden eggs have gone to India and Australia. The 
reason for this is as self-evident as it has – until now – appeared 
imponderable. Evidence conclusively suggests that the success of a T20 league 
depends upon a limited number of team franchises – which is why both the IPL 
and the Big Bash feature eight. In England, though, the County Championship 
boasts 18 clubs, all with their own deeply rooted identities, interests and 
loyalties – and these are not easily dissolved. What supporter of a proud and 
ancient club wants to see it retired in favour of some parvenu team, without 
romance, without record, without history?

Yet there is a solution ready to hand – and it derives, ironically enough, 
from England’s distant past. Old though counties may be, they are not the 
oldest focus of team loyalties that the English have had. Some time around AD 
900, eight centuries before the first ever county match was played, a Syrian 
traveller to Rome recorded an intriguing detail about England: that it boasted 
“seven kingdoms”. A historian from Lincoln, writing in the early-12th century, 
provided more detail, explaining that when the English first arrived in Britain 
after the withdrawal of the Romans, “they conquered the land, and established 
seven kings.” Vanished though the realms of Northumbria and Mercia, of the East 
Angles and West Saxons, of Essex, and Sussex, and Kent may be, the memory of 
them has not entirely faded. Partly this is because, despite their absorption a 
millennium and more ago into the United Kingdom of England, they remain to this 
day a focus for local loyalties; and partly it is because, over the past few 
years, they have provided the inspiration for a global TV phenomenon.

What cricket means to Yorkshire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-nightwatchman/2016/apr/29/what-cricket-means-to-yorkshire>
Game of Thrones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, 
with its murderous power struggles and internecine civil wars, may not appear 
an obvious source of inspiration for cricket administrators to follow. 
Nevertheless, the sheer popularity of the show should serve to remind them just 
how thrilling the spectacle of ancient realms engaged in no-holds-barred combat 
can be. Westeros, the fictional continent at the heart of HBO’s epic tale, was 
once, like early medieval England, a heptarchy: a land of seven kingdoms. The 
ECB, if they are looking for a franchise system that would enable them to give 
people a sense both of the contemporary and of the past, of show-business 
swagger and of regional identity, of boldness and of integrity, are staring it 
in the face.

Admittedly, the resurrection of the Heptarchy in the first-class grounds of 
England would need to be tinkered with at the edges if it were to be made to 
work. Howls of protest from other clubs would doubtless greet any proposal that 
Kent, Sussex and Essex – simply because they had belonged to the original 
Heptarchy – should be allowed to play in the new T20 tournament under their own 
banners. Fortunately, though, historians of early medieval England need not 
fret too much. The borders of the Heptarchy were forever changing. No 
definitive list of the kingdoms that constituted it was published until many 
centuries after it had evolved into England. There is plenty of scope for being 
inventive with the lineaments of heptarchical cricket.

That said, the four greatest realms of the Heptarchy select themselves. 
Wessex, the only English kingdom to withstand the onslaught of the Vikings, had 
already, by the time of Alfred the Great, come to stretch from Somerset to 
Kent; and so it should once again. Looking eastwards, the kings of East Anglia, 
whose gold and ships were buried in the great mounds of Sutton Hoo, claimed the 
overlordship of both Essex and London – garnering for the East Anglians the 
splendid prizes of Chelmsford, The Oval and Lord’s. Mercia, the great kingdom 
which at its largest extent covered all the Midlands, and Northumbria, which 
spanned the whole of the North from the Humber to Edinburgh, are likewise 
shoo-ins for heptarchical cricket. These are all teams that anyone would relish 
cheering on.

Nevertheless, there are complications. In 886, in the reign of Alfred the 
Great, Mercia was formally divided by treaty into rival spheres of influence: 
the western half, which retained its ancient name, came under Alfred’s sway, 
and ended up being ruled by his heroic daughter, Aethelflaed; the eastern half 
remained under Viking rule. Separated from Mercia, the region came to be known 
as the Five Boroughs, after its main towns: Derby, Leicester, Lincoln, 
Nottingham and Stamford. Only in 917 – thanks to the efforts of Aethelflaed and 
her brother, Edward – was it finally brought back under English rule, and made 
safe for cricket. Home to Trent Bridge, Grace Road and the Racecourse Ground, 
the Five Boroughs richly deserve to play heptarchical T20.

When Yorkshire tried to emulate Beatlemania and crack America in 1964
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-nightwatchman/2015/sep/17/yorkshire-beatlemania-crack-america-1964-cricket-brian-close>
So too, on the western side of the Pennines, does the realm of Rheged. Truth 
be told, no one is entirely sure where precisely this near-legendary, 
Welsh-speaking kingdom was; but we do know that it was somewhere in the region 
of Lancashire and Cumbria, and that the Northumbrian hold on it was always 
precarious. “They drank mead, gold and sweet, ensnaring.” No better description 
of the bars at Old Trafford could possibly be imagined. Nor, of course, was 
Rheged the only Welsh-speaking realm to contest with the various Anglo-Saxon 
kingdoms the mastery of Britain: there was Wales itself. “Terrible will be the 
wailing before the rush of warriors,” sang one Welsh bard, looking to inspire a 
warband as it set out across Offa’s Dyke into Mercia. So in a similar vein, no 
doubt, will the Welsh fans cheer on their bowling attack on a bouncy track at 
Edgbaston.

Wessex. Mercia. East Anglia. Northumbria. Rheged. Wales. The Five Boroughs. As 
in the age of the Heptarchy, so now, these can be names to play with, names to 
light up song. Let India have the glitz of theIPL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl>, and Australia the swagger of the Big 
Bash – English T20 has history on its side.

Wessex

Emblem: Golden wyvern
Battle cry: “They split the shield-wall, they hew battle shields”
Counties: Kent, Hampshire, Somerset, Gloucestershire, Sussex
Royal burh: Rosebowl

East Anglia

Emblem: Wolf
Battle cry: “It’s a good season when the wolf gives food to the raven”
Counties: Essex, Middlesex, Surrey
Royal burh: Lord’s

Mercia

Emblem: Seahorse from the Staffordshire Hoard
Battle cry: “Great evils are best met with courage”
Counties: Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Northamptonshire
Royal burh: Edgbaston

Five Boroughs

Emblem:Raven
Battle cry: “Think of glory, show great courage, keep watch against the foe”
Counties: Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, Derbyshire
Royal burh: Trent Bridge

Northumbria

Emblem: Eagle-headed angel 
Battle cry: “Unfurl the sails, and let God steer us where He will”
Counties: Yorkshire, Durham
Royal burh: Headingley

Rheged

Emblem:Horned man
Battle cry: “Of the bravest stock, you are the best that is, that has been and 
will be”
Counties/countries: Lancashire, Scotland
Royal burh: Old Trafford

Wales

Emblem: Red dragon
Battle cry: “Fierce attacking, and Saxons will fall as food for wild beasts”
Counties/countries: Glamorgan, Ireland
Royal burh: The Swalec

• This article appeared first in The Nightwatchman 
<http://www.thenightwatchman.net/>
• Follow The Nightwatchman on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Nightwatchman/408335152572761> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/NightwatchmanXI>
• Issue 16 
<https://www.thenightwatchman.net/buy/the-nightwatchman-print-subscription-from-issue-16>
 andNightwatchman Christmas gifts 
<http://www.thenightwatchman.net/buy/product-category/christmas-gifts> are 
available now
 