
As a sometime teacher of writing, I am aware that one of the most 
indestructible genres within the canon of storytelling is Finding The Way Home. 
From the Wizard of Oz to ET, from Hansel and Gretel to The Incredible Journey, 
countless works of fiction concentrate on the theme of home and how to get 
(back) there.

But what is a home? Home is central to the idea of family life – a place 
where, even though there might be strife, you “fit”. There, you are known, 
loved and accepted – even though, with the masks of manners and social 
propriety lowered, you might also be undermined, raged at and criticised.

Many people search for an idea of home throughout their lives, never actually 
having had one – for instance, people in care, or fostered. I cannot imagine 
real homelessness, but we often think of it in terms of the physical discomfort 
of having no roof over your head. Even were they properly housed, though, many 
of the homeless would still be homeless – alone and disconnected. In this 
atomised modern world, it is the fate of all too many.

But even those who were lucky enough to grow up in a stable home still must 
leave to find their own one day. This rite of passage is one of the most 
distressing – and exciting – things about growing up. I remember to this day 
the fear and excitement I felt when I left my parents’ house for the first time 
at the age of 21.

I had found a place to live, but it was not home. In fact, well into my 30s, 
when I talked about “home”, I still would have been referring to the little 
terraced house I grew up in west London. In reality this was not home either – 
it was as much as anything else a place that, however much I was attached to 
it, I was determined to escape.

Like my elder brother, who wandered the world for much of his 20s, I was 
unable to find home. When he visited New Orleans in the early 80s, he knew he 
had arrived home. He’s lived there ever since. As for me, I didn’t feel I had 
discovered home until I became a father and moved into my first house in a 
place I loved, the Portobello Road. It was less fashionable in those days but, 
crucially for me, it was near where my father worked all his life in a 
greengrocer’s, so there was still a link with family history.

But even that I had to leave (after I was divorced), and make a new home – 
this time with my second wife. It was then, with her practical skills and love 
for the place we moved into, I came to understand why once women were called 
“homemakers”. Nowadays, most would be deeply suspicious of the word, suggestive 
of domestic bondage and passivity as it is. My wife is so much more than a 
homemaker, yet I cannot deny that she has made our home with a love and passion 
and concern that I would be incapable of, and for that I am deeply grateful.

Once, those guilty of capital crimes faced with a choice between exile and 
death, would often choose the latter. Now I understand why. In a sense, your 
children, too, become exiles, once they leave home and search for their own 
place in the world. I hope that however old they grow, they will always feel 
welcome in my house – as I did in my parents’. Even more, I hope they find 
somewhere to live that is their own, a place that now only in exists in their 
imaginations.

It won’t be what they expect – it never is – but whatever its physical 
manifestation, I can only wish that as they take their place in it, it takes 
their place in them – and becomes not simply a place to exist, but somewhere 
that fulfils one of the deepest of all human longings. A place called home.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter?lang=en-gb>
 