
Exactly five years ago, the world was captivated by the sight of millions of 
Egyptians ousting a tyrant after decades of ironfisted rule.

The world watched all this through acclaimed and garlanded coverage on 
al-Jazeera, in what was billed as a “breakthrough” moment for the network 
worldwide. The protesters in Tahrir Square watched themselves on the network’s 
Arabic service, erecting impromptu cinema screens using sheets of white cloth.

Al-Jazeera <https://www.theguardian.com/media/al-jazeera> was the first outlet 
in the region that crossed borders, told the stories of ordinary people, and 
asked awkward questions of its rulers. The attitude made it a broadcasting 
phenomenon and, despite the later appearance of many competitors, the region’s 
most-watched news channel.

The network’s management had differing approaches to the revolution. Some of 
the old-fashioned news hacks said their job was simply to cover the events, not 
to encourage them.

It may be though, as Orwell said, that telling the truth in a time of 
universal deceit was a revolutionary act. Others, such as the director general 
at the time, Wadah Khanfar, took to TED to declare “the [democratic] future we 
were dreaming of has arrived”.

Fast forward five years, and the revolutions have been in crisis for quite 
some time. Al-Jazeera’s fortunes, which rose with it, have fallen too. The 
future arrived but wasn’t what we had dreamed of during the initial euphoria of 
the overthrows.

Al-Jazeera has been blamed in many quarters of the Middle East for the carnage 
and chaos that has followed. Those critics do not see instability as the 
inevitable bitter harvest of tyranny. They think dictators can rule forever and 
that the dreams and spirit we saw in 2011 can somehow be permanently subdued – 
if everyone simply accepted corruption and despotism, everything would be fine.

Al-Jazeera’s response to the revolutionary rollback has been inadequate. Some 
of it is to be expected. The quagmires in Syria,Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> and other countries have become very 
personal for their diasporas who make up much of the staff base at al-Jazeera. 
They live every killing, every jailing and every injustice.

This has manifested itself in coverage which is deemed partisan along narrow 
lines, and more motivated by the settling of old scores, rather than lighting 
torches of freedom and progress.



This matters because the revolutions have suffered setbacks in large part 
because of a failure to plan. If there is to be a next stage to the revolution, 
it has to be well thought out. However, even the network’s annual forum, 
designed to bring together political players in the region, isn’t being 
utilised to map out the future in detail. There are precious few progressive 
institutions in the Arab world and that makes the region’s most influential 
media organisation even more important.

Recently, though, cuts by the Qatari state have been causing panic at the 
network.

Aside from the decline in oil prices, there is real speculation 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/qatar-power-aljazeera-idUSL8N1510U1> that the 
state is reducing its backing because of all the “problems” al-Jazeera has 
caused with its neighbours.One recent news report 
<https://theintercept.com/2015/12/18/al-jazeera-blocks-anti-saudi-arabia-article/>
 claimed the network had blocked an article due to pressure from Saudi Arabia.

Al-Jazeera America is being shuttered after only two years and over $2bn of 
investment. Staff at al-Jazeera English have been frustrated that the real 
prospect that existed of overhauling CNN and BBC World has been on pause for 18 
months, with not even talented departed staff being replaced. Meanwhile, the 
network is not making the case for why it should continue to be supported.

The BBC’s director general, Tony Hall, recently attempted to justify his 
organisation’s funding by making the appeal that it fosters democracy and 
therefore needs to not only continue its Arabic, Farsi, Russian and other 
services, but also wants to expand into North Korea. Some may debate the effect 
of such outreach, but al-Jazeera is the real indigenous deal when it comes to 
being a force for democracy in the Middle East. The world should care about 
this because greater freedoms and hope in the future will stop the rise of 
extremist groups like Daesh [Islamic State].

Al-Jazeera is, however, a shadow of what it was under charismatic idealist 
Khanfar. It has stopped articulating a greater purpose, stopped setting the 
agenda, and stopped appearing to have its finger on the pulse. The endless 
stream of high-profile visitors to the network’s HQ attempting to get a handle 
on what’s going on in the Middle East have stopped coming. No one even seems to 
care or question why the network has had a temporary director general, Mostefa 
Souag, for nearly three years now, or how it can function for so long in the 
absence of empowered leadership.

There is a lot at stake and a lot to do. Al-Jazeera has to make a better fist 
of the situation, stop living solely in the past, and begin exciting the world 
again with its passion and ideas. In an albeit shallow pool, it is still the 
Arab world’s most progressive institution and best hope. It must realise this 
mantle and better exercise its power. Once it does, it will find the people 
rallying to its side once more.

Osama Saeed <https://twitter.com/OsamaSaeed> was al-Jazeera’s global head of 
communications between January 2011 and January 2016.
 