
George Osborne's autumn statement  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/05/autumn-statement-george-osborne-austerity-plans>
 was an all-purpose political pick-and-mix of tax cuts for shopkeepers and 
pennies off at the pump, liberally sprinkled with "don't let Labour ruin it" 
rhetoric.

To the extent that it had a guiding principle, it was to shut down Labour's 
argument about the cost of living crisis by giving the hard-pressed British 
public a few goodies, and exhorting them to wait for jam tomorrow, when the 
"job-rich recovery" really takes hold.

Ever since Ed Miliband's party conference speech, with its promise to freeze 
household energy bills, the coalition has been scrambling to show that it can 
do something to ease the squeeze on households: the chancellor's announcement 
that he would cancel next year's 2p rise in fuel duty was just the latest 
example.

But of course it's not just rising prices that have contributed to what Labour 
likes to call the "cost of living crisis", but the chronic weakness of wages in 
the wake of the 2008-09 recession – and here, the chancellor's approach is to 
deny any problem exists.

Economists remain divided about the forces behind what the TUC has called the 
longest wage squeeze since the 1870s, but Miliband argues that it severs the 
age-old connection between economic growth and rising living standards. 
According to analysis by the Office for Budget Responsibility, the real wage of 
the average worker will not be restored to its pre-recession level until 2018.

The Treasury's carefully crafted riposte, spelled out in the autumn statement 
green book last week, is that rather than a tale of skinflint employers and 
their downtrodden staff, the weakness of take-home pay is a consequence of the 
increased cost to employers of providing staff pensions, and paying higher 
national insurance contributions after the rate rose under Labour.

On that analysis, we might expect wages to bounce back smartly as the economy 
picks up. In other words, the fundamental relationships in the economy remain 
undisturbed: nothing to worry about here, move on.

Yet that doesn't feel quite right. For one thing, the Treasury data is based 
on mean, not median, incomes and, as anyone who can dredge up memories of 
schoolroom maths will know, a mean can be dragged upwards by a relatively small 
number of large readings at the top end of the scale.

Second, the beneficiaries of those costly pension payouts are not necessarily 
the same people whose wage packets have been under attack over the past five 
years. Many of these beneficiaries will already have retired; many more will be 
the higher-paid workers who tend to have more generous retirement provision.

And third, pension top-ups and employer NICs are an important measure of 
employers' costs, but they don't end up in workers' pockets at the end of the 
week – and you can't use them to pay the gas bill.

But there's more at stake here than a spat about data. Labour's concern with 
the cost of living taps into a much wider debate about the state and shape of 
Britain's economy, and whether it can deliver for working people.

The rekindling of the housing market and the rise in consumer borrowing is 
helping paper over the cracks for some. However, the behaviour of the labour 
market since the start of the crisis confirms something that has long been 
growing clear: for many workers towards the middle and bottom of the income 
distribution scale, the idea of having any bargaining power over their wages, 
terms and conditions has become a distant dream.

Last month's Panorama programme about working practices at online retailer 
Amazon encapsulated the helpless, dehumanised existence of many thousands of 
workers in contemporary Britain. Monitored by machine, they are constantly at 
risk of being chucked off the payroll if they miss targets or take time off 
sick.

It's not just a UK problem: in the US, where the wage of the median worker is 
no higher in real terms than it was in 1997 
<http://www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/p60-245.pdf>, Barack Obama made a stirring 
speech last week, addressing the fact that many workers have "the nagging sense 
that no matter how hard they work, the deck is stacked against them."

This is the same powerful feeling that has motivated the Living Wage campaign 
in the UK, and pushed it from the fringes of civil society to the centre of 
political discourse. And it's the same sense of injustice that has motivated a 
wave of recent strikes across the US among low-paid employees of giant firms 
such as Walmart and McDonald's.

Solving these problems will take more than lopping a few quid off the average 
energy bill; it requires a guiding vision of the kind of economy, and the kind 
of jobs, Britain should be aspiring to. That might mean tackling shortcomings 
in corporate culture, vocational education, employment law, the finance sector 
and a host of other areas.

Osborne once appeared to have an economic vision, but it dissolved in the face 
of hard reality, and instead this recovery looks like a reversion to the 
"debt-fuelled" growth he once professed to despise, egged on by state-backed 
mortgage subsidies.

Obama said last week: "I believe this is the defining challenge of our time – 
making sure our economy works for every working American."

Sadly, Osborne's answer to the British analogue of that challenge is to deny 
that it exists.
 