
The morning after a budget statement is usually dominated by a frantic hunt 
for bombshells. What did the chancellor do that he hoped we wouldn't notice?

Not this time. The traditional day two round of briefings and analyses still 
went on but with less purpose than usual. Largely because it was, as one 
Institute for Fiscal Studies economistrather mournfully noted 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/budgets/as2013/as2013_carl.pdf>, only "the third most 
important thing to happen yesterday" – after the gales and the death of Nelson 
Mandela. And George Osborne and his colleagues had trailed so much of the 
autumn statement that on the big day there wasn't that much more to say.

Without all that distracting policy detail, we can concentrate on the economic 
forecasts. The contours of Osborne's Britain in 2018come into greater focus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/datablog/2013/dec/06/how-the-uk-will-look-in-2018-according-to-the-autumn-statement>
. Let's explore them by posing a question: what is growth for?

In a capitalist economy, growth in national income is one way to give young 
people a stake in the system. It allows societies to provide jobs, higher 
incomes and all the other things that people (especially younger workers) need 
to feel like they are getting on in the world. So in the natural course of 
things the recovery plotted out by Osborne yesterday should be good news for 
people just starting out. At last! A chance to get ahead.

But that's not how it looks. Going by the official forecasts and government 
policies, this appears to be a recovery for the elderly, the wealthy and the 
bosses – and less like one for those keen to get a foot on the ladder.

Some of this you probably know already: benefits for the under-25s are being 
hacked back <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-24369514>. Houses are 
getting even more unaffordable: theOffice for Budget Responsibility 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk> (OBR) has raised its forecast for property 
prices in 2017 by 10% – and it reckons 4% of that rise has already happened 
since the time of its last predictions in March. So, if you're out of work, 
life is going to get a lot tougher; but even if you're just starting off in 
work (but without the bank of mum and dad) life is going to get a lot tougher.

There's more. The higher education (HE) system looks more and more like a 
Ponzi scheme <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ponzi_scheme> than ever. The cap on 
university places will be lifted in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/05/university-places-restriction-lifted-student-loan-george-osborne>
, but just how the state loans to all those new students will be funded is an 
utter mystery. By privatising the student loan book, says the chancellor. But 
this is like believing you will pay your gas bills by selling your furniture: 
at some point, the money runs out and you have nothing left to flog. So for the 
next few years, undergraduates should fill their boots with physics and 
engineering degrees – but God knows how we pay for them after that, especially 
given how well the coalition has done on managing the HE budget so far. It will 
be the would-be students of about a decade hence who will have to deal with the 
mess.

As for the jobs market that the young enter, that looks more and more like a 
place of permanent precariousness. The well-respected Resolution Foundation now 
estimates thatworkers' wages are unlikely to recover 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/press/AS2013/> before the end of this 
decade. Adjusting for RPI inflation, the typical worker will be earning less 
come 2017 than they were when Tony Blair came to power in 1997. For a long time 
after the crash, it was generally assumed that this depression in wages was the 
price we paid for avoiding a massive rise in unemployment. But as the years go 
by, my bet is that we'll talk about this as a permanent change in the labour 
market: Britain aping the American model of stagnation for the average worker 
but massive returns for bosses and big shareholders.

Finally, public services are going to get a lot meaner. According to the OBR, 
the government's daily spending on public services will shrink by 2018 to the 
lowest levels since 1948. As a share of national income, it will amount to an 
amazingly small 11%. As for public investment, forget about it: Thursday saw 
the announcement of a plan to cap deficits forever – and thus in effect kill 
off the old government get-out clause (shared by Labour and Tory alike) for 
borrowing to invest.

So to recap: young people will have to contend with an unsustainable 
university system; a jobs market that won't give many of them decent wages; and 
the meanest public services since the creation of the NHS.

There are winners from Osbornomics, of course. I was in a briefing yesterday 
morning when a well-known commentator (I shan't grass him up) acknowledged that 
he was the oldest person in the room and sardonically thanked everyone for 
protecting his pension payments.

Look, these are a few thoughts put down at the end of a busy couple of days. 
But I don't see this as a war between young and old, or about short-termism 
versus long-termism. I think this is about the creation of an economic model 
that prizes its past – as represented by the elderly and the asset owners – 
more than its future.

Certainly, you have to wonder how long a system can carry on if it offers so 
little to its young.
 