
Imagine Narnia’s evil twin; a place of darkness without talking animals or the 
gentle Aslan. A place overseen by the grim reaper and his sidekick, fucking 
cancer.

Entry into this grim world is not through a wardrobe, although it is via a 
piece of bedroom furniture. My bed is a thing of beauty. Purpose built some 
years ago, the brief to the surprised designer being “Bedknobs and Broomsticks, 
but in stainless steel, please.”

Despite the lack of a magical knob, I’ve discovered that it can transport 
me back through time – unfortunately it’s to Helen’s illness and death.

The night she died I started sleeping on her side, and still do. The clock is 
there and although I retire late, I always sleep well. One night, however, I 
moved back to the side I’d occupied for so many years. It was a shift of 3ft 
(it’s a big bed), but I might as well have thrown myself on to spikes.

When I looked across to the empty space that had been Helen’s side, my sense 
of loss was overwhelming. I shut my eyes, but the spikes dug deeper. I 
remembered what it was like to wake beside her for so many months, wondering 
whether this would be the day the pain started getting worse, the test results 
more negative or, in the latter period, seeing her ever-thinner body taking up 
less space under the same duvet. Like the drunk whose world starts spinning 
when they close their eyes, I start to feel despair breaking further through 
the wall that has kept grief at bay and allowed me to maintain the facade of: 
“Adam, you are coping so well.”

All this new torment I explain to Heidi, my recently recruited, very 
professional and calm counsellor. She asks gently, “What happened next, Adam?” 
I’m not sure what she expects – that I died? Was sick? Took up crystal meth?

My answer does, though, challenge her deadpan demeanour, her eyes flashing 
with incredulity. “I simply moved back to Helen’s side of the bed. Everything 
immediately returned to normal. Grief gone, solid walls of coping back in 
place.”

Saying this out loud makes me realise that this must sound crazy, but I’ve 
repeated the move several times since – shifted sides of the bed in a maelstrom 
of despair and then moved back and been immediately fine without even a 
lingering upset. So, once again, my life reads like some cheesy film script in 
which the inexplicable becomes the everyday.

I hadn’t reckoned, however, with Heidi. “OK, tell me why you really moved to 
Helen’s side of the bed?”.

She’s right; it would have been just as easy to move the clock. I explore 
long-buried memories. “My dad died when I was four and my mum told me she chose 
then always to sleep on his side.” In counselling terms, I suspect this hits 
pay-dirt as I continue. “Mum took over the family business a week after Dad 
died on Christmas Eve and coped extraordinarily well with three children under 
10.”

Hilary Mantel on grief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/27/hilary-mantel-rereading-cs-lewis-a-grief-observed>
Heidi digests all this and does her stuff. By the end of the session I’m 
pretty sure that I’m following a coping strategy imprinted since childhood. The 
deep black hole of misery at Helen’s death that I’d always feared was there, 
has been identified and so can be managed. That the gateway to this black pit 
is my own bed is unexpected, but not so much as my ability to move back to 
Helen’s side and be immediately fine.

This is big news. One of the reasons for my counselling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/30/do-i-need-counselling-google>
, despite northern instincts to be a strong, silent type, was to find and 
vanquish my grief demons so they wouldn’t come back to rule me and destroy my 
ability to give Millie and Matt the lives they deserve.

So it’s with enthusiasm that I start to spend longer on the far side of the 
bed; like someone training for a marathon with ever farther runs. Each time the 
black hole threatens to engulf me, I return to safety and sanity by moving back.

That this works again and again is magic and tragic, two words probably 
familiar toCS Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/27/hilary-mantel-rereading-cs-lewis-a-grief-observed>
. His book in which he faces his feelings about his wife’s death from cancer is 
less well known than the Narnia stories but probably more important to the 
man’s sanity. To write about grief is to cope with grief.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 