
Following the credit crunch, you might have supposed free market thinking was 
dead and buried. The banks – deregulated stormtroopers of the neoliberal army – 
nearly caused the collapse of the world economy and the taxpayer picked up the 
tab for the gamblers in the City casino.

Using the huge debts created by the crunch (and not by excessive public 
spending, as proved byInstitute of Fiscal Studies figures 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/4822>), the uber-Thatcherite young Tories 
sought to dismantle the welfare state. They continue to rob most of us to give 
to the rich.

But Monday's report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/apr/14/poll-gloom-doom-decades-living-standards>
 of findings from the YouGov survey offered persuasive evidence that the 
British population is finally turning away from the greed is good, selfish 
individualism that Thatcherism and Blatcherism engendered. It showed that,while 
the Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/apr/14/britons-sympathetic-unemployed-france-germany>
 are still as deceived by selfish capitalism as ever (Tea Party Republicans to 
a crazy extent), on nearly every issue we are finally much closer to mainland 
Europe, ideologically.

Whether it be helping the poor to get work, willingness to pay tax for better 
public services, hostility to massive pay for CEOs, state redistribution of 
wealth, the idea of a New Deal policy to renew the economy or equal 
opportunities for rich and poor children, we are much nearer to the Germans or 
French than to Americans.

The really interesting question is whether, how and when this shift in the 
population's attitudes will express itself. If the Eds (Miliband and Balls) do 
not start to call for a radical shift in policy – and let us not forget that 
the Labour frontbench is still riddled with Blatcherites – then there will be 
no real alternative at the next election. There will be a collapse in 
democracy, a serious disconnect between a Thatcher-pickled, selfish , stinking 
rich ruling elite and everyone else. What are the psychological conditions for 
this to change?

Relative deprivation <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relative_deprivation> 
theory proposes the following. For an "up with this we will not put" overthrow 
of the existing order, akin to what happened in the Soviet Union in 1989, five 
conditions are needed: wanting something (whether it be a pay rise or a new 
order); seeing that someone else possesses it (eg the Danes, with their 35-hour 
weeks, eco-friendly industrial base and redistributed wealth); feeling entitled 
to it; feasibility that you could obtain it; and the absence of a sense that 
it's your fault that you do not yet have it.

If a person passes through the first four stages but not the last, they are 
liable to self-blame. This has been the depressed, introverted, "look after 
number one" mentality which has ruled for 30 years. It has meant that, like 
Americans, wesuffer twice the rate <http://jech.bmj.com/content/60/7/646.short> 
of mental illness of mainland Europe.

But when enough people pass through the last stage and, for example, begin to 
blame their ruling elite for their problems, 1989-like weird political shit can 
start happening. The YouGov-Cambridge survey may be a sign it's on the way.

Instead of being duped by the Tories' claptrap about the debt being caused by 
public spending, we are in favour of redistributing wealth and work, and a lot 
of state intervention. Instead of blaming ourselves for low pay and long hours, 
we may be realising that economic meltdown (combined with climate change) 
heralds a much more sustainable low-growth future – vastly preferable in every 
way, with "shop till you drop", credit-fuelled consumer junkies a thing of the 
past.

No one predicted the demise of the Soviet Union. If that could happen, so 
could an end to the "greed and growth is good" society.
 