
If you are among the estimated 70 per cent of bank customers who don't pay 
charges, you're unlikely to benefit from switching unless you're unhappy with 
your bank.

There's also very little point in going though the hassle of changing your 
current account simply to get a better rate of interest. On an average yearly 
credit balance of £100, switching from an account paying the worst rate of 0.1 
per cent to the best rate of 1 per cent would produce the princely after-tax 
sum of 72p.

You won't get any interest at all if you move to the Co-operative Bank or open 
an Alliance & Leicester Giro Current Account or an ordinary current account at 
NatWest. If you keep big balances in your current account, you'd be better off 
keeping your money in a current account-linked savings account such as those 
from Egg, Scottish Widows Bank and Virgin Direct.

 Charges for cash 

If you are unlucky enough to have access only to cash machines outside your 
bank's free network, you have a very good reason for switching. Assuming you 
make one cash withdrawal a week, you'll save £31.20 a year by becoming an 
ex-NatWest customer; £52 if you bank with First Direct, the Halifax or HSBC; 
£78 if you're with Abbey National or Lloyds TSB. Barclays costs the same as 
Abbey and Lloyds TSB but is reverting to free cash withdrawals for its own 
customers in October. However, customers of other banks should watch out for a 
£1 charge that will be levied on them at Barclays machines from the same time, 
although they will at least get a warning before taking the cash.

 The bane of bank charges 

If you belong to a bank which charges a monthly fee when you overdraw, it will 
be worth taking your business to a bank which offers a fee-free overdraft. 
Assuming that you overdraw every month by more than £50, you'll save a minimum 
of £60 a year if you switch from Barclays, Lloyds TSB and NatWest; £96 if you 
have an Alliance & Leicester Giro Current or Keyway Account.

If your overdraft tends to hover just under the £100 mark, you can cut your 
costs to zero if you switch to Bank of Scotland's Cheque Plus account, or to 
the accounts from the Halifax and Royal Bank of Scotland.

If you need an overdraft of up to £250, any of the non-fee charging accounts 
are suitable. If you need to arrange an overdraft of more than £250, you face a 
minimum arrangement fee of £20 with Bank of Scotland's Banking Direct Cheque; 
£15 with First Direct.

With the exception of the Co-operative Bank, which also charges a minimum of 
£15, none of the other accounts makes you pay for arranging an overdraft.
 