
Once upon a time in Sydney there was a plastic surgeon and an anaesthetist. A 
32-year-old woman came to the surgeon in search of a nose job, to alter the 
shape of her nose and fix her sinuses.

The surgeon agreed to undertake the cosmetic surgery in a small, private 
hospital. But no sooner was the local anaesthetic injected the patient suffered 
a problem. Before even an incision was made, she went into cardiac arrest, 
requiring chest compressions, defibrillation and adrenalin.

Short of dying, this is as serious as complications get, so it’s fortunate 
that the patient survived. But when she awoke she found to her astonishment 
that she had not one but two things to be grateful for – her lifeand the nose 
job, which the surgeon should have abandoned in light of her instability. 
What’s more, she had been sent to recover in a usual ward without intensive 
care facilities.

This incident didn’t happen in the bygone era of “cowboy medicine”. It 
happened recently and the patient complained to the state’s medical council. 
The surgeon offered the flimsy explanation that minus the nose job (elective, 
non-urgent and likely, fully paid for upfront) she would have woken up 
“disappointed” and might not have rebooked the procedure.

The secret surgeon's diary: 'The anaesthetist thinks the patient may die on 
the table'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/04/the-secret-surgeons-diary-the-anaesthetist-thinks-the-patient-may-die-on-the-table>
The anaesthetist, who failed to warn the surgeon, said she wasn’t “thinking 
straight”. She sent a post-arrest patient to a usual recovery ward without 
intensive care facilities and continued assisting the surgeon on the remainder 
of the list. During the hearing, the surgeon blamed the anaesthetist and the 
anaesthetist said she felt pressured by the surgeon.

In a pithy ruling that could qualify as a subject in the medical curriculum, 
the medical council rebuked the surgeon for “putting the nose before the 
patient”.

The incident raises many questions about professional ethics and personal 
integrity, but I couldn’t help but be struck by what it says about the 
persistent hierarchy within the medical profession that has always placed 
surgeons at the top of the ladder, general practitioners at the bottom and left 
all other doctors to find a foothold somewhere in the middle.

How doctors engage with each other is determined not just by knowledge and 
experience but also by where a doctor fits into the pecking order. This is an 
open secret widely understood by doctors, less so by health administrators and 
the public.

The very notion that in the throes of a serious, life-threatening situation, a 
doctor may not act in a patient’s best interest seems unbelievable. After all, 
it is a dereliction of the duty that we so automatically expect doctors to 
perform that we would never think to question it. When was the last time you 
asked a surgeon, “If, by chance, my operation were to go wrong, would you 
listen to the anaesthetist?”

The relationship between a surgeon and an anaesthetist is a particularly 
interesting one, especially in private hospitals where many elective and 
cosmetic interventions occur.

“Patients don’t come to theatre for the anaesthetic,” a senior surgeon said 
flatly, in attempting to deconstruct the hierarchy for me. The patient 
“belongs” to the surgeon and the anaesthetist’s job is to enable the operation. 
The private hospital is beholden to the surgeon for bringing in business and 
the anaesthetist is beholden to the surgeon because in effect, she is employed 
by the surgeon. The anaesthetist’s livelihood depends on the goodwill of the 
surgeon; losing work doesn’t just mean loss of lucrative income but loss of 
future earnings because word of mouth matters greatly.

An eminent surgeon spoke of the three As: an anaesthetist must be available, 
able and amicable. I noted that “able” referred to the specific task of giving 
an anaesthetic rather than taking a more holistic view of the patient.

“Well, you don’t want an anaesthetist saying you are straying too close to an 
artery.”

“But what if you are?” I pressed, intrigued by the insight.

“A good surgeon should listen but mostly, both would agree that it’s none of 
the anaesthetist’s business.”

Hardly reassuring if you were the patient.

The nose job in the face of a cardiac arrest would never have proceeded in a 
public hospital. Anaesthetists there have a firm say in cancelling procedures 
and alerting surgeons to unsuitable conditions. The power imbalance is not as 
stark but public hospital anaesthetists grapple with other problems.

While responsibility for decisions is shared and keeping the surgeon happy is 
not a prerequisite for income, the “best” anaesthetics lists (with registrar 
support) are said to be jealously guarded by the most influential doctors. 
Public hospital anaesthetists speak of being edged sideways when they want to 
gain experience in complex areas because these lists are heavily controlled. 
When disillusioned anaesthetists leave for the private hospital system, no one 
wins.

One doctor spoke of his many foiled attempts to up-skill in cardiac 
anaesthetics at his large public hospital. “One day, I got fed up and crossed 
the road to the private hospital to do exactly what my hospital wouldn’t let me 
and eventually I left the public system altogether.”

He warns that inexperienced anaesthetists in private hospitals risk being 
governed by the surgeon’s whims and outbursts. An orthopaedic surgeon demanded 
that a young anaesthetist leave his existing group practice and join one that 
he had influence with. When the anaesthetist demurred the surgeon became openly 
hostile, eventually forcing the anaesthetist off his list. For their part, 
surgeons observe that anaesthetists in the private system readily ingratiate 
themselves for the sake of work. “I’ve had anaesthetists offer to carry my bag 
– I refuse but it’s easy to see how power can go to your head.”

That power is concentrated in the hands of some surgeons is well known. It is 
visible and implied and readily recognised even within the community of 
surgeons. A top surgeon spoke of a prominent colleague whose errors were never 
mentioned at the regular morbidity and mortality meeting.

“There are only two explanations for a surgeon who has never made an error. 
Either he doesn’t operate or there is a code of silence amongst his 
colleagues.” Again, hardly reassuring news for patients or doctors.

When is saving a life 'too much medicine'? This is a lifelong test for doctors 
| Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/27/when-is-saving-a-life-too-much-medicine-this-is-a-lifelong-test-for-doctors>
In every hospital, guidelines abound on ethics, integrity and open disclosure. 
But these exhortations will come to naught if the most senior and influential 
doctors don’t commit to personal action.

Nothing is more powerful than a surgeon saying, “We’re a team, tell me if 
there is a problem.” Nothing is more welcome than a surgeon conceding, “You’re 
right, there is another way of looking at this.” Having worked with some such 
surgeons, I can tell you that every time a surgeon listens, collaborates and 
communicates, the greatest beneficiary is the patient.

“Surgeons will be surgeons” even the best surgeons are known to sigh. But when 
it comes to medical hierarchy, the stakes are high. At issue are egos, 
reputations and livelihoods, but most importantly, the life of the patient, who 
is oblivious to all the competing interests in the operating theatre. Patients 
should, and do, find it unacceptable that their best interests are not at the 
forefront of the surgeon’s mind in every single case.

We can keep coming up with ideas to extinguish the hierarchy but in my view, 
the most powerful winds of change will be fanned by surgeons. There are 
surgeons capable of inspiring change – they are contemplative, reflective and 
cooperative and we need to hear their voice. Rightly or wrongly, the culture of 
medicine is such that the rest of us on the lower rungs of the ladder are still 
waiting for inspiration from the top.
 