
Australian Jessica Pereira 
<http://www.9news.com.au/health/2015/12/08/11/00/rare-cancer-sufferers-plead-for-help>
’s moving plight to find funding for a costly targeted therapy to treat her 
rare lymphoma surfaced simultaneously as former PresidentJimmy Carter rejoiced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/06/immunotherapy-drug-jimmy-carters-cancer-cure>
 that there was no sign of the melanoma that had spread to his liver and brain, 
thanks to another blockbuster immunotherapy.

Pioneering cancer treatment engineers immune systems to fight disease
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/09/pioneering-cancer-treatment-engineers-immune-systems-to-fight-disease>
The juxtaposition was ironic. A newly married woman faces the existential 
question of why she must die at age 26 while a 91-year-old man is back teaching 
Sunday school, casually explaining that he missed the last few lessons because 
doctors needed to remove part of his liver.

I was pleased for President Carter and could well picture his oncologist’s 
gratification. After all, it’s not everyday that insistent tumours melt away 
under treatment. But I identified more strongly with Pereira’s oncologist 
because the hardships patients face in obtaining treatment is a constant thorn 
in the side of every oncologist.

The drug Pereira needs is subsidised in Australia but for an uncommon subtype 
of lung cancer; her argument is that if a monthly supply costs an eligible lung 
cancer patient just $37 per month she should not be forced to pay $7,500. This 
drug is promisingly effective but not curative.

Don’t get me wrong: if young Jessica were my patient, I would be arguing her 
case even in my sleep. But if you then asked how I proposed to offer sequential
blockbuster therapies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/02/doctor-cancer-patients-cure>
, with variable but mostly a small chance of success, costing tens of thousands 
of dollars per patient per year, I couldn’t give you a ready answer except to 
say that the dilemma is increasingly pressing on the minds of oncologists, as 
it ought.

How to ascribe monetary value to a life? When to adamantly insist on coverage 
for one drug but merely desire another? How to balance clinical efficacy with 
cost-effectiveness when the patient pleads you should spare no cost in saving 
her life?

New cancer therapies are exorbitantly priced and compassionate access is nigh 
impossible unless the company expects eventual government subsidisation, in 
which case a period of free access is a very small price to pay for 
establishing market familiarity and reap rich returns.

We need governments to exert their influence on behalf of all patients to 
tackle the prohibitive cost of new drugs.

High-prescribing oncologists or so-called key opinion leaders may secure free 
access for their patients but most patients are told to cost-share or 
self-fund. The vast majority of patients deem both options unaffordable but the 
tired arguments about the billion dollar cost of drug development and drug 
companies not being charities continue to hamper any meaningful conversation 
about cost. It’s notable that the pharmaceutical industry has outperformed the 
market so far in 2015. The S&P Pharmaceuticals Select Industry index grew 
13.37% versus 4.16% for the S&P 500.

Individual oncologists bargaining with big pharma to serve select, usually 
affluent patients, is never going to lead to systemic change. For this, we need 
governments to exert their sizeable influence on behalf of all patients to 
tackle the prohibitive cost of new drugs.

Doctors recognise the intellectual argument that healthcare cannot be 
endlessly funded but in a highly sub-specialised system, each doctor ends up 
advocating on behalf of a narrow subset of patients.

This came into sharp focus when I treated an elderly non-cancer patient with 
recurrent falls admitted to my medicine unit. Thousands of dollars of tests 
later, a thorough history revealed that the reason for his falls was blindness 
from bilateral cataracts.

I was alarmed to find that he dialled his insulin dose via guesswork and he 
couldn’t even count the fingers held in front of his face. He had spent the 
year on the cataract surgery waitlist. After a whole month in hospital sorting 
out peripheral matters, I asked whether he would consider residential care 
because I could not let him go home alone. He looked calmly in my direction but 
his voice shook, “If you place me, I will kill myself. If you really want to 
help, fix my cataracts.”

Cataract surgery, timely hip replacement, suicide prevention and community 
rehabilitation make a profound, even transformative, difference to patients’ 
lives but those who need them are hardly the public face of suffering. 
Moreover, such patients lack vocal advocates.

Did you hear about the frail widow who was glad she broke her hip because it 
finally moved her up the orthopaedic waiting list? Or the man who lived in a 
wheelchair because he wasn’t weak enough to qualify for inpatient rehab but 
wasn’t strong enough to get to an outpatient facility? I looked after them both 
– they didn’t make me feel any less committed to my cancer patients but they 
provided an object lesson in perspective about healthcare funding.

Not so long ago, senior clinicians proudly proclaimed that their only 
responsibility was to care for the individual patient irrespective of societal 
cost. While this attitude will never vanish, modern doctors are increasingly 
coming to grips with the fact that one patient’s expensive hepatitis or cancer 
therapy inevitably comes at the cost of another’s HIV drugs, wound management 
or dementia care.

Entire conferences are dedicated to the ethics of sustainable healthcare and 
debating how to get the balance right. But the hardest part is learning how to 
articulate these notions to patients without fostering doubt and extinguishing 
hope.

With no uniform policy, absent training, and no community appetite, doctors 
are understandably reluctant to broach the cost of profligate medicine with 
their colleagues, let alone patients. Yet I don’t think this is evading 
responsibility as much as feeling uncertain about just how to practice fiscal 
responsibility while being the healers we set out to be.

Thoughtful doctors know that if we don’t rise to the challenge, we will 
eventually be faced with the greater challenge of disappointing more and more 
patients. It is neither appropriate nor feasible to fund every intervention for 
every patient.

Why I won’t be rushing to tell my cancer patients there’s a cure | Ranjana 
Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/02/doctor-cancer-patients-cure>
Rare Cancers Australia estimates that of the 44,000 patients diagnosed each 
year with less common or rare cancers, more than half will succumb to their 
illness. Cancers of the lung, breast, prostate, colon and melanoma attract the 
lion’s share of attention due to their larger numbers and effective lobby 
groups, but this is an indictment of a healthcare system, which should cast a 
wider net of help.

The Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Drugs Fund in the UK 
sets aside £340m per year to pay for drugs that are not covered by the NHS for 
reasons of efficacy or cost but which may still be considered on an individual 
basis. The fund is typically accessed for treatment of rare cancers and the 
independent panel has a rapid turnaround time of 10 days. Canada is considering 
a reimbursement pathway for all rare diseases. Australia should regard these 
policies with interest.

It’s worth remembering that for every news story that tugs at the heart 
strings, there are countless other patients who suffer silently, hoping that 
society will not ignore them. Healthcare policy can’t be determined through 
newspapers and sound bites because of the very real implications it has for 
every single one of us.

The true measure of a society can be found in how it treats its weakest and 
most vulnerable. Hospitals and medical clinics are filled with such people. 
It’s time for bold leadership and candid conversation to foster a system that 
actually delivers what it claims – health and care, with compassion, fairness 
and ethics at its core.
 