
It's early morning in Madrid, and neither Antony Hegarty nor Marina Abramovic´ 
have been up long. The celebrated musician and the legendary performance artist 
are rehearsing for The Life and Death of Marina Abramovic´, an opera that will 
make its debut at the Manchester international festival next year. The pair 
have a benevolently witchy air: Abramovic´ has an almost narcotically deep, 
consonant-rolling Serbian accent; Hegarty talks a lot, but less than the 
motormouthed Abramovic´, his soft voice punctuated by reflective pauses. 
Despite the fatigue of rehearsing solidly for 15 days, the level of mutual 
admiration is almost tangible.

They met three years ago at a party hosted by Björk and her partner, the 
artist Matthew Barney. "Matthew Barney was grilling little fish on the lawn, 
and Antony was sitting inside at the table," says Abramovic´. "The next time I 
saw him was when he performed at Carnegie Hall, part of Rufus Wainwright's 
Christmas special. I hadn't heard him sing before and his voice came at me like 
a great wave. I just stood up. People around me were complaining, but I was 
compelled. I kept saying out loud, 'Who is he?' I wanted to know everything 
about him."

"Oh lord," breathes Hegarty, heavily. "I don't know quite what to say, Marina. 
I just feel like a normal singer." Yet, since the release of the Mercury 
prize-winning album I Am A Bird Now, in 2005, Hegarty's eerie, genderless voice 
has had a profound effect on audiences across the world. As Abramovic´ says, 
"his voice brings a spirit to everyone who listens – so much so that you begin 
thinking about your own mortality".

There are few artists more concerned with mortality than Abramovic´, now 63. 
She describes The Life and Death of Marina Abramovic´ as "a series of births 
and funerals of the soul", adding that it will contain scenes from her 
childhood and her adult career. Hegarty has composed the music, with avant 
garde sound artist William Basinski, and will appear on stage; the opera will 
also star Willem Dafoe, along with an international cast of performance artists.

It's Abramovic´'s first major project since this year's retrospective of her 
work in New York, which drew 850,000 people to the Museum of ModernArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> and cemented her status as the 
doyenne of performance art. Since the 1970s, she has pushed mind and body in 
shows that explored the limits of pain and exhaustion: cutting herself, lying 
on ice or in a ring of fire, even allowing the audience to attack her with guns 
and knives. For Moma, she created a piece called The Artist Is Present, in 
which she sat mute in the museum's atrium each day for three months, while 
spectators took turns to sit opposite her. This week, she launches a new 
retrospective at London's Lisson Gallery and is giving a lecture at Tate Modern.

Hegarty had misgivings about The Artist Is Present. "I was so worried about 
you," he says softly. "I was scared of crazy people coming and disrupting the 
piece. In a lot of ways, I really didn't want you to do it." In the event, the 
piece was relatively drama-free: the most remarkable disruption came from 
someone projectile-vomiting into the performance area.

Hegarty, who "sat" with his friend a number of times during the piece 
(something she found "galvanising") asks if she "had a process for letting go 
of the energy".

"I had to be a blank canvas with each person," she says. "I tried to empty 
myself between each sitter." Not physically, though – Abramovic´ says she 
"didn't pee at all" during each day of the performance. "I'd come home some 
nights with this incredible heaviness. I would sit in the bath and pour two 
pounds of salt into the water until my skin had almost boiled off, so that the 
next day I would be stripped down and ready. I was also in a lot of pain with 
my back. Every work changes me, but in the past I have been able to visualise 
my next piece of work as I reached the end of another – this was entirely 
different. I was in a state of complete . . . blankness." 

Vulnerability is the key parallel between Abramovic´ and Hegarty. Though their 
work should be, says Hegarty, "more esoteric than it is", both lay themselves 
so bare that the audience can create their own inroads into the work and find 
something that resonates with them. "Throughout my life," says Hegarty, "one of 
the only places I saw people truly expressing themselves was through pop music. 
I was such an emotional child, but there wasn't much room for expression in my 
family, and I think a lot of people are still in the same situation. People 
need help to cry out about how they feel."

Abramovic´ says that's why his performances are so cathartic, with audience 
members weeping or singing out loud in the breaks between the songs. "His work 
is so dense with his own experience, but has enough pure emotion to let the 
public complete it. That's why he gets such an amazing response."

Although Hegarty performs more frequently than Abramovic´, and on bigger 
stages, she experiences the most anxiety. "I have so much insecurity," she 
says. "I will literally sit on the toilet until the minute I'm due to perform. 
Then I get in there and it all disappears."

Hegarty, on the other hand, has varying degrees of jitters. "When I'm on tour, 
I run on so much adrenaline that, really, I never leave the stage. When I 
finish touring, I am out of commission for six months or so, until I can crawl 
back to being a normal person."

Abramovic´ laughs. "It's funny, because I get the same thing," she says. "I 
still feel like I am in that museum atrium sometimes. Being an artist is not 
easy – I have always said that to the students I have taught over the years. 
It's a huge sacrifice."

The pair embark on an analysis of the artist's function. "I believe art is the 
oxygen of society," says Abramovic´, "which means artists have to work hard to 
keep it alive. To really change the way society thinks, you have to give your 
entire being to it until there's nothing left." Hegarty agrees, but suggests 
artists are privileged. "I believe creative expression should be the birthright 
of all people," he says, "but a significant portion will never have any other 
opportunity than to do it vicariously, through people like us, the few allowed 
to express our inner lives in the way we do." He pauses, cautious. "Sometimes 
it sits uneasily with me."

Please sing at my funeral

If Hegarty is feeling introspective, that isn't too surprising. The new Antony 
and the Johnsons <https://www.theguardian.com/music/antonyandthejohnsons> 
album, Swanlights, out today, has an almost apocalyptic preoccupation with the 
human body and its relationship to the earth: it is clearly the product of 
someone with not only existential concerns ("I am battling through my shame and 
fear," he says), but environmental ones. This week he edits the Guardian's 
music site and – judging by the pieces he's commissioned, particularly a 
conversation with Björk about the environment – it looks like his fears for the 
planet have, for a moment, eclipsed his preoccupations with gender, which made 
I Am a Bird Now so captivating.

More than anything, Hegarty wants the world to strive towards a more 
matriarchal existence. "Just living is creative," he explains. "Every decision 
we make in life is a creative one: sentences we string together, the way we get 
dressed in the morning. Every movement could be considered dance if you really 
open your mind to that feminine plane of thought."

"Wow!" says Abramovic´.

These two artists do seem awestruck by each other, listening intently to what 
the other has to say, only speaking when they've reached their full conclusion. 
One thing, however, remains unspoken: the ultimate tribute, Abramovic´'s 
request that Hegarty will sing at her funeral, which she recently divulged to 
her biographer.

"This is Marina's wish," confirms her assistant, after the interview. "But she 
has never asked Antony because she is too shy."

Marina Abramovic is at the Lisson Gallery, London NW1, (020-7724 2739), 13 
October to 13 November.

• Correction 11/10/10. We misquoted one of Antony Hegarty's lyrics as "shaman 
fear" when he was singing about "shame and fear". We also talked about the 
"feminine plain" rather than the "feminine plane". This has been corrected.
 