
Karen’s unexpected and unwelcome kiss on the beach was no love bite, yet her 
lips left a mark as deep as if she’d been written into my sad story by Bram 
Stoker. Fittingly, his inspiration for Dracula came only a few miles up the 
coast while he was visiting Whitby. Karen’s sincere seaside snog was too soon 
after Helen’s death by any judgment. She was upset, “Sorry, but it seemed the 
perfect moment.”

I assured her that she’d done nothing wrong in assuming I was single through 
divorce not death – people do.

Afterwards, we’d chatted until 2am, animated like survivors of an unexpected 
crisis. It was innocent, with much laughing, many nightcaps, no kissing.

Karen confessed that for the first time since her divorce, she’d thought of 
taking a bed (not beach! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/03/i-turn-down-an-offer-many-men-wouldnt-refuse-sex-on-the-beach>
) buddy. She was “out of practice and clumsy” but had gone for it because it 
felt like time out and she liked me.

I saw that my rejection of her puckered-up pass was so unconsidered it was 
nothing to do with my recent bereavement and everything to do with more than 20 
years of fidelity. I’d acted as a married man.

I sat opposite Karen thinking how fantastic it would be to share a bed with 
this kind, sexy woman

Yet I’m no longer married. So when the shock subsided, I sat opposite Karen 
thinking how fantastic it would be to share a bed with this kind, sexy woman. 
I’d escape the widower script, maybe for one night only, hidden away from the 
rest of my life with its bedtime loneliness and never-ending bleeding 
logistics. These thoughts were academic as when Karen discovered I was a recent 
widower, her gaze became concerned, not carnal. Has a bloke ever plunged into 
the friend zone faster, I wonder?

But how soon is it “normal” for a bereaved person’s libido to wake up? 
Bluntly, how is it possible that a few months after his beloved wife’s death a 
husband would have no guilt about wanting to shag someone?

I don’t know a widower or widow to compare timelines with and premature 
fornication is not the sort of topic you can dance into easily, even online.

Bereaved sexual re-awakening seems almost taboo, with at least one brilliant 
exception. A supportive colleague passed meLucie Brownlee’s Life After You 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/life-after-you.html>, “Not because it’s about 
bereavement. I thought how many touch points you have with her – the 
north-east, Yorkshire and a frank view of the world,” she’d lied. Her intention 
was clear; she hoped Brownlee’s experience would teach me something.

I recommend this raw and brilliantly uninhibited story, including how she took 
comfort in a fuck-buddy friendship with her plumber. That the reader ends up 
liking her more for it is a tonic to my spinning head. I’m guessing that as 
friends and family haven’t disowned Brownlee, there’s hope for me. Critically, 
her Carry On Plumber dalliance took place in the first year after her husband’s 
death.

I worry, though, that while I’m technically single, to many of the people in 
my life and Millie’s and Matt’s lives, I’m still married to Helen. So I’ll 
tread carefully for their sakes. For my own, I find my lack of guilt at what 
Karen and I could have got up to upsetting and surprising, but not inexplicable.

I loved Helen so much and would gladly have swapped places with her. There 
were no issues or unfinished business between us and while I scream out for 
more years together, we had something so special in the best of times and an 
even more profound love in cancer’s worst of them.

This helped me to embrace what may be the hardest lesson in bereavement – that 
you cannot love someone who is gone exactly as you did when they were alive. 
The contrast between the two states is too stark. I’ve understood this crappy 
truth quicker then many, perhaps primed by my dad’s death when I was four. So, 
no sex but also no guilt that there might have been … or could be soon. 
Bravado, perhaps, but I’m made bold and more open by Brownlee’s honesty about 
her libido. You take help where you can through the layered complexities of 
this bastard bereavement.

Crazy, crazy new life. I long more than ever for the simple, beautiful old one.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 