
A 90-year-old woman has lain shrivelled and uncomfortable in her bed for forty 
hours, awaiting an operation. She has become heavily constipated as a result of 
an over-enthusiastic prescription of anti-diarrhoeal tablets and is now at risk 
of a bowel obstruction.

The surgeon says that the hardened faeces need to be manually evacuated under 
anaesthetic but it’s the weekend and only one operating theatre is open, with a 
bevy of surgeons desperate for the same limited resources. My patient doesn’t 
speak English and I don’t speak Polish but the language of starvation and 
defeat is universal.

No words of consolation will relieve her of the suspicion that she has been 
abandoned because she is old. Her bleary-eyed, septuagenarian son, wants her to 
taste a piece of her birthday cake because today might be her last birthday.

“Doctor, can my mother have cake?”

If she fasts, the surgery might happen. But if she eats, it definitely won’t. 
If she has the surgery, she might die. But if she doesn’t, she might also die. 
I wish he didn’t have to ask the question and I wish I didn’t have to answer it.

The patient who showed me how to be a better doctor and person
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jul/28/patient-showed-me-how-better-doctor-person>
I have already argued with the surgeon, who is a trusted friend, and who is 
even more upset than I am, asking me to imagine how he feels when patients and 
doctors blame him for delaying surgery when he spends entire weekends biding 
his time to get into theatre.

“But you’re the surgeon,” I say. “Who has the authority to open another 
theatre?”

“Bureaucrats, who don’t work weekends.” 

I am driving home hopeless and helpless when a colleague calls. “My hospital 
says patient experience surveys rate me as being in the bottom percentile of 
providers. How can this be when I give my heart to medicine?” This from a woman 
whose greatest concern during a difficult pregnancy was who would look after 
her patients when she took maternity leave.

She is surprised when I laugh, “You can’t be at the bottom because I am!”

Soon, we are swapping stories of doctors who are equally stumped by surveys 
that call into question their approach to patient care and seem to put the 
blame at their feet for not doing better.

One might have thought good medicine was always about the patient but patient 
experience surveys are the latest trend in healthcare. Done at significant cost 
and with good intention, they seem reasonable enough. After all, in order to 
address the matter, it’s important to know what makes patients unhappy.

As the saying goes, a happy patient can still be a dead patient

But poor patient experience surveys must be an executive’s nemesis. Pleasing 
political masters means performing magic and making the problem vanish, 
preferably before an election comes around, but addressing the cause is a lot 
like peeling an onion, uncovering layer upon layer of challenge that makes one 
weep.

Firstly, patient experience is not the same as patient satisfaction. A patient 
who is shaken awake every four hours might be in a rotten mood the next morning 
but those neurological observations might just have saved her life.

A patient denied jam on his toast might say the service stinks but better a 
grumpy diabetic than a comatose one. As the saying goes, a happy patient can 
still be a dead patient. But patients aren’t naïve and many understand the 
clinical imperatives that determine their experience.

Whether it’s waiting hours in the emergency department, being stuck on a 
trolley, facing delay in surgery or awaiting chemotherapy, very few patients 
make an actual fuss – because they see that doctors and nurses are doing their 
best.

Indeed, the neediest patients tend to complain the least – perhaps because 
they are tired but also because their experience of chronic illness has taught 
them patience and empathy. No, this should not be an excuse for provider 
complacency.

For most patients, a genuinely poor experience results from a lack of 
communication and a failure of compassion. Combine deferred surgery, lying in a 
trolley, a cancelled appointment and a hurried consultation with a lack of 
decent explanation and no acknowledgement of suffering and you have a real 
problem with patient experience.

A poor patient experience is leaving an incontinent patient wet because there 
is a shortage of nurses and when a confused patient can’t be fed because the 
nurse has two hands and five patients. It’s when you can’t reach your water 
jug, and when you do, it’s empty. It’s being desperate for a hot tea, a warm 
shower and a working call-bell. When patient dignity suffers, there are no 
winners – a bad patient experience is a guilty provider experience. Realising 
this isn’t rocket science but ushering change is really hard.

Hospital medicine is increasingly conducted amid apologies

Every frontline clinician knows that no amount of ward redesign, geographical 
shuffling of patients or imaginative rebranding will solve the fundamental 
problem of having fewer doctors and nurses on the floor to deal with 
increasingly complex patient needs. Studies show that extra staffing of 
registered nurses improves patient outcomes. Nurses flag early signs of 
deterioration, help patients mobilise safely, and step in when doctors don’t or 
won’t communicate effectively. Having good nurses on the ward transforms the 
environment – interns feel secure, specialists feel supported, and patients 
benefit from earlier discharge and lower readmission rates.

An ageing population has placed an unprecedented demand on allied health 
services like physiotherapists and social workers but it seems as if no one saw 
this coming. Try finding a service on a weekend and you could be waiting all 
day.

“If your patient isn’t homeless or destitute right this minute, I can’t get to 
it,” apologised one lone, harried social worker covering an entire hospital.

Heart and kidneys don’t wait for a quiet weekday to fail. An appendix doesn’t 
wait for an available theatre to burst. Tottering patients don’t know not to 
fall on a Sunday. Clearly, infrastructure and planning are not for an 
individual doctor to fix but when hospitals perform poorly, the spotlight 
shines inevitably on doctors.

Hospital medicine is increasingly conducted amid apologies. I am sorry you 
can’t have your operation today. I am sorry the morphine took so long. I am 
sorry you have vomit-stained clothes. I am sorry your son left before a doctor 
could get here.

The apologies are necessary and it’s humbling that they heal more than mere 
words should, but apologies without action slowly erode us because we know that 
tomorrow will be filled with more apologies and so will the day after and the 
day after that. Those who engage with patients know that you can’t soothe and 
trick people into thinking they are getting better care – you actually have to 
provide it. But as long as bureaucrats answer to politicians and clinicians 
answer to patients, the tension will remain.

Hospital crises show the gap between how doctors and patients perceive events 
| Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/11/hospital-crises-show-the-gap-between-how-doctors-and-patients-perceive-events>
Some people just leave. “I get paid better for a different headache,” says one 
surgeon, who quit the public system after ten years of battling a dysfunctional 
outpatient system. But many others stay, in part due to a philosophical belief 
that their exceptional training should benefit the least well-off in society. 
It is especially these doctors and nurses we want to shield from 
disillusionment.

Having observed healthcare delivery in some of the best institutions in the 
world, I have been struck by one observation. It’s when executives regularly 
make time to visit the wards and interact with patients, families and all 
manner of providers, from physicians and nurses to porters and aides.

They peer into a decrepit bathroom, pick up a flimsy frame, sit in a wobbly 
chair, taste the tepid tea – and discover what makes for a poor patient 
experience. A clinician leader who doesn’t see patients frequently loses touch 
with their most human concerns. A non-clinician heading finance, operations or 
human resources, is never exposed to the daily realities of human suffering yet 
is charged with making far-reaching decisions that impact all our lives. The 
best leaders make it a point to keep their finger on the pulse – and society is 
better for it.

Patient experience surveys are here to stay, and in time, to financially 
reward organisations and individuals who do well on them.

But to truly improve patient outcomes organisations will have to do more than 
probe patients and fault doctors. To borrow from the drug advertisements, when 
pain persists, organisations will need to talk to their doctors.

But then, they will need to listen.
 