
As interest rates languish at the lowest level in living memory, there is 
little hope for savers looking on in disappointment at their bank statements. 
The average savings account now pays a dismal 0.61%, according to 
Moneyfacts.co.uk, and the firm recorded just 12 rate rises in February – and 
235 cuts.

For the many people trying to build on their deposits, there are other options 
available – some of which are potentially more rewarding alternatives, but 
carry with them risks alongside the possibility of better returns than the 
banks.

Bonds

Traditionally, bonds have been the next step up from cash, although 10-year UK 
government bonds now yield a miserly 1.41%. You can get a higher return from 
corporate bonds, which essentially are IOUs issued by companies to raise funds. 
Most investors will buy a fund of corporate bonds in order to spread the risk 
in case one company goes bust.

Darius McDermott, managing director of Chelsea Financial Services, says fixed 
interest is attractive when inflation is low. “Falling interest rates have 
driven a 30-year bond bubble, but that could burst if inflation returns,” he 
says. Performance has been poor lately, with the average fund down 1.5% over 
the past year.

Stocks and shares

While cash is safe and dull, stocks and shares are risky and more rewarding.

The benchmark FTSE 100 index hit an all-time high of 7,122 in April 2015, but 
is down almost 15% since.

Patrick Connolly, certified financial planner at Chase de Vere, says shares 
are only for long-term savings. “Never invest money you need in the next five 
or 10 years.”

Most people reduce the risk by investing in a fund, but these can still be 
volatile.

Peer-to-peer lending

Peer-to-peer (P2P) platforms offer a tempting alternative to cash, with 
pioneers Zopa and Ratesetter paying between 3.5% and 6.5% a year. The platforms 
take money from savers and loan it to individuals and small businesses, cutting 
out the banks to give both sides a better rate.

Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at advisers Hargreaves Lansdown, says P2P is 
riskier than cash as you are lending money rather than saving it. “Given the 
higher rates, many consider the risks worthwhile.”

Your money is not protected by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme, 
which guarantees the first £75,000 of bank savings.

Platforms carefully vet loan applicants and spread each loan across many 
borrowers, while some run contingency funds in order to cover losses. Since 
last week, you can take your returns free of tax, via the new Innovative Isa.

Crowdfunding

Equity crowdfunding websites allow ordinary people to invest in start-up 
businesses in return for a share in future profits. The companies looking for 
funding can range from pop-up restaurants hoping to expand, to electronics 
companies launching new products or even funding schemes for films.

Given the failure rate – half of start-ups don’t survive for five years – this 
is a high-risk area.

Andrew Hagger, personal finance expert at Moneycomms.co.uk, says: “You could 
make a handsome profit, but also risk losing all your capital.”

Premium bonds

More than 20 million Britons hold around £50bn in premium bonds, making them 
the UK’s favourite flutter. Many are lured by the prospect of winning the 
monthly £1m jackpot, but David Black, banking specialist at DJB Research, says 
more than 98% of prizes are worth just £25. “You may get lucky, but how many 
people do you know who have won a large prize?”

Each bond costs £1 and the chances of winning a prize are 26,000-1. This 
worsens to 30,000-1 in June when the average prize rate is being cut from 1.35% 
to just 1.25%.

Premium bonds are run by National Savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> & Investments and backed by HM 
Treasury so your money is absolutely safe, but Black says they are unsuitable 
if you want a regular income or guaranteed returns.

Gold

Gold <https://www.theguardian.com/business/gold> is supposed to be the 
ultimate safe haven, but it can be highly risky. The gold price spiked to 
$1,900 an ounce in August 2011 during the eurozone crisis, but today trades at 
$1,240, punishing investors who bought at the top of the market.

Guy Foster, head of research at Brewin Dolphin, says gold is a curious asset: 
“It is supposed to be a store of value, but by conventional investment metrics 
it is almost valueless.”

You can invest in exchange traded funds such as the SPDR Gold Trust, which 
tracks the spot price of gold; a gold miner such as Randgold Resources; or buy 
bullion or coins. Foster says: “If you buy physical gold, you have to factor in 
the cost of storing it.”

Adrian Ash at Bullion Vault, an internet exchange, says gold does well when 
inflation is high, investors are nervous, and other assets are falling. “This 
makes it a useful tool for diversifying from your other investments.”

Buy-to-let

Buy-to-let has been one of the most successful investments of the past 20 
years, but has also been blamed for squeezing first-time buyers off the 
property ladder.

The average landlord in England and Wales earned rental income of £8,394 and 
capital growth of £13,594 in the year to January, giving a total return of 
£21,988, according to estate agents Your Move and Reeds Rains.

The glory days may be over, however, as chancellor George Osborne launches a 
tax crackdown on amateur landlords. From this month, new investors must pay a 
3% stamp duty surcharge, which will drive up the charge on a £300,000 property 
from £5,000 to £14,000.

Osborne will phase out higher rate tax relief on mortgage interest payments 
from April 2017, and cut wear and tear allowances, while the Bank of England 
may stiffen borrowing rules.

Green funds

You can save money and the planet by investing in environmental funds, but 
going green could also land you in the red. This sector was expected to shine 
until a £910m tax raid by Osborne turned down the heat.

Mick Gilligan, head of fund research at Killik & Co, says there are still some 
tempting funds. “Bluefield Solar Income invests in 59 solar energy sites across 
the UK and currently yields 7.3%.” He also rates Greencoat UK Wind. “It has a 
well-diversified portfolio of UK wind farms and yields 6.2%.”

Numerous P2P crowdfunding sites invest in renewables, notably Abundance 
Generation, says Andrew Hagger. “You can invest in a solar farm run by Swindon 
borough council at a fixed return of 6% a year over 20 years.”

Alternative investments

Savings don’t have to be in bank accounts or on a share certificate. They can 
be hung on your wall or put in a glass cabinet - or even be small enough to fit 
in your pocket.

■ Rare coins Investors in rare coins have been in the money lately, with 
prices rising 6.2% last year, according to the Stanley Gibbons Coin Index.

Keith Heddle, managing director of Stanley Gibbons Investments, says: “Luxury 
and collectible coins are much more enjoyable to own than a share certificate 
or a unit in some fund.”

Numismatics is the official term for coin collecting, and Lawrence Chard, 
director of Blackpool-based dealer Chards, recommends buying coins in the 
highest grades or best condition you can afford. “Look for unusual mintmarks, 
striking errors, flaws and low mintage figures. Just because a coin is old, it 
doesn’t make it valuable.”

■ Art and antiques Investing in art and antiques might sound daunting, but 
Colin Sheaf, chairman of Bonhams UK and Asai, says things have changed. 
“Auction houses have taken enormous strides to make it accessible for 
everybody.”

You can view upcoming sales online and visit the auction house to talk to 
experts, Sheaf says. “You could invest in Georgian furniture from around £500, 
or early 18th-century English porcelain from £1,000.”

Buying a painting or installation is an art in itself, so master your 
technique before risking serious money. “Buy what you love, there is no 
guarantee you will make money from it,” warns Sheaf.
 