
While the world waited for the US to decide whether to shoot itself in the 
foot, bad things were happening in European financial markets. The American 
fiasco did not help matters, admittedly, but Spain's 10-year bond yields crept 
back above 6%, while Italy's came perilously close to doing so.

The last time that happened, the eurozone leaders called an emergency summit – 
the Brussels event a mere 10 days ago. Time for another pledge "to do whatever 
it takes to ensure the financial stability of the euro area as a whole and its 
member states"?

Of course not. What is really needed is for the politicians to show they have 
the armoury, and the backing of their electorates, to make good on their 
pledges the next time the euro area's stability is threatened – as it will be.

Even after the latest bailout, Greece is regarded by investors as a lost 
cause, its debt burden still too high to allow its economy to recover. That's 
fine; investors can live with that worry and reckon on taking sharper haircuts 
in a year or two. The pressing problem, and the real source of concern, isItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> and Spain. What will the eurozone 
leaders do if those bond yields keep rising?

A 7% rate for either country is regarded as the start of the danger zone, but 
even 6% applies a heavy brake on growth and deficit-reduction ambitions. In 
Italy's case, with total bonds outstanding of €1.6 trillion and €860bn of debt 
maturing over five years, debt-service costs would rise by about €18bn a year 
if 10-year borrowing costs were to stay at 6%, according to broker Evolution's 
calculations.

We know what the eurozone leaders would like to do. They would like to deploy 
the European financial stability facility (EFSF), which is to be given new 
powers as a contagion-fighting weapon. It will be able to recapitalise 
financial institutions and intervene to buy sovereign bonds in the market, 
making life uncomfortable for anyone inclined to bet on disaster – 
"precautionary programmes", as the German and French finance ministers call it.

But there are two problems. First, the EFSF does not yet have these powers and 
it may take until the end of the year to put them in place, even if the 
eurozone parliaments get their skates on. Second, the fund has not been given 
an expanded budget. At €440bn, it's not big enough to decisively move the 
prices of Italian and Spanish bonds and thus lower borrowing costs; a 
half-hearted intervention might be worse for confidence than no attempt.

Increasing the size of the EFSF means asking the AAA-rated eurozone members to 
increase their underwriting capacity and accept more risk. Are German voters 
prepared to go there? They might be if their politicians can make a persuasive 
case that the survival of the euro is at risk and that cost of inaction would 
be lower living standards for a generation. But nobody should seriously believe 
funds could be raised easily or quickly; the battle for hearts and minds will 
be messy.

Unfortunately, markets do not run to political timetables. Growth is slowing 
in the eurozone, and Friday's anaemic US GDP numbers underlined how weak demand 
is in the west. Having spent too long obsessing about Greece, the eurozone 
leaders find themselves with only half a plan to cope with a fresh emergency in 
Italy orSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>. To be fair, one might 
say they are travelling towards "ever closer co-ordination and co-operation" as 
fast as their electorates would tolerate at this stage. But that does not mean 
the pace will prove fast enough to prevent another crisis.

Late summer has been called the financial hurricane season. This year's 
forecast – aka those bond yields – is alarming, even if America's politicians 
wake up to their own stupidity.

BP clutches at Iraq deal

It is not hard to see why BP has fought hard to win startling concessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jul/26/bp-profits-break-up> from 
Baghdad: Iraq needs more oil from the giant Rumaila field but the British firm 
is in desperate need of new success too.

BP is currently in the doldrums and investors are becoming restless. New chief 
executive Bob Dudley had hoped to light a fire under the sagging share price by 
tying up the Arctic deal and share swap with Rosneft. That collapsed in a heap 
of acrimony, despite the huge billing when unveiled in January, and legal 
action against BP by angry TNK-BP investors continues.

Another £5bn-plus strategic tie-up with India's Reliance Industries – called 
"transformational" in February – has just gained Delhi's approval but has 
soured slightly since Reliance suffered a major downturn in gas output.

BP has been looking at a possible US shale gas deal but is wary, given the 
environmental issues over "fracking" – a technique for extracting gas – at a 
time when the Gulf of Mexico oil spill is still firmly in Americans' minds.

Rival Shell, meanwhile, has sailed ahead with second-quarter profits of $8bn 
compared with BP's $5.3bn. Shell's boss, Peter Voser, dismissed suggestions it 
would be a good time to launch a BP takeover but Dudley did not rule out the 
idea he could do his own break-up in the wake of similar moves by 
ConocoPhillips and Marathon Oil.

Shareholders are wary of that, not least because they predict political 
objections in Westminster to a massive downsizing that would spell an end to BP 
acting as any kind of national champion. But someone needs to find a big idea 
fast to save the longer-serving chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg's bacon - if not 
Dudley's. For now, it will have to be Iraq.
 