
Imposter Syndrome is the bane of her existence: “I look to my role models and 
remember that nobody, no matter how ‘aw shucks’ they seem in interviews, can 
get anything done without, well,believing in themselves. I try to stay so 
inspired to get work done that there isn’t even time to be insecure about it, I 
just have to do it.”

Some of the best advice she ever received was from British singer Kate Nash: 
“She told me to say to myself every morning: ‘I’m a badass bitch from hell and 
nobody can fuck with me.’ Saying it out loud makes it more true than if you 
just told yourself it in your head. So I recommend that.”

She has a “motivational playlist”: “[which is] mostly Kanye, also some Fiona 
Apple and Eve and Kelly Rowland.”


Her favourite pizza topping is: pepperoni.


A standout fashion moodboard from her youth? “A Muppet soaked in salad 
dressing.”


The person she’d most like to interview: “Beyoncé. Because her visual album 
left me with SO many questions, and she seems to have come into her own (even 
more so than before) lately in a really special way, and I think it would mean 
a lot to our readers.”


She’s been writing every day since the age of 12: “So I feel adrift when I 
don’t do it, but doing it regularly makes me less ‘present’ (urgh) because it 
puts my brain in a constant mode of narration and reflection. Acting balances 
that out, especially onstage, because it requires being really in the moment, 
not self-conscious, not evaluating your own behaviour as it happens.”


She credits her friend’s older sister with inspiring her to start her 
magazine, Rookie: “I had a fashion blog and I thought she was cool, and she 
sent me links to her favourites and told me which magazines she liked – at the 
time I was reading: Lula, i-D, Dazed and Confused, Nylon, international Vogues.”


On Kenneth Lonergan, who wrote the play, This Is Our Youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/12/this-is-our-youth-anthem-stewed-youth-review>
, which she’s currently starring in:“He is a beautiful man. He was really 
involved in our rehearsals in Chicago and in New York, and getting insights 
from him directly added 14 layers of depth to the show and to how I play my 
character. When I first read the show, I interpreted it as a kind of Whit 
Stillman-y, semi-bleak, ‘Gee, aren’t privileged white New Yorkers the worst but 
also kinda funny!’ work. I went through and marked off every few lines as a 
whole beat. Kenny went through everyword with us. I saw [that] no matter how 
colloquial the language is, it’s all so charged with intention. And I developed 
a lot more compassion for all the characters, and saw how it didn’t just have 
to be a funny play about semi-horrible people, but could actually be somewhat 
devastating and bittersweet, and that Warren, Dennis, and Jessica are all kind 
of heroes in their own way.


On co-star Kieran Culkin: “He has a very flexible face and is good at making 
expressions that terrify me.”


On co-star Michael Cera: “I’m really appreciative of how 
responsive/sensitive/attentive Michael is in moments that are harder to play or 
harder to make real. That trust is the engine of our scenes.”


After every performance of TIOY, the three of them play Rainbow Road on Mario 
Kart.

She has regrets – chiefly with regards to Rookie: “I regret ever limiting 
Rookie or our readers or our definition of feminism to something closer to my 
own very specific experience.”

Right now, she’s listening to the Strokes: “I was told to do that when I first 
moved to New York and it’s been going well.”

 