
Life is short and time is finite, and nobody can possibly be expected to watch 
more than oneNicola Walker 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/features/nicola-walker-interview-there-s-more-pressure-in-feeling-rated-9238554.html>
 television series at once. Sadly, though, nature is currently conspiring 
against by handing us two Nicola Walker crime vehicles at once. On BBC One, 
Walker currently stars in the brooding detective dramaRiver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/13/river-bbc-skarsgard-season-one-episode-one>
. On ITV, meanwhile, Walker currently stars in the brooding detective drama
Unforgotten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/08/unforgotten-episode-one-recap-is-a-less-serious-because-times-passed>
.

Both shows are very good, and Nicola Walker is exceptional in both of them, 
but imagine the madness that would ensue if you tried to watch River and 
Unforgotten in the same week. Storylines would get mixed up. Character traits 
would blend into one. You’d barely be able to tell one scene of hushed 
solemnity from another. Watching both shows would be a mistake of incredible 
proportions, so let’s approach this mathematically. Working from a set number 
of categories, let’s pit Nicola Walker against Nicola Walker and figure out 
whichNicola Walker <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nicola-walker> show you 
should be watching. Spoilers abound, obviously.

Nicola Walker’s profession

River: Police officer.

Unforgotten: Police officer.

Winner: Draw

Most exciting crime that Nicola Walker will solve

River: Her own death (I did warn you about spoilers)

Unforgotten: A decades-old murder that nobody really seems to care about.

Winner: River <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/river>

Most mournful Nicola Walker vehicle?

River: Unbearably mournful.

Unforgotten: Unbearably mournfu… oh, wait, this is a tie.

Winner: Draw

Most important Nicola Walker

River: Turns up in the very first scene, and speaks before the lead character.

Unforgotten: Not only does she speak first, but she’s also the very first name 
on the credits.

Winner: Unforgotten.

Most sidekicky Nicola Walker

River: Exceptionally sidekicky, to the extent that she’s able to list all the 
Weight Watchers points contained in a niçoise salad.

Unforgotten: Not sidekicky at all. In fact, this version of Nicola Walker 
actually has her own sidekick, and I don’t even expect that he knows how many 
points are in any type of salad.

Winner: River.

Most brooding Nicola Walker

River: Hardly brooding at all, given all that salad business.

Unforgotten: Relatively brooding, but apparently this is just because it’s the 
sort of show that requires a brooding police officer as the lead character.

Winner: Unforgotten

Most dead Nicola Walker

River: Unbelievably dead, right from the get-go.

Unforgotten: Probably not dead at all. She does spend loads of time around 
dead people, though. Does that count?Winner: River.

Most tonally jarring disco song that Nicola Walker sings during the first 
episode

River: I Love to Love by Tina Charles, in its entirety.

Unforgotten: Sunny by Boney M, but only a couple of lines.

Winner: River.

Happiest Nicola Walker

River: During a scene where she forces the old policeman she’s haunting to 
perform a heartbreakingly grief-stricken karaoke number.

Unforgettable: During a scene where she has a discussion about the statute of 
limitations on murder.

Winner: Draw, because, actually, neither of these scenarios are particularly 
happy.

Most believable Nicola Walker

River: Not very believable at all, because she doesn’t appear to be very upset 
by the fact that she’s dead.

Unforgettable: Very believable, because she’s a police officer who seems 
permanently bummed out.

Winner: Unforgotten

Who’s that starring alongside Nicola Walker?

River: Stellan Skarsgård? Yes. Eddie Marsan? Yes. Jimmy Page? No, that’s just 
a policeman who looks identical to Jimmy Page.

Unforgettable: Cherie Lunghi? Yes. Tom Courtenay? Yes. Alan Sugar? No, that’s 
Trevor Eve doing an inexplicable Alan Sugar impression.

Winner: Unforgotten

How many dead people co-star with Nicola Walker?

River: So many dead people. In fact, I’m starting to suspect that everyone in 
River is dead, and that Skarsgård is hallucinating them all, and that this will 
turn out to be an incredibly upsetting remake of I Am Legend set within the 
confines of an enviably well-stocked John Lewis homeware department.

Unforgotten: So far, just one, although that person is just about as dead as 
you can get.

Winner: River

Things that Nicola Walker is most likely to lose screentime due to

River: Shots of Skarsgård going purple in the face as he runs up some stairs, 
endless unnecessary slow-motion footage, nice furniture, the viewers’ 
unshakable belief that they’re actually watching Luther.

Unforgotten: Shots of a vicar singing One Direction songs, loads of 
unconnected people doing unconnected things in different parts of the country, 
the viewers’ unshakable belief that they’re actually watching River.

Winner: River

If Nicola Walker wasn’t in it

River: It would just be a series about Stellan Skarsgård riding around on the 
DLR while staring mournfully into the middle distance.

Unforgotten: It would literally just be some footage of a man staring at some 
bones.

Winner: River

Result

It’s official. In a near-whitewash, River Nicola Walker beats Unforgotten 
Nicola Walker into a cocked hat. If you’re going to watch one Nicola Walker, 
watch that. But don’t watch both, or I’ll have just massively wasted my time 
here.
 