
It is not often that you stumble across discussion of the merits of French 
seams when sewing lace on primetime telly. Nor the perils of making your 
corset’s boning channels millimetres too wide. And definitely not the knack of 
perfect pleating and pattern matching. It is for all this marvellous technical 
detailing that I have been particularly enjoying this series ofBBC2’s Great 
British Sewing Bee <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03myqj2>, which, in this 
third outing, for the first time feels completely comfortable and confident in 
its own skin. That it has perfectly relaxed – or perhaps geeked out – into its 
format at exactly the same moment as the BBC has decided to cut its run from 
eight to six, seems unfortunate to say the least.

As a result, we have whittled down the competitors at double-quick speed: Ryan 
and Amanda both booted off for slightly wayward kilts; Paul and Deborah coming 
unstuck when faced with lace, wetsuits and leather. (Who wouldn’t?) I had 
wondered if lovely, sunny Deborah might edge her way into the final after her 
brilliant alteration and neat pencil skirt. I had, however, reckoned without 
zipgate and the turquoise leather jacket of great ugliness.

Which leaves us with three: Neil 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/1Fmf0gSXmwN8wwwRlVRSjrH/neil>, the 
lieutenant colonel who has proved as commited and precise as his army rank 
would suggest; charming IT consultantMatt 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/1xZm0h3DndLtHD7NmGNkPj9/matt>, who 
also learned to sew in the army (maybe it could launch a fund-raising sideline 
in weekend craft courses); and gently competitiveLorna 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/Sb3MsS7M5kwjhhm8X4S1my/lorna>, who 
has somehow commandeered a model who could be her twin, the pair sprinkling 
elegance (and, apparently, Gaga stage outfits) throughout the workroom.

A week ago, you would have said that Neil would win without breaking a sweat. 
After the great kilt masterpiece, in which every fold was immaculate, sharply 
pressed with military rigour, you would have been crazy to bet against him. The 
man is astonishingly precise. He measures, he cuts, he sews, it fits the model 
perfectly. Which is what is meant to happen. And so very rarely does.

The glimmer of weakness Neil showed last episode, however, suggests a victory 
for Lorna or Matt is still possible, if not necessarily probable. If I have an 
issue with Neil’s creations, it’s that they’re slightly predictable: a slinky 
skirt, some kind of cut-away neckline or bodice, all darted very close to the 
torso. Nothing wrong with that – there are a huge number of us who would be 
very glad indeed to create such faultless garments and at such speed – but it’s 
just not terribly exciting.


Both Lorna and Matt create clothes that feel either more interesting or more 
wearable or maybe, admittedly, just more my style. They both sew in a style 
that I recognise too – slightly more haphazard, and, you imagine, normally at a 
much slower pace. Which brings me to my biggest irritation with Sewing Bee. It 
is not Patrick’s weird moustache. Nor Claudia’s ever-more-manic shouting, which 
functions as a kind of invigorating soundtrack to proceedings. It’s the time 
limits.

The thing with sewing for pleasure, rather than because you are a professional 
seamstress trying to earn a living, is that you really don’t want to rush, even 
if you’re a lazy-to-moderately-good sewer like me. Fabric is expensive and time 
is precious: it is not always cheaper to knock yourself up a skirt or a frock 
than buy one from the high street. So you want your handmade garments to be 
really special. You spend time making a toile, getting a perfect fit, adjusting 
the pattern, tweaking the design. You handsew a hem, add beautiful facings, 
make it all as perfect as possible.

None of which, I know, makes for great television. Non-sewers might already 
find the detailed discussions of how to properly press a dart a bit much, to be 
honest. (I, of course, rewind them and watch twice). But I’m not sure I see the 
point of makingwalkaway dresses 
<http://butterick.mccall.com/b4790-products-6089.php?page_id=371> with wonky 
bias binding from unaltered patterns for mannequins. Who cares if the pattern 
says you can have it made by lunchtime? Much better to have a beautiful dress 
by dinner time. Even the final day challenge, in which contestants are 
challenged to create a “made-to-measure” garment, feels like a time trial.

Should Sewing Bee return for another series – and here’s hoping it does, with 
Claudia as bonkers as ever – just once I’d like to see the contestants produce 
something lovingly, slowly made that is perfection. I’d like the alteration 
challenge to be an actual alteration – make this ill-fitting dress look 
gorgeous – rather than a weird transformation challenge. And I’d like the full 
eight-week run again please: no need to rush the show along with the clothing - 
this final has arrived much too soon.
 