
George Osborne said his budget had “put the next generation first”, following 
claims that the government has neglected young people in order to woo older 
voters at the election. However, many of the flagship measures appear to 
benefit those who already have assets, earn good salaries or are making profits 
already.

Increase in the personal tax allowance

The measure: Osborne is continuing the policy started by the Liberal Democrats 
under the coalition to raise the threshold at which people start paying income 
tax. Under the plans, it will now rise to £11,500 by next April.


Who benefits: When the policy began, it was taking very low earners out of 
income tax altogether, as well as delivering a tax cut to middle and higher 
earners who take home less than six figures in pay. However, now millions of 
the lowest paid are already exempted from paying income tax, economists suggest 
it would help this group more to take them out of national insurance.

What the 2016 budget means for you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-what-it-means-for-you>
An increase in the 40p tax threshold

The measure: Workers will now not have to pay the higher rate of tax at 40p in 
the pound until they earn £45,000, up from £42,385.

Who benefits: This is effectively a tax break for earners already at the top 
end of the income scale. It will please Tory backbenchers annoyed that more 
middle class people have been drawn into paying the higher rate of tax through 
fiscal drag.
Financial impact of the 2016 budget per household 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/mar/2016-03-16T17:54:28.html> 
Cut in capital gains tax

The measure: Capital gains tax paid on profits will be cut from 28% to 20% for 
transactions that are not related to residential property.

Who benefits: The move will be good for shareholders who will pay less tax 
when they sell their investments for profit. It is a tax cut for people who are 
already benefiting from making money.

ISA changes

The measures: People will be able to put £20,000 into an Isa with tax-free 
interest, up from just over £15,000, and under-40s will be able to put up to 
£4,000 a year into new lifetimeIsas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> to 
obtain a government top-up of £1 for every £4 contributed.

Who benefits: Designed to encourage saving, these policies will only be good 
for people who have enough money to set aside at the end of the month. The 
lifetime Isas could see parents hand over money to their children and get the 
savings topped up.

Welfare cuts

The measures: The chancellor wants to find at least £3.5bn a year in extra 
savings and at least some of this will come from cuts to the disability benefit 
known as personal independence payment (PIP).

Who loses: Disabled people who need assistance with going to the toilet and 
dressing are set to get lower entitlements of PIP and there will be a knock-on 
effect on a range of linked benefits. People who care for disabled people could 
also lose their allowance related to the PIP of the person they are looking 
after.

The “Airbnb” and “eBay” tax break 

The measures: People will be able to earn £1,000 tax-free by renting out their 
homes on sharing holiday websites or selling items on the internet.

Who benefits: Again, this benefits people with assets to sell and homes of 
their own to let. However, it is unlikely to raise huge amounts of money as 
there is a high degree of noncompliance in these areas.

George Osborne backs sugar tax and £3.5bn of Whitehall cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/george-osbornes-sugar-tax-economic-fears-budget>
Sugar tax

The measure: Soft drinks companies will have to pay a levy related to their 
sugary products in two years, with the money going to benefit children’s sport.

Who benefits and who loses: Children who drink fewer sugary drinks are set to 
be the main winners, with the industry losing out. But some, including tax 
expert Richard Murphy, are concerned that it is a regressive way of dealing 
with the problem of excessive sugar in drinks – as the tax will just be passed 
onto consumers.

Fuel duty 

The measure: Fuel is frozen for a sixth year in a row.

Who benefits: Those who own cars and other vehicles are the main beneficiaries 
of this as a planned rise is cancelled. Tory deputy chair Rob Halfon has been 
the main campaigner for low fuel duty, as part of his drive to get the party to 
embrace “white-van Conservatism” that addresses the everyday concerns of 
families.

Education changes

The measures: Schools are to become academies and ministers will consider 
teaching maths to 18 for all pupils.

Who benefits: This is one of the very few measures in the budget aimed at 
helping all young people. However, the government has been criticised for 
spending vital education money on turning schools into academies for 
ideological purposes.

Business tax changes

The measures: Corporation tax is going down yet again to 17% and small 
businesses will get relief from rates – but another £9bn will be raised by 
closing tax loopholes.

Who benefits and who loses: Large amounts are set to be raised from 
multinationals if the Treasury is successful at enforcement. But business 
overall is receiving huge sweeteners to compensate partly for this in the form 
of the other tax cuts. Small business owners will benefit from the relief on 
business rates but the losers will be councils and users of council services, 
as the Treasury is devolving this revenue to them.

Beer duty frozen but wine duty rises

The measures: The chancellor said beer, cider, and spirits would not see a 
change to duty but wine duty is set to rise with inflation.

Who benefits and who loses: Those who like a drink are spread across all 
demographics. But singling out wine for an increase in duty is bad news for the 
majority of drinkers, as the wine trade industry claims it is now the favoured 
alcoholic beverage for 60% of UK adults.
 