
The market reaction to the Brexit shock has been mild compared with two other 
recent episodes of global financial volatility: the summer of 2015 (following 
fears of a Chinese hard landing) and the first two months of this year 
(following renewed worries about China, along with other global tail risks). 
The shock was regional rather than global, with the market impact concentrated 
in the United Kingdom and Europe; and the volatility lasted only about a week, 
compared with the previous two severe risk-off episodes, which lasted about two 
months and led to a sharp correction in US and global equity prices.

Can the EU persuade the UK to change its mind on Brexit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/27/brexit-can-the-eu-persuade-the-uk-to-change-its-mind>
For starters, the UK accounts for just 3% of global GDP. By contrast, China 
(the world’s second-largest economy) accounts for 15% of world output and more 
than half of global growth.

Moreover, the EU’s post-Brexit show of unity, together with the result of the 
Spanish election, calmed fears that the EU or the eurozone would fall apart in 
short order. And the rapid government changeover in the UK has boosted hopes 
that the divorce negotiations with the EU, however bumpy, will lead to a 
settlement that maintains most trade links by combining substantial access to 
the single market with modest limits on migration.

Most importantly, markets quickly priced in the conclusion that the Brexit 
shock would lead to greater dovishness among the world’s major central banks. 
Indeed, as in the two previous risk-off episodes, central bank liquidity 
backstopped markets and economies.

But the risk of European and global volatility may have been only briefly 
postponed. Leaving aside other global risks (including a slowdown in 
already-mediocre US growth, more fear of a Chinese hard landing, weakness in 
oil and commodity prices, and fragilities in key emerging markets), there is 
plenty of reason to worry about Europe and the eurozone.

First, if the UK-EU divorce proceedings become protracted and acrimonious, 
growth and markets will suffer. And an ugly divorce may also lead Scotland and 
Northern Ireland to leave the UK. In that scenario, Catalonia may also push for 
independence from Spain. And without the UK, Denmark and Sweden, which aren’t 
planning to join the eurozone, may fear that they will become second-class 
members of the EU, thus leading them to consider leaving as well.

Second, upcoming elections promise to be a political minefield. Austria will 
repeat its presidential election in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/austrian-presidential-election-result-overturned-and-must-be-held-again-hofer-van-der-bellen>
, the previous one having ended in a virtual tie, giving another chance to the 
far-right Freedom party’s Norbert Hofer. In October, Hungary will hold a 
referendum, initiated by the prime minister, Viktor Orbán, on overturning 
EU-mandated quotas on the resettlement of migrants. And, most importantly, 
Italy will hold a referendum on constitutional changes that, if rejected, could 
effectively jeopardise the country’s membership in the eurozone.

Italy currently is the eurozone’s weakest link 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/jul/26/italy-economy-banks-loans-crisis-europe>
. Matteo Renzi’s government has become politically shakier, economic growth is 
anaemic, the banks are in need of capital, and EU fiscal targets will be hard 
to achieve without triggering another recession. If Renzi fails – as is 
increasingly possible – the anti-euro Five Star Movement (which recently did 
well in municipal elections) could come to power as early as next year.

Forget Brexit, Quitaly is Europe's next worry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/jul/26/italy-economy-banks-loans-crisis-europe>
Should that happen, the Grexit fears of 2015 would pale in comparison. Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, the eurozone’s third largest member, 
is too big to fail. But, with a public debt 10 times larger than Greece’s, it 
is also too big to be saved. No EU program can backstop Italy’s €2tn of public 
debt (135% of GDP).

Moreover, elections in France, Germany, and the Netherlands in 2017 create 
additional uncertainties as weak growth and high unemployment in most of Europe 
boost support for anti-euro, anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim, and 
anti-globalisation populist parties of the right (in the eurozone core) and of 
the left (on the eurozone periphery).

At the same time, Europe’s neighbourhood is bad and getting worse. A 
revisionist Russia has become more assertive not just in Ukraine, but also in 
the Baltics and the Balkans. And the consequences of the continuing turmoil in 
the Middle East are at least twofold: renewed episodes of terrorism in France, 
Belgium, and Germany, which may over time dent business and consumer 
confidence; and a migration crisis that requires closer cooperation with 
Turkey, which itself has become unstable since thebotched military coup 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/turkey-international-relations-failed-coup-by-sinan-ulgen-2016-07>
.

Until the coming round of elections is over, the EU is unlikely to take any 
steps to complete its unfinished monetary union by introducing more risk 
sharing and accelerating structural reforms to encourage faster economic 
convergence. Given the current slow pace of reforms (and population ageing), 
potential growth remains low, while actual growth is on a very moderate 
cyclical recovery that is now threatened by post-Brexit risks and 
uncertainties. At the same time, high deficits and debts, together with 
eurozone rules, constrain the use of fiscal policy to boost growth, while the 
European Central Bank may be reaching the limits of what even unconventional 
monetary policy can do to sustain the recovery.

The eurozone and the EU are unlikely to disintegrate suddenly. Many of the 
risks they face are on a slow fuse. And disintegration can of course be avoided 
by a political vision that balances theneed for greater integration 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/remaking-post-brexit-european-union-by-carl-bildt-2016-07>
 with the desire for some degree of national autonomy and sovereignty over a 
range of issues.

But finding ways to integrate that are democratic and politically acceptable 
is imperative. Muddling through has resulted in an unstable equilibrium that 
will make disintegration of the EU and the eurozone inevitable. Given the many 
risks Europe faces, a new vision is needed now.

 * Nouriel Roubini is a professor at NYU’s Stern School of Business and 
chairman of Roubini Macro Associates 
Copyright: Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 2016
 