
Swedish prisons have long had a reputation around the world as being liberal 
and progressive. So much so that in 2005 even Saddam Hussein requested to be 
transferred to a Swedish prison to await his trial –a request that was rejected 
by the Swedish authorities <http://www.thelocal.se/20050725/1782>. But are the 
country's prisons a soft option?

The head of Sweden's prison and probation service, Nils Oberg, announced in 
November thatfour Swedish prisons are to be closed due to an "out of the 
ordinary" decline in prisoner numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/11/sweden-closes-prisons-number-inmates-plummets>
.

Although there has been no fall in crime rates, between 2011 and 2012 there 
was a 6% drop in Sweden's prisoner population, now a little over 4,500. A 
similar decrease is expected this year and the next. Oberg admitted to being 
puzzled by the unexpected dip, but expressed optimism that the reason was to do 
with how his prisons are run. "We certainly hope that the efforts we invest in 
rehabilitation and preventing relapse of crime has had an impact," he said.

"The modern prison service in Sweden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden>
 is very different from when I joined as a young prison officer in 1978," says 
Kenneth Gustafsson, governor of Kumla prison, Sweden's most secure jail, 
situated 130 miles west of Stockholm. However, he doesn't think the system has 
gone soft."When I joined, the focus was very much on humanity in prisons. 
Prisoners were treated well, maybe too well, some might say. But after a number 
of high-profile escapes in 2004 we had to rebalance and place more emphasis on 
security." One of those escapes was made by a man called Tony Olsen, serving 
life imprisonment for shooting dead two police officers, from a maximum 
security prison in collusion with a prison guard. The then director general of 
the prison service was forced to step down.

Despite the hardening of attitudes toward prison security following the escape 
scandals, the Swedes still managed to maintain a broadly humane approach to 
sentencing, even of the most serious offenders: jail terms rarely exceed 10 
years; those who receive life imprisonment can still apply to the courts after 
a decade to have the sentence commuted to a fixed term, usually in the region 
of 18 to 25 years. Sweden was the first country in Europe to introduce the 
electronic tagging of convicted criminals and continues to strive to minimise 
short-term prison sentences wherever possible by using community-based measures 
–proven to be more effective at reducing reoffending 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Factfile%20autumn%202013.pdf>
.

According to the UK Ministry of Justice, the highest rate of reoffending 
within a year of release among adults is recorded by those serving 12 months or 
less. The overall reoffending rate in Sweden stands at between 30 and 40% over 
three years – around half that in the UK. One likely factor that has kept 
reoffending down and the rate of incarceration in Sweden below 70 per 100,000 
head of population – less than half the figure for England and Wales – is that 
the age of criminal responsibility is set at 15. In the UK, children aged 10-17 
and young people under the age of 21 record the highest reoffending rates: 
almost three quarters and two thirds respectively – a good proportion of whom 
go on to populate adult jails. Unlike the UK, where a life sentence can be 
handed down to a 10-year-old, in Sweden no young person under the age of 21 can 
be sentenced to life and every effort is made to ensure that as few juvenile 
offenders as possible end up in prison.
 Kumla prison in Sweden. Photograph: Fredrik Persson/Press Association Images 
One strong reason for the drop in prison numbers might be the amount of 
post-prison support available in Sweden. A confident probation service – a 
government agency – is tasked not only with supervising those on probation but 
is also guaranteed to provide treatment programmes for offenders with 
drug/alcohol or violence issues. The service is assisted by around 4,500 lay 
supervisors – members of the public who volunteer to befriend and support 
offenders under supervision. There is no equivalent in the UK.

When I tell Gustafsson that Chris Grayling, Britain's justice secretary, 
recently announced that inmates in England and Wales are to be made to wear 
prison uniforms and have limited access to television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/nov/01/male-prisoners-uniforms-daytime-television-banned>
, he laughs. "[Politicians] keep their fingers away from us. We are allowed to 
get on with our jobs without any interference."

He talks about broader goals and objectives for the Swedish justice 
department: "This year and next year the priority of our work will be with 
young offenders and men with convictions of violent behaviour. For many years 
we have been running programmes to help those addicted to drugs. Now we are 
also developing programmes to address behaviours such as aggression and 
violence. These are the important things for our society when these people are 
released."

I spoke to a former prisoner who now runs a social enterprise called X-Cons 
Sweden <http://www.x-cons.eu/About.aspx>. Peter Soderlund served almost three 
years of a four-year sentence for drug and weapons offences before he was 
released in 1998. He was helped by a newly formed organisation run by former 
prisoners calledKris <http://www.kris.fi/in-english/>, (Criminals Return In 
Society). For some years he worked to help build Kris until 2008 when, 
following organisational disputes and conflicts, he left.

"The big difference between Kris and us is that we are happy to allow people 
who are still taking addiction medications to join us," he says. Both 
organisations work with the same goal: helping prisoners successfully 
reintegrate into society after they have been released. And what is life like 
for the prisoner in Sweden? "When I was inside I was lucky. In Osteraker prison 
where I served my sentence the governor was enlightened. We were treated well. 
But I knew that not all Swedish prisons were like that. I met so many people in 
there who needed help – after I received help from Kris I knew I wanted to help 
others. With X-Cons, we meet them at the gate and support them into 
accommodation and offer a network of support."

Could it be, though, that the Swedish public is losing its appetite for 
genuine rehabilitation for prisoners? "In Sweden we believe very much in the 
concept of rehabilitation, without being naive of course," says Gustafsson. 
"There are some people who will not or cannot change. But in my experience the 
majority of prisoners want to change and we must do what we can to help to 
facilitate that. It is not always possible to achieve this in one prison 
sentence.

"Also it is not just prison that can rehabilitate – it is often a combined 
process involving probation and greater society. We can give education and 
training, but when they leave prison these people need housing and jobs."
 