
In 2005 I was working on a redesign of the travel section to go into the first 
edition of the Guardian's Berliner newspaper format. We wanted to make our 
coverage more inclusive, more fun, and more relevant to our readers' lifestyles 
and interests. Instead of high-end safaris in Africa and sailing jaunts to the 
Caribbean, we would be recommending hidden restaurants where the locals eat, 
music festivals across Europe, and budget accommodation from £5-a-night hostels 
to family-friendly campsites.

After I finished presenting my ideas to editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger, he 
asked me what I thought about getting our readers to write the Guardian's 
travel content, citing Wikipedia's user-generated example.

Seven years on, the idea of readers contributing comments, ideas, tips and 
stories doesn't seem quite so radical – but it has become one of the central 
strands in our travel coverage.

Our collection of reader contributions has grown to well over 30,000 tips on 
Been There <http://www.ivebeenthere.co.uk/>. These include 4,200 hotels and 
just shy of 2,500 restaurant tips across the world – from hotdog stands in New 
York to high-end cuisine in Tokyo.

Before the addition of reader contributions, travel assignments tended to 
involve sending a journalist to a city to review a handful of hotels, or hoping 
one of our journalists was based in that city and could file a story. With our 
readers – and locals across the world – contributing, suddenly we dramatically 
broadened and improved our coverage.

In the years that followed, as the online travel community blossomed, we 
directed our readers to local blogs around the world, connecting them to 
in-the-know residents whose fingers were more on the pulse than any of the 
traditional guides to a city.

We also invited these bloggers to comprise the bulk of our city guide coverage 
– an interactive online series that has covered 13 cities to date – and to 
contribute to our growing Guardian Travel Network.

In 2009, when Twitter first burst on to the social network scene, writer Benji 
Lanyado put his travels entirely in the hands of live tips from the 
Twittersphere, visiting Paris and following hundreds of tips from locals and 
enthusiasts, in real time.

So began the first of 17 hugely successful live Twitter trips covering the UK 
and Europe, directing Benji to secret music performances in Cologne, forgotten 
communist cities on the outskirts on Krakow, via backstreet pubs in Nottingham.

And what's the benefit of all this? Well, in my opinion, it makes the 
Guardian's travel coverage a lot more inclusive, better informed, up to speed 
with changes, and considerably more authoritative. Finding travel stories used 
to be about one man in an office making all the calls... now we've got locals 
and readers chipping in, it's a much broader experience.
 