
Really, the surprise isn’t that Chris Evans has quit Top Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear>. The surprise is that he 
even hosted it in the first place.

Top Gear – at least the latest non-boring, non-serious, non-Angela Rippon 
version that’s existed since 2002 – is Jeremy Clarkson’s show. He created it. 
He presented it. He threaded his voice through it indelibly. He made his 
fortune from it. Whoever was tasked with replacing him, after he punched a man 
about some meat, was doomed to fail from the very beginning.

Jesus Christ himself could have descended from heaven, presented a 
note-perfect Christmas special about driving a Mazda to Madagascar, and 
Clarkson fans – the gimps in BMW fleeces who own every book the man ever wrote, 
like The World’s Gone Mad and Here’s What Gets My Goat and Tediously Contrary 
Opinions in Exchange for Cash – would have hated him on sight.

So what chance did Evans have? Shrill, try-hard Chris Evans from the 1990s. 
Anyone ancient enough to remember the Evans from two decades ago should have 
seen this coming. That Evans was a cranky control freak with a messiah complex 
who barged his way to success only to scupper himself with his own hubris. And 
although he’s worked hard to tamp down these polarising edges as the host of 
the Radio 2 breakfast show, they still don’t seem far from the surface.

Chris Evans quits Top Gear after one series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/chris-evans-quits-bbc-top-gear-after-one-series>
Almost all the trouble that Evans encountered on Top Gear happened behind the 
scenes. Producers quit. Co-stars allegedly feuded with. He’s been accused of 
egomania and (after reports of alleged historic sexual assaults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/04/bbc-chris-evans-police-questioning-radio-2-sex-assault-allegations>
) much worse. Believe everything you read, and the message seems to be that 
Evans is not a pleasant man to work with.

But these storms could have been weathered if he’d succeeded onscreen. 
Unfortunately, he did not. Over the course of his six Top Gear episodes, he 
found himself caught between two poles; he was either too much like Clarkson, 
or not enough like Clarkson. Too shouty, too nauseous, too visibly nervous and 
with too few good lines, Evans realised too late that he’d inherited a show 
that was custom-made for someone else, and that it didn’t fit him at all.

Who knows what Top Gear could have become if he’d stuck it out. The sensible 
assumption is that he would have tailored it to his own strengths, toning down 
the suffocatingly rigid format and ramping up the live-wire spontaneity of the 
studio sections. But we’ll never know. Chris Evans is doomed to go down in 
history as Top Gear’s David Moyes; the capable pair of hands who suffered by 
comparison to his beloved predecessor.

The question now is: who’ll replace him? The smart money would be on a 
promotion for Matt LeBlanc, but his strength is as the laconic sidekick. Chris 
Harris impressed most this last series, both with his journalist’s eye and his 
driving ability, but his personality lacks the punch of Evans, let alone 
Clarkson.

We’ll be inundated with big-name suggestions in the coming weeks, but that 
would arguably be a mistake. What the BBC should do now is find an unknown. It 
should act as the star-maker it is by banking on a newcomer and letting them 
grow into the role. It could still fail that way. But at least it’d be a 
low-profile failure, and not the months-long implosion it was this time around.
 