
Recently I co-produced a podcast <http://www.wnyc.org/shows/neighborhood/> 
called There Goes the Neighborhood. It looks at the complex and often 
fraudulent policies, powerful economic forces and inherent racial implications 
that drive gentrification in Brooklyn, New York. We discovered that 
gentrification is many things and moving parts, but it essentially boils down 
to white wealth pushing out black and brown residents from neighborhoods that 
had once been undesirable – because they were composed of black and brown 
residents.

In the middle of making the podcast, my husband, son and I were informed by 
our landlords that after 10 years in our own Brooklyn apartment, our lease 
would not be renewed – they were tearing down the building to rebuild, and as 
renters, we would need to be out by the end of July.

I'll never be able to buy a home. The super wealthy broke the system | Rebecca 
Carroll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/29/home-ownership-super-wealthy-broke-the-system>
I first moved to Brooklyn over 20 years ago with Caryn, a friend I’d met while 
working as a receptionist at the Department of Afro-American Studies at 
Harvard. I was looking headlong into my future as a writer living inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City after two years in the 
Boston area. I’d moved there straight out of college in hopes of finding my 
birthfather, then my sole black biological relative. Before the Harvard job, I 
worked as an intern for a black film production company and waitressed at a 
black-owned cafe. I also had a very serious black boyfriend at the time.

Most black people raised in black communities would not feel the need to point 
out these details. But for me, as an adoptee raised in a white family, in a 
white town, this time period was what helped to shape my identity as a black 
woman.

Caryn, who is also black, found us an apartment in the heart of Crown Heights, 
which in pre-gentrification 1994 was still predominantly black, serving one of 
the largest Caribbean communities outside of the West Indies. There were no 
cafes or cute French restaurants, no bean-to-bar chocolate makers or farmer’s 
markets. It was, though, culturally vibrant and rich, intimately busy and 
beautifully complex.

Several months after we moved in, I published my first and second books in 
quick succession and was offered a year-long fellowship back in the Boston area 
at Harvard’s WEB Du Bois Institute. I felt I couldn’t pass up this opportunity. 
When I moved back to New York in 1996, it was with a white boyfriend who had an 
apartment in lower Manhattan.

I bounced from room to room, apartment to sublet, all in different parts of 
Brooklyn, but none that ever felt like Crown Heights had – in other words, none 
of the neighborhoods ever felt black. I tended to find places to live through 
co-workers, and I was working in mainstream media, which was then, as now, 
extremely white.

By the time I was in my early 30s, I had landed in a sublet in Williamsburg. 
It has never been a bastion of racial diversity, but it was, at least for a 
brief period of time, a somewhat interesting neighborhood to live in. Once an 
entirely industrialized zone, the area began to attract mostly white artists 
before the self-proclaimed (still mostly white) hipsters flocked in.

I met my husband on the local subway platform there, and he later got a job 
teaching in the Bronx while I continued to work in Manhattan. We stayed in 
Williamsburg based solely on its proximity to our jobs. We had each other and a 
wealth of culturally and racially mixed friends, and the neighborhood did claim 
a small but dynamic Latino community, which is where our apartment was, and so 
we decided that would be enough.

But as gentrification spiked – with apartment buildings being torn down and 
high-rise condos being erected on every other block, attracting a seemingly 
endless stream of white newcomers with money to spend on $15 beard balm, we 
started to feel less at home. And when it came to finding a grade school for 
our son, we ended up placing him out of zone, because the racial makeup was so 
lacking in our neighborhood school. I began telling my husband, who is white, 
that the next time we moved I wanted to be around more black people. He got it.

The way to kill a complex city is to chase out all the poor people – and their 
food | Samantha Gillison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/01/kill-a-complex-city-chase-out-poor-people-their-food>
In one episode of the podcast, I talk to a young black girl who lives in the 
Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood of Brooklyn, where her parents own their home. 
Sandwiched in between Crown Heights and Bushwick, Bed-Stuy is a historically 
black neighborhood, second only to Harlem as a black cultural mecca in all of 
New York City. In the episode, I described the neighborhood as being “like a 
secret kingdom of black people and magnificent houses”.

Although like any neighborhood it has gone through various waves of change and 
strife – a particularly rough era earned it the term “Bed-Stuy, Do or Die” 
coined by Notorious BIG, who was born and raised there – it is well known for 
its gorgeous brownstones and tree-lined streets, and has long been beloved, 
maintained, protected and vitalized by its black residents. Not surprisingly, 
it has become a main target of gentrification.

“Black people are disappearing,” a Bed-Stuy resident about my age told me when 
I interviewed her for the podcast. When my family found out that we had to move 
soon after, I knew exactly where we would go.

The day we signed the lease on our new apartment in the secret kingdom, I went 
around the corner to get a bottle of water at a nearby deli. I passed an 
elderly black man, who said to me, his eyes clear and gracious, “How you feel 
today?” I stopped, smiled, shoulders loose, heart open, and said, “You know 
what? I feel good.”
 