
The Who's Pete Townshend <https://www.theguardian.com/music/petetownshend> 
famously wrote the line "Hope I die before I get old". He didn't, but fellow 
band member Keith Moon did. "What a drag it is getting old," drawled Mick 
Jagger, but it was Brian Jones who died young. Jim Morrison sang of The End 
being his only friend, while David Bowie brilliantly explored what it would be 
like to be a rock'n'roll suicide. The former died, the latter lives on.

What marks out the pop stars who die prematurely from the ones who do not?

A study published in the British Medical Journal 
<http://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/2/6/e002089.full> (BMJ) provides some answers. 
It proves for the first time that it is not the fame that makes one prone to 
emotional problems, it is mostly childhood maltreatment and adversity.

Other studies had already proven that rock and pop stars die prematurely 
compared with the general population. This one examined a sample of 1,210 since 
the 1950s, with a minimum of five years of fame; 9% died prematurely.

Solo performers were twice as likely to die prematurely as ones in bands. 
Non-whites were also at greater risk. But the crucial finding was that Adverse 
Childhood Experiences (ACE) – experiences like parental divorce or 
maltreatments like emotional neglect or abuse were the main cause of premature 
death – and a key factor is that they increase substance abuse.

Twice as many of the stars who died from substance abuse had at least one ACE 
compared with those who died of other causes. Whereas under a third of those 
who died from substance abuse had no such experiences, 80% had two or more.

This is exactly what studies of the general population would predict. Having 
four or more adverse experiences makes you seven times more liable to abuse 
alcohol and 12 times more likely to attempt suicide. ACE numbers have also been 
shown to be a major cause of personality disorders like narcissism – which, in 
turn, have been proven to be common among both fame-seekers and the famous.

The number of these experiences probably also explains why stars who survive 
into middle age die prematurely. Childhood adversity is a major cause of other 
diseases: people with four or more such experiences are twice as likely to 
suffer cancer and heart disease, partly as a result of substance abuse.

The BMJ study accords with a wider and still little-known fact: the Human 
Genome Project finds that differences in DNA, our unique genes, explain very 
little of why people suffer the vast majority of illnesses, both mental and 
physical – 5-10% at most. Childhood adversity is emerging as the main cause of 
mental illness, along with wider social factors.

And in an age when programmes like the X Factor and Britain's Got Talent have 
such a deep cultural impact, the BMJ study also provides potent reasons to 
discourage young people from believing that fame in itself is a desirable goal.

We already know that people who place too high a value on money and fame are 
more at risk of the commonest mental illnesses. The BMJ study provides further 
scientific reasons for government to consider our new obsession with fame 
regardless of talent as a major public health issue. Its authors conclude that 
"pursuing a career as a rock or pop musician may itself be a risky strategy and 
one attractive to those escaping from abusive, dysfunctional or deprived 
childhoods".

We have created a society in which far too many people suffer such childhoods. 
Growing numbers of children aspire to pop stardom; those who do so, and who 
engage in celebrity worship, are more likely to have had high numbers of 
adverse experiences. The case for meeting of the needs of children gets ever 
more persuasive.

• This article was amended on 26 December 2012 to correct the link to the 
study published in the British Medical Journal, which posters had pointed out 
was not working. This article was further amended on 4 January 2013 because the 
original said Pete Townshend sang "Hope I die before I get old". Townshend 
wrote that line, but did not sing it.
 