
Let’s hear a cheer for the number three – the super-prime digit and signifier 
of the Christian trinity, or a mobile phone network, depending on the type of 
altar you worship at. Three is commonly seen as a lucky number, but not in the 
Golightly household. I hate three with a black-edged vehemence.

It wasn’t always this way. I used to love three.

Helen and I were an item for years before Millie’s arrival meant that our 
status shifted from cosy couple to threesome. Sprogged-up friends who had roped 
us into parenthood, saying: “Have kids you two, it’s the best thing that will 
ever happen to you. Don’t leave it too late!” suddenly sympathised after 
Millie’s birth: “Bloody hard, isn’t it!”. But Helen and I weren’t complaining 
because the baby took our 11-year relationship to a better place, and Millie 
was so lovely that we wanted another.

So Matt was born, and we went from “couple with baby” to a full-fat family of 
four. It was fab: no one’s outnumbered, and there’s a world of family tickets, 
board and card games that work brilliantly for four. No disrespect to others 
with more or fewer children but four really rocked. There came a time when the 
two kids really got on and could read to, watch with, play with and generally 
entertain one another. This allowed Helen and me to re-connect and be closer 
than ever, after years when they had needed constant attention and everything 
wiping. With hindsight, these were halcyon days when the sun beamed at us even 
if we didn’t always feel its warmth so keenly at the time, as I do now with 
grim hindsight.

Then Helen fell ill and it is due to the beauty and brilliance of the woman 
that nothing changed in the happy Golightly gang of four, irrespective of 
medical treatment or darkening outlook. Shortly before she died, the four of us 
watched Casino Royale, then, inspired by the film, sat in the pub playing poker 
and comparing our “tells” – the unconscious body movements or speech patterns 
that show we are bluffing. For the record, Helen’s was saying: “Have I turned 
the iron off?”; Millie’s, tossing her long hair; Matt’s, picking his nose; and 
mine pulling hair from my ears (OK, so I’m going to be alone forever). I 
recorded this on my phone and it remains a poignant tribute to our happy 
foursome; torn apart when, 38 days later, Helen died.

With her death, four became three again, but a dreadful parody of the happy 
three of old. Now three “sucks the big one” as they say. Every card game, table 
setting, ticket purchase and hotel booking shouts out that we are no longer 
quorate. Have you ever tried to play pontoon or poker with three?

So the holidays are coming; our first as three. Helen had been offered the use 
of a villa in Piedmont from a friend through work, but had not told me when, 
where or, most critically, from whom. I am determined to go, however; this will 
be the last great hurrah to Helen’s holiday planning. Luckily, at her funeral I 
had been saved from trying to profile the congregation for Italian home 
ownership when a tall mourner stepped forward to say: “Hello, I’m James. Would 
you still like my house? We would love you to use it.”Bereavement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/bereavement> provides great insight 
into the overwhelming kindness of strangers. I would love not to have had the 
opportunity to understand this, but it’s life-affirming, if ironically so.

Thus, it is with a mixture of joy and sadness that I book three, not four, 
flights for the first time, seeing Helen’s now meaningless passport on the 
pile. I really hate the idea of just the three of us playing out an ersatz 
version of happy holidays past.

Maybe it’s macabre to think this way, but what would Helen have done if the 
situation were reversed? I imagine her saying: “Take a fourth person whom the 
kids love, someone fun, like Uncle Kenny. Cheer up, Adam, and ring him now!”

So told, I’m on the phone to Millie’s godfather, Kenny, asking him if he will 
be our “manny” (male nanny). Yes! Our number flicks from three to four, and it 
all looks suddenly sunnier. We will blaze a trail through rural Italy looking 
to the watching world like a couple with kids. Now I can hear Helen laughing.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

@MrAdamGolightly <https://twitter.com/mradamgolightly>
 