
It will soon be a year since you died. The first letter from your wife was a 
sincere note of thanks, which made me wish I could have done something to 
prevent your sudden and unexpected slide into multi-organ failure leading to 
death.

Your cancer had progressed through the year but you were surprisingly well – 
the end came so swiftly that no one had any time to prepare. You died in 
intensive care, the family deciding that breathing through a ventilator was not 
your idea of living.

You’d be proud to know that your wife arranged a gracious funeral where your 
children spoke of their wonderful father. Then, it was time to tackle the 
paperwork. She wrote to me to say she was applying for your life insurance to 
be paid out and needed me to complete a form. I did so that very evening, 
knowing how important it was for her to be financially stable again. She had 
given up her job to spend time with you; the house needed repair and a pile of 
medical bills demanded attention.

When pain persists: what makes hospital patients really unhappy? | Ranjana 
Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/when-pain-persists-what-makes-hospital-patients-really-unhappy>
I confess that at first I groaned at the questions I knew awaited me. Where 
exactly was the lump you found? When did you first see me? Could I provide the 
initial x-ray report? And serial blood tests? On what date did your disease 
become terminal? Which organs were involved? Could I provide enough 
substantiation? Which doctors had you ever consulted for your cancer? Where did 
they work now?

To answer these questions, many pedantic, I waded through three years of 
medical records. At one point, we were seeing you every month – I sifted 
through hundreds of entries to get the details right because I knew they 
mattered. At the end I was asked if there was anything else. Yes, I wrote. 
Please treat this woman with all the compassion she deserves and expedite her 
claim.

But two months later, I was surprised to find another note from your wife. 
Doctor, it said, you got the date of diagnosis of terminal illness wrong, so 
they rejected my claim. I explained that it had been a matter of semantics. You 
developed incurable illness one year ago but the terminal event happened the 
week you died. Nonetheless, I amended the form and even wrote a note of 
explanation, confident that the claim would be successful.

Some time later, yet another letter from your wife landed on my desk. This 
time, your wife had taken a highlighter to dozens of photocopied test reports. 
While you were alive, she had begged to be spared the details, but here she 
was, months on, learning the brutal and unnecessary minutiae that your liver 
was replaced by cancer, that your kidneys had stopped functioning, that the 
lack of oxygen had caused a small stroke. Her letter was gracious but it would 
have been naive to miss her ire. I know you are busy, she wrote, so I have 
highlighted the important bits to help you fill out the form correctly.

I called her all day and when I finally found her, she said she was exhausted 
by the attempt of trying to find another doctor who could help her. Her 
accusation stung but her helplessness brought a lump to my throat. So instead 
of adding to her woes the entirely unhelpful explanation that it wasn’t my 
fault, I offered to call the insurer myself. Your wife was relieved but it took 
me a long time to locate someone who could go beyond the usual platitudes and 
offer me some real information.

This “claims consultant” sounded young and too casual but I gave him the 
benefit of the doubt. I could swallow youth and brashness as long as your life 
insurance was paid out. I even submitted to his mini-inquisition. If you had 
become nauseous on Sunday, why did you report it on Wednesday? Because you had 
hoped it would go away, I said. Because every cancer patient is told that not 
every symptom spells panic. I was aghast when it struck me that his real 
question was whether you were somehow responsible for your deterioration. No, I 
said, indignantly, you could not know that this time, your nausea was a 
harbinger of death.

Put me through to your doctors, I suggested. They will understand the nuances. 
Surely, I thought to myself, they would be sympathetic, but my request was 
denied.

Help me understand what the problem is, I said finally, because I don’t think 
it’s my inability to understand your form.

The problem is, he said breezily, your patient died shortly after he turned 55 
but his life insurance policy expired at age 55.

I then understood that the extra forms were not to help your wife but to help 
the insurer deny the claim.

“So it would have been simpler if he had died a little earlier?”

“Yes,” he replied, satisfied, neither reading nor understanding the moral 
question in my voice.

“Why don’t you tell his wife this?”

“It’s a process.”

After this, what else was there? I thought while the decision might be 
technically defensible it seemed unfair and hardly in the spirit of the care 
you were promised. But I had a sinking feeling that he was arguing from the 
head and I was pleading from the heart.

Why am I telling you all of this? Because I thought of you recently when I 
read a newAsic report into life insurance products 
<http://asic.gov.au/about-asic/media-centre/find-a-media-release/2016-releases/16-347mr-asic-issues-industry-review-of-life-insurance-claims/>
. Australians insurers pay out $8bn in claims each year and while 90% of claims 
are resolved, there were some disturbing findings that echoed with my anecdotal 
ones.

As an oncologist, I didn’t think an Asic report would provide me food for 
thought but the more I read, the more I remembered patients who grapple with 
insurance companies while tackling the challenge of terminal cancer.

The report mentions that claims specialists may be paid an incentive to deny 
claims. I thought then of my lung cancer patient with a stable mental illness 
whose symptoms kept being conflated by her insurer although it was progressive 
lung cancer that was making her ill.

I find TPD (total and permanent disablement) claims the most exasperating of 
all. The report says they are denied between 7% and 37% of the time. My breast 
cancer patient is repeatedly asked how many hours she can work on the factory 
floor. None, due to severe back pain, is the answer. Why do insurers have a 
hard time understanding that not every cancer patient is imminently dying but 
many patients are disabled by their symptoms?

To sustain hope while preserving honesty is the greatest challenge in oncology 
| Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/28/to-sustain-hope-while-preserving-honesty-is-the-challenge-in-treating-cancer-patients>
The report also found extensive delays in processing claims accompanied by 
poor customer support and I can attest to this. Terminally ill patients have 
neither the time nor the energy to pursue a claim, making this another burden 
for the carer. This is why we advise sick patients to file an early claim but 
unfortunately, some patients interpret this as doctors hiding their prognosis 
and become even more anxious.

I guess I want you to know that your wife isn’t alone, there are other 
patients and families caught in this situation. I can’t say that the Asic 
report will help your wife but I hope it proves a wake-up call to unscrupulous 
insurers who would seek to profit from vulnerable consumers.

I feel sorry that your wife doesn’t seem to know the real reason why her claim 
keeps getting rejected and I hope that someone will tell her, or better still, 
honour her claim. For what it’s worth, I will keep filling out every form that 
crosses my desk. It feels pointless but I want you to know that I really did 
try my best.
 