
How are you? What about this weather we’ve been having. How are the kids? I 
hear No 42 are digging out a basement. I don’t know where they get the money. 
Did you hear what Peter said about Paul? What Paul said about Paula? We really 
should do something about the dog mess fouling the street. Do you want to see 
the new kitchen?

Do you find this sort of thing fascinating – or do you only pretend? Such 
topics constitute the essence of small talk, smeared like spermicide over 
social intercourse lest the embryo of a real conversation be fertilised. Not 
that there’s anything wrong with small talk per se. Pondering the meaning of 
life or the meaning of meaning at the school gates would be unbearable. But 
enough is enough. Among those who flatter themselves as being educated, curious 
and thoughtful – like, I imagine, most Guardian readers – serious talk is 
becoming a form of bad manners.

I don’t go to dinner parties much now, but when I do, small talk seems to be 
the main course with gossip, jokes and conversation-as-performance as side 
dishes. It’s a pleasant enough combination. However, some things are strictly 
off the menu. Serious conversations are by-and-large taboo, except when 
conducted on a one-on-one basis, preferably in a dark corner at the boozy 
remnant of the evening.

The risk of offending people is not really the great crime it is commonly 
deemed

This aversion to the serious – or if you prefer, as I do, the real, honest and 
important – crosses social barriers. In the upper working-class I grew up in, 
everything was a bit of a laugh, really, and kept at a superficial level, or we 
might be construed as getting above ourselves or risk – god forbid – an 
argument, which was simply not done.

Now I count myself as a member of the supposedly navel-gazing (and supposedly 
reprehensible) “metropolitan elite”, I find the impulse to stay on the surface 
is entirely without class borders. For the average Ukip voter or angry welder 
in Stockport – not that they are coterminous – we broadsheet-reading, 
Newsnight-viewing would-be sophisticates are all up ourselves. My complaint, on 
the contrary, is that we are not up ourselves nearly enough – perhaps for fear 
of what we might find in those shadowy spaces.

An article in the current edition of Wired magazine decries the dominance of 
small talk <http://www.wired.co.uk/article/banning-small-talk>. The author 
attempted a solution by holding a party where it was banned entirely. The host 
provided index cards with examples of “meaningful conversation starters”. 
Guests responded with unexpected enthusiasm. The writer reports, “We found out 
who (besides our significant other) would give up a kidney if we needed one. We 
debated the theory of suicide prevention. We talked about the art of the 
dominatrix.” Most of the partygoers loved the experience.

There are hazards in trying to push a conversation out of the quotidian. I 
love a bit of meaningless banter. I love laughter and verbal horseplay. But 
can’t there be something else on offer? A lively exchange of views perhaps, 
rather than the ritual of supporting, or not challenging, one another’s 
opinions for the sake of a quiet life. Maybe even, God forbid, a robust 
argument, a bit of a ding-dong. But this risks censure.

By digging below the surface, we build not only knowledge but also intimacy. 
If all dials are set to “avoid conflict” then that intimacy is hard to 
facilitate. We don’t want to be intimate with everyone we meet – to quiz the 
shop assistant about their attitude to euthanasia might be pushing it too far. 
But when it comes to friends and acquaintances, must we always err on the side 
of the insipid?

Honest communication takes bravery – perhaps because many of us have opinions 
we are ashamed of and like to keep hidden, or in our heart of hearts know we 
might find hard to logically defend and yet count as emotionally valuable. We 
fear standing out of the crowd. This shame, or lack of confidence, has become 
so acute thatthe idea of safe spaces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/24/safe-spaces-universities-no-platform-free-speech-rhodes>
 no longer stops at university campuses – it is in the living room, in the 
kitchen, at the party.

Modern morality is just exhibitionism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/09/modern-morality-is-just-exhibitionism>
I have sometimes offended people in a social setting by asking “inappropriate” 
questions or delivering controversial opinions. This is mostly inadvertent, but 
occasionally I just like to stir the pot – because I believe the risk of 
offending people is not really the great crime it is commonly deemed.

I have often found the backlash painful, but I cannot regret it, because in my 
mind I was not trying to draw attention to myself, but attempting to open up a 
dialogue, to cut through the great foam mattress that presses down on most 
social conversations. That sometimes requires sharp tools.

Politeness is a wonderful and pervasive British trait, and I embrace it, but 
it can squeeze the life out of … well, life. I don’t think it should ever be 
considered rude to be honest and sincere, or interested in anything other than 
the cost of double-glazing on sash windows. I feel lately we’ve slipped back to 
the 1950s, where anything but the most compliant and surface comments were 
greeted with deep embarrassment.

I’m through with polite blandness. I’m up for a barney, a frank exchange of 
views, a cut beneath the epidermis. It isn’t always safe – but it is, more 
often than not, interesting. And if it goes well, it can genuinely bring people 
together – rather than keep them suspended, as we increasingly find ourselves, 
in a warm, and shallow bath of consensus.

 * A sentence in the second paragraph was inadvertently changed in the editing 
process. It was restored on 7 October 2016 to the writer’s original words:
 ‘Among those who flatter themselves as being educated, curious and thoughtful 
– like, I imagine, most Guardian readers – serious talk is becoming a form of 
bad manners’  