
Just in case anyone thought the Turnbull ascendancy would usher in a golden 
age of mums and bubs in federal politics, the government’s chief whip Scott 
Buchholz hasgenerously stepped in on Wednesday to correct them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/16/breastfeeding-mp-reportedly-told-to-express-more-milk-before-votes-says-issue-resolved>
. Buchholz reportedly requested that Liberal MP and new mother Kelly O’Dwyer 
bottle-feed her infant daughter using expressed milk instead of breastfeeding, 
so that mothering didn’t interfere with her parliamentary duties.

Breastfeeding MP reportedly told to express more milk before votes says issue 
'resolved'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/16/breastfeeding-mp-reportedly-told-to-express-more-milk-before-votes-says-issue-resolved>
Unbeknownst to Buchholz, under standing orders members are allowed to 
breastfeed in the chamber during divisions, or entitled to a proxy vote. The 
chief whip’s apparent ignorance of these rules aside, incidents like this 
demonstrate bluntly why politics, the corporate world, and many other public 
sphere environments are inhospitable to mothers.

This is a trivially obvious point, but it’s worth going a bit deeper. Whether 
or not you think female under-representation in the top echelons of society is
feminism’s most pressing problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/13/want-to-pretend-your-a-feminist-but-do-nothing-to-improve-womens-lives-talk-about-women-on-boards>
, the forces that resulted in O’Dwyer being given erroneous breastfeeding 
instructions by her male boss are at work all around us.

Often the exclusion of mothers from public life is put down to their own 
choices, or treated as an effect of individuals (like Buchholz) being 
personally prejudiced or ignorant. The truth is that our social structure, at 
its most fundamental level, assumes women’s bodies are deviant, especially when 
they are engaged in pregnancy, breastfeeding or primary care of an infant.

Of course, women are not the only group who must endure their bodies being 
marked as different from a pre-existing norm: people with visible disabilities 
are often physically excluded from shared spaces, patronised by long-existing 
practices and assumptions that assume the non-disabled body is the only type 
that will be present. Trans people are also tormented and harassed, for 
instance while using gender-segregated toilet facilities.

Public mothering seems to draw a particular form of ire.

But public mothering seems to draw a particular form of ire. Noisy or 
misbehaving children frequently spark calls for kid-free flights and 
restaurants.Family <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> parking is 
decried as a selfish indulgence. People complain that breastfeeding is 
inappropriate for outside the private sphere.

It is rare to hear these vociferous calls for segregation applied to any other 
group unless you’re deep in fringe territory (with the exception of anti-trans 
bigotry, which is widespread and disturbing). But it is perfectly acceptable to 
opine that children should be seen and not heard, and that therefore mothers, 
who make up the vast majority of the primary caregiving force, should stay 
cloistered indoors until their children reach the age of majority.

Navigating the world with children in tow can be a difficult and frustrating 
endeavour even before these complaints are added on top. The standard response 
to this line of argument is a condescending sneer: “Well, you should’ve thought 
of that before you had kids.”

Should we, though? Why should our families, our choice to have children, be 
controlled by the knowledge that public spaces are hostile to parents with 
children, rather than our own desire and readiness to reproduce? Why shouldn’t 
public goods and public spaces be equally accessible to all?

Why should it be unreasonable to say that, as a society, we are collectively 
responsible for the wellbeing of our children, and excluding their mothers from 
social and professional arenas is not in their best interests?

Breastfeeding MP reportedly told to express more milk before votes says issue 
'resolved'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/16/breastfeeding-mp-reportedly-told-to-express-more-milk-before-votes-says-issue-resolved>
This attitude is treated as one of entitlement, as though equal access 
shouldn’t be a cornerstone of our community.

The entitled attitude is actually the reverse: the presumed entitled to 
child-free public spaces. Yes, people often find children crying to be 
annoying, or public breastfeeding weird. But crying babies and breastfeeding 
are a fact of life that will always be with us, like the weather.

Attempting to police or restrict these constants, like Buchholz did when he 
instructed O’Dwyer to modify her breastfeeding practice, only draws attention 
to how the existing set of arrangements is inadequate to deal with the full 
spectrum of humanity. Difference is all around us; the challenge is to change 
how we do things to accommodate as many people as possible, even if that means 
occasionally having to share a plane with a cranky toddler.
 