
Guardian News & Media (GNM) has used employee surveys for several years as a 
key tool to engage with staff.

Given that the editorial strategy is based on the concept of openness and 
dialogue, it is only right that this extends to the way we run the business. 
More than this, the engagement and commitment of staff is critical as GNM 
continues to undergo radical change to align with the digital transformation of 
the media sector.

The last survey took place in autumn 2009, during the company's first round of 
major restructuring. Plans to hold a survey in 2011 were delayed in order to 
align with the company's digital first strategy, which was at that time still 
under development. The new style of questionnaire was launched in the summer of 
2012.

While past surveys were conducted on an annual basis and contained scores of 
questions, the new system is based on a six-monthly cycle and concentrates on 
far fewer questions, which are based on employee engagement.

These questions include whether staff would recommend GNM as a great place to 
work and whether GNM motivates them to do all they can to ensure its success.

The survey, which will build a robust picture over time of how the company is 
performing through the eyes of staff, is designed to fit in with the business 
planning cycle. It was created in partnership with external consultancy ORC 
International and based on feedback from managers and employees via focus 
groups and interviews.

The first survey achieved a 62% response rate overall; 70% from commercial and 
53% from editorial.

The results of the first questionnaire, which were not available at the time 
of publishing the Living our Values report, will be benchmarked against 
companies from a range of sectors.

The survey will be used to highlight areas for further development of people 
policies and practices, as well as identifying tangible actions the company can 
take to improve staff engagement. The results will be shared with staff and 
used as the basis to encourage open discussion.  

Digital skills

If GNM is to meet its ambition of becoming a digital first company, it is 
vital that staff not only understand how the industry is transforming, but also 
have the required skills to meet the challenge of ensuring the Guardian stays 
ahead of the field in developing new products and services.
 
For this reason, GNM launched a digital skills survey during the last 
financial year to gain a clearer understanding of what skills and knowledge 
will be important across all parts of the business, and where training is most 
urgently needed.

More than 600 employees responded to the survey, and, on top of that, a series 
of one-to-one and group interviews with managers was held.
 
We have used these insights to develop a prioritised training and development 
plan, which was still being finalised at the time of the publication of Living 
our Values. The scheme will be introduced in stages during 2012-13.

As part of the programme, GNM is running a series of "train the trainer" 
workshops with internal stakeholders who will support parts of the roll-out.

GNM is not only concentrating on formal training, but continues to run a 
number of informal workshops on a monthly basis to help staff gain a deeper 
understanding of some of our product launches and ongoing digital development 
work. For example, last autumn a special Twitter season was run to help staff 
get the most from the platform.

Performance review and feedback

The transformation programme across the company in 2011-12 has involved 
reorganisations and rapid change. This resulted in a decline in the number of 
formal performance reviews that were in both the commercial and editorial 
departments.

However, there is now a drive to simplify the process to ensure that the 
system is more effective and beneficial to all staff.

After the commercial departments met their 80% appraisal target in the year 
ending March 2011, they raised the bar to 90% in the last financial year. 
However, the completion rate over this period fell to 57%.

In editorial, the target for 2011-12 had been maintained at 40%, despite 
achieving only an 8.78% completion rate the previous year. Unfortunately, the 
numbers fell again last year to just 2%.

Within the commercial, digital development and finance areas, the numerous 
different review formats have been reduced to a single form, and appraisals 
have been renamed as performance development reviews (PDRs). As part of this 
change, GNM is moving away from a review at the anniversary of hiring to a 
mid-year update meeting linked to the company's financial and strategic cycles.

This addresses the concern raised by Guardian Media Group chief executive 
Andrew Miller that the appraisals were not linked directly to the company's 
performance.

He said: "Processes like appraisals can only work if there is a framework of 
priorities. If you are starting from the perspective of appraisals then you are 
looking down the wrong end of the telescope."

As part of the new initiative, the HR department has run a number of training 
sessions for both managers and staff to provide them with a refresher on PDRs, 
giving feedback and personal development. By the summer of 2012, 33 managers 
had been trained, and this number will increase as we roll out sessions across 
the business areas.

Editorial is addressing the poor appraisal performance by introducing a number 
of training sessions with managers. One-to-one support is being provided where 
appropriate.

One of the issues within editorial has been the number of departmental 
restructures where reporting lines have changed. This has now been addressed 
with a clear cascade plan that clarifies who should be reviewed by whom. 
Reviewers are supported through training and coaching, and staff will be 
encouraged to seek appraisals from their line managers. 

Internal vacancies and pay transparency

The Guardian has put a particular emphasis on recruitment and pay transparency 
to address two of the lowest scores in last all-staff survey in 2009 which were 
"I understand how my pay is determined" and "selection for internal jobs is 
fair".

With regard to career progression, there was a feeling that internal 
opportunities were not transparently advertised and selected, and that there is 
less opportunity for internal candidates than external candidates. In order to 
address this, as a matter of course all vacancies are advertised internally on 
the intranet before going to the external market, typically for two weeks.

In the last financial year, ending March 2012, there were 13,686 job 
applications, of which 1,345 were internal (10%). Of the 1,590 interviews that 
took place, 238 were internal (15%). Of the 269 people hired, 75 were employees 
working in the company, representing 28%.

Unsuccessful internal candidates receive feedback on why they have not been 
successful, and the HR department provides developmental support and coaching 
for unsuccessful candidates when they request it.

In an attempt to reduce the need for redundancies and to give staff the 
opportunity for career development, the majority of all editorial roles, in 
particular, are now advertised only internally.

With regard to pay transparency, a robust and thorough pay governance process 
has been introduced and implemented to justify and evaluate all out-of-cycle 
pay increases.

GNM has a remuneration committee that meets at least quarterly and acts as the 
key forum for review and decision making discussion around pay and other 
benefits and policy development on reward to align with the strategic 
objectives. It is responsible for monitoring and approving GNM's remuneration 
policy to ensure consistency, fairness and equity, in line with Scott Trust 
values.

New starter days/induction

The Guardian launched a new induction programme in March 2012. It now includes 
a monthly afternoon session and a "buddy" system to support those joining the 
company.

The induction has been piloted to find the most interesting and useful format 
and delivery mode, and the next stage will be launched in September 2012. It is 
a process that will be be kept under review, as it is important to make new 
joiners feel welcome and part of GNM from the beginning of their time in the 
company.

The aim of the buddy system, which had signed up 30 staff by the summer of 
2012, is to reduce new starter anxieties and increase links/relationships 
across the organisation that would otherwise be difficult to establish. The 
role of the buddy is to be a point of contact before and after the new 
starter's first day and to offer advice/support. An induction website will be 
launched by the end of 2012.
 