
‘We each have two lives,” a wise person once said, “and the second begins when 
we realise we have only one.” I can’t tell youwhich wise person, sadly; the 
internet attributes it in roughly equal measure to Confucius and Tom 
Hiddleston. (It’s not a very Confucian sentiment, so I’m going with 
Hiddleston.) But it hardly matters. It’s an aphorism, and like all the best 
ones, it feels as if it always existed, and only needed someone to discover it. 
Or rediscover it: judging by various new books andessays 
<http://www.laphamsquarterly.org/roundtable/long-history-short-form>, this 
oldest of philosophical forms is making a comeback. Our era of dwindling 
attention spans and 140-character content-burps is generally held to be one of 
escalating stupidity. But it’s also ideally suited to aphorisms. So maybe we’ll 
end up imbibing some wisdom accidentally, too.

There are two species of aphorism, James Lough explains in Short Flights 
<http://www.amazon.com/Short-Flights-Thirty-Two-Aphorisms-Inspiration/dp/1936182882>
, a recent modern collection. The more irritating is the “instructional” kind: 
pompous nuggets on how to behave, of the sort dispensed by Benjamin Franklin. 
(“Early to bed and early to rise.” OK, we get it, Ben. You’re perfect.) Not all 
instructional aphorisms are terrible: “Be kind, for everyone you meet is 
fighting a hard battle” is useful advice. But juicier by far are “aphorisms of 
insight”, which don’t tell us what to do, but radically shift our view of how 
things are. As Lough writes: “An insight aphorism is anarchic, a bomb exploding 
in an empty house, blasting out the windows, blowing the doors off their 
hinges.”

Of these, my favourites are the ones that land at first like a bucket of cold 
water, issuing a bleak assessment of life, yet turn out to contain a liberating 
truth. Take Rilke, translated by the Jungian psychologist James Hollis: “The 
purpose of life is to be defeated by ever greater things.” The economist Thomas 
Sowell: “There are no solutions; there are only tradeoffs.” (You’ll never solve 
all your problems. So which ones are worth putting up with, to solve the 
others?) A line attributed to Joseph Campbell: “We must be willing to let go of 
the life we had planned, so as to have the life that is waiting for us.” Or the 
therapist Sheldon Kopp: “You are free to do whatever you like. You need only 
face the consequences.” And, yes, I’m aware these are all by men: aphorisms 
usually are. (The aphorists in Short Flights are three-quarters male.) I’m 
stereotyping, but I wonder if that’s partly because women writers are less fond 
of the glib signoff that silently follows every aphorism: “And that’s all 
that’s worth saying aboutthat!”

Exhausted? It’s time to focus | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/20/dont-be-victim-attention-theft-oliver-burkeman>
But a good aphorism never really draws a line under things. Instead, it keeps 
on giving, unfolding further meanings. I’m convinced that Earle Hitchner’s quip 
– “Americans think 100 years is a long time, while the English think 100 miles 
is a long way” – explains more about transatlantic relations than you’d think. 
And the whole of human happiness may be encapsulated in Carl Rogers’s line: 
“The curious paradox is that when I accept myself just as I am, then I can 
change.” There are whole books – lots of them – that don’t contain nearly that 
much wisdom.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 