
Looking for a better return on your savings? Here’s a tip: get yourself down 
to Tesco. The decision by high street banks such as Santander to slash interest 
rates on their current accounts means that for those people who have a few 
thousand pounds in savings and want easy access to their cash with no nasty 
shocks, signing up for a Tesco Bank current account is increasingly looking 
like a no-brainer.

It pays an attractive 3% on balances of up to £3,000, and there are no 
requirements for customers to pay in a minimum amount (ie their salary or 
pension) every month, or even set up any direct debits. On top of that, each 
individual can have up to two accounts. So someone who opens both and puts 
£3,000 into each would receive a total of £180 interest a year. To get the same 
amount of interest from the Santander 123 account you would have to have 
£16,000 stashed away. Theoretically, a couple could open four Tesco accounts 
and earn 3% on £12,000 – £360.

The supermarket bank will almost certainly be one of the beneficiaries from 
Santander’s decision to halve the rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/01/santander-123-account-rate-cut-comes-into-effect>
 on its 123 account, held by 3.6 million people. As of 1 November they will 
receive a flat 1.5% interest on balances up to £20,000. Previously the account 
paid 1% on £1,000-£2,000, 2% on £2,000-£3,000, and 3% from £3,000-£20,000. 
Under the old terms the maximum amount of interest you could receive, assuming 
you had £20,000 in the account, was £600 a year. Now it is £300 – or £240 once 
you deduct the £5 monthly fee.

Unfortunately, some of the other top-paying current accounts are also reducing 
their rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/13/tsb-lloyds-slash-interest-rates-current-accounts-santander>
. From 4 January TSB’s Classic Plus will no longer offer 5% on balances up to 
£2,000. Instead it will pay 3% up to £1,500. That means the maximum amount 
customers can earn will fall from £100 to £45 a year.

On 8 January, meanwhile, Lloyds will scrap the tiered interest rates on its 
Club Lloyds account and bring in a single rate of 2% on balances between £1 and 
£5,000. This account currently pays up to 4%, but the move will halve the 
maximum interest payout from £200 to £100 a year. Those holding the Halifax 
Reward account will also receive less bang for their buck, as the monthly 
reward payment is falling from £5 net (£6.25 gross) to £3 net (£3.75 gross) 
from 1 February.

It’s not all bad news: some of the other decent-paying current accounts have 
not (yet) been cut down to size. For example, Nationwide’s FlexDirect pays 5% 
on balances up to £2,500, fixed for 12 months, provided a customer pays in at 
least £1,000 a month – but after 12 months the rate falls to just 1%. 
Meanwhile, Bank of Scotland customers earn 3% on balances of £3,000-£5,000 when 
they add the free Vantage option to their account.

With no monthly funding, direct debits or monthly fees, for smaller balances 
it’s great
Susan Hannums, Savingschampion.co.uk 
If you’ve a few thousand pounds to play with, and don’t want to tie your money 
up for a long period, signing up for a Tesco Bank current account (or two) 
would appear to be a canny move.

“It is one of the simpler accounts available,” says Susan Hannums from 
Savingschampion.co.uk. “With no monthly funding or direct debit requirements, 
and no monthly fees, for smaller balances it’s a great option.”

But there are no guarantees as to how long that 3% rate will last. When asked 
what Santander 123 account holders should do, Andrew Hagger at financial 
website MoneyComms says it will largely depend on how much cashback they earn 
on top of their interest.

It is estimated that the average amount held in the 123 account is close to 
£12,000. Someone in that situation is pocketing around £120 a year in interest, 
after the £5 a month fee. If they also receive £4 a month cashback that figure 
rises to £168, while if they receive £9 a month cashback it’s £228.

Some people will now be looking for a better current account. They could opt 
for a fixed-rate savings bond, but even locking your money away for five years 
will only get you a rate of around 2%.

Some people may be tempted to dip their toe into the peer-to-peer market, says 
Hagger. RateSetter was this week offering 2.5%-3% on its “rolling market” 
account. With this, in theory, you are able to access your money whenever you 
like. Investments are not covered by the Financial Services Compensation 
Scheme, but RateSetter runs a provision fund which it says has ensured that 
none of its individual investors has lost a penny.

Another option, says Hannums, is to open multiple current accounts so that you 
can earn the most amount of interest while being able to save a healthy lump 
sum. “But this isn’t for the faint-hearted, as it can be fiddly getting all the 
accounts set up and making sure you adhere to all the terms and conditions.

“That being said, at a time when interest rates on savings accounts are in 
many cases at rock-bottom levels, this is exactly the thing you need to do when 
every penny counts.”

And if you’re in the market for a personal loan …

Another supermarket giant this week joined retail rival Tesco in showing the 
established banks a thing or two by launching what may be the lowest loan rate 
ever recorded.

Sainsbury’s has unveiled a personal loan with a representative APR of 3.1%, 
which ties with a deal currently offered by Swedish challenger Ikano Bank as 
the UK’s lowest. But if you have a Nectar card and meet the criteria, the 
Sainsbury’s Bank rate falls to 3%, provided you are borrowing between £7,500 
and £15,000 over a period of between one and three years. That 3% rate also 
applies to Nectar cardholders looking to borrow from £15,001-£19,999 over a 
period of between two and three years. Charlotte Nelson at financial data 
website Moneyfacts.co.uk says that at the start of this month the lowest loan 
rate on record was 3.1% APR.

The current market represents something of a personal loans price war and 
intriguingly – or perhaps worryingly – a growing number of lenders are now 
letting people max out their borrowing. Last monthFirst Direct upped its 
personal loan limit to £50,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/14/personal-loan-war-heats-up-first-direct-raises-limit-to-50000>
, and this week Lloyds did the same. Traditionally the most you could borrow 
via a personal loan was often £25,000. Lloyds says the increase reflects 
“rising prices and changing customer needs”.

Consumers are increasingly using short-term borrowing to take advantage of 
record low interest rates
BBA 
Ten days ago the British Bankers’ Association said consumer credit was growing 
at its fastest rate for a decade 
<https://www.bba.org.uk/news/statistics/high-street-banking/>, driven by strong 
demand for personal loans and credit cards. It added: “Consumers are 
increasingly using short-term borrowing to take advantage of record low 
interest rates.” This trend has accelerated since the Bank of England cut the 
base rate to 0.25% in August.

If you are juggling various costly debts such as store card and credit card 
borrowing, you may be able to save money by consolidating all your debts into 
one lower-cost personal loan. This isn’t an answer for everyone, but for some 
it will reduce the amount they pay each month. Be aware that only applicants 
with clean credit records are likely to get the headline-grabbing 
representative rates. You may also want to consider whether another product 
such as a credit card might suit your needs better.

It’s not just personal loans where rates are falling. Mortgage lenders have 
been engaged in a price war for some time, resulting in cheaper deals for some 
homebuyers and remortgagers. A few days ago Yorkshire building society launched 
a two-year discounted deal priced at 0.98% – its lowest-ever rate.

Jonathan Harris at mortgage broker Anderson Harris says: “With lenders 
continuing to cut mortgage rates in order to boost their balance sheets before 
the end of the year, there are lots of attractive deals on the market for 
borrowers. The downwards pressure on rates looks to show no sign of easing, 
which is great news for borrowers.”
 