
I surface from deep sleep to birdsong outside the window. It’s that 
warm-bedded rise into gentle consciousness that in other circumstances might 
invoke allusions to Ovid and his deity dream-maker Morpheus. But this is 
Yorkshire, not Kalamata, so better to say I’m on holiday being woken up by 
squawking bloody seagulls.

It’s a scene that has played out here for me for over 40 years across 
generations of gulls and layers of bright paint on the pretty cottages. Change 
here is rare, even as the world turns elsewhere. Happy childhood summers were 
spent running free, benchmarked in my memory by distant world events.

So it’s August 1977. I’m in my bunk listening to Radio Luxembourg. Tony Prince 
announces “The King is dead” before playing Elvis all night. Later, I’m buying 
my first car from the local garage and driving girlfriends to our cottage to 
see whether any of the magic of the place rubs off on them, though barely 
opening the front door to find out. Visiting friends discovered the world of 
vet James Herriot wasn’t fiction and one Home Counties princess realised there 
were inside toilets in the north after all.

When we were both career building, I brought Helen here infrequently but with 
Millie and Matt’s arrival we visited more often and their love of the town 
started to mirror my own. They entered the same fancy dress competitions in the 
summer fete as I had years before, but they won! They played outside for hours 
and went crabbing, we made expeditions for fish and chips after failing to 
catch anything edible.

We spent Christmases here with extended family, renting ever posher piles as 
we outgrew the tiny house bought by my parents in the 1960s. So when the tidal 
wave of Helen’s death swirled through our lives it was natural to find 
ourselves in this place of sanctuary soon afterwards. Here, roaring seas erode 
the Jurassic coastline in a clumsy parallel of how Helen’s death ripped away 
the bedrock of the happy family life that Millie, Matt and I enjoyed with her. 
But the cliffs still stand, echoing the shape of their past while wearing a 
fresh face to the world. They endure. So shall we.

Now I’m about to make red lights flash in the school of early bereavement best 
practice. I’m buying a house here. I would be putting down a deposit with life 
assurance cash I should use to clear my mortgage on the family home. But what 
the hell – it would put down roots for the kids somewhere that meant a lot to 
their mum and I might even end up living here one day as a faux salty sea dog.

I’m slightly troubled at the morality of owning a second home, albeit one I’ll 
have to rent out to pay its way. But my friend Pete shoots from the hip as 
usual, “For God’s sake take off the hair shirt – you’ve been coming here most 
of your life, you'll probably die here and you'll use it regularly.” Pete is 
right. I have a vision of holidays full of friends and relations where sheer 
bustle disguises the fact that Helen is horribly absent.

Immediate family, not least Helen’s parents Barbara and Ray, seem cool and 
supportive, so in my new world anyone else who might question this decision can 
go to hell. If their partner dies in their late 40s after 27 years together, 
they can take a view on the morality of having a holiday home that I’ll listen 
to. So I’ve put the car up for sale and started looking for a seven-seater, 
hoping to make the trip with friends and family for years to come.

Armed with this happy vision, I stretch the picture to a distant future when I 
might even bring a new love interest. This possibility was encouraged by Helen 
in our early conversations about my future with the kids at a time when her 
death seemed a far-off, dark horizon, even with cancer confirmed. I nodded in 
numbness rather than acceptance.

A call from James, my solicitor, dents the daydream, “You’ll never believe it 
but there’s an old ecclesiastical covenant from land that the house is built 
on. You shouldn’t promote – that may also mean practise – drunkenness or 
promiscuity in the vicinity.”

I’m speechless, so borrow words from one Mr Edmund Blackadder: “Fortune vomits 
on my eiderdown once more.”
 