
The following announcement by the Field Marshal Commanding-in-Chief the Home 
Forces was issued by the Press Bureau early yesterday afternoon:–

WEDNESDAY, 12 20 P.M.
At 10 30 p.m. last night a German submarine appeared off the small, undefended 
port of Seaham Harbour. She approached to within a few hundred yards of the 
town and then opened fire.

Some thirty rounds of shrapnel were fired from a 3in. gun. Twenty rounds fell 
in the direction of Dalton-le-Dale, and a dozen rounds fell in and about Seaham 
Colliery.

A woman who was walking through the colliery yard was seriously injured, and 
died 
<http://www.durhamrecordoffice.org.uk/Pages/EvidencefortheattackonSeahamin1916.aspx>
 this morning. One house was struck by a shell. No other casualties or damage 
occurred.

AIMLESS VINDICTIVENESS.
Seaham Harbour is on the coast of Durham, about midway between the Tyne and 
the Tees. It is a town of 16,000 inhabitants, and is mostly engaged in shipping 
coal. The hamlet of Dalton-le-Dale, 1¾ mile inland from Seaham Harbour, is in a 
populous colliery district.

Press messages state that the German submarine was only a quarter of a mile 
off the harbour. The inhabitants of the town were startled by the detonations 
and flashes, but there was no great alarm. All the shells passed high over the 
town, and exploded a mile and a half or so inland. The firing lasted about 
twenty minutes.

The woman who was fatally injured was a young married woman. She was staying 
with friends, and was walking with a companion near a pit. She was severely 
injured about the arm, foot, and head, and died later in hospital. Another 
young woman escaped by lying flat on the ground.

The house struck was a miner’s cottage. The shell first hit the backyard wall, 
dislodging a large number of bricks, and then passed through the kitchen wall 
into the room, finally falling near the front door. There was only the wife of 
the occupier in the room at the time, and she escaped unhurt.

The previous occasion on which a German submarine has shelled the British 
coast was on August 16 last year, when a submarine appeared off the Cumberland 
coast and fired shells at Harrington, Parton, and Whitehaven and the railway by 
the shore. There were no casualties.
 