
Almost half of adults have not yet made a will, according to research carried 
out forThe Observer by Co-op Legal Services. It found that just 53% had put 
down in writing what they wanted to happen in the event of their death.

It’s not a job anyone relishes, but if you die without leaving a will, you 
could leave costs and complications for your loved ones to deal with, alongside 
a great deal of heartache.

“There’s a common misconception that only the supremely wealthy need a will, 
but everyone should have one – even if you’ve not got much to give,” says 
Hannah Maundrell from websiteMoney.co.uk <http://www.money.co.uk/>. “Writing a 
will doesn’t have to cost a fortune and it won’t take long. Whatever your 
circumstances, it’s definitely worth doing. If not, you risk leaving your 
grieving family with a whole host of problems.”

Funeral costs can see you digging deep, but small directors ease the pain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/03/funeral-cost-small-directors-bereaved-families-cremation-burial>
Co-op Legal Services found several reasons why people put off writing a will, 
with 46% saying they have nothing to leave, 15% not wanting to think about 
death, and 14% simply not having got around to doing it. Other concerns include 
the time it might take and the amount it might cost.

The idea of not wanting to think about death is a big sticking point, with 
many people still not comfortable discussing it. “Talking about dying won’t 
make it happen,” says Toby Scott from theDying Matters coalition 
<http://www.dyingmatters.org/>. “It can feel a bit morbid at first, but knowing 
you’ve got your plans and affairs in order can be a great relief. You can then 
get on with living the life you have, safe in the knowledge that everything is 
in place for loved ones.”

What happens if you die without a will?

“It can leave surviving loved ones in a real mess,” says Scott. “It can cause 
problems that take a long time to sort out, and can trigger arguments that can 
split families apart.”

The reality is, if you die without a valid will you will have no say in what 
happens to your estate. In this scenario the law decides – the legal term is 
intestacy. Under the rules of intestacy your estate will be divided among 
certain blood relatives in accordance with a strict order of priority, which 
may not be in line with your wishes.

While these rules were updated in October 2014 in a bid to offer more 
protection to close relatives, certain groups have not benefitted. Hayley 
North, chartered financial planner at Rose & North, says: “If you are not 
married your partner has no entitlement to anything – even if you have children 
together.” Step-children and step-grandchildren also do not automatically 
inherit.

So a will is particularly important for cohabiting couples, as well as those 
who have remarried and have complicated family structures. Also, it doesn’t 
just ensure that the right people benefit immediately after your death – it can 
allow you to make sure that a new partner stays in your home when you die, but 
that your children will still be in line to inherit.

It can feel a bit morbid ... but knowing that your affairs are in order means 
you can get on living your life
Toby Scott, Dying Matters 
With this paperwork in place, you can also make sure more of your estate goes 
to your loved ones rather than into the chancellor’s coffers in avoidable 
inheritance tax. In addition, you can use this document to set out who will be 
your executors – the people who will oversee the distribution of your estate. 
You can even use your will to set down your funeral wishes.

“If you have young children, the other critical thing is who will be their 
legal guardians,” says North. “However, it is vital to have the conversation 
with friends and family long before this is required.”

When should you write a will?

Another reason commonly cited by people for not having made a will is that 
they are too young to think about it. In reality, it is never too early. Steven 
Cameron, pensions director at Aegon, says: “None of us knows what the future 
holds, so the earlier people start inheritance planning, the better protected 
their loved ones will be.”

A will can be revised later if necessary, or written to take into account 
certain changes you expect - for example, if you are living with a partner but 
think you may get married you can have wills written “in contemplation of 
marriage”. Inserting this means a will is still valid after you marry.

10 of the strangest wills of all time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/25/10-strangest-wills-finances-death>
Should you do it yourself?

If your affairs are very straightforward, you could consider buying a DIY kit. 
WH Smith, for example, sells them from £9.99.

Elsewhere, Which? offers a “self service” will writing package starting at £99 
for an unmarried person and £156 for mirror wills for a couple. Other online 
will writing services includeAffio.co.uk <https://www.affio.co.uk/> and 
Rocketlawyer.co.uk <https://www.rocketlawyer.co.uk/>.

You need to think very carefully before opting for one of the cheaper DIY 
options without legal assistance. According to Co-op Legal Services, around a 
quarter of the wills it sees in its probate and estate administration 
department are DIY documents. Of these, approximately a third are deemed 
ineffective in some way. This could include ambiguity in the wording and 
misunderstanding of legal terms, and in some cases wills have not been 
witnessed.

“This can result in an estate not being distributed as the person intended,” 
says James Antoniou from Co-op Legal Services. “It can also have a significant 
impact on the length of time it takes to administer an estate.”

It’s also worth noting that anyone can set themselves up as a will writer, so 
it is important to ensure you are using a specialist legal professional who is 
regulated and insured.

North from Rose & North adds: “While using a solicitor is more expensive than 
going down the DIY route, it will ensure that everything is set up correctly – 
and could prevent some serious mistakes.”

If you are thinking about drawing up a will it is worth looking into the Will 
Aid <http://www.willaid.org.uk/> scheme, which runs throughout November. This 
is a campaign based on a partnership between the legal profession and nine UK 
charities, with solicitors waiving their usual fees for writing a basic will, 
and instead inviting people to make a donation to Will Aid. The recommended 
amount is £95 per person, or £150 for a couple.

Once you’ve drawn up your will it is important to ensure it remains 
up-to-date. As a rule of thumb you should revisit it every three to five years 
– or when there is a material change to your life, such as marriage, children 
or divorce.
 