
The 13th series of The X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> finishes this weekend 
with a grandstand finale that will feature performances from The Weeknd, Kylie 
Minogue, Little Mix and Madness, but with plummeting ratings year-on-year, the 
question many TV fans are asking is: does anyone still care about the singing 
competition?


This year it was announced that the show would remain on our screens until at 
least 2019, after ITV signed a new three-year deal withSimon Cowell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell>. ITV’s director of television, 
Kevin Lygo, said The X Factor, along with Britain’s Got Talent, were defining 
programmes for the broadcaster and continued to be “amongst the most popular 
and hugely entertaining formats on television”.

Saturday’s finalists are 23-year-old Matt Terry, 29-year-old Finnish national 
Saara Aalto, and boy band 5 After Midnight, each of whom will be performing 
duets with established pop stars. Unlike in previous years when the finalists 
covered existing hits as their prospective first single, each act will have 
their own track written especially for them by Ed Sheeran, with all profits 
going to charity.

But despite this and other overhauls by Simon Cowell, it has not been a 
vintage year for The X Factor. When the show returned in August, complete with 
judges Louis Walsh, Sharon Osbourne and Nicole Scherzinger, as well as host 
Dermot O’Leary, it had its lowest launch ratings in 10 years, and throughout 
the series it haslost out in the ratings battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/20/strictly-come-dancing-x-factor-ratings-5m-viewers>
 to its BBC rival Strictly Come Dancing.

The recent episode of Strictly in which one of its most popular contestants, 
the former shadow chancellor Ed Balls, was eliminated had an average of 10.6 
million viewers and a peak of 11.4 million. That weekend The X Factor was 
watched by 6.1 million viewers, peaking at 7.6 million. Meanwhile, Planet Earth 
II has secured a larger proportion of the sought-after 16- to 34-year-old 
audience than Cowell’s talent show.

According to Annette Hill, professor of media and communication at Lund 
University, this is a sign of audiences’ growing fatigue with the X Factor 
format.

“To begin with, talent shows offered this wonderful story of success, but 
there was still an element of authenticity in the way that they auditioned and 
the way the contestants would sing to us or dance to us. We were following 
their performance and their true selves through the classic journey of the 
show,” Hill said.

“The problem was that it really quickly became quite illegitimate and faux, 
because everything became over the top. It’s what I call the moment’s moment: 
big tears, big tantrums, elements of the reality talent show where it becomes a 
huge spectacle of excess and emotion without the authenticity running behind 
it. So viewers start to question whether voting matters in these shows, and are 
aware that they’re watching something that’s so highly produced, particularly 
The X Factor.”

Hill’s book, Reality TV, draws on research conducted over the last 15 years 
with 15,000 people, most of whom said they were bored of talent shows. “Around 
2008 to 2010 is when the ratings started to flatline for many talent shows, and 
certain shows that I really liked, like Got to Dance on Sky, were axed,” she 
said. “The main talent shows had to rejuvenate themselves. Strictly did it 
really well with good casting and presentation, and that invitation to a party 
that the show does so well. It very cleverly handled the format fatigue by 
always keeping a real warmth to it.”

Since it debuted in 2004, The X Factor has spawned major chart successes such 
as One Direction and Leona Lewis, but last year’s winner, Louisa Johnson, who 
was the show’s youngest ever champion, had the lowest chart entry for a 
winner’s single to date.

To try to boost ratings, The X Factor has in part relied on novelty acts who 
simultaneously thrill and enrage viewers. This year it was the rapper Honey G, 
who was described by Lily Allen as “so wrong on so many levels”, and who until 
recently was kept in the competition by Cowell, leading to a slew of criticism 
on social media by viewers who criticised the show as “a fix”.

Lisa McGarry, editor of UnrealityTV.com <http://www.unrealitytv.co.uk/>, said: 
“I feel a little disloyal in saying this, considering how attached I have 
become to The X Factor over the years, but perhaps it is time for it to stop.

“I no longer get excited as summer closes and the ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> extravaganza approaches. The 
constant format changes reek of desperation and although I have become more, 
not less, fond of Simon Cowell, I fear he has taken this talent vehicle as far 
as it can go. There is not a sob story we haven’t heard, nor an Adele tune that 
has not been murdered.”

ITV said TheX Factor was still averaging nearly 8 million viewers and a 31% 
share of viewing each week. The highest audience it has attracted this series 
was 10 million. The show also averages a 46% share of 16-34s, compared to 
Strictly’s 31%. Fifty-six per cent of Strictly’s audience were over 55, ITV 
pointed out.

Which is why not everyone is keen to write The X Factor’s eulogy just yet. Ben 
Preston, editor of the Radio Times, said he believed rumours of the show’s 
death had been greatly exaggerated.

“The X Factor is a television blockbuster,” he said. “A few years ago, during 
the glory days of Jedward, everybody wanted to talk about the show, everybody 
was watching it, and the politicians were going around using it as a way of 
ingratiating themselves on the doorsteps of their constituents. Those big 
reality shows that people watch in their millions have their moments in the sun 
– for Bake Off it was the year of Nadiya; arguably for Strictly, which 
certainly is in brilliant health at the moment, this has been the year of Ed 
Balls – everyone you met had to have an opinion about Ed’s Gangnam Style or 
foxtrot.

“And so The X Factor isn’t being talked about now as it was in its heyday, but 
most television producers would kill for its audience and kill for the 
contracts they’ve signed with ITV. It’s going to be with us for a long while 
yet.”
 