
A mixed response greeted the new production of Alan Plater's Blonde Bombshells 
of 1943, at the Hampstead Theatre in London. While many critics agreed with 
Dominic Cavendish of the Daily Telegraph that it is an "enchantingly effective" 
celebration of wartime spirit, Robert Hewison in the Sunday Times found the 
story "desultory" and Nicholas de Jongh, in the London Evening Standard, felt 
the characters were "undeveloped" and the details "anachronistic".Alan Plater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater> responds:

It may seem churlish to complain about reviews for a show playing to packed 
houses, especially when the Guardian, Times and Telegraph have been highly 
generous with their praise. But no self-respecting playwright turns down the 
chance of a churl.

Obviously, I'll fight for the right of any critic to say - to quote three 
items - that my writing is lazy, that I've set back the stage musical by 50 
years and am guilty of "anachronistic homophobia". I won't fight to the death, 
you understand - maybe for about five minutes, or until I get a headache. 
Meanwhile ...

1 Concerning laziness: the Blonde Bombshells saga has been around my desk for 
about 18 years and there are around 30 versions on the computer. I was also 
taught by my English teacher in the fifth form of my state school in Hull that 
if, in an essay, you make an assertion about laziness, you must quote examples 
to justify your case.

2 It isn't a musical; it's a play about professional musicians who happened to 
be women. It works in Hampstead because I'm blessed with a brilliant company of 
actor/singer/musicians. Pick on them and I'll send the lads round.

3 The story is set in 1943 and the dialogue - which, in one short scene, uses 
phrases like "nancy boy" and "poof" - is in no way anachronistic. These phrases 
were in common currency in the north at the time and haven't yet disappeared.

But it's good that one of the more vehement of my critics confessed to singing 
along to Leslie Sarony's I Lift Up My Finger and I Say Tweet Tweet - an 
experience that even Kenneth Tynan and Harold Hobson, in their pomp, were 
almost certainly denied.
 