
The telephone rings. There's a seven-year-old Geordie on the line: my grandson 
in Newcastle, who says: "Hello bonny lad." "Hello bonny lad," I reply.

"Grandpa. I've got a joke for you. Why did the skeleton cross the road?" 

"I don't know. Why did the skeleton cross the road?" 

"To get to the Body Shop." 

Later in the day I fax him. 

"Question: How do you get milk from a hippopotamus? 

"Answer: Take the saucer away." 

This being the Guardian, I should put the story in context. I have 14 
grandchildren, though it isn't that simple. My wife and I have three children 
each, all of breeding age. Five of the kids are in stable relationships and, 
the last time I counted, three of them were married. Statistically I have seven 
natural grandchildren, five step-grandchildren and a couple more who came 
ready-made with a partner and have become, legalistically speaking, de facto 
step-grandchildren.

Geographically, there are six kids on Tyneside, three in Yorkshire, two in 
Reading and three just up the road in Crouch End, north London. The youngest is 
a babe not yet a year old. The oldest is a de facto on Tyneside. She's now 17. 
A couple of years ago she came to us for a weekend visit. We took her to Ronnie 
Scott's where a cool front-of-house guy kissed her hand and said: "Will you 
marry me?"

"You can't," we said. "She's only 15." 

"I'll wait." 

We don't take the little ones to jazz clubs, though we do fill their heads 
with music when they're in the house. It works like this. When baby-sitting a 
very young one who doesn't want to go to sleep, the best solution is to walk 
the babe up and down to a medium tempo Duke Ellington blues. Research shows 
that Match of the Day and Casualty (in vision only) also have soporific 
qualities.

Grandparents rediscover, a generation after being parents, that small children 
are primitive creatures: little animals with basic needs. If they cry, it's for 
one of a finite series of reasons. Hunger - you feed them. A dirty nappy - you 
change them. Bellyache - you walk them up and down, with optional Ellington, 
until they fart, crap, belch or puke. You're no sort of grandparent until 
you've been puked and/or crapped and/or peed on regularly, ideally on all your 
favourite clothes. But if you have favourite clothes, you're not ideal 
grandparental material in the first place.

I discussed this primitive element with my daughter (and mother of two) not so 
long ago. We both remember the smell of our grandparents when we were very 
young. I still recall the smell and texture of my grandfather's waistcoat, the 
dangly metal of his watch-chain and the iron bristles of his moustache.

If we're to get all psycho-wotsit about this, he was probably my role model 
for the job. My maternal grandfather, his name was Thomas Plunkett, a 
steelworker of Irish stock and a working-class aristocrat: my favourite species 
of humanity, which is why my plays are full of them. He worked night shifts at 
the tube works in Jarrow and, as far as I was concerned, the institution of 
shift-working had nothing to do with making steel tubes to help the war effort 
and everything to do with giving him freedom in the daylight hours to have fun 
with me.

We were like the old men in Last of the Summer Wine, wandering around Jarrow 
having adventures, except he was in his late 60s and I was about five. We'd go 
to the river and look at the ships. We'd go to the pictures to see Old Mother 
Riley films. We'd go to the park to see the men playing bowls.

He told me that one of them, Stan Judge, was the greatest player in the 
north-east, which meant he was the greatest in the known world. He explained 
that Jack, the legendary greenkeeper, always did the first cut of the new 
season by hand, with a scythe, and we watched him at work.

He taught me the importance of craftsmanship and laughter and of being able to 
kick with both feet if you were a footballer, the legends of heroes as diverse 
as Raich Carter and Jimmy Wilde, respect for trade union membership and 
contempt for means-tested benefits. What my grandfather handed on, though he'd 
have scoffed at such fancy talk, was a cultural inheritance, as surely as if 
he'd given me a library of first editions and a wine cellar. This is much the 
same as lulling a child to sleep with Duke Ellington.

The heart of the matter, as far as I'm concerned, has to be laughter. There'll 
be time and reason enough for weeping as the kids grow up. Jokes are crucial. 
Admittedly, this is a personal quirk. In 1997, the University of Northumbria at 
Newcastle gave me an honorary degree. My thank you was a formal lecture 
entitled Seriously Though: Old Jokes and the Zeitgeist. My thesis was a more or 
less serious one - that a study of jokes will tell you, pretty accurately, what 
is going on at any given time in what our leaders call, bizarrely, the real 
world.

I'm contemplating a follow-up study on jokes and their relationship to 
grandchildren. So far, my chapter headings are:

1. Pre-school. Basic Knock Knock and Doctor Doctor jokes. Within this 
framework there's a natural evolutionary process. Age 3 will settle for:

"Knock knock." 

"Who's there?" 

"Who." 

"Who who?" 

"Why are you laughing? I haven't told you the joke yet." 

By the age of five, there's even greater sophistication: 

"Doctor, doctor. I think I'm a chicken." 

"Why didn't you come to see me earlier?" 

"We need the eggs." 

2. Primary school. Street wisdom creeps in along with the baleful influence of 
consumerism, hence the Body Shop gag quoted earlier. The good news about the 
primary school stage is a growing enthusiasm for shaggy dog tales and the 
absurd. "There's a man walking along a street with a penguin. A passer-by says 
to him: 'That's a fine penguin. Are you taking him to the zoo?' 'No,' says the 
man. 'I took him to the zoo yesterday. Today we're going to the pictures.'"

This went down very well with a nine-year-old and a 13-year-old only last 
week, but the seven-year-old seemed a touch bemused.

My research into the next chapter - Big School humour - is at too early a 
stage to offer any useful analysis, though I expect nuns will come into it. 
Call it work in progress.

But jokes aren't everything. Non-verbal humour (sight-gags as we say in the 
trade) has a major part to play, especially with the very young. The following 
routine is very effective. Child tugs your left ear and your tongue pops out. 
Child tugs your right ear and your tongue goes in. Repeat until one of you gets 
bored. If you are really enterprising you can become your own string puppet. 
From a sitting position you can lift your leg up by means of an invisible piece 
of string. I recently learned from a famous comedian that this was part of the 
great Max Wall's act, which I must have seen and absorbed subliminally.

It's even possible to generate laughter totally without cause. One of my 
favourite devices is to make eye contact with one of the kids during a hitherto 
well-behaved family meal, and suddenly cover my mouth as if stifling a laugh. 
Properly done, this will reduce an entire table to chaos within two minutes.

Most of these games can be played sitting down. Little ones must be persuaded 
at an early stage that grandfathers don't run and aren't all that keen on 
standing up. Drawing, painting, reading, glove-puppetry and story-telling are 
all sedentary activities and merit their own consideration and analysis.

For the moment, let us concentrate on two key principles. 

First, the grandparental relationship is unconditional. All parental 
relationships - even good ones - are speckled with asterisks and footnotes to 
do with bedtimes, hair styles, tattoos, body-piercing, loud music, choice of 
friends and the age-old question: what time do you call this? Grandparents are 
exempt from all this baggage. The relationship, if handled with sensitivity, 
should be a conspiracy against the parents.

Second, keep it simple. Last summer, I spent a whole afternoon in our garden 
with our then two-year-old from Crouch End, blowing bubbles and discussing them 
in great detail: their colour, texture, direction of travel and likely destiny. 
We made up stories about them because, as everyone knows, all bubbles are 
different even though they are born equal.

It's a great way to put the rest of the world into a proper perspective. Who 
actually cares about the third way, the Tory party leadership, the directorship 
of the National Theatre, digital revolutions and cyperspace?

Blow a few bubbles. You know it makes sense.
 