
It is often said, and truly, that you can’t choose your family. But the lack 
of choice in a parent’s life goes much further than this. Once you have 
children forming their own extra-familial relationships, you enter into a 
community of people that you can’t avoid. Only you don’t have the blood bonds 
that somehow keep family together (if you’re lucky). Inevitably, you are not 
going to like all of that imposed community. The chances are, you could 
cheerfully throttle some of them.

With annoying or dislikable kids some recourse is available when they are in 
your home and in your power – ideally using tactics that they won’t be able to 
plausibly squeal about to their parents. You could try subtly undermining their 
self-esteem (“Do youreally feel you need to have that pudding, dear? It’s very 
calorific”) or being wilfully unfair, perhaps by making sure that their choice 
of DVD never prevails (“Frozen is scratched I’m afraid … but this classic black 
and white documentary on the native wildlife of East Anglia is box fresh”).

Such shameful – but entirely understandable – malice is particularly tempting 
when experiencing thatmodern horror, the sleepover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2002/jun/05/familyandrelationships.judyrumbold>
. Here, you find out the true cost of hospitality when, at 1am, little 
Scheherazade or Cordelia is still cackling at the top of her voice while 
spreading the remnants of an illicit and adhesive midnight feast across the 
bedclothes and keeping your own children from sleeping so they will be 
thoroughly ill-tempered all through the next day.

The parents can present a bigger problem. Let’s assume that the parents of 
little Crispin are card-carrying fascists …

As payback, try a little casual cruelty when they show you their half-witted 
drawing of a pony, loudly admiring it before listlessly chucking it in the bin, 
or pointedly offering the dog one of the cookies they just made and pressed on 
you with their own dear little hands (ideally, you will have trained the dog to 
refuse it).

The parents can present a bigger problem. Let’s assume, for instance, that the 
parents of little Crispin are card-carrying fascists. Very few people are quite 
so theatrically evil nowadays, so just say they swear by the Daily Express and 
have a signed photo of Nigel Farage on their mantelpiece.

You have to sit around at their houses, perhaps when coming to pick up the 
children, while they make lots of veiled yet surly references to hijabs and 
“so-called refugees”. Or the problem may not be the tiresome opinions of the 
parents. It may be their behaviour that is problematic. A family with an 
admirable belief system may nevertheless smoke relentlessly inside the house or 
let the kids have access to age-inappropriate viewing material, or have pets 
with fleas that your children pick up and distribute.

Grin and bear it is the obvious solution, at least when it comes the adults. 
Suck your way through cups of ill-brewed tea and leave after a quick biscuit or 
accepting the invitation for a glass of something stronger. Pretend you have an 
eating disorder when invited over for dinner. Otherwise, the best solution is 
just to leave it alone and complain behind their backs. Hypocrisy has served 
the British well for centuries and it has a lot to commend it. Any attempt to 
curtail the behaviour of the parents is liable to be seen as snooty and 
high-minded and is bound to fail.

The children are another matter. You’ll almost certainly get away with it. 
That’s the beauty of the whole thing. Because all parents know their children 
are so lovable no one could ever wish them ill. That’s certainly the case with 
mine, who I know are beyond all possibility of being covertly persecuted by my 
parental peers. Or that’s what I tell them, anyway.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 