
You might think it too soon to start speculating about the tax planning of 
Ronnie Corbett, butnot for the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/04/01/ronnie-corbett-spared-children-six-figure-tax-bill-by-selling-fa/>
: he “spared” his daughters a six-figure tax bill, the paper reports, by 
selling his large family home, buying a bungalow, giving them the money and 
then surviving for another seven years so that the gift wouldn’t be taxed.

You can question the news value of the story, given that the house was sold in 
2003. You can query its accuracy, given that some friends say the Corbetts 
merely wanted fewer stairs. You can quibble over the scheme itself, if its 
intention was to avoid inheritance tax, since in the intervening 13 years the 
house would have more than doubled in value, the daughters would have been able 
to pay 40% in tax and pocket more money than the sum they’ve probably spent by 
now anyway. The country would have reaped the reward, Corbett could have had 
another decade in his beloved house and everyone would have won. Avoiding tax 
is often, one way or another, more expensive than paying it, but the money is 
never the point. For people who hate paying tax, it’s the principle of the 
thing.

Looking for ethical investments? Here are a few that could be worth your energy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/19/ethical-investments-green-schemes-energy-risks-returns>
The issue of inheritance tax opens up a fascinating fissure in the psyche of 
the right wing: on the one hand, this money should not go to the state, because 
that will only encourage it to grow, and when it grows, it interferes. The 
Telegraph – for whom this issue is trumped only by news about statins and the 
weather – carries a story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/08/money-the-unauthorised-biography-by-felix-martin-review>
 about Osborne’s inheritance tax receipts from last year, which topped £4bn for 
the first time.

The rise is entirely explicable by a house price bubble and does not in any 
way represent a “raid”, on the middle classes or anybody else. Yet if your 
broad approach is that the chancellor is the sheriff of Nottingham and the 
innocent dead person with the £2m house is the peasant of Sherwood, of course 
your sense of injustice will be keen.

The contradiction comes with the counter-factual: if HMRC didn’t take 
inheritance tax, where would it go? To your children and grandchildren. But 
surely this undermines their self-sufficiency, which is the other pillar of the 
rightwing worldview. Far more prominent than the small-state narrative in the 
rhetoric of the right is the idea that success is the result of one’s hard 
work; that riches should be seen as proof of personal virtue, and poverty, by 
the same token, evidence of vice.

Without meritocracy, without the fluidity of a system where everybody has the 
same odds and is raised (or not) to make the most of them, this worldview 
becomes coarse and basic: I want it because it’s mine, and I want to keep it, 
even when I’m dead, because my children are more important than the society 
they have to live in. The only way to square these contradictions is to avoid 
both tax and dynasty, and leave your money to a cats’ home.

One’s own personal finances exist in a separate arena altogether, one which it 
would be discourteous to mention

We all know at a human level how this paradox is really resolved: you keep 
your worldview and values, your beliefs and your agency in one place, and in a 
separate place, ringfenced and pin-protected, you keep your money. Even though 
almost all political positions come down eventually to amassing, distributing, 
prioritising, sharing or hoarding money, one’s own personal finances exist in a 
separate arena altogether, one that it would be discourteous to mention.

The left is exactly the same, and the best proof of this is not in inheritance 
but in savings. This week sees the Treasury launching theinnovative finance Isa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/11/new-year-maximise-money-isas-peer-to-peer-savings>
; one of the first products available is fromAbundance 
<https://blog.abundanceinvestment.com/2014/05/abundance-wins-guardian-sustainable-business-award/>
, which brokers direct investment in renewables. If and when it works, this 
could revolutionise banking, creating an alternative system that invests 
entirely in the real economy, in which 99% of the returns go to investors, that 
pays no bonuses and could never need a bailout, that uses no leverage and has 
no shareholders.

But if that satisfies the public’s itching resentment of traditional banks, 
one question remains: 60% of Isa holders said they’d choose a green Isa were 
one available. This would amount to £28bn of personal investment, which is more 
than the renewable sector even has the capacity to spend. So why didn’t these 
savers choose green investments to begin with? Why wait for the Treasury to 
come up with a tax-efficient way of doing it? Why did the tax break matter more 
than the nature of the investment? Why, come to that, has “ethical” investment 
become frozen in a quasi-Victorian values system, so that an ethical fund will 
avoid alcohol manufacture but has no strictures against child labour? Why this 
gulf, between the future we claim to want and the one we sink our cash into?

Felix Martin’s fascinating Money: The Unauthorised Biography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/08/money-the-unauthorised-biography-by-felix-martin-review>
 hangs on one fundamental idea: money is a social construct, sometimes a 
promise, sometimes a debt, either way the marker of a relationship between one 
person and another. It has no intrinsic value, yet we treat it as though it 
does. This, I’d argue, puts it at a distance, separates it from our moral 
selves, so that we cannot account for our actions around it, we only know that 
its needs must be met. Money has taken on a mystical, Lord of the Rings-ish 
quality where the only way to escape its power is not to have any. But it’s 
only precious as a social currency, and should be seen and celebrated as a 
means of expressing one’s values and ambitions. Happy new (tax) year!
 