
It took them a day to absorb the news but by Friday investors across the world 
had decided that the Federal Reserve’s decisionnot to increase  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/17/federal-reserve-interest-rates-record-low>
interest rates was bad news. Stock markets dropped as investors absorbed the 
Fed’s cautious tone about the world economy. But while Wall Street may not be 
happy, this weekend most workers should be breathing a sigh of relief.

For weeks we have been hearing from trigger happy economists and policy types, 
includingsome at the Federal Reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/29/federal-reserve-stanley-fischer-rate-increase-inflation>
, arguing that the Fed should start raising rates for the first time since the 
recession. Fortunately, for now at least it seems Fed chair Janet Yellen has 
chosen not to join this chorus. For at least another six weeks, the Fed will 
leave its zero interest rate policy in place.

The drive to raise interest rates is difficult to understand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/05/federal-reserve-interest-rates-hike-presidential-candidates>
 from any broad view of the state of the economy. Most immediately, it is not 
possible to find any basis for concern about inflation getting out of control. 
The inflation index upon which the Fed focuses has been running below its 2% 
target for six years. Its most recent movement has been flat or even downward 
as falling commodity and import prices have put downward pressure on the 
overall inflation rate.

Furthermore, it is important to remember that the Fed’s policy is that 2% 
inflation is an average, not a ceiling. This means that we can run an inflation 
rate of 3% for the next four years and still be in line with the Fed’s 
inflation target.

If recent price movements provide little rationale for raising interest rates, 
the current state of the labor market gives plenty of reason to keep interest 
rates low. It’s true that the 5.1% unemployment rate is not especially high, 
but this measure does not fit with most of the other evidence about the state 
of the labor market.

The employment rate, the percentage of the population who have jobs, is still 
more than three percentage points below its pre-recession level. This is true 
even if we focus exclusively on prime age (ages 25-54) workers. Other measures 
of labor market slack, like percentage of people involuntarily working 
part-time and the quit rate are still near recession levels.

Most importantly, there is no evidence that wage growth is accelerating. The 
rate of hourly wage growth remains near 2%, the same pace as the last four 
years. If workers are to share in the gains of productivity growth we should be 
seeing annual wage growth of at least one percentage point more than the rate 
of inflation. In fact, since workers should be getting back some of their 
losses over the last decade, we should expect to see wage growth outpace 
productivity growth for at least a short period of time.

While the case against a rate hike is strong, it was hardly a foregone 
conclusion that the Fed would not raise rates. Many of the establishment 
economists and economic policy types (you know, the people who couldn’t see an 
$8tn housing bubble) were arguing that the Fed should raise rates. They really 
didn’t have much of a story on the need to curb inflation, nor could they 
plausible argue the economy is growing too fast.

In the absence of the normal justifications for rate hikes they were left to 
arguing that a zero interest rate is not normal. Of course, an economy in which 
millions of workers can’t find jobs, millions more can’t get full-time jobs, 
and wages are stagnant, is not normal either. That is the reason we need to 
keep interest rates low.

The rate hikers’ return to normal argument is like arguing that putting away 
our umbrellas will make it stop raining. It simply is not serious.

But policy has often been moved by unserious arguments in the past. A big 
difference this time was the public mobilization against an interest rate hike. 
At the center of this movement is the Fed Up campaign being led by the Center 
for Popular Democracy. This campaign has pulled together unions, community 
activists, religious organizations, and ordinary workers across the country.

They have visited with members of the Fed’s board of governors, including 
Yellen, as well as many of the Fed’s district bank presidents. The point is to 
remind the Fed’s leaders that interest rate hikes have real consequences for 
real people. Higher rates mean fewer jobs. They also mean lower wages and less 
bargaining power for those who have jobs.

This sort of campaign is important for securing a balance in Fed policy. The 
financial industry can be counted on to pressure the Fed to raise rates to 
prevent inflation. After all, the Wall Street bankers rarely lose their jobs in 
a downturn. It is essential that the Fed feel comparable pressure on behalf of 
ordinary workers. For now it seems they took the workers’ views seriously.
 