
I wonder which meaning of "zest" came first: youthful energy, vim and vigour, 
or the thin, outer layer of peel on a citrus fruit? Answers on a postcard, 
please. Not that it really matters. The point is that if you want to find a 
family of aromatic flavours that encapsulates feelings of effervescence and 
joie de vivre, look no further than the rind of our two most workaday citrus 
fruits, oranges and lemons.

Both are essential in my kitchen, lemons most of all. I use their juice day 
in, day out, but I also hanker after the zest. For while lemon juice 
contributes lightness and freshness to a dish, it's the zest that brings pure, 
vibrant lemon flavour. Lemon juice is sour and certainly fragrant, but the zest 
is much more deeply scented and layered. Often, the two work beautifully 
together, but sometimes the zest alone is what you want.

This unmistakable lemony depth comes from the potent essential oils in the 
zest. And this is what you need whenever you want a dish to be really lemony, 
rather than just really sharp. That applies in sweet contexts as much as in 
savoury ones. The best lemon tart, mousse, shortbread or drizzle cake are 
always the zestiest.

Releasing that fantastic flavour is simple, but it does need a little care. 
Use unwaxed fruit, if you possibly can. Wax is applied to citrus to create an 
appealing gloss and help it keep longer, but the wax is based on polyethylene, 
shellac or both, so I go for unwaxed fruit and take my chances on shelf life 
(lemons don't tend to hang around very long in my house, anyway). Choosing 
organic is one way to ensure a lemon is wax-free, but conventionally-grown, 
unwaxed lemons are also easy to find; if you can get only waxed fruit, dip them 
briefly in very hot water, then wipe with a clean cloth.

Thereafter, the trick is to release that lovely outer rind without picking up 
any of the spongy, white pith beneath. This is very bitter and will contaminate 
the zest's pure qualities. A sharp, fine grater will neatly remove the zest 
alone: make just one pass of the grater over the rind, turn the fruit a few 
degrees and grate again. Don't rub away at the same spot, or you'll inevitably 
take the pith.

You could also deploy one of those specialised lemon zesters with a row of 
little holes at the end that remove the zest in long ribbons, though they are 
really only worth using if you want the zest as decoration, because the strips 
are too thick and long to combine nicely into a mixture.

If you're zesting lemons but don't need all their juice, it's worth squeezing 
them anyway. Keep the juice in the fridge and use it to make a hot lemon and 
honey drink – this will, of course, be even more delicious if you add a little 
zest, too.

Fried fish with very lemony mashed potato

The mash is quite a surprise the first time you taste it, but you'll want to 
make it again. A shoo-in with fish, it's also very good with chicken or chops 
(lamb particularly). Serves four.

2 tbsp olive oil
1 garlic clove, bashed
1-2 bay leaves (optional)
1 sprig fresh thyme (optional)
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
4 fillets sustainable white fish, such as haddock, coley, whiting or 
MSC-certified cod
1 large knob butter
Finely grated zest of 1 lemon

For the lemony mashed potato
500g floury potatoes, such as maris piper, peeled and cubed
1 garlic clove, peeled and left whole
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
100ml extra-virgin olive oil, plus a little extra for frying
Juice and finely grated zest of 1 lemon, and juice of 1-2 lemons

For the mash, put the potatoes and garlic clove in a pan, cover with water and 
add salt. Bring to a boil, then lower the heat and simmer until tender: 15-20 
minutes. Drain, reserving the cooking water, and leave to dry in a colander for 
five to 10 minutes.

Pass the potatoes and the soft garlic clove through a ricer (or press through 
a fine sieve). Use a wooden spoon to combine the hot mash with the oil and some 
salt and pepper, then add the lemon zest and the juice of one lemon. Taste, and 
add more lemon juice, if you like, and enough of the cooking water to give the 
mash a loose, creamy consistency. Keep warm.

Heat the oil for the fish in a large frying pan over a medium heat. Add the 
bashed garlic clove and the bay and/or thyme if using. When the garlic is 
sizzling, season the fish generously and lay skin side down in the pan. Cook 
for two to three minutes, then add a large knob of butter and the lemon zest. 
Turn down the heat a fraction and cook the fish for three to four minutes more, 
basting it with the pan juices.

Spoon a big dollop of the lemony potato on to four warm plates, lay the fish 
on top and spoon over any pan juices. Serve with a side salad.

Chocolate and lemon zest fudge

Cocoa and lemon share acidic, aromatic qualities that cut the richness of 
sugary, creamy fudge. Makes up to 40 small pieces.

A few drops of sunflower oil
300g caster sugar
1 tbsp golden syrup
100g unsalted butter, cut into chunks
100ml double cream
50g sifted cocoa powder
Finely grated zest of 3 lemons
1 tsp flaky sea salt

Very lightly oil a 15cm x 22cm baking dish. Put the sugar, syrup, butter and 
cream into a deep saucepan and heat gently (it will bubble up), stirring all 
the time, until the sugar has dissolved, then put a sugar thermometer into the 
pan and bring to a boil. Boil until the mixture reaches 116C (soft-ball stage), 
then remove from the heat and leave to stand for 10 minutes. Add the cocoa and 
the zest of two lemons, and beat vigorously with a wooden spoon for a minute or 
two, until the fudge thickens, becomes slightly grainy and starts to come away 
from the base of the pan. Tip into the prepared dish and spread out. Sprinkle 
with the remaining zest and the flaky salt, leave for a few minutes to firm up, 
then mark it into small squares with a sharp knife, before leaving it to set 
completely – this will take three or so hours. Cut into squares and store in an 
airtight container.
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's lemon tart: 'Sparkling flavour.' Photograph: 
Colin Campbell for the Guardian 
Lemon tart

In this classic tarte au citron, the zest is infused into the eggs, where it 
imparts its sparkling flavour before being strained out to leave a 
super-smooth, silky custard. Serves 12.

4-6 medium-large, juicy lemons
4 large free-range eggs, plus 4 free-range egg yolks
250g caster sugar
150ml double cream
Icing sugar, to finish
For the sweet shortcrust pastry
200g plain flour
35g icing sugar
Pinch of salt
125g cold, unsalted butter, cut into cubes
1 free-range egg yolk 
2-3 tbsp cold milk (or water)

For the pastry, put the flour, sugar and salt in a food processor and 
blitz briefly to combine (or sieve into a bowl). Add the butter and blitz (or 
rub in with your fingertips) until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Add the 
egg yolk and just enough milk or water to bring it together into large clumps, 
then tip out on to a lightly floured surface, gently knead into a ball 
and flatten slightly. Wrap in clingfilm and chill for 30 minutes.

Meanwhile, start on the filling. Finely grate the zest of three of the lemons. 
Squeeze the juice from these lemons, strain into a measuring jug, and juice as 
many more lemons as you need to get 175-200ml juice.

Whisk the eggs and egg yolks with the sugar, then stir in the lemon zest and 
juice. Leave to stand for about 10 minutes, then whisk one more time and leave 
to stand for another 10 minutes.

Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Roll out the pastry fairly thinly and 
use it to line a 24cm tart tin, letting the excess hang over the sides. Prick 
the base with a fork. Line with baking parchment and baking beans. Place on a 
baking sheet and bake for 15 minutes. Remove the parchment and beans, and bake 
for 10 minutes more, until the pastry is cooked and lightly golden. Trim the 
excess from the sides, and lower the heat to 150C/300F/gas mark 2.

Strain the filling into a clean bowl, skim off any froth and stir in the 
cream. Pour carefully into the pastry case and bake until barely set, with 
a slight wobble in the centre: 30-35 minutes. Leave to cool completely, and 
serve dusted with icing sugar.rivercottage.net <http://www.rivercottage.net> 
for the latest news from River Cottage HQ.
 