
The George and Dragon, Hudswell

Small, friendly and community-owned; you can glow with virtue in this 
beautiful spot as well as enjoying the locally-sourced food and a pint of Black 
Sheep or guest ales. The pub is a freehouse and runs a shop, internet access 
and allotments for the 200-odd locals, so there's always something going off. 
Pub games include darts, bowls and cribbage and there's a garden. The pub is 
often frequented by visitors from across the world who are doing the nearby 
Coast to Coast Walk. Landlady Jackie Stubbs and her mum Margaret are naturals 
at their job.
• Hudswell, Richmond, 01748 518373, georgeanddragonhudswell.com 
<http://www.georgeanddragonhudswell.com>

The White Lion Inn, Cray
 Photograph: Mike Kipling Photography/Alamy 
The prettiest of the three pubs on upper Wharfedale's loveliest walk, the 
triangle between Cray, Buckden and Hubberholme. The ashes of the writer JB 
Priestley were scattered at Hubberholme, which he called "one of the smallest 
and pleasant places in the world". True, but Cray is even smaller and more 
pleasant. The pub is very small and simple with stone-flagged floors, low 
ceilings and log fire in season. Trout on the menu come from nearby Kilnsey, 
meat from Dales farms and cheese, natch, from over the narrow pass in 
Wensleydale. There's endless space outdoors plus a babbling stream and you can 
stay overnight in cottagey rooms.
• Cray, Skipton, 01756 760262, whitelioncray.com <http://www.whitelioncray.com>

The Fountaine Inn, Linton
 The Fountaine Inn, Linton, North Yorkshire 
This historic whitewashed inn stands in a fascinating backwater, overlooking a 
tiny green but with Vanbrugh's typically monumental Fountaine hospital and 
almshouses to one side. The pub is one of five in the Skipton-based Individual 
Inns group, a mini-chain which for once lives up to its name. The Fountaine's 
traditional exterior goes with a smart, cool interior, excellent menu and 
plentiful range of food and drink. Linton can be crowded in season, but limited 
parking and the fleshpots of nearby Grassington usually means that visitors – 
especially walkers – can find room.
• Linton In Craven, 01756 752210, fountaineinnatlinton.co.uk 
<http://www.fountaineinnatlinton.co.uk>

The Bridge Inn, Grinton
 Landlord Andrew Atkin behind the bar at the Bridge Inn 
A roomy village pub by the tumbling river Swale with a team of friendly staff, 
mostly from the surrounding village. There's plenty of room outside but if it's 
cold or wet, landlord Andrew Atkin makes a point of welcoming streaming 
cagoules and muddy boots. Log fires help, too, in such conditions, along with 
good and varied food – some of it shot by Atkin himself – and Jennings beer, 
plus a constantly changing range of guest ales. Comfy accommodation and walks 
to die for, both in beautiful countryside and among the ghostly ruins of 
vanished mineral mines.
• Grinton, Richmond, 01748 884224, bridgeinn-grinton.co.uk 
<http://www.bridgeinn-grinton.co.uk>

The Lion Inn, Blakey Ridge 
 The Lion Inn, Blakey Ridge, North Yorkshire 
An oasis amid the grandeur of the North York Moors with the extra-friendly 
appeal of a place which in winter is regularly snowed-in. Indoors is darkly 
snug, warm and tempting, but the vistas outside are tremendous. They look even 
better over a Black Sheep, Theakstons, Thwaites, Copper Dragon ... the Lion is 
beer heaven but with racks of wine, spirits and soft drinks as well. There are 
13 rooms, one with a four-poster, and all manner of small services to hardy 
explorers including secure storage for bikes. The kitchen has never heard of 
nouvelle cuisine; this is large portion land.
• Blakey Ridge, Kirkbymoorside, 01751 417320, lionblakey.co.uk 
<http://www.lionblakey.co.uk>

The Horseshoe Hotel and Ye (or "Top") Horseshoe, Egton Bridge
 Ye Horseshoe, Egton Bridge, North Yorkshire 
Shared honours for two pubs with (almost) similar names in this interesting 
enclave of the "old religion". Henry VIII's reformation never really made it 
here and the Catholic church is still the biggest and busiest place of worship. 
The Horseshoe Hotel has a lovely position by the river Esk, a handsome Georgian 
building with stones carved with the markers of the local Egton estate. 
Pleasant panelled rooms inside, good food and beer and friendly staff. Ye 
Horseshoe, higher up the hill (hence "Top") has a lively landlord, plentiful 
pies, vegetarian and senior options and at least six real ales on the go. You 
can stay comfortably at both pubs.
• Horseshoe Hotel, 01947 895245, egtonbridgehotel.co.uk 
<http://www.egtonbridgehotel.co.uk>; Ye (or 'Top') Horseshoe, 01947 895274, 
yehorseshoe.co.uk <http://www.yehorseshoe.co.uk>

The Sportsman's Arms, Wath
 Photograph: Ian Dagnall/Alamy 
They have served the same Eton Mess recipe here for more than 30 years and 
landlords Ray and Jane Carter and their family have the art of running a pub 
completely mastered. Their staff are proof of this, too – however busy, they 
have a way of fitting you into the smallish bar or large garden and terrace. 
Grander dining takes place in a sit-down, bookable restaurant. Wath is a sweet 
hamlet in a wonderful area for walking; the circular route from Pateley Bridge 
is especially good, four miles out along the northern fellside and back along 
the river. Don't miss Wath's tiny Methodist chapel at the end of a row of 
cottages; and don't fall off the playground seesaw and break your arm, as I did 
when I was seven.
• Wath-in-Nidderdale, Pateley Bridge, near Harrogate, 01423 711306, 
sportsmans-arms.co.uk <http://www.sportsmans-arms.co.uk>

The Horseshoe, Levisham
 Photograph: geophoto/Alamy 
A welcoming pub in a classic North York Moors village, all timeworn stone and 
red pantiles amid the surrounding moors which roll away to the horizon. Listen 
out, and you'll hear the puff and occasional hoot of the North Yorkshire Moors 
Railway steam trains. The line has a station, though it's a good step uphill to 
the pub. Rewards await on a menu which sources fish from Whitby and Hartlepool 
skippers and real ale from Cropton brewery and Black Sheep. The pub's owners 
Charles and Toby Wood also run The Fox and Rabbit (foxandrabbit.co.uk 
<http://www.foxandrabbit.co.uk>) at nearby Lockton which is less picturesquely 
sited but equally good. Try both on a gentle morning or afternoon round walk.
• Main Street, Levisham, 01751 460240, horseshoelevisham.co.uk 
<http://www.horseshoelevisham.co.uk>

The Birch Hall Inn, Beck Hole
 The Birch Hall Inn, Beck Hole, North Yorkshire 
This is a tiny place – "two bars with a sweet shop in the middle", say 
landlords Neil and Glenys Crampton – but exceedingly pretty and in the middle 
of the gentler part of the North York Moors which has become known as Heartbeat 
Country thanks to the nostalgic TV series. Like the now sadly-closed Sun Inn at 
Spout House in Bilsdale, it is pretty basic but the beer is hand-pulled and the 
pork pies, Beck Hole butties and Beer Cake are delicious and cheap. The record 
number of customers crammed into the pub is 30 plus two dogs, but there is a 
riverside garden. Cute though it is, the pub-and-shop arrangement is entirely 
"real". It dates back to the early 19th century when railway navvies and miners 
abounded and this pretty spot was part of the Industrial Revolution.
• Beck Hole, Whitby, 01947 896245, beckhole.info/bhi.htm 
<http://www.beckhole.info/bhi.htm>

The Bull Inn, West Tanfield 
 The Bull Inn, West Tanfield, North Yorkshire 
West Tanfield is a regular on Beautiful North Yorkshire calendars, a straggle 
of cottages along the river Ure with a church and ruined pele tower at one end. 
The Bull has a prime position by the "double" road bridge. Jules the landlady 
serves up simple but good food and well-kept beer and advises on the many local 
walks, all gentle because this part of Yorkshire is riverine and flat. If The 
Bull's full,The Bruce Arms 
<http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Restaurant_Review-g1237037-d1367944-Reviews-The_Bruce_Arms-West_Tanfield_North_Yorkshire_England.html>
 just up the road is less well-placed but is just as friendly and is 
outstanding for food.
• West Tanfield, 01677 470678, thebullinnwesttanfield.co.uk 
<http://www.thebullinnwesttanfield.co.uk>

• Martin Wainwright is the northern editor of the Guardian and the author of 
The Coast to Coast Walk (Recreational Path Guides) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781845138547>
 at £10.39
 