
Hares Leap, Burniston, nr Scarborough

Located on the main coast road, from Scarborough to Whitby, this deli-cafe is 
a gem. Housed in a converted stone barn on a working seven-acre smallholding 
(the cute piglets frolicking in the neighbouring paddock may put the squeamish 
off their pork belly), it is perfect whether you're after a quick snack, you're 
staying self-catering locally and want to stock up, or you're looking for 
somewhere to linger over lunch. Virtually everything is homemade, from Hares 
Leap's own sausages to its smoked mackerel, and it shows. Through the week, 
there are sandwiches, pates, homemade soups and creamy, sophisticated quiches - 
of a proper egg custard consistency - to eat-in, as well as amazing-looking 
game pies, salads and cakes to takeaway. The rich, raisin packed, very subtly 
sour Yorkshire curd tart is recommended (takeaway, £1.50). On Sundays, lunch 
includes the likes of braised beef and vegetable pie, or local roast lamb and 
Yorkshire pudding, with sticky red cabbage, roasted vegetables and creamed 
potatoes (midday-2.30pm, mains £6.95-£8.95).  
• Cafe menu around £3-£9. The Barn, Flatts Farm, Coastal Road, Burniston, nr. 
Scarborough, +44 (0)1723 371607 

Mr Moo's, Skipsea
 Mr Moo's, Skipsea 
Like many farmers, Stephen and Judith Foreman have had to diversify. In their 
case, into ice-cream. Using milk from their dairy herd (now kept at nearby 
Harpham), they make over 30 varieties of Mr Moo's using all-natural 
ingredients, including some locally grown fruits. It's quality stuff: fresh, 
thick and luxurious, not overly sweet, the flavours clear and well-balanced, 
the ice-cream studded with pieces of, say, crystallised ginger or apple crumble 
topping. You'll find Mr Moo's all over Yorkshire, but the Foreman's also run a 
showcase ice-cream parlour and coffee shop at their coastal HQ, Southfield 
House farm. The menu runs from simple cones to extravagant sundaes, and 
includes (judging by an Alpine Toasty, £4.20) a serviceable, if unremarkable, 
range of savoury snacks. The coffee shop isn't the prettiest but there is a 
pleasant patio with outdoor seating, and, after your ice-cream, you can stroll 
out through the farm to the seafront at Withow Gap. Interestingly, the path 
takes you past old WWI and WWII pillboxes and a small, disused Grade II nuclear 
shelter.
• Kids' cones £1.10, adults from £1.70. Sundaes from £4.10. Southfield House 
Farm, Skipsea, Driffield, +44 (0)1262 469829;mrmoos.co.uk 
<http://www.mrmoos.co.uk> 

Little Organic Bakery
 Little Organic Bakery 
Note: this is an edited version of the entry for ECO Catering, which has since 
closed. The same owners are now serving the same menu at the Little Organic 
Bakery (address below).
Katy Wheelwright's establishment produces some of the finest vegetarian 
cooking and baking on the Yorkshire coast. Using organic, Fairtrade and local 
ingredients, Wheelwright creates fantastic cakes (try the fragrant lavender 
scones, £1), soups and sandwiches, light, brightly flavoured savoury tarts, 
and, perhaps, her masterpiece: the herby cheesejack (£1.80). Yes, that's right, 
a dense, moreish savoury flapjack. It's an oaty, cheesy slice of genius.
• Biscuits and cakes from 50p, sandwiches £3.20. 12 Wellington road
Bridlington, East Yorkshire, +44 (0)7853 303049, 
atnumber12.co.uk/#!the-little-organic-bakery 
<http://www.atnumber12.co.uk/#!the-little-organic-bakery>

Jeremy's, Scarborough
 Photograph: Rob Thompson 
Chef-owner Jeremy Hollingsworth has cooked in some very serious kitchens. He 
worked for Marco Pierre White for six years, back in the 1990s, when Marco was 
at the top of his game, and he was head-chef at MPW's Quo Vadis when it won its 
Michelin star. Since late 2009, he's been back in his native Scarborough, 
fighting the good food fight at this neat, attractive North Bay restaurant. It 
cuts quite a dash among the endless streets of guesthouses and hotels, and 
Hollingsworth is working hard to compete with the cheaper local restaurants and 
cafes.Note: the light bites menu which Tony reviewed is no longer avaialble; 
mains start at £15.
• 33 Victoria Park Avenue, Scarborough, +44 (0)1723 363871; 
jeremysrestaurant.me.uk <http://www.jeremysrestaurant.me.uk> 

Francis Tea Rooms, Scarborough
 Francis Tea Rooms, Scarborough 
Between a retro clothing boutique, neighbouring art gallery and this charming 
retro tea rooms, tiny South Street is Scarborough's fledgling trendy enclave. 
All vintage crockery, dainty embroidered tablecloths and art deco shop front, 
the Francis Tea Rooms hark back to a more civilised era, when ladies wore hats 
and took afternoon tea. The savoury menu (including five variations on rarebit) 
is pretty exhaustive, but the main draw here is owner Wendy Kingston's 
first-rate cakes and tray bakes; the lemon and ginger scones, the Yorkshire 
curd tart with whipped cream, and the speciality teas (all Taylor's of 
Harrogate, from £1.50-a-pot).  
• Biscuits/cakes from £1, larger snacks/meals £3.40-£8.50. 7 South Street, 
Scarborough, +44 (0)1723 350550;wix.com/francistearooms/home 
<http://www.wix.com/francistearooms/home>

Gibson's at No 25, Scarborough
 Gibson's at No 25, Scarborough Photograph: P)R 
Now, that is what you want to see in a deli: not just shelves laden with 
speciality food products, but a small team, out the back, busily making and 
baking things. Indeed, everything about Jackie Gibson's friendly deli - from 
its 28p jam tarts upwards - smacks of things done properly and with real pride. 
Made-to-order sandwiches, for instance, come on tasty organic baguettes. 
Elsewhere the counters are laden with the deli's own biscuits, cakes, quiches 
and pies.  A smoky bacon and stilton tart (£2) is dense, gooey, full of real 
ingredients and has long, strong flavours. A slice of ground almond cake is 
beautifully moist, impeccably fresh and light. Take your haul down the road to 
the quiet Esplanade, a grand avenue of Georgian hotels overlooking 
Scarborough's South Bay and South Cliff Gardens. Park yourself on a bench, and 
tuck in.  
• 25 Ramshill Road, +44 (0)1723 360022 

Whitby
 The Magpie Cafe fish and chips, Whitby. Photograph: Gary Calton 
People describe Whitby as a port, but it is more useful to think of it as a 
huge open-plan fish 'n' chip shop; a town where the smell of beef dripping 
hangs heavy in the air, every second building dispenses hot, rustling chips, 
and every wall is crowded with folk eagerly tucking into their battered 
bonanza. Of the town's best chippies (many of them combined takeaway/restaurant 
operations), the Magpie Cafe (14 Pier Road, +44 (0)1947 602058,magpiecafe.co.uk 
<http://www.magpiecafe.co.uk/>) has the history and the queues - and, judging 
by this visit, a still justified reputation for seriously good fried fish - 
while Mister Chips (Mister Chips, Whitby, 68-69 Church Street, +44 (0)1947 
604683;misterchipswhitby.co.uk <http://www.misterchipswhitby.co.uk>), which 
majors on sustainable fish varieties, and Royal Fisheries (Royal Fisheries, 48 
Baxtergate, +44 (0)1947 604738;fuscowhitby.com <http://www.fuscowhitby.com>), 
part of the Fusco's empire, are probably its nearest rivals. Both Trencher's 
(New Quay Road, +44 (0)1947 603212;trenchersrestaurant.co.uk 
<http://www.trenchersrestaurant.co.uk>) and Graveley's (Graveley's Seafood 
Restaurant, Khyber Pass, +44 (0)1947 603500,graveleyswhitby.co.uk 
<http://www.graveleyswhitby.co.uk/>), which commands fantastic views out over 
the beach and harbour, are good eat-in restaurants, while Riverside Fisheries 
(3a Church Street, +44 (0)1947 600706), Whitby Gazette's current Fish & Chip 
Shop of the Year, is a good in-the-know pick, slightly off the beaten track. 
• Prices: fish 'n' chips, takeaway, around £5-£7, eat-in £7-£16.  

Black Horse Inn, Whitby
 Black Horse, Whitby 
Swerve the crowds on Pier Road, at this cosy, historic real ale pub - all 
solid, well-aged wooden fixtures 'n' fittings, bare floorboards and stained 
glass windows - where they serve a short, enjoyable, if slightly curious, 
"tapas" menu. There's a three-strong Yorkshire cheeseboard accompanied by a 
sparky, sweet 'n' spicy rhubarb chutney (£5.65), various olives, kipper, smoked 
salmon and Whitby crab pates, plates of smoked pork salami with a chilli salsa, 
tapenade and Melba toast and, for dessert, local goats' milk ice-cream (100ml 
tub, £2). Oh, and if you're the sort who enjoys a pinch of nasal snuff, be 
reassured that the Black Horse stocks a variety of flavours from Wilsons of 
Sharrow.  
• Tapas dishes from £2-£5.65. 91 Church Street, Whitby, +44 (0)1947 602906; 
the-black-horse.com <http://www.the-black-horse.com>  

Sandside Cafe, Sandsend
 Sandside Cafe, Sandsend 
As locations go, you will struggle to beat this glorified beach hut at 
Sandsend. You sit with the North Yorkshire moors at your back, the beach at 
your feet, and - running from Whitby's famous ruined abbey to equally dramatic 
cliffs in the north - a two-mile sweep of bay to ponder. The food is creditable 
mainstream cafe tackle. For instance, a Whitby crab sandwich (£5.40) comes on 
ordinary white sliced loaf (essentially, it's just a delivery mechanism), but 
it's fat and fully-loaded with arrestingly fresh crab meat, plenty of the good 
white stuff. The menu includes breakfast, sandwiches, jacket potatoes, pasties 
from Bob Ford of Glaisdale and, the pick of the bunch, Sandside's homemade 
cakes and fruit pies. The carrot cake, not only a big, moist wedge, but 
properly spiced so that it's on its way to being ginger cake, is notably good.
• Snacks from around 80p, sandwiches from £3. East Row, Sandsend, +44 (0)1947 
893916;sandsidecafe.co.uk <http://www.sandsidecafe.co.uk> 

The River Gardens Cafe, Sleights, Whitby
 River Gardens Cafe, Yorkshire Coast 
Part of Perry's Plants - a quaint, idiosyncratic commercial nursery, that also 
comprises an 18-hole putting green - there has been a tea rooms on this site 
for over 100 years, and little wonder. On a sunny day, it's an idyllic spot, on 
the banks of the lazy River Esk, a few miles inland from Whitby, in the small 
village of Sleights. The cafe, a large wooden hut, produces simple, wholesome 
home-cooked dishes. A quiche and three salads (£5.50) is not particularly 
refined (being picky, the kitchen goes a bit heavy on the cheese in its 
quiches), but it's certainly tasty and a generous portion. You'll find Whitby 
scampi and crab sandwiches on the menu, local favourites like steak pies from 
the renowned Sleights' butcher, Radford's, homemade soups, and a good variety 
of colourful, appetising cakes, ranging from blasts-from-the-past, like coconut 
Bakewells, to a freshly baked cherry pie.  
• Perry's Plants, River Gardens, Sleights, Whitby, +44 (0)7785 573625; 
perrysplants.co.uk <http://www.perrysplants.co.uk> 

Getting there

First TransPennine Express <http://www.tpexpress.co.uk> travel from Manchester 
to Scarborough, from £11.50 one way.East coast <http://www.eastcoast.co.uk/> 
travel from London King's Cross to Scarborough from £11.15 one way.

This article was updated on 27 April 2012
 