
Weeton's


Within this posh Yorkshire food store, there is also a cafe which knocks out 
locally sourced breakfasts, sandwiches and appetising lunch dishes, such as 
smoked duck potato cakes. It is popular if lacking in atmosphere: you sit 
serenaded by the background hum of refrigeration units. You are very much 
eating in a shop. A sample plate of eggs Florentine was a generous portion, the 
smoked salmon decent, the eggs sunny. However, at £6.25, elements of it 
(somewhat tired, dry spinach; one egg's yolk already popped; the Hollandaise 
lacking a pointed sharpness) were a little sloppy. It was adequate but no 
classic and, if you're really watching the pennies, my advice would be to skip 
the cafe and buy a few takeaway bits to eat in the park opposite. The store 
sellsVoakes's excellent pork pies <http://www.voakespies.co.uk/>, warm homemade 
pasties and savoury lattices, handsome salads and sandwiches. Its Weeton's 
wedgie (£1.50), a peppery open cheese-and-potato pie, is sensational.
• Takeaway snack items 60p-£4.50, cafe meals £4.95-£10.95. 23-24 West Park, 
01423 507100,weetons.com <http://www.weetons.com>

Bean & Bud

 Photograph: T.L. Mazumdar 
While primarily a coffee shop – one whose conscientious craftsmanship is clear 
in a sample flat white (£2.40) – Bean & Bud also sells a limited selection of 
first-rate food. Its remarkably fresh, packed-that-morning sandwiches use 
ingredients from a neighbouring butcher and Harrogate's renowned dairy dazzler, 
theCheeseboard <http://www.thecheeseboard.net/>. A sample Coverdale cheese 
(like a creamier, cleaner Wensleydale) and red onion marmalade sandwich was 
impeccable. Cakes, meanwhile, come from Brighton-based,Sticky Fingers 
<http://www.stickyfingerscakes.co.uk/>. That might seem a bit ridiculous, 
geographically, but SF – a small, family operation with a growing following 
among independent retailers – makes superb cakes. Its Tunisian orange cake is 
highly recommended. By Harrogate standards, Bean & Bud is quite the bohemian 
hangout, too. I certainly didn't hear Belle & Sebastian anywhere else on this 
visit.
• Coffee from £1.50, sandwiches £3.20, cakes £1.90-£2.60. 14 Commercial 
Street, 01423 508200,beanandbud.co.uk <http://www.beanandbud.co.uk>

Palm Court Cafe

 Palm Court, Harrogate 
Above Farrah's chocolatier and gift store <http://www.farrahs.com/foodhall.php>
 – which itself sells sandwiches, from £1.99, and Voakes's award-winning pies – 
this is a rather old-fashioned cafe in both good ways (home-cooked food 
prepared with decent local ingredients) and bad (rather drab, grannyish decor). 
A dish of rich Lyonnaise potatoes, proper sausages and sweet beetroot and 
carrot salad was every bit as tasty as it sounds. Yes, admittedly, after being 
reheated, those sausages had taken on a distinctive ever-so-slightly mushy 
texture, but, at this price-point, in a limited kitchen, that goes with the 
territory. Flavour is more important than finicky detail, and Palm Court is 
making the best of itself, across a menu that teems with things you would 
gladly eat: Yorkshire ale rarebit; homemade chilli; curried sweet potato soup; 
ploughman platters. Moreover, it is doing so at prices which, by local 
standards, are a pound or so cheaper than the norm. There's a 20% takeaway 
discount, too.
• Meals £3.45-£6.25. 29 Montpellier Parade, 01423 566220, 
palmcourtcafeharrogate.co.uk <http://www.palmcourtcafeharrogate.co.uk>

Cupcakes by Charley

 Cupcakes by Charley 
In Harrogate, there are numerous traditional venues offering afternoon tea. If 
you are looking for something more modern, minus the doilies, this Montpellier 
Quarter cafe, complete with its shocking pink furniture, Burt Bacharach 
soundtrack and fantastical cupcakes, should suffice. To metropolitan baking 
hipsters, the cupcake may be very much last year's thing, but, even at this 
unfashionably late hour, the eponymous Charlotte Mitchell's creations are a 
reminder of just how good the cupcake can be. Not only do her pretend lemon 
meringue pies and sham vanilla sundaes (complete with chocolate flake) look 
fantastic, but they taste remarkably of what they should, with none of the 
sickliness or artificiality that often dogs cupcakes. Her sticky toffee pudding 
creation, particularly, is in a light, beautifully crafted class apart.

• Cupcakes £1.95. 5a Royal Parade, 01423 524330, cupcakesbycharley.co.uk 
<http://www.cupcakesbycharley.co.uk>

Sasso

 Sasso, Harrogate 
It is an illustration of how Britain is tightening its collective belt that, 
even in well-to-do Harrogate, a restaurant of Sasso's reputation needs to 
discount. The upside, for the budget traveller, is that you can eat two courses 
for £8.95 (at lunch and before 7pm Mon-Fri) at this Good Food Guide and 
Michelin-listed Italian. Good complimentary tapenade and somewhat pappy bread, 
was followed by a discus-sized Milanese fish cake, served with an interesting, 
zippily dressed mixed salad and a creamy, nicely calibrated horseradish sauce. 
The cake was well-seasoned and accurately cooked, the filling fairly generous. 
All in all, it was a very pleasant plate of food. The only sour note was having 
to listen to a bloke at the next table, one of several middle-aged, lunchtime 
bargain hunters, explain how public sector waste is strangling the UK economy.
• Before 7pm, two courses, £8.95. 8-10 Princes Square, 01423 508838, 
sassorestaurant.co.uk <http://www.sassorestaurant.co.uk>

Quantro Restaurant

 Quantro, Harrogate 
Midweek lunchtime and this slightly dated modern restaurant – clean lines, 
abstract art, curious plum 'n' pale green colour scheme – was packed. Its very 
competitively priced lunchtime menu clearly has a loyal local following. It's 
not hard to see why. Service is efficient and super-friendly, little touches 
(water comes with ice 'n' lemon in an attractive blue pottery jug) set it 
apart, and the kitchen is sending out reasonably sharp versions of 
crowd-pleasing international classics such as stroganoff, salmon pasta in dill 
and watercress sauce, Caesar salad, and stir-fried chicken noodles with hoi sin 
vegetables. A chunky fish broth was a big bowlful which, while not making any 
pretence to bouillabaisse levels of sophistication – the broth's predominant 
flavour was tomato and garlic, not fish – was hearty, flavourful and packed 
with lightly fried gnocchi and sizable hunks of salmon, white fish and, 
slightly dry, tuna. Likewise, therouille was a rather route-one blended paste, 
but tasty. For £6, who's complaining?
• Lunchtime set menu, two courses, £8, three, £10. Light lunch meals £6-£8. 3 
Royal Parade, 01423 503034,quantro.co.uk <http://www.quantro.co.uk>

Mirabelle

 Mirabelle, Harrogate 
Another lunchtime bargain and, arguably, the pick of the bunch. Good in their 
different ways as Sasso and Quantro were, the experience at chef-owner Lionel 
Strub's French restaurant is, in all respects, a step up. With its understated 
pale blue and off-white colour scheme and its decorative ironwork sculptures, 
the space itself is classy. The service is also easygoing, chatty and on the 
ball, in a way that is all too rare. The food was of a piece with this. An 
accurately cooked sea bass fillet arrived on a generous portion of vibrant, 
saline samphire with a beurre blanc that had a pleasing vinegary twang. This 
came with a good side of vegetables (carrots slightly overcooked, the only 
misstep), as well as free filtered water and a little complimentary appetiser 
of good beetroot and walnut bread. If one of the aims of a discounted lunch 
menu is to tempt you back to pay full price at night, Mirabelle's was certainly 
the most persuasive.
• Lunch, one course £8.95, two £11.95. 28a Swan Road, 01423 565551, 
mirabellerestaurant.co.uk <http://www.mirabellerestaurant.co.uk>

Fat Badger

 Fat Badger, Harrogate 
Attached to the slick White Hart Hotel, the Badger has been given a rather OTT 
makeover. With its taxidermy, oil paintings, Chesterfield sofas, 
faux-flickering gas lamps and handsome dark wood fixtures, it looks how big old 
Victorian pubs might had Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen been alive at the time. The 
food, however – and the Fat Badger is particularly useful in that you can eat 
here all day – will quiet any misgivings about the decor. There are sharing 
platters, upmarket sandwiches and pasta dishes, plus a handful of mains, such 
as fish and chips, Niçoise salad and Asian baby back ribs with fries, priced at 
just under a tenner. The lunch deal (two courses for two, £18.95), where you 
can choose between the likes of haddock in a butter and caper sauce with bubble 
and squeak, or Cumberland sausage and mash with onion marmalade, looks good 
value. Judging by a sample bowl of mushroom soup – big-hitting flavours, a nice 
sour cream edge, dressed with a seriously pungent truffle oil – the kitchen is 
cooking with enough rigour and skill to pull off the above with aplomb. A pint 
of Blonde Witch (£3.30), one of six real ales, was in okay if not sparkling 
form.
• Snacks, sandwiches and sharing platters, £4.95-£10.95, mains £7.95-£11.95. 
Coldbath Road, 01423 505681,thefatbadger.co.uk <http://www.thefatbadger.co.uk>

Graveley's

 Graveley's, Harrogate 
Chatting as my meal is cooked, the guy behind the counter tells me he has 
spent so long in fish 'n' chip shops, he can now tell what brand of oil a 
chippy is using, just by sniffing the air. That is the kind of knowledge you 
want in a chip shop. This being Yorkshire of course, Graveley's uses beef 
dripping. A good quality one too, I'd guess, given that my haddock and chips 
was perhaps most notable for the savoury unctuousness, that ineffable 
lip-smacking background beefiness, which echoed through both the chips and 
fish. The former had a decent crunch, if not a shattering glassiness, while the 
batter was thin enough, if not quite of the tempura-like lightness it can be. 
The mushy peas (90p) were bright and fresh and a reminder of what a warming, 
soul-stirring treat they can be when made properly. Graveley's chip shop is 
attached to a more elaborate restaurant, and so it also offers relatively 
exotic items, such as smoked mackerel paté, prawn cocktail and Whitby wholetail 
scampi, to take away.
• Lunch, haddock and chips, from £3.25, evenings from £4.70. 8-12 Cheltenham 
Parade, 01423 507093,graveleysofharrogate.com 
<http://www.graveleysofharrogate.com> 

The Blue Nile 

 Blue Nile, Harrogate 
Tucked away upstairs at the Blues Bar, Hani Zayed's one-man operation serves 
homely Egyptian food at very keen prices. Don't expect anything flash. Zayed's 
done what he can with the room – rich scents, a few rugs and trinkets, and 
ambient north African music help set the mood – but it's all pretty make do and 
mend. There are Carlsberg beer mats and paper napkins on the tables, the chairs 
don't match and old blues icons are still immortalised in murals on the walls. 
The food, likewise, is all about flavour rather than fussy presentation. From a 
menu that includes familiar eastern Mediterranean staples, such as baba 
ganoush, ful medames and shish kebabs, I enjoyed an intriguing stew of 
(slightly gristly) lamb in a heady gravy, full of fragrant diverging herb and 
spice flavours, the sauce at times almost sour, at others almost perfumed. It 
was served plainly, with rice, like a curry. Not the place to take a fussy 
eater, then, but a find if you fancy a bit of unexpected adventure in Harrogate.
• Starters £4-£5.75, mains £6-£8. Upstairs at the Blues Bar, 4 Montpellier 
Parade, 0779 122 8256,bluesbar.co.uk <http://www.bluesbar.co.uk>

Tony travelled from Manchester to Harrogate with Northern Rail (
northernrail.org <http://www.northernrail.org>). For more information on 
Harrogate, visityorkshire.com <http://www.yorkshire.com>

• Britain's best budget restaurants - read more of Tony's reviews 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/interactive/2011/jan/07/britain-best-budget-eats-restaurants-cafes>
 