
Castle Howard grounds

There's a lot more to North Yorkshire's premier stately home than drawing 
rooms, painted ceilings and marble floors (though they're mighty impressive). 
The house sits in 1,000 acres of countryside on the edge of the North York 
Moors offering bracing walks on to the Howardian Hills to pretty woodland 
picnic spots. If you need the kids to burn off some energy, then hitch a ride 
in the Kelly Car, a bright yellow tractor-powered road train that runs all day 
from the ticket office to the lake. There you'll find a large adventure 
playground. At its centre is a magnificent pyramid tower that houses two 
curling slides. A great place for kids to work up a sweat and for parents to 
grab a coffee from the cafe while keeping an eye on them.
• 01653 648333, castlehoward.co.uk <http://www.castlehoward.co.uk/>. House and 
grounds/grounds only: £13/£8.50 adults, £7.50/£6 children, family ticket from 
£33.50/£23, under-5s free. Open 10am-4pm (grounds only) in low season and 
10am-5.30pm high season

Ryedale Miniature Railway at Gilling East, near Ampleforth
 Ryedale Miniature Railway 
Imagine having a giant model railway in your back garden, one with trains big 
enough for you and lots of friends to sit on top of. That's basically the 
template for the Miniature Railway at Gilling East on the edge of the moors. On 
certain Sundays during the summer months the beautiful, sleepy village near 
Ampleforth echoes to the sound of small steam engines and tooting whistles. A 
local group of model engineers (generally older men with flat caps and generous 
smiles) open their track to the public who can ride on special carriages for a 
small fee (usually 50p a time). There's a smart new clubhouse and cafe built 
with Lottery funding and many people bring a picnic to eat on the grass while 
the trains chuff past.
• rsme.org.uk <http://www.rsme.org.uk/>. Open Sundays from 8 April-30 
September (excluding 20 May and 26 August) from 12.30pm-4.30pm

Eden Camp Modern History Theme Museum, near Malton 
 Eden Camp Modern History Theme Museum, near Malton 
Most children roll their eyes in dismay at the thought of a museum, but Eden 
Camp, on the Pickering road just outside the national park, is hugely popular 
with young people of all ages for the way in which it tells the story of 
Britain during the second world war. It is based around a genuine prisoner of 
war camp and many of the exhibits are inside the original camp buildings, while 
outside are vehicles and aircraft of the period. Life on the home front and 
overseas is recreated in vivid detail through sights, sounds and even smells. 
You can see and hear what the London Blitz was like and experience being in a 
submarine. It treats the subject matter with respect without ever being dull.
• 01653 697777, edencamp.co.uk <http://www.edencamp.co.uk/>. Open Monday to 
Sunday 10am-5pm, adults £6, children £5

Paddling at Sandsend, near Whitby
 Photograph: Leslie Garland Picture Library/Alamy 
If you want to get your feet wet but don't fancy running into the stormy North 
Sea, slip off your shoes and paddle in the stream that runs across the beach at 
Sandsend. This is where a Victorian railway bridge once stood and you can still 
see the foundations of one of its mighty pillars. The stream pools around it 
and during the summer families come here to splash and play in the water. 
Without tides and currents it's a safer alternative to the main beach, great 
for younger children or those less confident in the water. If you like beach 
afternoons without having to be on constant look out for the kids, this is a 
great spot to head to.

Back in time at the Ryedale Folk Museum, Hutton-le-Hole
 Photograph: Alamy 
This three-acre, open-air museum, off the road from Pickering to Helmsley, has 
a delightful collection of more than a dozen historical buildings to explore. 
All of them have been rescued from dereliction and moved here. From a crofter's 
cottage to a 1953 village shop and an Edwardian photographic studio (the oldest 
of its kind in the country) – the buildings are a wonderful way to find out how 
generations of people in the North York Moors lived and worked. The museum also 
has a lively events programme including traditional cooking and craft 
demonstrations. On 2 and 3 June, there will be a second world war weekend, with 
historic vehicles and people dressed in period 1940s' clothing.
• 01751 417367, ryedalefolkmuseum.co.uk <http://www.ryedalefolkmuseum.co.uk/>. 
Adults £7, children £6, family ticket £22.50, under-4s free

Monk Park Farm, near Thirsk
 Photograph: Alamy 
Children and animals are always a good mix, and the visitor centre at Monk 
Park Farm is aimed squarely at younger visitors. It's been developed from a 
dairy farm in the heart of Herriot country and is now home to a wide range of 
animals from sheep and cows to alpacas and wallabies. There are both indoor and 
outdoor feeding areas where children can meet some of the animals up close and 
even bottle feed a lamb or two. There is also a petting barn with smaller 
animals such as guinea pigs and rabbits, an adventure playground, a lake and a 
large tearoom. If you're bringing your own food, then there's also a picnic 
area. It's lively, friendly and most definitely hands-on.
• 01845 597730, monkparkfarm.co.uk <http://www.monkparkfarm.co.uk/>. Open 
every day until Sunday 4 November from 10.30am-5pm (till 6.30pm Wednesdays 
until 5 September). Adults: £5.50, children £4.50, family ticket from £18 (card 
payment charges apply)

Mountain biking in Dalby Forest
 Photograph: Alamy 
For the time being the mountain-bike hire shop in Dalby Forest has closed 
down, but if you have your own wheels, then Dalby is a wonderful place to ride. 
The forest is criss-crossed by a network of trails which are graded by colour 
in a similar way to ski runs, allowing riders of all abilities to enjoy this 
wonderful part of North Yorkshire. The simplest, graded green, follow forest 
roads and are great for family outings and gentle meanderings. The red trail is 
the longest and takes riders into the heart of the forest, which was first 
settled during the Bronze Age. The black trail is for skilled mountain-bikers 
and includes some scarily steep descents between the trees. Whichever trail you 
pick, you'll enjoy being at the heart of the Great Yorkshire Forest.
• 01751 460295, forestry.gov.uk 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/website/recreation.nsf/LUWebDocsByKey/EnglandNorthYorkshireNoForestDalbyForestDalbyForestVisitorCentreandShop>
. Foot, cycle and horse access is free. Cars £7 from 6am-4pm and £4 after 4pm 
(seven-day pass £15)

Take the lift to West Cliff at Whitby
 Photograph: Alamy 
Stepping into the lift to take you down to the beach can be slightly 
disconcerting. You're expecting it to be a Victorian wrought-iron contraption 
hauled by giant chains – but instead you travel in a modern department store 
elevator through 120 feet of solid Yorkshire rock. Once at the bottom, a 
pedestrian tunnel leads onto the beach itself. But it's worth the rather odd 
journey: a wide stretch of sand that is mercifully clear of litter and rubbish. 
Enthusiastic young lifeguards keep an eye on swimmers and body boarders and 
there is a cafe, shop and toilet facilities. Many people come to Whitby without 
ever visiting West Cliff but it's worth seeking out.
• Lift operates 30 April-27 September, 60p single journey

Rock-pooling at Robin Hood's Bay
 Photograph: Alamy 
Grab a net and explore the many rock pools that appear when the tide goes out 
in Robin Hood's Bay. It's a steep walk from the top of the village where the 
car parks and bus stops are, but it's worth it. This is the rock pool central 
of the Yorkshire coast – you can spend hours exploring and searching for all 
manner of marine life left behind by the retreating sea. When you've finished 
(or the tide's turned), head to the coastal exhibition at the coastguard 
station. This explains how the coastline was formed and has water tanks full of 
local sea life in case you were unsuccessful in your own rock-pooling 
endeavours. There's just time to grab a locally made, ice-cream before you 
prepare for the epic walk back up the hill.

Falling Foss Tea Gardens, Sneaton Forest, near Whitby
 Falling Foss Tea Gardens, Sneaton Forest, near Whitby 
Falling Foss looks like somewhere out of a fairytale: a small stone house in a 
beautiful wooded valley next to a magnificent waterfall. Tea gardens may sound 
grand and formal but this place is wonderfully relaxed and child-friendly. The 
house is owned by a husband and wife team who serve great food and drinks in 
what is basically their own garden. But it's more than a place to eat; it's a 
place to explore. The garden is encircled by a stream in which you can splash 
and play andSneaton Forest 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/website/wildwoods.nsf/LUWebDocsByKey/EnglandNorthYorkshireNoForestSneatonForest>
 is great for walking, climbing, running and generally getting up to mischief. 
Up in the forest is The Hermitage, a hermit's cave carved from stone. It's the 
kind of place to fire the imagination as well as your appetite.
• 07723 477929, fallingfossteagarden.co.uk 
<http://www.fallingfossteagarden.co.uk/>. Open April to October, 10.30am-5pm

• Jerry Ibbotson is founder of yorkparents.co.uk

Tell us about a great day out in the area by adding a comment below
 