
Hari Kunzru, novelist

The discovery

I went to the Basel Art Fair and stayed across the German border in a little 
spa town called Badenweiler, which in summer appears to be populated 
exclusively by retirees taking the waters. This gives the place a sephulcral 
calm that is pleasing if you've been surrounded by art world insanity all day. 
It has a castle, a ruined Roman bath and two pieces of stunning 20th-century 
architecture - a beautiful modernist church and multilayered 1960s arts centre 
that I intend to buy and inhabit as a sort of Bond villain. Next door is the 
once-grand Hotel Roemerbad (www.roemerbad-hotel.de 
<http://www.roemerbad-hotel.de>), one part Proust to one part Thomas Mann, a 
slice of pre-First World War Europe that survived the convulsions of the last 
century.

The disappointment 

My lowest point came in Terminal 4 at Heathrow, in the midst of the confusion 
over which liquids you could take on board. I arrived three hours before a 
longhaul flight and just about made it to the gate before it closed. The 
intervening time was spent in a queue, which was being administered by people 
who must have paid a heavy psychological price for working in that environment 
for eight hours at a time. This was the moment I finally admitted to myself 
that the romance of air travel is dead.

Juliet Kinsman, editor of Mr and Mrs Smith Hotel Guides 

The discovery 

I've stayed in some special places, but nothing prepared me for Dar Ahlam in 
Ouarzazate (www.darahlam.com <http://www.darahlam.com>): little wonder its name 
means 'house of dreams'. A friend described this luxury Moroccan hideaway as 
'hotel theatre', and that's exactly what it is. We had breakfast on a 
rosepetal-strewn table by the pool; fresh pomegranate lassis for elevenses; a 
three-course lunch on safari-style tables in the vegetable garden; an aperitif 
on the rooftop watching the sun set behind the Atlas Mountains; and our 
candlelit supper was a tasty tagine in a jewelled corner of the kasbah. Makes 
my mouth water just remembering it.

The disappointment 

I'd heard great things about the cocktail bar at Marina All Suites on 
fashionable Leblon in Rio. Supposedly a favourite with the world's most famous 
Carioca, Gisele, it was hardly a setting befitting supermodels. The tacky decor 
felt more like the product of someone who'd been given £50 and a couple of 
hours at Homebase and Camden Market. The bedrooms were bizarre too - more 
Travelodge than trendsetting boutique hotel.

Phil Hogan, Observer writer & novelist 

The discovery 

I don't much like boats, but my highlight was chugging upriver into the Borneo 
jungle to see the orangutans, proboscis monkeys, macaques and crocs in the 
water. Villagers, who a hundred years ago would have had our heads on sticks, 
waved shyly as we passed. Then on the way back at twilight, an amazing sight as 
wave after wave of huge fruit bats flapped slowly across the dimming sky like 
pterodactyls. It was dark before we knew it, leaving nothing to look at except 
the insects crossing the beam of our headlight and the starry heavens above. Oh 
yes.

The disappointment 

Flying to the US during the big terrorism scare wasn't the best fun of the 
summer. I suppose there's a certain Blitz spirit afoot, hopping about trying to 
get in and out of your clothes in a moving queue and explaining why you're 
carrying quite so many tape recorders, but by the time I'd been X-rayed, 
interrogated, fingerprinted, stamped, waxed and polished through Heathrow, New 
York, Portland and all the way back again, the novelty had kind of worn off.

William Sutcliffe, novelist

The discovery 

I didn't know until this year that you could fly from Glasgow airport on a 
20-seater propeller plane and land on the sand at Barra, the southernmost of 
the Western Isles. The flight is enough to make the trip worthwhile. It's just 
an added bonus that the Western Isles archipelago turned out to possess the 
most stunningly beautiful combinations of mountain, beach and sea I have ever 
come across. And in Scarista House (www.scaristahouse.com 
<http://www.scaristahouse.com>) on Harris, it also happens to possess the 
perfect hotel, serving haute cuisine in the wildest landscape Europe has to 
offer.

The disappointment 

Apart from the food, which was wonderful, Sardinia was a disappointment: 
somehow not as interesting as it has always looked on the map. Apart from the 
beaches, there just didn't appear to be that much to see. It somehow makes 
Italy an even more perfect destination, in that it has managed to effectively 
subcontract out the beach tourism to a separate island, leaving the mainland 
for people in search of something more stimulating.

Joanne O'Connor, travel editor, The Observer

The discovery 

Libya was a revelation. I'd heard the Roman ruins at Leptis Magna were 
incredible and they were, but nothing prepared me for the warmth and generosity 
of the Libyan people. Lying on top of a sand dune in the middle of the Sahara, 
somewhere near Algeria, counting shooting stars has to be one of the highlights 
of my year.

The disappointment 

This was the year in which jetting to Spain on a cheap flight for the weekend 
became the equivalent of drink driving or smoking while pregnant. And while I 
certainly don't want my bargain break to Barcelona to be the thing that tips 
the planet into meltdown, I find it frustrating that the government chooses to 
punish air travellers with increased taxes while seemingly doing nothing to 
bring down the cost of rail travel.

Michael O'Leary, CEO, Ryanair

The discovery 

My highlight came in December when the Office of Fair Trading recommended that 
the BAA airport monopoly should be referred to the Competition Commission. If 
the three London airports were broken up and forced to compete, it would lead 
to better service and lower costs.

The disappointment 

The reported terrorist threat to UK airports in early August, and the way this 
was mismanaged by the Department for Transport and the Home Office, which 
introduced over-the-top, ineffective and nonsensical security measures that 
involved confiscating toothpaste and gels as if these were weapons of mass 
destruction. We hope that the government will learn from this and respond with 
sensible, effective security measures because the only way to defeat terrorists 
is to keep Britain flying.

Viv Groskop, writer

The discovery 

John Burton Race's wonderful The New Angel restaurant in Dartmouth (
www.thenewangel.co.uk <http://www.thenewangel.co.uk>). We were on what was 
otherwise a very child-focused holiday in Devon and allowed ourselves an 
'adult' lunch there as a treat. It is as expensive as you would expect for a 
Michelin-starred restaurant (£50 a head if you're careful with the wine) but 
worth every penny. The seafood is sublime, the desserts incredible. It's 
perfect if you're travelling in on the boat ride from Totnes: the restaurant is 
on the quayside right opposite where the ferry draws up.

The disappointment 

Almost being stranded at Moscow airport, heavily pregnant, when the Russian 
flight staff decided I was so enormous that I must surely be over the 32-week 
limit. I had a doctor's note stating I was only 28 weeks pregnant, but they 
wouldn't accept it. I was deemed not too pregnant, though, to be left standing 
at a check-in counter for half an hour, while they checked my luggage off the 
plane and stared at me incredulously while tutting. In the end I began to weep. 
They relented and checked the luggage back on. Fortunately for all parties 
concerned, I did not give birth on the plane.

Desmond Balmer editor, The Good Hotel Guide

The discovery 

The real find was the Hotel-Restaurant L'Ocean (www.re-hotel-ocean.com 
<http://www.re-hotel-ocean.com>) on the Ile de Re. It had that classic French 
combination of simplicity and style. The restaurant was the focal point, 
attracting locals and visitors alike for the simple but delicious food: local 
oysters, the freshest fish. Our days were spent cycling on the network of 
dedicated tracks that run across the islands. Lunch was a bowl of mussels and a 
glass of wine at a vineyard degustation. Bliss.

The disappointment 

In June, we set an impressive new personal best for a flight delay: 44 hours 
at Birmingham International from cancellation to take-off (previous record, 27 
hours in Paphos). We arrived in good time for an 11am flight to La Rochelle, 
only to find a cargo flight had crash-landed during the night, blocking the 
main runway. Flybe quickly booked us on their next flight; the trouble was that 
this was two days later. True, we didn't hang around for long in an airport 
lounge, but it is just as dispiriting returning home with your suitcase on your 
wedding anniversary.

 Tom Robbins, deputy travel editor, The Observer

The discovery 

For a glimpse of alternative America, ignore San Francisco and head instead to 
Jerome, a former ghost town in the Arizona hills. After its mines closed in the 
1950s, the population crashed from 15,000 to 200, before the hippies gradually 
started to colonise the ramshackle wooden houses which cling to the hillside. 
Today it's on the tourist trail but the counterculture vibe remains. As dusk 
falls, locals play guitars on their balconies, watching the wildfires burn on 
the plains below. Stay at the Connor Hotel (www.connorhotel.com 
<http://www.connorhotel.com>) and drink whisky in the spit and sawdust Spirit 
Room saloon.

The disappointment 

Returning to places you have loved in the past is often a mistake, and I wish 
I'd never gone back to Padstow. We all know the Cornish coastline has been 
getting gentrified for years, but in Padstow it's now reaching the point of 
self-parody. Fishermen unload lobster pots on one side of the dock, watched 
from the other by sharp-suited salesmen from the temporary Jaguar dealership 
set up to capitalise on the moneyed visitors. Every second shop belongs to Rick 
Stein and to get a white coffee you now have to ask for an 'Americano with 
milk'. It's the unrelenting uniformity of it all that's so repulsive, like 
being trapped inside a Boden catalogue. Even the beer is Chalky's Bite, a 
special concoction from local brewery Sharps. Chalky, in case you didn't know, 
is Rick's dog.

Lynn Barber, Observer writer

The discovery 

My biggest discovery was Suffolk! It seems insane that I've been going to 
north Norfolk for decades but somehow completely missed Suffolk. I loved 
Southwold and Walberswick and the brilliant Minsmere nature reserve - it might 
almost make me unfaithful to my beloved Cley. I also did some great 
birdwatching in Trinidad, at the Asa Wright nature reserve (www.asawright.org 
<http://www.asawright.org>) and - less glamorously - on a rather scuzzy lagoon 
behind Montpellier airport, which is a good place to see flamingoes.

The disappointment 

Paying £160 for a day return to Leeds on Virgin trains. How can that be? I 
flew to Austria, Valencia, Montpellier for less. The result is that it now 
seems cheaper to visit friends abroad than in England.

Tom Hall, Lonely Planet

The discovery 

The memory I'll savour is drinking macchiatos in the art deco cafes of Asmara, 
Eritrea's beautiful capital. Eritrea is suffering from bad government and the 
constant threat of war with Ethiopia, but you wouldn't know it to sit and chat 
with the warm, friendly locals. Asmara is a sunny, lively city with an almost 
Mediterranean vibe. The Horn of Africa remains a mostly unexplored destination. 
If the governments of these countries ever sort out their differences, the 
route from Addis Ababa to Asmara via Lalibela's rock churches and the Simien 
Mountains would be one of the continent's great road trips.

The disappointment 

The constant stream of confusion over security measures when travelling 
through UK airports. On one trip I was separated from my deodorant, toothpaste 
and hair wax, only to repurchase them 30 yards beyond the queue and take them 
on the plane unhindered. I felt especially sorry for transit passengers, who 
looked on helplessly as they handed over duty-free and cosmetics. That's 
another planeload of people who won't return here on holiday.

Matt Turner, editor of Hotel Design Magazine Sleeper

The discovery 

Emotionally, I would have to say my honeymoon was my travel high - four nights 
of unadulterated luxury at Carlisle Bay in Antigua (www.carlisle-bay.com 
<http://www.carlisle-bay.com>), followed by a week of Red Stripe, ribs and 
reggae at Ku (www.ku-anguilla.com <http://www.ku-anguilla.com>) on Shoal Bay 
East, Anguilla. But gastronomically it was reliving Lost in Translation at the 
New York Bar & Grill on the 52nd floor of the Park Hyatt Tokyo (
www.tokyo.park.hyatt.com <http://www.tokyo.park.hyatt.com>). Having dined on 
Kobe beef (the cows are massaged and fed lager) and duck-fat fries, followed by 
whisky in the bar, it was probably a high point in terms of cholesterol and 
blood pressure as well, but I made up for it with a healthy 5am sushi breakfast 
the next day at Tokyo's Tsukiji fish market.

The disappointment 

Staying at the new Hilton Manchester and having to get the lift from the 19th 
floor to the ground floor, then queue for 20 minutes with all the non-residents 
for a lift to the skybar on the 23rd floor. It was raining, so the views 
weren't up to much in any case. The next morning I reached the executive lounge 
at 11.02am, to be told that they had stopped serving breakfast at 11am. When we 
pointed to the breakfast buffet that was still laid out, we were told we still 
couldn't eat because 'they had run out of cutlery'. And no, the waitress hadn't 
seen Falling Down (the film where Michael Douglas goes gun-crazy at 
Whammyburger when he is refused breakfast). I know because I asked her.

Peter Tatchell, human rights activist

The discovery 

Madeira. Although better known as a genteel holiday destination for the 
over-50s, the island is paradise for adventure tourism, with sensational 
mountain hiking, canyoning, abseiling and rock climbing. I was gob-smacked by 
its natural wonders. Cloud-touching mountains, cascading waterfalls and virgin 
forest, thick with exotic wildflowers. Volcanic rockpools swept by raging surf. 
Sheer-sided, moss-covered gorges. I did an independent walking tour with 
Headwater Holidays (www.headwater.com <http://www.headwater.com>) and stayed at 
the Royal Savoy Hotel (www.madeiraroyalsavoy.com 
<http://www.madeiraroyalsavoy.com>). Both highly recommended.

The disappointment 

What should have been a fab adventure trek around Tasmania turned into 
disaster. I was climbing the 300m sea cliffs on the Tasman Peninsula when I 
pulled my gluteus maximus (bum muscle). This injury forced me to abandon my 
30-year ambition to do one of the great walks of the world - the six-day trek 
from Lake St Clair to Cradle Mountain. Being a stubborn bastard, I was 
nevertheless determined to climb Cradle Mountain. Hobbling to the summit was an 
unforgettable mix of agony and ecstasy.

Gemma Bowes, Observer travel writer

The discovery 

Every year my friends and I return to a gorgeous cottage near Chagford in 
Devon, let by Rural Retreats (www.ruralretreats.co.uk 
<http://www.ruralretreats.co.uk>). In November, with one member of our (now 
shrunken) group up the duff and another on crutches, we resolved to finally 
visit the town of Totnes for some lightweight shopping and cafe-sitting. We'd 
heard it was quirky and full of hippies but it was better than that; we found 
gorgeous rambling streets packed with amazing furniture and antiques shops, 
organic cafes, cheesemongers and vintage clothes shops selling stuff you just 
can't find in London any more, at a third of the price. And not a hippie in 
sight. To cap it all, we found our idea of the most perfect pub in the world, 
the Barrel House, a scruffy old place with live music and rude pictures in the 
toilets. We drank red wine and swore we'd all move there one day. As we plodded 
giddily back to the car, wrapped in our new woolly hats and gloves, a load of 
lads swerved past in a souped-up Fiesta and leaned out of the window to shout: 
'HIPPIES!'

The disappointment 

Driving around Sri Lanka, I'd heard a lot about the favourite local brew 
'toddy'. It's made from coconut tree sap which is extracted each morning by 
'toddy tappers' who tightrope walk between the upper trunks to reach the 
precious nectar. I loved the coconut whisky, arak, so when we eventually pulled 
over at a roadside toddy stall I believed I was in for a real treat. When the 
skinny, cross-eyed and, frankly, totally hammered vendor passed me a warm cup 
full I took a giant swig. It was absolutely repulsive - an acidic, vinegary, 
dirty soup that tasted like rotten vegetables and piss.

Jay Rayner, food critic

The discovery 

The writer Alain de Botton has claimed that the pleasure of a holiday lies as 
much in the anticipation as in the event itself. I wonder if he has kids. As 
all parents know, booking a holiday for the family can be a nightmare. Get it 
wrong and not only will you have a horrible time, but you will carry on having 
it for two weeks with little prospect of escape. This year, we decided to take 
our small boys abroad, and booked accommodation through Simply Crete (
www.simplycreteholidays.co.uk <http://www.simplycreteholidays.co.uk>). It was 
an apartment in a complex on the north-west of the island, with a huge pool and 
views out over the sea. It was only a few hours after our arrival, as we 
watched our kids leap in and out of the water with the instant friends for life 
that they had already made, that we knew we had found the perfect family summer 
holiday. We'll probably do the same thing next year and this time, we really 
will be able to enjoy a little of de Botton's famed anticipation.

The disappointment 

Before I visited Moscow for the first time this autumn, a friend who had been 
a reporter there for many years told me that the city was 'full of bitterness 
and anger and undiagnosed psychosis'. After five days, under brooding gun-metal 
skies, dodging the iron-browed doormen who stand guard at the entrance to every 
restaurant and eating mediocre food at oligarch prices, I was convinced he was 
right.

Sir Stelios Haji-Ioannou, owner of Easygroup

The discovery 

My high point came on 9 December when the new-look easyCruiseOne called for 
the first time on the island of St Barts in the French West Indies, one of my 
favourite places. Sporting a new, more refined livery in graphite and grey, it 
meant that people no longer cracked jokes about my orange boat.

The disappointment 

The low point was just a few days earlier, when the Chancellor doubled air 
passenger duty for all passengers under the false pretence of a green tax. It 
will only affect the poor, who will not be able to afford it, and it will do 
nothing for the environment. The rich will continue to travel and it takes no 
account of how environmentally friendly your airline is.

Olga Polizzi, hotel designer and owner of Rocco Forte Hotels

The discovery 

Spending time in Berlin overseeing the renovation of our newest hotel, Hotel 
de Rome was my highlight. Berlin truly comes alive at night, and one of my 
discoveries was the Berghain Nightclub - great DJs, great electronic music. The 
club is true Berlin and is housed in an old factory. Be prepared to queue and 
ditch the designer gear -the wilder the better as far as the dress code is 
concerned.

The disappointment 

First Great Western Trains. I regularly use the service to travel to Cornwall 
and Devon to visit my two hotels there, Tresanton and Endsleigh, and the 
sub-standard service never fails to amaze me. I have endured many frustrating 
four-hour journeys with no food and drink as the buffet car is closed and the 
trains are often dirty and in disrepair.

Sarah Turner, travel writer

The discovery 

Having waited all year for the recent rash of business-class only airlines to 
go out of business , I finally relented and flew to New York with Eos (
www.eosairlines.com <http://www.eosairlines.com>). While I've travelled 
business class before, I've never flown without the nagging knowledge that only 
a flimsy curtain separates you and your champagne from the huddled masses. It 
took a plane with just 48 passengers to make me realise that all that guilt and 
recycled air can take its toll on a person. And given that on regular airlines 
business fares are kept artificially high to subsidise economy passengers, it's 
cheaper. A return to New York costs from £1,100, compared with £3,993 on BA.

The disappointment 

Riding an elephant at a sanctuary in Thailand. Yes, it supports the work of a 
pioneering conservation project. This I can admire. And having a Westerner on 
their back for two hours is doubtless better than their previous life sleeping 
on the streets in Bangkok (as a result of a decline in the use of elephants in 
the logging industry), but I don't need to go through the personal humiliation 
of clambering on their backs to appreciate their good fortune. Feeding them a 
banana would have been enough.

Pete Tong, DJ

The discovery 

Amsterdam. My memories were of school trips, seedy gigs and the red light 
district, but that all changed when I went to the Amsterdam Dance Music 
Conference in October. We had some time to kill and walked around the city. 
Everyone was so nice; no chain stores, lots of happening furniture shops and 
boutiques, beautiful canals. The lack of traffic was a bonus, there were bikes 
everywhere - so different to London.

The disappointment 

My experiences at Heathrow. It has hit meltdown and can't handle it anymore. I 
went to Russia last week and the baggage system had broken down at Heathrow. On 
the way back we had to wait two and a half hours for luggage.

Hilary Bradt, founder of Bradt Travel Guides

The discovery 

Brooklyn Museum (www.brooklynmuseum.org <http://www.brooklynmuseum.org>). I 
discovered there was an exhibition by the Australian sculptor Ron Mueck and 
another by Walton Ford, who does extraordinary wildlife paintings. Mueck's 
lifelike but wrong-size sculptures were as mind-boggling as I expected. But it 
was the whole museum that I found entrancing. It doesn't try to show too much, 
so you never feel overwhelmed, and the exhibits are all clearly labelled. The 
museum is inexpensive and next to the main botanical garden.

The disappointment 

I was in Madagascar climbing Marojejy, an impressive peak above 2,000m. We did 
it in style, with porters and a cook called Primo, who lived up to his name, 
producing first-class meals. Until the fourth day. Optimistically I ladled what 
looked like a delicious stew onto my mound of rice. Primo was standing by 
beaming proudly. I took a large mouthful. But I couldn't swallow it. Even with 
onions and tomatoes, dried fish tastes like its smell. Out it came.

Alastair Sawday, publisher, Special Places to Stay Guides

The discovery 

I had never been to Brussels, discouraged by its reputation for banality, but 
on the way back from the Frankfurt Book Fair by train I couldn't resist a peek 
at the Grand'Place. It is a riot of architectural joyousness, of unrestrained 
preening, pomp and plagiarising. Not a square metre fails to delight. I found 
myself almost laughing out loud at the audacity of it all. And then I learnt 
that Louis XIV's guns had once flattened it, so what I was admiring was a risen 
phoenix - the outpouring of civic pride. And that was rather moving, for here 
was a city's people determined to recreate what they knew to be beautiful.

The disappointment 

Arriving at the Birmingham NEC to give a travel talk and accidentally 
wandering into the adjacent hall where the Clothes Show Live was in full 
throttle. Surrounded by gaggles of painted fashionistas with manicured talons 
and extended hairpieces, I was a Gulliver marooned on a strange island. As the 
crowds of teenage girls grew denser, my alienation grew deeper. While the 
celebrity crowd animators offered the girls one freebie after another ('Now 
what do I have in this bag for you?'), I bowed out, ungracefully.
 