
Job: founder, chairman, Brunswick Group
Age: 52
Industry: public relations
Staff: 400
Worth: £112m
2007 ranking: 89

Alan Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker> is the City PR man 
with influence at the heart of Downing Street.

Founder and chairman of Brunswick, one of the most powerful corporate and 
financial PR companies in the world, Parker is a close personal friend of 
Gordon and Sarah Brown.
 Alan Parker. Photograph: Alex Lentati  The prime minister is godfather to one 
of Parker's children and his wife used to work at Brunswick. It was Parker who 
recommended Stephen Carter, former Ofcom chief executive and (briefly) the 
chief executive of Brunswick, to be the PM's new chief of strategy.
When Brown visited China and India at the beginning of this year, he was 
accompanied not only by Carter but Parker as well, prompting one observer to 
ask - was the prime minister getting two advisers for the price of one?

"Alan Parker is in a different league. His influence in boardrooms is huge," 
said our panel, who put Parker above both his Finsbury rival Roland Rudd and 
Matthew Freud in this year's MediaGuardian 100.

Founded in 1987, Brunswick is the PR outfit most firms think of first when 
they have a major deal to announce or want to spin their way out of trouble.

Key clients include Astra Zeneca, Barclays, British Airways and Diagio, and in 
the media sector, Pearson, Thomson Reuters, Reed Elsevier, NBC Universal and 
Time Warner.

Its list of high profile clients is matched only by Parker's penchant for 
hiring big name staff, including Carter, former Sun editor David Yelland, 
former Bill Clinton aide James Rubin and former FT media editor Tim Burt.

A former oil rig worker and rock band manager, Parker founded Brunswick with 
the help of his father, former British Rail boss Sir Peter Parker. He has kept 
the company independent, reportedly rejecting a £200m takeover bid from Sir 
Martin Sorrell's WPP several years ago.

Married to former political lobbyist Jane Hardman, on the guest list at the 
wedding were both Brown and Conservative party leader David Cameron, with whom 
Parker was pictured on holiday in South Africa earlier this year.

His brothers are Nathaniel Parker, who plays Thomas Lynley in BBC1 drama The 
Inspector Lynley Mysteries, and the film director Oliver Parker.

Parker Sr was knighted in 1978. Will his son go on to match that achievement 
or perhaps go one better and end up in the House of Lords?

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk 
<mailto:editor@mediaguardian.co.uk> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 