
Job: founder and chairman, Brunswick Group
Age: 53
Industry: public relations
Staff: 400
2008 ranking: 77

The founder and chairman of the City's biggest PR firm, Brunswick Group, Alan 
Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker> is close to both Gordon 
Brown and David Cameron. In the current political climate, that is clearly the 
place to be.

Parker is also a godfather to one of the prime minister's children. Sarah 
Brown, who ran her own PR company, also once worked for Parker.

The Brunswick Group boss straddles the world of politics and big business, 
although he is not always to everybody's taste. The Daily Mail's Peter Oborne 
railed against the "new breed of public relations men who, normally in exchange 
for a large fee, would massage the links between the wealthy and the political 
class".

He added: "No one can begin to understand modern British politics without 
knowing who these individuals are and how they operate."

The son of Sir Peter Parker, the former head of British Rail, Parker was an 
oil rig worker and a rock band manager before founding Brunswick in 1987.

It made its name in 1991 when it was hired by ICI to fend off a takeover by 
the Anglo-American conglomerate Hanson, and he has since built it into one of 
the most powerful PR companies in the world with offices in 15 countries and 
nearly 500 staff.

Key clients include AstraZeneca, Barclays, British Airways and Diagio, and in 
the media sector, Pearson, Thomson Reuters, Reed Elsevier and NBC Universal. 
Brunswick is retained by more than a quarter of FTSE 100 companies.

Parker's big-name clients are matched by his penchant for "trophy" 
appointments, big names likely to impress his City clients including the ex-Sun 
editor David Yelland and the former Financial Times media editor Tim Burt, who 
are both partners of the firm in London.

He also hired the former Ofcom chief executive Stephen Carter, now the 
government's communications minister, and recommended him to Brown.

Both Brown and Cameron were guests at Parker's wedding to the former political 
lobbyist Jane Hardman, in 2007. The Tory leader was pictured with Parker on 
holiday in South Africa last year.

Parker is one of three famous brothers: Nathaniel Parker starred as Thomas 
Lynley in BBC1 drama The Inspector Lynley Mysteries, while Oliver Parker is a 
film director.

Parker Sr was knighted in 1978. Will his son go on to match that achievement 
or will he end up one better with a seat in the House of Lords? His 
chairmanship of Save the Children UK is unlikely to do the prospect any harm.
 