
Job: founder, chairman, Brunswick Group
Age: 51
Industry: public relations
Staff: 400
Worth: £112m
New entry

Alan Parker's Brunswick is one of the most powerful corporate and financial PR 
companies in the world.

Chairman of the PR outfit most firms think of first when they have a major 
deal to announce or want to spin their way out of trouble, Parker advised 
former BP chief executive Lord Browne, who resigned after he failed to prevent 
the Mail on Sunday printing details of his private life

Its list of high-profile clients - EMI, Pearson, Reuters, Time Warner - is 
matched by Parker's penchant for hiring some of media's biggest names to work 
for him, including Brunswick's chief executive, former Ofcom head Stephen 
Carter.

Described as the "great conduit" between Whitehall and the City, nowhere was 
this more apparent than at Parker's wedding to former lobbyist Jane Hardman in 
March, where guests included Gordon Brown and David Cameron.

The prime minister is godfather to the couple's son, William, and his wife 
Sarah Brown is a long-standing friend of Parker and once worked for him.

Parker has overseen some of the City's most talked about takeovers and 
acquisitions - advising on deals worth nearly £350bn in Europe and the US in 
2006 - and has a hotline to any chief executive around the world.

Founded 20 years ago, Brunswick has 13 offices in 10 countries and more than 
330 clients including 22 of the firms in the FTSE 100. Parker owns more than 
50% of the business, with the rest split between around 65 partners.

Its list of media clients also includes Emap, BBC Worldwide, Reed Elsevier, 
ITN and SMG.

Parker hired former Ofcom boss Carter to be his chief executive last December. 
Other big name Brunswick hirings have included ex-Sun editor David Yelland and 
former Bill Clinton aide James Rubin.

A former oil rig worker and rock band manager, Parker founded Brunswick in 
1987 with the help of his father, former British Rail boss Sir Peter Parker.

Alan Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker> is reported to be 
worth £112m, some £42m more than when he last appeared in the MediaGuardian 100 
in 2004.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 