
Jimmy Carter’s August announcement that doctors had discovered tumors on his 
brain came with a promise: the former US president would scale back his work 
schedule.

Months later, he sheepishly admits that hasn’t happened. Carter, who 
celebrated his 91st birthday in October, told the Associated Press he has a 
good reason – he feels just fine.

Carter, speaking with the AP hours before participating in a home-building 
project organized by Habitat for Humanity in Memphis,Tennessee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tennessee>, said he’ll continue receiving 
immune-boosting drugs to help his body seek out cancer cells after completing 
four rounds of treatment. It’s too early for doctors to determine the drug’s 
result since August, he said. He also received a targeted radiation treatment 
that month.

Jimmy Carter's hometown rallies after cancer diagnosis with hundreds of signs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/20/jimmy-carters-hometown-cancer-hundreds-signs>
“I’ve reacted well to the treatments,” he said. “I haven’t been uncomfortable 
or ill after the treatments were over. So that part of it has been a relief to 
me and I think to the doctors. But the final result of how well the treatments 
are combating or controlling the cancer, we don’t know yet.”

Carter said he hasn’t cut anything from his schedule at the Carter Center, the 
human rights organization he founded after leaving the White House. He is 
demurring on an election monitoring trip this month in Myanmar, but election 
observers will include his grandson and the center’s new CEO, Jason Carter.

He has also taken on a mediation role in a dispute among Martin Luther King 
Jr’s children and has continued to act as Habitat for Humanity’s most prominent 
booster.

Carter and the Atlanta-based charity have been synonymous for more than 30 
years. Carter’s presidential museum inAtlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta> even includes an exhibit 
featuring a pair of his work boots and a hammer once used in a contest on the 
Tonight Show.

He and his wife, Rosalynn, have volunteered a week of their time annually 
since 1984, events dubbed “Carter work projects” that draw thousands of 
volunteers and take months of planning. The streak seemed at risk in August 
when he revealed his illness and doubts about making a planned November build 
in a remote region of Nepal.

Ultimately, concerns about civil unrest in the region forced the trip’s 
cancellation rather than Carter’s health (his doctors had approved the trip). 
Carter said he was looking forward to the planned building strategy there, 
describing plans for walls woven of bamboo with the anticipation of a builder 
starting a new project.

“Back in August ... I didn’t know if I would be physically able or if the 
doctors would let me go to Nepal, but they finally approved my going, and I was 
very happy and excited about that,” Carter said. “To find out that we couldn’t 
go because of civil disorder in Nepal was just a very serious blow to me and I 
presume to the other 2,500 people who were going to join us down there.”

Instead, Carter joined some of those volunteers raising the walls of a new 
home north of downtownMemphis <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/memphis> on 
Monday morning after donning a white hard hat and a tool belt stocked with 
hammer, measuring tape and a thick pencil. He also will announce plans to 
return to the city in August for a weeklong project.

Carter said he likes detail work, such as placing trim around doors and 
windows. It reminds Carter of the furniture pieces he makes in a workshop 
inside the couple’s compound in his small hometown of Plains, Georgia. Carter 
said he tries to become “a regular worker” at Habitat sites, with breaks for 
media interviews on the organization. His work ethic on these sites has become 
part of Habitat lore, a reputation of which Carter seems aware.

“While I’m working, I don’t want anybody to bother me,” he said, smiling. “I 
don’t want other volunteers to be coming and taking photographs because they’re 
not working and I’m not working when they’re taking my photograph.”

Next August, volunteers plan to build 21 homes in a Memphis neighborhood. The 
organization also plans to complete other home repairs and landscaping, along 
with home repairs or modifications for low-income seniors living around the 
area.

As for Carter, his favorite moment remains handing the keys and a Bible to 
home recipients, who along with volunteers are often moved to tears.

“As a matter of fact,” he said, “I get maybe a little more emotional the older 
I get.”
 