
Letter from America No 2743, September 14 2001

I turned on a 24-hour news station and saw a kind of movie I detest, of the 
towering inferno type: a roaring image, of a monolith collapsing like a 
concertina in a vast plume of smoke. Just as I pressed my thumb to switch to 
"the real world", I caught the familiar voice of a newsman and realised I was 
in the appalling real world of Tuesday September 11, 2001, a date that for 
Americans will live in infamy, along with the memories of Pearl Harbor, 
December 7, 1941, and November 22, 1963, the grievous day of President 
Kennedy's assassination.

Before nightfall, an old United States senator was to call it "the most tragic 
day in American history". And by that time, numb from the apocalyptic images 
[of four US airliners deliberately brought down by hijackers, who crashed two 
of them into the World Trade Centre towers in New York], not even a historian 
was going to question the senator's definition by bringing up, say, the civil 
war and a million dead. But in our time, in my time certainly, the most awful, 
startling, morning I can remember, not because this was the most awful domestic 
disaster ever, but because, for the first time in the American experience, an 
act of war aroused, and television pulverised, our senses in a way we'd never 
known.

For myself, after the first mere announcement, I thought back to another 
September, by a fluke of memory, to another September 11. You must bear with me 
in this. The point will emerge. The first great battle of the first world war 
was over, the Battle of the Marne, on the 11th, and in the following days the 
newspapers hailed the German retreat as a triumph. The subheadings printed: 
"Heavy casualties on both sides." I didn't at first know what that meant, but 
soon learned, as during the next four years it became a standard phrase.

We often suggested the German casualties - at 60,000 in one day. We didn't 
print numbers of our own. Later, when the Battle of the Somme was over, Britain 
had lost a quarter of a million men in that battle alone. We never knew nor 
read that. Many years later, I wrote: "Is it conceivable that if the British 
could have been a population of viewers - of television viewers instead of 
newspaper readers - is it conceivable they would have just shaken their heads 
and gone to the railway stations, as they did, to wave their boys off on the 
troop trains?'

So, the first thing I felt was, "This is a war. It's here, it's happening to 
us." It is the first thing, I think, for people outside the United States to 
realise. It is the same feeling of bewilderment and secret fear (What next?) 
that Londoners felt after the first night of the Blitz, in September 1940.

If there is one note, one small note, in this whole monstrous story that can 
be called heartening, it is the act on Wednesday of the Nato ambassadors in 
Brussels. For the first time in the history of the alliance, the council voted 
to invoke Article 5 of the original treaty, which says plainly (something that 
has been quietly and blandly evaded): "An armed attack against any of the 
allies in Europe or North America shall be considered an attack against them 
all." This was far and away the best news for the White House and the Pentagon 
in many a year, for it gave strength and credibility to the president's promise 
of punishment for the perpetrators.

 Was Saddam a threat 

Letter No 2866, January 30 2004 

If I wanted to catch your attention at once, I should say that not since a 
lanky, unknown, young American aviator dropped his rickety plane by night into 
the Paris airport, climbed out and said "I am Charles Lindbergh", has a totally 
unknown American hurtled overnight into the limelight of more countries than 
his own. I'm talking about the lightning arrival on the scene of David Kay. 
While Charles Lindbergh's act was one of great personal courage it did not 
affect the political fate of any nation. Dr Kay's single Reuters interview has 
deeply embarrassed the Bush administration and could prove to be the first 
strike to wound it.

David Kay was, until last week, the chief weapons inspector of the Central 
Intelligence Agency. However, Mr Kay resigned last Friday and made public the 
findings of his long association with the task of searching through Iraq for 
biological and chemical weapons, and the materials that might suggest a 
forthcoming nuclear arms programme. The whole argument about Saddam's threat 
has been reduced or simplified in most countries to the question: Did he or did 
he not have weapons of mass destruction?

Now, what did Dr Kay conclude in the findings he reported to the Reuters 
agency? He said that the CIA and United Nations inspectors uncovered all there 
was of a nuclear programme, and that after the Gulf war further nuclear efforts 
to make a crude bomb were a failure. Also, well before the invasion of Iraq, 
Saddam had abandoned his biochemical weapons programme. In the end Dr Kay said 
it all in seven words: "It turns out we were all wrong." All meaning the 
American and British and other allied intelligence. Dr Kay thus gave the 
president the escape hatch that the Hutton report opened to Prime Minister Tony 
Blair.

Asked by a reporter next day if he would now withdraw the "weapons of mass 
destruction" excuse, the president looked dazed; and after six seconds simply 
dodged the question.

He said he had regarded Saddam as a serious threat to the security of the 
United States. Why he turned down a golden opportunity to claim rightly that he 
was misled is a mystery. He just doesn't want to blame anybody, including the 
CIA.

Do you remember the movie Casablanca, about a cynical American played by 
Humphrey Bogart who sets up a nightclub in Casablanca during its occupation by 
France's Vichy government? He pretends to be indifferent but is secretly 
helping refugees from Hitler get to America. Asked, "Why did you come to 
Casablanca?" lazily he replied: "I came for the waters." "Meester Rick, there 
are no waters in Casablanca." "I was misinformed."

When will the president quote Bogart?
 