
The noises coming from the England camp after their Ashes win should be 
encouraging for supporters because the message is not one of mission 
accomplished but that they are aware improvements are needed before two tough 
Test assignments this winter.

Trevor Bayliss, the head coach, has been very impressive during his short time 
in charge and was spot on in saying that the victory must not paper over cracks 
in the team. He knows there is a lot of work to be done with a developing side 
and will now look at ways to address the shortcomings. Victory over Australia 
is a very handy starting point.

Ashes 2015 review: the best and worst from this year’s series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/24/the-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review>
Trevor arrived in the country the day before the squad flew to Spain for their 
training camp at the end of June and is still learning about English cricket. 
We have spoken on the phone about some of the players atYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> and I know he will be contacting 
other coaches, directors of cricket, umpires and people in the coming weeks and 
months.

His assistant coach, Paul Farbrace, is another key man in this respect. They 
have an excellent rapport and Farby, who helped lay the foundations for the 
England team before Trevor arrived, is an excellent judge of a player, too. 
Neither is the type to rest on his laurels and they should still be encouraging 
a positive mind-set with the bat, even after an up-and-down showing in the 3-2 
win.

Joe Root, named man of the series for England, epitomises this positive 
approach and is one of the reasons why I believe the future looks bright. And 
just to stress this point again, being positive and aggressive is not about 
trying to smash every ball to the boundary; you can still show this intent when 
leaving.

Ricky Ponting was a player who did this. He would still make a pronounced 
movement when not offering a shot, meaning the ball went past on his terms. 
Leave with your feet stuck in cement and it betrays indecision, which the 
bowler will pick up on.

Joe is cut from the same cloth as Ponting in that he makes good decisions and 
movements at the crease. England’s batting is a concern for some but for me the 
talent is there, they just need to look at how Rooty has gone about his 
business as a how-to guide.

First up, before South Africa, is Pakistan in the United Arab Emirates, which 
despite being a neutral venue has become something of a stronghold for 
Misbah-ul-Haq’s side, with eight wins from their last 13 Tests there. England 
went there in 2012 as the world’s No1 side and lost 3-0 but this year they must 
keep an open mind about what they can achieve.

Spin will play a big part and Adil Rashid, who has been taken on tours and 
followed the team around all summer, is at the stage where he needs to play for 
England to find out about him in Test cricket. And the sooner the better for 
me. Give him these three Tests – six innings with the ball on surfaces that 
will suit him – and they will have their answer.

One idea floated has been for Moeen Ali to open the batting to help slot Rash 
in. This could work but there are other ways, too. Moeen could move up the 
order to replace Ian Bell or Jos Buttler could step aside to give Jonny 
Bairstow the gloves. But I get the feeling Buttler has become an important 
voice in the dressing room and England like what he is about.

Bell has made some noises about considering his Test future and, like Michael 
Clarke, only he will truly know the answer to the question of whether he is 
hungry enough to continue. I always think that, if you are thinking about 
retiring, you have probably decided already. But maybe this was just weary talk 
at the end of a tough series.

On Adam Lyth, I am personally gutted he has not been able to show how good a 
player he is. He knows the numbers don’t stack up and it is down to the 
selectors now to make their call. If they go for change, I believe they should 
look at a right-handed option at the top alongside Alastair Cook in the UAE.

With all due to respect to Cook – a fine player who, with Kumar Sangakkara now 
retired, is the leading active run-scorer in Test cricket – spin is not his 
strongest suit. He has a cut shot, drives the genuine half-volley or tucks one 
off the hips, but he does not leave his crease much. And so a right-hander who 
plays with positive intent could complement Cook rather than another leftie. 
Alex Hales, whom many are suggesting, would go well.

It has been noted that Gary Ballance has batted at No5 for Yorkshire since he 
was left out by England but that is actually due to the make-up of our own side 
and he could yet move up for us if we need him to. My feeling, though – and 
this is not based on anything I have been told – is that the best way back into 
the England side for Gaz is in the middle order.

So, if Bell does decide to retire, the long-term solution could be to deploy a 
Yorkshire middle order with Root moving up again to No3, followed by Gaz and 
Jonny. Gaz has certainly not played his last Test match, though; it is not a 
case of if he returns but when.

The third spinner in the touring party is a tricky one – there is not a great 
number of them around in county cricket at the moment and those who are 
Test-ready are at the older end of the spectrum, like Gareth Batty at Surrey or 
James Tredwell at Kent. Both would do a job but I am a big fan of Scott 
Borthwick of Durham, too.
 