
At 6.45am, I arrive at my first appointment of the day: 88-year-old Florence. 
She lives on her own and needs help starting her day. Although I don’t actually 
start my shift until 7am, I always like to get there slightly early as I know 
Florence will be looking out the window, awaiting my arrival.

My career from French patisserie to care home cookery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/apr/24/my-career-from-french-patisserie-to-care-home-cookery>
For many of my clients, I am the only person they will see in a day, so it’s 
important to make sure they know they are the focus of my attention during a 
visit.

I help Florence get washed and dressed and make her some breakfast. I tidy her 
surroundings and ensure she is settled, safe and secure. But, most importantly, 
I talk to her and listen to how she is feeling.

We see many reports in the media about “clock-watch care”, where visits are 
restricted to 15 minutes or less, with one recent story even claiming thathalf 
a million home care visits last less than five minutes 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2954910/Shock-toll-5-minute-care-visits-Hundreds-thousands-elderly-suffer-drive-bys.html>
.

It would be impossible for me to get anything done that is of value to people 
in this short time.

The minimum amount of time I will spend with a client is 30 minutes, which 
means I can get to know their unique qualities rather than just see them as a 
checklist of care needs. Indeed, according to the National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence (Nice), homecare visits to elderly people shouldlast for at 
least half an hour 
<https://www.nice.org.uk/news/article/most-home-care-visits-should-be-at-least-half-an-hour>
.

Florence is certainly worth more than just a tick on my rota; she’s a 
fascinating lady who deserves my complete focus during my time with her. I’ve 
got to know her habits, such as making a cup of tea how she likes it – with a 
squeeze of lemon and a drop of honey.

Paying attention to the finer details and adapting to each call is an 
essential part of my role. As well as Florence, I can see another four to five 
people throughout the day – some days I see up to 12 clients, depending on 
their needs.

I can’t sing for toffee, but one of my clients is a nervous, self-conscious 
lady and I discovered one day that she relaxes more if I sing to her while 
getting her washed and dressed.

My sense of fun seems to be an effective way of connecting with many of my 
clients, who are themselves such characters with wonderful stories to tell.

I help them in a variety of ways; from essential tasks, such as ensuring they 
take their medication, to more social activities, such as going to the shops or 
for a little walk outside.

Caring for people is an awesome responsibility and I feel enormous privilege 
to be given that trust. I know that it is a daunting and scary experience to 
accept someone other than family into your home and life.

Want to write for us about working in social care? This is how
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/aug/14/write-about-working-in-social-care>
I was inspired to work in homecare after caring for my own husband, mother and 
daughter during illnesses and before they died, so I know first-hand the 
importance of helping people feel as comfortable as possible in an environment 
that means something to them. I joined Bluebird Care York because of its 
reputation for delivering the level of care that you would expect for your own 
friends and relatives.

There are huge positives to working in care – it’s a career where you can get 
an enormous sense of personal achievement from knowing you are helping other 
people. The opportunity to make a real difference to someone’s life is a 
wonderful and rewarding experience.

Names of clients have been changed
 