
Andrew Wasike knows better than many the realities of modern – or not so 
modern – social housing. Through his work with the Leeds Tenant Federation, he 
goes inside a lot of homes, and is often worried by what he sees.

Wasike claims that the government's Decent Homes commitment – to ensure that 
by 2010 all accommodation is warm, weatherproof and has reasonably modern 
facilities – has turned out to be "merely cosmetic", with only a handful of 
homes in each area getting attention. But with a financial squeeze on the 
horizon, he is adamant that completing the project must be a priority, and that 
it will end up saving resources elsewhere.

"Some families are living in very poor conditions," he says. "We're in the 
21st century; we need proper standards. It affects people's health. The cold 
weather goes straight through the walls. If these were insulated, people would 
reduce the amount of visits they make to their GP with problems like asthma."

Having lived in the Netherlands for seven years, Wasike, a former political 
detainee who left his native Kenya in 1999, is keen for the government to look 
to other European countries for solutions.

"In the Netherlands, central government gives every local authority money that 
is supposed to maintain houses," he says. "It has to be used for that work, and 
any money that is left has to be returned. Councils have an obligation to see 
that it has improved standards, and if it is judged that it hasn't then the 
councils will be held responsible and made to pay back the money." That 
incentive, he says, makes all the difference to delivery.

Wasike is keen for tenants to take a greater stake in the upkeep of their 
homes. "We should find a way to educate tenants to maintain their homes and 
keep them in good shape, so it's not only housing associations or councils who 
are responsible. Residents need to work as a team with them. Landlords should 
walk around and see if their houses are well maintained. If they're not, they 
should be asking why that is."

Rachel Williams and Shanthy Sooriasegaram
 