
Jason Gillespie will enter talks with the director of England cricket, Andrew 
Strauss, over the vacant head coach role knowing his bargaining position has 
grown stronger as a result ofthe decision by his former Australia team-mate 
Justin Langer to withdraw from the running 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/19/justin-langer-rules-out-england-job>
.

Gillespie is due to meet Strauss this week to discuss replacing the sacked 
Peter Moores but went on record on Tuesday to state that he is currently very 
content as coach ofYorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> and 
would require some serious persuasion to be prised away from Headingley.

“I’m in my dream job,” he told the BBC. “It would certainly take persuading 
[to leave]. It’s very humbling, very flattering [to be linked to the job]. But 
I haven’t had any contact and until that happens I can’t say anything.”

Justin Langer out of running for England job after signing new deal in 
Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/19/justin-langer-rules-out-england-job>
Such a pronouncement from the 40-year-old should come as no surprise given his 
position as the standout candidate in a shrinking field. The names of Trevor 
Bayliss and Tom Moody, two more Australians, are not carrying much traction 
while Strauss has previously stated that Paul Farbrace, caretaker coach for the 
New Zealand series, is not in his thinking and that both men agree he would be 
better as assistant to the long-term appointment.

Farbrace, who has worked with Gillespie at Headingley and was previously in 
charge of Sri Lanka, would be keen, however, if Strauss were forced into a 
rethink. “It would be very hard to say no to it,” he said. “I have got this 
chance against New Zealand and I’m going to give it a really good go. If at the 
end of it something happens, then great.”

Gillespie remains the frontrunner, however, and now armed with the knowledge 
that Langer, despite two phone calls from Strauss in the past week, has signed 
a new two-year deal to remain as coach of Western Australia, he will be able to 
state his terms with even greater authority and iron out any concerns over the 
role.

The former Australia fast bowler could look to address the issue of how much 
time is spent away from home and will push Strauss for assurances over the 
role’s power in light of the decisions to continue Kevin Pietersen’s exile and 
give long-term assurances to Alastair Cook and Eoin Morgan over their 
respective captaincies in Test and one-day cricket.

Away from that pressing appointment, Strauss can at least relax in the 
knowledge that the England players are focused on facing New Zealand in 
Thursday’s first Test at Lord’s, having addressed them and the backroom staff 
for the first time on Tuesday morning before their training session. He 
outlined his vision for the team and explained the rationale behind the 
decisions on Moores and Pietersen. The wicketkeeper Jos Buttler, a close friend 
of the latter, insisted any mutterings in the camp have now subsided.

“He was very open and honest about what has gone on and all the players 
respected that,” Buttler said. “Nothing has been kept from anyone and everyone 
knows the reasons why things are happening and what the plan is moving forward.

“It was great to hear from the man himself what his visions are. You read 
things in the press and you pick on hearsay but to sit in a room and hear him 
say why these decisions have been made and what the plan is moving forward 
gives the players clarity about what is going on.

Moores is understood to have written to the players to wish them well in their 
careers and state he will remain an England supporter, despite the shabby 
nature of his sacking 10 days ago.

Buttler, who made his Test debut under Moores last summer, hailed his former 
coach and claims any future success will be built on the foundations he laid.“A 
lot of people enjoyed working with Peter and were sad to see him go. We have to 
move on but what is good for the team moving forward is that some of the really 
good work that Peter did during his tenure as coach won’t be lost. He has put 
things in place for the team and I don’t think anyone will ever forget that.”
 