 Scandinavia's best-known war correspondent, and the best-selling Norwegian 
author ever, walks into the hotel bar looking healthy, rested and tanned, and 
thus quite unlike anyone else in wintry central London. Åsne Seierstad is 
riding a whirlwind of promotional interviews, ostensibly for A Hundred and One 
Days, her journal about being one of the few western reporters still in Baghdad 
when it was introduced to the concept of Shock and Awe. What everyone really 
wants to talk about, however, is a book she wrote at the beginning of the war 
on terror, The Bookseller of Kabul.
Seierstad entered Kabul with the Northern Alliance in November 2001. Like 
other western reporters exhausted by the privations and dust of battle, she was 
relieved to meet Shah Mohammad Rais, a bookseller who regaled her with stories 
of book-burnings under the communists, the mujahideen, the Taliban, of the 
thousands of volumes he had hidden, of his hopes for a liberal, democratic 
Afghanistan. He invited her to dinner, and she was struck by a simple idea: 
could she come and live with him for a few months, so she could see what
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> was really like, 
and write a book about it? He told her she was welcome.

The result was not quite what either of them had expected: she was shocked by 
the treatment his female relatives received, and by the cruel lengths to which 
Rais went to protect his business. When Rais - thinly disguised as the 
character Sultan Khan - read it, he felt so furiously betrayed that he flew to 
Norway, engaged a high-profile lawyer, and threatened to sue for "defamation of 
me, my family and my nation".

None of this did Seierstad much harm: the book was already doing well, and the 
controversy simply aided its climb of the bestseller charts. It has been sold 
in 20 countries; there are a million copies in print. But Rais's reaction, so 
unusual in the history of western interpretations of the third world, prompts 
uncomfortable questions. To what extent is the book's success due to the fact 
that it plays on preconceived ideas of Afghanistan? Does a western woman, 
privileged, glamorous, have the right to hold a third world family up to her 
own values and find it wanting? Is it realistically possible to do anything 
else - there is, some argue, a kind of racism in simply saying, "Well, that's 
how they live, and who are we to judge?" If a thoughtful, essentially objective 
observer comes to these conclusions, what licence does it give to those less 
sympathetic and more powerful; those for whom the war on terror is also a war 
on values of which they disapprove?

It was the conflict in Chechnya that made Seierstad a war correspondent in the 
first place. After a degree in Russian and the history of philosophy (she 
speaks five languages fluently and has a working knowledge of another four), 
she moved to Russia, where she studied their great writers: Pushkin, Lemontov, 
Dostoevsky. "I was looking for the Russian soul," she says, without irony. "I 
loved Russia." She started to write features for a Norwegian paper, and when 
the war in Chechnya began in 1994 she decided to go and see what was happening 
for herself. Twenty-four years old, and "totally unprepared", she went to live 
with the guerrillas in the mountains, returning many times, against the wishes 
of her editor, and of her mother, who would call the newspaper, begging it to 
ground her. "I became anti-Russian - I thought, they're brutal, and they're 
drunk, and they're racist. Now I'm somewhere in between. But it hurts me still, 
the tragedy of the Chechen people."

She saw lots of fighting, lots of the "worst thing", killed and injured 
children; there are a couple of scenes in A Hundred and One Days, after the 
first American airstrikes on Baghdad, which are hard to read and she cried 
while writing. In one a young boy lies in the mortuary; his father and brother 
enter "and you can see the way they're walking, they don't know yet" - 
Seierstad has an expressive face, both girlish and steely, and even more 
expressive hands; "and then they see" - her hands sweep across her own torso - 
"half his body is away." The waiter chooses this moment to serve a bowl of 
soup, and a tuna niçoise - but her eyes are turned inward, looking somewhere 
else altogether, remembering "just their expressions when they see". But even 
that was not as bad as the hospitals, full of those who wouldn't survive: "They 
have their children's eyes, asking, 'What's happened to me?'"

Although in some ways none of this is news, Seierstad's book is valuable for 
its focus on the ordinary Iraqis she encountered, their very personal 
humiliation. Two men, friends all their lives, stop speaking to each other 
because one, a Shia, welcomes the Americans, while the other, a Sunni, feels 
the invasion as if it were a personal insult: her translator, a middle-class 
woman who has grown up believing in Saddam's benevolence and power, knowing 
nothing of his cruelties, retreats into hurt and bewildered silence. Here 
Seierstad is a mostly unjudgmental witness to complex realities.

The question is, why did she not take this approach to The Bookseller of 
Kabul? One of the most worrying things about that book is that she removed 
herself completely; it reads like a novel, entering impertinently into the 
thoughts and feelings of the family; she acquires, by default, the authority of 
the omnipotent narrator - an omnipotent narrator, that is, with the unsettling 
problem of an appalled tone.

Everything that appears as thoughts, or conversation, Seierstad insists she 
was told: she doesn't speak Dari, but Khan, his eldest son Mansur, and his 
youngest sister Leila, spoke English. "The pity," says Seierstad, "is that I 
happened to come across a really dysfunctional family. There was so much 
quarrelling. But I didn't know that when I started. It had nothing to do with 
me. And he also betrayed me!" she adds fiercely. "He presented himself as this 
great liberal - and I was even thinking, 'Oh, this family is too liberal, but 
maybe they have some relatives in the country who are more traditional?' The 
question is, should I just write what he tells me, or should I write what I 
observe and what the other people tell me? He [Khan] wants to be a hero in the 
west, and he wants to be a hero in his own country - a patriarch following all 
the traditions. You can't have it all."

The answer to this, perhaps, is that it's not that calculated - both things 
can coexist. "What I learnt," she admits, "is maybe it's not possible for a 
western woman to write an honest account of an Afghan patriarch, one that he 
would like. Maybe our worlds are too far apart."

Seierstad does not duck any awkward questions; rather, she tackles them 
head-on. She is just getting going on this when her PR appears to drag her 
away; she has to be on air at the BBC in five minutes. She rises 
accommodatingly, but can't quite let the thought go. "We can't get rid of 
ourselves as journalists. I think it was important to write A Hundred and One 
Days because it shows how I work: these are my shortcomings, this is what I'm 
trying to do. So yeah," she laughs. "It's more honest."

· A Hundred and One Days is published by Virago, price £7.99.
 