 The suspect was, police said, wearing a suspiciously large coat. Armed 
officers were acting on intelligence at the culmination of a covert 
surveillance operation. Six shots from a Heckler & Koch high-velocity assault 
rifle were fired into the young man's body. Witnesses said he didn't stand a 
chance.
This was not Jean Charles de Menezes, the innocent Brazilian shot dead at 
Stockwell tube station in a botched anti-terrorism raid. One other unarmed man 
was killed by Metropolitan police marksmen last year:Azelle Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney>. Unlike the De Menezes killing, 
his death has received almost no publicity - but the similiarities between the 
two are striking.

Barely 11 weeks before De Menezes's death, Rodney, a 24-year-old Londoner, was 
killed by Scotland Yard's CO19 armed unit on a suburban road in Edgware. Death 
by police bullet remains rare in this country: Rodney and De Menezes were the 
only fatal Met police shootings between April 2005 and April 2006. (There has 
only been one since: Robert Haines was shot dead by CO19 officers in Kent last 
month.) But, more than a year and a half after Rodney's death, his family is 
still waiting for an inquest to open into his death. They know how he died, but 
they don't know why. The police have yet to give an answer. And, increasingly, 
the family wonders if justice will ever be done.

A couple of weeks before he was shot dead by an armed officer known to this 
day only as E7, Rodney telephoned his mother, Susan Alexander, and told her to 
come over. He and his girlfriend, together since they were teenagers, were 
expecting their first child. Alexander went over to his flat, and found her son 
"so excited" about the baby. As it turned out, Rodney's daughter was to be born 
just hours before his funeral.

On the night he died, Saturday April 30, Rodney, dressed up in smart clothes, 
clambered into the back of a hired silver VW Golf with Wesley Lovell, 26, and 
Frank Graham, 24. They drove him to get his hair cut - his mother found it 
still "glistening like he had just stepped out of the barber's" when she went 
to see his body at the morgue.

After leaving the barber's, the three men continued to drive across north 
London. They were apparently oblivious of the fact that the car they were 
travelling in had been under surveillance for some time. According to 
information later given to Rodney's family by the Independent Police Complaints 
Commission, armed police tailing the Golf in unmarked vehicles at some point 
moved to "state red". It meant that the car should be intercepted as soon as 
possible. Passing the Railway Tavern on Hale Lane at 7.43pm, the car was 
"hard-stopped": an Audi swerved in front, a Vauxhall Omega drew up tight 
alongside and a third police vehicle crashed into the rear of the Golf.

Fourteen members of the Met's elite C019 armed unit sprang out. The Golf's 
tyres were punctured with "Hatton rounds" designed to open doors or disable 
cars. Pedestrians screamed; drinkers sitting outside the pub on wooden benches 
ducked for cover. And from the passenger seat of the Vauxhall, E7, an officer 
with 20 years' firearms experience, leaned over his left shoulder and fired 
eight shots through the side of the Golf at Azelle Rodney, sitting in the back 
seat. Six bullets hit him in the face, head, neck and chest.

Long before family liaison officers called at Susan Alexander's house the 
following afternoon, she knew her eldest son was dead. Apparently unsure of 
Rodney's identity, police had first called on one of his neighbours, who put 
two and two together and told friends. Word spread through the close-knit 
extended family. Waiting for the police to call, Alexander turned on the 
television and stared at the red Sky News ticker. "All I can remember seeing 
is, 'Man shot dead in Edgware by armed police,' going round the screen," she 
says.

Within hours, news agencies misreported that Rodney was holding a gun when he 
was shot. The few newspapers that noted the incident subsequently described 
Rodney as a crack-dealing "drugs baron". This label perhaps explains why so few 
people have heard of the Azelle Rodney Campaign for Justice. The portrait of 
Rodney as a gun-toting drug lord is utterly alien to his family and wide circle 
of friends, however. And while his supporters don't say this, even if he was 
mixed up in drugs and guns, he could still be innocent: shot dead without cause 
or reason.

Like many parents, Alexander keeps a folder of pink, yellow and blue 
certificates showing her son's achievements in science, swimming and football. 
Three record his role in a Metropolitan police five-a-side football tournament 
as a teenager. Growing up in west London, he might have become a professional 
footballer like his cousin if he hadn't had two hip operations when he was 16, 
which left him with one leg shorter than the other. Always proud, he refused to 
claim disability benefit. "For a couple of years he was a bit confused about 
what he was going to do," says Alexander. He mixed short college courses with 
paid work for his uncles but imminent fatherhood made an impression on him. 
"That year or so before he died he really changed his view on things and had 
more focus on what he was going to do with his life."

Even now, having discussed her son's death with lawyers and the IPCC 
investigators ad infinitum, Alexander still lapses into the present tense when 
talking about him. "He's loyal. He's always been mature for his age," she says. 
"He's not the sort of person who would be drawn into something. He's strong 
willed." Alexander refuses to believe her son was a drug dealer. "He wouldn't 
waste time doing anything risky," she says. "He was healthy, fit and 
well-balanced. He went to the gym all the time."

So far, the police have not publicly offered any evidence to suggest that 
Rodney was a gun-toting drug dealer. According to a statement by E7, recounted 
in the minutes of an IPCC meeting, officers found it suspicious that one of the 
suspects was wearing a three-quarter-length coat on a warm day (it was, 
however, overcast). When Rodney appeared to duck down as the Golf was 
hard-stopped, E7 said: "Everything about his actions led me to believe that he 
was fully ready to fire with a fully automatic weapon." But the IPCC has 
confirmed that Rodney was not seen holding any kind of gun when he was shot 
dead.

Lovell and Graham were jailed for seven and six years respectively in January 
after pleading guilty to possessing guns in the Golf. Lovell was also convicted 
of allowing drug production in his Hammersmith home; he claimed that he had let 
Rodney use his flat as a crack factory to cancel out a drugs debt. Rodney, of 
course, was not in court to defend himself.

The court case revealed that three guns were in the Golf. Where exactly they 
were found and how deadly they were is disputed. In a statement in July, 
Scotland Yard said that the guns were "loaded and fully operational". Evidence 
given by the crown prosecution in court differs from this. According to the 
prosecution, a Colt .45 pistol that Graham admitted to owning was on the back 
seat but it had been deactivated and could not work. Inside a rucksack in the 
car were Lovell's pistol, converted from a tear-gas gun, alongside four rounds 
of ammunition, and a loaded double-barrelled handgun, so small it was "made to 
look like a key fob".

Passing sentence, Judge Simon Smith told Lovell and Graham: "From what I have 
heard ... I have no doubt whatever that you were engaged in some major criminal 
activity." But Rodney's family and friends do doubt his involvement. They say 
that not only did he have no criminal record but he was apparently not known to 
the police at the time of the surveillance operation that led to the shooting.

Ruairi Laughlin-McCann grew up with Rodney. They went to school together, 
played football together throughout their childhood and kept in touch as 
adults. As small boys they were taken on marches - to Greenham Common and 
against the poll tax - by their politically active mothers and Rodney remained 
politically aware, he says. "This isn't the stereotype of what the police want 
to describe as a young black Yardie drugs baron brought up in north-west 
London. Azelle wasn't imposing. He was approachable. He was a 6ft lad but he 
smiled all the time. He didn't walk down the street barging people out of the 
way." As Laughlin-McCann points out, Rodney should not be seen as guilty 
because of his association with two men found guilty of gun offences. Rodney 
"was friends with individuals from every walk of life", he says, from young 
professionals to footballers.

The charity Inquest, which provides advice on contentious deaths at the hands 
of the state, has helped the family. "There is always an attempt in these cases 
to demonise the person who has died to deflect attention away from the actions 
of those police officers," says co-director Deborah Coles. "You have a big 
question about whether there is a stereotyping of young black men, with a 
greater propensity to use lethal force then there is in other cases."

Even if he was mixed up with drugs, there is, as Rodney's aunt, Jennie 
Alexander, says, no death sentence in this country.

The family's lawyer, Daniel Machover, says: "The crucial thing is to resolve 
as much as is possible what actually happened in the last two minutes of Azelle 
Rodney's life, the perceived threat and the evidence relating to what E7 says 
was the perceived threat."

It has not been easy to mourn in the months since his death. Alexander visited 
the morgue with Rodney's girlfriend, who did not want to be named in this 
article. They could only see his face and neck. "He had this big cage around 
his body. He looked really nice, like he was sleeping, but I kept looking at 
the thing around him. At first, I didn't know why it was there. I know now. It 
was because they had shot up his whole body. That cage was holding him 
together."

When the family laid flowers at the scene they found a huge patch of blood on 
the road, which they cleaned up themselves with water from the pub. E7 was 
briefly relieved of his firearms duties, as is normal in fatal shootings. 
Rodney's family was told by the IPCC that E7 was retiring, meaning he would 
escape any internal police disciplinary proceedings. But the Guardian has 
learned that E7's retirement plans have been shelved for personal reasons. And 
a Scotland Yard spokeswoman says E7 will now be subject to "a misconduct 
review" by the Met's directorate of professional standards. If found guilty of 
any misconduct, the officer could be sacked, disciplined, or "given words of 
advice".

The family has discovered that after the shooting the CO19 officers were 
allowed to sit together in the station canteen and compose their statements. 
This is standard practice, although the IPCC recommended it should be banned 
after Harry Stanley was shot dead while carrying a chair leg. Machover 
describes the conferring as "scandalous" and a decision that will "blight the 
whole process, leaving a suspicion for the family that they will never be able 
to get to the truth of what happened, because the accounts of the officers may 
have been contaminated by discussion of their evidence before it was committed 
to writing".

The IPCC investigated the shooting. Rather than publish its report, it passed 
it to the Crown Prosecution Service - a sign of the seriousness of the case. 
But in July, the CPS concluded there was insufficient evidence to convict any 
individual for the slaying of Rodney. In a statement at the time, John Yates, 
the deputy assistant commissioner at the Met, said: "We offer our condolences 
to the family of Mr Azelle Rodney at this time. Protecting the public from the 
very real dangers posed by armed criminals is something that the Met works hard 
at every day. The situation facing our officer that evening clearly left him 
with no option than to take the course of action he did."

Rodney's family is now waiting for an inquest to open, which they hope will be 
held in front of a high court judge with the power to call witnesses. The 
production of evidence to begin this process would normally happen immediately 
after the CPS verdict. But four months on, the family are still waiting, 
because the IPCC has so far refused to supply any evidence to the coroner.

"We've come to an inexplicable standstill when things should be moving forward 
to an inquest," says Machover. "Susan Alexander finds herself confronting a 
wall of silence. The IPCC are failing to progress with disclosure to the 
coroner or to the family of any of the evidence, and so the coroner is refusing 
to even hold a pre-inquest hearing, let alone set a date for it or decide 
whether to give way to a high court judge." The family believe this is because 
of the existence of "secret evidence" gathered by police phone taps and other 
surveillance of Rodney that it would be a criminal offence for the Met, or the 
IPCC, to reveal. An IPCC spokesperson admits that "complex legal issues" have 
led to the delay. It aims to give the coroner and the family its report within 
the next fortnight.

All this leaves Rodney's mother, family and friends with many questions. What 
intelligence did police have that Rodney posed a threat? If there was such a 
threat, why did only one officer open fire? Why was Rodney targeted, and not 
Lovell and Graham in the front of the car? And why, when Scotland Yard has made 
strenuous efforts to right the wrongs over De Menezes, must Rodney's family 
still wait for answers?

"If there has been a mistake, let's discuss it," says Susan Alexander. "But 
we're not even discussing it. We're not getting answers. I don't know what's 
happened here. I can't rest until I know what's happened. I can't grieve 
properly. I want the truth and I want justice"

www.azellerodney.co.uk <http://www.azellerodney.co.uk>
 