
Alex McLeish believes he will be in charge of Aston Villa next season and has 
spoken of his conviction that he can win over the dissenting supporters who 
once again called for him to be dismissed after his side picked up a point 
againstTottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> that effectively 
guarantees another year of Premier League football.

"Sack McLeish, my Lord" rang out moments after the final whistle, as any 
relief Villa fans felt at avoiding relegation quickly gave way to more 
hostility towards the manager who made the short move to Villa Park from 
Birmingham City last summer. The draw with Spurs means that Villa will finish 
the season with their lowest everPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> points total and a 
club-record low of only four home wins.

McLeish, however, believes he has been working in difficult financial 
circumstances and said that he deserves another chance. "This season we've 
taken that wee plunge into the reduction of the wages, it has hopefully helped 
the finances a little bit. But it has put us through the mill, there's no doubt 
about that," the Scot said.

"But with planning we can rise. At the clubs I've worked with before, with 
proper planning, I've done well. If I went through that [this season], I've got 
to have a crack at the big time, when we can try and enhance the quality of the 
squad."

Asked whether he thought he would be given another chance, McLeish replied: "I 
don't know. There's not been any indication that we need an urgent meeting. I 
guess Randy [Lerner, the owner] will be pretty pleased with today's outcome 
because he's been very supportive in his texts over the last few days, which 
indicates great support. But you never know. I would expect to be here next 
season and I hope to win over the dissenting Villa fans. But I've got to get a 
consistently winning team on the pitch.

"I didn't say that I had my hands tied behind my back. But what I did say is 
that I bought into a project with Randy Lerner and the board andAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> Football Club that I would 
work with this club to try and reduce those wages. There might be some pain 
along the way with that, and sure enough that has come to the fore. But I would 
like to think that I have showed my leadership and stood up in times of 
adversity."

McLeish, who was relegated with Birmingham last season, claimed not to have 
heard the supporters' chants calling for him to go but the Scot added: "Listen, 
I've taken a lot of weight on my shoulders this season and I was happy to take 
the pressure off of the players. I'm not doing that again next season. They'd 
better get their finger out."
 