
For those who see the cinema as the last refuge from mobile phones, rumours 
about Apple’s latest squeeze on our attention spans will be alarming.Sonny 
Dickson <https://twitter.com/sonnydickson?lang=en>, a longtime Apple news 
leaker, tweeted that iPhones could have a “theatre mode”. People have 
speculated that this could be silent notifications and a dark screen.

Turn it on! Future iPhones and iPads to have 'theatre mode' for use in cinemas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/04/turn-it-on-future-iphones-and-ipads-to-have-theatre-mode-for-use-in-cinemas>
In one sense, says Jane Crowther, editor of Total Film, it might be a good 
thing. “People are incapable of not looking at their phones in cinemas,” she 
says, and anything that stops bright white rectangular screens stabbing the 
darkness would help. But it would also legitimise their use: “‘I’ve got it in 
theatre mode so I can look at my emails or Instagram.’ But there are people who 
go to the movies to really take note of everything that happens and it’s really 
distracting to have someone, even with a darker screen, [on their phone] next 
to you.”

Terri White, editor of Empire, agrees. “I find it absolute madness that 
anybody would want to do anything other than turn their phone off. You can’t 
fully give yourself over to a film and lose yourself in the moment, which is 
the amazing thing about cinema, if your phone’s buzzing on your thigh.”

The Guardian’s film critic Peter Bradshaw gets annoyed if people use their 
phone as a torch while trying to find their seat. “People rake the auditorium. 
I have been dazzled by the torch of some guy who’s come back from the loo.” 
Bradshaw was once a torchbearer. “I was called out online for using my phone – 
or rather the glow from my screen – to make notes by. People found that 
annoying and I thought: ‘Yeah, they’re right.’”

There have been attempts to get people to loosen up about phones in cinemas. 
In April 2016, the CEO of American cinema chain AMC suggested that asking a 
22-year-old to turn off their phone was like asking them to “cut off your left 
arm above the elbow” and he raised the possibility of phone-friendly 
screenings. But the outcry could not have been greater had he suggested that 
people urinate in the aisles (AMC backtracked 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/amc-u-turns-texting-theaters-now-%E2%80%98cutting-room-floor%E2%80%99>
).

“Almost every time I see a film I end up hissing at someone to turn their 
phone off,” an otherwise even-tempered colleague tells me. “Once it was someone 
I was on a date with. Another time I was settling down to watch all four hours 
of Lars von Trier’s Nymphomaniac when a woman in the row in front started 
texting. I sidled up behind and hissed at her to turn it off and she nearly 
jumped out of her seat. If you’re at the cinema, you’re participating in a 
social occasion in which the golden rule is not to spoil the film for others.”
 