
In comedy, as in television drama, films and books, certain conventions apply 
where female characters are concerned: they are a dramatic shorthand and a 
salvation for the easily confused. Spot an attractive woman and you think, 
"love interest", an attractive woman with dark hair and some item of leather 
clothing, "femme fatale, possibly responsible for the string of terrifying 
murders haunting the citizens of Chicago". Attractive woman with tight clothing 
and a vacant expression, "comedy bimbo, will shortly begin to handle prize 
marrows in an unknowing but suggestive way".

It is a paradigm that exists everywhere from Some Like It Hot to Last of the 
Summer Wine. It makes things easy to watch, but hard to identify with, since 
women know that being sexy does not actually prevent them from being kind, or 
clever, or funny. Being a bit naive does not necessarily mean you will spend 
your life suffering from the cruel machinations of men. Your IQ does not 
decrease as your cup size increases. And yet you would be hard-pressed to 
deduce any of this from watching most mainstream television.

Which is why watching Maggie Jacobs is a such a relief. Since Extras hit our 
television screens earlier this summer, Maggie has proved the surprise star of 
Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant's follow-up to the almost embarrassingly 
successful The Office. And while Gervais and Merchant's prowess in writing the 
two main male characters was not surprising - Andy Millman has shades of David 
Brent with a tad more self-awareness; Darren Lamb, Andy's useless agent, is 
Gareth Keenan with a fancier mobile phone - it is the role of Maggie, Andy's 
best friend and fellow extra that has proved unexpectedly convincing.

"It's amazing, really, that two men wrote such a good part for a woman," says 
Ashley Jensen <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashley-jensen>, who 
plays Maggie. "There was never at all a moment that I was reading the script 
and thought, 'No, a woman wouldn't say that.' In fact, at times they displayed 
an understanding of women that verged on the spooky. It's a bit like, how did 
they know that?" she says. "How did they know that's what a woman would do? But 
it was always right, and real. You know, it's easy to say that it would be good 
if there were lots more female writers, but then, why do there need to be, when 
men like that can write such good female parts?"

The friendship between Maggie and Andy is also hugely refreshing. In most 
shows where the central relationship is between a man and a woman, the romantic 
friction would have begun before the first ad break, even if destined never to 
be consummated. But Andy and Maggie, despite hanging out constantly, generate 
less sexual tension than an episode of Songs of Praise.

"The thing about Maggie and Andy," says Jensen, "is that it's not about sexual 
innuendo or flirting. I think it really is that they make each other laugh, and 
annoy each other - well, she annoys him quite a lot - but they do stand up for 
each other and care for each other when it comes down to it. And that's quite 
new, isn't it? I was trying to think of a British sitcom where there's a real 
male/ female comedy act and a real male/ female friendship and I couldn't 
really think of any. It's a nice relationship. A warm relationship. They 
genuinely like each other. And that's it."

In any case, there is more comedic mileage in a couple unencumbered by the 
trappings of romance or passion. The love story between Tim and Dawn from The 
Office was heart-rending and poignant, but it wasn't funny. Dawn's role in The 
Office was the Everygirl guide to the weirdness of Wernham Hogg, a straight 
character in a world of misfits. Maggie, by contrast, often finds herself 
careering off on comedy tangents that frequently make her the central character 
in the funniest scene in an episode. Merchant has said that Andy and Maggie's 
relationship is modelled on Laurel and Hardy - with Andy playing Ollie to 
Maggie's Stan.

Whereas Maggie is all messy hair, frequent moments of confusion and a personal 
style that equates to an explosion in Accessorize, Ashley is about sleek 
curtains of blonde, contemplative gazing and sharp dressing. Only the voice - a 
lilting Scottish accent - is the same. Until, that is, she tries to recount a 
particular chunk of dialogue from the last episode of Extras and has to stop 
because, she explains, "I'm not very good with technology. And I'd been 
watching a DVD and I couldn't get the living room TV to go back to being a TV, 
so I had to watch that episode on the fuzzy TV in the kitchen and it went 
ttcchhhhh with the static every time a tube went past. So the finer details 
were lost on me." And you think, "Ah, yes. Maggie."

The recent Perrier award to Laura Solon notwithstanding, women are constantly 
being derided for not being that great at comedy. Jensen has little truck with 
that. "Maybe 20 years ago the position of women in mainstream comedy was either 
you were an old battleaxe mother-in-law or you were the sexy girl and the men 
would get the funny lines. But it's moving away from that now. The Friends 
girls were wonderful. And in Britain there are things such as Nighty Night and 
Green Wing, where women are allowed to be funny, rather than just girly girls. 
It's taken a wee while to get to this stage, but it's moving in the right 
direction."

Of course, Maggie isn't a stand-up: a lot of the laughs come at her expense, 
after another spectacular misunderstanding or inappropriate remark. But then 
Millman and Brent don't generate their humour through dazzling wisecracks 
either. The Friends girls were funniest when they were playing geeky (Monica) 
or nasty (Rachel) or loopy (Phoebe) rather than just shooting snappy one-liners 
at the men. Compare them with, say, the women in Men Behaving Badly, the female 
roles in the most successful British comedy of the last decade. Dorothy was 
carping and superior; Debs had little more to do than stand around being lusted 
over. Failure is funny - much more funny than just rolling your eyes at the 
antics of men - and it is so refreshing to see women taking centre stage, 
clowning around and falling on their metaphorical arses. And Maggie, to be 
fair, does this more than most.

So what was it like acting with Gervais? Fun, clearly. "I never ever thought 
that I was a giggler," Jensen says. "I was the one who could hold it together 
but I didn't on this at all. I was kind of useless. Sometimes Ricky would just 
look at me and that was it and I would just be away."

Her admiration for Gervais and Merchant is obvious. "They'd both tell you 
exactly what they wanted. 'Ashley, do this. Move the cup there. Turn round, 
take two seconds and then look.' And you just have to go, 'Yeah, you know what 
you're doing.'"

She is also clearly tickled by the memories of meeting the stars who have 
guest appearances on the show - Samuel L Jackson ("or Sam Jackson, as I call 
him now") and Ben Stiller. "One day, Ben was doing his stuff and Ricky looked 
at me and went, 'What's Ben Stiller doing here? That's Ben Stiller.' It was a 
bit like that all the time - surreal."

Her career to date has been busy - now 36, she has spent the time since drama 
school working in theatre in Scotland and later London, before moving into more 
TV work in series such as Clocking Off, as well as one-off appearances in The 
Bill and East-Enders - but not life-affectingly busy. "It was sort of 
substantial work," she says, "but nothing so much that people would stop me and 
go, 'Oh, it's you.' But I've never really been like, 'Oh, I want to be famous.'"

She says she finds the whole notion of celebrity very strange. "Really 
desperately being famous? For what? To put your little mark on the Earth. I was 
here. I did this. I find that all a wee bit ..." Confusing, if the look on her 
face is anything to go by.

However, Jensen looks set to become a lot more high profile. As well as the 
second series of Extras, now in the pipeline, she has just finished filming 
Eleventh Hour, four 90-minute dramas for ITV with Patrick Stewart - who, 
coincidentally, appeared in the final episode of Extras. "My mate Patrick" - 
she is comedy name-dropping again - "only ever works with me now."
 