
A rash of unsolved outdoor homicides in Alaska’s largest city is putting 
residents on edge.

Altogether, the deaths of nine people who were killed on Anchorage trails, in 
parks and on isolated streets since January remain unsolved – among them three 
cases involving two victims each.

“It’s terrifying,” said Jennifer Hazen, a longtime resident who lives near 
Valley of the Moon Park, where two people were found dead early Sunday, one of 
them on a park bike trail. Hazen walks in the park regularly, and finds some 
comfort in knowing the unsolved homicides occurred in the middle of the night 
when she wouldn’t be out there anyway.

“I’m just really shocked about all this happening,” said another resident, 
Yegor Christman as he walked his dog on the bike trail. “I thought I lived in a 
pretty safe area.”

Adding to the feeling of vulnerability, Anchorage has had 25 homicides this 
year. That’s the same number the city had for the entire year in 2015. Even 
though the number is high, police point out that 1995, with 29 homicides, had 
the highest numbers in the past two decades.

With 15 homicides since late June, police issued an unusual public advisory 
this week urging residents to be “extra aware” of their surroundings, noting 
that crimes often increase at night and early in the morning.

“APD wants to remind our citizens to be cautious when they are out during 
these hours, especially if they are in isolated areas like our parks, bike 
trails or unoccupied streets,” the police department wrote. “If you plan to be 
out late at night, make sure you travel with several friends and not alone.”

Police chief Chris Tolley downplayed the significance of the advisory, saying 
police often remind the public to be safe, sometimes through a text messaging 
system. Earlier this year, police issued a similar safety alert after a series 
of car break-ins and thefts, Tolley said. The goal was the same in this week’s 
advisory: to inform the public.

“This is no different,” he said. “We want our public to be proactive. So this 
is really a plea to them in their personal safety.”

Three of the victims were found alone. Two of those victims had been shot, 
according to police, who will not say how the other seven died. They won’t say 
what details have been shared with the families of the victims. Relatives could 
not immediately be reached for comment Friday.

Police have released few details on any of the cases, saying investigators 
haven’t made any clear connections between the victims. Asked if police believe 
a serial killer could be on the loose, police spokeswoman Jennifer Castro said 
police always try to determine if unsolved crimes are related.

The only common denominators found among the victims are that the deaths 
occurred outdoors, in the early hours and in isolated places.

John McCleary is a longtime volunteer with the city’s Trail Watch program, 
which was started in 2006 after a string of assaults, mostly against women, on 
local trails. Trail Watch volunteers serve two purposes: to be the eyes for the 
police department, reporting any problems, and to create safer conditions on 
300 miles of trails with such efforts as cutting down vegetation.

But McCleary, the former director of the program for the city, said he had 
never seen a situation with so many unsolved killings despite having been 
connected with city trails since the late 1970s. He said he felt angry and 
frustrated that people couldn’t enjoy the trails like they could a decade ago.

McClearly called the situation “so abnormal”. “It doesn’t seem like I’m in the 
same city.”

Randall Alcala walks almost daily along the downtown Ship Creek trail, where 
two homicide victims were found dead in July. But those deaths, even though 
unsolved, don’t make him feel unsafe.

He just saw a black bear on the trail about a week ago, and is more leery of 
run-ins with one of the city’s hundreds of bears.
 