
Adrian Newey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey> may not be as 
famous as Karl Lagerfeld or Gianni Versace but among the designer labels of 
Formula One he is king of the catwalk, the name every driver wants to be seen 
with.

The man who makes the world's fastest cars, the genius who actually "sees" 
airflow, hardly looked at the vanguard of sartorial fashion as he strolled 
through the paddock yesterday, unrecognised by all but the cognoscenti.

Newey, who has placed Red Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> at 
the front of every grid this season, and who made champion cars for Williams 
and McLaren before that in a career dating back to the early 80s, was dapper, 
grey, balding and sporting jeans.

He is quietly spoken too, though the burning eyes are a clue to the 
ultra-competitive nature that has kept all rivals in his team's slipstream this 
year and could yet see the season evolve into a straight shoot-out between Mark 
Webber and Sebastian Vettel. This is the boffins' boffin, a middle-aged man 
with paper and pencil who is running rings around a generation of new designers 
with their computers and on-screen CADCAM technology.

"I think I am unique – or the last dinosaur, if you like," the 51-year-old 
says. "I've been lucky. I'm one of the last generation of engineers who were 
involved when motor sport was somewhat smaller and you could get involved in 
all its different areas. In my early days at March I was a race engineer at 
weekends, a draughtsman in the drawing office during the week and an analyst 
down at the wind tunnel at some other time. So I got involved in everything.

"Unfortunately now, though you try to move people around as much as possible, 
the teams have gone from being five or 10 engineers – when I started – to being 
more like 200 engineers in a topFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> team. So it becomes difficult 
for people to get involved in everything.

"The way I work, I try to absorb a particular problem through looking at 
results, listening to drivers at the circuit, looking at a problem on a 
computer, trying to understand how the car is operating mechanically and 
aerodynamically, and what problems it has. And from that, if it ticks away in 
my subconscious for the next week, an idea will pop out." He makes it sound 
like some happy serendipity.

Newey has brought what could be described as the "Red Queen effect" to Formula 
One. In Lewis Carroll's Through the Looking-Glass, Alice finds herself running 
hand in hand with the Red Queen, who shouts "Faster! Faster!" But "however fast 
they went they never seemed to pass anything". The Queen says to Alice: "It 
takes all the running you can do to keep in the same place." Lewis Hamilton, 
Jenson Button and the rest of Red Bull's pursuers are only too familiar with 
the feeling.

After some signs of mechanical fragility early in the season, followed by some 
instances of poor in-race decision‑making, the Red Bull cars have consolidated 
their dominance over their competitors in the past two races in Barcelona and 
Monaco, with Webber and Vettel now first and second in the drivers' 
championship, respectively.

Red Bull, insists Newey, are his last Formula One team. The only difficulty is 
in deciding what he does next. "It will have to be something stimulating, 
something that challenges my mind. I've looked at yachts but that seems the 
only sport more anti-social than motor racing. I don't know. But I will find 
something. I can't see myself staying in this in my 60s but I can't see myself 
lying on a beach either. At the same time I can't see myself moving on to 
another Formula One team. We've managed to create a very good working 
environment here. It's a good, honest, engineering-based team that goes about 
its task."

Newey was 13 or 14 when his father first took him to a local kart race. "He 
made the observation that most of the kids were racing because their dad wanted 
them to, rather than them wanting to do it. He said: 'Look, you have to show 
your determination.' And every pound I put in he matched me.

"So I got this rather tired old go-kart, which together with my driving was 
hopelessly uncompetitive. But the interest in modifying it and trying to make 
it go quicker overcame my driving aspirations and cemented my career choice."

After nearly a decade flitting between Formula One and IndyCar as a race 
engineer and designer, Newey joined Williams in 1990 and began to build a 
reputation as the world's leading car designer, making world champions of Nigel 
Mansell, Alain Prost and Damon Hill.

He left Williams in 1996 for McLaren because he could not get more control of 
the team (this is a man of such independence that he once painted his office in 
non-regulation colours – a demonstration of his strength of mind). Williams, 
needless to say, have never been the same team since; under Newey, McLaren and 
Mika Hakkinen went on to win two world drivers' championships.

Patrick Head, then technical director of Williams, says: "Adrian is a very 
astute and clever designer. Having him contributing to Williams was a plus, and 
having him contribute to another team was a minus. So if you add the two 
together, it is a big loss."

That loss was McLaren's gain first, and now the mantle has passed to Red Bull. 
"Adrian is a remarkable guy," their team principal, Christian Horner, says. 
"He's a unique character. He has tremendous creativity. And a huge eye for 
detail. But he's also very practical. He's come from old-school engineering.

"When Adrian came to us we weren't ready for him. When he went to McLaren and 
Williams they were very established teams. We didn't have the infrastructure 
they had. With Red Bull it was a clean piece of paper. A lot of people told him 
he was completely mad and he's proved them wrong. He has that element of flair 
and detail that pushes the boundaries."

For his part, Webber says Newey was one of the "clear attractions" of Red 
Bull, and his abilities mean the rest of the field is simply trying to catch 
up. According to Lewis Hamilton, it will take McLaren until the Silverstone 
grand prix on World Cup final day to get there. But by then Red Bull will have 
marched on once more. The rumour is that they have come to Istanbul with yet 
more weaponry to take them even further ahead of their floundering rivals.

Newey is so clever that it is strangely reaffirming to discover that he does 
not drive cars as well as he designs them, even though he is a keen weekend 
racer.

Horner says: "He's great fun to be with and he's got a great sense of humour. 
Last winter we went to see Graz in Austria, just before Christmas, to visit Dr 
Helmut Marko [a Red Bull consultant]. Helmut is waiting for us at the end of 
this tree-lined drive. So Adrian decided to put in a power-slide and he 
understeered our car straight into one of the trees, taking the side out of the 
car. Just a typical Friday evening with Adrian Newey."
 