
Next, Lost in Showbiz returns to the beleaguered studio housing The X Factor, 
bearing a helpful suggestion from across the Atlantic. There, on the set of the 
similarly styled American Idol,a fairly impressive spat 
<http://www.tmz.com/2012/10/02/nicki-minaj-mariah-carey-fight-american-idol-audition/>
 has apparently broken out between rapper Nicki Minaj and fellow judge Mariah 
Carey, after the latter apparently interrupted the former. Perhaps taking the 
matter of being interrupted a little too much to heart, Minaj subsequently 
called Carey "boring as fuck", after threatening to knock her out and chop her 
head off. "Think this shit is a fucking joke?" she said. "If you got a fucking 
problem then handle it … I'm not fucking putting up with her fucking highness 
over there. Figure it the fuck out." "If I had a gun," it's claimed she 
concluded, "I would shoot her."

Clearly keen to use the wisdom won through many years in the music business to 
calm the situation, Fleetwood Mac vocalist Stevie Nicks helpfully suggested 
that Carey should have respondedby murdering Minaj on screen 
<http://www.nme.com/news/stevie-nicks/66585>. "If I had been Mariah I would 
have walked over to Nicki and strangled her to death right there," she said. 
"I would have killed her in front of all those people and had to go to jail for 
it."

While not wishing in any way to condone the making of demented public 
intimations of violence, LiS feels impelled to note that over here, The 
X Factor's notion of a ratings-generating controversy is Louis Walsh claiming 
he can't make his mind up between Rylan Clark and Carolynne Poole. With the 
best will in the world, this now feels a trifle wan. They get actual threats of 
decapitation; we're still stuck with "You really made that song your own." No 
wonder ratings are down.

Lost In Showbiz can't help but feel that it would certainly be more inclined 
to tune in if it thought it was going to see Louis Walsh embarking on a 
mad-eyed, expletive-ridden tirade that culminated in him making repeated 
threats to stab Gary Barlow while, say, Phil Collins egged them on from the 
sidelines. Perhaps we could go one better than the Americans and actually arm 
the judges before the competition. Come on, Louis! Get yourself a shiv! Let's 
give Tulisa a billiard ball in a sock! Are you going to let a trifling matter 
such as your fear of permanent injury or an arrest for grievous bodily harm 
stop you winning the ratings war with Strictly? Let's not go down without 
a fight, in the most literal sense of the phrase!
 