
The term "local government", as applied to Britain, must be one of the most 
misused in our language. Many of us are not governed locally. At best, we 
depend on a local administration to sweep streets, collect rubbish, provide 
social care, libraries, schools – although education, arguably, is barely a 
local service any longer – and maybe housing.

If you are lucky, your local council will be innovative, creating partnerships 
with the private and third sectors to provide jobs and training. It may use 
powers to create new ventures. It may also be joining up services – health and 
social care, for instance, with a single chief executive running both the local 
council and the NHS primary care trust. But it will be the exception.

Precious few councils will see the post-election challenge in public spending 
as an opportunity to go back to the drawing board and reinvent themselves. But 
they will need to examine their services and ask whether providing services 
in-house is the most efficient form of delivery. That need not mean a return to 
mindless outsourcing, but it does mean the council commissioning and regulating 
a range of services provided by others. Street cleaning, and some environmental 
functions, could be devolved to communities, parishes, the third sector and new 
neighbourhood enterprises, where appropriate.

The local government, planning and housing bill planned by the Tories for 
their first year of office would take councils into new areas and recreate 
truly local government. Town halls will have to bid to become 
super-commissioning bodies for public services currently undertaken by 
government departments – such as joint control of primary care trusts, as well 
as wider scrutiny of the NHS locally, with strong influence over 
welfare-to-work programmes, economic development, and so on.

This will mean a cull in some Whitehall departments and the abolition of at 
least one, such as Communities and Local Government, which carries little 
clout. Its functions could go to a new constitutional department, overseeing 
devolution to English local government and, broadly, funding to Scotland, Wales 
and Northern Ireland.

Finally, a future government has to let councils become smarter in using their 
assets as collateral to borrow against. Town halls have the highest credit 
ratings, and they don't go bust. Using assets in land, buildings and housing, 
plus the combined multibillion-pound local authority pension fund, why not set 
up a mutual organisation in England to fill the gap left by deep cuts in 
central government funding?

Peter Hetherington writes on communities and local government for Society 
Guardian

• Are you a worker in this sector, or have you recently used its services? 
Please let us know your stories and views by posting a comment below. A 
selection will be published in a second supplement next week
 