
For Paul Put, the Belgian coach of Burkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso>, the statement from Europol 
that it had found evidence that as many as 380 matches in Europe had been fixed 
came as no great surprise. He is one of the very few coaches to have been 
banned for fixing games, serving a three-year ban in Belgium that expired in 
2011 after being found guilty of fixing two matches while manager of Lierse.

He remains adamant he was just a scapegoat and that the practice is 
widespread. "Match-fixing has always existed in football," Put says. "If you 
look at cycling, at Lance Armstrong, it's always him who is pointed at but 
everybody was taking drugs. It's not that I've been doing match-fixing, not at 
all, but it has been declared in the media like this. I also played football 
and I saw a lot of things. I don't think you can change it. It's unfortunate 
but I think in every sport you have to face those things. That is reality but 
what can you do about that?"

The Armstrong defence is unlikely to win Put much sympathy and it is not 
entirely clear whether he considers himself innocent of the charges or whether 
he simply regards it as unfair that he was punished when so many others who are 
allegedly guilty have not been.

"I accepted the ban because Fifa said I could work, so I didn't make any 
trouble in Belgium," he says.

Does he, then, view himself as a scapegoat? "Yes," the 56-year-old says. "It's 
the same like Lance Armstrong. It's the same. Everybody is pointing at Lance 
but without this he is the biggest champion. I don't think this is right. You 
have to see what's going on in football. There are a lot of big international 
players who are involved in match-fixing. I think it was worse in the past and 
these teams have survived."

What is known is that Lierse twice unexpectedly fielded reserve teams in 
Belgian top-flight league matches in 2005, seemingly as part of a match-fixing 
ring allegedly organised by the Chinese businessman Ye Zheyun. An international 
arrest warrant was issued against Ye in 2006 but he returned to China and 
denies all charges.

Lierse were the only club sanctioned and Put the only individual. Forty 
people, including Put, have been charged and face a criminal trial but that is 
unlikely to come to court for at least another two years.

"The suspension was a decision of the federation," Put says. "You always have 
to make an example for the whole world. We were all surprised because they took 
only one.

"You know there are more than 40 people. The whole of Belgian football was 
sick at that time. I was threatened by the mafia. My child was not safe. They 
threatened me with weapons and things like that. It's not nice to talk about 
these things but this is the reality."

So is he saying he was forced to fix games? "I was forced but 'fixing games' 
are big words," he says. "The team at that moment had nothing. It was in a very 
bad condition. There was no hope, no money, nothing.

"They made up a crazy story about match-fixing but other teams did the same. 
You have to see a lot of things and how it came about. It was not by our will. 
I am not a manager – just a coach.

"This is not a decision of a coach and a player. It is a whole team. If you 
want to fix a game you don't need 12 players. If you want to fix a game you can 
do it with one. That's what I don't understand – people didn't speak of the 
reality."

As the scandal broke, Put left Belgium and became the coach of Gambia, where 
he had significant success, taking them to a record high of 65 in the Fifa 
rankings. His achievements with Burkina Faso are even greater.

Apart from 1998 when they hosted the tournament, the Stallions had never 
progressed beyond the group stage of theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> but on Wednesday they 
face Ghana in the semi-finals, having gone 367 minutes in the tournament 
without conceding a goal.

Put regards their progress as some kind of redemption. "I have been working 
very hard," he says. "It was a very hard time for me and my family and my 
friends.

"If they point at you and you are the only one, it is hard. I've been 
fighting, fighting, working, working, day and night, and at least I now I have 
satisfaction."

He knows the route back to Belgium is probably closed forever, but Put dreams 
of better things. "My challenge," he says, "is to go to a big country with a 
big team and prove myself." What he has done with Burkina Faso will not clear 
his name but it may help people forget his past.
 