
Brisbane Roar coach John Aloisi has shot down reports he could defect to 
Adelaide United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> next 
season in the latest round of A-League psychological warfare.

Adelaide-born Aloisi and his assistant and brother, Ross Aloisi, are both 
coming out of contract and have been linked to a possible move to the Reds 
should Guillermo Amor depart at the end of the season.

Ten-man Sydney FC salvage point in testy draw with Melbourne City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/ten-man-sydney-fc-salvage-point-in-testy-draw-with-melbourne-city>
The Roar suspect the news is an attempt from the Adelaide camp to unsettle 
their opponents ahead of Sunday’s clash at Suncorp Stadium.

Aloisi, who intends to stay in Brisbane for the long term, said there’s “no 
truth” to the story at all.

“I’ve never spoken to anyone from Adelaide United,” he said.

“And I’m in positive discussions with Brisbane Roar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brisbane-roar> to extend my contract.

“For me, I feel we’ve only just started here – we had a good season on the 
pitch, we’ve started this season pretty well, but we feel there’s so much more 
growth within the football club and I want to be part of it.”

Aloisi said he hopes Henrique is given a warm reception by the Brisbane 
faithful when he makes his first appearance at Suncorp as an opposition player.

The 31-year-old was offered a new deal last season by the Roar but opted to 
move to Malaysia after seven seasons with the club.

However, he failed to settle in his new surrounds, tried and failed to secure 
a deal a deal to return to his old club, and made hisA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> comeback with Adelaide instead.

Last week, he scored two long-distance screamers to steer the Reds to their 
maiden win of the season over Wellington Phoenix.

“We left on good terms and now he’s back, unfortunately not with us, but it’s 
good to have him in the A-League anyway,” Aloisi said.

Spanish winger Manuel Arana – the player who essentially replaced Henrique – 
has made only one start and is yet to show anything resembling the 
Brazilian-Australian’s quality output.

But far from being under pressure to produce, Aloisi said he was holding Arana 
back to ensure he is fully fit for Brisbane’s busy schedule in the new year, 
when their AFC Champions League qualification campaign will test squad depth.

“Arana’s going to be a very good for us. We’re being careful, we’ll give him 
bits now to make sure when he does play more regularly, that he’s ready to go,” 
he said.

Key statistics:

* Henrique faces off against his former team on the back of scoring his first 
brace since netting a hat trick in November 2014.

* Adelaide United are undefeated in their last three games against Brisbane 
Roar (W2, D1) including wins both at home and on the road.

* Brisbane Roar have ended their last four games in stalemate (all 1-1); only 
twice in A-League history has any team gone more games without a win or a loss.
 