
Concentration of power in the hands of one person is a terrible thing, but 
nothing will be achieved by fantastical arguments designed to prove there are 
mechanisms within Iran’s constitution to remedy the issue.


Yet that is exactly what Iran’s reformists and moderates are trying to do in 
contending that the Experts Assembly, the clerical body whose 88 members will 
be elected by Iranian voters on 26 February, should supervise the supreme 
leader. During the election campaign, they have been saying the assembly should 
not confine itself to choosing and if needs be removing the supreme leader, but 
should also supervise his work. This, they argue, is one of the checks the 
constitution has put in place to prevent authoritarianism.

President Hassan Rouhani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani>, 
himself a candidate for the assembly, said last week in a televised campaign 
speech: “The leader’s qualifications must be meticulously supervised on a 
continuous basis by the Assembly of Experts.” Back in December, former 
president Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, who is close to Rouhani, suggested the 
assembly needed to be far more active and should “not be neglectful” of “all 
the affairs of the country” as they fell “under the leader’s aegis”.

Many conservatives have expressed disagreement. In response to Rafsanjani, 
Sadegh Larijani, head of the judiciary, stated unequivocally the assembly has 
no such authority. “Some people present their own illegal wishes and demands, 
which have no connection to the constitution,” he said. “We do not have such a 
thing as supervision over the leader.” Larijani acknowledged that while the 
assembly has responsibility for “discerning the possession of the qualities of 
leadership or lack thereof ... the issue of discernment is distinct from 
supervision, and the two are not interdependent.”

Perhaps the most famous reformist speech in favour of supervision came in 
parliament in 2004 from Mousavi Khoini, when conservatives were so outraged 
that they tried to remove him from the podium.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGXB3mNFlbHQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGXB3mNFlbHQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGXB3mNFlbHQ&media=>
 Mousavi Khoini’s speech in the Iranian parliament in 2004. 
Some months before his house arrest, Mehdi Karroubi, co-leader of the 
reformist ‘green movement’ wrote in 2010 to Rafsanjani, then the chair of the 
Assembly of Experts, that the assembly should “carefully supervise the conduct 
of all noted branches and institutions [and] the manner of the leader’s 
interaction with them, and make efforts to reform the noted branches and 
institutions through supervision over the leader.”

While there is no consensus among the political class over whether the 
assembly has the power to supervise the leader, my contention is that the 
conservatives’ reading of the constitution is right - and arguably the less 
dangerous one. To see why, let’s start with an overview of the assembly.

It began life as the Assembly of Experts of the Constitution, a body elected a 
few months after the toppling of the Shah to draft a new constitution. During 
the deliberations, it decided the Assembly of Experts would remain as an 
integral part of the system with the authority to elect and depose the supreme 
leader in accordance with the following three articles: article 107, which 
granted the assembly the right to “introduce” a marja (the highest rank of Shia 
authority) for leadership unless one clearly stood out, as was the case with 
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the first supreme leader (the wording would change 
in 1989); article 111, which authorised the assembly to depose the leader under 
extraordinary circumstances; and article 108, which allowed the assembly to 
determine its own size and the manner in which it would be elected.

The word ‘supervision’ does not appear in any of these articles, although the 
constitution’s drafters used the word ten times in the original constitution, 
giving for example the judiciary supervision over the “proper enforcement of 
laws” and the Guardian Council, the watchdog body that among other duties vets 
election candidates, supervision over national elections. It is unlikely the 
exclusion of the term over the leader was an error of omission.

Looking at the intentions of the drafters is just as problematic. 
Conservatives point out that nothing in the deliberations at the constituent 
assembly suggests the drafters believed the ‘vali faqih’ (the term for what 
became the supreme leader) required oversight. Ever since the term had entered 
Iran’s political lexicon, it carried the notion of a disinterested 
supervisor-in-chief.

As Khomeini put it in an often-quoted speech, “These things they say...‘if 
vilayat-e faqih were to be established, it’ll turn into dictatorship;’ this has 
to do with the fact that they don’t understand what vilayat-e faqih is… Vilayat 
faqih seeks to prevent dictatorship, and [it’s] not [the case that] it wants to 
engage in dictatorship… The faqih oversees the fact that they [government 
authorities] enforce the law.”


Nowhere in his speeches did Khomeini mention being under the supervision of 
the assembly. And the first Assembly of Experts - many of whose members had 
helped draft the constitution - did not exercise anything of the kind during 
Khomeini’s tenure.

Deliberations at the Council for Revision of the Constitution in 1989 shed 
further light. This council, the only one of its kind under the Islamic 
Republic, was put together by Khomeini during his final months and its last 
sessions coincided with his passing, with the agreed changes – which were put 
to a referendum shortly later – modifying 46 articles, including the removal of 
the post of prime minister, and all three directly dealing with the Assembly of 
Experts.

During the deliberations, Mousavi Khoeiniha, who ten years earlier had led the 
hostage-taking of American Embassy staff, opposed granting the assembly 
supervisory powers over the leader on the grounds it would create a “secret 
leadership” with “the real power...in their hands”.

Abdullah Noori similarly opposed the motion on grounds that the assembly’s 
right to depose the leader did not require it “to move alongside him step by 
step” as any incompetence would be “readily apparent and clear...if not to 
everyone, then to them,” the members of the assembly.

Interestingly, both figures emerged as voices of dissent in the next decade 
and saw the shutdown of their reform-leaning newspapers. More interestingly, 
some conservative clerics, most notably Ayatollah Mohammad Momen, who has sat 
in the Guardian Council since the early 1980s, favoured supervision.

The proposal was put to a vote and struck down. Despite modifications to the 
articles dealing with the Assembly of Experts, the word “supervision” did not 
make the cut. The duties of the assembly remained the same as before: to elect 
and to depose the leader.

This did not settle the issue. Down to the present day, reformists insist that 
full supervision is implicit in article 111, which authorises the assembly to 
depose the leader. Hossein Bastani, the reformist analyst now in exile and 
working for the BBC Persian Service, wrote in response to the distinction 
Larijani made between supervision and discernment. “In order to discern the 
persistence of the qualities of leadership,” he said, “the Assembly of Experts 
logically has no choice but to examine the leader’s conduct and remarks.”

His argument is like attacking a straw man. The limited oversight implicit in 
the authority to depose the leader under extraordinary circumstances is 
unanimously acknowledged. Indeed, there is a committee within the assembly, the 
Committee of Investigation, whose duties, if anything, go beyond what the 
constitution mandates. Most conservative clerics use the word “supervision” 
within this narrow scope.


In fact, the leader’s website lists “attentiveness to the persistence of the 
qualities of leadership” as one of the two primary duties of the assembly, 
alongside “appointing the leader.” No one disputes the minimal oversight 
implicit in the constitution.


But this is not the same, for example, as the supervision exercised by the 
parliament over the executive branch. Let us, for argument’s sake, imagine a 
reading of the constitution in which the Assembly of Experts could, in 
Karroubi’s words, exercise “continuous supervision” over the leader, while 
“none of the other supervising institutions could hinder its legal and 
religious duties in electing and even deposing a leader”.

The contradictions of this argument are apparent. The tendency of unsupervised 
institutions to become authoritarian necessitates a check, but empowering an 
institution over which the constitution has placed no institutional checks 
brings us back to square one. For the Experts’ Assembly is itself unsupervised 
by any other institution, save for the vetting of its candidates by the 
Guardian Council, whose members are directly appointed by the leader or by 
parliament endorsing nominees from the judiciary, whose head the leader 
appoints.


Let us also remember that the Assembly of Experts faces no constitutional 
restraints over its membership or election cycles. Armed with supervision over 
leadership, the assembly could exercise de facto power through a carefully 
chosen complaisant appointee - or series of them - and itself become the leader 
in all but name.


It is the paucity of the assembly’s duties that has prevented it from 
developing major institutional interests, and this may be the only thing 
standing between the existing order and one run by the Assembly of Experts. De 
facto rule by the assembly would be worse than the status quo, because the 
assembly would inherit all the powers held by the leader while holding on to 
its existing powers, under which it could at a stroke of a pen decrease its 
members from 88 to six and lengthen its election cycles from eight years to 15.

We should recall the argument raised at the Council of Revision in 1989 that 
an Experts’ Assembly with the power of ‘supervision’ could turn into a “secret 
leadership” - which would hardly bode well for prospects for greater democracy 
inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>. As things stand, it would be 
better to keep the genie in the bottle.

Amir Faress’ research at New York University focused on the constitutionality 
of the supervision of the Guardian Council. Opinions are the author’s own. The 
Tehran Bureau is an independent media organisation, hosted by the Guardian. 
Contact us@tehranbureau <https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 