
Somewhere in northern Malaysia there are 12 teenaged footballers living in one 
large room and hoping to be selected to play for the local team so that someone 
will notice them and give them a contract. They are not being paid.

Somewhere in Holland an illegal immigrant is sleeping on the floor of one of 
the country's top agents, living on no more than expenses and again hoping for 
a deal at any club that can pay him a decent wage.

And somewhere in Spain there's a footballer who does have a contract, but not 
the one he thought he was signing, which would have taken him to Real Mallorca. 
His paperwork ties him for 10 years to a company, not a club, and he has 
already been moved to two second-division sides he had no interest in playing 
for. His pay is so poor he has been home to try to coax some money out of the 
club who sold him.

All these players are from Ghana, and there are hundreds more from other 
African countries dotted around the world. One of them, a 17-year-old 
international prospect from Togo, has disappeared altogether after signing up 
for a Swiss agent. His country wanted him for Olympic duty but no one has heard 
of him for four months.

All are victims of what the top man in African football calls 'a hideous slave 
trade' that plunders the continent. It started slowly in the late Eighties when 
African teams started to excel at the under-17 and under-20 World Cups, and the 
players are moving ever younger - many of them 15 and 16. Issa Hayatou, 
president of the Confederation of African Football (CAF), is scathing about 
agents and the youth academies springing up all over Africa. He backs up his 
argument by recalling the 1998 Belgian government inquiry into a 'slave trade' 
scandal in which club directors signed up young players as their personal 
property from which to make as much profit as possible.

Sepp Blatter, president of Fifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa>, 
agrees with Hayatou. 'It's time to fight against the exodus of young players to 
Europe,' he told The Observer. 'We must create an age barrier before which a 
player cannot be transferred to another continent.' He promises new regulations 
by the end of June, after which no player under the age of 18 will be allowed 
to transfer to Europe. But there will be legal problems with such a ban and 
there is a flaw in the slave-trade argument - because many of the 'slaves' earn 
more than £20,000 a week and hundreds are on a six-figure salary.

Roger Milla, Africa's most famous player, is not so forthright. 'Perhaps it's 
not normal for players to move to Europe when they're 15 or 16, but if you 
don't get paid in your own league, or you are paid very little, you'll want to 
move somewhere where you can get rich,' he says. The two main reasons to move 
early, explains Milla, are the hopeless state of domestic leagues and national 
FAs that allow clubs to get away with not paying their players on time, or 
paying less than agreed; and the families. 'A young player in Europe can send 
money back to his extended family,' says Milla. 'That's very important. It 
means far more than most Europeans can imagine.'

The point is emphasised outside her home by Gloria Osei Kuffour, the 
wealthiest grandmother on the Ainet Road in Kumasi, Ghana. Ten years ago she 
was no better off than any of her neighbours in this busy shopping area; then 
one of her four children, Samuel, was taken away from her. In 1991 a European 
agent caused a sensation by selling Samuel and two of his team-mates in Ghana's 
under-17 team to Torino. There was uproar in Italy because the players were so 
young.

Gloria remembers it well. 'Was I sad when he went. Sad? No, I was happy. Very, 
very happy.' But wasn't he a slave? She throws back her head and laughs, 
loudly. Gloria answers these questions while standing next to her BMW, having 
recently returned from a trip to Germany, where Samuel now plays for Bayern 
Munich. 'When Samuel was a young boy he was very good at football and I wanted 
to help him. I sold our television to pay for some boots, and the other 
children didn't complain because they wanted to help him too. I always pray to 
God to help my son become a big man. I helped him... now he can help me.'

Gloria has discussed this with the mother of Tony Yeboah, once a Leeds 
striker, who left Ghana for Germany when he was a teenager and plays now for 
Hamburg. Life was hard for Yeboah, who spoke no German or English, but his 
mother was 'very, very happy too,' said Gloria, a football lover who supports 
her local club and watches Samuel play for the national team when she can.

Kuffour himself is not sure Fifa are doing the right thing. 'It's every man 
for himself,' he says. 'I'm very happy with the way things turned out for me. 
I'm able to look after my family very well, I play for one of the best clubs in 
the world - I can't complain about anything.'

The other two who signed for Torino have also prospered in Europe. Mohammed 
Gargo, Kuffour's partner in central defence for Ghana, is earning Serie A money 
at Udinese - who have half a dozen young Africans in their youth team - and 
Emmanuel Duah has ended up at Leiria in Portugal. 'They've got no complaints,' 
said Kuffour.

He is more than happy with the man who did that controversial deal, Domenico 
Ricci, who is still his agent nearly 10 years later. Ricci's company, African 
Football Management, is probably the most active in the market - or at least 
the respectable part of it - and has been the target of much of Hayatou's 
invective. Ricci, an Italian who is married to a Zairean, has 60 African 
players in Europe but sees himself as anything but a 'slave trader'.

He laughs off much of the criticism and turns the argument around to blame 
Fifa and CAF for introducing a 'racist law' themselves - the regulation that 
requires licensed international player agents to post a bond of 200,000 Swiss 
francs (about £80,000). His point is a good one when one trawls the official 
Fifa list of 534 licensed agents. There's one in Egypt, and for the continent 
of Africa that's it. More than 300 African players in the top division of 
western Europe's best leagues, many hundreds more at lower levels around the 
world - and not a single black African agent on their own continent.

Not that that stops Africans doing deals. France and the USA have licensed 
agents from Africa, and there are unofficial 'local managers' doing deals with 
the Europeans. In eight days in Ghana I was asked three times if I was an 
agent, and if I wasn't did I want to have a go anyway and sell players in 
Europe. Telephone numbers were foisted upon me, and one man almost begged me to 
extend my stay and take up his offer.

'Sure, there are good agents and bad agents,' says Ricci, 46. 'Some of the 
unlicensed locals have no real idea how to operate, and some of the Europeans 
are unreliable too. But it's no good Hayatou and his executive at CAF just 
blaming the agents for taking money out of the game. If there's an exodus to 
Europe they should first of all be asking: Why? CAF is hiding behind reality. 
The young players are leaving because in Africa there's no money, too little 
competition. They should be working to make the whole structure of African 
football more professional. Hayatou says we're taking away, but we're 
investing. And look at CAF - they're not working for the development of African 
football, they just want as many years as possible on the Fifa or CAF executive 
so they can make more money and build a bigger house.

'What have they done to help African agents? The bond is too expensive. The 
Fifa agent law is racist and CAF should have done something about it when it 
was introduced. They need African agents to work with the African mentality, 
but CAF are only interested in lining their own pockets.'

They are not the only ones. The chairmen of professional leagues in South 
Africa and Cameroon have ended up in jail, and four of the top five officials 
at the Ghana FA have recently been found guilty of corruption in transfer 
deals. A Ghanaian club owner declared a transfer at $250,000 when he received 
$800,0000 - and this sort of thing is commonplace.

One man who knows all about the subject is Prof Pierre Lanfranchi, an expert 
in the development of football worldwide and a consultant to Fifa. 'National 
federations cannot even build a middle-term plan for development,' says 
Lanfranchi, Regius Professor of history at De Montfort University, Leicester. 
'There are absolutely no foundations to the professional game in Africa.' Fifa 
aim to start putting those foundations in place by keeping promising young 
players at home, at least for another couple of years.The plan is that this 
will raise standards and attract sponsorship. 'At least it's worth a try,' says 
Blatter.

Ricci, who played for Cagliari and Torino in the Italian second division 
before coaching in Zaire, says the boys he sold to Torino were all old enough 
and happy enough to move.

'Is a boy going to refuse a move like that?' asks Ricci at his office in 
Brussels. 'You cannot compare Africans to young players in, say, Russia, Norway 
or Croatia, who can stay in their own leagues until they're 20 and beyond and 
still learn a lot. If you stay on as a professional in Africa till you're 22, 
you'll never get to Europe. The infrastructure is so poor - coaching, pitches, 
equipment, travelling, administration - that you'll have no chance of 
developing.'

The benefits to Africa of players moving to Europe, says Ricci, are slowly 
beginning to surface. When a player returns to Africa he can help. 'The leagues 
have improved in the last 10 years, because the links to Europe are closer,' 
says Ricci, who believes the best are in South Africa ('which has an 
infrastructure and is completely unlike the rest of the continent'), Ivory 
Coast, Nigeria and Ghana.

If Nigeria is one of the best, it still has its problems. Of the 17 clubs in 
the top division only one, Julius Berger FC, paid their players their full 
wages on time last season. Julius Berger was also the only club to have a 
home-based player in the squad of 22 for the Nations Cup, which Nigeria hope to 
win against Cameroon today. Apart from one in Tunisia, all the others earn 
thousands of pounds a week in Europe.

A visit to a boys' game at Nsawom, a run-down town of shacks and rusty 
corrugated iron near Accra, showed what the boys must overcome to make it to 
the top. The pitch, hemmed in by school buildings and a community centre, was 
90 per cent red dust and 10 per cent grass, and was unmarked. There was a dry 
stream bed running the length of the sloping, pot-holed pitch. The goals were 
knocked up from off-cuts and the crossbars sagged markedly. Both goalkeepers 
were barefoot. When a defender went in for a tackle - and how they flew in to 
the challenge - he would emerge with the ball from a great cloud of dust. Yet 
the level of skill was exceptional.

They were lucky to have a ball according to Abedi Pele, former African 
Footballer of the Year and the best player to have come out of Ghana. 'When I 
was a boy we played on dirt with a bunch of rags for a ball,' he says. The club 
who sold him, Tamale, have clearly not made enough to plough back into the 
grass roots; they have no grass. They play all their matches on gravel and have 
the worst facilities in the Ghanaian league.

Abedi and Ricci are agreed with Fifa that investing in youth football is the 
best way to bring about long-term improvement. And that's what they are doing, 
along with many other individuals and top European clubs. As with the agents, 
there are good and bad youth academies opening up all over the continent. Abedi 
has just opened one near Accra, Ricci's company have four in West Africa, 
Cameroon's state brewery has set up an academy, there's another nearby run by a 
Greek club owner, and the big money is coming from Ajax (Ghana and South 
Africa), and throughout West Africa Feyenoord, Paris St Germain and Monaco. 
English clubs have yet to catch on, though Manchester United have bought a 
controlling interest in Fortune FC, the South African second-division side 
previously bankrolled by Quinton Fortune, and one of Arsenal's international 
scouts has had a look at how things work in Cameroon. An English-backed academy 
cannot be far away. One top-class player every five years would cover the 
running costs.

These academies, if well run like the Ajax set-up at Obuasi, will offer boys 
not only top coaching, but an education. There will be structured schooling, 
occasional visits to Europe and, whether the Fifa age barrier works or not, the 
boys will at least be well prepared to move on.

'We must leave the players here until they're older,' says Blatter. 'If the 
young players remain it will be the first step in attracting investment in 
football here.'

Gloria Kuffour, meanwhile, has a message to the mothers of Africa. 'I want all 
of you to help your boys learn football. Help them. Give them everything you 
can.'
 