
Amit Lahav, artistic director, Gecko <http://geckotheatre.com/>

Theatre brings people together to celebrate creativity and the complexity of 
humanity. It encourages true community and inspires people to push themselves 
in both the making and watching of it.Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> provides an essential, often unique 
perspective of the world for people to consider and enjoy, allowing us time to 
observe beauty and horror and everything in between. It encourages us to 
contemplate a world beyond our own. Without it and other essentials arts, we 
may be lost.


 The immediate threat may be from budget cuts and funding restrictions, 
however the biggest threat comes from an apathetic view that it’s okay to 
reduce support for creative training in schools. Drama teachers up and down the 
country regularly tweet Gecko with horror stories of cuts and department 
closures. Fewer and fewer young people are being exposed to the creative 
industries at GSCE.

 Our unique experience 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b06pyvlh/on-stage-live-from-television-centre>
 at the BBC this week, staging theatre live for TV, has shown us what can be 
achieved with a small amount of investment and a huge amount of ambition. The 
corporation’s commitment to the arts this autumn is commendable, but we’ve 
reached a point where we need arts fans to stand up and be counted.

 So please: support your local venue; invest a small amount in a favourite 
artist or company’s crowdfunding campaign; or send an email to someone you 
admire in the arts to let them know that their work means something to you. We 
need a positive approach to this now.

If we want to continue to be world leaders in the arts, we have to wake up, 
embrace and encourage the epic wealth of creativity in our artists, young 
people and ourselves.

Fin Kennedy, playwright and artistic director, Tamasha 
<http://www.tamasha.org.uk/>

From Shakespeare onwards, Britain has led the world in theatre. New British 
plays are one of our nation’s greatest exports and sustain the repertoires of 
theatres across Europe, the US and often beyond. This work showcases our nation 
as the inclusive, tolerant, humane and self-reflective society that it is.

It’s a mark of sophisticated civilisations that they create space for people 
to come together to peacefully consider the issues of the day – for citizens to 
open themselves up to personal change by empathising with the experiences of 
others. In the UK, theatre is where this happens.

Theatre is a critical training ground for new talent for other creative 
industries. TV, film, radio, advertising, gaming and other digital artforms 
would wither without theatre’s contribution to training successive generations 
of actors, directors, playwrights and technicians.

It is perhaps the most grassroots and socially-engaged artform we have. On a 
daily basis, theatres and theatre-makers around the country undertake work in 
schools, social services departments, old people’s homes, pupil referral and 
more. Many of these creative community participation projects are “invisible” 
in terms of media coverage and what the general public think of as what 
constitutes British theatre.

My 2013 report, In Battalions <http://www.finkennedy.co.uk/in-battalions>, 
sadly found new British theatre to be under a deep and sustained attack from 
government cuts to Arts Council England (ACE) and local council arts budgets. 
It meant less new work, fewer new artist training opportunities and a worrying 
decline in outreach such as youth theatres. Alongside a worrying drop in 
take-up of GCSE and A-level drama in schools due to the English Baccalaureate 
not valuing the subject, the future of British theatre’s world-leading status 
is seriously threatened.

Children need theatre like they need food and fresh air
Jo Belolli, Polka Theatre 
Despite all the evidence presented, the government is still asking ACE to 
model for 25-40% cuts in the forthcoming spending review. This would decimate 
British theatre for a generation, which is why we should celebrate theatre, the 
unsung hero of UK culture. But this also makes it an easy target. The value 
that our theatre sector brings to UK communities up and down the country is 
immense. Yet all this is in danger for the sake of shaving a few extra pounds 
from an entirely unnecessary austerity programme.

Jo Belolli, associate producer for early years, Polka Theatre 
<http://www.polkatheatre.com/>

Children need theatre like they need food and fresh air. To engage as an 
audience member in a live performance, or to participate in a creative activity 
with peers or family members nourishes their huge imagination and intellect. 
Theatre provides opportunities to think and feel; to recognise, question and 
reflect; to empathise and wonder; to enjoy, discover and feel uplifted. To 
witness their responses, and often those of their accompanying adults, says it 
all.

For many, the fact that they are experiencing a live performance – in the 
here-and-now reality of the moment – is extraordinary in itself and often very 
memorable. At Polka, we hear countless passing comments from children, some who 
are now adults, that they’ve been before; their visit had made a lasting 
impression.

In these times when there is an increasing amount of entertainment and 
recreation available immediately, with the swipe of a finger or a click of a 
switch, we need to keep advocating the intrinsic value and pleasure of live 
theatre. We must strive to keep it affordable and accessible. We need audiences 
to keep coming in through our doors. We need people to recognise what theatre 
can offer and how much children can benefit from it.

Matthew Linley, artistic director, Unity Theatre, Liverpool 
<http://www.unitytheatreliverpool.co.uk/>

#LoveTheatreDay 2015 – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/live/2015/nov/18/love-theatre-day-2015-live-blog>
I always struggle with the question: why should you love theatre? We all love 
in so many different ways and for so many different reasons. I’m much more 
comfortable with the question: why doI love theatre? Here’s why it matters to 
me and why I want to celebrate it.

I love theatre because…

 * When it’s good it sends shivers down my spine like nothing else 
 * And when it’s bad it provides conversation for days on end 
 * At its best it can say things impossible to say in words 
 * At its heart it’s about telling stories and telling them well; I 
particularly love the way it brings people together to hear and be part of 
those stories 
 * It can and does challenge, enthral, inform, enthuse and energise me 
 * It consistently influences the way I think and feel; it makes me think 
continuously about my life, my values and who I am 
So theatre for me is about aspiration, hope, energy and confidence. It’s about 
dreaming of new futures, new ways of doing and being.

Above all, it’s about fun.

On this #LoveTheatreDay, there is one thing I would say we can all do to help 
more people love theatre – and it’s simply this: take someone who hasn’t got 
the bug next time you go. Share the love!

As part of the follow up to #LoveTheatreDay, the Guardian Culture 
Professionals Network, as media partner, will be broadcasting
#LiverpoolTheatreLive 
<http://www.unitytheatreliverpool.co.uk/liverpool-theatre-live-2015.html?CMP=> 
from 2.30pm on Thursday 19 November

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 