
The embarrassment and surprise when it happens, that one explicit moment in 
reaching puberty, is a subject familiar to half the global population. In a 
project collated by the International Reference Centre, a young girl described 
how at 10 years old, like millions of adolescent girls worldwide, her period 
started at school. With just one toilet at school, like many her schoolmates, 
she went home "so no one would see me". She relates that from then on, "when my 
time of month would come I would pretend to be sick so that I did not have to 
go to school". In a report published by WaterAid last year one schoolgirl 
recounts that "in our school, there is no water facility in the toilet- it is 
so difficult, sometimes I have to miss school". According to her classmate, 
"there is no place to change and dispose the cloth – it is a question of 
putting used cloth in our pockets. So we just bunk classes when we have to 
change cloths."

A recent survey conducted by the British Medical Journal found sanitation to 
be the best medical intervention in the last 150 years. And yet, a lack of 
adequate sanitation remains one of the main reasons so many schoolgirls are 
denied an education, good health and a dignified life. One in four girls does 
not complete primary school. Of the 113 million children not in school, 60% are 
girls. According to UNICEF, in 70 developing countries more than 15% of girls 
are so often absent they are rarely enrolled. This deficit has a serious effect 
on a the welfare of a country: for every 10% increase in female literacy there 
is an increase of 10% in life expectancy at birth, and around 0.3% of economic 
growth. Research has shown that educated women participate in community 
decisions to a much greater extent. Water and sanitation are some of the key 
issues preventing this from being commonplace around the world.

For many girls the lack of privacy, safety and proper facilities are barring 
them from an education. Without a toilet, the open air alternative leaves them 
open to attack by snakes, and sexual assault by male peers or adults. Even if 
there are latrines available, the lack of segregation threatens sensitive 
gender differences – in a study by the Red Cross in Senegal, girls are warned 
off urinating in the dirty and public school latrines: they may simply 'hold 
on' to their bladder all day, even to the extent of not drinking to avoid the 
need to urinate. Evidence shows that not dehydration and 'holding on' can 
severely effect levels of concentration, and can lead to significant health 
problems.

At one school, reported by UNICEF in Malawi, a boy chants the cruel refrain 
"girls lack soap, girls lack soap" to explain why so many girls drop out of 
school. The lack of girl-friendly facilities is a huge problem when it comes to 
menstruation. Women spend about six to seven years menstruating: that's around 
3,000 days in a lifetime. Yet this taboo subject is still largely neglected by 
WASH (Water,Sanitation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sanitation> and Hygiene) 
education programmes and initiatives. Research has shown that teaching about 
menstruation is not given priority, and this has serious repercussions for 
girls and women. A joint study by UNICEF and WaterAid in Bangladesh found that 
rags are used, washed and re-used in a continuous process that causes urinary 
and vaginal infection. Usually, there is no more than one toilet, and this is 
often reserved for the teachers. Where there is a latrine for the pupils the 
girls are left to clean up, causing them to miss classes and risk exposure to 
disease. A recent report for WaterAid in Nepal found that roughly half of the 
girls questioned had been absent from school due to menstruation, mostly 
because of a lack of privacy for cleaning and washing. Periods are known to 
make young girls feel unclean, and smelly. Plan International's Stefanie Conrad 
says that "Menstruating girls face extreme challenges without adequate 
sanitation facilities, and often just stay at home during their period." 
Without good toilets, many young girls face the indignity of having to manage 
hygiene during menstruation without water, in dark corners, with fear of being 
watched. Conrad adds, "Girls reported harassment through boys and teachers when 
having to use the open to relieve themselves".

Sanitation programmes have a proven effect on attendance rates – UNICEF 
reveals that one such programme in Bangladesh registered an 11% increase in 
girls' attendance rates every year. Sanitary disposal facilities and single sex 
toilets are important requirements- as Richard Jolly at the Institute of 
Development Studies says, "unless there are separate facilities for girls many 
parents don't want their girls to be in school – especially when the girls are 
starting menstruation." Failure to invest in adequate sanitation widens the 
gender gap for many in the developing world, and denies millions of girls the 
fundamental right to a good quality of health and education.

A report in March by the Department for International Development included the 
testimony of Hemkala, a female pupil in Nepal, talking about the school's new 
facilities. "We're happy that girls have a separate latrine," she says, 
"especially during menstrual time. If we didn't have the latrine, we would have 
no option but to go back home, missing many classes." She can now come to 
school any day, any month, all year round.

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 