
Labor frontbencher Anthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> has opened up 
about the experience of finding his absent father, saying locating him in Italy 
was “a moment I will never forget”.

Albanese has shared his family story in a new biography written by the 
Canberra-based political journalist Karen Middleton, revealing he located his 
father in Italy with the help of intermediaries after the death of his mother, 
Mary.

The Sydney MP grew up with his mother after Carlo Albanese returned to Italy 
after a romance in 1962. Albanese grew up thinking his father had married his 
mother but had died in a car accident before he was born. He was told the truth 
as a teenager.

Albanese told Middleton, and the ABC on Tuesday night, that he had resolved 
not to try to find his father while his mother was alive.

He said it had been “very traumatic” for his Catholic mother to tell him the 
truth about his conception, and growing up with her alone, he had felt the need 
to send his mother a message that she was all he needed.

His position changed after his mother’s death in 2002. Albanese recalled being 
asked by his son, Nathan, where his father was during a visit the two made to 
his mother’s grave. “It hit me I had a responsibility to him as well ... to 
find out more about my father,” Albanese told ABC’s 7.30.

The MP then asked for assistance in tracking down his father in southern 
Italy, including from the former Howard government minister and later 
ambassador to Italy, Amanda Vanstone.

Carlo Albanese was located in 2009. “It took my breath away. I didn’t think it 
would happen,” the MP said.

Albanese travelled to Italy to meet his biological father. Before the meeting, 
Albanese described his emotional state. “I went on a walk by myself. I was very 
emotional. It was a big deal. It was a big moment in my life.”

The two men formed a relationship, and Albanese was also united with two 
siblings, before Carlo Albanese died of cancer in 2013.

He was asked whether he thought about his mother when he was eventually 
reunited with his father. Albanese said his mother was very much front-of-mind, 
but he believed she would have understood why he felt a need to form a 
relationship.

“While she was alive I didn’t want to do a disservice to her. I didn’t want 
her to think in any way that I needed something else. But I think she would get 
it,” he said.
 