
Michael Vaughan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-vaughan> has no 
need to worry about the mood of the England dressing room when he returns to it 
today to begin preparations for the one-day series. He would have found things 
a bit low if he had come through the door immediately after we had been 
whitewashed in Sydney, but we are not a demoralised and dispirited bunch. We 
have stronger characters in this England team than that. By the time we start 
preparations for the one-day series today, I'm sure the boys will have picked 
themselves up.

We have been beaten 5-0 in the Tests, but we have to put things right in the 
one-day series. I expect everyone to be buzzy, everyone to be upbeat and 
working on their individual games. I'm sure that Michael will be positive and 
organised and will be talking to us as a group about how he wants us to go 
about things.

His methods remain largely a mystery to me. I made my one-day debut under 
Michael, against New Zealand at Bristol in 2004, but that is my only experience 
of his captaincy. I've heard from some of the other guys what a good captain he 
is and obviously his record against Australia in 2005 proves it. One thing he 
can be sure of is a great response from Andrew Flintoff. Fred's a natural team 
player. He'll be low at the moment, but he's not out of form and he will be 
looking to switch to one-day mode.

It is not just Vaughany who is rejoining us. There are other players coming in 
who weren't involved in the Ashes series. Paul Nixon has been around the 
England dressing room during this last Test. I've never met him before, but he 
has already shown himself to be a really energetic person. He's not made his 
England debut yet, but he's old enough not to be overawed and he has been 
talking to me as if I have known him for years. That's a really good way to be. 
To get energy from the players coming fresh into the one-day side can only help 
those of us who have taken a pounding in the Test series.

I didn't feel too good after the Sydney defeat. Some people went out for a few 
beers to get over it, but that lifestyle is not for me. If we win I'm more 
likely to join the lads for a while, but if we lose I like to spend time on my 
own. I listen to R&B, Nelly Furtado, 50 Cent and it gets me through.

This time, after a bit of music therapy, I went out for a Chinese with my 
brothers, Rakev and Khalid. They weren't sure about Chinese food when they 
first arrived in Australia at Christmas, but they are getting into it now. 
Family is very important to me, not just when things are going badly, and I 
would spend every night with my brothers if I could. Rakev, my younger brother, 
is a bit lively and cheeky and he was full of encouragement, telling me it was 
my first Ashes series and there were lots more to come. Khalid is quieter, and 
worries about me a bit. He tells me he prays for me and wants things to go 
right. He didn't say much that evening. He was feeling it as much as me.

I've been reflecting a little on what I need to do in the years and months 
ahead to lift my game. Duncan Fletcher has a reputation of protecting his fast 
bowlers from too much county cricket, but he has never prevented me from 
playing for Lancashire. I think I need overs under my belt during the summer to 
keep in a groove. Some people are at their best when they are fresh. I believe 
that I need to play a lot of cricket to get into match fitness and learn how to 
respond to pressure situations.

I took a bit of stick for a missed run-out opportunity against Shane Warne at 
a critical time in the Sydney Test. Warnie swung me into the leg-side, Alastair 
Cook flung the ball in as he went for a second run and I was not back behind 
the stumps in time to attempt the run-out. I know I got that wrong and I hold 
my hand up. Usually, I get behind the stumps as a matter of routine, but I 
thought they had made their second run quite comfortably.

It was looking at the television replay in the changing room at the interval 
that I realised Warne was about a yard out of his ground. I don't think it's 
down to a lack of match experience because normally I instinctively get back to 
the stumps. I've always had that in me. On this occasion I didn't and it proved 
a bit costly. I felt bad inside and it's something to learn from. It's the 
first time I've ever done it. I won't be doing it again.
 