
The federal government has defended its approach to tacking welfare following 
the release of new research showing nearly 3 million Australians are living 
below the poverty line.

A new Australian Council of Social Service (Acoss) report says this figure 
includes 731,000 children – a 2% increase in the past decade.

The chief executive of Acoss, Cassandra Goldie, said the alarming results 
should act as an urgent appeal to senators to reject further cuts to family 
payments, currently before the upper house.

A 'national shame': Acoss report reveals worsening poverty in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/16/a-national-shame-acoss-report-reveals-worsening-poverty-in-australia>
The assistant minister for social services, Zed Seselja, said the government 
was very committed to finding ways to encourage people to look after themselves 
and get people off welfare if they didn’t need to be on it.

“Our opponents on the left have pushed, I think, a welfare mentality in this 
country,” Seselja told Sky News on Sunday. “We simply can’t go on assuming huge 
numbers of Australians welfare will just become the norm.”

He said the government is committed to an “investment-led approach” which 
could result in more training, more mentoring and more opportunities for 
internships.

Labor’s spokeswoman for families and social services, Jenny Macklin, responded 
by saying that the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, had failed to show 
leadership on tackling poverty and inequality.

“Instead, Mr Turnbull wants to make cruel budget cuts that will hurt 
vulnerable Australians even more,” she said in a statement.

But Dr Goldie is becoming increasingly frustrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/16/a-national-shame-acoss-report-reveals-worsening-poverty-in-australia>
 with such debates.

“We frame it as if it’s the fault of the individual, you’re either lazy, not 
working hard enough, not retraining hard enough, but the basic numbers are 
there,” she told ABC television.

“One job available for every five people conservatively is the estimate 
looking for paid work.”

She said former Labor prime minister Bob Hawke reduced child poverty by a 
third after setting it as a core goal of his government.

“But over the last 10 years we’ve seen no change in the level of poverty among 
the Australian population as a whole – but children are really at risk,” Goldie 
said.

She said the cuts stripping another $60 a week from single parent families and 
the proposal to withhold Newstart support for young people for up to four weeks 
would likely lead to increased poverty.

Goldie said the overall picture from the past decade was one of persistent and 
entrenched poverty across the community with an increase in child poverty, 
which she described as a national shame.

Welfare groups calling for Newstart increase 'lack imagination', says minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/25/welfare-groups-calling-for-newstart-increase-lack-imagination-says-minister>
Those most at risk were children in lone parent families who are three times 
more likely to be living in poverty than those from couple families,

Goldie said those doing it toughest were overwhelmingly people living on the 
$38 a day Newstart payment, 55% of whom were in poverty.

That was followed by families on the parenting payment (51.5%), the majority 
of whom were lone parents with children.
 