
The list of sports events suffering cancellations and pull-outs as a result of 
the swine flu outbreak has grown, taking in motor racing, football, golf and 
elite-level diving.

Motor racing's A1GP <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> series cancelled 
its final race of the season in Mexico, at least 10 golfers withdrew from a 
Canadian Tour event in Mexico and teams of Chinese and Malaysian divers 
scrapped plans to compete in the United States. Yesterday the remainder of the 
Concacaf under-17 championship in Tijuana was also cancelled, with Costa Rica, 
Honduras, Mexico and the US due to contest the semi-finals.

The H1N1 virus has been confirmed in the US, Canada, New Zealand, Britain, 
Israel and Spain, but Mexico remains the only country where sufferers – as many 
as 159 according to government estimates – have died. A1GP organisers said the 
decision to cancel its final race had been taken reluctantly.

"To say we are disappointed to have to make this call is an understatement," 
chairman Tony Teixeira said in a statement. "We must have the safety of all 
members of the A1GP community, as well as the thousands of loyal fans in Mexico 
City as our prime concern." The race had been scheduled for 22-24 May.

China's diving squad, which won seven of the eight gold medals on offer at the 
Beijing Olympics last year, withdrew from the Fina Grand Prix in Fort 
Lauderdale next month. Teenage British diver Tom Daley is due to compete at the 
same event. The Amateur Swimming Union of Malaysia (ASUM), meanwhile, said it 
had consulted its National Sports Council (NSC) before deciding not to compete.

The decision means there will be no final preparation for divers ahead of the 
world championships in Rome in July. Their move came just hours after golfers 
withdrew from the San Luis Potosi Open.

The Mexican event is part of the Canadian Tour – part of the feeder system for 
the main US PGA Tour. The La Loma Golf Club has been closed to the public and 
no fans or local caddies will attend.

Olympic Council of Malaysia Honorary Secretary Datuk Sieh Kok Chi said there 
was also every possibility athletes would be withdrawn from Thailand's Martial 
Arts Games in June. "We must give priority to the safety of our athletes 
because they are our country's asset," he said. "For the time being, athletes 
should remain in the country as Malaysia is free from the swine flu."
 