
Some strange - and very, very bloody - things are happening in the American 
horror movie these days. The horror genre seems to have awoken from its long 
slumber in PG-13 territory and fully embraced its true identity as an arena for 
torture, wholesale slaughter, plasma-heavy mayhem, the terrorising of dim and 
promiscuous teenagers, and the inventive repurposing of domestic power tools 
for homicidal ends.

Once upon a time I dreamed of this moment. Now that it's finally here, I'm not 
so sure. As a seasoned and sometimes nostalgic veteran of the genre's sick 
high-tide in the late 1970s and early 80s, a devotee of Chainsaw, Last House, 
Dawn of the Dead and Friday the 13th (the four essential food-groups of the 
aging gorehound), I've long mourned the migration of this rascally, often 
proudly indefensible genre's primary sensibilities into the dread orbit of the 
major studios. As John Waters has often pointed out about the decline of the 
sleazy B-feature (horror's only true home), the studios took our blood, guts 
and nudity, our censor-baiting and our impoverished inventiveness, and poured 
A-feature money all over it, promptly ruining it.

Here lie the origins of the ghastly PG-13 horror movies of the past 10 years. 
Gore-Lite - what is the point? In the week that Final Destination 3 arrives on 
DVD with an interactive feature that literally allows you to shout, "Look out 
behind you, fool!" at the characters, we also see the fourth Scary Movie spoof 
coming to cinemas, applying theAirplane! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/airplane> principle (and one of its 
directors) to the many recent horror movies it mocks. The former suggests that 
audiences are bored with what's on offer even in the reliably gruesome Final 
Destiny franchise, while the latter suggests that kids are now so jaded by the 
tricks and tropes of the genre that nothing short of being chased through the 
woods at midnight by Leatherface himself will ever scare them again.

But we all reckoned without Eli Roth or the Saw movies. Roth, the director of 
Cabin Fever, a frankly overhyped and overrated cross-pollination of Deliverance 
and Chainsaw Massacre, certainly gives good quotage and knows his horror tricks 
better than Kevin Williamson. (It tickled him to kill off the virgins before 
the slutty chicks in Cabin Fever, a reversal of the genre's usual moralistic 
hacking-order.) With the more recent Hostel, however, his work seems to have 
degenerated into ordinary torture-garden grand guignol, with a subtext about 
the Ugly American Abroad tacked on as faint justification for the movie's many 
flayings, bludgeonings and DIY amputations.

Perhaps Roth was just unlucky to find himself trailing the zero-budget 
indoor-apocalypse called Saw, made for buttons and soon netting $100m 
worldwide, which road-tested his torture-parlour schema with memorable crudity, 
maximum bloodshed and a strong dose of narrative incoherence. A Saw sequel has 
been and gone, with the threequel due next summer, but one has to ask: where 
does the franchise - or the horror movie itself - go now that all caution has 
been cast off? Now that, in order to appease the rabid Fangoria subscription 
base (among whom - full disclosure - I once numbered my teenage self), one must 
start with snipping women's' toes off or enucleating unpleasant young men, and 
then try to outdo oneself from there?

This must be a grim endeavour for the film-makers and, for the first time in 
my gore-hardened life, I found it was one for me too. Maybe I'm just too old 
for all this. Given the nature of the horror genre, it's hardly worth calling 
for a return to some kind of blood-drenched "middle ground", some psychopathic 
Third Way for the modern plasmaphile. As it is, the only person I can find who 
truly loved Saw is the reliably psychopathic Christopher Moltisanti in the new 
season of The Sopranos. And with fans like him, who needs lousy reviews?
 