
I like a bit of dystopian fiction with my sunshine and sangria. As such I 
couldn't have asked for a more perfect companion on a recent trip to a 
welcoming, sunkissed Barcelona thanMargaret Atwood's Oryx and Crake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/10/bookerprize2003.bookerprize>. 
The opening scenes introducing the central character Snowman, a lonely figure 
isolated on the sandy and possibly toxic shores of human civilisation, gave a 
very different edge to the packed Barceloneta beach under my feet.

Set in the near future, the novel flicks between the story of Snowman's 
current plight, his mission to survive (for what?) and a sequence of flashbacks 
alluding to how he ended up as possibly the last human in the world. There's 
evidence of disasters, both natural, man-made and even man-managed. Atwood has 
a knack for creating a totally believable Everyman in Snowman – or Jimmy, as he 
was once known – lost in the wreckage. What would we do as an individual or as 
a race when faced with a species-ending event? What different moral decisions 
could we take before or after?

We learn of Snowman's or rather Jimmy's liberal arts education in a world that 
prizes the study of science and his later work as a copywriter helping to 
peddle the latest pharmaceutical innovations, most notably the BlyssPluss Pill 
that promises to reverse the ageing process.

Snowman's past life and his love of words punctuate the book as echoes of a 
lost time but also reveal an uneasy conscience. He has helped create this new 
world, shape its narrative and reimagine himself as a quasi-religious figure. 
Words and stories become his tools to survive the harsh reality he has found 
himself in and as the reader, you cling to the same constructs to make sense of 
the scene and events occurring. You recognise the words, but nothing quite 
makes sense, nothing feels certain.

Vestiges of the ordinary and everyday surrounded by weird science, thoroughly 
referenced by Atwood at the back of the book, add to this feeling of 
displacement. The sense that the new world has its roots in the now and is 
never very far away creates a feeling of threat that is not assuaged when you 
discover the chain of events that have destroyed much of the world as we would 
recognise it. Atwood introduces new ideas and concepts that help us understand 
what has happened, but never overdoes it. The book avoids the temptation to 
explain everything away, leaving some large unanswered questions.

All good beach reads need a love story of course, and Oryx and Crake manages 
this too. Snowman's past affairs and deep devotion to Oryx are like their own 
study of human relationships, lust, love and everything in between. How much of 
human nature can or should be controlled to further human existence remains a 
question throughout.

If you want to get away from it all with your beach read, this book won't 
disappoint – but you might not want to stay where you end up.
 