
I am not an ideal beach reader. Bed, bus, bath, yes; but I like the sea almost 
too much to be able to concentrate on anything else in its vicinity. I tend to 
sit next to books on beaches, gawping at the horizon.

In my twenties, my projected holiday reading would consist of several short, 
dense books that I'd failed to read the rest of the year. Most ridiculously, I 
tookWittgenstein's Tractatus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2001/sep/05/features11.g21> on return 
trips to several European beauty spots, on the grounds that a) it didn't take 
up much room in the suitcase and b) I wouldn't finish it by the Tuesday and 
find myself at a loose end. (Both these surmises were correct.) Even now, 
there's an abridged copy ofAnatomy of Melancholy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/aug/18/history.philosophy> interleaved 
with Horrid Henrys and Just Williams in my children's kitchen-table pile of 
breakfast reading that I am certain to take to France in a fortnight's time.

So I'm going to pick something for a beach bar on a balmy evening that 
combines philosophical investigations with a larky tale of bank robbers on the 
run, studded with blackly comic apercus about booze, death, laziness and 
loneliness – all the great holiday subjects. I once lent The Thought Gang to a 
friend who by accident went on holiday by himself to a couples resort. He 
didn't speak to anyone for a week and ended up devouring it several times: 
probably ideal reading conditions.

The novel is made up of the rambling thoughts of philosophy professor Eddie 
Coffin: a disorganised middle-aged lush who has stumbled through an academic 
career at Cambridge and now finds himself, after defrauding a philanthropic 
foundation with imaginary research, friendless and penniless in southern 
France. He hooks up with a crazy petty criminal called Hubert – one-legged, 
one-armed, part-deaf – and they launch themselves on a spree of philosophical 
bank robberies, inventing the getaway lunch on the side (this involves sitting 
in a nice restaurant while the police cars roar past). The robberies are 
situationist street theatre, performed in different styles: Marxist, Stoic, 
positivist ("yes, I'm positive I want to rob this bank"), Neo-Platonic ("You'll 
have to pay close attention if you want to tell the difference between this and 
a Platonic job. Ask the Prof if you have any questions.")

Along the way, Eddie treats us to anecdotes from his disreputable past (the 
time he was kidnapped by an editor and handcuffed to a radiator in a last-ditch 
attempt to get him to write his great book, his accidental involvement in the 
Afghanistan war, his efforts to deal with the Worst Undergraduate Ever) and 
gives Hubert "Eddie's edited highlights" of western philosophy. After all, both 
they and the reader are, hopefully, in much the same situation as those who 
started "the biz": "Sunshine, a glass of wine, a bit of time."

So we get the 15 top ideas, including Seneca's "maximum maxim" ("'This is what 
Zeno said, but what about you?'… It's not the enlightenment that counts, but 
the taking part"), as well as the bottom 10 (alchemy, supersophistry, plain 
wrongness). There are digressions onMontaigne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2010/may/10/montaigne-philosophy>
, Kant and Nietzsche, an extremely eerie appearance from beyond the grave by 
foul-mouthed ancient Greek poetHipponax 
<https://www.princeton.edu/~achaney/tmve/wiki100k/docs/Hipponax.html>, an 
exhausting amount of wordplay and an unaccountable fondness for words beginning 
with the letter Z.

The whole is eminently quotable and criminally enjoyable, like a better-read, 
more bad-tempered Douglas Adams. As Eddie says: "You don't want to let the 
cosmos catch you backing off in any way." Good advice, wherever you are.
 