
My holiday reading usually begins in one of three places. There's the shelf at 
home where I keep all the books I've bought over the years but never got round 
to reading. There's the folder in which I stuff cuttings of book reviews that 
whet my appetite, often from way back whenever, prompting an online search or 
visit to a secondhand shop. And then there's the cupboard at the 
Guardian/Observer offices where spare copies of all the books submitted for 
review are kept.

Generally, I eventually pick one from each place. So I end up with a worthy 
tome (Tristram Shandy, say), something excitingly different (Alfred Bester's 
sci-fi classic,The Stars My Destination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/14/science-fiction-authors-choice>, 
springs to mind), and something contemporary, often by an author new to me.

I didn't know Mark Poirier's work before I picked up Modern Ranch Living on 
one such holiday cupboard-scramble a few years ago. It follows two slightly 
mixed-up people in Tucson – Kendra, a 16-year-old high-school fitness addict, 
and Merv, a 30-year-old water park manager. They spend an oven-like summer 
trying to make sense of existence while a mystery plays out at the edges of 
their lives. The heat of the Arizona desert connected with me instantly when I 
first read it, on a boiling summer holiday in Sicily. So – just for you – I 
travelled all the way to Mallorca to test its suitability as a recommendation 
by rereading it under a blazing Mediterranean sun.

And under these exacting test conditions, it came up trumps again. Unlike many 
contemporary US novels, the characters have lives to which I can relate; they 
have believable relationships with parents, siblings and friends, and, while 
they are stuck in ruts, they are not hopelessly so.

Kendra Lumm is one of the most intriguing female characters I have read about 
in a long while. She is spiky and judgmental, and she uses gym sessions both as 
anger management and to build her self-confidence (her clever older brother is 
about to leave home for Columbia University, while she flounders at school). 
Plussing as which, her unique way with grammar is appalling. Driven to take 
extra English classes to improve it, she accidentally joins a poetry programme 
– where she meets an important new friend who is into voodoo dolls.

Meanwhile, at Splash World, college-dropout manager Merv Hunter is torn by 
feelings of inadequacy around his schoolmates who did go to university (despite 
provocations, they remain loyal friends), and by disgust at the menial services 
he must provide certain swimming pool regulars. At home, relations with his 
mentally ill mother are strained.

Whereas so many American writers dwell on failure to thrive in a dynamic 
nation, Poirier's characters rise to their challenges and emerge with credit. 
Readers who enjoyed AM Homes'sThis Book Will Save Your Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jun/11/fiction.features1> will no doubt 
recognise a similar underlying positivity in Modern Ranch Living. For me, the 
added bonuses of learning about a part of America I knew little about, of 
arroyos and adobe houses – and some engaging tangents – made it a thoroughly 
satisfying beach diversion.

• Modern Ranch Living by Mark Poirier is available as an ebook and paperback 
from Bloomsbury Publishing 
<http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/modern-ranch-living-9781408849996/>
 