
The scenario of China Miéville's The City and The City reveals itself like an 
armchair traveller's road trip through eastern Europe. There's the once 
beautiful but dishevelled city of Besźel, reminiscent of a Krakow that never 
recovered. Then there's the modernised Ul Qoma, a hub of new investments and 
growth that brings to mind a post-reunification Berlin.

These two cities occupy the same geographical space, divided not by walls, but 
by Miéville's genius for the fantastic. Certain areas belong to Besźel, others 
to Ul Qoma, while some are crosshatched between the two. Citizens from one city 
learn from birth to "unsee" the citizens, vehicles, buildings of the other. Any 
crossing of these boundaries invokes a shadowy organisation called Breach, 
which exists to police the separation.

Into this zone is thrust Inspector Tyador Borlú of the Besźel Extreme Crime 
Squad, who is faced with the corpse of a student from a university in Ul Qoma. 
All evidence points towards cross-border foul play, but vested interests want 
the case tidied away and forgotten. From this point the novel settles into one 
of the best police procedurals you will ever encounter.

If you read it on that level alone you will enjoy it, and first time round 
that's what I did. Yet it lurked in the back of my mind, drawing me back, and 
the next time I went away I packed the book in my bag.

My second reading was at a much more leisurely pace and in a more leisurely 
situation, and this time it wasn't just the plot and characters that gripped 
me, but the realisation that we all go through our lives much like the citizens 
of Besźel and Ul Qoma, carefully not seeing things that we don't want to see.

The sensation of culture shock that this creates is heightened if you happen 
to be outside normal routines and comfort zones, making you think about 
examples of bias or media blackouts, about alienation in society in general and 
the things to which you personally are oblivious as you travel to work or 
wander around the shops.

It may not sound like a cheery beach read, but Miéville writes convincingly 
and positively, showing the issues of a society in which people are blind to 
each other, and emphasising how much things can improve if we only open our 
eyes a little wider. It's a book not only for the beach but for any kind of 
holiday, because it repays as much thought as you are willing or able to put 
into it.

• James Cole comments as wolveseatdogs
 