
The requirement for summer reading used to be a vast, compelling book. 
Something to lose yourself in. Tolstoy, Conrad, Dostoevsky orLewis Grassic 
Gibbon <http://www.grassicgibbon.com/>: these were the kinds of books which 
transported you to a different time and place. But my tastes have changed; 
family holidays don't offer the hours of uninterrupted reading. You can only do 
half an hour here or an hour there. Plus, I began to think what's the point of 
all that packing and travelling to some beautiful place only to then spend 
hours immersed in 19th-century Russia.

So now I like summer books that linger in the mind. Like my taste in wine – 
less about quantity than quality. I want a book that makes me think, which 
triggers those delightful hazy reveries when lying in hammocks watching clouds, 
or gazing at the sea's horizon pondering what I have just read. I now have a 
really exacting requirement of summer reading; it has to meet the André Gide 
test – "the book which has failed is that which leaves the reader unchanged". I 
want books that change me, which fundamentally shift some perception, 
understanding of life. These are the books that might be candidates for that 
small shelf in a home in my 80s! The 50 or so books which have shaped my 
outlook on life.

This summer, I have found a brilliant candidate – John Burnside's I Put a 
Spell on You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/02/put-a-spell-on-you-john-burnside-review>
. The title proves uncannily true. A week since I finished reading it, I am 
still spellbound. The sentences, ideas and experiences he describes still 
rolling around in my head and colliding like snooker balls: the humour, the 
tragedy, the confusion, the insight. Another reason to be grateful: it has 
provided me with the epigraph for the new book I am writing. This is a small 
book which speaks with an extraordinary capacious humanity and penetrating 
precision.

There is a beautiful border country between poetry and prose, and increasingly 
it's the bandits in this border country whose books bring me up short: Kathleen 
Jamie, Andrew Greig and John Burnside are all poets (and Scottish).Rebecca 
Solnit's The Faraway Nearby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/07/faraway-nearby-rebecca-solnit-review>
 was my book of the summer of 2013. All of them construct books with no obvious 
narrative pull, no beginnings or ends; but with digressions, memoir and 
reflection all sitting alongside each other. As if they are curating a 
collection of their own ideas and writing, and as with the best artistic 
curators, you are left to connect (or not) the disparate material, to find the 
resonances or fill in your own. These are books which prompt a particular kind 
of engagement: they give you work to do because of their own untidy sense of 
incompletion.

Burnside's starting points are often autobiographical. Reflecting on a 
childhood in working-class communities in Cowdenbeath in Scotland and Corby, he 
takes his reader on a spiral – Catholicism, sexuality, glamour, the role of 
women, male identity, class, urban planning – and always to the accompaniment 
of music and its lyrics. Time and again, one is caught up short with an insight 
framed with both modesty and profoundity.

"Slow attrition of mistaken commitment" for example. An oblique reference to 
the figure who haunts these pages, his wonderful mother who struggled to make 
ends meet and bring up her children in the most unpropitious of circumstances 
of alcoholism, and boiling male frustration. Burnside is a rare man who sees 
deeply into female experience – his portrayal of the absurdity of much adult 
male identity had me smiling with recognition – and describes it with deep 
sympathy. "In the town where we grew up, the will of girls and women was 
continually sapped, from cradle to crone, boyfriends and husbands taking over 
where the parents left off." It's a sentence whose full implications we are 
still only beginning to understand. What if a girl did not seek male approval 
but pursued the understanding of her own will, her own independent spirit?

But to pick out these themes is already a disservice. There is so much more. 
Unexpected conclusions such as "there is nothing very interesting about 
romantic love". Or an essay on murder ballads – a terrifying tradition marking 
(even celebrating) domestic violence. Narcissism, mental breakdown and the 
careful analysis of one of those confusing experiences we long to find an 
explanation for in which, as a young man, he rejected a woman he was 
passionately in love with.

This richness is obviously shot through with pain but Burnside's spell – the 
one persistent thread is in "glamourie", "thrawn" and associated words 
expressing the contrary compelling wildness of the human spirit – works its 
magic, enchanting you to read on and find from these pages a world more 
thrilling than ever, despite the presence of pain.

• Madeleine Bunting is writing a book for Granta on the relationship between 
England and Scotland.
 