
Where better to find your perfect beach for reading than Sicily? It has miles 
of soft sand, gently sloping out to sea for easy swimming, as Inspector 
Montalbano does every day. I know this even though I have never been there, 
because I first came to this local detective through the admirable RAI 
television series,currently getting another run on BBC4 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b01dpm3k/inspector-montalbano-series-1-6-the-artists-touch>
.

The TV version – and there's a Young Montalbano series 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/tv/posts/The-Young-Montalbano-Reinterpreting-the-detective>
 as well – is a softer man than in the books, rather sexy and constantly 
propositioned by the most elegant women. Camilleri's original character is 
frequently bad-tempered, and gauche with the opposite sex, however often 
aroused. He is an archetypal chauvinist male, terrified of being trapped into 
marriage by his long-term lover Livia. He is more frequently drawn to delicious 
Sicilian food than sex. It is only after a meal in a small trattoria that he 
generally speaks of "heaven".

Montalbano's great appeal is his understanding of the rich Rabelaisian 
characters among his people. Signora Cosentino, for instance, is "an 
irresistibly likeable balloon with a mustache".

The opportunity to observe and get involved is what drives him. Although his 
success is said to have made him famous, the last thing he wants is promotion, 
which might take him away from frontline policing, as he frequently moans to 
his boss. He is surly with any superior for whom he has no respect. In The 
Snack Thief he actually terrorises and near beats up an anti-terrorist squad 
colonel. But his relationship with his own team is as a "band of brothers". So 
when Sergeant Fazio interprets what to do when left without instructions:

"'I figured out what it was you wanted me to do, and I did it'. Montalbano 
felt moved, This was real friendship, Sicilian friendship, the kind based on 
intuition, on what was left unsaid. With a true friend, one never needs to ask, 
because the other understands on his own and acts accordingly."

One surprise to me was that he is consistently kind to immigrants, as much as 
the innocent unfortunate. But then Sicily, home to the mafia and male 
chauvinism, has been forgiving to the boatloads of north African immigrants 
reaching their shores. Montalbano is gentle with the African prostitute and 
almost treats the elderly refugee Aisha as if she were his aunt.

The plotting is characteristically convoluted. It starts simply with the 
murder of a middle-aged businessman in the lift of his apartment block. But it 
turns out his Tunisian cleaner – who also sold him sex – has gone missing. 
Enter a new element, the death of supposed Tunisian sailor at sea, shot by the 
Tunisian navy while on an Italian fishing boat. It turns out he was the 
cleaner's brother, and was actually a terrorist on the run. And then there's 
the boy, her son – he is the snack thief of the title, because he has had to 
live in hiding after his mother disappeared and has been mugging school-kids 
for their lunches. It has a touch of Midsomer Murders about it, in the way the 
author uses very ordinary elements of rural life to tell an unusual story.

What makes Camilleri stand out from simplistic whodunnits, let alone 
commonplace police procedurals, is that Montalbano does not always bring 
criminals to justice. If he does, Camilleri frequently sidelines it.

So, in The Snack Thief, the final arrest of a woman for murdering her husband 
is only briefly mentioned. The story concentrates on how Montalbano saves a 
Tunisian boy after his mother is murdered and wangles the system, including 
acquiring her illegal gains, to provide for the boy's future. Another murder by 
the security services he hardly bothers to conclude.

Montalbano is a bit like Simenon's Maigret in his sense of decency and 
justice. He has to work within a society dominated by the mafia, corrupt 
politicians and self-serving bureaucrats. He cannot hope to defeat them 
outright, but schemes to achieve his ends by outflanking them.

However even he has to admit that his manipulation of events, using his power 
as a policeman, can go too far. The innocent still get killed, like Aisha. In 
his first book The Shape of Water, he knowingly leaves a gun for a deranged 
young man to kill a crooked lawyer. After that he has to agree with his beloved 
Livia, that he tried too hard to "be God", but is actually only "second-rate".
 