
On 10 March 1868, Jules Verne was excited. He was deep in the first volume of 
his latest book – whose working title had recently changed from Journey Under 
the Waters to Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea – and it was going well. 
That day he wrote to his editor, Pierre-Jules Hetzel: "Oh my dear Hetzel, if I 
don't pull this book off, I'll be inconsolable. I've never held a better thing 
in my hands."

I can't think of a better thing to read on the sands. Twenty Thousand Leagues 
Under the Sea is arguably Verne's masterpiece. As a classic it has aged 
wonderfully well: it is escapist fun, but still retains its literary and 
scientific significance. To dismiss it as simply an adventure story does it a 
disservice. Yes, Verne's oceanic journey around the world is a ripping yarn, 
but it is also an eerie tale of isolation and madness, packed full with 
geographical and scientific accuracies that make the fantastic uncomfortably 
believable.

The narrator, oceanic scientist Professor Pierre Aronnax 
<http://www.shmoop.com/20000-leagues-under-the-sea/professor-pierre-aronnax-timeline.html>
 is on a mission to determine the animal (or otherwise) nature of an unknown 
being attacking ships around the world. Aronnax, along with his faithful 
servant Conseil and the boisterous harpooner Ned Land, are kidnapped by their 
target, a horned submarine called the Nautilus. Their captor is the mysterious 
Captain Nemo, an intelligent, quiet man who hates all who live on land (for 
reasons mostly unexplained, unless you read Verne's The Mysterious Island).

Without a doubt, Nemo is what elevates Twenty Thousand Leagues above the rest 
of Verne's work. The devil in the deep blue sea, Nemo lives in stasis in his 
metal cocoon, roaming the oceans to leer at wreckages and attack ships. His 
appreciation for human achievements, seen in his collection of art, books and 
music, clashes with his furious hatred of civilised society. He is an 
intriguing, Byronic figure, unmatched in depth of character even today.

The relationship between Aronnax and Nemo is an intriguing dance between 
understanding and uneasiness. Initially, both of them delight in finding 
another academic mind. Aronnax is thrilled by the unexpected luxuries of the 
Nautilus, with its world-class collections of underwater treasures, inventively 
cooked seafood dishes and unending supply of seaweed cigars. Meanwhile, Nemo 
revels in showing off the Nautilus's capabilities to someone who understands 
them, taking Aronnax on little field trips to hunt sharks, visit the South Pole 
and explore the underwater city of Atlantis.

Nemo becomes increasingly sinister despite Aronnax's romanticised eye: he 
drugs his captives, refuses to explain the violent death of a crew member and 
alternates between sorrowful melancholia and cold fury. Ultimately it is 
Aronnax's transition from admiration and envy to complete fear that makes 
Twenty Thousand Leagues so eerie and exciting. At the climax when Nemo finally 
attacks a ship with Aronnax on board, the reader, Aronnax and the "archangel of 
hate" Nemo reach a satisfyingly simultaneous understanding. The two men watch 
in silence as the drowning sailors sink into an ocean crevasse like "a human 
antheap caught out by the invasion of the sea", and everyone finally 
understands that Nemo will never let his captors live. Later, when Aronnax 
literally crawls across the salon floor in complete darkness, desperate to 
avoid the sobbing Nemo who is playing his organ in the same room, my heart was 
pounding thrillingly hard. I've read Twenty Thousand Leagues multiple times and 
Nemo's madness still scares me.

Its episodic chapters may not appeal to some, but as a beach read, Twenty 
Thousand Leagues is the perfect book to pick up and put down. You are 
consistently rewarded with iconic scenes: a battle with a giant squid, an 
underwater funeral, a trip to Atlantis. Verne's detailed descriptions of 
geography and sea life fill me with a curiously Victorian sense of potential 
for discovering the unknown.

But, layered between all the fun is the sobering parallel drawn between Nemo 
and his sanctuary: like the tortured Captain, the ocean is a dangerous, 
unpredictable and completely isolating force.

After reading Twenty Thousand Leagues, you will never be able to look at the 
sea in the same way again. Was that a whale or a custom-made submarine 
harbouring a broken, vengeful man? I'll stay on shore, thanks.
 