
If Ben Ainslie is serious about putting together a team and a boat to win the 
America's Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/americas-cup> for Britain, 
there is one call he needs to make. It is to Adrian Newey, the genius whose 
cars are about to win their fourth straight Formula One world championship.

Ainslie and Newey have something in common: they both understand wind. That 
sensitivity was put to devastating use by Ainslie this week, calling the 
tactical shots as Oracle, the US boat,won eight races in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/25/americas-cup-team-usa-finale> to 
dash sailing's most celebrated trophy from the lips of their New Zealand 
rivals. As usual, his feeling for shifting breezes was allowing him to think 
two or three moves ahead of his rivals.

Newey deploys his understanding in a different way. A trained aerodynamicist, 
he stands at his drawing board and is said to "see" the wind, predicting its 
behaviour and imagining its points of high and low pressure as it passes over, 
through and under a vehicle that exists, at that moment, as no more than a few 
strokes of 4B pencil on paper.

The other thing that links them is the America's Cup. Ainslie has just 
fulfilled a childhood dream by becoming the first British sailor to take part 
in the race since 1964 and the first to be part of a victorious crew since 
before the second world war; now he would like to be part of the first British 
team to win the 162-year-old competition.

As for Newey, he has long dreamt of designing a boat for the cup, and only the 
inducement of vast sums of money offered by a series of employers inFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> – including a starting salary of 
$10m a year, not counting bonuses, when he joined Red Bull back in 2006 – has 
kept him from making the jump on several occasions in the past.

The 72ft foiling catamarans that fought for the cup in San Francisco Bay over 
the past fortnight, and which will probably compete for it again in three 
years' time, look just the sort of thing that he might have created on his 
famous easel. All that carbon fibre and Kevlar, all those foils and wings 
lifting clear of the water and seeming to fly above the waves: it's just 
waiting for the application of his terrifying intellect.

This is a man whose cars have won more than 140 grands prix and are currently 
reducing their rivals to the status of also-rans once again. He would love the 
challenge of taking sailing boats already capable of travelling twice as fast 
as the wind that powers them and finding a way of making them faster yet.

This was an extraordinary week for the America's Cup. Sometimes a minority 
sport comes up with a moment that changes everyone's perception and pulls in a 
whole new audience, as Franz Klammer did for ski racing when he hurtled down 
the Innsbruck piste to win a gold medal at the 1976 Winter Olympics. You didn't 
need to know the first thing about his sport to see that this was 
heart-stopping excitement. And with Klammer's winning run, the whole era of Ski 
Sunday was born.

That's what seems to have happened this week to the world of yacht clubs. New 
Zealand were already 8-1 ahead when the sheer spectacle of the telecast sucked 
me in. I had never before in my life shown the remotest interest in the 
America's Cup but the sight of those elegant catamarans, each the height of a 
12-storey building, fighting for advantage as they rounded the marks in front 
of an extraordinary setting – the sunlit San Francisco skyline, the Golden Gate 
Bridge, the hulking mass of Alcatraz Island – was irresistible. For the next 
week, this unfamiliar sport took precedence over everything.

Gradually I discovered that a lot of other people were experiencing a similar 
reaction. And it wasn't just about Ainslie. His dramatic arrival midway through 
the competition, drafted in to replace the team's tactician at a moment of 
crisis, became a tremendous story once Oracle started to claw back the deficit 
that would leave them match-point down for day after day and race after race. 
But the bigger picture was even more gripping.

Those of us experiencing a sudden conversion and trying to get to grips with a 
sport of phenomenal complexity were helped by the efforts of NBC, the host 
broadcaster, whose friendly, erudite commentators and phenomenally instructive 
graphic overlays rapidly gave the viewers at least a rudimentary understanding 
of what was going on as the boats jibed and tacked back and forth, searching 
for speed.

The on-board cameras and microphones brought home the human effort involved, 
recording the shouting and the scurrying and the creaks and groans from the 
machinery, but the science also became part of the attraction. After a week I'd 
just about got my head around the concept of VMG (velocity made good) and was 
searching the internet for vector diagrams to explain the phenomenon of 
"apparent wind".

Any sport would benefit from a close study of how the broadcasters did it. And 
the funny thing is that, after 20 years of declining interest, the network had 
not wanted to show the 2013 series at all. They were only persuaded to take it 
on again when the race organisers agreed to buy the airtime, selling 
advertising to their sponsors and paying the broadcaster's costs.

Everyone's sporting memory bank consists mostly of isolated incidents, and my 
favourite moment came as the boats raced for the first mark in the 19th and 
last race of the series. Seeing New Zealand make the most of an advantageous 
starting position, Oracle's captain, Jimmy Spithill, sent his boat lunging into 
the turn. Running wide like an understeering F1 car, it lurched and plunged 
down off its foils.Somehow Spithill held it together, tucking in behind the 
Kiwi boat as they made their way to the second gate while preparing for the 
long upwind leg.

It was there that Ainslie was able to work his magic, securing the lead and 
bringing an assassin's smile to his skipper's face as they turned for home and 
the glorious climax to an unforgettable comeback.

So now there are only another three years to wait for the next fix of this 
remarkable new drug. Make that call, Sir Ben. And the rest of us will start a 
whip-round for the £100m you'll need.
 