
While the eyes of the world were trained on Japan on Sunday morning as the 
latest chapter of Lewis Hamilton's remarkable rookie season in formula one 
unfolded, I was rather preoccupied with wondering whether my own racing team 
could deliver a strong start to the2007-08 A1GP World Cup season in Zandvoort 
in the Netherlands <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b4rSlRTO7gQ>. Thankfully we 
won the feature race 
<http://sport.theguardian.com/motorsport/story/0,,2182820,00.html> and, in the 
motor sport world at least, we have another British success story.

When we started A1 Team GBR two years ago, throwing ourselves headlong into 
the new and, at the time, unproven World Cup, I had no idea of the 
rollercoaster ride we would be taking. With Britain at the centre of the 
world's motor sport industry, the pressure on us to perform is probably greater 
than for any other nation, so we have a lot to live up to. Fortunately we have 
proved our strength - finishing third in the first two seasons with only France 
scoring more podium finishes than us.

Taking over from John Surtees as team principal this summer to run an 
international racing team for the first time has been a fairly daunting, but 
welcome, task. Having worked relentlessly all summer restructuring the team, it 
would be fair to say I was terrified by the possibility of performing badly in 
the first race. However I have complete confidence in our newly promoted 
engineer, our race team and our two superb drivers for this season - Oliver 
Jarvis and Robbie Kerr. Olly and Robbie may not be household names like 
Hamilton or Jenson Button, but it's clear that they are as good as anyone at 
this level and can deliver results.

The whole weekend in Zandvoort seems a bit of a blur now. Away from the 
on-track action, my schedule was non-stop - attending the season launch event; 
going to various meetings; entertaining the British media contingent at a 
Saturday night dinner; and hosting our recently announced commercial partners 
throughout the weekend. I wish someone had warned me beforehand that being team 
principal meant you only slept four hours a night at race events, but if that's 
what it takes to perform the role, I'm up for the challenge.

Back to the on-track action, and it was pretty important to me that we picked 
up where we left off at the end of the 2006-07 season, when we picked up three 
wins and four second places in the last seven races. On Saturday I wasn't 
convinced we could do it as the team had struggled a bit during the morning 
practice sessions and I knew that we were facing stiffer competition. We 
qualified a fairly disappointing 10th for the sprint race but a much more 
impressive third for the feature race, which certainly gave us the confidence 
we needed heading into Sunday.

In the sprint, we made great progress with Olly on the pace and pulling off 
some fantastic overtaking to finish seventh. Early on in the feature race, Olly 
scythed past Germany, one of our main rivals, then after pitting he put in some 
flying laps to ensure South Africa came out behind us after their stop. From 
then on, Olly dominated the proceedings. He was so in control of the race that 
at times it seemed as if he was merely enjoying a Sunday drive. Towards the end 
of the race I think he was beginning to get a bit lonely out there as he kept 
begging our race engineer to chat to him over the radio and keep him 
entertained.

The only downside to us winning is that I'd bet Robbie that I'd give up 
smoking if we won the first feature race of the season.

Katie Clements will be writing exclusively for Guardian Unlimited throughout 
theA1GP <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> season
 