
In my case, the answer to the question “do you remember what you were doing 
whenJFK was shot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/22/jfk-assassination-timeline>?” 
is: probably sleeping or being sick. Eighteen months old at the time of the 
first Kennedy slaying, I was old enough to ask why my mother started crying 
when, in a Yorkshire shop in June 1968, a transistor radio confirmed that the 
second Kennedy had died.

Robert Francis Kennedy is a powerful presence – and John Fitzgerald Kennedy an 
overwhelming absence – in The Death of a President, a book by William 
Manchester that I have thought about immeasurable times since first reading it 
in 1975.

By then I was 13 and we had moved south to Hertfordshire, where I attended a 
Catholic school run by an American religious teaching order. Our teachers would 
speak (sometimes tearfully) of having voted for JFK or signed up for his peace 
corps. As the first (and still only) Catholic to reach the White House, his 
framed photograph was on the wall of the entrance hall. We played sport against 
another local school that was actually calledJohn F Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-f-kennedy>, a measure of the impact 
his death had made in England.

My dad, a history graduate and obsessive consumer of the news, had a library 
of books about politics and it was there that I discovered The Death of a 
President. William Manchester was a newspaper reporter who became a history 
professor, and in this account of Kennedy’s assassination he combines the 
highest standards of both professions.

Jacqueline Kennedy had commissioned the book 10 weeks after the murder, 
although she subsequently delayed its appearance, apparently concerned by 
private details about family relationships. This pre-publication stumble has 
led the suspicious to question the independence and authority of the account.

For me, though, any worries about what might not be in the book are 
over-powered by what is. Its 700 pages cover just five days, from preparations 
for the flight to Dallas to the burial of the 35th president. Interviewees 
included all the major players – President Lyndon Johnson, the senior Kennedys 
and the relatives of the presumed assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald – but also 
hundreds of minor ones: aides, caterers, undertakers, tourists, hospital 
orderlies, priests. From these transcripts, Manchester constructs an 
astonishing multi-viewpoint narrative in sections named after the Secret 
Service code-words in use on the days in question, including “Lancer” (the 
president) and “Castle” (the White House).

Manchester seems to have found out everything: not just what people said, 
thought, ate, and wore, but what was in JFK’s wallet (including the number of 
his driving licence) and how his widow planned to distract their young son 
during the funeral.

A teenager who read a lot of thrillers, I remember realising that this book 
was more gripping than any of them. Subsequent re-readings confirmed my view 
that this was how the stories of contemporary events – whether in journalism, 
history or fiction – should ideally be told.

At a direct level of influence, I wrote a novel, Idlewild, and a radio play, 
London, This is Washington, in which JFK was a character. One of Manchester’s 
minor but most striking interviewees, Father Oscar Huber, the priest who gave 
the president the last rites, is a character in my book.

Manchester’s working principle – if someone mentions curtains, ask which 
colour and, if they were chewing gum, which flavour – disfigured magazine 
journalism in the US and UK for a while, in pieces that told us more about the 
soft furnishings than the subject. But the general instinct is correct: tiny 
gestures and decisions can have massive significance. Interviews are a crucial 
tool for capturing history and the pursuit of detail should be exhaustive and 
pedantic.

I was a teenager who read a lot of thrillers, but this book was more gripping 
than any of them

Although the best American non-fiction writers who came after Manchester – 
Norman Mailer, Tom Wolfe, Michael Lewis – tended to be brighter stylists, they 
carried on the understanding that the strength of contemporary history is the 
availability of primary oral accounts and that the reporter’s major job is to 
orchestrate and counterpoint these verbal sources. Mailer’s The Executioner’s 
Song, his magnificent account of the life and judicial killing of criminal Gary 
Gilmore, is formally divided into sections called Eastern Voices and Western 
Voices, but the importance of the burning spoken memory equally informs Wolfe’s 
The Right Stuff and Lewis’s Moneyball and Flash Boys.

Those other great American factual narratives are as much part of Manchester’s 
legacy as his contribution to our understanding of Kennedy, which, because his 
aim was to capture the way it was then, has not been devalued by subsequent 
revelations.

For those who are convinced that Lee Harvey Oswald didn’t kill Kennedy – or 
that Lyndon Johnson did – Manchester’s book is a travesty and a main supporting 
column of the establishment cover-up. For more open-minded readers – and any 
writer aspiring to tell the story of their times in any form – it is one of the 
few works of history that itself deserves to be described as historic.
 