
Ever since Darren Henley's review of music education in 2011 and the furore 
thereafter concerning cuts, curriculum and the government's National Plan for 
Music, roundtables and symposiums on the subject have been plentiful. The 
latest was held recently at the centre of the London Symphony Orchestra's music 
education programme, St Luke's on Old Street, by theWorshipful Company of 
Musicians <http://www.wcom.org.uk/> (WCM).

Featuring a stellar panel that included the LSO's own managing director 
Kathryn McDowell, Classic FM's Darren Henley and Richard Morisson of The Times, 
the debate was given the cheerful title, A Happy Life is a Creative Life: Why 
Every Child NeedsMusic <https://www.theguardian.com/education/music>.

I was buoyed by the heartening voices of the LSO's junior and senior youth 
choirs, who opened the event. Someone had played a blinder: music and children 
at a debate on music education. They were fabulous, as were the ensembles that 
followed – all served to hammer home what a thoroughly good thing it is when 
children, inspired by great teaching, engage in music-making.

But those in the room knew this already; educators and musicians have rallied 
to expound the benefits of a good musical education. These arguments have been 
rehearsed to death. The problem is: why has the argument not been won? In an 
attempt to answer this, the WCM symposium provided a rather downcast 
deconstruction of the state of music education in the UK, in which panel 
members struggled to retain a broadly positive tone, eventually becoming 
flooded by questions from the floor as the blame game started.

Government, heads, parents, teachers and Ofsted were all thrown into the 
firing line. Morrison began proceedings by condemning the recent advice from 
the Department for Education that local authorities withdraw financial support 
for already "hobbled" music hubs. He continued with sardonic swipes at culture 
ministerSajid Javid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/apr/11/sajid-javid-culture-secretary-maria-miller>
, and his opposite number Harriet Harman, for making audience diversity a 
"central plank" of arts policy ahead of forming working links with the 
department.

Henley began by reflecting on his 2011 review in the context of recent 
developments in music education. "It was made clear to me that we weren't as a 
sector going to enjoy a period of public spending that was going to get 
bigger," he said. "I wanted to find a system that would get the most amount of 
money to the widest possible number of children."

Part of this system was, of course, the creation of music hubs: a concept that 
initially received qualified support from most people but has since been
condemned by Ofsted 
<http://www.ofsted.gov.uk/news/music-hubs-fail-improve-music-education-for-all> 
for its "failure to improve music education for all". Not the fault of the 
idea, for there is good sense in avoiding both oversubscription and 
under-provision of music education through better communication between 
providers, but rather an inevitability given increasingly damaging cuts to 
already underfunded hubs.

Henley rightly cited the excellent work of the Manchester music hub as a model 
for how the idea can work, although admitted that "in other areas of the 
country we need to do more".

McDowell highlighted the well-recognised work of LSO Discovery 
<http://lso.co.uk/lso-discovery> with children in east London. The problem is 
really not with arts organisations. School projects such as the BBC'sTen Pieces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/16/bbc-ten-pieces-classical-music-primary-school-children>
 andIn Harmony Opera North <http://www.operanorth.co.uk/education/in-harmony>, 
working with young people in Leeds, attest to the frankly astounding work going 
on country-wide to engage young people from all backgrounds in music.

Leslie East, chief executive of ABRSM <http://gb.abrsm.org/en/home>, switched 
focus, suggesting that a lack of follow-through on first access projects has 
led to a decline in state school students continuing with music lessons in a 
"coherent, constructive, progressive way … because of a lack of funding".

Questions from the audience became increasingly dominated by the issue of 
music provision in state schools. Henley called for arts leaders to take the 
argument to those heads who, in the words of Morrison, view time dedicated to 
music as being "frittered away" when it could be spent on science or maths. One 
audience member bemoaned an alleged lack of drive by parents to put pressure on 
state school governing bodies to provide for a cultural education.

There were some topics left unanswered by the panel. What about the changes to 
school league tables and the irresponsible rhetoric from government and some 
top universities that bullied some schools into "prioritising" subjects at the 
expense of music? That same rhetoric scared parents from disadvantaged areas 
into believing that choices such as music for their children were unhelpful in 
escaping from a negative economic narrative.

What about the withdrawal of entitlement funding for sixth form musical 
enrichment? Where were the success stories of the remarkable work going on in 
state music departments swimming against the tide? It was certainly a shame not 
to see a state school represented on the panel and perhaps these issues would 
have been more thoroughly examined had that been the case.

This was a panel and an audience passionately committed to increasing the 
quality and breadth of music education. It was not a room full of heads, 
governors and ministers. Morrison said we must "keep on banging the drum" to 
those on the frontline of delivery and decision-making in schools. Quite right, 
but they've got to be in the room to hear it.

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 