
It's an idea so simple, so beautiful, that you can't believe it was not 
thought of before. Sail a ship into the Arctic as the winter freeze grips, let 
it get trapped in ice, then run visitors out there by dog sled or skidoo. And 
if that vessel is special – like a two-masted tall ship – all the better: the 
trip becomes something imbued with adventure, redolent with the traditions of 
Shackleton and Nansen, something to conjure up faded sepia images of the Fram 
and the Endurance, of explorers with icy beards, and heroism on the limits of 
human endurance. This is what Basecamp Explorer has done.

Flying in to the Arctic archipelago of Svalbard from Tromsø in northern 
Norway, I am gripped myself, with the sheer excitement of it all. Behind me a 
group of men with fur-lined hoods are trading extreme travel anecdotes. "So we 
built a barrier with skis to keep the bears out..." "There were narwhals all 
around the ice floe..." But for me there are no such stories. I'm a hot country 
person – always have been. This is a first taste of the Arctic and, before I 
even contemplate anything as extreme as narwhal-besieged ice floes, I want to 
know if I could handle the conditions. I have – I have to admit – two very 
large doubts, both of them size nine and already encased in three pairs of 
socks.

The first surprise is how light it is at midnight in late March. The Arctic 
changes from total darkness to total light within two months, a difference of 
about half an hour a day from mid-February. The second surprise, as I walk to 
the small modern airport terminal, is the cold. It settles around you like a 
super-cooled over-excited lover: nibbling your ears, licking your eyeballs. And 
it doesn't stop. Not for day, not for night, not for man, woman or beast. For 
the entire trip, it goes on trying to get inside your clothing.

Longyearbyen, the capital city, population about 2,000, stands on one of the 
fjords of Spitsbergen, the largest island in the archipelago. Around the few 
buildings, which are mostly grey, the ground is white. The surrounding 
mountains are white, too; the fjord is frozen white and nothing at all is 
green. I get out of the car and stand in the street, looking down towards the 
fjord and the mountains beyond. When the wind blows it smudges away the 
certainties of ridge and horizon, and replaces them with subtle suggestions of 
great and aching beauty. It also bites the end of your nose off.

"We'll get you equipped properly tomorrow," Solfrid Håkenstad, base manager, 
tells me. She looks around, as if searching for a few landmarks to interest me, 
but like everyone in Longyearbyen, she is drawn back to the only feature that 
counts: the huge dark satanic power plant. "It runs on coal," she says. "We 
have some mines."

Within the hour I am in love with that power station. I adore its 24-hour 
lights and plume of smoke. I love the steady grumble as it devours fossil fuels 
to keep me warm.

The Basecamp hotel is a charming pastiche of a pioneer's log cabin, with a 
good connection to the power plant. Inside no one wears boots and it is 
deliciously cosy. I could have stayed there for my entire trip, enjoying that 
warmth and reading Arctic exploration stories – like that of Umberto Cagni in 
1900, amputating his fingers with scissors and walking 12 hours a day on 
drifting ice only to discover that in a week he had managed three feet in the 
right direction. I love that kind of story when I'm in a warm bed. However, in 
the morning they force me outside and down to the clothing depot.
 On the skids … visitors travel to the ship in style Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
Martin Machiedo is my guide, a huge man who looks like a Viking marauder, but 
is actually an affable Croatian. I am decked out in one-piece padded snowsuit, 
balaclava, crash helmet, fur-lined gauntlets and huge boots. I am already 
wearing every single sock I have brought with me – four on each foot – but my 
toes are cold. Martin hands me hot pads which I shove down my boots. It takes 
an hour to get dressed, then we head over to the skidoo park and have a 
10-minute driving lesson. The skidoo is basically a customised ride-on lawn 
mower that will never see grass. We slide out of the parking area and hit the 
frozen surface of the fjord. The engine noise hides all other sounds. We speed 
north-east, stopping occasionally to view a lone reindeer. Spitsbergen has 
three species of resident land animal: a dwarf variety of reindeer, the Arctic 
fox and the polar bear. The first of these cling to life through the winter by 
digging for scraps of moss and lichen, then fatten up during the brief summer, 
to the delight of the other two.

After an hour we leave the valley and begin to climb towards a pass where we 
take advantage of a small hill to have a picnic. Outdoor lunches in minus 20C 
are different from your average picnic. They don't last as long.

Under way once more, I am wishing that the cumbersome helmet and clothing, 
necessary to travel at speeds of 80kph, did not interfere so much with viewing 
the stark beauty around us. But up at these latitudes, the cold is always the 
dominant factor. When Dutchman Willem Barents first stumbled on this 
archipelago in 1596, his expedition became trapped in the ice, enduring 
constant polar bear attacks in temperatures so cold that the men, huddled 
around a fire, found their socks were on fire but their feet still frozen. 
Englishman Hugh Willoughby, in the same waters a few years earlier, was found 
dead in his ship along with all his crew. According to one report some were 
frozen "in the act of writing, pen in hand ... others at table, spoon in mouth".

"This winter was quite mild," Martin muses. "It even rained once."

I nod understandingly, desperately inserting yet more hot pads into my gloves. 
We are at -40C and every photograph tempts frostbite. The cold has become my 
only thought, my obsession.

We come to a small group of huts by the frozen reaches of Templefjord. "This 
is where the hero of Svalbard, Hilmar Nois, lived," Martin tells us. "He spent 
a record 37 winter seasons here, hunting foxes and bears."

And all without a string vest, I mutter. At that moment, Hilmar seems to me 
like the most dangerous kind of lunatic – one people admire. He came here, with 
three uncles, in 1909 and lived in a tiny hut of wood and earth. The hut still 
stands, looking more like a relic of the municipal allotment society than a 
testament to polar heroics.

Far away across the fjord we can see our destination, the ship, but first we 
pass a glacier, getting off the skidoo to admire the blue ice and spot some 
large footprints. "Polar bear," confirms Martin. Sadly the animal does not 
reappear and we skidoo the last mile to the ship. The light has faded to a 
pearly blue and the huskies who sleep around the ship are being fed. Without 
losing a second, we park and clump up the gangplank to the antechamber for 
partial undressing. Then finally we're inside that boat.
 Going nowhere … the pilot house on the Noorderlicht. 
Instantly we are transported to a world of warmth, steaming mugs, tots of 
brandy, mahogany and brass, the smells of cooking, books and charts, smiles. 
Ted van Broeckhuysen is the captain of our immovable ship, the Noorderlicht, 
and he tells me how it can take a month of delicate manoeuvres before they 
finally get properly stuck. The ship was built in 1910 and has been through 
numerous incarnations: a lightship, a hostel for construction workers, a 
clubhouse and an empty hulk until Ted and colleagues fully restored it.

We eat a hearty, and convivial, dinner. People settle down afterwards with a 
book or a map. I examine the charts, spotting remote trapper huts and an 
abandoned Russian fishing station, tiny human traces in a world of rock and 
ice. The cold, once fought off, becomes a distant memory and leaves only a 
seductive languor behind. I wonder if that's how it goes when you are dying out 
there on the ice: the pain melting into that deliciously irresistible 
sleepiness. Through the portholes the light has faded to a smooth pinkish glow 
and the huskies are sleeping. I sip a whisky. Maybe this Arctic explorer 
business isn't so bad. Maybe I could get to like it. Eventually I head to my 
cabin and sleep like a baby.

Next day Martin has us up early. We've a long way to go. Our mission is to see 
a colony of nesting northern fulmars. A little miracle of nature really – that 
birds could hatch eggs and rear chicks in these conditions. Nesting birds, I 
recall, were the reason behind the great classic book of polar exploration, 
Apsley Cherry-Garrard's The Worst Journey in the World – the author and his two 
companions having been sent by Captain Scott to collect emperor penguin eggs. 
The cold was so severe that when Cherry-Garrard's teeth chattered at -60C, they 
shattered.

After a long drive into the mountains we find the birds in a deep sheltered 
canyon, miraculously raising their young. The peculiar thing is that this is a 
very common creature and lives off Britain's coast, too. It's like spotting a 
London bus on Everest.
 Hounded out … going sledging in the great white wilderness. Photograph: Kevin 
Rushby 
By evening we are back in Longyearbyen again – back to my favourite power 
plant. But next morning I'm out once more, ready to try the dog sled. In the 
Arctic, huskies are kept on the edges of human settlements in compounds of high 
wire fences. Marthe Sørli, the dog team leader, gives us our instructions. Six 
dogs in a team. Fetch one at a time. Keep the snow anchors embedded. Dog names 
are shouted out and I identify my first: a greyish mutt with one blue eye that 
burns with malice, and a green one that is pure venom. I try to estimate the 
length of chains on the dogs I have to get past. Would those teeth penetrate 
the snowsuit? One stands on his kennel and yowls like a mad thing. Others do 
wild dervish dances. Some, the most scary ones, lie still and watchful.

These are Alaskan huskies, smaller than their Greenlandish cousins, but a bit 
quicker and – Marthe tells us – less ferocious. As I grab my dog's chain, 
trying to communicate a confidence I don't feel, I realise he is only excited. 
They just want to come. They all want to come. He drags me to the sled. I clip 
him on and go back for another. Soon we are ready. The dogs are wild with 
excitement and making a noise greater than any skidoo engine. Then Marthe yanks 
up the anchors and instantly we are jerked forward into – silence. The dogs all 
stop barking and run. All we hear is the swish of the sled.

We race out of the compound, down the slope and on to the valley bottom. I'm 
sitting in the sled, but when Marthe finally manages to halt the enthusiastic 
hounds, we swap over. Once again the mad cacophony is instantly cut off as we 
spring forward. I've learned the two commands: Ji! means right and Ha! is left. 
The dogs do not require a go signal. Within minutes I am hooked. I love the 
peace and tranquility. I love the way you can leap off and run alongside to 
keep warm. Most of all, I love the dogs – mad snow rolls, fights, total and 
complete enthusiasm. The day passes far too quickly and I'm left with only one 
regret – that I didn't do the entire trip by sled.

Back in Longyearbyen, over a reindeer steak in the Huset restaurant, Martin 
tells me about a friend of his. "He's taken his dogs and gone off to the North 
Pole – again. He loves it. Weeks out there, camping and sledding."

The memory of the cold is already fading. That delicious sleepy languor is 
creeping over me, assisted by the Huset's astonishingly well-stocked wine 
cellar, and I find myself musing on future possibilities. Of course, that is 
when the Arctic is at its most dangerous – when you're warm.
 