
Last season's position: 2nd (Grand final winner)
Guardian writers' prediction: 2nd

Graham Arnold's self-proclaimed 'smallest club in the league' may have 
conquered Everest with their deserved championship win last season, but now the 
challenge is to maintain that momentum. In many ways, of course, it is easier 
to be the hunter rather than the hunted.

Arnold though has developed into an astute coach and man-manager who seems to 
know exactly how to get his side working in harmony both on and off the pitch 
and, arguably, be better than the sum of their parts. Though they will be 
written off in some quarters, the Mariners will likely sustain their impetus 
from last season's breakthrough achievements in theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> and subsequent AFC Champions 
League campaign.

Arnold has turned the Mariners' weakness – small budget and limited supporter 
catchment area – into a positive of sorts, and there is a level of 'us against 
them' mentality within the squad. The Mariners work hard at community 
engagement which adds further to the esprit de corps, while the lack of daily 
local media scrutiny allows the team to go about their business without some of 
the strains – perceived or otherwise – suffered by the capital city clubs.

For better and for worse the atmosphere at Gosford's Bluetongue stadium is 
more Soccer Mum, than terrace tifosi. What other club would pass an oversized 
farewell card around the members section to acknowledge the retirement of 
Patrick Zwaanswijk, as if it were the departure of Barry from accounts 
receivable, rather than a professional footballer?

Arnold has inked a new three-year deal which will keep him at the Mariners 
until at least 2016. It means that the league's smallest club are also 
reaffirmed as the most steady, with Lawrie McKinna the only previous incumbent 
at the helm. Once again stability will be a cornerstone of any success the 
Mariners enjoy.

Like most A-League clubs, Central Coast have lost their fair share of 
important cogs. Several starters from last year's grand final win are now gone 
with Pedj Bojic, Bernie Ibini and Mat Ryan all significant losses, as is 
improving midfielder Oliver Bozanic. Perhaps, though, the most notable absence 
will be Zwaanswijk whose experience, quality and presence will be sorely missed.

Last season's surprise A-League top goalscorer Daniel McBreen will miss the 
first weeks of the campaign while he completes loan commitments with his 
Chinese Super League club. That a journeyman striker like McBreen somehow went 
from a modest career return in front of goal, to top of the A-League tree is 
testament to Arnold's rare ability to polish a rough diamond.

Recent years has seen the Mariners cope with player departures better than 
most. Notably, Arnold has successfully groomed young players into stars almost 
overnight with Ibini, Mitchell Duke and Trent Sainsbury prime examples. Don't 
bet against youth squad graduates Michael Neill and Hayden Morton making an 
impact, nor New Zealander Storm Roux or former Sydney FC player Tom Slater.

At the other end of the scale experienced Eredivisie defender Marcel Seip has 
been brought in to fill the considerable void left by his compatriot 
Zwaanswijk. The success or otherwise of the 31-year-old will be an important 
component for the Mariners amid relatively inexperienced defensive options 
which also includes Joshua Rose, Sainsbury, Zac Anderson, Brent Griffiths, 
Morton, Neill and Roux. Arnold and the Mariners have rarely got it wrong with 
their imports in recent years and it would be a surprise if Seip is an 
exception to the rule.

There is at least surprise, however, on the incoming list with goalkeeper Liam 
Reddy signed as a replacement for the Club Brugge-bound Ryan. The Mariners have 
made a point of signing players that fit in with the family culture of the 
club, yet Reddy has a lengthy rap sheet dating all the back to a fierce punch 
landed on the chin of former Joeys captain Mark Byrnes a decade ago in the 
National Soccer League. More recently Reddy departed Sydney FC in unhappy 
circumstances after consuming alcohol on a trip to New Zealand, and in the 
interim had an unlikely spell in the Iranian top flight.

The Mariners have made two other significant recruits, who are more likely to 
be pivotal to the success of the upcoming campaign. Marcos Flores is one of the 
major moves of the A-League off-season with the Argentinian set to bring a new 
level of flair to the Mariners. It will be interesting to see if Arnold uses 
him as a striker or in a creative midfield role.

The second key signing is that of local-boy-made-good Matt Simon. The former 
East Gosford tradie is in many ways a player cast in the image of the average 
Mariners fan. The striker is more effective than his sometimes agricultural 
style suggests and a solid goal return saw him earn Socceroo caps in years gone 
by. Similar in style to McBreen, Simon returns to his hometown club after an 
indifferent 18-month stint with K-League side Chunnam Dragons.

With their settled and pragmatic approach, the Mariners are likely to start 
the season in more cohesive fashion than many of their rivals. Provided they 
avoid injuries to key personnel, expect Arnold's men to be there or thereabouts 
at the business end of the season.
 