
Guardian writers' predicted position: 6th
Last season's position: 4th

It's been 10 years since Adelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> were born, and four 
years since their favourite son, Aurelio Vidmar, proclaimed that Adelaide was a 
"pissant town that would never win anything". He may have been onto something. 
Since Vidmar's infamous outburst, there has been little glory in the city of 
churches. Not only that, the "politics" Vidmar lashed out at in 2009 still 
appear to plague the club.

Last season Adelaide began in red-hot form after a vigorous pre-season in the 
Asian Champions League, where they were knocked out by Bunyodkor right on time 
for theA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> season opener. 
Cameron Watson was playing like Andrea Pirlo, Dario Vidosic was scoring goals 
for fun, and new signings Fábio Ferreira and Jeronimo Neumann showed plenty of 
promise. It was all going beautifully until Christmas time.

Then the wheels fell off. First the Western Sydney Wanderers smashed them 6-1, 
and then, just as the board had settled a court case with former coach Rini 
Coolen, John Kosmina decided he'd seen enough. According to Kosmina, the 
"whispers in the tunnel" were too much to bear, and anticipating a coup, he 
abdicated his crown. The chairman Greg Griffin and assistant coach Michael 
Valkanis walked away whistling innocently with their hands in their pockets, 
but the damage was done.

With the Michael Valkanis and former Adelaide City great Sergio Melta 
appointed as interim coaches, Adelaide won just two of their last 10 matches, 
stumbling home to finish in fourth, before being promptly dumped out of the 
finals by Brisbane.

The SBS football analyst Craig Foster might still be waiting for his panel of 
"ex-captains" to choose the Socceroos tactics 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=6xPDG-Lo7hc#t=71>, 
but he got the next best thing after being appointed to a selection panel to 
choose Adelaide United's next coaching victim. Within a few weeks even Fozz got 
sick of the politics, resigning from the panel in April "because undertakings 
that were given were, within just a few days, not honoured".

Whatever the whispers in the corridors, a new season has indeed brought a new 
coach. The former Barcelona youth coach Josep Gombau arrives at Hindmarsh 
Stadium via Hong Kong, where he performed admirably with Kitchee FC.

With him he has brought his assistant from Kitchee, Pau Martí, as well as two 
Catalans who weren't good enough to play for Barcelona, but managed to turn out 
for CF Badalona, a club in Catalonia which my sources tell me is just a 
crappier version of their more illustrious southern neighbours. Sergio Cirio 
and Isaías Sánchez add to a squad already laden with Latin types, which should 
bring something different to the competition.

Australians haven't been big on Latin Americans and Spaniards in the A-League, 
but if Gombau and his Latin legion of Isaías, Cirio, Ferreira, Cássio, Neumann 
and Marcelo Carrusca can combine effectively, it might be the best thing since
Pitbull and Marc Anthony recorded a song with Cypress Hill 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fdi7VoAa8rI>. And if he can get the pissants 
playing tiki-taka, even old Fozz might be able to forgive and forget.

Gombau has also brought Steven Lustica to Adelaide, who will likely anchor the 
midfield with Isaías, as well as welcoming Western Sydney Wanderers' unwanted 
vice-captain Tarek Elrich into the fold. Lustica and Elrich are both handy 
A-League level players, while the return of Michael Zullo from the Eredivisie 
could be a like-for-like replacement for Iain Ramsey, who has signed for 
Melbourne Heart. Zullo has also been spotted at left back in pre-season. 
Meanwhile, Socceroo hopeful Brent McGrath has joined the club on a short-term 
deal to replace injured striker Bruce Djite.

The losses, however, have not been insignificant. Tomi Jurić, the man we all 
want to be the next Mark Viduka, has traded places with Elrich and returned 
home to Western Sydney, while Dario Vidosic was snapped up by Swiss club FC 
Sion in August. Less concerning was the departure of Iain Fyfe to Iranian club 
Mes Kerman, although it did explain why Fyfey had been cultivating sucha lovely 
facial friend <http://p.twimg.com/AuDaV7XCIAALCer.jpg:large>. Thankfully for 
the Reds faithful, the best goalkeeper in the competition and club captain, 
Eugene Galekovic, is likely to remain at Adelaide after reportedly being 
impressed with Gombau.

While Kosmina wonders aloud if a sweeper is too retro for the modern game on 
Fox Sports <https://twitter.com/ShaunMooney11/statuses/377029064013266946>, 
Gombau now faces the mammoth task of educating cattle footballers in the 
glorious movements of Barcelona. In pre-season they've looked sharp against 
state league sides, but a new tactical system takes time, and in such a short 
season, they'll need to start their 10-year tiki-taka sooner rather than later.
 