
Guardian writers' predicted position: 1st
Last season's position: 3rd

If last season was a season of transition for Melbourne Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-victory>, then this one will be 
fun to watch. Super coach Ange Postecoglou is already the most successful 
Australian club manager with four grand final wins, and a third 
premiership/championship double for Postecoglou is by no means an unrealistic 
objective this season.

Postecoglou's two and a bit season spell at Brisbane Roar was not only 
enormously successful, with the club winning the double in season six, the 
title in season seven and going 36 games undefeated in-between, it was also 
revolutionary in theA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>. 
Brisbane, by playing attractive, possession-based football, showed the way 
forward for other clubs and were the benchmark for the continued progression of 
the league.

Last season, Postecoglou's first at Victory, was considered a transitional 
year – one for the coach to implement his philosophy – but from day one the 
signs of a deadly style of play were evident. By the 25th minute of their round 
one game against Heart, Marco Rojas and Archie Thompson had combined for the 
first time. It was a combination that everyone knew would come, but no-one knew 
how to stop it. A narrow semi-final loss to eventual champions Central Coast 
ended their season, but Postecoglou's disappointment showed how determined he 
is for his sides to succeed.

If people expected Postecoglou to copy Brisbane's successful style of play at 
Victory, they were wrong. The basic principles of play were the same – to press 
and an emphasis on keeping the ball, but Postecoglou adapted and implemented a 
different style of game –one based on vertical passes, False 9's and lightning 
quick transitions 
<http://leopoldmethod.com.au/ange-postecoglou-space-detective/>. 

This time around, with 12 months to employ his style, and 12 months to cut the 
players not up to the required standard, everyone is expecting a better, more 
refined version of Melbourne Victory.The team's pre-season showing against 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/24/luis-suarez-liverpool-melbourne-victory>
 showcased the club and the A-League to the rest of the world, and they did 
everyone proud, causing frequent problems for Liverpool's defence.

But causing problems for the opposition's defence was always going to happen. 
Victory had the best attack in the league last season (along with Central 
Coast) and possessed the league's best attacker in Marco Rojas … aka the Kiwi 
Messi.They've lost Rojas, who moved to VfB Stuttgart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/03/marco-rojas-a-league-stuttgart-bundesliga>
, but their list of attackers is scarily good.

Thompson and youngsters Connor Pain and Andrew Nabbout have been joined by 
Kosta Barbarouses (23, from Alania Vladikavkaz) and Mitch Nichols (24, from 
Brisbane Roar), both of whom have played under Postecoglou at Brisbane. 
Socceroo James Troisi (25, on loan from Atalanta) has also joined, and Gui 
Finkler's return from a long term knee injury can be considered a new signing.

Victory may have lost Rojas and Marcos Flores (who never really suited the 
False 9 role anyway) but their attack looks to have only improved. But, as with 
last season, their attack wasn't the issue. Melbourne scored 48 goals during 
the regular season, but conceded 45. The defensive issues were the real signs 
of transition. If a style of play is new to the whole team, mistakes are 
inevitable. If an attacker misses a one-on-one or doesn't make the correct run, 
the damage isn't as detrimental as if a defender chooses the wrong option when 
playing out or doesn't track his runner. Last season, Melbourne Victory had too 
many defensive lapses, too many players unsuited to Postecoglou's style of play 
and too many key injuries.

Postecoglou has been ruthless in his handling of unsuitable players and will 
hope to have found the right defensive balance for the new season. Petar 
Franjic, Matthew Foschini, Diogo Ferreira, Sam Gallagher and Tando Velaphi were 
all released, and Melbourne will instead hope that Nick Ansell and Adama Traore 
have an injury-free season, that Adrian Leijer returns to his pre-Fulham form 
and that new signing Pablo Contreras lives up to his marquee status. Fans will 
still hope to see plenty of the clubs talented young defenders, such as Scott 
Galloway, Jason Geria and Dylan Murnane, but not under the same circumstances 
as last season.

One of the major off-season coups for Melbourne, apart from the signing of 
Contreras, was retaining Mark Milligan. Milligan,who was heavily pursued by 
Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/12/melbourne-victory-crystal-palace-mark-milligan>
, has been appointed captain, taking over from Leijer. His midfield role was 
essential to Melbourne's performances last season and saw him return to the 
Socceroos to play a major role in Australia qualifying for Brazil 2014. 
Milligan is up there with Alessandro Del Piero and Thomas Broich as the best 
player in the league, and his ability to play accurate vertical passes and 
break up opposition attacks is vital for Melbourne.

Victory's need to retain Milligan became more vital after Billy Celeski, 
another who flourished under Postecoglou's system, moved to the UAE. While 
they'll be without Milligan and new signing Barbarouses for their opener 
against Melbourne Heart, both away on international duty, Victory will be many 
people's favourites for the A-League title. It will be a scary proposition for 
opponents that last year's 'transitional season' was still a success: 
Postecoglou has assembled a fantastic squad and there's no reason why they 
won't improve.
 