
Reigning A-League champions Adelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> have opened their title 
defence with a draw, held 1-1 by unfancied Newcastle at Hunter Stadium.

English midfielder Wayne Brown scored on debut at Hunter Stadium on Sunday, 
before Jesse Makarounas pounced on a comical Jets error to ensure Guillermo 
Amor’s Reds left with a point.

A crowd of 9,145 did their bit for the domestic game, bringing the weekend’s 
total attendance to 106,365 – a single-round record.

A-League wrap: Mariners provide late drama, Sydney FC crush derby rivals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/sydney-rout-rivals-wanderers-record-a-league-crowd>
On the field the new-look, more youthful Reds started brightly but could not 
land the killer blow in a goalless second half.

Newcastle struck first when, against the run of play, Brown caught United 
custodian Eugene Galekovic off his line and raked a shot straight into the 
bottom-left corner from outside the penalty area.

It wasn’t long before the Reds restored parity thanks to a catastrophic 
miscommunication between goalkeeper Jack Duncan and defender Daniel Mullen.

Duncan raced off his line and clattered into Mullen, leaving the pair prone on 
the ground and allowing Makarounas to help himself to an open net.

Makarounas was in stirring form, at one point evading two defenders and 
passing off sweetly to Sergio Cirio, only for the Spaniard to blast into the 
side netting.

A flurry of chances came and went for both sides.

Henrique clipped a dangerous ball towards goal while and Andrew Hoole and 
Devante Clut tested Galekovic’s mettle.

But it was his Jets counterpart Duncan who passed his biggest exam with 
aplomb, error aside, tipping Ben Garuccio’s dangerous free-kick over the 
crossbar.

Former Jet James Holland made an impact on debut with some brave defending 
that single-handedly stopped Hoole netting the winner.

Spanish striker Sergi Guardiola was quiet, but showed glimpses of the ability 
that is ready to be unearthed with quality service.

The Jets have been hit with more injury concerns which would have concerned 
coach Mark Jones in his firstA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> game in charge, with Finnish 
striker Aleksandr Kokko, Jason Hoffman and Mullen all succumbing to leg 
problems.
 