

Guardian writers' predicted position: 5th
Last season's position: 5th

Brisbane Roar's style of football en-route to their maiden championship win 
three seasons ago was in many ways a new barometer for theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>. They backed it up with another 
title, only to flounder for the first half of last season amid instability 
brought about by the departure of Ange Postecoglou and the failed short-term 
reign of Rado Vidosic.

Now under Mike Mulvey there are signs that success, and the 'Roarcelona' tag, 
could be making a return to Suncorp Stadium. Many of the key personnel from the 
dual-championship winning roster remain. Most significantly, perhaps, is the 
return of Matt McKay 
<http://www.theguardian.com.au/story/1698020/matt-mckay-signs-with-brisbane-roar/?cs=12>
 following an indifferent period in Asia, with the Brisbane-proud Socceroo very 
much a driving force in that breakthrough title win. As an aside McKay is set 
to be utilised in central midfield which will surely hinder his hopes of game 
time at next year's World Cup in Brazil, having been used for the Socceroos 
almost exclusively as a left-back.

Much will depend on what Mulvey brings to the team in his first full season at 
the helm, but after a strong finish to last season there are plenty of signs 
that he has the wherewithal to get the group pushing in the same direction. 
McKay described Mulvey as "an extremely good coach and great man manager" upon 
his re-signing two months ago. Indeed, Mulvey had the Roar enjoying significant 
momentum by the end of the last campaign, with the team eventually halted by 
Western Sydney Wanderers in the penultimate match of the finals series.

Though not particularly well known before being handed the reins a third of 
the way into last season, Mulvey has undergone a significant coaching 
apprenticeship, winning two titles at the helm of Gold Coast United in the 
National Youth League. He stepped into the breach through the turmoil that was 
Gold Coast's A-League demise and somehow managed to have a team of teenagers 
turn in several extremely competitive performances despite hugely difficult 
circumstances.

Mulvey has been entrenched in the Queensland football scene throughout his 
coaching career. The state has arguably produced more young talent than any 
other region of Australia during the past decade and, to their credit, the Roar 
have traditionally aimed to promote local products. And it is a value that 
Mulvey has stated is part of his modus operandi. Indeed at the time of Mulvey's 
appointment last December, theBrisbane Roar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brisbane-roar> general manager Sean 
Dobson said "his [Mulvey's] values and expectations met those of the club." In 
other words, the Roar wish to retain the culture, philosophy and local identity 
that has worked so well for them in the recent past.

The backroom staff that Mulvey has at his disposal is as impressive as any in 
the league. But, like Mulvey himself, it is very much a case of quite 
achievement rather than headline grabbing. Ken Stead, who many point to as a 
critical component behind the success enjoyed by the Roar during the 
Postecoglou era, has assumed the role of technical director. Luciano Trani 
comes in as Mulvey's No2 with the Melbournian regarded highly for his technical 
analysis work with Adelaide United and Wellington Phoenix, and even at 
Melbourne Knights during the National Soccer League. One-time Evertonian and 
Brisbane product Jason Kearton will look after the club's goalkeepers.

A small section of the Roar support last year, initially at least, viewed 
Mulvey as unworthy of the role. The displeasure coincided with the Roar's 
elimination from the AFC Champions League on penalties against Thailand's 
Buriram United. However subsequent results achieved by the big-spending Thai 
side have proven that there was no shame in suffering the same fate as the 
likes of Uzbekistan powerhouse Bunyodkor. A poor run of form to open the season 
could, however, bring rancour from some of the Suncorp faithful, but the Roar 
management are far more even-keeled than many of their competitors and it would 
take a cataclysmic run of events for the club to even consider a change at the 
top.

Last season saw Brisbane without the services of skipper Matt Smith and 
forward Henrique for large chunks of the season. The pair's return to full 
health and match fitness will be a valuable boost for the Roar. Striker Besart 
Berisha enjoyed a relatively modest campaign by his own lofty standards, but 
with midfield support from Thomas Broich, Liam Miller, McKay and Luke Brattan 
it is hard to imagine the Albanian not delivering in front of goal.

Brisbane Roar's main acquisition during the off-season has been midfielder 
Miller. It may well be that the former Celtic player fits in at the Roar more 
so than he did for much of his time at Perth Glory. So too, Dimitri Petratos 
could blossom at the club having departed Sydney FC in unhappy circumstances. 
There are plenty of examples of talented youth that have started an A-League 
career in glittering fashion only to take several seasons to find consistency. 
It is easy to imagine the 2013-14 season being a turning point in Petratos's 
still fledgling career.

Equally, it is conceivable that Bratton will be a star of the upcoming 
A-League season. Postecoglou described the midfielder as one the best passers 
he has ever seen, and Bratton was a constant during the Roar's late season run 
last term. On the debit side Brisbane have lost the attacking guile of Mitch 
Nichols and the outrageously quick Ben Halloran, while foundation player 
Massimo Murdocca will take his metronomic style to Melbourne Heart.
 