

Guardian writers' predicted position: 7th
Last season's position: 7th
Equipped with one of the best players in a generation in Alessandro Del Piero, 
you can't help but feel this season will be vital forSydney FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc>. The club's CEO, Tony Pignata, 
has already declared that the Sky Blues cannot afford another season without 
finals football, and anything less than that would be considered another season 
of failure.

Their manager, Frank Farina, has had a full pre-season, off the back of his 19 
games in charge last season to mould a team that can reach the lofty 
expectations placed on the club by fans and media alike. To help meet the 
expectations, Farina has appointed Rado Vidosic as head coach, a man who he 
knows well after their time together at Brisbane Roar.

Farina and Vidosic, along with the rest of the coaching staff, have spent the 
off-season trying to implement a new style, with Vidosic saying he wanted to 
"change everything about Sydney FC" – but success may come down to how the club 
start the season.

Sydney FC's start to last time around was disastrous, and culminated in the 
resignation of then-manager Ian Crook. After Vitezslav Lavicka's reign ended, 
with ninth- and fifth-placed finishes, it was supposed to be a season with 
attractive football at the forefront. But the focus on youth and insistence on 
a long-term project soon turned into chaos and on- and off-field change – 
things are never easy in Sydney. By round nine, when Frank Farina officially 
took over, the club had collected just seven points and conceded 22 goals. The 
poor start was too much to overcome, and despite an improvement under Farina, 
they missed out on finals football, yet another season of failure.

This time around Farina has had a full pre-season to prepare his troops, and 
has added some quality names. Pedj Bojic (from the champions Central Coast 
Mariners) and Richard Garcia (from Melbourne Heart) have joined marquees Del 
Piero and Brett Emerton, while fan favourite Nick Carle has returned from his 
season-long loan in the UAE and Young Socceroo Corey Gameiro has joined after 
being released by Fulham. This has given the squad a familiar 'bling' look, and 
although it perhaps lacks balance across the pitch, there should be enough 
individual quality to match most teams.

Despite all the new faces, (Sydney have also added former youth-teamer Marc 
Warren, Serbia youth international Nikola Petkovic and re-signed Matt Jurman) 
the arrival of Vidosic still feels like the most important. Vidosic, rightly or 
wrongly was said to be "the brains" behind Brisbane Roar's success. His 
subsequent failure as manager at the Roar doesn't diminish his reputation – he 
is highly regarded as an astute tactician and analyst.

Vidosic has been key in Sydney FC's move towards more proactive football. 
4-3-3 has been the formation of choice in pre-season, with pressing and 
possession the aim. But after seasons of frustrating, workmanlike football, 
such a change won't occur instantly.

The main question surrounding the squad Sydney FC has assembled and the use of 
4-3-3 has been how Carle and Del Piero will fit together. The solution seems to 
be deploying Carle in a deeper role at the base of Sydney's midfield triangle, 
with Del Piero as the central striker. That decision will be sure to spark 
debate; Carle is a fantastic attacking talent and being used in deeper role 
will be unfamiliar for most.

Early sightings of the new style were positive, but Sydney's pre-season form 
since returning from their tour of Italy has left fans concerned. After three 
wins against Italian opposition (out of their six games), Sydney proceeded to 
lose to Wellington Phoenix (3-0), St George (2-1), Newcastle Jets (1-0), 
Brisbane Roar (4-1) and Perth Glory (3-0).

Despite double (and sometimes triple) sessions a day, the uptake of the new 
tactics has only been steady, and there is much to be improved despite the new 
season being upon us. Of course, the change hasn't been helped by the fact 
Sydney have struggled with injuries. At different stages in pre-season, players 
such as Rhyan Grant, Pedj Bojic and Vedran Janjetovic have suffered injuries, 
and the talented Terry Antonis is a long term casualty. Any injury to Del Piero 
during the season would be incredibly tough to overcome.

The Italian carried Sydney for large parts of last season and was undoubtedly 
the focal point of almost every attack. His 14 goals were perhaps the only 
bright spot, and the reason why fans continued to turn up in their thousands 
when the club were languishing in 10th place.

The main reason, despite averaging 1.5 goals per game, for the club's 
struggles last season was their inability to defend. Farina has vowed that the 
leaky defence will be a point of focus; Sydney cannot afford to concede 51 
goals again – no amount of individual talent will make up for that. But the 
problems in defence haven't disappeared, with Farina putting the pre-season 
loss to Perth down to individual errors – something heard all too often by 
Sydney FC fans. It will be Farina's job to ensure such costly errors don't 
occur when round one begins against Newcastle Jets.

The concern for Sydney going into the start of the season is the fact that 
their opening five fixtures consists of three against opponents who beat them 
in pre-season (Newcastle [H], Brisbane [A] and Perth [A]) and two derbies 
(Wanderers [H] and Victory [H]). Another slow start will make it more difficult 
to sell the message of a revamped style, especially in such a fickle market. 
Farina and Vidosic have the task of bringing the attractive, possession-based 
game the fans so crave onto the pitch, but what they crave the most is winning 
– and that will be the challenge.

• Follow Sydney FC v Newcastle Jets in Friday's A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> opener with the Guardian's 
minute-by-minute report
 