
It is either genius or folly to schedule the opening round of the A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> season in between two crucial 
qualifiers for the 2018 World Cup.

When you think however that only a handful of leagues around the world this 
year will boast an attendance figure higher than the 61,880 at Saturday’s 
Sydney derby – a new A-League record – then it is safe to say it went pretty 
well.


Starting the season with one of the biggest fixtures of the entire calendar 
also provokes mixed feelings, a fear that it will be like starting a feast with 
dessert. Yet this crowd provided the perfect feel-good aperitif for the season 
ahead.

Football Federation Australia to look into ignition of flares at Sydney derby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/football-federation-australia-to-look-into-ignition-of-flares-at-sydney-derby>
They say that the form book goes out the window when it is derby time but what 
happens when there is no form?Sydney FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> will be trying to ensure that 
however light the tome is, it stays well and truly inside the house for the 
next few months after a 4-0 demolition of their cross-city rivals continued 
their unbeaten run in this fixture to eight games.

Bobo and Filip Holosko had played together for Besiktas and carried on where 
they left off in Turkey with the first two goals of Sydney’s season but it was 
in midfield where Graham Arnold’s men won the game with Josh Brillante 
excelling.

For the Wanderers, who just missed out on the title last year, it was a rude 
awakening to the new season and damages their chances of being the A-League 
launch poster boy Yoshi’s chosen club.

There is plenty of time left to show it is just a blip and just think of the 
future quiz questions – which finalists suffered a 4-0 thrashing in the opening 
game of the next season? At least it can’t get any worse.

The Sydney derby has set the standard for next week’s Melbourne equivalent, 
although Victory will still be kicking themselves about giving away a 
last-minute goal in the season opener on Friday against 10-manBrisbane Roar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brisbane-roar>. Luke DeVere has had 
plenty of injury problems but showed remarkable footwork and agility to fire 
home while falling over in the 96th minute.

When Matt McKay was red-carded (one of three early baths run in the opening 
weekend) midway through the second half in his 200th A-League appearance, it 
was looking grim for the Queenslanders even with Brett Holman suggesting that 
he is going to have a very good season.

It got worse with seven minutes remaining as Mitchell Austin fired the 
visitors ahead but DeVere saved McKay’s bacon with virtually the last kick of 
the game.

The unexpected point didn’t stop Roar boss John Aloisi savaging referee Shaun 
Evans after the match. FFA, the ultimate referee, may choose to make an example 
of the coach to send a message to the others. With the outburst coming so early 
in the season though, Aloisi perhaps is thinking he might just get away with it.

Melbourne City’s 1-0 win over Wellington Phoenix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wellington-phoenix> in New Zealand was 
marginally less dramatic, although a red card for goalkeeper Thomas Sørensen 
just before the hour made it a very nervy finish for the Australians. Despite 
the seven minutes of injury time – another lengthy addition in this opening 
weekend – the home team just could not get the equaliser.

With Tim Cahill ready to make his league debut at the derby next week – 
depending on his international commitments – Melbourne is the football place to 
be over the next few days even if City will be without Sørensen and Victory 
will miss the injured James Troisi.

In an action-packed round, much of the entertainment came out west. New 
Central Coast Mariners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/central-coast-mariners> boss Paul Okon 
may be a popular ex-Socceroo but the decision to show club legend and assistant 
coach John Hutchinson the door in August was seen as controversial by many. And 
with half an hour left of their opening game at Perth Glory with the hosts 
three goals to the good, it looked downright dangerous.

Adam Taggart was the early star, taking advantage of some sleepy defending to 
score two what can only be described as “strikers’ goals”. Perth had plenty 
more chances but suspicions that they are susceptible to pace proved to be 
correct.

There are not many players called Roy these days but Roy O’Donovan threw the 
sinking Mariners a lifebelt after 56 minutes, one that Perth picked up and 
handed back again with seven minutes remaining.

A-League wrap: Mariners provide late drama, Sydney FC crush derby rivals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/sydney-rout-rivals-wanderers-record-a-league-crowd>
Marc Warren’s goalline clearance hit his own prone goalkeeper and rebounded 
into the net. The only thing the game lacked was a controversial call from the 
referee and Chris Beath duly obliged with four minutes left, deciding that a 
block by Rhys Williams on O’Donovan happened inside the area. Still, if Central 
Coast can continue that second half form, there may be brighter times ahead.

Newcastle Jets and Adelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> closed the opening 
weekend with a 1-1 draw on Sunday. It was solid stuff all round. The Jets, with 
Andrew Nabbout making an encouraging debut, did enough against the champs to 
suggest that this season may be better than last. It was not a bad point for 
Adelaide either who may need a little time to find their rhythm given the 
personnel changes at the club over the last few months.

While it was not the most exciting way to end an entertaining opening round, 
young Yoshi will have a hard time choosing a team after all that. If the 
A-League continues like this, he won’t need to. He can just enjoy the ride.
 