
Guardian writers' predicted position: 9th.
Last season's position: 8th

Newcastle. Where the heavy industries of the harbour give way to the rolling 
wineries of the Hunter Valley. In the claret and blue vertical stripes, 
Newcastle are a poor man's Crystal Palace. Or a homeless man's Barcelona.

Not long ago, the Newcastle Jets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastle-jets> played some of the best 
football in the A-League. It's been seven years since Gary van Egmond prized a 
winless Newcastle side from the hands of Nick Theodorakopoulos, turning the 
club around to finish in the top three before falling at the preliminary final 
to Adelaide.

As one of the few Australian born and bred coaches in the A-League, 'Dutchy' 
instantly became a cause célèbre among many in the football community.Craig 
Foster was effusive in his praise 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/a-league/all-signs-point-to-victory/2008/08/09/1218139164645.html>
, labelling him "the best [coach] in the country and certainly one of the 
brightest we have produced from a tactical perspective."Michael Cockerill began 
to talk of the Socceroos and Van Egmond in the same sentence 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/a-league/van-egmond-makes-all-the-right-moves/2008/02/24/1203788152323.html>
.

How things have changed. In 2007, Van Egmond led what might be called "the 
Australian turn" in the coaching ranks, a phenomenon that has well and truly 
captured the hearts and minds of A-League decision makers. At the conclusion of 
season eight, all 10 coaches in theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> were locally sourced. But these 
days, Graham Arnold and Ange Postecoglou are simply better managers than Van 
Egmond, and the excitement of youth has shifted to Tony Popovic and Alistair 
Edwards. No longer is Van Egmond special.

Last season Newcastle went from the dole queue to riches to mediocrity in the 
space of 12 months. In April 2012, Nathan Tinkler threatened to hand the 
licence back after realising another mining tycoon, Clive Palmer, got his Gold 
Coast United licence on the cheap,which would have left the club without a 
major backer 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/a-league/tinkler-cannot-hand-back-licence-says-ben-buckley-20120410-1wlx9.html>
. To the relief of everyone in Newcastle, the situation was defused and within 
four months, the Jets had announced former England striker Emile Heskey as 
their marquee signing.

Bringing Heskey to the Hunter was a peculiar move for Van Egmond, who had 
promised a youthful team that would play a fast-paced attacking brand of 
football. Still, while Heskey had been the subject of much derision for his 
lack of goals in England, he quickly became Newcastle's greatest asset, scoring 
four goals in the opening four games.

His presence in the squad became vital as Van Egmond quickly realised that his 
kids weren't that crash hot after all, and Heskey's compatriot Michael Bridges 
was hauled out of retirement to bolster the experience of the squad. Trying 
times call for desperate measures, but after talking up the side's youthful 
credentials, it seemed an admission of defeat from Van Egmond.

While Heskey was an astute bit of business, Newcastle otherwise neglected 
their foreign quota. The squad had a local flavour, but then again Newcastle 
has never been known for its nosh. Swiss left-back Dominik Ritter did a job, 
but was more hash brown that potato rosti, while Brazilian midfielder Bernardo 
Ribeiro offered pretty moves without much follow through.

There were a few positive signs, however. Young centre-back Connor Chapman 
might be Australia's answer to Franz Beckenbauer, if only he'd stop elegantly 
passing the ball straight to the opposition, while Mark Birighitti is a 
confident goalkeeper with plenty of potential. Olyroos pair Craig Goodwin and 
Adam Taggart did enough to earn themselves a call up to the national team. 
Signing Zenon Caravella midway through the campaign added some classy touches 
to an otherwise industrious midfield.

This season Van Egmond will surely have to make the finals to keep his job. 
After rumours of a return of Ljubo Milicevic, Van Egmond instead recruited 
Dutch centre back Kew Jaliens and repatriated Australia's forgotten striker 
Nathan Burns. Jaliens should give the Jets some much needed experience in the 
backline, while Burns will fill the void left by Ryan Griffiths, who returned 
to China in the January transfer window. With Heskey injured for at least the 
first three rounds, plenty of responsibility will be thrust on Burns in the 
Jets attack.

They won't set any benchmarks, but they'll niggle away at their opponents, and 
generally do a good job in making up the numbers. On paper at least, there is 
more than enough quality in the squad for Newcastle to finish in the top six. 
Then again, Ruben Zadkovich, the man with a highlights reelas long as a 
caterpillar's leg <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K2KNjVqRdy4>, has been 
spotted in the No10 role in pre-season. That video never gets old.
 