
Guardian writers' predicted position: 10th (or last if you're being rude)
Last season's position: 10th
The upcoming campaign could prove to be a watershed moment in Wellington 
Phoenix's short history. For the first time New Zealand's only professional 
team will open their season with someone other than Ricki Herbert at the helm.

Herbert had been the longest serving coach in the A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>, and in his stead comes the 
second-most experienced manager – and most successful – in Ernie Merrick. 
Nevertheless, having finished bottom of the pile last term, and with new 
management directing a slew of fresh faces, it is hard to see this campaign 
being anything other than one of transition.

Hope, however, springs eternal for the Phoenix's wind-lashed supporters. It is 
a little remembered fact that Melbourne Victory, under Merrick, finished second 
from bottom in the first season of the 'New Football' era, only to win two of 
the next three titles, with the club quickly transformed into a league 
powerhouse in the process.

Recent seasons had seen the Phoenix turn their Wellington home venue into a 
'fortress', to use standard media vernacular. Road trips were, perhaps 
unsurprisingly, a different story. Dealing with time differences and lengthy 
flights, as the Phoenix do on a fortnightly basis, is a rarity for any national 
league. Indeed their visit to Perth is widely believed to the longest domestic 
away trip in world football (although supporters of Vladivostok in Russia may 
have something to say about that).

Wellington Phoenix <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wellington-phoenix> 
management indicated they wanted the club to move in a different direction with 
the surprise ejection of Herbert late last campaign. The current All Whites 
boss had been at the helm since the club's somewhat rushed foundation in 2007, 
in place of the disaster prone New Zealand Knights. Though having enjoyed 
domestic and international success despite modest resources, Herbert's 
pragmatic approach was apparently deemed out of step by club management in the 
A-League's brave new possession-based football world.

"It was a tough year for them last year and the boys are enjoying training 
again," Merrick said earlier this week at the A-League launch. It seems the 
need for change was driven not only by on-field results.

Though having lived in Australia for 38 years Merrick still speaks with a hint 
of a lilting Scottish accent. Merrick, who seems unable to attract the plaudits 
enjoyed by some other A-League coaches, perhaps due to his self-observed 'funny 
voice', now has the chance to put his imprimatur on the club.

Most notable of the new arrivals is the mercurial Costa Rican Carlos 
Hernandez. The former A-League player of the year has been criticised for his 
weight and work ethic in the past, but Hernandez has, according to Merrick, 
"renewed energy" and is intent on forcing his way into Los Ticos' World Cup 
squad. Fellow Costa Rican arrival, the unlikely-monikered Kenny Cunningham, has 
featured during his nation's successful Brazil 2014 qualifying campaign and 
numerous reports tip the speedy forward to make a significant impact in the 
A-League.

But it is away from the headline-signings where Merrick's impact may be most 
lasting. Having thrown a host of talented teenagers in at the deep end during 
his Victory tenure, Merrick plans, in contrast to Herbert, to have New Zealand 
youth play a key role in the future of the Phoenix.

The club have signed five new players around the age of 20, with more to come 
according to Merrick. "It is time to bring in some young ones," said Merrick, 
who most recently was in charge of the Hong Kong national team. "There is so 
many good young players in New Zealand. There is a lot more talent around, a 
lot more around like Kosta Barbarouses and Marco Rojas. Every time we bring a 
young player into the school of excellence I keep saying 'what a good player', 
and of course they can only get better."

Luke Adams is one of the new faces, with the New Zealand youth international 
having returned home after a stint with Derby County. There is also an 
interesting addition in the form of raw teenager Alex Rufer, son of former 
international Shane, and nephew of All Whites icon Wynton.

Of the more experienced youngsters, there are high hopes for Louis Fenton who 
remains an impressively balanced young man despite surviving an upbringing that 
was presumably filled with playground jibes from unworldly schoolmates in 
reference to his middle names: Ferenc Puskas.

The young brigade could find themselves in action from the opening round. The 
Phoenix will be hit with numerous absentees this weekend as New Zealand prepare 
for next month's intercontinental World Cup play-off.

International distractions could prove an ongoing challenge for the Phoenix 
but qualification for the World Cup will lift a recent gloom that, if recent 
media reports are to be believed, has recently been descending on New Zealand 
football. World Cup qualification and the realisation of Merrick's Phoenix 
ambitions could make for a very different landscape a year from now.
 