
Guardian writers' predicted position: 4th
Last season's position: 6th

Perth Glory <https://www.theguardian.com/football/perthglory> were a force to 
be reckoned with in the National Soccer League (NSL) but they have found the 
going a little tougher since 2005 and the inception of the A-League, and their 
manager, Alistair Edwards, is looking to return Glory back to their former 
successes.

Glory's dominance from 1999 to 2004, with four grand finals (two wins) and 
three minor premierships, pales in comparison to theirA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> results. In eight seasons the 
closest Perth came to matching their former successes was a third place finish 
and a controversial grand final defeat to Brisbane Roar in 2011-12.

Edwards knows what is needed to succeed in the West, having played nearly 100 
times for Perth during the NSL years, and will look to make them a force again.

Last season, Edwards's appointment coincided with a massive upturn in form for 
Perth. With seven games to go, Edwards oversaw an extraordinary turnaround, 
collecting 13 points and taking Perth from last and a five game losing streak, 
to sixth place and a spot in the finals series. Their run was ended by 
Melbourne Victory in an entertaining elimination final, but the team's change 
in style and results bodes well for the upcoming season.

Edwards did a fantastic job taking an aging squad, which under former manager 
Ian Ferguson had a more direct style of play, and transformed them into a team 
which has a greater focus on possession football. This season, with a motto of 
"football, not fightball", Perth will look to continue the new focus while also 
continuing the upturn in form.

With a full preseason to shape his squad, Edwards has freshened up the group 
with some young faces, while maintaining an experienced core. Youth Socceroos 
Ryan Edwards and Jamie Maclaren have returned from spells in England with 
Reading and Blackburn respectively, while Cameron Edwards, Ryan's younger 
brother, has joined from Melbourne Heart. Ryo Nagai, who scored in the 
elimination final, has returned for another year on loan from Japanese side 
Cerezo Osaka.

Daniel de Silva, who has been away on international duty in Kuala Lumpur with 
the Young Socceroos for AFC Under-19 Qualifiers, is a fantastic prospect. De 
Silva has yet to start in the A-League but debuted for the club at just 15 
against Sydney FC. After a strong Under-20 World Cup campaign in Turkey, where 
he shone in Australia's game against Colombia, de Silva was linked to 
Manchester United and Everton but will continue his development in Perth. While 
he will be protected by Glory coaching staff, fans will no doubt be excited to 
see more of de Silva (and Perth's other youngsters) this season.

Perth's oldest remaining off-season signing has been Sidnei Sciola, 26, with 
maverick Ljubo Milicevic, 32, released just a week before the start of the new 
season. This is telling, and goes a long way to rejuvenating the squad, with 
experienced A-League players Liam Miller (Brisbane Roar), Dean Heffernan 
(Western Sydney Wanderers) and Nick Ward (unattached) all leaving. But with a 
spine of experienced A-League and international players, with Danny Vukovic in 
goal, Michael Thwaite in defence, Jacob Burns captaining the side in midfield 
and Shane Smeltz up front, Perth have a good mixture of youth and experience.

The big question that remains for Perth this season though is one of goals. 
With only 29 in 27 regular season matches, Glory were the lowest scorers in 
2012-13. SSmeltz, who missed a decisive 88th minute penalty in the elimination 
final, finished the year as Perth's top-scorer with just seven, which for a 
two-time Golden Boot winner was a disappointment. Smeltz struggled with a hip 
injury throughout the last season and was unable to replicate his previously 
lethal form. The injury required surgery during the off-season and Smeltz isn't 
expected to return until round four clash.

That means 20 year-old Maclaren is likely to start up front for Perth in their 
first game against Adelaide United. Maclaren, who played in the Under 20s World 
Cup in June and scored against hosts Turkey, has been in good form in 
pre-season, scoring four goals in the last four games, including a well-taken 
brace against Sydney FC. Goals like his two against Sydney, the first a 
well-taken finish from close range after controlling a cross and the second a 
last-minute lob will be much welcomed for Perth this season.

Liam Miller's move to Brisbane Roar means Perth lose a quality No10 to play in 
behind Maclaren in the early rounds of the season. Miller, like much of his 
team-mates struggled for form during the start of last season, but improved and 
was pivotal to Perth's late resurgence under Edwards. His move will give an 
opportunity for new signing Ryan Edwards to play in the role he vacated.

Edwards's link up with Maclaren in pre-season has been impressive and that 
understanding will need to continue in order for Perth to score more frequently 
this season.

The late loss of Milicevic, even though he rarely featured during pre-season, 
will be a blow to Perth and their defensive depth. Despite his outspoken 
nature, Milicevic is an extremely talented defender and was expected to play a 
major role in central defence, paired with Thwaite. Both are comfortable on the 
ball, which is key to Perth's emphasis on playing out from the back. With 
Milicevic's exit, the experienced Steve Pantelidis will become a more regular 
feature in defence.

Should Perth suffer injuries at the back, they will be forced to rely on 
younger, less experienced defenders such as Jack Clisby and Brandon O'Neill.

These younger players will play an increased role as Perth continue their 
progress under Edwards. While an immediate title challenge may be beyond 
expectations, a top six finish or better will be the aim as Edwards attempts to 
return the club back to the success of their NSL years.
 