
A few weeks ago we needed to put a roof on an old outbuilding in the woods 
and, as usual, we decided to do it the hard way. Instead of a simple corrugated 
iron or felt roof, we wanted to do a living, or green, one. It's a lot more 
work, but well worth the effort: having soil above your head offers great 
insulation, against both cold and noise; the grass or sedum usually looks 
stunning and means that the building blends beautifully into the natural 
background; and instead of removing an area for wildlife, there's another 
playground for it.

I would rather have used our own timber for the supporting structure, but it 
was easier, I'm afraid, to buy some straight, treated timber from down the 
road. Once we had put the five-by-two rafters in place, we screwed thick sheets 
of ply on to them. The area of the roof is roughly 20sqm and, since the main 
drawback of a living roof is the weight, we erred on the side of caution, using 
stronger and thicker wood wherever possible. We created an overhang on one side 
so that there's somewhere to dry wood, put dirty boots and so on. The other big 
drawback of a living roof is that if it ever springs a leak you'll have a job 
to find the cause, so we laid a huge, heavy-duty pond-liner membrane called 
EPDM over the ply, being fairly paranoid as we did so that it didn't get cut or 
scratched.

There's a bit of debate about the perfect gradient for a living roof – too 
steep and the soil will just slop to the bottom, too shallow and rainwater 
won't drain away and you really will have a pond. We just went along with the 
extant slope of the building, which was about 20 degrees, and put upstands all 
around it to keep the soil in situ. In the end it looks like a very shallow, 
rectangular bath. The lowest upstand has metal lath screwed on to its base so 
that rainwater can escape through the holes.

Then comes the fun bit. You put down some old carpet or dust sheets on the 
EPDM to protect it and then lay out a drainage layer. I like something called 
Leca (Light Expanded Clay Aggregate) because it is, as the name suggests, 
incredibly light. It's basically a lot of holey pebbles. Then you put down 
landscape fabric so that the rainwater, not the soil, will drain away. Getting 
the soil up there is the back-breaking part. It takes a lot of barrows to get 
even a few inches of soil spread over 20sqm and just getting it up there is a 
job in itself. You can either chuck it up with a shovel or have someone up on 
the roof yanking up bucket after bucket.

I forget the names of all the guests who helped us over the weeks with the 
project – there was S with his son; K with her dog. Various other people came 
and had a laugh as we lugged wet mud up. Others looked after the children, 
helping them make a den and light a fire.

We decided to do a sedum, rather than a turf, roof just because it requires 
less soil and therefore creates less weight. I'm notoriously ignorant about 
plants if they're not trees, so my very green-fingered mother-in-law, over from 
Italy for Christmas, helped out, meticulously arranging the rockery plants into 
a quilt of colour: we put in thyme, sedum, sempervivum (house leeks), arabis, 
campanula, lychnis, silene (campion), lewisia, dianthus and so on. We also grab 
random plants and mosses growing in walls and gutters around the place and put 
them in, aubretia and so on. I also know, from having watched it for the past 
year, that the wasteland we got the soil from had nettles and forget-me-nots 
growing all over it, so some of those will doubtless come through as well.

That's part of the joy of a living roof – even when you've finished it, you've 
no idea what it will eventually look like. It will almost certainly surprise 
you. It will change with the seasons. Some seeds will fall on stony ground, 
some will get eaten, some will be choked and some will thrive. It looks fairly 
sparse now, just a few dozen tiny plants sitting in a large, sloping bed of 
mud. But come spring it should be a tapestry of colours, a testament to the 
hard work of a lot of wonderful visitors.


To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-
jones <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit 
windsorhillwood.co.uk <http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
 