
The convoluted, time-shifting plot of Andrey Kurkov's novel The President's 
Last Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9780099485049/the-presidents-last-love>
 includes a president of Ukraine being poisoned by his political enemies. In 
2004, a few years after the book was written, the Ukrainian presidential 
candidateViktor Yushchenko was actually poisoned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/dec/13/ukraine.nickpatonwalsh1> in just 
one of the bizarre twists that accompanied the Orange revolution in that 
country. After the revolution Kurkov was invited to a Kiev restaurant by two 
secret service generals. "They gave me coffee and cognac and asked if I thought 
my book could have been used by the plotters. I said people who poison 
presidents don't read books like mine. But a lot of things that at one time 
seemed far-fetched later became, if not normal, then at least not so abnormal. 
I also had a gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine in the book. Two years later 
Russia turned off the pipelines."

Kurkov combines his career as a novelist with that of a journalist and 
commentator and all his work is bound up with life in post-soviet union 
Ukraine. He came to prominence in the west with his novelDeath and the Penguin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/thrillers/9781860469459/death-and-the-penguin>
, published in Russian in 1996 and in English in 2001. It featured a Kiev 
obituary writer, Viktor, and his pet penguin, Misha, who had been rescued when 
the zoo closed down. Viktor's hapless wanderings take him through a country 
where soviet absurdities have been replaced by the equally dark absurdities of 
organised crime.

Half a dozen more novels have followed in which Kurkov has ingeniously 
explored the political, psychological and emotional travails of a diverse 
gallery of Ukrainians. It is a body of work that has drawn both critical and 
popular praise. Among his most high profile admirers is Michal Palin, who 
applauded the "deceptive ease" with which Kurkov draws the reader "into a 
dense, complex world full of wonderful characters".

Kurkov's new novel, The Milkman of the Night (Harvill Secker) is published in 
the UK next month. It opens in typically arresting style with Irina, a single 
mother of a three-month-old baby who lives in the countryside outside Kiev, 
every morning catching the first minibus into the city. When she arrives she 
sells her breast milk in a special salon. Part surreal murder mystery, part 
multi-stranded love story, it is full of apparently bizarre incidents and 
behaviour. But as Kurkov points out, real life in Ukraine has not been short of 
its bizarre elements, as is evidenced by the way he first got himself published.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union most publishing businesses had stopped 
functioning so Kurkov had to publish himself. He borrowed enough money from 
friends to buy six tonnes of paper from Kazakhstan. "But it wasn't book paper, 
it was wrapping paper for foodstuff. Then I arranged for a printer of sheet 
music to actually print it, but they needed an official order. So I went to a 
paint shop who gave me one of their order sheets and I invented the name of a 
publishing house." Eventually he printed 25,000 copies of a "quite difficult" 
philosophical novel,The World of Mr Big Forehead, and 50,000 copies of a 
"beautifully colourful book for children – the food wrapping paper turned out 
to be excellent for colour printing" –The Adventures of Baby Vacuum Cleaner 
Gosha. He sold the books, largely through individual deals with station 
newspaper kiosks, and advertised on Kiev buses and via a sandwich board that he 
wore "on the equivalent of Kiev's Carnaby Street, where I sat in between 
Russian-doll sellers".

When a chain of kiosks ordered 10,000 copies and didn't pay, Kurkov had just a 
few hours to reclaim the books but didn't have any transport. He eventually 
persuaded the driver of a funeral bus to help him out. "I didn't tell him that 
I needed to keep the books in the bus overnight. But I gave him vodka and he 
allowed me to sleep in the bus with the books. So I got my books back, the 
driver got to his funeral the next day and it worked out for everybody. None of 
this was easy but, as I proved, it was not impossible. And by the end of the 
first year, I had sold all 75,000 books."

An editor at Edinburgh University's Polygon Press, who had published early 
work by James Kelman and other acclaimed writers, expressed an interest in the 
work but moved on before purchasing the book and the incoming editor scrapped 
all his projects. "One of the characters inThe World of Mr Big Forehead was a 
very patriotic, pro-soviet rat," explains Kurkov. "So instead of coming to 
Britain with a novel about a penguin, I nearly came 10 years earlier with a 
novel about a rat. But animals have been in my work from the start. The first 
thing I remember writing was a poem about a hamster. I had three who lived in a 
glass jar half-filled with cotton wool. I'd sometimes let them out and one was 
killed when my father squashed it in a door and another was eaten by a street 
cat I brought home. My first piece of poetry was about the loneliness of this 
last hamster. He eventually fell off the balcony. These were dangerous times 
and I still don't know whether it was suicide, murder or an accident."

Kurkov was born in a village near Leningrad in 1961. His father was a military 
test pilot and his mother a doctor. In 1963 Khrushchev demobilised 100,000 
officers; Kurkov's father took a job at the Antonov civil aircraft factory in 
Kiev and the family moved into a two-room apartment just across the road from 
the airfield, where his elder brother still lives. "You get used to the noise 
of jet engines being tested at night surprisingly quickly."

He says there was both a lot of ideology and creative writing in the soviet 
education system. He remembers writing poems about "uncle Lenin" at 
kindergarten and later long poems about Pioneer camps. He still thinks that 
soviet children enjoyed good childhoods. "Kids now have these commercial camps, 
but they are not really about group activities and having real fun as the 
Pioneer camps were, it is just a business. And when I was young every child had 
two or three hobbies. Collecting stamps, making model aeroplanes, whatever. Now 
they just think about mobile phones and getting better mobile phones."

It was Kurkov's hobby of collecting cactuses – "I had about 1,500 at the peak 
of it" – that led him to an interest in languages, starting with botanical 
Latin. "Then I learned Polish which was quite close to Ukrainian and then 
someone told me Japanese was the most difficult language in the world so I 
decided to try that." He was accepted on to a translators course – "I'm rusty 
now but can still talk about food if not philosophy in Japanese" – and then a 
KGB eavesdropping course. "I didn't want to join that unit for my national 
service because if you had been in the KGB you weren't allowed to leave the 
Soviet Union for 25 years because of the access you had to secrets. So my 
mother spoke to one of her patients who was a police general. He went and 
changed the code on my papers so I was sent to the military police as a prison 
guard." Kurkov served in Odessa and loved the experience: "I wrote nearly all 
of my children stories while working there."

During the Brezhnev era Kurkov says he wasn't really a dissident, "but 
everything about the system made me laugh. My brother was a proper dissident 
who was falsely accused of breaking into an ice-cream kiosk, because it was not 
popular at that time for the authorities to accuse people of being anti-soviet. 
The judge told my mother that he liked old medals so my mother bribed him with 
a collection of my grandfather's tsarist medals. My brother got a two-year 
suspended sentence and two weeks later I saw the medals on sale in an antique 
shop."

From the early 80s Kurkov sent "manuscripts of absurdist novels" to Soviet 
publishing houses without success. "There were a lot of publishing houses in 
Kiev and I would go and meet the editors. They were always very friendly and 
some of them were quite open that they liked the books, but they couldn't 
publish because of censorship. I was advised to write something 'proper', by 
which they meant realistic, with positive characters and a good story that was 
communist without being too communist."

At some stage he just "stopped caring" about publication. Friends with access 
to Xerox machines were illegally copying his manuscripts which were being 
circulated all over the Soviet Union. "There was something very romantic about 
it, and I knew I was doing something of interest to other people, not just me. 
I was invited to Moscow and Leningrad to give these illegal readings at jazz 
clubs and science clubs and in private flats. In 1988 I read my whole novel, 
which took 4½ hours, in front of 200 people. I'd lost my voice by the end, but 
had a huge sense of optimism about what I was doing."

The collapse of the Soviet Union followed soon after, and by the time he had 
self-published his first two books he was left with a $700 profit with which he 
bought his first computer.The World of Mr Big Forehead was nominated for many 
prizes, including the Russian Booker. Kurkov had long been, illegally, sending 
manuscripts abroad and has an impressive collection of rejection slips, 
including one from his current UK publisher which said: "Dear Mr Kurkov, we're 
only publishing quality literature. We wish you luck elsewhere." It was not 
until 1997 that a Swiss publisher acceptedDeath and the Penguin. "It was a 
strange feeling. Not exactly happiness – I'd spent so long sending out sample 
chapters and synopses and letters, it was part of my life. For that to stop was 
strange."

The fact that Kurkov writes in Russian has periodically been a source of 
contention as the various waves of Ukrainian nationalism ebb and flow. He says 
now the government is still negotiating the balance between Russian and 
Ukrainian but currently has bigger things to worry about. He still lives in 
Kiev with his English wife, Elizabeth, and their three children: "I am the only 
Ukrainian citizen in my family." As a journalist he is regularly called on to 
analyse Ukraine's politics. During those heady days of the Orange revolution he 
set up camp in a bookshop just off the main square, where he organised 
discussions and served tea and cognac to the freezing protesters. "It was an 
excellent time. The atmosphere was very relaxed and the revolution was 
immediately commercialised with Orange memorabilia on sale everywhere." He says 
people knew very quickly that it had not been as much of a clean sweep of the 
old order as had been hoped for. "But the main thing is that people had lost 
their fear of the secret service and the police and the tax office. They 
realised they could defend their rights."

He says of the country today, as former Orange prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko 
stands trial, that everyone watches the news "as if it were a soap opera. We 
recently had elections of which someone said we had a choice between a sports 
car without brakes, or brakes without a car. Since Ukrainians are never in a 
hurry we chose the brakes with no car. But as always cultural life is booming, 
although we have an anti-cultural government and an uneducated president, but 
they don't interfere much."

Kurkov promotes Ukrainian writers abroad and is currently setting up a 
Ukrainian writing festival in France. "The Milkman of the Night was my attempt 
at a novel without politics. I failed. Alongside my murder and love stories is 
a very charismatic guy who dreams of privatising the restaurants in the 
parliament. I've never wanted to write stories that just send coded messages 
about Ukrainian politics, I want to write stories that readers everywhere can 
enjoy. But my next book, which has already been published in Russian is, I 
think, politics free. It is about a man who is transported back in time to 1957 
in Ochakiv, a small town on the Black Sea. It happens when he puts on a police 
uniform and provides some nice pictures of soviet life. What can possibly be 
political about that?"

Andrey Kurkov will be at the Edinburgh International Book Festival 
<http://www.edbookfest.co.uk/> on Friday 2 August.
 