
I used to love reading Liz Jones's Wedding Planner column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lizjones>, if only for the car crash 
element of wondering why on earth these two people were marrying each other. 
Sadly, time proved that instinct to be right. I say sadly because I think that 
most people thinking of getting married truly believe that it is for life, 
despite the statistics.

So, welcome to wedding season: where thousands of soon-to-be-married couples 
pray for sunshine at the weekend; where friends and relations prepare to travel 
up and down the country, some of them dozens of times; where the wedding 
magazines gain a sudden prominence on the newsstands.

But if you are a bloke, you may be forgiven for thinking that all of this 
doesn't have much to do with you. Sure, there will be stag weekends. And maybe 
morning suit hire. And turning up on the day and getting wasted. But the 
build-up and hype is dominated by women. A sweeping generalisation, maybe, but 
there's some truth in it.

So over the next few weeks I'd like to take us on a journey: a blokes' guide 
to weddings. I have more than a few thoughts of my own: married once, best man 
three times, an usher half a dozen more and a guest more times than I can 
count. (And I used to work in a pub that had at least one wedding per weekend 
all year round). But more than that I'd like to share your experiences: top 
tips, dos and don'ts, salutary lessons, funny stories, maybe even some sad ones 
too.

And having categorised this as a blog for blokes, that doesn't mean that I 
just want advice and thoughts from men, for I think that we would also learn 
much from female input.

Let's begin at the beginning: the proposal.

I am constantly amazed by the number of people who reveal that the decision 
was made during a casual shall-we-get-hitched conversation in the kitchen. 
Surely it deserves something more romantic than that? Especially if there is a 
chance that she might say no …

My then girlfriend and I had never discussed marriage before I proposed, so 
when I got down on one knee on a moonlit beach in Jamaica it came as a complete 
surprise. I think it raised my chances of a positive outcome. It was only a 
decade later that she revealed that her initial thought was: "I can always 
change my mind later."

I didn't have a ring on me at the time (I was too scared to make that choice 
alone), so I needed some proof that this wasn't just a spur-of-the-moment 
action under the influence of the local delectations. I had already asked her 
father for his blessing - not his permission, that might have been going a bit 
far. It was proof enough. (His words weren't entirely encouraging: "I'm very 
happy for you to ask, but I'm not sure that she'll say yes.")

On the subject of The Ring: it very much depends upon your wife-to-be. Is she 
high maintenance? If so, she will want to choose and you may need a bank loan. 
Personally, I had lined up a friendly jeweller but on the morning in question 
my fiancee subtly guided us toTiffany's 
<http://uk.tiffany.com/Shopping/Default.aspx?mcat=148203>. There are no prices 
on any of the jewellery. Your future bride makes her choice and an assistant 
passes you a piece of paper with a number on it. And then you pay. It's not for 
those of a nervous disposition …

I'm sure that you have your own proposal stories to tell. Please do.
 