
Journalism plays a crucial role in bringing news and issues to the attention 
of the world. It has the power to stir consciences and prompt action.

The articles contained in this supplement are fine examples of this craft, 
helping to broaden our understanding of the challenges faced in Africa and 
other parts of the developing world.

For GSK, our interest and activity in these countries is long-standing and it 
is why we are supporting the Guardian's efforts in International Development 
journalism.

Reporting in this area requires commitment, sensitivity and an ability to take 
a long-term view. It is the same for scientists.

Twenty years ago, the insight and passion of a GSK scientist, Joe Cohen, led 
to a new vision: the possibility of a first-ever vaccine to prevent malaria.

Malaria is an unforgiving killer with devastating societal impact. As many as 
3 million people die each year because of the disease, mostly in Africa. This 
must change. At GSK, we believe it can.

Recent clinical trials in Mozambique to develop our malaria vaccine delivered 
unprecedented results. It was shown to reduce an infants' risk of getting 
infected by malaria by 65%. Importantly, the vaccine also demonstrated close to 
60% protection against severe forms of the disease, including death.

Of course, if we are able to successfully develop this vaccine, it won't be a 
magic bullet. Malaria is a disease of constant assault and we must continue to 
use all the tools at the global community's disposal to tackle it, including 
bed nets, insecticides to kill mosquitoes and treatments.

Nevertheless, an effective vaccine would certainly transform efforts to stop 
malaria. It would also serve as a pathfinder for the next generation of malaria 
vaccines - a cause we are already working on.

This disease can be defeated through partnership. The united efforts of the 
Malaria Vaccine Initiative, the Gates Foundation and GSK to study and develop 
this vaccine show what might be possible. Together, we have brought scale and 
commitment to this project, bringing us ever closer to making the vaccine a 
reality.

In Agogo, Ghana, a baby boy, Ernest, has just been enrolled in a clinical 
trial for the malaria vaccine. His mother has already lost two children to 
malaria. She hopes that the vaccine will ensure she doesn't lose a third.

The potential impact of a malaria vaccine is clear to see. We are now moving 
into the later stages of clinical development, but we still have many steps to 
take on our journey before we fully understand and deliver the vaccine's 
potential.

In years to come, we hope that our efforts, combined with the efforts 
currently being undertaken by the global community, will mean that journalists 
will be reporting about a place where malaria is controlled; where people can 
protect themselves and know what to do if they do get infected. A place where 
children like Ernest survive the threat of malaria.
 