
The Amalfi coast provides one of the world's great drives. Glamorous 
pastel-painted Positano, gorgeous Praiano, terraced lemon groves, sea of lapis 
lazuli. I see nothing. Instead, I'm stuck behind the fat belching back of a 
white coach that swings drunkenly round bends, or am dodging Neapolitan maniacs 
screaming towards me in over-driven sedans. Having exhausted my supply of 
insulting gestures, I turn abruptly off the SS163 at Sant'Agata, and head down 
a cul-de-sac signposted to Marina del Cantone.

Snaking slowly down, window open, I tack past butterflies and goat herds and 
convents with walls like shortbread. The radio plays Lina Sastri, the scent of 
early mimosa fills the Alfa and the Gulf of Salerno sparkles like my new mood. 
Nerano village offers a pleasant pause and a cone of fresh lemon sorbetto. 
There's a famous restaurant here called I Quattro Passi where I'm tempted to 
stop for dinner, but there's something about the menu . . . "Music box of 
anchovy fillet with a ribbon of leek and lightly curried oil" and "spring roll 
of tuna with winter melon froth" are served warm, it says, but leave me cold.

Marina del Cantone is the end of the road, and is a tiny pebble beach, two 
pensioni and three restaurants. It feels timeless and genuine, and I check in 
at the Hotel Certosa, and elect to dine at Maria Grazia's place. It is simple, 
spic and span and family-run, so I show the owners €30 and ask for dinner. They 
seat me under a blue stripy awning on the terrace, and serve a Campari soda the 
same shade as the sunset that blushes the bay.

I adore mozzarella di bufala - the best is like eating milky clouds - but the 
one that comes is almost too rich and too big to finish. Almost. Respite is 
offered in the guise of a plate of simple bitter greens, scarole, I think, 
wilted in hot water, briefly sauteed in olive oil and spiked with nuggets of 
soft garlic. Octopus then, pink and pulpy and dressed with lemon, and more 
country greens, these with olives and capers. A stoneware jug of Capri red wine 
appears and twilight signals the arrival of baby aubergines cooked with 
pomodorini and herbs that smell of sunny hillsides.

As a pair of open-decked gozzi hove into the bay, their crews of two calling 
out to each other, a small piece of grilled gurnard is brought. It comes with a 
squeeze of citron that makes it taste faintly (and rather delightfully) of Earl 
Grey tea. Pasta? Si, per favore. This turns out to be the house speciality of 
la pasta con i cucuzzielli - spaghetti turned in a sauce of grated baby 
courgettes with basil and caciocavallo cheese. It is simply delicious. And, 
after the preceding feast, filling enough to make me shoo away the smiling 
offer of seconds, and of dessert, too. The family seem genuinely distressed 
that I should eschew their baba alla casa, so it arrives anyway, a fleshy navel 
of dough soaked in boozy orange syrup with a slice of tutti frutti ice cream.

In danger of losing all sense of caution, not to mention sight of my own 
navel, I accept a digestif made by Grandma Rosa, who throws me a twinkly wave. 
It is flavoured with basil, and served very cold. I like it, but not as much as 
the mint one which follows it. Or the wild fennel one which nearly trumps the 
loquat version. I've always found limoncello to be a bit like yellow Windolene, 
but Rosa's is something else - silky, not sickly; fruity, not sweet. "E buono?" 
Rosa asks. E buono, alright Nonna. Molto buono.

· Ristorante da Maria Grazia, Marina del Cantone, Massa Lubrense (00 39 081 
808 1011,massalubrense.it/mariagrazia.htm 
<http://www.massalubrense.it/mariagrazia.htm>). Open every day, lunch and 
dinner March 10 to December. Hotel Certosa, +081 808 1209,hotelcertosa.com 
<http://www.hotelcertosa.com>. The stylish way to arrive in Marina del Cantone 
is by sea from Naples. Hire a boat and a driver for the hour-and-a-bit trip at
taxidelmare.it <http://www.taxidelmare.it> or masticiello.com 
<http://www.masticiello.com>.
 