
The prospect of a squeeze in spending has triggered two main responses: fear, 
that a "slash-and-burn" approach to public-service budgets would fuel social 
unrest, and optimism, that "clever cuts" could result in the development of 
more efficient, sustainable and user-responsive services.

Cuts are inevitable, but a short-term approach – simply shrinking budgets, or 
"cutting the state down to size" – will damage schools, health and welfare 
services. It is crucial to tackle waste and excess, but we must think carefully 
and radically about what public services we want, and how to deliver them more 
effectively.

Those are the key messages from readers and contributors to the Guardian's 
seriesA New Public Services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2009/sep/16/public-spending-departments-money-cuts>
, distilled from hundreds of contributions to the debate in print and online, 
over the past two weeks.

The series was intended to gauge perceptions of and attitudes in the public 
services as they prepare to move from a golden age of bumper year-on-year 
spending increases into a period of relative austerity.

We asked Guardian writers, readers and bloggers, public servants and citizens 
for their views on what should be cut, what protected, and how we should 
deliver services in the future.

It is neither scientific nor exhaustive but, from the diverse views, we have 
identified five key themes, which we believe reflect the core concerns and 
aspirations of contributors. We have expressed these as the following 
questions, which we've put to the three main political parties.

• Trust Staff would be more motivated and productive if they were trusted more 
to exercise professional judgment and were less constrained by targets, 
paperwork and micro-management. How would you restore professional autonomy and 
remotivate public-services staff?

• Jobs and pay There are too many unproductive jobs, too far from the 
frontline, and too many managers. Executive pay is too high. Where would you 
make staffing cuts, would you cap executive pay, and what role would there be 
for alternative providers, such as the private, social enterprise and voluntary 
sectors?

• The Sure Start principle There's too much spending on services that "pick up 
the pieces" or knee-jerk policy responses to media headlines. How would you 
rebalance investment to encourage long-term preventive services such asSure 
Start 
<http://www.dcsf.gov.uk/everychildmatters/earlyyears/surestart/whatsurestartdoes>
 or prisoner rehabilitation schemes, and in which policy areas?

• People power Too much spending reflects the needs of the providers, not the 
users of services. How would you incorporate user "voice" into the 
commissioning, design and provision of services? How far would you hand 
spending power to users – say, through individual budgets?

• Scrap grandiose schemes The billions spent on national databases, such as 
those for children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/sep/15/contactpoint-child-databases>
, and huge IT systems would be better spent on frontline services.PFI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pfi> hospital and school building schemes 
should be scaled down. Do you agree?

Each of the three main parties is committed to making cuts and efficiency 
savings in public services. But there was concern among many respondents that a 
crude approach to cutting billions off departmental budgets – exemplified for 
some readers by cuts pushed through by the Thatcher government in the 1980s – 
would disproportionately affect the least well-off, and store up social 
problems.

Anger at the cause of the crisis – an out-of-control financial sector – and a 
sense of injustice that the poor, pensioners, ethnic minorities and unemployed 
teenagers will suffer most as public services shrink, were matched by a general 
acceptance that public spending cuts were inevitable. Some voices warned 
against panic, arguing that it was wiser to maintain investment and capacity 
and raise taxes. Others pointed out that some services had already been cut 
close to breaking point.

But many thought the financial crisis was a big chance to tackle waste and 
inefficiency. There was support for the view that the bureaucratic demands of 
centrally imposed targets and audits meant that too many staff were employed on 
non-essential functions. Few called for across-the-board pay cuts, but there 
was a strong feeling that chief executives and top civil servants were paid too 
much.

There is still huge support for popular institutions, such as the NHS, but 
there was curiosity about, and in some cases passionate support for, ideas such 
as personal budgets, social enterprise and "expert patient" self-help 
programmes that promise financial savings and question the notion that a 
centrally directed welfare state, its staff and agencies are always best placed 
to supply all services.

But if statutory services don't hold all the answers, there was scepticism 
about the corporate private sector, and cynicism about markets, privatisation, 
choice, mega-IT projects and other centrally imposed policy fashions of recent 
years. There was little stomach for grand Whitehall-led policy roll-outs, or 
for more structural reorganisations of services.

So what next? A sharp, brutal move to a "small state" has its vociferous 
supporters on the Guardian blogs. Other voices see change as a progressive 
re-ordering of investment priorities – spending on long-term preventive 
services, for example. Others located the future of many services as local and 
personal, through community self-help and voluntarism, and service user 
partnership with the professionals who provide the services.

If there was anything like consensus, it was that change was necessary. One 
contributor wrote: "Public service reform was too difficult in the good times. 
In the bad times, it will be too expensive not to."
 