
The moment when Bishop Samuel Wilberforce challenged Thomas Huxley on the 
subject of evolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/10/plinth-huxley-wilberforce-evolution-debate>
 is one of the most famous episodes in the British Association’s history. More 
than 150 years ago, this exchange lives on as a key moment in the progressive 
acceptance of Darwin’s theory.

Now known as the British Science Association 
<http://www.britishscienceassociation.org/> – to stress that science sits at 
the heart of the meeting – its primary aim is to improve public perception and 
appreciation of science, an aim that remains as important today as in the 
Victorian era.

Science <https://www.theguardian.com/education/science> sits squarely in the 
middle of our democracy. Not just as a source of innovation and economic 
stimulus but as a subject at the heart of every citizen’s life – whether they 
appreciate it or not.

What should we, collectively and individually, do about our dwindling energy 
resources and growing carbon emissions? When should we go to the doctor 
demanding antibiotics and when should we just sit out a fever? Underlying these 
questions – and many others – are basic scientific ideas and a probing 
curiosity about how the world works and what it is made of.

Unfortunately in England our education system makes it all too easy for 
individuals mentally to turn their backs on the scientific ideas that matter to 
them. We have a system that forces children to make stark choices at a 
ridiculously early age between disciplines, unlike most of Europe including 
Scotland, where the leaving certificate requires each pupil to have studied a 
broad range of subjects.

Last summer the Royal Society published its vision for science and mathematics 
education report <https://royalsociety.org/education/policy/vision/>, setting 
out its ambition for the next 20 years on these subjects.

The report calls for all children to study some science and maths until they 
leave school – and those pupils who are destined for further science study to 
keep up humanities subjects. It would be a great sign of progress if our 
politicians backed this call.

This does not mean (as CP Snow put it) that everyone should understand the 
second law of thermodynamics, but instead that we should all understand how 
science analyses evidence, tests (and refines) hypotheses and when theories can 
and can’t be proved.

Scientific evidence is of course not the only thing that politicians use to 
make their decisions, but it would be easier for their constituents to know 
when politicians were throwing the scientific evidence out of the window to 
suit their own convictions, if voters themselves had a much firmer 
comprehension of what that evidence was.

As my presidency of the BSA was announced last week, following in the 
footsteps of a dazzling array of the scientific leaders of the past 170 years 
including my predecessor as the (first) master of Churchill College, Sir John 
Cockcroft, these matters of how our education system does or does not prepare 
every citizen for their adult lives is very much in my mind. The BSA plays an 
important role in providing a forum for debate and exchange between practicing 
scientists and the public. Long may it continue to do so.

Athene Donald is professor of experimental physics at the University of 
Cambridge
 