
The Guardian, January 8 1953 

This year has been a harrowing one in America in many ways, but in one respect 
it shook off at least an infamous if waning habit. It was the first year on 
record that there was no lynching in the United States. The good word was 
reported last night by the Tuskegee Institute, the negro college established by 
the state of Alabama in 1881, which has kept records of all lynchings and race 
riots since the year after its founding.

In the intervening 70 years only the six states of New England have never 
lynched anybody. Thirty-seven states have at some time or another lynched a 
negro. But in this century the annual incidence of lynching has declined
steeply. In the last 10 years of the nineteenth century the annual average was 
154. From 1920 to 1930 it was 30, and 15 for the next 10 years. In 1945, 1947, 
and 1951 there was only one American death by lynching.

The word, which has the strict meaning of illegal execution by a mob, has no 
proved origin. It has been variously derived from Lydford in England to the 
Lynches of South Carolina. The writer and lexicographer HL Mencken says that 
the likeliest claim is that of "Captain Charles Lynch of Virginia, a primeval 
100% American who devoted himself to harassing Loyalists before and during the 
Revolution."

By any other name, the practice of lynching got off to a brisk start during 
the sittings of the popular tribunals that looked for and found disloyalty to 
the new Republic rampant throughout the victorious colonies. But lynching came 
to be thought of as a peculiar American institution during the period of 
westward expansion, when desperadoes of every sort preyed on the frail civil 
governments of the shifting western frontier.

Yet it is not the righteous vigilantes of the west that come to mind when the 
word is mentioned: it is the negro. And the record of lynchings since the late 
1880s has been overwhelmingly the record of negroes taken out of a local gaol 
and hanged or shot by a mob for proved or alleged rape or homicide. 
Three-quarters of the victims in the Tuskegee records have been negroes. And 
since the numbers dwindled, more than 91% of them have been negroes.

The institute, however, tempers its pride in the new record by warning about 
"other patterns of violence" that are replacing lynch law. The most marked 
since the last war is the practice of bombing private homes, especially 'where 
members of the race have moved into what were considered white neighbourhoods.' 
Occasionally, the report says, the victims are "negro leaders who were thought 
to be too active in improving the status of their people."

From the ghastly race riot in Detroit in 1943 to the bombing of a negro's home 
in Florida last year, it is plain that the most inflammable places are urban 
areas where negroes have spilled over districts traditionally inhabited by poor 
whites. The poorer the white the tighter is the social tension when negroes 
rent houses nearby. The day after the Detroit riot nine years ago I remember 
one shabby, raddled white man confessing in a corner saloon: "I may be low and 
poor but I ain't as low as a nigger - not yet".

It is a text for sociologists and housing experts. And little good will be 
done unless they discover some methods of easing the housing conditions of poor 
whites whose only hold on dignity is their pale face.
 