
Aaron Ramsey will miss Wales’s opening 2018 World Cup qualifier against 
Moldova. The midfielder suffered a hamstring injury in Arsenal’s Premier League
opening game against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
and Arsène Wenger said the player would not be fit until after the 
international break.

Chris Coleman, naming a 23-man squad for the qualifier in Cardiff on 5 
September, said he expected Ramsey to be out for another three weeks. “When 
you’ve got a player as good as Aaron, take him out of any team and you are 
going to know about it. He is irreplaceable, he makes a huge impact for us. He 
is a great player and it’s a shame he’s not here. He’s a loss to any team.”

Jonathan Williams is also expected to be out for a couple of months after 
suffering an ankle injury in a Crystal Palace pre-season friendly. “Jonny has 
had a good impact on the team and brings something different,” Coleman said. “I 
saw that tackle on him, it was a coward’s tackle from behind, and that was 
annoying.”

Welsh fairytale ends as Cristiano Ronaldo takes Portugal to Euro 2016 final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
The midfielder David Vaughan, who made his debut in a 2-0 away defeat to the 
United States in May 2003, has retired. The 33-year-old was in the squad who
reached the Euro 2016 semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
 but he remained an unused substitute throughout the tournament. The former 
Blackpool and Sunderland player has decided to focus on his club career at 
Nottingham Forest.

Coleman said: “He sat down with me when he got back from France and explained 
he was going to retire. I tried to talk him out of because he’s been with us 
for so long and he’s got good quality. He wants to spend more time with his 
family and concentrate on his club career, and we’ve got to respect that. He’s 
been a great servant forWales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>.”

In their place come the Newcastle defender Paul Dummett, the Cardiff 
midfielder Emyr Huws and the Leicester striker Tom Lawrence.

The manager said he was “fully focused” after being linked with the vacancy at 
Hull City. It was reported Coleman wanted to talk to Hull but the Football 
Association of Wales rejected their approach.

“I want to work at the top level like everyone else but that doesn’t mean 
that’s the Premier League,” Coleman said. “I’ve said before I’d like to work in 
Europe again but what I’ve got here is something pretty special, something 
close to my heart.

“There was an approach, the FAW turned it down and I’m fully focused on what I 
need to do for my country again. It’s difficult to walk away from Wales now, 
especially on the back of what we’ve done and on the eve of aWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> campaign. I’m not 
going to tell a lie. If someone comes and it’s the Premier League, anybody, you 
kind of look at it sideways, of course you do. But I’m the manager of my 
country. That comes around once if you’re lucky, and I hope I never have any 
regrets when my time with Wales is up.”

Coleman also dismissed the idea of Wales being part of a Team GB team at the 
Tokyo Olympics in 2020. Sam Allardyce has backed the idea but the FAW fear it 
could damage Wales’s position as an independent nation within Fifa.

“For us, no. I don’t agree with that,” Coleman said. “Anything that could put 
what we’ve built in jeopardy is not for us – and our stance on that hasn’t 
changed.”

Wales squad (v Moldova, Cardiff, 5 Sept) Hennessey (Crystal Palace), Ward 
(Liverpool), O Fon Williams (Inverness); Gunter (Reading), Chester (Aston 
Villa), A Williams (Everton), Collins (West Ham), Davies (Tottenham), Richards 
(Cardiff), Taylor (Swansea), Dummett (Newcastle); Allen (Stoke), Ledley 
(Crystal Palace), Huws (Cardiff), King (Leicester), Edwards (Wolves), G 
Williams (Fulham), Cotterill (Birmingham); Bale (Real Madrid), Robson-Kanu 
(unattached), Vokes (Burnley), Church (MK Dons), Lawrence (Leicester).
 