
When a man who once played the last 10 minutes of a Premier League match still 
drunk from the night before is quite this horrified about your defensive 
organisation, it is perhaps time to take a breath and listen. Paul Merson’s 
response on Sky Sports toArsenal’s concession of a 3-0 lead at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/04/arsenal-anderlecht-champions-league-match-report>
 to Anderlecht on Tuesday night was perfectly pitched: a combination of 
fan-level astonishment, ex-pro’s disdain and impartial bewilderment at the 
shoddiness of a team led by the same new-broom manager who sold him to 
Middlesbrough 17 years ago, in the prelude to the most successful period in 
Arsenal’s history.

For all that, Merson’s description of Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> as “tactically clueless” is 
perhaps slightly wide of the mark. It wasn’t so much Arsenal’s tactics – the 
gameplan, the formation – that were wrong at the Emirates. It was the 
execution, the spirt, the basic quality of the personnel involved, the system 
of recruitment and preparation that put them on the pitch together in the first 
place. This was, let’s face it, not so much a tactical blunder as a systemic 
collapse, a story of failure spreading back up the arm.

Indeed, if Merson wanted to criticise anybody’s tactics it ought to be those 
of the Anderlecht manager, Besnik Hasi, who left it until his team were 3-0 
down before probing with any real purpose some very obvious Arsenal weaknesses. 
Why didn’t Hasi bring Aleksandr Mitrovic on to cuff Nacho Monreal around much 
earlier in the piece? Why didn’t Anderlecht simply stride through that 
collapsible Arsenal midfield once it became clear there was little resistance 
there? Have they not been watching? Has Wenger not been watching? Did any of 
this, in the end really come as much of a surprise to anyone? Wenger blamed his 
defence for the goals conceded, a defence, just to be clear, trained, selected 
and prepared byArsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger>. As ever though it was in 
Arsenal’s midfield that the real problems with the team and indeed the 
methodology of late Wengerism coalesced. And most obviously in the person of 
Aaron Ramsey, a lovely footballer with a wonderful range of skills, who right 
now simply looks a little lost.

Two moments at the end of the game seemed to sum up Ramsey’s fretfulness, the 
sense of confusion over exactly what it is he’s supposed to be doing out there. 
With 88 minutes gone Arsenal, 3-2 up, were awarded a free kick 30 yards from 
goal. Ramsey (really?) stepped up and rather than slowing things down or 
playing the ball to a colleague simply punted it over the bar. Moments later, 
as Arsenal attacked, five red-shirted players swarmed into the box, Ramsey 
chief among them, only forAnderlecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> to scamper away through a 
vacated midfield and score a schoolboy-level, two-touch equaliser.

It would be easy to blame Ramsey for this, to wonder how a central midfielder 
can play so loosely at the end of a match of such importance. But he is in 
effect an embodiment of a wider confusion of methods. Wenger suggested during 
the week that Ramsey is currently suffering from the after-effects of his 
seductive, unrepeatable 18-goal season, struggling now to locate the real meat 
of his role. Ramsey was wonderful last year, but perhaps he was wonderful in 
the wrong way, his rare attacking gear a distraction from the more basic areas 
– linking, tackling, passing – in which Arsenal need him to excel right now. 
Just as Paul Scholes often played deeper for Manchester United, so Ramsey needs 
to accept that Alexis Sánchez has that forward role, that his job in the 
current team is to score less and play more, to be a shield rather than a sword.

If he has failed to do so, then this is a managerial failing on two levels: 
most obviously it is Wenger’s job to ensure Ramsey understands and executes his 
role; and secondly both Ramsey and Mikel Arteta – worryingly immobile again – 
are ill-fitting parts as a defensive fulcrum. Arteta came to Arsenal as a 
passing midfielder with an eye for goal, just as Ramsey’s streak at the start 
of last season came in a team that contained Mathieu Flamini and Jack Wilshere, 
and where he was allowed to play half and half, to defend and attack with 
relative freedom.

This season, if he has failed at times to stretch himself across a larger 
space, it should be remembered he is attempting to fill a hole that ought not 
to be there in the first place. The frustration for Arsenal supporters is that 
the most obvious omissions in the team are hardly insurmountable. Two signings 
would have done it: a competent centre-back to replace Thomas Vermaelen; and an 
athletic, specialist defensive midfielder. Had Arsenal signed either of these 
they may well have already qualified for the knockout stages. They might have 
had a (small) chance of topping the group. There might even have been a sense 
of progress, of trying to allow this team to play to its full potential, to 
challenge the best, to dream of going a little further.

Instead failures of recruitment are obscuring progress that has been made. The 
full range of Arsenal’s high-speed attacking combinations was on show in 
opening up that three-goal lead. This really should have been the story here. 
Instead it is simply the same old story. Arsenal will – almost certainly – once 
again reach the last 16 of theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>, a fine achievement in 
itself, albeit one that is being glossed by the failure to strive for a little 
more.

There is a wider issue here too. Arsenal have been helped greatly by the Uefa 
seeding system, which has for the last few years placed them in groups with 
only one genuine heavyweight. From next season this will change.Teams that win 
their domestic league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/10/uefa-champions-league-seedings-change>
 will instead be given top seeding. As a result simply existing lucratively 
within that top 16 group and sustaining the prestige of Champions League 
football in spring is about to become that much more difficult.

Back in August 1997, as Merson was heading for Middlesbrough, an article in 
the Independent concluded “The sale of Merson is Wenger’s first questionable 
decision as Arsenal manager”. At a time when simply standing still could soon 
mean taking a slight step down there is perhaps good reason to question him 
again.
 