
Aaron Swartz <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz> had always 
been ambiguous about marriage. But last December, having dated his girlfriend 
Taren Stinebrickner-Kauffman for 18 months, he seemed to be changing his mind.

"He said, sort of out of the blue, in the context of some conversation: 'Maybe 
we should get married?'" says Stinebrickner-Kauffman, sitting at a table by an 
open window in Heller's bakery in Washington DC, the humid breeze catching 
strands of her hair. "I was just so shocked. I asked: 'Where did that come 
from?' because he had never expressed anything positive about the idea of 
marriage before."

The 26-year-old Swartz was frequently described as a technological genius. At 
the age of 14, having dropped out of high school, Swartz helped to author the 
RSS web syndication specification that provided a standardised format to 
publish frequently updated works, such as blog entries, news headlines, audio 
and video content. At 19, he co-programmed the social news and entertainment 
websiteReddit <http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/reddit>, which was sold to 
Condé Nast in 2006 for an undisclosed sum thought to be between $10m and $20m. 
In 2008, he co-wrote theGuerilla Open Access Manifesto 
<http://archive.org/stream/GuerillaOpenAccessManifesto/Goamjuly2008_djvu.txt>, 
which called for activists to "liberate" information locked up by corporations 
or publishers. In 2010, at the age of 23, he co-foundedDemand Progress 
<http://www.demandprogress.org/>, an online advocacy group that successfully 
campaigned against internet censorship bills and attracted more than a million 
members. By 24, Swartz was a Harvard research fellow conducting studies on 
political corruption.

A fierce proponent of the open access movement – which promotes free and easy 
access to the world's knowledge online – he was also a social activist, guided 
by an abiding fascination with what he saw as the corrupting influence of big 
money on institutions and the fundamental imbalance of power structures in the 
modern age.

"I've never met anyone so single-minded about changing the world," says 
Stinebrickner-Kauffman.

He read voraciously. One of his friends emailed me a list of books Swartz had 
read over a recent three-month period: there were 24 in total, including Susan 
Sontag's journals,The Principle of Hope 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/philosophy/9780262522045/the-principle-of-hope>
 by Ernst Bloch and a book on how to decode advertisements. He took in 
information and analysed it at a rapid rate, thirsty for knowledge about how 
the world worked and how it could be made better. He was obsessed by fonts: 
Helvetica was one of his favourites and he would choose restaurants according 
to what font they used on the menu. People called him a genius. His girlfriend 
remembers being woken up by Swartz one morning because he was desperate to hear 
her views onBayesian statistics. 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_statistics>

"Some of our biggest fights were about the nature of consciousness," she says, 
laughing, "often in the elevator in our building. We were yelling at each other 
about consciousness while the other people in the elevator were about to walk 
their dogs."

When Swartz mentioned marriage, she didn't take it too seriously. They joked 
about what kind of wedding they would have. Swartz said he wanted "a Liz Lemon 
wedding", a reference to Tina Fey's character in the sitcom30 Rock 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/30-rock> who organised a last-minute 
marriage ceremony intended to be low-key and unsentimental. 
Stinebrickner-Kauffman wanted a big party, but Swartz was worried she would 
invite guests he didn't like. "And I said: 'We should talk about this after the 
trial is over,'" she recalls. "That kind of cut off the conversation."

"The trial" was a prospect that loomed large over their relationship. In July 
2011 – a month after they started dating – Swartz was indicted on multiple 
felony counts for downloading several million academic articles from a 
subscription database called JSTOR. It was unclear what Swartz intended to do 
with the articles. He might have wanted to make them openly available to online 
users, believing as he did in the fundamental principle of freedom of 
information. He might have intended to analyse the data. Or he might have 
simply wanted to show it could be done. Whatever the reason, Swartz did not 
expect his actions to attract the full retributive force of the judicial 
authorities.

And yet that is precisely what happened. The apparent zeal with which US 
attorney Carmen Ortiz and Massachusetts assistant US attorney Stephen Heymann 
pursued the case took many by surprise but this was a post-WikiLeaks world, 
where large, powerful organisations were struggling to cope with the threat 
posed by internet hackers who could infiltrate government records and shut down 
entire online systems at the click of a computer mouse.

Despite Swartz's alleged crime having no discernible victims or personal 
financial gain, and despite the fact that JSTOR declined to pursue charges 
after he returned the articles, Ortiz issued a press release at the time of his 
indictment stating: "Stealing is stealing, whether you use a computer command 
or a crowbar."

It seemed like it had been decided that an example should be made. Aaron 
Swartz was it. The prosecutors were unwilling to compromise on jail time. In 
January 2013, less than three months before the criminal trial was set to 
begin, Ortiz's office formally rejected a deal that would have kept Swartz out 
of prison.

Two days later, on 11 January, Swartz hanged himself with his belt in the 
Brooklyn apartment he shared with his girlfriend. There was no suicide note. 
Stinebrickner-Kauffman was the one who found him when she got back from work. 
He was wearing the same clothes she had seen him in when she left for the 
office that morning: a V-neck black T-shirt and brown corduroy trousers. He had 
his coat on. When she called the emergency services, she was screaming so hard 
that at first they couldn't hear the address.

In the five months that have elapsed since that day, Stinebrickner-Kauffman 
has thought a lot about why her boyfriend killed himself. In the immediate 
aftermath of his death, she found the strength to speak at his memorial 
service, decrying the "unfair prosecution [and]... deeply dysfunctional 
criminal justice system" that had brought such intolerable pressure to bear on 
the man she loved. She spoke to a handful of reporters, did what she could to 
ensure that message spread. Then, exhausted, she took compassionate leave from 
her job as executive director ofSumOfUs <http://sumofus.org/about/who-we-are/>, 
a global protest movement that seeks to hold corporations to account, and 
retreated to Australia for two months. For a while, she simply didn't want to 
talk any more. This is one of the first interviews she has done since returning 
to work.

She says now that it would be too easy to explain away Swartz's suicide by 
saying he was depressed.

"I've read a lot about depression and it just doesn't sound like Aaron." When 
she speaks, she chooses her words cautiously. Her face is pale and tense, her 
eyes tired. Her every gesture seems to carry within it a sadness that is all 
the more unbearable for being contained.

"He didn't have an absence of joy. He didn't have an absence of human emotion… 
I think he was in a lot of pain. A lot of it was to do with the case. I don't 
think he would have killed himself if it weren't for the case, put it that way.

"The thing that I regret is that I didn't know I should be looking for 
anything… In retrospect, there are clues I could have picked up on and I just 
didn't know to.

"I think he made a really dumb decision. But I also think I understand how it 
happened. The biggest problem with the decision is that it's permanent. Other 
dumb decisions, you can usually recover from. People make mistakes." She breaks 
off and starts to cry, lowering her head as her shoulders shake. "It hurt me," 
she says finally, her voice quiet, "but I don't think it was his intention to 
do so."

Swartz's death prompted an outpouring of grief. For many in the online 
community, he had been both hero and pioneer: a man who used his technological 
ability not to become a multimillionaire Silicon Valley entrepreneur but, 
instead, to try and make things better for others. He was the poster boy for 
internet freedom. His ex-girlfriend, Quinn Norton, a tech journalist, was 
quoted in theNew Yorker in March explaining the impact of Swartz's death. "If 
you look at 2011 to the present, there's an incredible emotional rollercoaster 
about internet freedom and the Arab revolutions," she said. "The internet was 
going to change everything and at the end of 2011 you had Occupy. And then 
everything just got destroyed. 2012 was the year, globally, for the heightening 
of censorship and the heightening of surveillance, and then Aaron killed 
himself. Aaron was so much the internet's boy, and that so much exemplified 
this machine crushing our hopes."

A remembrance website set up in the days after his death was inundated with 
tributes from all over the world – many from those who had never met him.

"I am so sorry about the tragic loss of Aaron," wrote a person called Ying Yan 
on 18 January. "Although I never met him… I admire and appreciate the great 
work he had accomplished. Like many, I will remember his tireless, selfless and 
astonishing effort to advance democracy. Like many, I will work to cherish that 
memory."

His friend Ben Wikler says that Swartz touched so many because he possessed "a 
staggering capacity for empathy, sometimes a crippling capacity".

His professional choices were guided by his conscience. In 2009, he chose to 
spend time as an intern in the congressional offices of Democrat Alan Grayson 
because he wanted to learn about how government operated before he set about 
the business of trying to improve it. Swartz had already compiled a report 
about the relation between candidates' wealth and their electoral success. 
During the period he spent in Grayson's office, he worked to help pass Obama's 
landmark healthcare reform. In 2010, he volunteered for the Democratic national 
convention in the runup to the midterm elections.

Unlike many social activists, who dismiss the political process as corrupt 
without seeking to understand what makes it so, Swartz was always seeking a 
deeper explanation from within the institutions he wanted to change.

Policy adviser and journalist Matt Stoller, who got him the placement with 
Grayson, was particularly struck by that fact.

"What kind of millionaire founder of a tech website chooses to spend time 
sitting in a congressional office to really understand the work flow?" Stoller 
asks, sitting in an office overlooking Capitol Hill. "No one. That doesn't 
happen… He was a basic technocratic liberal who thought that if you worked 
really hard, and approached a problem with openness and curiosity, then it was 
possible you could make life better for people."

Sometimes, this meant Swartz's standards were impossibly high. "He genuinely 
held other people as equally important as himself," says Wikler. "When he heard 
about injustice happening to someone else, it would be hugely taxing for him. 
He would feel a deep sense of obligation."

This obligation extended to a horror of imposing himself. Sometimes, this 
meant he acted strangely, as if he were lacking a necessary layer of protective 
skin. He felt uneasy dealing with taxi drivers or waiters, for instance, 
because he disliked the iniquitous distribution of power. He hated to feel a 
burden, even to his closest friends. When Wikler and his wife first invited 
Swartz to dinner, he didn't mention he suffered from ulcerative colitis, an 
inflammatory bowel disease, because he didn't want to bother anyone. "The bread 
was the only thing he could eat," Wikler recalls.

But it also meant that he felt obliged to try and change the world. As an 
example of this moral imperative, Wikler cites a conversation he had with 
Swartz four years ago about the extent of an individual's ethical duty. They 
began discussing Thomas Keneally's bookSchindler's Ark 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780340936290/schindlers-ark>
, which tells the story of a German industrialist who saves the lives of more 
than 1,000 Polish Jews during the Holocaust. In the book and the subsequent 
film adaptation (asSchindler's List), Schindler is tormented by the fact that 
he didn't do enough and could have sold his car to save more people.

In August 2009, Swartz sent an email to Wikler. "So let's take the case we're 
both in, where we spend our days on social justice work and have a nagging 
voice at the back of our heads when we go to the movies," he wrote. "I find the 
guilt and the passion pretty much indistinguishable. Both want me to spend more 
time on my work, since that's what I find fulfilling and important. And while I 
don't usually live by these principles (obviously, I still go see movies and 
watch TV), I'm much happier when I do… So I guess I don't see the trade-off. 
Schindler should have sold the car: he would have saved lives and been happier 
too."

His close friend Alec Resnick saw something similar at work. "Disengagement 
was never his response," he says. "Aaron saw things as systems that needed to 
be tweaked." Was he ever contented? "Never."

Aaron Swartz was born in 1986, two years after the US government passed the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, which was later used to indict him. At the age of 
three, he taught himself to read. His father, Robert, a computer consultant, 
remembers Swartz reading aloud a note stuck to the refrigerator in the family 
home in Highland Park, a wealthy suburb some 20 miles north of Chicago, much to 
the astonishment of his mother.

"He certainly seemed very bright," says Robert Swartz, speaking over the 
phone. "We realised when he was a few years old he was progressing on an 
intellectual level faster than his friends."

The eldest of three brothers, Swartz was perpetually curious and fascinated by 
computers and puzzles from an early age. As a teenager, he dropped out of high 
school because he was bored by it. At the time, he wrote a blog post about his 
disenchantment with organised education: "Seriously, who really cares how long 
the Nile river is, or who was the first to discover cheese?" he typed. "How is 
memorising that ever going to help anyone?"
 Taren Stinebrickner-Kauffman, Aaron Swartz's partner, speaks during his 
memorial service. Photograph: Mary Altaffer/AP 
His parents were supportive but insisted he carried on taking classes at a 
local community school. Meanwhile, Swartz's social life began to thrive online. 
He became a talented software engineer and attended conferences with 
like-minded computer programmers, many of whom were shocked to discover that 
the sophisticated coder they'd met online was actually a 14-year-old geek 
wearing a T-shirt three sizes too big for him.

Later, he went to Stanford University. Again, he found the rules pointless and 
stifling and he dropped out after a year to build a website that would help 
people build data-driven, content-rich websites. The website failed but his 
original investor suggested he merge it with a start-up called Reddit, which he 
did in 2005, contributing his considerable programming skills to streamlining 
the site.

A year later, Reddit was attracting millions of users each month and was 
acquired by Condé Nast. For a brief time, Swartz worked atWired magazine in San 
Francisco as part of the buyout deal but he disliked the restrictions of office 
life and soon left for Cambridge, Massachusetts, where he felt most at home, 
partly because of the thriving hacking community based around the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology.

MIT had a long and noble history of celebrating the anarchic and innovative 
cult of the hacker. In the early days of internet research when the 
university's few computers were kept in locked rooms, MIT hackers used to pick 
locks or crawl through ceiling vents in order to gain access. Their view, as 
espoused by the internet's founder Tim Berners-Lee, was that the internet was 
"for everyone".

This chimed with Swartz's personal philosophy, outlined in the Guerilla Open 
Access Manifesto. "Information is power," it read. "But like all power, there 
are those who want to keep it for themselves... Those with access to these 
resources... have a duty to share it with the world."

Swartz had already experimented with making large stashes of public documents 
available online without charge and on 24 September 2010, he bought an Acer 
laptop and started to download academic journals from the JSTOR database. When 
the network detected something was amiss, Swartz's IP address was blocked. He 
then wired a hard drive directly into the MIT network and was filmed by a 
surveillance camera apparently attempting to retrieve his laptop from a 
university building. On 6 January 2011, Swartz was arrested.

Was he committing a crime? While authorised users are theoretically allowed to 
download as much as possible from JSTOR, this is only after paying an annual 
subscription fee – major institutions pay up to $50,000 for the privilege. Its 
terms of service also prohibit the use of programs to aid bulk downloading.

There was little doubt that what Swartz was doing was wrong, but his actions 
didn't seem to be malevolent or worthy of a 35-year jail term. His defence 
lawyer, Elliot Peters, later described the material Swartz downloaded as "a 
bunch of, like, the 1942 edition of theJournal of Botany!"

Swartz's father remains quietly furious about the way the subsequent 
prosecution was handled. "I think they saw this as a case where they could show 
that they were tough on cybercrime… They were vindictive, cruel and they 
destroyed Aaron."

Swartz remained intensely private about the investigation, partly because he 
didn't want to incriminate those close to him in case they were subpoenaed. As 
a result, he never explained what his motivation had been for downloading the 
documents. But shortly after his arrest, Swartz agreed to return the documents 
to JSTOR, which considered the case closed. MIT, however, continued to 
co-operate with the prosecution – an action that many consider a profound 
betrayal.

"MIT, I think, has become a bureaucracy fundamentally inimical to 
technological innovation," says Stinebrickner-Kauffman. "They're undergoing a 
struggle for the heart and soul of the institution, and Aaron got lost in the 
middle."

Swartz's arrest was the start of a two-year battle, during which he existed in 
a near-constant state of stress and nervous tension.

"We had a pretty intense ritual of renting a Zipcar, putting all our 
electronic devices outside of the car, and sitting in it with the radio turned 
up because he was concerned about people listening in," says Alec Resnick. "I 
asked Aaron: 'Do you think this is totally insane?' He gave me a bunch of 
reasons why it wasn't."

Swartz and Stinebrickner-Kauffman started dating in the midst of all this and 
moved to New York in November 2011. He had a lot on his plate: during the first 
half of 2012 Swartz's mother was seriously ill after a routine operation left 
her in a coma. But he wasn't given to sharing how he was feeling and, at first, 
Stinebrickner-Kauffman didn't think the allegations against him sounded 
particularly serious. It was only as the case dragged on – it took a year 
before he gained access to the evidence against him and another year before it 
came to trial – that she realised the authorities were intent on pursuing him. 
They started to discuss the possibility of Swartz going to prison.

"My mother is a criminal justice activist so prison was not weird to me," she 
says. "I was actually trying to make a serious effort to normalise [the idea] 
of prison for him… So I would say: 'You can write the book you always wanted to 
finish.'"

Yet Swartz remained troubled by the prospect. He had thought he might go into 
politics and was worried about the impact a felony charge might have on his 
future. Physically, too, he was unsure how he would cope – he was small in 
stature (an inch shorter than his girlfriend) and fragile in other ways too. In 
certain respects, he was still something of an innocent – he loved spending 
time with children, says Stinebrickner-Kauffman, "because he said they hadn't 
yet learned how to lie". For a person who had never thrived in institutions 
governed by rules he didn't agree with, jail must have seemed a particularly 
horrifying prospect. "But beyond all that," his girlfriend says, "he just 
really thought he was innocent."

Intensely private to the last, Swartz barely discussed the case with anyone 
other than his father, who was helping with the legal process.

"I had a clear sense of how devastating this was to him," says Robert Swartz. 
"Because of the financial cost, because of the uncertainty of the penalties, 
because of how it changed his life and the effect it had on his relationships. 
All of those things were very hard for him."

In the weeks leading up to his death, Swartz had been concerned about how to 
raise funds for the continuing legal process. He came from a comfortable 
background, but by this stage his finances were running low. The thought of 
asking his friends for help was agonising: he had a near pathological antipathy 
towards the idea of being a nuisance. In their Brooklyn apartment, 
Stinebrickner-Kauffman would try "to shepherd him emotionally" and come up with 
strategies that would make it more bearable.

"I would say: 'So what if you could fundraise by lying in bed with the blinds 
down, making a phone call? I'll be on the phone too… ' We talked a lot about 
how to make it palatable."

For all the pressure he was under, Swartz did not seem particularly depressed. 
The couple had enjoyed a skiing holiday in Vermont in early 2013. The night 
before he killed himself, he seemed in high spirits and insisted they go to a 
local bar called Spitzer's Corner on the Lower East Side, where they shared a 
burger and a grilled cheese sandwich. Looking back, Stinebrickner-Kauffman is 
tormented by the thought that there were signs she should have picked up on. 
"That said, I think he probably intentionally hid things from me."

His friends agree that Swartz was someone who held no illusions, who was aware 
of the world's fundamental injustices and who wanted to tackle them rather than 
pretend they didn't exist. They say that this outlook occasionally took him to 
"dark places" and "a negative frame of mind". He wrote a blog post once about 
the necessity of "leaning into the pain". One of Swartz's favourite novels was
Infinite Jest 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780349121086/infinite-jest> 
by the author David Foster Wallace, who committed suicide by hanging in 2008, 
and he had previously discussed suicide with Resnick.

"We talked about it in the abstract a couple of years ago as a philosophical 
question and whether it ever made sense," Resnick says now. "We came to the 
conclusion that it cuts short the ability to do good work."

And yet, on Friday 11 January, Aaron Swartz decided to do just that. Five days 
after his death, US attorney Carmen Ortiz issued a statement expressing 
sympathy but defending the conduct of her office. The prosecutors, she said, 
"took on the difficult task of enforcing a law they had taken an oath to uphold 
and did so reasonably". Ortiz went on to state that because Swartz's actions 
had not been motivated by financial gain, her office had viewed "six months in 
a low-security setting" as "an appropriate sentence".

In the time that has elapsed since, Swartz's parents have received no personal 
communication from Ortiz's office. There are certain words that come up 
repeatedly when his friends and family discuss the investigation. 
"Reprehensible" is one. "Heinous" is another. Ben Wikler calls it "unspeakable".

"Aaron wasn't built for a world of red lines and strict rules," Wikler says. 
"He moved in and out of institutions, he didn't fit into boxes and that was OK 
be cause he was also obsessed with never hurting anyone. He was monk-like. And 
the prosecution, all the way through, showed no hint of remorse or recognition 
of what might have been wrong, even in his death. There's just something wrong 
with a system where people have power to do that to someone like Aaron."

There is a particular tragedy, too, in realising that Aaron Swartz was one of 
the few people equipped with the skills and idealism to want to change that 
system for the better. In the end, says Stinebrickner-Kauffman, there is no 
explanation that could possibly make sense of his suicide. "He just… " she 
breaks off, searching for the right words. "It was just too hard." She crosses 
her arms loosely on the table. The sentence floats between us. It seems like 
the only thing there is left to say.

• This article was changed on 3 June 2013. The standfirst said that Swartz had 
hacked into JSTOR - in fact, he had access but wanted to make the documents 
available to a wider audience. This has been amended to reflect this.
 