
It was fitting that a memorial service held Saturday for computer freedom 
activistAaron Swartz <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz>, who 
killed himself on January 11 as he faced hacking charges, was open to all.

In a spacious meeting room in the heart of New York's East Village 
neighbourhood, friends, fellow activists and supporters of 26-year-old Swartz 
gathered to recount fond memories mixed with angry calls for justice and a 
continuation of the fights that Swartz dedicated his life to.

Swartz's girlfriend, Taren Stinebrickner-Kauffman, was firm in her belief that 
Swartz's death had been caused by a prosecution system that had threatened him 
with up to 30 years in jail for hacking an online collection of academic 
journals linked to MIT with the intent of releasing millions of research papers 
on to the internet.

She said the prospect of a trial had dominated their life together and that 
prosecutors in the case should be held accountable for a tragedy that has 
shocked the tech community worldwide. "He faced a deeply dysfunctional criminal 
justice system," she said, and blamed a recent delay as a final straw. "He was 
so scared, so desperate and so tormented, and more than anything else just so 
weary, he could not take it another day," she said.

Stinebrickner-Kauffmann asked the packed crowd of several hundred inside the 
famed Cooper Union building's Great Hall – a scene of major civil rights and 
anti-slavery speeches in the past – to fight on for internet freedom and win 
justice for Swartz. Her anger was matched by that of Roy Singham, a close 
collaborator with Swartz who founded the Freedom to Connect initiative.

In a fiery and emotional speech that earned a rousing standing ovation, 
Singham slammed the case against Swartz. "This was not suicide. It was murder 
by intimidation, bullying and torment," he said. "We must demand accountability 
for those who tormented Aaron." He cast Swartz as the latest in a long line of 
heroic activists trying to change a powerful and entrenched system. "He was, in 
my humble opinion, one of the true extraordinary revolutionaries that this 
country has produced," he said.

The actions that brought the case against Swartz were just part of a young 
life spent using his undoubted computer genius in the cause of internet freedom 
and trying to make as much information accessible to all as possible. He helped 
build theReddit <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/reddit> online 
community and had been an instrumental voice in defeating legislative efforts 
aimed at extending control over the internet.

But Swartz was also troubled by a long struggle with depressive moods. The US 
attorney for Massachusetts, Carmen Ortiz, who brought the case, has disputed 
claims that her office was too zealous. "This office's conduct was appropriate 
in bringing and handling this case. The career prosecutors handling this matter 
took on the difficult task of enforcing a law they had taken an oath to uphold, 
and did so reasonably," she said in a statement last week. It has also emerged 
that Swartz had been offered a plea bargain for a six-month sentence.

But during the moving memorial service, during which numerous speakers paid 
tribute to their friend and a video of a speech by Swartz was played, there was 
also a strong focus on the happy side of Swartz's life. Amid much laughter, a 
picture emerged of an intensely driven young man who had a playful side that 
won immense loyalty from friends and activists all over the world.

"Aaron would have loved to have been here," Stinebrickner-Kaufmann said. His 
longtime friend Ben Wikler paid tribute to Swartz's personality. "What I found 
incredible about Aaron was not only his dedication and his brilliance, but also 
how much fun he was," he said.

Another speaker, Holden Karnofksy, who heads the GiveWell charity industry 
group, remembered long walks through Brooklyn's streets with Swartz intensely 
debating everything from Victorian sexuality to the reliability of GDO figures.

But perhaps the most poignant vignette, especially in the wake of the 
outpouring of global emotion among hackers and internet professionals, came 
from journalist Quinn Norton, who had been a close confidant of Swartz's. It 
seemed to symbolise the link between his private and public lives. She 
described a camping trip in northern California in which the two had tried and 
failed to light a camp fire in the face of driving rain. But, upon later 
returning to the pile of wood they thought their sparks had failed to ignite, 
they discovered it had become a roaring blaze. Fighting back the tears, she 
described the scene. "It was strong enough to stay lit in the rain," she said.
 