
After the apparently radical notion of “fairness” ambushed its first budget, 
the Abbott government seemed to go through four stages of grief.

First came outrage. How could anyone question the means it had chosen to 
achieve a goal as undeniably worthy as “budget repair”. Was no one thinking of 
the kiddies?

Labor, the prime minister argued, had “helped to burden everyone … with 
commonwealth debt heading for $25,000 … What’s fair about that? What’s fair 
about this generation dumping our burdens on our children and grandchildren? If 
we are going to have intergenerational fairness, we’ve got to get spending 
under control; we have to get debt and deficit under control. That’s why this 
budget is a fundamentally fair measure.”

Then came explanation. Of course poor people were hit hardest, because they 
were the ones governments spent money on. Tax “expenditures” – ie loopholes – 
weren’t fair targets for savings, according to this argument.


“Inevitably government spending disproportionately benefits low- and 
middle-income earners and if you have got to squeeze government spending – as 
we have had to, to get the deficit under control – if you have got to squeeze 
government spending, inevitably it is going to impact on the people who most 
immediately benefit from it,” Abbott explained.


And then when those arguments didn’t wash – either in the electorate or the 
Senate – came tacit acceptance. It had been sold badly and the electorate had 
been insufficiently prepared for the pain.


Now commentators – mostly the ones who went along with explanations one and 
two – are decrying the possibility that we have reached a fourth, and 
tragically terminal stage, “stalemate” or “reform fatigue”, an interesting 
diagnosis given how little has actually happened. They worry the government has 
gone soft, that the need for both fiscal and political caution has sapped its 
resolve, that Tony Abbott’s promise that household budgets will not be hurt in 
the interests of repairing the national budget means nothing can or will be 
done to reduce government spending or to rein in the deficit.


But perhaps it’s time to reassess two of the assumptions underlying much of 
this well-rehearsed “debate”.


First, the argument that balanced budgets and economic growth inevitably lead 
to a fairer society because “all boats rise on a rising tide”. In fact,
according to a Committee for Economic Development of Australia report 
<http://www.ceda.com.au/research-and-policy/policy-priorities/disadvantage>
released this week, more than one million Australians have not risen with the 
rising tide of 24 years of continuous economic growth, but have been left 
behind in lives of poverty and social exclusion.


The report documents intergenerational poverty and disadvantage and explains 
why the simplistic assertion that a growing economy offers all Australians the 
fairest thing of all – a job – doesn’t always work out in practice. And the 
causes of poverty it identifies make some spending cuts look particularly 
short-sighted and stupid – like abandoning the additional spending for 
disadvantaged schools that the Gonski review said was essential to prevent them 
from slipping even further below national standards.


The second assumption that deserves scrutiny is that the fairness agenda is 
somehow incompatible with economic growth – and the goal of a budget to reach 
surplus – because such “reform” necessarily requires across-the-board 
government spending cuts.


The Center for American Progress has been challenging this idea 
<https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/economy/report/2015/01/15/104266/report-of-the-commission-on-inclusive-prosperity/>
 for a while, pointing out that harsh cuts and low wages in many developed 
countries have actually hollowed out the middle class and deprived economies of 
the most vital ingredient for growth – willing consumers. It asserts that a 
level of fairness is in fact essential for continued economic growth.


Australia has done much better than most countries to date in ensuring that 
the benefits of growth are shared rather than concentrated with the wealthiest, 
but there’s no reason to assume that different policies would not produce 
similar results here, and this week Labor’s thinktank,the Chifley Research 
Centre, has launched an “inclusive prosperity commission” 
<http://www.chifley.org.au/federal-labors-think-tank-launches-inclusive-prosperity-commission/>
 to consider the links between equity and growth in an Australian context.


This assumes, of course, that politicians want to break the much-bemoaned 
stalemate and this week makes one wonder about that.


The treasurer, Joe Hockey, had suggested he would consider cutting 
superannuation tax concessions, but when Labor put forward a policy idea to do 
that, Tony Abbott said it was just another Labor plan to raise tax. A 
suggestion from Labor’s shadow treasurer,Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, that he was open to the idea 
of changes to negative gearing was given similarly short shrift.


But Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, for one, insists 
we should not be giving up on “reform” just yet.

In an interview during a trip to outback Queensland this week he noted that 
“there are some very distinguished commentators who say the reforming era is 
over and we are now left with just a shallow populism where politicians will 
just kick the can along the road and avoid making tough decisions and just go 
for the cheap populist shot”.

But he begged to differ.


“I think that is far too pessimistic. I think there is still opportunity for 
reform, but we have to explain it, and I think we are now having a serious 
debate about budgetary problems, about where growth is going to come from with 
the downturn in the commodities market … this is the art of putting together 
the budget. Getting the mix right is critical.


“The budget message has to be one of stronger growth and greater 
competitiveness, and adjustments, whether to tax breaks on super, or to 
benefits, they have to be done in a way that is seen to be responsible and fair 
and that will pass the pub test … you want to get to the point where people say 
‘yep, I understand you need to make tough decisions and yep you’ve broadly got 
it right, you’re in the right ballpark’. If you get to that point you get the 
right sort of community consensus.”


It’s always easier to discuss the political “art” of a budget in abstract 
rather than detail, but if fairness was viewed as a way of boosting growth 
rather than hindering “reform”, the stalemate might be much easier to break.
 