
Oil and gas services group Abbot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/abbotgroup> has been kicked out of the 
new FTSE4Good index of socially responsible investment for failing to meet 
human rights and stakeholder criteria.

Heywood Williams, the building materials group, has also been thrown out for 
failing to meet stakeholder criteria while Peterhouse, a services company, has 
been removed.

But 14 newcomers have pushed their way on to the list of those meeting social 
corporate responsibility [CSR] standards, including National Grid, Corus and 
Tate & Lyle.

A further 51 groups worldwide have opened discussions with the FTSE4Good 
organisers and Eiris, the consultancy which draws up the indices.

The list was established just over 12 months ago and the organisers at the 
stock exchange yesterday boasted it had gained "widespread acceptance as a 
global standard for SRI investment".

Abbot, of Aberdeen, provides drilling and other services to the energy world. 
It failed to meet any of three criteria drawn up the FTSE4Good index.

This requires a policy statement specifically on human rights which goes 
beyond employee rights or a commitment to at least two of the International 
Labour Organisation's core standards for employees globally.

Oil and gas groups are considered "high impact companies" because they are 
often involved in countries with repressive regimes.

National Grid won entry to the index for being "clear of exclusions" while 
Corus and Tate & Lyle now meet environmental criteria. Others included for the 
first time are IMI, Alfred McAlpine and Telewest.

Mark Makepeace, chief executive of FTSE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> Group, said it had been a good 12 
months. "In the first year of the FTSE4Good series, the indices have had a 
significant impact on the debate surrounding CSR.

"We hope that all debate in this area will go towards encouraging companies to 
disclose more and more information on CSR, leading towards more consistency and 
transparency", he said.
 