
Senior academics have accused the Abbott government of “shooting the 
messenger” when it attacked modelling that found the budget hit poorest 
families the hardest, and have produced a new analysis “broadly confirming” the 
earlier conclusions.

Professor Peter Whiteford and Daniel Nethery from the Australian National 
University said on Monday their analysis “broadly agreed” with modelling from 
the National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling (Natsem) released last 
week.

The academics, from the Crawford School of public policy, looked at the impact 
of the family tax benefit changes on single income and two income families. In 
both cases the hardest hit were families not in the workforce with oldest 
children, who the government wants to see resume paid work.

But some working families with younger children also lost significant amounts 
- single and dual income families with a three year old, and earning $40,000 a 
year were almost $10 a week worse off, and earning $60,000 were more than $20 a 
week behind. On the same income brackets families with two small children, aged 
3 and 6, were worse off by a larger margin each week.

In its modelling, Natsem found families with incomes of up to $47,000 with 
children will lose 7.1% of total disposable income by 2018-19 while the most 
well off families, with incomes of $119,000 and over, will be slightly ahead.

But last week the prime minister rejected Natsem’s work out of hand because it 
did not include the so-called “second-round” or flow-on effects of the 
government’s policies, for example their intention of getting more Australians 
into the workforce.

Tony Abbott said this omission meant the modelling was “a fraudulent 
misrepresentation” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/27/abbott-and-hockey-at-odds-over-labors-economic-modelling-of-budget-impacts>
 of the government’s budget because returning people to work was “the whole 
point of the policy measures”. He said the Labor party had “used and abused” 
the modelling firm for political purposes, after Labor initially released only 
some of the Natsem findings.

But in an article on the Conversation website 
<http://theconversation.com/looking-inside-the-sausage-machine-the-budget-is-still-unfair-42407>
, the ANU academics say it is “highly unlikely” that any positive second round 
effects “will offset the losses in disposable income experienced by many 
families with children” – and suggest the government was “shooting the 
messenger” because Natsem had reached a conclusion the coalition did not like.

“Governments should welcome the type of evidence-based policy analysis 
exemplified by Natsem’s analysis, and idelly provide it themselves. It focuses 
the debate on concrete questions of how policy changes affect people’s lives. 
To criticise the straightforward modelling approach because it yields the 
‘wrong’ answer smacks of shooting the messenger,” they wrote.

The academics said the new childcare package – a centrepiece of the budget – 
was progressive and increased assistance for low and middle income families the 
most. They did not look at the net effect of the new childcare assistance and 
the family tax benefit cuts, as Natsem did.

But they said looking at the overall cost of the packages on childcare 
assistance and family tax cuts, it became clear “the total volume of assistance 
for families is going down.”

“To assess the overall household impact of the budget, it is necessary to 
balance who wins from the generally progressive child care assistance proposals 
versus who loses from last year’s and the new savings proposals,” they said.
 