
Mike Leigh writer/director

Of course I recognise the enduring popularity of Abigail's Party. It still 
hits a nerve about the way we live. It's real even though it's apparently a 
heightened and comic play. It's a reflection of the realities of how we live on 
a several different levels. It's about aspirationalism and materialism, love 
and relationships. Like much of my work, it's about the disease I call "the 
done thing" – basically, keeping up with the Joneses. It's actually quite a 
complex play. People may not analyse its complexity but it's so popular 
precisely for that reason.

I feel fine about it being my most famous work in this country because it's 
nice to have a work that's so popular, and at the time it brought my 
film-making to the wider public. On the other hand I do feel I've done better 
and more profound pieces of work, be it Naked, Vera Drake or Secrets & Lies. I 
must always make a distinction between the original HampsteadTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> play, which I was very pleased 
with, and the later television version, which is still the play but with some 
compromises made for the BBC. It is a mess technically.

I appreciate it when people say it has influenced them. The evidence is that 
its influence is ongoing though: I know through the grapevine that young people 
watch it all the time and continue to get it. People don't particularly see it 
as a period piece although, 32 years after it was broadcast on the BBC, it is a 
period piece.

Mike Leigh was talking to Amy Raphael

Alison Steadman 

Actress

'It gradually dawned on us that we'd done something special'

We had a tremendous amount of fun creating Abigail's Party but we had no idea 
how popular it would be. I loved getting my character together, coming home and 
rummaging around for a costume, doing research at the make-up counters in 
Selfridges. I found the first improvisation quite easy, whereas you often feel 
awkward at the start, and I remember thinking, "I've got something here." I 
think it dawned on us gradually that we'd done something a bit special. 
Thinking about it now still makes me laugh. I even got anEvening Standard 
award, which was very exciting. 

We filmed it over four days in the studio, and on the last night the chief 
cameraman came over to me, shook my hand and said, "Thank you very much, 
Alison. I've loved this show, I've loved watching your performance." I've never 
forgotten that. Cameramen back then never talked like that to actors. 

As the years have gone by, the impact has been extraordinary. I once did a 
series with Jennifer Saunders, and at the wrap party she said: "Do you realise 
what an influence you were on me and loads of other people?" And I had no idea. 
Thirty- two years after it went out, people still approach me, particularly 
young people, and say, "Oh wow, I've just seenAbigail's Party" or "I'm studying 
it for A-level."

I recently went for a coffee on Hampstead Heath and the lady sitting next to 
me said, "Oh my God you'reAlison Steadman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alison-steadman>." She was in her 
mid-thirties, very bubbly, and she said, "Me and my friends have Abigail's 
Parties all the time, all girls, we get all the drinks in, we read it and we 
have a laugh, it's a smashing night. Beverly of course is the favourite part to 
play but we're fair and we swap around." I was amazed. I'd heard of gay men 
doing that but not women.

The first few years after it went out I kept wishing people would stop talking 
about it. Nothing would wipe away Beverly. I got so many offers of parts which 
were basically Beverly with knobs on. But I didn't want to cheapen it, I was so 
proud of that piece of work. I'm playing Pam inGavin and Stacey now, and people 
say "Oooh she's a little bit Beverly." But there isn't a trace of her actual 
character in Pam, people just say that because she's from Essex and they hear 
me doing the accent. If anything has seemed "a bit Beverly", it's pure 
coincidence, or because there are only so many things I can do as an actress!

Tony Jordan screenwriter and producer

'I've been to parties like that. I've met Beverly 100 times' 

No one's even come close to critiquing the class system as well as Mike Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mikeleigh> in Abigail's Party. We all tried 
to. I like to think that I did in little snatches with shows likeEastEnders.

I must've been 20 when it was on TV. I was coming out of adolescence, my spots 
were going, and I'd just bought my first place. I was starting to wonder how I 
was going to fit in, worrying about social niceties, so it was like a horror 
film for me.

It's all about the middle-class system: Susan is upper-middle-class, Beverly 
and Laurence are the real middle class, and then Tony and Angela are the lower 
middle, they're desperately trying to fit  in. But you can see their faces, 
they're thinking: "Shit, is this really what we've been aspiring to?"

The characterisation is so clever that everybody I know who's middle-class I 
can put into one of those camps. I've been to some of those parties, I've met 
Beverly and every other character a hundred times. For the past 30 years I've 
been dying for one of them to say to me: "Tone, do you want a little cheesy 
pineapple?" 

Abigail's Party has absolutely informed what I do as a writer. Whenever I 
approach character it pops into my head because of the standard of 
characterisation. It's clearly influenced TV generally too. If you look at the 
sitcoms that followed:Ever Decreasing Circles, Absolutely Fabulous, even the 
awkwardness of Basil Fawlty [inFawlty Towers] whenever he came into contact 
with anybody in authority. All those shows tap into the same thing, us aspiring 
to better ourselves, to be part of a fictitious elite. People have more today 
but I think we're just the same as back then. I go to dinner parties now where 
they've got square plates, and instead of just giving you your dinner, it's 
piled in a three-foot tower. 

It's also a really simple story. Yes, someone dies – but aliens don't land on 
the back lawn, Abigail isn't raped, murdered and left in the wheelie bin. The 
basic conflict is that Beverly's into Demis Roussos and kitsch erotica 
paintings, and Laurence is into Beethoven, Van Gogh and Lowry. Sometimes it's 
good to be reminded of that as a writer, that you don't have to have 
helicopters and explosions if your characters are interesting enough. I always 
useAbigail's Party as a reference point when I've got people round the story 
table getting carried away.

Julia Davis 

Comedy writer and performer

'I'd never seen a strong female character leading a piece'

It's taken me three series of working on Gavin and Stacey to not be totally in 
awe of Alison Steadman. She's absolutely lovely but I've watchedAbigail's Party 
so many times and I just couldn't stop thinking, "It's her from Abigail's 
Party." She's had such an influence on me. 

I was in my 20s when I first saw it. I'd seen strong female characters like 
Margot inThe Good Life but I think it was the first time I'd seen a woman 
leading a whole piece and being hilariously funny. Before then female roles on 
TV seemed to be either posh women in comedies or kitchen-sink characters, 
whereas Beverly was an aspirational suburban character who Alison clearly loved 
playing. Because it's improvised it's much more layered than scripted comedy, 
it's got that overlapping feel of real conversation.

When someone pointed out that Nighty Night seemed influenced by Abigail's Party
 I felt almost bad – it wasn't conscious. Beverly's not as hideous as Jill in 
Nighty Night but she's relentless and domineering. Moments like when she tells 
Ang how to put her lipstick on, that cruelty, that sense of one woman being 
overbearing to another, that's definitely my sense of humour. Then there's the 
physical look of the play, the size of Beverly against her husband, the fact 
Ang is really small. I love all the characters and I'm endlessly fascinated by 
the dynamics between couples generally. I'd happily watch it again and again.

Richard Eyre, 

TV, film and theatre director

'In another 25 years, people will still find it funny and true'

Abigail's Party has certainly become a classic because it transcends its 
period and its social milieu. I first saw it at Hampstead Theatre and I thought 
it was incredibly funny. It seemed a kind of emblem of, and a satire on, the 
Thatcherite aspiration that would late sweep the country. I think it's had an 
influence on TV comedy since by licensing an extreme kind of social satire.  I 
can imagine it being revived in another 25 years and people still finding it 
funny and true.

Arabella Weir

Comedian, actress and author

'I remember thinking: I'm seeing something really original'

As Beverly, Alison Steadman blazed a trail for character comedy. Anybody 
playing a character in a sketch show or a series likeThe Office owes something 
to her. It's hard for people to understand today, but back whenAbigail's Party 
came out we just didn't have character comedy like we do now. There were no 
David Brents.

Alison created a pretty extreme character with a very distinct physicality and 
made her believable, which is what we went on to do withThe Fast Show. To me 
her performance is in the tradition of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton. She 
made these brave, bold moves that could've backfired terribly and made you 
think, "what is she doing? What's with the stupid shoulders and that silly 
voice?" Obviously everyone in the show is absolutely brilliant, otherwise 
Beverly would have been an embarrassing caricature. But when you're sharing the 
limelight with a David Brent or a Beverly, how do you get a look in?

I was at drama school when I first saw it on TV and I remember thinking, 
"blimey, I'm seeing something really original", but I didn't know it would 
inform my career as much as it did. We didAbigail's Party at drama school for 
the rest of time, everybody did, we couldn't get enough of lines like "do you 
like a little bit of Demis Roussos?"

That provincial, aspirational bourgeoisie depicted in Abigail's Party was very 
recognisable at the time. And yet you could probably nail our class system 
today by doing almost exactly the same production with different ways of 
denoting naffness. Whereas my generation thought posh was about how many books 
you'd read, these days people think rich equals posh. If you've got an enormous 
4x4, a Louis Vuitton handbag and a facelift, you're posh. The Beckhams would 
probably be the King and Queen ofAbigail's Party's world today. 

Simon Stephens 

Playwright

'It's almost like TV's Waiting for Godot. It affected everything'

Alison Steadman's Beverly is the defining performance of 70s drama, but when I 
think about the play it's Tony and Sue that stick in my mind. John Salthouse 
gives a terrific performance as Tony with his brooding violence. The way 
Harriet Reynolds as Sue accesses fear and manages to remain comical is 
extraordinary. I guess as a dramatist I'm interested in the stillness and 
latent nature of violence, and I think Tony and Sue released that with real 
force.

The world of Abigail's Party was the backdrop to my childhood. I have distinct 
memories of my parents having friends around for drinks parties. Us Brits are 
such an alcoholic nation, and I think Mike Leigh cuts to the quick of that in
Abigail's Party. The sheer volume of alcohol they all drink is incredible.

It's one of those plays that's so all-pervasive, it's hard to identify 
specific influences it's had. It's almost like television'sWaiting for Godot, 
it affected everything. Every play written sinceWaiting for Godot was inspired 
by it, and to an extent what Mike Leigh did for the televisual form was 
similarly influential. The way he looked at character so forensically; his 
ability to access horror, tragedy and fear under the guise of comedy; and then 
releasing those big Greek themes in a suburban setting. Seeing that as an 
aspiring stage- and screenwriter at university in my 20s was incredibly 
inspirational. I'd love to be able to write something likeAbigail's Party today 
and not have a script editor pester me about it having an apparent absence of 
action.

David Aukin 

head of drama at production company Mentorn

'As long as there is theatre, people will go on performing it'

Abigail's Party must be one of the most watched dramas on television ever but 
it only got on television because something else collapsed and there was a hole 
in the schedule. It was such a cheapy for the BBC too: it's almost exactly the 
Hampstead Theatre production, even the same set. Yet it's influenced a whole 
generation of comedy writers and performers. 

Michael Rudman and I were running Hampstead Theatre at the time [Aukin was 
executive director] and we approached Mike Leigh about doing a show there. I 
think he very much took on board the venue in deciding what sort of play he 
wanted to do; the north London location, the very small space. 

It's a classic. It's about mothers and children; husbands and wives. Our 
externals may change but the internal dynamics of our relationships remain the 
same for ever. As long as there is theatre, people will go on performing it. 
Like all classics it has a truth about it which will survive for all time.

Melvyn Bragg

Author and broadcaster

'Alison Steadman managed to hit a national nerve' 

There was something unmistakably fresh about Abigail's Party when it opened at 
Hampstead Theatre. It seemed to be part of a surge which goes all the way from 
improvisation to Alan Ayckbourn. It also has a seriously great central 
performance by Alison Steadman. She managed to create not only a character but 
a slice of society, maybe even a slice of English life going back a few 
centuries. She hit a real national nerve.

Create your own Abigail's Party, with Euan Ferguson

The cast Some have been known to love Abigail's Party so much that they 
attempt to recreate the whole play, right down to the nuts and the nibbles. 
It's a task made increasingly hard by the passage of time and hugely changing 
social circumstances, not least of which is finding five friends who smoke.

Music The play is not so much about people with "bad taste"; it's about 
tension between couples who share their lives but can never share a smidgeon of 
taste, and the power and compromise involved. So the battle between Beverly and 
Laurence is nominally over Demis Roussos vs the "light classical" of James 
Galway, and both could easily be found to play on iTunes, but a literal 
recreation wouldn't work: they have had their day. Perhaps the nearest you 
would get to that musical tension today would be between Susan Boyle's 
forthcoming Christmas album and Pachelbel'sCanon: but, crucially, both being 
advocatedwithout irony.

Food etc The "cheesy-pineapply ones" are beyond simple, as are peanuts, and 
the drinks are straightforward. The tricky bit is the olives, used early on in 
the play to establish Laurence's European pretensions and Beverly's penile 
fixation. Today it's hard to find the ones in the play, so used are we to 
"posh" olives; I suppose you could de-posh them by removing them from the 
balsamic-marjoram liquor, steeping them in Sarson's and filling them with sweet 
chopped tongues of pimento pepper – or perhaps you can still buy those 70s ones 
if you live near (and if there is such a thing as) an "upmarket Spar".

The painting Despite the rest of Laurence's hideously parvenu tastes, in their 
own way worse than Beverly's honest tawdry schlock, he does love his art, and 
talks with true knowledge about Van Gogh. Hence the cataclysmic battle over 
Beverly's taste, which can be reproduced today:Wings of Love, by Stephen 
Pearson, which has sold more than three million prints, is still available 
online for £23.99.

Walls/carpets/furnishings Hard. You'd need to visit, often, for a year, 
charity shops. Or you could do the same amount of damage to your resale price 
with a simple wrecking-ball.
 