
Beneath a wall-mounted guitar and understated plaque bearing the words 'KAISER 
CHIEFS', I sit in reception at 1 Golden Square, Absolute Radio's London home 
since before it was even Absolute. The station started life as VirginRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> in 1993, before being taken over 
and rebranded in 2008. Rumours suggest that the company might soon change hands 
yet again, but whoever owns Absolute by the time you read this will be wise to 
leave it – and its numerous satellite stations – alone, because Absolute (and 
Absolute 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s and 00s) is a brilliantly well-defined operation.

As far as the main station goes, it might be overstating things to say you 
should forget everything you thought you knew about Absolute dwelling on 
wall-to-wall Stereophonics, but if you forget about 60% of everything you 
thought you knew, you'll be fine.

Absolute's jovial publicist Cat leads me through to an exquisitely decorated 
boardroom. While drivetime host Geoff Lloyd broadcasts from down the corridor, 
programme manager Tony Moorey (favourite band: Elbow) says that one of the 
secrets to Absolute's success is that "we don't try to pretend we're the 
coolest station on Earth". If there were awards for understatement, Tony's 
assertion would probably win Absolute yet another statuette to join the dozens 
already perched atop the boardroom mantelpiece. Absolute's output – stuff such 
as the Ian Wright-hosted Rock'N'Roll Football on Saturdays – might set it apart 
from most other stations, but well over a third of the songs Absolute played 
last month were also played on Radio 2.

How do I know this? Well, Absolute has probably the best online "proposition" 
(websites and stuff) of any UK radio network, just one example of which is that 
they developed and made public a site called Compare My Radio, which allows 
anyone to examine the output of all major UK radio stations. Put "Biffy Clyro" 
into the search box and you'll find XFM Manchester played them most last month 
– 215 times – compared to 58 plays from Radio 1 and 119 plays by Absolute. Is 
it just me who finds this interesting? No? Good. The best bit is that you can 
compare stations, each of which has a "variety gauge" – the ratio of total 
tracks played compared tounique tracks. The higher the better, apparently. So 
Absolute is at 17% (1,459 songs), which might not seem great until you see 
that, with just 222 different songs, Capital's variety gauge is stuck at only 
3%.

Anyway, I ask Tony where, between the staff canteen and the playlist, the 
phrase "meat and two veg" most strongly applies.

"I would be nervous to name artists we play and call them meat and two veg," 
he says.

Just in time, we're joined by James Curran, Absolute's long-standing head of 
music. I ask if there's anything the station's core audience has reacted 
negatively towards. He can think of only two songs in 12 years that have been 
prematurely whipped off the playlist. "One was the Streets' Fit But You Know 
It," he says. "We thought it had a Parklife feel to it. The audience love 
Parklife, we thought. They didn't like it. The other was Stylo by Gorillaz."

Drilling down to the big issues, I ask if they're likely to be refurbishing 
their boardroom anytime soon, as I'd quite like to buy one of their rather 
comfortable chairs. This line of enquiry proves fruitless, although Cat and 
Tony do talk me through one highlight from Absolute's recent history. "David 
Cameron came in," Tony shudders, "and when asked about Twitter made the mistake 
of announcing, live on air, that 'too many tweets make a twat'. He said he 
didn't understand the meaning of the word 'twat'."

Don't most people understand the word 'twat', I wonder?

"Well I do," Cat says. "I'm not sure if I believed him."

It's time to go to see Geoff in the studio, but before I tell you about that 
let me tell you about another amazing technological thing Absolute does. If you 
listen online or in its app, you hear fewer ads. Something complicated 
involving computers happens and when the player sees an ad break coming, it 
calculates low long it is and finds a song of that exact length, which it then 
chucks into your stream instead of the ads. We're all wary of sharing data in 
2013, but if there's something you can do as a commercial radio listener to 
avoid hearing ads for Curly Wig solicitors, you do it.

So we move through to a studio where Geoff Lloyd is currently on air. Today's 
phone-in topics are annoying namesakes (a "Phil Collins" in Somerset is 
particularly furious), and between songs Lloyd tells me that the best song he's 
played so far today is Rebel Rebel, and the worst is the new Killers track. 
Geoff's been broadcasting from this building for 14 years, and if you can 
tolerate the station's playlist – far better than under Virgin's reign, he 
notes – he's an engaging and funny broadcaster.

"Are you going to write 'snake-hipped radio DJ Geoff Lloyd is enigmatic'?" he 
asks.

"Are you enigmatic?" I ask.

"No," he sighs. "What's the opposite of enigmatic?"

Geri Halliwell, I offer. He seems pleased, and I bid farewell, as Pure by the 
Lightning Seeds plays in the background. Once home, I check Compare My Radio, 
finding that Absolute is British radio's 16th-biggest Lightning Seeds champion. 
It's just me that finds this interesting, isn't it?
 