
A radical al-Qaida-linked preacher deported from Britain has pleaded not 
guilty to terrorism charges at the start of his trial in one of two terror 
cases before a Jordanian military court.

Abu Qatada, 53, is charged with plotting terror attacks against Israelis, 
Americans and other westerners in Jordan in two foiled attempts in 1999 and 
2000. In both casesAbu Qatada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada>, 
who was abroad at the time, was convicted in absentia and sentenced to life in 
prison. But on his deportation to his homeland in July, those sentences were 
suspended and he has to be re-tried under Jordanian law.

Abu Qatada, whose real name is Omar Mahmoud Mohammed Othman, has been 
described in courts in Britain and Spain as a senior al-Qaida figure in Europe 
who had close ties to the late Osama bin Laden.

Britain accused him of links with Zacarias Moussaoui, the only person charged 
in the US over the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks, and with shoe bomber 
Richard Reid. Audio recordings of some of the cleric's sermons were found in an 
apartment in Hamburg, Germany, used by some of the September 11 hijackers.

On his arrival in Amman on 7 July, Jordanian prosecutors charged Abu Qatada 
with conspiring to carry out terror attacks inJordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan> twice – once in 1999 for a foiled 
plot against the American school in the Jordanian capital, and another time in 
2000 for allegedly targeting Israeli and American tourists and western 
diplomats during Jordan's Millennium celebrations.

On Tuesday the tribunal – consisting of two civilian judges and a military 
judge – said the cases will be heard separately, and proceeded with the hearing 
in the case involving Israeli and American tourists.

But Abu Qatada objected to the presence of the military judge – Colonel 
Mohammad Afif – saying it violated an agreement with Britain that paved the way 
for his extradition and meant to guarantee him a fair trial in his homeland.

Wearing a dark brown prison uniform, Abu Qatada appeared defiant and in high 
spirits as he stood in the dock, his back to the bench. Later he asked for a 
microphone and addressed the tribunal.

"I will not answer questions by this court because I do not recognise its 
jurisdiction," he said as his relatives – including his son Qatada – and 
reporters crowded the courtroom. Cameramen and photographers were not allowed 
inside.

"This tribunal includes a military judge and this is a violation of the deal 
with Britain that encouraged me to return home for retrial," he added somberly.

Presiding judge Ahmad Qatarneh, a civilian, halted the hearing for 30 minutes. 
The court had planned to hear the other case, but instead adjourned the 
proceedings until 24 December.

In Britain earlier this year Abu Qatada questioned the impartiality of 
Jordan's military court, an issue that delayed his deportation from Britain for 
years. But after Jordan and Britain ratified their treaty on torture aimed at 
easing those worries in June, the radical preacher voluntarily accepted to 
return to Jordan for a retrial.

Abu Qatada arrived in Britain on a forged passport in 1993 after fleeing a 
Jordanian government crackdown on militants. He was granted asylum in the UK a 
year later, but he eventually wore out his welcome because of his suspected 
militant activities, which allegedly included raising funds to finance terror 
plots in Jordan.

British authorities first tried to deport Abu Qatada in 2001, then detained 
him a year later under anti-terrorism laws, which at the time allowed suspected 
terrorists to be jailed without charge. Though he was released in 2005 when the 
unpopular law was overturned, the cleric was kept under close surveillance and 
detained in various ways.

Britain's original efforts to deport him were blocked by courts over concerns 
that evidence obtained under torture could be used against him. After years of 
successfully fighting the numerous attempts to expel him from the UK, Abu 
Qatada indicated last summer he would voluntarily return to Jordan after the 
treaty on torture was ratified.

That treaty explicitly bans the use of evidence "where there are serious and 
credible allegations that a statement from a person has been obtained by 
torture or ill-treatment".
 