
Jordanian military prosecutors in Amman have interviewed Abu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada> on terrorism-related charges 
after the radical cleric was flown out of the UK in the early hours of Sunday 
after an eight-year extradition battle.

Abu Qatada arrived mid-morning by private chartered jet at the capital's 
civilian airport accompanied by four British police officers who handed him 
over to their Jordanian counterparts. They whisked the cleric – once described 
as Osama bin Laden's righthand man in Europe – in a 12-car convoy manned by 
masked anti-terrorism police to the nearby military state security court on the 
outskirts of the city.

A Jordanian military prosecutor said the 53-year old preacher had been charged 
with conspiring to carry out al-Qaida-linked attacks inJordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan>. He was questioned in the presence 
of his lawyer, Tayseer Thiab, according to one of the prosecutors involved, who 
said he expected Abu Qatada to be detained for 15 days, pending further 
questioning. The charges date back to alleged offences in the 1990s.

Abu Qatada was expected to be held in the maximum security Muwaqqar prison in 
a military zone near the capital, Amman. The recently built high security 
prison is reportedly comfortable, with a library, a music room, a centre for 
"social development" and craft rooms.

Abu Qatada's father, Mahmoud, and an unidentified relative stood at the 
entrance of the court building, but were not allowed to enter.
 Abu Qatada (left) at RAF Northolt in east London where he boarded a private 
flight for Jordan. Photograph: RAF/MoD/PA 
"I have nothing to say, except that my son is innocent and I hope the court 
will set him free," he told Associated Press.

Just after midnight, Abu Qatada had been taken under police escort from 
Belmarsh prison in south-east London, where he had spent the past four months 
after breaching a bail condition which restricted use of mobile phones and 
other communication devices.

Members of the Metropolitan police's extradition unit accompanied him in a 
blue armoured police van escorted by three squad cars on the 25-mile journey 
across the capital to the RAF base at Northholt where Abu Qatada, wearing grey 
robes and a white headscarf, boarded a charted jet waiting on the runway.

At 2.46am he took a last look at British soil from his window seat as the 
plane taxied towards the runway and rose into the sky towards the Middle East.

The home secretary, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, wasted no time in expressing 
her delight at his removal, issuing a statement almost as soon as the jet's 
wheels were up.

"I am glad that this government's determination to see him on a plane has been 
vindicated and that we have at last achieved what previous governments, 
parliament and the British public have long called for," she said. "This 
dangerous man has now been removed from our shores to face the courts in his 
own country."

Abu Qatada's arrival in his native Jordan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/feb/19/abu-qatada-profile> brought to an 
end a £1.7m legal fight that involved recourse to European courts and the 
drafting of a special treaty of mutual assistance between the British and 
Jordanian governments.
 The private jet carrying Abu Qatada taxis on the runway at RAF Northolt. 
Photograph: Sgt Ralph Merry ABIPP RAF/MoD/Cr/PA 
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> said he was 
absolutely delighted that Abu Qatada, 53, had finally been removed, saying the 
radical preacher's continued presence in the UK had made his "blood boil".

Cameron said: "This [Abu Qatada's removal] is something this government said 
it would get done and we have got it done, and it is an issue that like the 
rest of the country has made my blood boil that this man who has no right to be 
in our country, who is a threat to our country and that it took so long and was 
so difficult to deport him, but we have done it, he is back in Jordan, and that 
is excellent news."

Since 2005 Abu Qatada has spent many years incarcerated in Belmarsh prison or 
under home arrest despite not facing UK-based terror charges.

The legal battle to remove him has cost the UK £647,658 in legal aid for the 
terror suspect and more than £1m in government costs, the home secretary, 
Theresa May, disclosed in a letter to the all-party Commons home affairs 
committee last month.

Abu Qatada was far less the outspoken face of Islamism than the hook-handed 
Abu Hamza or former al-Muhajiroun leader Omar Bakri. He almost never spoke in 
English even in private. However, due to his high theological standing within 
terrorist groups and a network of contacts that included links to the 9/11 
hijackers, security services considered him to be the most dangerous Islamic 
radical in the UK.

In a series of legal fights which restarted in 2005, Abu Qatada's lawyers were 
successful in arguing that evidence gleaned by the use of torture would 
deployed against him by Jordanian authorities should he be forcibly deported to 
the country where he was convicted of terror charges in his absence in 1999.

The Home Office was eventually forced into drawing up a 24-page mutual legal 
assistance treaty between the UK and Jordan, containing a key passage that 
states where there are "serious and credible allegations that a statement from 
a person has been obtained by torture" they would not be used in a court.

The agreement that finally secured Qatada's departure was announced by May 
earlier this year.

Abu Qatada's lawyer, Edward Fitzgerald QC, then unexpectedly told the special 
immigration appeals commission (Siac) that his client was prepared to leave if 
the treaty was enshrined in law.

"There's never been a time in the last 12 years that Mr Othman [Abu Qatada] 
and his family could safely return to Jordan," he said. "For a long period of 
time, he has made it clear that he wishes to leave lawfully."

The Jordanian information minister, Mohammed Momani, said on Sunday that 
Jordan "is keen on credibility and transparency" in its handling of Abu Qatada.

May said Abu Qatada's departure "marks the conclusion of efforts to remove him 
since 2001 and I believe this will be welcomed by the British public.

"I am glad that this government's determination to see him on a plane has been 
vindicated and that we have at last achieved what previous governments, 
parliament and the British public have long called for."

Both the prime minister and May said the case would trigger a change in the 
UK's relationship with theEuropean court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights> (ECHR), which 
had upheld arguments against extradition advanced by the cleric that cited 
human rights laws.

"I am also clear that we need to make sense of our human rights laws and 
remove the many layers of appeals available to foreign nationals we want to 
deport," said May. "We are taking steps – including through the new immigration 
bill – to put this right."

Asked about whether the UK should withdraw from the ECHR, Cameron said: 
"Frankly when it comes to these cases I don't rule anything out in terms of 
getting this better for the future."

Keith Vaz, chairman of the House of Commons home affairs select committee, 
said it had taken Home Office lawyers too long to conceive of the scheme to 
sign a treaty with Jordan to allay fears that evidence extracted through 
torture would not be used against Abu Qatada. He said the delay had cost the 
taxpayer £1.7m.

Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said Qatada's deportation was 
extremely welcome and meant he could stand fair trial in Jordan after legal 
delays that had been "deeply frustrating for all governments".

"We must ensure that delays like this do not last for so long in future and 
that the system is reformed to make it faster. Abu Qatada should have made this 
decision to face justice in Jordan before, as this has dragged on far too long, 
but it is extremely welcome news that this saga is now at an end."
 