
The clearing of Abu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/abu-qatada-cleared-terror-charges-jordan-court>
 on terrorism charges in Jordan on Wednesdaymight seem surprising in Britain, 
but seen from Amman’s point of view it is far more logical. The verdict follows 
indications that Jordan – increasingly concerned by the war in Iraq on one 
border and in Syria to its north, as well as by a rising domestic Salafist 
movement – is adopting a strategy of divide and rule, co-opting those figures, 
such as Qatada, who are willing to condemn Islamic State.

According to some estimates there are about 2,000 Isis supporters in Jordan. 
Indeed,Qatada’s acquittal was prefigured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/07/isis-beheadings-islam-abu-qatada>
 in June by the release of Salafist leader Assem Barqawi, also known as Abu 
Muhammad al-Maqdisi, who had spent five years in prison for recruiting jihadis 
for the war in Afghanistan.

Experts at the time of Maqdisi’s release – unexpected even among Jordanian 
Salafist leaders – pointed to his criticism of Isis and support for the 
al-Qaida linked Nusra Front, whichJordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan> judges as not having the same 
ambitions to dominate the region as Isis.

With growing numbers of young affluent Jordanians being attracted to the third 
generation of Salafism, – which first set down roots in the country in the late 
1980s, not least around the towns of Zarqa and Ma’an –the kingdom is keen to 
distinguish between those it sees as a threat and those it can manage.

Exacerbating the problem for Jordan is the weakening of Iraqi security on the 
two countries’ shared border this year following Isis militants’ surprise gains 
across north and western Iraq.

Jordan also has the largest number of its citizens fighting with Islamist 
groups in Syria.

Significantly, towards the end of his second trial this month, Qatada, who is 
also a vocal supporter of the Nusra Front, publiclycriticised Isis’s beheading 
of journalists as un-Islamic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/07/isis-beheadings-islam-abu-qatada>
.

Speaking from his courtroom cell in Jordan, he told journalists: “Messengers 
should not be killed,” quoting the prophet Muhammad.

Jordan’s judgment appears to be that it is better to have prominent Salafist 
leaders opposed to Isis at large – if on a short leash – than a focus for 
discontent in jail. Speaking to al-Jazeera about Maqdisi’s release earlier this 
year, Abu Sayyaf, leader of the Jordanian Jihadi Salafist movement based in the 
north of the country, said: “He is the mentor and father of our curriculum.”

“There is a pressing need for a mentor like him at this time of bloodshed. He 
is very concerned about the blood of Muslims being shed and their souls and 
honour,” Abu Sayyaf added.

Abu Sayyaf has also insisted in the past that there should be no “jihad in 
Jordan” – although in other interviews, including one to Foreign Policy, he has 
made it clear that that is for pragmatic reasons concerning the strength of the 
movement at present in Jordan.

The anxiety about the growing Salafist threat in Jordan, while not new, has 
been given fresh urgency following events in Iraq and Syria. At the beginning 
of the Arab spring, Jordan’s King Abdullah had been concerned by the threat of 
instability posed by the Muslim Brotherhood and its supporters in the Gulf.

It is in this broad context that Qatada’s acquittal fits a temporary and 
pragmatic strategy by the government aimed against the greater threat:Islamic 
State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>.

Indeed there is some evidence that the kingdom’s decades long and very public 
antipathy to the Muslim Brotherhood, not least in the past five years, may have 
resulted in an increase in support for the Salafist movement, with many tribal 
“East Bank” Jordanians coming to see the Brotherhood as “foreign”.
 