
The radical cleric Abu Qatada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada>, 
who was deported to Jordan from the UK in July, pleaded not guilty at a 
military court in Amman on Tuesday to charges of conspiracy to carry out terror 
attacks.

The 53-year-old preacher, who was once described as a senior al-Qaida figure 
with close links to Osama bin Laden, protested at the presence of a military 
judge as the first of two trials began. "I will not answer questions by this 
court because I do not recognise its jurisdiction," he said.

Two civilian judges and one military judge presided over the hearing at 
Jordan's state security court. Abu Qatada said the UK-Jordan treaty that led to 
his return to Amman had guaranteed a civilian trial.

After more than a decade of legal battles, the cleric submitted to deportation 
afterJordan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan> and Britain ratified a 
special mutual assistance treaty in June promising fair legal treatment. The 
defence lawyer Ghazi al-Deeba read excerpts from article 27 of the treaty, 
which stipulated that the trial take place in a "competent, independent and 
impartial tribunal established by law". The presence of a military judge 
violated this clause, he said, adding that the treaty also invalidated evidence 
obtained through torture or ill-treatment. He complained that the trial had 
been delayed for too long.

The prosecution interrupted several times, saying terrorism was one of five 
grand crimes – terrorism, counterfeiting, drug-trafficking, treason and 
espionage – that were reserved for security court jurisdiction in Jordan. 
"International agreements take precedence over local law," Deeba said.

Abu Qatada, wearing brown prison robes, was silent during the latter part of 
the hour-long hearing, hands in pockets as he sat on a wooden bench in a cell 
guarded by a row of police officers.

Foreign and local journalists filled the seven rows of benches for the public, 
along with Abu Qatada's two sons, three daughters and wife, who travelled from 
Britain in August. His sister came in late, blowing him a kiss before joining 
the row of women in the back.

Outside the court, one of his daughters said his situation was worse in Jordan 
than in Britain in terms of communication. "He's in prison," said one daughter. 
"It is not good for the court to keep him like this." The family is allowed 
three 30-minute visits a week, and 10 minutes of phone conversation.

Abu Qatada, whose real name is Omar Mahmoud Mohammed Othman, arrived in 
Britain on a forged passport in 1993 after fleeing a Jordanian government 
crackdown on militants. , and obtained asylum a year later. In 1999 and 2000, 
he was convicted in Jordan in absentia for attempted terrorism plots against 
various western targets, and was sentenced to life imprisonment.

In 2001, the UK authorities recognised him,as a security threat and began 
trying to deport him. He was detained in 2002 under anti-terrorism laws, which 
at the time allowed suspected terrorists to be jailed without charge. He was 
released in 2005. Courts repeatedly blocked the deportation attempts over 
concerns he would be tried by evidence obtained under torture. After his 
return, the Jordanian sentences were suspended pending the retrial.

The next hearing is scheduled for 24 December.
 