
The family of the radical Muslim cleric Abu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada> have followed him out of the UK, 
it has been revealed.

The Home Office said Abu Qatada's wife and children had formally dropped their 
bid to stay in the UK. The move comes after the government finallydeported the 
preacher to Jordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/07/abu-qatada-jordan-deportation-battle>
, following a legal battle lasting nearly a decade that has cost the taxpayer 
millions of pounds.

The family reportedly boarded a flight to Amman, where Abu Qatada is awaiting 
trial on terrorism charges, on Thursday evening.

A spokesman for the Home Office said: "Abu Qatada's wife and five children 
have now left the UK. The family has formally agreed to drop an outstanding 
application for indefinite leave to remain."

Last month the radical cleric was flown out of the UK in the early hours of 
the morning after an eight-year extradition battle. The cleric – once described 
as Osama bin Laden's right-hand man in Europe – was interviewed by Jordanian 
military prosecutors in Amman on terrorism-related charges.

A Jordanian military prosecutor said the 53-year-old preacher had been charged 
with conspiring to carry out al-Qaida-linked attacks inJordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan>.

Qatada fled to Britain from Jordan in 1993 with his wife and their first three 
children. He was granted leave to remain the following year after claiming 
asylum on the grounds of religious persecution. Meanwhile, the Jordanian 
authorities convicted him of terror charges in his absence.

In 2001 he went on the run after being questioned over alleged links to a 
German terror cell. He was finally arrested in 2002 and detained at Belmarsh 
high security jail in south east London but was never charged, and attempts to 
deport him to his native Jordan were resisted by the European Courts on human 
rights grounds.

Qatada only gave up his fight after the Jordanian government ratified a new 
treaty guaranteeing his right to a fair trial.

Last month the prime minister David Cameron said he was delighted that Abu 
Qatada had been removed from the UK, saying his presence in the country had 
made his "blood boil".
 