
The radical Islamist preacher Abu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada> will not be able to return to 
Britain despite his surprise acquittal by the Jordanian state security court on 
terrorism conspiracy charges.

The Home Office moved quickly on Wednesday to underline what Downing Street 
had made clear back in June when Abu Qatada wascleared of a separate set of 
bombing charges dating from 1998 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/26/abu-qatada-cleared-terrorist-bomb-plot-jordan>
.

“He can’t come back, and he won’t come back. He is a Jordanian and he does not 
have a UK passport. He is also the subject of an indefinite deportation order 
as well. He would not be granted permission to enter the UK, end of story,” it 
said.

Abu Qatada, 53, an international terror suspect who was once described by a 
Spanish judge as Osama bin Laden’s right-hand man in Europe, is subject to a UN 
travel ban as well as the indefinite British deportation order, and as a 
Jordanian citizen is now barred from returning to Britain.

Nevertheless his acquittal is a blow for the UK home secretary, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>. She won wide praise last 
year when she finally secured his return to Jordan to stand trial after a legal 
battle that had lasted nearly a decade in Britain. It was an achievement that 
successive home secretaries had failed to secure.

The ruling by the Jordanian state security court comes as something of a 
surprise as only a week ago theJordan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan>
 Times reported that he was expected to be sentenced to between two and a half 
and six years for his role in a thwarted bomb attack on Amman in 2000 and which 
was known as the millennium bomb plot.

However, May’s breakthrough in the case only came when she secured an 
undertaking from the Jordanian authorities that no evidence that had been 
obtained through torture could be used in the trial.

Abu Qatada’s lawyers always maintained that he had been convicted in absentia 
by the Jordanians using torture-tainted evidence from his co-conspirators.

The Islamist preacher calculated that there was no other evidence left 
available to convict him when he voluntarily returned to Jordan in July 2013 on 
the basis of the “fair trial” treaty, saying that for the first time in 12 
years he felt safe returning to Amman.

This calculation was one which a British judge sitting in the special 
immigration appeals commission reinforced when he referred to the case against 
Abu Qatada as being “extremely thin” once the torture-tainted evidence was 
discounted.

It now appears that the panel of civilian judges in the Jordanian state 
security court has agreed. In his ruling on Wednesday the judge said the 
evidence was “weak” but did not specify whether it had been obtained under 
torture.

Abu Qatada was first detained in Britain in 2002 in the immediate aftermath of 
9/11 and the failure to deport him was a major headache for successive home 
secretaries.

The European court of human rights ruled that he could not be sent back to 
Jordan if he was to face trial based on torture-tainted evidence – a ruling 
that fuelled much Conservative and tabloid hostility to the ECHR.

It may be argued that Abu Qatada has played a 10-year waiting game that has 
finally paid off. During his retrial, his defence team attacked the credibility 
of alleged recorded conversations between him and two fellow Salafists who were 
his co-defendants – the only available non-torture-tainted evidence. Neither of 
his co-conspirators was able to give fresh evidence as one is dead and the 
other was freed in a general pardon in 2011 and is believed to be fighting in 
Syria.

Nevertheless Abu Qatada spent much of his time in Britain in maximum security 
prisons and briefly under virtual house arrest on a control order. So it could 
hardly be argued that his successful waiting game did not come without a price.
 