
Alex McLeish <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> said the 
behaviour of Aston Villa's Fabian Delph, Chris Herd and James Collins in an 
incident at a nightclub earlier this week is a "slur on the club".

The trio have been disciplined for their part in a nightclub fracas in the 
early hours of Tuesday following Villa's annual awards dinner.

The players have apologised but McLeish is still angry about the unwelcome 
attention the incident has brought. "It's a slur on the club. I feel for [club 
owner] Randy Lerner and the fans ofAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> but the players need to show 
some respect for themselves and the football club."

The trio were fined for their conduct, although it is understood Delph was 
treated more leniently after acting as peacemaker in the incident.

The Villa manager said: "We acted very swiftly. We're very disappointed. We 
won't tolerate that kind of behaviour."

Speaking about Herd and Collins, he said: "If selected I think the most 
important thing is that they've been punished. They've shown a bit of humility 
which is the least we can expect.

"It happens at every club. It happens at even the top clubs. It's the culture 
of one pint too many. I think it reflects badly on Randy Lerner, the club, 
myself and most importantly the players themselves. They owe us. They have to 
give us a performance that we will be proud of."

In his apology, Collins said: "I'm sorry for what has happened and I take 
responsibility for my actions. It does not show me in a very good light and 
does not put the club in a very good light.

"I know I should not have been out in a club with my wife after the 
end-of-season dinner at that time in the morning and I was wrong to be in that 
position.

"It was a misunderstanding and was resolved quickly but I understand how it 
looks and I apologise for that. As a senior, experienced player, I understand I 
am in a position of responsibility.

"I let myself get into a position in which I didn't act responsibly and I 
apologise for this. It was Monday night, it was early in the week and I didn't 
have training the next day.

"But I know I've let myself down, I've let the club down, I've let the manager 
down and most of all I've let down the fans of Aston Villa, who have been great 
to me."

Herd said: "I would like to apologise for what happened and I apologise for 
being out at that time. My actions were out of character. Even if I felt at the 
time that the prior situation inside the nightclub had not been dealt with 
properly, it was no one's intention to be involved in any trouble.

"In fact, we were accompanied by our girlfriends and wives. But I should not 
have acted in the manner in which I did. I'll do everything I can to make it up 
to the club and the fans, as they have both been fantastic since I've joined 
the team.

"My immediate aim is to help the team to finish the season strongly and to 
secure our position in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>."

Delph, who has been dogged by injury problems in recent seasons, said: "I'm 
sorry for being out on Monday night, the early hours of Tuesday morning and I 
apologise to the club for this – the fans, the chairman, the manager and my 
colleagues.

"I am injured, I won't be fit again until pre-season and I probably thought 
that going out would not carry any consequences. I was sober, I was in control 
of my actions and I did try to calm down the situation. I didn't hit out or 
strike anyone but I should not have been there and I was wrong to be in this 
position."

When McLeish was Birmingham manager 12 months ago, the club held their end of 
season party on the Monday before the final game of the season with Tottenham, 
and several players went out drinking until the early hours although there was 
no fracas.

Birmingham were defeated by Tottenham at White Hart Lane on the final day of 
the season and defeat this Sunday against Spurs would leave Villa staring at 
relegation.

McLeish refused to draw any parallels with his former club and believes 
discipline is not a problem. "If I was to say it reflected badly on us I think 
20 other clubs would be saying the same thing," he said. "It doesn't matter how 
old you are or how young you are. They have to have responsibility and we're 
still getting these kind of incidents week-in and week-out.

"I'm not going to tolerate it. I'm not going tolerate that type of behaviour. 
I don't know if it's an education issue but if they step over the line they 
will be dealt with every time."

McLeish admits that the use of social networking sites such as Twitter means 
players cannot expect to act in an inappropriate way without being found out. 
"It's even worse now with the social network, people with camera phones. I'm 
afraid there's no chance of you becoming invisible when you have one pint too 
many."

Villa, in a club statement, said: "The club dealt with this matter internally 
and the players in question have been disciplined. The fines are being split 
between two charities the club are promoting at the game against Spurs on 
Sunday – Cure Leukaemia and Anthony Nolan."
 