
People used to retire at 60 or 65 and then, from the pension providers' 
viewpoint, conveniently died shortly afterwards. Now they are living longer and 
longer and for many, nearly a third of their lives will be lived post 
retirement. For some this will be a golden age – good health, supportive 
family, an ample retirement income – but for others there will be loneliness, a 
gradual loss of mental faculties, long term physical ill-health and a struggle 
to survive. Most will remain in their own houses but others will have moved to 
retirement villages or care homes.

So how do we slow the decline of mental health, find companionship and keep 
our spirits up? One answer is via community improvised theatre. TheCurtain Up 
Players 
<http://www.kirklees.gov.uk/community/localorgs/orgdetails.asp?OrgID=7622> 
started life as a group for the over 50s at the Lawrence Batley Theatre in 
Huddersfield. We would create two or three plays a year and then perform at the 
theatre and in village halls and lunch clubs. But last year the group was told 
it no longer fitted in with the theatre's development programme. Despite a 
vigorous campaign to change this, we were turfed out. Luckily theProper Job 
Theatre Company <http://www.properjob.org.uk/> offered its rehearsal room for a 
peppercorn rent andKirklees council <http://www.kirklees.gov.uk/> gave us a 
small grant to cover basic costs.

At the moment we are creating a play for a lunch club called The Welcome Home 
Party. It is set in a village in May 1945, while people are welcoming home the 
troops. We meet for two hours every Thursday morning and over the last three 
weeks have developed our characters. As always we do not have a script, but 
have some roughly worked-out scenes around which people improvise. This keeps 
people mentally agile, and develops and maintains their creativity and 
spontaneity, so important to the art of ageing.

As one cast member remarked: "The group stretches my ability to communicate 
with people, which when you are on your own you forget."It also means that 
there are no lines to learn. In this play the audience will be intermingled 
with the actors as villagers and therefore, even more than normal, this will 
keep the cast on their toes.

The group, which has 13 members, has developed a large amount of social 
capital over five years. We are all very different, but there is true 
friendship between us and we know the rest of the group are there to provide 
support, no matter what life throws at us. We have supported people though 
three deaths, including one of a cast member. We have helped people to live 
well with serious illnesses and isolation, keeping them out of hospital. We 
have become a small supportive community; as another member said: "Since I 
first joined the group I don't think there's been a meeting without laughter 
and I always leave feeling great." In our performances at lunch clubs and care 
homes we have breathed a bit of life into people's days.

As the numbers of older people continue to grow and as central and local 
government support dries up, older people will need to support one another and 
pool their resources if they are to live full and interesting lives after 
retirement. The final word goes to another member of the cast: "When many are 
concerned with what to do with the growing number of elderly [people] we need 
to be there in the thick of it voicing our opinions and ideas. Our group is an 
excellent way of being there."
 