
Update 25 October 2011 - International Resources Group (IRG), a Washington 
based company owned by L-3 Communications, have asked us to make clear that 
they have not funded Pargav and we accept this. On 25 October,our apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/oct/25/corrections-and-clarifications>
 for this error was published in the Clarifications and Corrections Column.


Three of the six donors who funded Adam Werritty's jetset lifestyle were 
prominent pro-Israel business figures.

Gus O'Donnell's report into the Liam Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> affair identified two previously 
unknown funders of Pargav, the company which paid more than £140,000 towards 
Werritty's first class flights and five star hotels.

One of these was Mick "the miner" Davis, the boss of the FTSE 100-registered 
mining company Xstrata and a leading figure in the UK Jewish community.

It has previously emerged that two of the donors to Pargav were financier 
Michael Lewis and the real estate tycoon Poju Zabludowicz, both linked to the 
BritishIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> Communications and 
Research Centre (Bicom), the UK's main pro-Israel lobby group.

Davis, 52, is chairman of United Jewish Israel Appeal, a British charity which 
splits its contributions between charitable work in the UK and Israel. He 
collects one of the biggest pay cheques in the FTSE 100 and was paid £21.2m 
last year.

Davis, Lewis and Zabludowicz are all big donors to the Tory party. Davis gave 
£150,000 to Conservative party central office over the last 21 months according 
to Electoral Commission records. He also gave £7,500 to the office of the 
education secretary Michael Gove in August.

In June, Davis was among a delegation that included Zabludowicz, the chairman 
of Bicom, which met the foreign secretary William Hague to discuss the impact 
of the Arab spring on Israel. Last year Davis was at the centre of a fierce 
controversy within the UK Jewish community after he made highly critical 
remarks about the Israeli government.

Lee Petar, a boss of Tetra Strategy, the lobbying firm that introduced a Dubai 
defence contractor to Werritty, was previously communications chief for Bicom.

Another company called IRG was named by O'Donell as a donor to Pargav. A 
Washington-based company that describes itself as an international professional 
services firm that helps governments, also called IRG, last night said that it 
was not the company involved.

O'Donnell reported that Werritty identified the other funders of Pargav as G3, 
an international investigation company run by former MI6 employees, and the 
private equity tycoon John Moulton, who owns Reader's Digest. O'Donnell said 
Werritty told him Pargav was "a not-for-profit organisation which has supported 
his work in the Middle East.

O'Donnell said: "Dr Fox facilitated an introduction between Mr Werritty and a 
donor. The links between Dr Fox and Mr Werritty mean donations given to Mr 
Werritty could at least be seen as giving rise to the perception of a conflict 
of interest."

Additional reporting by Rajeev Syal and Daniel Bond
 