
One of Adam Werritty's financial backers is preparing to hand the police new 
evidence that he claims proves Liam Fox's best friend and self-styled adviser 
duped him into handing over money.

Jon Moulton, a multimillionaire venture capitalist who donated £35,000 to the 
"slush fund" set up to support Werritty's jetset lifestyle, has told the 
Guardian he will provide the police with documents proving he was misled by 
Werritty.

Moulton said he would hand over "written assurances" that detail how his 
donation to Pargav, the company that helped fund Werritty's first-class flights 
to meet Fox overseas, would be spent. He said Werritty "wasted" the money and 
spent it in a way that "bore absolutely no resemblance" to the assurances. He 
told the Guardian he would "of course … provide whatever the police would like".

It comes as the police are considering whether to launch a full-scale 
investigation into allegations that Werritty may have acted fraudulently by 
handing out business cards that described him as an "adviser to the Rt Hon Dr
Liam Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> MP".

The Guardian understands that detectives at the City of London police's 
economic crime unit have interviewed at least five people in connection with 
Werritty's actions.

One of those is John Mann, the Labour MP who first raised questions about Fox 
and Werritty's working relationship. Another is Harvey Boulter, a Dubai 
businessman who says he was led to believe Werritty was Fox's official adviser.

Werrity is not among those who has been interviewed by police, his lawyer said 
on Friday. "Adam has not been contacted by the Police, and it follows that he 
has not been interviewed by them," said the lawyer. "I can add that he has also 
not been asked to provide a written statement to thePolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police>, nor has he done so voluntarily."

The City of London police declined to comment on the progress of their 
inquiries, but it is understood that in cases involving politicians, the police 
and the Crown Prosecution Service work together to ensure they have sufficient 
evidence before opening a full-scale investigation.

Jim Murphy, the shadow defence secretary, said: "If a formal case were to open 
this would be very serious indeed. The prime minister has refused to reveal the 
facts and it may be left to the police to do so. The prime minister would be 
much better advised just clearing this up once and for all rather than allowing 
it to drift."

The other donors to Pargav are Stephen Crouch, a defence lobbyist; G3 (Good 
Governance Group), an international investigation company staffed by former MI6 
employees; Tamares, an investment company owned by the defence and retail 
industry tycoon Poju Zabludowicz; and the financier Michael Lewis.

Moulton told BBC Newsnight this week that Fox had solicited the donation from 
him after he gave funds to the former defence secretary's "back office" while 
Fox was in opposition. "Liam [Fox] asked me to put some money in the same 
general direction. I was at great pains to get written assurances as to what it 
was used for, which bore absolutely no resemblance to what it was used for. I 
can definitely say that I was mugged. In fact, if you look at the dictionary, 
the definition of 'foxed' is discoloured with yellowish-brown staining, and I 
fear it might be reasonably appropriate."

The prime minister has been called on to investigate the role of Gerald 
Howarth, the arms sales minister, who met Crouch and Werritty inside the House 
of Commons in September.

Crouch, who reportedly paid £20,000 to Pargav, said he paid a "flat fee" in 
the hope of introductions to British energy companies. Howarth said he was 
unaware that Werritty had received money from Crouch before the meeting on 27 
September.

It has also emerged Oliver Hylton, who had been suspended by the hedge fund 
CQS, is no longer employed by the company. The company is run by Michael Hintze 
a major Tory party donor. Hylton, Hintze's former right-hand man, allowed 
Werritty to work out of CQS's offices and served as the sole director of Pargav.

• This article was amended on Friday 4 November at 16:00 GMT and at 18.50 GMT
 