
Adam Werritty <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty> was paid more 
than £70,000 by a company set up to support his jetset lifestyle following Liam 
Fox around the world, official accounts have shown for the first time.

It comes as the City of London police confirmed they were continuing their 
investigation into allegations of fraud surrounding the former defence 
secretary's best man and former flatmate, who handed out business cards falsely 
describing him as one of Fox's official advisers.

Annual accounts for Pargav Limited, show Werritty collected £73,850 in the 
year to 31 October last year. Most of the money came from high-profile Tory 
donors, some of whom had been directly petitioned for donations by Fox.

Fox was forced to resign as secretary of state for defence last year after 
repeated revelations about his working relationship with Werritty, his close 
friend of 14 years who had no official role in government and had not been 
granted security clearance.

The Guardian revealed that Werritty handed out business cards that described 
him as "advisor to the Rt Hon DrLiam Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> MP" and used his quasi-official 
role to met a string of world leaders, including the president of Sri Lanka, 
Mahinda Rajapaksa.

Pargav's accounts, filed at Companies House on Monday, state that "consultancy 
charges of £73,850 were paid to Mr AM Werritty, a shadow director of the 
company". The accounts add that Werritty owed the company an additional 
£11,381. Werritty's debts to the company dragged it £5,125 into the red.

Pargav, which received £147,000 of funds from four high-profile Tory-donating 
businessmen and an international investigation company staffed by ex-MI6 
employees, paid for Werritty to take a string of first-class flights to meet up 
with Fox at 18 exotic locations while the former cabinet minister was on 
government business. Fox also hosted Werritty at the Ministry of Defence's 
headquarters on Whitehall 22 times between the 2010 general election and his 
resignation in October last year.

Some of the donations also ended up being spent on high-end suits and even a 
bill of £379.60 at Larry Flint's Hustler Club topless bar in New York, while 
donors thought they were supporting "security policy analysis and research".

One of the donors, Jon Moulton, a Tory donor and multimillionaire venture 
capitalist, has provided the police with documents that he claims proves he was 
duped into handing over £35,000. Moulton, whose private equity company Better 
Capital owns Reader's Digest UK, said Werritty "wasted" the money and spent it 
in a way that "bore absolutely no resemblance" to written assurances Werritty 
provided.

Moulton said Fox had solicited the donation from him after he gave funds to 
the former defence secretary's "back office" while Fox was in opposition. "Liam 
[Fox] asked me to put some money in the same general direction. I was at great 
pains to get written assurances as to what it was used for, which bore 
absolutely no resemblance to what it was used for," he told BBC Newsnight in 
November. "I can definitely say that I was mugged. In fact, if you look at the 
dictionary, the definition of 'foxed' is discoloured with yellowish-brown 
staining, and I fear it might be reasonably appropriate."

A City of London police's economic crime unit confirmed its investigation into 
claims that the donations were solicited or used fraudulently. A spokesman said 
on Monday: "The City of London police has an ongoing investigation into 
allegations of fraud made by John Mann MP. Detectives have spoken to a number 
of people as part of this investigation, but it is not force policy to disclose 
names. The investigation continues."

Until the filing of Pargav's accounts, Werritty had not been named in the 
company's official records. The identification of Werritty as a "shadow 
director" raises further questions about the management of the company. "It 
should be remembered that acting as a shadow director is not an offence in 
itself,"HMRC states on its website 
<http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/manuals/insmanual/ins44133.htm>. "But the existence of 
a shadow director is a risk indicator. It raises the suspicion that the shadow 
director is attempting to conceal something by managing the company but not 
being listed as one of its directors."

Pargav's only named director was Oliver Hylton, who was working as aide and 
charity adviser to Michael Hintze, the billionaire chief executive of hedge 
fund CQS. Hylton, who left CQS's employment in the wake of the scandal, also 
provided Werritty with free office space in CQS's plush offices over looking 
Buckingham Palace.

Hintze, who has donated £1.5m to the Tory party and was this week revealed as 
one of the leading Conservative donors invited to dine privately with David 
Cameron following the 2010 general election, was also a funder of Fox's 
now-defunct Atlantic Bridge charity, which was run by Werritty.

Pargav was created days before the charity commission suspended Atlantic 
Bridge, which had been paying for Werritty's flights around the world.

Also listed among Pargav donors were Mick Davis, the boss of the FTSE 
100-registered mining company Xstrata, financier Michael Lewis, a real estate 
company owned by arms tycoon Poju Zabludowicz, G3, an international 
investigation company run by former MI6 officers, and defence lobbyist Stephen 
Crouch's IRG Ltd. Davis, Lewis and Zabludowicz are all big donors to the Tory 
party.

Werritty's lawyers had not commented by Thursday evening.
 