
David Cameron has come under increased pressure to investigate a second 
defence minister's dealings with Liam Fox's self-styled adviserAdam Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>.

John Mann, the MP who first raised questions about Werritty's role at the 
heart of government, last night demanded that the prime minister immediately 
open an inquiry into whether the arms sales minister Gerald Howarth breached 
the ministerial code when he met one of Werritty's secretive funders.

The spotlight has fallen on Howarth after the Guardian revealed that the 
junior defence minister secretivelymet one of the backers of the fund set up to 
support the jetset lifestyle of Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/25/defence-minister-met-firm-funding-werritty>
.

Mann wrote to Cameron on Wednesday after Sir Philip Mawer, the independent 
adviser on ministerial interests, said he could only launch an investigation if 
the prime minister gave him the green light. "We need transparency. The 
government's refusal to have its own independent adviser investigate this is 
making a farce out of the ministerial code," Mann said last night.

Jim Murphy, the shadow defence secretary, said: "We have more and more 
allegations but no answers. The prime minister said all questions would be 
dealt with, but three weeks on from Dr Fox's resignation he is still refusing 
to reveal the full facts. It is not good enough that he is prepared to ignore 
serious issues which took place on his watch."

Howarth met Stephen Crouch, a defence industry lobbyist, in the House of 
Commons on 27 September.

Howarth said he was unaware of allegations that Crouch had paid Werritty 
thousands of pounds for help setting up high-profile meetings.

Crouch's organisation, Iraq Research Group, paid £20,000 to Pargav, the "slush 
fund" that gave up to £140,000 towards Werritty's first-class flights to meet 
Fox overseas.

The meeting took place at the suggestion of Fox, who resigned as defence 
secretary earlier this month after revelations about his working relationship 
with his friend Werritty, who was not an official adviser. No civil servants 
were present at the meeting – an apparent breach of the ministerial code.

Labour claimed on Wednesday that a full independent investigation into the 
Werritty affair would show that three defence ministers breached ministerial 
rules in their dealings with Werritty.

• This article was amended on 3 November 2011. The original referred to 
"Stephen Crouch, a defence industry lobbyist and former mercenary boss". This 
has been corrected.
 