
A fourth minister has been linked to the scandal surrounding Liam Fox's friend 
and unofficial adviser,Adam Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>.

Henry Bellingham, the minister for Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, met one of Werritty's financial 
backers in Sudan last year.

Bellingham met Stephen Crouch, a lobbyist who paid Werritty £20,000 for help 
in setting up meetings, at Juba airport inSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> in July 2010.

A spokesman for the Foreign Office said Bellingham had discussed "commercial 
activity [Crouch] was undertaking in South Sudan". But he said the meeting was 
not pre-arranged.

Crouch, a Tory donor and activist, has extensive links to major oil companies 
and is on the record lobbying for contracts inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. The businessman, who is said to claim 
he is a former British intelligence officer, is linked to Tony Buckingham, the 
multimillionaire boss of the London-listed oil firm Heritage Oil. South Sudan 
holds one of the world's largest untapped oil reserves.

During the official visit to Sudan, Bellingham told local media British 
companies were "lagging behind in the exploration and exploitation of oil all 
over Sudan". He said oil was "very important" for Britain, and said Sudan had 
"great potential".

At the time, Sudan was targeted by strict US sanctions and an international 
warrant was outstanding for President Omar al-Bashir's arrest for suspected war 
crimes in Dafur.

Liam Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> was forced to resign 
as defence secretary last month amid revelations that he met Werritty, his best 
man and unofficial adviser, 19 times while on overseas trips.

Gerald Howarth, the arms sales minister, met Werritty and Crouch at the 
Commons, without civil servants present. Lord Astor of Hever, the 
undersecretary of state for defence, met Werritty during a defence industry 
gathering in the Middle East last December.

Kevan Jones, the shadow defence spokesman, said: "This is an important 
revelation. Two departments and four ministers are now embroiled in a scandal 
that keeps on growing. Why is a Foreign Office minister meeting Adam Werritty's 
funder in Sudan? We need to know what was discussed. It is a strange 
coincidence to say the least. It is deeply inadequate of the prime minister to 
continue to refuse to probe this issue further."

Bellingham and Crouch's relationship goes back to at least 1994, when they 
were both involved in lobbying for the lifting of strict sanctions against 
Saddam Hussein's Iraq regime. A spokesman for Bellingham said they met "a 
couple of times every year".

Since then, Crouch has been involved in lobbying for contracts in Iraq, in 
association with a former MI6 officer, Rupert Bowen, and a former UK ambassador 
to the Middle East, Julian Walker; and Buckingham's HeritageOil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/oil> has bought into oil exploration 
rights in Iraq.

During last year's general election, Buckingham donated £5,000, via Crouch, to 
a successful Tory candidate in the marginal seat of Carmathen West. Crouch had 
temporarily taken up residence in the constituency and volunteered to act as 
party chairman.

Heritage Oil, in which Buckingham is a major shareholder and chief executive, 
has a track record of quickly developing operations in previous war zones, 
includingLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> and the Democratic 
Republic of Congo.

The company declined to say whether Crouch was in Juba on behalf of Heritage. 
The city, which is the capital of the newly created country of South Sudan, is 
at the centre of the oil-rich Muglad Basin.

South Sudan holds 80% of Sudan's estimated 6.8bn barrels of untapped oil. 
Current production, of 500,000 barrels a day, accounted for 50% of Sudan's 
domestic revenue and 93% of exports in 2009, according to Global Witness. 
Experts say a new pipeline to the south could easily quadruple production.

A spokesman for the Foreign Office said: "Minister for Africa Henry Bellingham 
visited Juba for one day in July 2010. His visit was organised as part of the 
government's leading role in supporting preparations for the South Sudan 
referendum, held in January 2011.

"Shortly after his arrival, Mr Bellingham encountered Mr Crouch at Juba 
airport. This was not pre-arranged and Mr Bellingham had no prior knowledge 
that Mr Crouch would be at the airport. The encounter lasted a few minutes. Mr 
Crouch set out briefly the commercial activity he was undertaking in South 
Sudan. The conversation they had did not lead to or generate a request for 
formal follow-up."

The Foreign Office said civil servants were present in the arrivals lounge of 
the airport where the meeting took place, but were talking with South Sudanese 
officials during Bellingham and Crouch's meeting.

The spokesman said Bellingham was unaware that Crouch had paid money to 
Werritty.

Crouch did not return requests for comment.
 