
Is there anyone who isn't annoyed by online advertising? Even a little? Lose 
weight fast? Would you like to meet attractive singles in your area? How about 
a free bet when you sign up here?

These are some of the more pointlessly random things put up for sale on the 
internet; but what's on offer is not likely the most vexing part – there's also 
the ads' delivery method.

Blinking pop-ups, auto-playing videos and flashy banners are just a few of the 
more irksome tools in the advertisers' attention-grabbing bag of tricks.

In essence, however, they are the trade-off – users get to use a site for free 
but it comes at a cost of having to see the accompanying adverts.

Most people wouldn't argue that these gaudy accompaniments aren't bothersome – 
a widely cited Adobe study from 2013 demonstrated that 62% in the UK found them 
annoying. And while there isadditional evidence that people do not like the 
blinking <https://adblockplus.org/blog/eyetracking-study-results>, there's also 
the question as to whether anyone's even paying attention to the tired old 
online formats; or, put otherwise, whether banner blindness has rendered them 
not merely irrelevant – but invisible. A similarly popular statistic gives 
banner ads a click-through rate of 0.11 per cent. Ask yourself: "when did I 
last click one?"

Enough people have been annoyed to take matters into their own hands. Coming 
in the form of a browser extension, adblocking software blocks advertisements 
from web pages including banner ads, text ads, sponsored links, sponsored 
stories and video pre-roll ads.

Adblocking <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ad-blocking> software is nothing 
new, however, where it was once only used by smallish cadres of tech-savvy 
power users, it's now becoming more mainstream.

Research indicates that the simplicity and effectiveness of the technology has 
resulted in 30% of web users using some form of adblocking. And this figure is 
set to risefurther <http://blog.pagefair.com/2013/the-rise-of-adblocking/>. 
This is something we witness at Adblock Plus – more than 300 million people 
have downloaded our software worldwide and this figure increases by two million 
every week.

Adblocking technology puts power back into users' hands, and the advertising 
world needs to respond by working out how to get its messages across without 
being annoying and intrusive. Research shows that very few people find 
advertisements in more established media annoying. So why can't that be 
replicated online? Why shouldn't online adverts, just, uh, grow up a bit? 
Indeed, they must – because as opposed to the rather solid spot adverts occupy 
elsewhere, users call the shots online.

Adblockers should not rid the internet of all advertising. Without moderation, 
they have the potential to become a destructive force for the internet 
ecosystem. It is worth restating that advertising is an essential funder of the 
internet, without which a lot of content would not be viable.

Trying to achieve this balance has led to the creation of the Acceptable Ads 
initiative. Developed with the broader Adblock Plus user community, the 
initiative has identified the pet peeves web users have when it comes to online 
advertising. From this a set of criteria has been identified as to the 
advertisements that are considered acceptable by internet users – those 
websites that comply with the criteria can then apply to have their ads added 
to the Acceptable Ads whitelist, which will unblock them by default. Users 
still hold ultimate control, however: they can block all ads with one click in 
their settings and they can pick and choose what to block as well.

It's intended to benefit both parties – web users aren't annoyed and 
advertising agencies are able to get their message across more effectively. But 
we're neither proud nor stupid enough to think we can do it alone.

An example of the advertising industry finding new ways to achieve balance is 
the use of native adverts. Native advertising has many definitions – which is 
to say it doesn't possess one at all – but most agree that it is advertising 
designed to fit the form and function of a site. That's encouraging in that 
native adverts' reason for being is not to intrude; on the other hand, they're 
troubling if they try to masquerade as editorial content. Labelled clearly as 
an ad, these have a chance to be a very positive development signalling 
industry-side change.

Again, it goes back to finding common ground between all parties. If we all 
want to make the internet better, publishers need to wean themselves from 
banners, advertisers need to be more creative, adblockers need to be more 
flexible and we all have to talk to the users – who ultimately determine our 
fate anyway.

Till Faida is the co-founder of Adblock Plus <https://adblockplus.org>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 