
A Bruce Djite brace has delivered Adelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> a 4-1 semi-final triumph 
against Melbourne City and a spot in the A-League decider. Djite scored a 
screamer and converted a penalty in a game-breaking display in Friday night’s 
semi-final at Coopers Stadium.

Melbourne’s Nick Fitzgerald gave the visitors some hope with a 72nd-minute 
reply before Adelaide’s Dylan McGowan and Pablo Sanchez sealed the result with 
late goals. The Reds will host a May 1 Adelaide Oval grand final against the 
winner of Sunday’s semi-final between Western Sydney and Brisbane.

Djite rewarded Adelaide for sustained dominance of City, who fell short of a 
first grand final appearance. The powerful attacker scored twice in 12 minutes 
to send the Reds into their secondA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> grand final – the other, a loss 
in 2007.

Djite broke the deadlock with a stunner in the 48th minute: after Marcelo 
Carrusca sliced through Melbourne’s defence and laid off, Djite, from about 16 
metres, launched a sweet right-footer that smacked into the side netting. And 
in the 60th minute, he added another after Bruce Kamau – whose speed and skill 
bothered City all night – was brought down in the box.

The contact from Melbourne defender Jack Clisby appeared marginal, but Djite 
assuredly slotted the penalty with a low-left blast to delight the sell-out 
15,489 Adelaide crowd.

City’s Fitzgerald then caused some home-town jitters with a clinical 
right-footed goal from 10 metres out to revive the visitors with 20 minutes 
remaining. But their fate was soon sealed. In the 88th minute, from an Adelaide 
corner, McGowan deflected into the net from close range and then in the last 
minute, Sanchez added another as United remained on track to claim the double – 
the Premiers Plate and the Championship trophy.

Adelaide United coach Guillermo Amor said he was proud of his winning players. 
“I’m feeling fantastic,” he said. “It’s important to enjoy this moment - and to 
think that there is one more game, to prepare well.”

Melbourne City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-city> coach 
John van ‘t Schip said his side were outclassed by Adelaide. “We didn’t get to 
the level that we thought we could,” he said. “We didn’t keep the ball good 
enough, didn’t create, (striker) Bruno (Fornaroli) was isolated too much ... it 
was hard work.”
 