
Each Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> player will honour 
the anniversary of the death of coach Phil Walsh in different ways, captain 
Taylor Walker says. The Crows play Melbourne at the MCG on Sunday, one year 
after Walsh was allegedly murdered by his son during his first season as 
Adelaide’s head coach.

“A lot of water has gone under the bridge, obviously it’s 12 months since he 
passed away,” Walker said on Monday. “He left a massive footprint on the footy 
club and individuals lives so I’m sure individuals will treat it differently by 
themselves.

Likable and watchable GWS Giants are becoming many AFL fans' second team | 
Craig Little
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/27/likable-and-watchable-gws-giants-are-becoming-many-afl-fans-second-team>
“But as a footy club we’re really happy with where we are at and have got a 
lot of memories out of it and look forward to, as he said, getting the job 
done. We’ll do it on Sunday.”


The Crows captain said Walsh was often in his thoughts. “I had a great 
relationship with him so it’s probably fair to say I do think about him quite 
often,” he said. “He was a great man, Phil.”

But Walker was reluctant to publicly expand. “They are conversations that 
myself and Phil have had and, to be honest, I don’t really feel comfortable 
putting it out there so that is something I will hold to myself,” he said.

Walker said he would always be grateful to Walsh for appointing him as 
Adelaide’s captain. “It’s something that I will cherish for the rest of my 
life, that he announced that I was captain,” he said.

And he said the death of Walsh had further galvanised Adelaide’s players. “We 
are a pretty united group as it is, we have got a great culture here,” Walker 
said. “And I think anything that is dramatic within footy clubs can unite and 
bring the group together and we have been able to do that.”

Walsh’s son Cy, 27, pleaded not guilty to murdering his father in the South 
Australian Supreme Court last February. In an early appearance in the Adelaide 
Magistrates Court, the possibility was raised of Cy Walsh experiencing a 
drug-induced psychosis at the time of the alleged murder.

Phil Walsh died from multiple stab wounds and his wife Meredith was taken to 
hospital and treated for a leg injury after the alleged murder at their western 
beachside home. Cy Walsh is due to reappear in the Supreme Court on 29 July.
 