
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> rode the bumps and 
ultimately ran away with a 22-point AFL win over Melbourne in an end-to-end 
classic at the MCG on Sunday.

In an freewheeling contest, the Crows emerged triumphant with an 18.12 (120) 
to 15.8 (98) victory to extend their winning streak to six. Adelaide improved 
to fifth on the ladder after finishing stronger than the valiant Demons.

Playing on was not an umpire’s direction but a way of life at the MCG, where 
both sides brought an attacking intent to the contest. Adelaide’s midfield 
machine and attacking firepower proved the difference, one year to the day of 
the death of Crows’ coach Phil Walsh.

Collingwood emerge with scrappy win over Carlton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/02/collingwood-emerge-with-scrappy-win-over-carlton>
The Crows boasted six multiple goalscorers and an even spread of contributors 
in the middle, led by Brad Crouch and Rory Sloane. Taylor Walker, Eddie Betts 
and Richard Douglas kicked three goals each.

A tackle count of 100-74 would have delighted Crows coach Don Pyke but there 
would be few Melbourne fans among the 29,133 in attendance that would leave 
unsatisfied with the Demons’ effort.

Nathan Jones was the game’s elite performer with 33 disposals, while Jeff 
Garlett was the spark in attack with four goals and a hand in more.


The Crows stole an early break on an errant Melbourne, taking a 17-point lead 
at quarter-time but Melbourne banished their errors and roared back into the 
contest. Led by Garlett, Paul Roos’ side kicked eight second-quarter goals as 
their run-and-gun style bore fruit and a half-time lead.

It was then Adelaide’s turn to surge as their midfield took over to win the 
first 10 clearances of the third term. Walker and Betts helped the Crows to 
five goals in nine minutes to wrest control back.

Still the Demons came, finishing the third quarter just nine points in arrears 
but their challenge was snuffed out by a disciplined Adelaide side in the final 
term as they kept kept Melbourne at bay.
 