
• Every fringe there are a handful of new venues, and the showiest of that 
collection this year is the Royal Croquet Club, in the north end of Victoria 
Square in the city centre. And, yes, they have an actual croquet lawn in the 
middle, where women fromCroquet SA  <http://www.croquetsa.com.au/>were waiting 
last night to teach me how to swing a mallet. I think I’ll blame my poor 
performance on the pitted surface – I enjoyed the game more when we got down to 
strategy, and it was less about getting your own ball through the hoop, and 
more about hitting the other player’s ball away.

• The Croquet Club’s surroundings aren’t too shoddy either, with newly 
refurbished Victoria Square’s nice lighting, water feature and large concrete 
steps. It’s all been fitted out with flag bunting, crisp white wooden furniture 
and lovely large bars. So there is a bit of a disconnect when you walk into the 
club’s biggest venue, the Panama Club, and leave the slick and fancy for the 
world of rough-and-ready fringe: the performance space mats directly on the 
grass; the seating bank just flats of wood.
 Turning in Time: a performer moves around a suspended hula hoop, paper 
umbrellas are set rotating on top of another’s feet. Photograph: PR/Adelaide 
festival 
• My first show at the Panama Club is Turning in Time 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/turning-in-time/faf83796-d1b3-40c4-9d7c-6ef86793216b>
. A4 Circus Ensemble find some lovely moments thanks to delicate skills; a 
performer moves around a suspended hula hoop, paper umbrellas are set rotating 
on the top of another’s feet. These moments, though, are too few in the 
production, which struggles to tie acts together and feels swallowed by the 
large tent. Between scenes, they screen old footage of traditional circus – 
trapeze artists, clowns, horses and lions – with narration from Dolly Lennon 
<http://www.abc.net.au/gnt/history/Transcripts/s941424.htm>, who began 
performing in the circus in the 1930s. There is an energy and a joy to these 
images and history that, unfortunately, this young cast can’t yet live up to.

• Also in the Panama Club, A Simple Space 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/a-simple-space/8a84f09a-583b-48d4-95e5-887ed0fa61f5>
 has energy in spades. I first saw this production at the 2013 Fringe, when it 
was a half-hour performance on a weekend afternoon. The opening game of 
strip-skipping (speed skip until you trip, only the last one standing gets to 
keep their clothing) takes on quite a different slant when playing to an 
evening, rather than family, audience. Circus performers of course often make 
mistakes with their tricks – but here the fallibility of the performer is taken 
to extremes. Everything becomes a competition: how many standing back-tucks can 
you do? How good a balloon animal can you make with your hands behind your 
back? How long can you stay in a handstand while the audience throws plastic 
balls at you? No-frills acrobatic tricks make up the bulk of the performance; 
it’s all terrific fun.
 