
Adelaide United coach Guillermo Amor cut a frustrated figure after two big 
decisions went against his side in the Reds’ controversial 2-1 loss toWestern 
Sydney Wanderers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/western-sydney-wanderers>
 at Coopers Stadium.

Wanderers’ defender Jack Clisby laid a crunching tackle on winger Sergio Cirio 
in the first minute and received a yellow card from referee Shaun Evans, 
despite the challenge forcing the Spaniard from the field minutes later.

Nikolai Topor-Stanley set to leave Wanderers for overseas club
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/nikolai-topor-stanley-set-to-leave-wanderers-for-overseas-club>
Trailing 1-0 with an hour gone, Wanderers brought on Brendon Santalab who 
equalised soon after his introduction.

The striker then upended United midfielder James Holland in the closing stages 
with a bruising late tackle, which left the home side calling for a red card.

But referee Evans issued Santalab with a yellow card before the Wanderers No11 
popped up and scored the winner in injury time.

Amor was cautioned for his reaction to the foul on Holland, with Evans warning 
the Barcelona legend he was about to be send to the stands.

“The referee’s decisions, I prefer not to speak (about them),” Amor said after 
the match.

“The result is 1-2, now to speak about the referee or the linesman or the 
(possible) red card, it’s not the solution.

“The two actions are strong actions, if it’s a red card or not, this decision 
is for the referee.”

Despite the loss, Amor said he was pleased with United’s performance with 
promising signs from new recruits, Spanish striker Sergi Guardiola, Henrique 
and local young speedster Ryan Kitto.

The Spaniard acknowledged the Wanderers continually prove to be a tough 
opponent for the Reds.

“It’s better now to be calm and analyse (the game) well,” he said.

“I think we played well in general. The game was a strong game, with Western 
it’s always a strong game.”

Rival coach Tony Popovic was understandably more upbeat, and praised his 
team’s recovery from a 4-0 thumping in the Sydney derby last weekend.

“You always hope the players that come on the park make an impact,” Popovic 
said.


“I thought we played very well in the first half and certainly didn’t deserve 
to be 1-0 down at half time.


“To respond the way we did after last week and the changes we made today. To 
win it at the end, at the death, very pleasing.”

Asked whether Santalab should have even been on the pitch to score the late 
winner, Popovic indicated that his challenge and the earlier one by Clisby were 
dealt with appropriately by the match officials.

“They are yellow card offences,” he said.


“They are strong tackles and they (the tackles) got what they deserved.


“I don’t dispute that.”
 