
Adelaide United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> coach 
Guillermo Amor praised the Reds late fightback which helped them earn a 1-1 
draw against Brisbane Roar on Friday night.

United were forced to come from behind after Brett Holman broke the deadlock 
on the hour with Sergi Guardiola equalising on 78 minutes.

Beister boost for Victory in A-League clash with Wanderers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/beister-boost-victory-a-league-wanderers>
Unlike a week earlier when the Reds conceded two second half goals to slump to 
a 2-1 defeat against Central Coast Mariners, Amor’s troops showed some resolve 
to claw their way back into the contest.

“I think the level of the team today was good,” Amor said. “Our players worked 
very well. Everybody gave everything and for us it’s not bad.”

While the Reds were able to salvage a point, the result still leaves the 
defending champions bottom of the table with just two draws after six matches.

One major positive for United is the form of Guardiola, whose header 12 
minutes from time was his third in as many matches after scoring against 
Melbourne City, the Mariners and Brisbane in consecutive weeks.

“He’s happy; when the number nine scores goals [he’s happy],” Amor said. “It’s 
important for him and it’s important for us.”

Roar coach John Aloisi expected a difficult hit out against the Reds but felt 
his side were more than equal to the task. He hailed the influence of Tommy Oar 
and Dimitri Petratos, with the pair a constant threat throughout the match.

“It was going to be a difficult game but I thought that we caused them 
problems as well,” Aloisi said. “We were able to find Tommy Oar and Dimi 
Petratos really well in those pockets, in between the lines.”

With the game delicately poised at 1-1 and United pressing for a winner, 
Brisbane hit the hosts on the counter a number of times in the dying stages but 
failed to find a winner.

Aloisi felt if his side were more clinical in attack, they could have snatched 
all three points in the final minutes.

“We should’ve capitalised more there,” he said. “We wanted to win the game so 
we kept going. Of course they were trying to win the game so we knew it was 
going to become a little bit spread.

“When we got in that final third we should’ve punished them a little bit more 
because we got into some good areas.”
 