
A fast-finishing Adelaide steamrolled a flagging North Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne> by 33 points on Thursday 
night to bank a fifth consecutive win of the AFL season. The Crows suffered 
goal kicking yips yet prevailed 12.28 (100) to 10.7 (67) at Adelaide Oval. 

Captain Taylor Walker, Eddie Betts, Matt Crouch and Richard Douglas each 
booted two goals forAdelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> as 
the Kangaroos’ mid-season stutters continued. They’ve now lost four of their 
past five games. North forward Lindsay Thomas kicked three majors, including a 
goal of the year contender with a checkside punt while pinned on the boundary 
line, and key forward Ben Brown booted two.

Sam Newman's Footy Show: a retrograde carnival of cliches tested at a 
nightclub urinal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/23/sam-newmans-footy-show-a-retrograde-carnival-of-cliches-tested-at-a-nightclub-urinal>
But the Roos, who entered the game with just six days’ rest, were overwhelmed 
in the final quarter by the Crows, who enjoyed their bye last weekend. 
Adelaide, with on-baller Matt Crouch (32 disposals) and rising star Rory Atkins 
(21 touches, one goal) prominent, led by six points at three quarter-time. And 
their fresher legs then proved decisive, Adelaide kicking four majors before 
the Roos scored a late consolation goal – the Crows had 14 scoring shots to two 
in the final term.

The home side had earlier failed to capitalise on their dominance, kicking 3.8 
to 1.2 in the first quarter before a crowd of 37,890, the lowest for the Crows 
at Adelaide Oval. Many spectators were scared off by forecasts of 
thunderstorms, which didn’t eventuate. The misses proved costly in the second 
term when North found fluency.

The Kangaroos, with Jack Ziebell (24 disposals) and Ben Cunnington (26 
touches) influential, booted five goals to one to take a four-point advantage 
into half-time. The finals aspirants then went toe-to-toe in the third quarter, 
with Adelaide goalsneak Betts booting two of Adelaide’s four goals to help his 
side to a 8.18 to 9.6 lead at the last change. The Crows then powered to a 
ninth win of the season – one fewer than North, whose loss was compounded by 
the loss of utility Farren Ray to concussion in the opening term.



 