
Eddie Betts booted six goals as Adelaide ended North Melbourne’s AFL season 
with a 62-point elimination final belting on Saturday night, but two key Crows 
face tribunal concerns. Adelaide defender Kyle Hartigan was reported for 
tripping and fellow backman Daniel Talia could be charged with striking in the 
Crows’ 21.15 (141) to 12.7 (79) victory atAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> Oval.

The Crows advance to an away semi-final against Sydney, with Hawthorn to meet 
Western Bulldogs in the other semi-final. Qualifying final winners Geelong and 
Greater Western Sydney have secured home preliminary finals in a fortnight.

The Crows ended the distinguished North careers of Brent Harvey, Drew Petrie, 
Nick Dal Santo and Michael Firrito. With the Roos’ quartet not being given 
fresh contracts at the club, only Dal Santo offered evidence on Saturday night 
that their delistings weren’t premature – he was arguably North’s best player.

GWS Giants outgun Sydney to progress to AFL preliminary final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/gws-giants-outgun-sydney-to-progress-to-afl-preliminary-final>
Brilliant Crow Betts will star on the highlight reel but his teammates 
Hartigan and Talia will anxiously await match review panel verdicts after 
viewing the replay on Monday. Hartigan was reported on the spot for tripping 
Kangaroo Lindsay Thomas in the second quarter – the Crow thrust his left leg 
into Thomas’ knee. And Talia appeared to fell Roo forward Petrie with a left 
forearm in an act which sparked a fiery melee, also in the second term.

The incidents took some gloss off a polished second-half display from the 
Crows, who led by just 12 points at half-time. Betts then was a key character 
in a third-term onslaught from the home side: Adelaide kicked eight goals to 
three to book their semi-final spot.

Betts booted three goals for the quarter and helped form a dominant Crows 
attack also boasting Tom Lynch (four goals) and Taylor Walker and Josh Jenkins, 
who each kicked two. Adelaide defender Brodie Smith (29 disposals, two goals) 
and teammate Matt Crouch (29 possessions) were superb while the Kangaroos had 
few clear-cut winners - Dal Santo (29 touches) was industrious and Jack Ziebell 
(22 disposals) battled gamely, while Majak Daw slotted four goals and Thomas 
booted three.



 