
Thomas Kristensen scored a first-half brace as Brisbane Roar waltzed to a 4-0 
A-League win over a flatAdelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> on Sunday.

Snapping a frustrating run of four straight 1-1 draws for the Roar, 
Kristensen’s two goals came within the space of just three minutes, and both 
were served on a platter by Socceroo hopeful Tommy Oar.

Brisbane Roar hold on for W-League win over Adelaide United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/brisbane-roar-hold-on-for-w-league-win-over-adelaide-united>
Veteran Thomas Broich added the third in the 55th minute, steering a 
well-timed header past Adelaide captain Eugene Galekovic from a smart Dimitri 
Petratos free-kick, while a late Jamie Maclaren penalty was the final dagger.

The Roar remain fourth on the ladder, equal on points with Melbourne Victory 
and one behind second-placed Melbourne City, but have closed the gap on runaway 
leaders Sydney FC to seven points.

It was a spritely performance from Brisbane despite a sub-standard pitch at 
Suncorp Stadium, which showed clear signs of wear after a Coldplay concert 
midweek. However it did not overly detract from the spectacle of the match, 
played out in front of 15,605 fans.

The only concern from the Roar’s perspective was a calf injury to Broich, who 
was taken off shortly after scoring his goal.

For the Reds, it was a harsh reality check after breaking through for their 
first win of the season last week, and any hopes of a similar run to last 
season’s sensational march to the premiership-championship double looks 
unlikely.

Jamie Young started in goal for Brisbane, following Michael Theo’s late 
withdrawal due to a quad injury, and was equal to the task every time he was 
tested.

Adelaide’s best chances came late on, when the match was already settled, with 
Iacopo La Rocca’s crossbar-rattling header in the 64th minute the closest they 
got to finding the back of the net.

Former Denmark international Kristensen had no such trouble, striking in the 
28th and 30th minutes to take his season tally to four goals.

It was an unhappy return to Suncorp for Henrique, who was received warmly by 
his old fans but was responsible for the handball that gave away Maclaren’s 
85th-minute spot kick.

Maclaren nearly opted out of the match because of the recent death of his 
grandmother but decided to play on and dedicated his goal to her memory.

 