
Paul Jewell dismissed the risk in signing Luis Antonio Valencia in typically 
irreverent fashion when unveiling his World Cup discovery at Wigan Athletic in 
2006. "If it doesn't work out he can always double up as a Michael Jackson 
lookalike," proposed the then Latics' manager. Valencia has thankfully never 
had to resort to wearing a sequined white glove but, three years on, a more 
daunting tribute act awaits Cristiano Ronaldo's probable successor atManchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>.

Of all the leading targets for Sir Alex Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sir-alex-ferguson> once he banks £80m 
from Real Madrid for Ronaldo it is the player with the least fanfare that will 
inherit the biggest problem. It may be grossly unfair to compare a 23-year-old 
who has not performed in Europe with the current 23-year-old world footballer 
of the year, but that is the scrutiny Valencia will endure should he make the 
small but significant journey from the JJB Stadium to Old Trafford.

Whether he is capable of making that step, and filling the void created by 
­Ronaldo on his own terms, is the ­legitimate question that ensures risk again 
surrounds his signature this summer. The calibre of his admirers, however, tips 
the balance in favour of the Ecuador international.

Ferguson's scouts monitored Wigan's right-winger throughout last season, no 
doubt with the Ronaldo succession as a watching brief, and United have inquired 
as to the asking price since the campaign closed. It is understood 
complications over the fee, with Valencia's former club Villarreal due a 
sell-on fee of up to 20% presents a greater obstacle to the deal than the £17m 
valuation itself. £17m? For a club of United's resources and in the context of 
Real's offer for Ronaldo it is a modest sum, however obscene that description 
seems in the real world. But for a player of Valencia's achievement and 
top-level experience, if not his pedigree, the fee represents a sizable gamble. 
It is, though, £1m less than Ferguson paid for Nani.

Valencia has improved with each of his three seasons at Wigan, overcoming 
difficulties with the language (Emile Heskey thought the winger naturally shy 
until the arrival of fellow Spanish-speakers Wilson Palacios and Maynor 
Figueroa brought his personality to the fore) and the physicality of thePremier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> to justify Jewell's 
decision to take him on loan from Villarreal after the 2006 World Cup.

The former Wigan manager ­combined commentating for the BBC with ­scouting for 
unknowns his club could afford in ­Germany, although he spotted ­Valencia from 
the comfort of the armchair. ­"Valencia was the first name in the notebook," he 
recalled. "I was at home ­watching Poland play Ecuador on the first night and 
immediately wrote his name in the notebook. When I went over to Germany I 
watched him play against Costa Rica and England and was really impressed."

It was 15 months later, and with ­Jewell replaced by Steve Bruce as manager, 
before Wigan secured Valencia on a permanent deal for almost £5m. His pace, 
ability to beat a man and magnetism for the byline were instrumental in the 
Latics' recovery under Bruce, and hold ample appeal for a manager who has 
nurtured the best out of Ronaldo and Andrei ­Kanchelskis. Valencia's supply to 
Heskey was also key to Wigan's survival in 2007‑08 but the Ecuadorean's 
crossing remains erratic, as does his finishing, much to the relief of Ferguson 
when he lofted a gilt-edged chance wide against United in the recent title 
run-in.

Valencia has scored only six goals in 47 starts in the Premier League – 
further evidence that he is not a like-for-like replacement for Ronaldo – while 
he remains untested in the Champions League. Despite being named in squads 
against Everton, United, Lille and Benfica during Villarreal's run to the 2006 
semi-finals, he was never called from the bench.

Still the appreciation grows. Arsène Wenger called Valencia "one of the best 
right-wingers in the country" in April and Rafael Benítez was interested last 
summer when Wigan were not prepared to sell.

It is the former Wigan manager, Bruce, who captured the winger's appeal best. 
"Valencia has got that thing which not many players have anymore – the ability 
to dribble. Someone who can run with the ball, take it up the pitch and beat a 
man is now becoming a dying breed – there aren't many around. We don't produce 
players who want to dribble, we seem to produce the archetypal steady English 
player. If a player does want to take his man on and run with the ball, people 
will want to pay to go and see him." That is just what they are saying in 
Madrid.
 