
As a research and development worker with Coram in the East Midlands, I aim to 
be the trusted person adopted children and young people can turn to, building 
their confidence and sense of self-worth while recognising needs that are often 
invisible to the public

It’s 8am and I’m in the office on the phone to Alice*, an adopted young 
person, before she starts school. Her adoptive granddad has fallen ill, and 
talk of bereavement has triggered feelings of loss about her birth family, 
reigniting ‘why’ questions that she needs to share with someone.
 Lorraine Wallis, adoption research and development worker, Coram. Photograph: 
Coram 
For 15 years, I have been working as part of voluntary adoption agency Coram 
<http://www.coram.org.uk/>’s research and development team, dedicating 
continued emotional support to looked-after children and young people, who may 
have previously experienced loss and trauma. I’m there through the highs and 
lows of adoptive family life, whether it’s receiving texts about a relationship 
break-up or attending the wedding of an adopted young person I supported 12 
years ago.

Coram recognises that adopted children will always have feelings about their 
past, and as a result of discussions with adopted young people themselves I 
help the organisation develop ongoing child-focused support through group work, 
annual holiday camps and participation projects.

Mid-morning I’m sat with an adoptive family at their home in Nottingham. Last 
week at a group session, Zoe* confided in me that she had found her birth 
cousin on Facebook, but she didn’t know how to approach her adoptive parents to 
ask about organising a meet-up.

My role often involves me acting as a bridge between the young person and 
their new family, but my main aim is always to help children feel as though 
they are able to talk through these things in the first instance, to avoid them 
acting unsafely on their curiosity alone. If children worry or think the 
adoptive parents will feel threatened by their social media search, they won’t 
seek support.

Contact with birth relatives often centres on the young person feeling as 
though they are finally getting in control of the relationship. They hope that 
they finally might understand why this happened to them. At the meeting I try 
and help the parents see the situation from the child’s point of view. Because 
of the circumstances that led to the adoption, there are often difficult 
issues, such as mental illness or a history of abuse, to face when making 
contact with a birth relative so it is important to help the young person and 
their adopter think about how to manage their journey.

I worked with adopted young people during our group work sessions to produce a 
DVD,Contact in adoption 
<http://www.coram.org.uk/buy-our-dvd-contact-adoption-views-young-people-0>, as 
the young people themselves wanted a way to help adults involved in adoption 
understand contact from a child’s perspective. Sharing their stories on camera 
was not always easy, but it’s important to better understand adoptive young 
people’s interest in reconnecting with the past and why some want to do so, so 
I’m forever recommending the DVD to social workers and the parents I’m working 
with.

After lunch, I’m back in the office making last minute changes to the activity 
timetable for this year’s summer camp for adopted 11- to 13-year-olds. After 
resounding calls from the young people, the scheduled hike on the first day has 
been unsurprisingly replaced by the zip wire.

Through Coram Adoption East Midlands 
<http://www.coram.org.uk/adoption/contact-us/east-midlands-adoption>, I run 
three activity-based camps throughout the year for different age groups. From 
listening to and understanding the needs of adopted children, it was clear that 
they need opportunities to build confidence and self-esteem that may have been 
damaged by negative birth family experiences.

There was one teenager, Robert*, who initially would only communicate his 
feelings to me by writing them down on a post-it note and shyly handing it 
over. But after attending several camps and group work sessions, he’s now able 
to give presentations in front of a room full of prospective adopters and even 
spoke at the 2014 NationalAdoption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/adoption> awards to hundreds of people. 
There’s no better job satisfaction than seeing a young person realise their 
capabilities while enabling adoptive parents to see their child’s positives 
being appreciated despite the trauma of their past.

More than a decade ago in initial consultations with adopted children, I 
discovered that they wanted more chances to meet with other like-minded young 
people from similar backgrounds who can share their experiences, and the 
holiday camps provide just that. One of the best moments was when 
eight-year-old Aaron* was cheering with everyone as his new friend braved the 
zip wire. He told me it was the first time he hasn’t felt different to everyone 
else.

*Names have been changed to protect confidentiality

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 