
My Role 

My role as a senior social work practitioner is to provide support to adopted 
children, their adoptive parents and their birth families. As part of my role I 
run support groups for adoptive parents and adopted young people between 10 and 
17 years of age. I also manage the letterbox exchanges, where adoptive families 
write a letter to the birth family to let them know how the adopted child is 
getting on.

 A lot of the support I offer is to families in crisis. I have had to deal 
with runaway teens, stealing, drug and alcohol misuse, suicide, child-on-parent 
violence and truanting from school. The list of risky behaviours goes on and 
on. My role is to prevent adoptions from breaking down where possible, causing 
children to return to care. I provide interventions, working together with 
other agencies and professionals to stabilise the family.
 Annice Thomas: ‘My passion is working directly with children and young 
people.’ Photograph: Annice Thomas 
A typical day

My first task for the day is to organise a speaker for our bi-monthly support 
group for parents. The group is now in its fourth year and has gone from 
strength to strength. Last night group members shared and supported each other 
so well that many didn’t want the session to end. We finally concluded at 10pm.

I receive a call from an adoptive mother who is at her wits’ end. Her 
12-year-old son stays out until 1am and then comes home high on drugs. The 
young person has from foetal alcohol syndrome and experienced historical 
chronic neglect. Hearing the desperation in the mother’s voice I make 
arrangements to visit the family the following day.

At lunchtime I meet a group of children at Pizza Hut. After eating, the group 
get serious as they discuss what it feels like to be adopted at school and how 
different they feel to their peers. Seeing the children talking so freely about 
their feelings is really rewarding.

I visit an adoptive mother and her 13-year-old son who are making plans to 
visit the place of burial of the son’s birth mother for the first time. I work 
with the young person to explore his thoughts and feelings around the loss of 
his birth mother.

The issues affecting my work

One of the main issues that affects my work is social media. It is impossible 
for parents to watch their children 24/7, no matter how tight the controls on 
computers at home. I have had to deal with adopted young teenagers who have run 
away back to their birth families because they have made contact on social 
media sites, unaware of the dangers they are facing.

Knowing a child will be placed with a 'forever family' makes me happy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jul/03/knowing-a-child-will-be-placed-with-a-forever-family-makes-me-happy>
What I love about my job

My passion is working directly with children and young people, helping 
families and individuals to process their pain and understand their life’s 
journey. I thoroughly enjoy working with the adoption groups, especially the 
children’s group. I have seen people grow in confidence and started to feel 
comfortable about being an adopted person.

The not so nice parts of my job

Every day I work with vulnerable individuals who have lived through abuse and 
trauma. I come into contact with young people who do not realise how special 
they are as their self-esteem is often non-existent. I often wish I had a magic 
wand that could make their pain disappear but I have come to accept that I 
cannot fix or change the past for these children.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.

Annice Thomas’ book for parents and professionals working with adopted and 
fostered children,I Don’t Know Why 
<http://www.authorhouse.co.uk/Bookstore/BookDetail.aspx?Book=432640>, was 
published in 2013.

 