
Adrian Newey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey> designs racing 
cars, but his true medium is air. What they say about him is that while he 
contemplates the shape of his next car, he can visualise the air flowing around 
it. In his mind he sees the invisible waves and currents, the areas of low and 
high pressure. Then he can start thinking about how to shape it.

That makes me think of someone like Antonio Canova, sitting in his Rome 
studio, studying a block of marble just arrived from the quarries at Carrara, 
then walking around the room to examine it from every angle and, as he does so, 
seeing within its rough form the outline of Psyche Revived by Love's Kiss, 
which you can see, two centuries later, in the Louvre. Some people have that 
kind of special vision, and Newey seems to be one of them.

The Red Bull RB6, the vehicle in which Sebastian Vettel won the Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> world championship on Sunday, is 
the latest of his masterpieces. Darren Heath, a gifted photographer who has 
been taking pictures of racing cars for 22 of his 42 years, reckons it to be 
the most aesthetically pleasing of the current generation of cars. If you could 
only strip off all the sponsors' insignia, Heath says, you would be able to see 
how beautiful it really is. Of course the most beautiful racing cars are not 
always the fastest, but there is a special satisfaction – at least for a 
certain type of enthusiast – when it works out that way.

Newey was born in Colchester 51 years ago and studied aeronautics and 
astronautics at Southampton University. But racing was his true love and after 
graduating he joined Emerson Fittipaldi's grand prix team in a lowly capacity. 
Within a couple of years he was working for the March team and designing cars. 
Soon it became obvious that he was the latest in a line of brilliant British 
racing engineers which began after the war with John Cooper and Colin Chapman 
and continued through Patrick Head, John Barnard and Ross Brawn. Interestingly, 
he sets down his designs with a pencil on paper – a sculptor who uses a chisel 
and hammer rather than a power tool.

Before the RB6, Newey's masterpieces included the March that won the Indy 500 
in 1985 and 1986, the innovative Williams cars which provided Nigel Mansell and 
Alain Prost with world championships in 1992 and 1993 and the McLarens that 
gave Mika Hakkinen his two titles in 1998 and 1999. Before he puts away his 
pencils for good, his cars will probably have won 100 world championship grands 
prix, far more than those of any other single designer, even the prolific 
Chapman. So the success of the RB6 is hardly a surprise.

Yet it might have happened almost a decade earlier. In 2001, when he was 
working for McLaren, Newey accepted an offer to move to the new Jaguar Formula 
One team, owned by Ford. Then he changed his mind at the last minute and stayed 
at McLaren – lured back, it is said, by the promise that he would be allowed to 
design an Americas Cup yacht, another of his obsessions. Jaguar stumbled along 
until 2005, when Ford's disenchanted bosses sold the whole operation – 
including the Milton Keynes factory and its personnel – to Dietrich Mateschitz 
ofRed Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> for precisely one 
dollar. Two years later Mateschitz made Newey an offer he couldn't refuse, 
believed to be a basic salary of $10m, and the rest is now history.

Newey uses some of his fortune to buy great racing cars of the past – 
including a lightweight Jaguar E-type and a Ford GT40 – and to drive them in 
competition with gusto if not great success. He is a boffin who dreams of being 
a different kind of hero.

We should be very proud indeed of men like Head, Brawn and Newey, but amid the 
celebrations for the triumph of a group of engineers in Milton Keynes and their 
resident genius it is a mournful thought that the rise to prominence of these 
brilliant, world-beating racing car designers coincided so exactly with the 
decline and disappearance of a once-thriving indigenous motor industry.

Harrison's pay packet is not boxing's biggest problem

Estimates of the number of punches landed by Audley Harrison in the MEN Arena 
on Saturday night range between one and two. Estimates of his reward for 
spending just under eight minutes in the ring with David Haye hover around the 
figure of £1.5m. Harrison is best remembered for winning the Olympic 
superheavyweight title in Sydney, for which he was awarded a £1m contract by 
the BBC – a deal which turned out so badly that boxing eventually disappeared 
from the corporation's schedules altogether. One should never mock a man brave 
enough to put on boxing gloves and climb through the ropes, however lamentable 
the consequences. It is the state of the sport itself, and the ethics of the 
men who run it, that deserve scorn.

Zizou on hand for José company

Give or take the odd minor eruption, things have been going pretty well for 
José Mourinho in his first season with Real Madrid. Yet Florentino Perez, the 
club's president, announced at the weekend that Zinedine Zidane would be 
returning to the Bernabéu as "presidential adviser to the first team". The 
statement continued: "Zidane will be readily available to the president and 
coach for all matters concerning the first team, with whom he will keep in 
frequent contact." You can bet José is thrilled to bits.

England's nutty new kit 

The thought was forming that the England rugby team's new strip was not so 
much anthracite, the description preferred by the kit supplier, as nutty slack 
(the name, for those born since the demise of the mining industry, of an 
inferior kind of coal). Then Martin Johnson's team produced their best 
performance since ... well, since you know perfectly well when, thus blowing to 
bits a cherished theory that a hideously overdesigned new kit is the surest 
possible predictor of imminent doom and total humiliation. This notion has been 
nurtured since Scotland's football team turned up 20 or so years ago in a strip 
that made it look as though they had forgotten to put on their shorts, and 
reaped the proper reward for their foolishness.
 