
Adrian Newey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey>, Red Bull's 
technical director and the most respected designer in Formula One, is worried 
about the safety of the new low nose which is the most conspicuous feature of 
this year's radical technological changes.

On the first morning of the opening testing session in southern Spain, which 
was remarkably quiet as teams came to terms with their complex new engines, 
Newey said: "The regulation has been introduced following some research by the 
FIA [the sport's governing body] which suggests that nose height reduces the 
chance of cars being launched [into the air] like the accident thatMark Webber 
had when he hit the back of Heikki Kovalainen in Valencia 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1mNgUQccbww> a few years ago.

"I must admit, I am concerned that the opposite may now happen, that cars now 
submarine effectively. If you hit the back of a car square on then you go 
underneath and you end up with a rear crash structure in your face, which is a 
much worse scenario."

Most of the cars introduced in recent days have had low, sloping noses, making 
them look a little like anteaters, though those unveiled by Mercedes andRed Bull
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> on Tuesday morning were less ugly 
than most. Newey added: "There have been some accidents where you think would a 
low nose possibly have made things much worse? There was the accident a few 
years ago where Michael Schumacher span at the first corner and somebody 
mounted him. Would a low nose have made that worse?

"I guess it's like all these things, it might help in some scenarios, it hurts 
in others. It's one which I must admit personally I'm not in favour of. For me 
it's introduced possibly more dangers than it has cured."

Red Bull's team principal, Christian Horner, when asked to comment on Newey's 
observations, added: "Adrian has never been a fan of this nose concept of 
torpedoing a car underneath another rather than going over the top.

"But that's the duty of the FIA and they're responsible for the safety in the 
sport. They've done their research and come up with the regulations. I don't 
think their regulations intended to have noses that we've seen, that aren't 
beauties, but their priority is for safety. Inevitably there will be concerns 
and differences of opinions."

The team's four-times world champion, Sebastian Vettel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel>, added: "First of all, 
there is always a risk when you step into the car and you cannot manage what 
you do, unless you don't run.

"The nose rule was introduced to stop cars from lifting off behind another 
car. Hopefully we will not have a situation like that. For some things they 
might be safe for others, maybe not … "

The 2014 cars come with a whole raft of changes, the most important of which 
is the power unit, in which the old V8 has been dropped in favour of a new 
1.6-litre turbo-charged V6. But, in turn, this has resulted in new aerodynamic 
regulations.

Jerez was a very quiet place on Tuesday as even engineers and mechanics were 
left scratching their heads as they completed system tests to make sure the 
cars were ready for the track. The four-day testing session will end on Friday 
and will be completed by two further tests in Bahrain next month.
 