
These should be joyous days for Red Bull as they prepare for their “home” 
grand prix in Austria next week on the back of theirfirst win of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/08/daniel-ricciardo-nico-rosberg-grand-prix-canada>
 in Montreal.

Daniel Ricciardo, who had already exceeded expectations, produced his maiden 
victory at the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve, and their four-times world champion, 
Sebastian Vettel, was more like his old self, taking third place to equal his 
previous best result of the season in Malaysia. And yet Sunday was, arguably, 
also the worst day in the history ofRed Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> Racing.

It started well enough, with an upbeat announcement that Adrian Newey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/08/f1-red-bull-fight-off-ferrari-to-retain-services-of-adrian-newey>
, the most successful designer in the history of Formula One, had signed up to 
a new multi-year agreement. In fact, Red Bull’s hand had been forced by a 
report in Germany’s Auto Motor Und Sport, which said that the company was 
building a new technology centre near its F1 base in Milton Keynes.

There would be new and innovative technical projects, ranging from road cars 
to aircraft, maybe even boats‚ and it would be headed up by Newey. That report 
forced Red Bull to issue a hurried statement and the team principal, Christian 
Horner, normally the most assured of performers in front of the microphone, 
looked a little uncomfortable as he fended off questions about the maestro’s 
future.

The statement said: “As part of this new agreement Adrian will work on new Red 
Bull Technology projects, as well as advising and mentoring Infiniti Red Bull 
Racing as it develops itsFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> cars over the next few seasons. 
The details of the new projects will be announced in due course.”

So that was all right then. Newey would continue to be involved with Formula 
One. But later in the day, on Sky TV, his tone was almost valedictory. “I’m 
looking forward to different challenges. I’ve had a great time in Formula One,” 
he said.

Then, on Sunday night, Newey revealed his frustrations with the sport. “I just 
feel, to be perfectly honest, the current regulations are very restrictive, 
which is a shame. It’s difficult to find new areas to explore as they are so 
tight, more engine orientated. They need more of a fundamental rethink in my 
opinion.”

So Newey will be hands-on for the rest of the season but then he will be 
backing away from F1. And Red Bull will face the impossible task of replacing 
the man who has guided them to four straight double world championships since 
2010.

Ferrari have had a hand in all this. They badly wanted to sign Newey and money 
was not an issue. One report said they would be willing to double his salary 
and pay him £20m a year, maybe more.

In truth Newey was never close to joining Ferrari. He hates politics, which is 
why he walked out on McLaren, and Maranello is worse, much worse than Woking. 
But Ferrari’s interest still gave Newey a gold-plated bargaining chip in his 
negotiations with Red Bull. So Ferrari, though they did not get their man, can 
still comfort themselves with the thought that they have destabilised the most 
successful team in modern F1.

The good news for Red Bull is that Newey is not leaving entirely. And he has 
in place a team in his own innovative image, including the chief designer, Rob 
Marshall, and Dan Fallows, who became the new head of aerodynamics when Peter 
Prodromou was head-hunted by McLaren last year. These are Newey men but they 
are not Newey. David Moyes was an Alex Ferguson man but, as Manchester United 
supporters will tell you, a little ruefully, he was not Ferguson.

Newey always wanted a fresh challenge for his creative genius and now he has 
one. “I’m 55 and not ready for the beach just yet. I wanted to try my hand at 
different things,” he said. “It’s been a fantastic time [in F1]. I’ve loved it 
but that’s the only job I have had, if you like, as a design engineer in motor 
racing.”

Newey joined Red Bull in 2006 and he is not leaving yet. This is an exciting 
time for the company and himself. But it is also an exciting time for the race 
team’s rivals. And that is why Red Bull were not alone in their celebrations on 
Sunday night. Without Newey to contend with, there is suddenly fresh hope for 
Mercedes, McLaren and Ferrari.
 