
Adrian Newey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey> is the leading 
Formula One designer of his generation. While the drivers pursue the double 
world champion Sebastian Vettel this weekend the other technical directors will 
attempt to chase down the man who has made Red Bull the dominant force.

Their attempt to catch Newey has so far been about as successful as Wile E 
Coyote's efforts to catch Road Runner. Eight times Newey has produced cars that 
have won the constructors' world championship, five times at Williams, once at 
McLaren and twice atRed Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull>. Many 
of his rivals in Australia this week have worked alongside him at one of those 
teams during their careers.

A footballer once described challenging the Argentinian Ossie Ardiles as "like 
tackling dust". And so it is with Newey. Once his rivals catch up … he is no 
longer there. And last season no one got even close.

When the 2012 F1 championship gets under way here on Sunday Red Bull will once 
again lead the way, according to Pat Fry, the technical director at Ferrari, 
who worked with Newey at McLaren.

"I think Red Bull are ahead of the rest at the moment," Fry says. "Maybe half 
a second. We're guessing about fuel levels used in testing but I would say Red 
Bull are between five- and seven-tenths ahead of everyone else. I think it will 
be Red Bull, then McLaren and Lotus close together, and then us somewhere."

At Mercedes Bob Bell, who designed Fernando Alonso's championship-winning car 
at Renault in the middle of the last decade, also believes that Newey will once 
again lead the field on Sunday.

"I think Red Bull have an advantage, a close one, if you look at the testing 
results," he says. "But I don't think they as far ahead as last year. Maybe 
they were sandbagging in Barcelona.

"I would make them No1 and then McLaren and then there are a group, ourselves, 
Lotus and Sauber, all ahead of Ferrari, and not far behind McLaren."

But how does Newey do it, again and again? McLaren's technical director, Paddy 
Lowe, worked with him at Williams and McLaren: "He is a great aerodynamicist – 
he's got great flair. He's very creative and innovative. He has a very good 
understanding of the car as a whole. He has worked with the car at all levels 
from the early 80s. He's very talented. Now, with bigger teams, it's difficult 
for engineers to get the range of experience that I had. And Adrian had even 
more than me."

Bell does not know Newey as well, having never worked with the 53-year-old, 
but believes he puts a huge amount of effort into the detail of the design. "If 
you've looked at his cars, and the car is a reflection of the man, then you'd 
have to say that he's got an inescapable attention to detail On top of that 
he's original. He sees the bigger picture, the complete car, so it has his 
hallmark over the whole thing. It's not a collection of diverse solutions that 
have been brought together by different people."

Force India's Andrew Green says Newey is out on his own in Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>. "I've a lot of admiration for 
Adrian," he says. "I worked with him back at Red Bull. He's a very talented 
aerodynamicist and engineer.

"His way of working and his style of leadership is unique. There will never be 
another Adrian Newey. The way he is able to see the car in motion and the way 
he draw his plans is utterly individual."

James Allison at Lotus has been the technical director at his team since 2009, 
having joined Renault in 2005 from being head of aerodynamics at Benetton in 
the mid 1990s. Allison believes it is Newey's innovation and conceptual vision 
in an era where regulations have changed that has ensured his success.

"Adrian's just very good, an aerodynamicist who knows what a racing car ism," 
Fry adds. "He doesn't care or concentrate on reliability. I think we've all got 
a lot of work to do before we catch up with Adrian, but I hope we're getting 
there."

There is just one note of caution. At Mercedes, where they have had a heavy 
winter of recruitment, Bell wonders if Newey's solitary genius could backfire.

"You can't doubt his success. He is fairly unique. The only criticism you 
could level at him is that he does leave the team exposed if something happens 
to him. You have to be sure that the organisation that is left is able to 
maintain a high level of competitive design into the future."

Chasing Newey – the technical directors in his wake

Paddy Lowe (McLaren): A Cambridge graduate, he joined Williams in 1987 and, 
after winning the championship with them in 1992 was head-hunted by McLaren. 
Became engineering director and was appointed technical director last year.

Pat Fry (Ferrari): Joined Benetton in 1987 and moved to McLaren in 1993 to 
work on active suspension systems. Became David Coulthard's race engineer for 
four years. Moved to Ferrari in 2010 and became technical director last year.

Bob Bell (Mercedes): Joined McLaren as an aerodynamicist in 1982, progressing 
to future projects manager before joining Benetton, Jordan and Renault. Became 
technical director at Mercedes last year.

James Allison (Lotus): Another graduate from Cambridge, he joined Benetton in 
1991 and became head of aerodynamics there in the mid-1990s. Began five-year 
spell with Ferrari in 2000, joined Renault in 2005 and became technical 
director in 2009.

Andrew Green (Force India): Started his career as a designer with Reynard Cars 
in 1987 and moved into F1 with Jordan in 1990. Joined British American Racing 
in 1998, moved to Red Bull in 2004, and became technical director at Force 
India last year.
 