
When I started writing poetry, Adrian Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/adrian-mitchell> was a figure in the 
landscape, someone I partly took for granted, and partly felt as an encouraging 
presence, not just because he was a gifted and deeply humane writer, but 
because he offered a counterpoint to what someone with my interests and 
background could not help but see as "the Establishment".

Nobody understood better - nobody felt so surely - the intimate relationship 
between poetry and song. It was that understanding, as much as his political 
vision and his deep compassion, that singled him out on the one hand as an 
English poet in the tradition of William Blake, and on the other as a 
particularly European English poet, close kin to Prévert, say, or Eluard, in 
his wise engagement and intuitive musicality.

Auden famously declared that "poetry makes nothing happen" - by which, I 
think, he meant that we cannot expect from a poem some simple process of 
cause-and-effect. In "Talking Back (To WH Auden)",William Meredith 
<http://www.enotes.com/poetry-criticism/meredith-william> counters with the 
suggestion that

What it makes happen is small things,
sometimes, to some, in an area
already pretty well taken 
care of by the senses

and he continues -

It is like finding on your tongue
Right words to call across the floe
Of arrogance to the wise dead,
Of health to sickness, old to young.

Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> makes things happen, in 
other words, by equipping us with right speech, and so preparing us for right 
action - and, as such, it is an essentially moral discipline.

When I was starting out, a rookie poet with my head, as the French saying 
goes, "full of everything and nothing", I met Adrian Mitchell at a school in 
Surrey. By some mishap, we had been booked on the same day, with the same 
classes, and I remember the confusion that ensued when I arrived, far too early 
and not quite sure what I was getting myself into. By confusion, of course, I 
mean dismay. As one teacher put it, when I walked into the staff room clutching 
my folder of workshop ideas: "You're not the poet!" And, of course, I wasn't.

Now, looking back, I am a little surprised by what Adrian Mitchell's work, and 
his example, meant to me. Perhaps the best measure of "the poet" is how much 
and how well his work makes things happen, in that subtle and cumulative way 
that Meredith talks about - how it helps us discover the right words on the 
tongue for an "order revealed by the closest looking" - and Adrian Mitchell 
always lived up to that standard.

I am sure there are many who saw him just as I did, at that first meeting, and 
on the rare occasions when our paths crossed over the years - as a fixture, 
someone we could depend upon to speak out, honestly, and with that rare mix of 
good judgment and engagement that so few of us achieve - and I am sure that 
there are many more for whom, sometimes, in an area pretty well taken care of 
by the senses, his poems made small but significant things happen, things we 
have all been

changed by and had never seen, 
might never have seen, but for them.
 