
Adrian Newey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey>, the creative 
genius behind Red Bull’s four double world championships, has revealed how 
frustrated he became with the Renault engine before he decided to become less 
involved with the Formula One team. “It’s very frustrating that we’ve been 
pushed into a position where we’ve got an engine which is quite a long way 
behind, with all sorts of failings, and with no obvious light at the end of the 
tunnel,” he says.

“You can say: ‘OK, Mercedes have done such a good job, Ferrari are now doing a 
better job and Renault haven’t got it together.’ But at the same time I think 
the FIA needs to be a bit more active rather than being completely passive and 
saying: ‘Well, that’s not our problem.’ They can’t just give up – there has to 
be some governance.”

The 56-year-old had his words vindicated on the first occasion the Red Bulls 
ran in anger in Saturday afternoon’s qualifying: Daniel Ricciardo and Daniil 
Kvyat were seventh and 13th respectively.

The word genius is not used flippantly in the case of Newey, the finest F1 
designer of his time. He has produced 10 cars that have won the constructors’ 
world championship, five at Williams, four atRed Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> and one at McLaren, who, at this 
particular moment, must regret his departure more keenly than anyone. That is 
why his withdrawal from the F1 frontline is a source of great regret, though 
his opponents are likely to get over it quickly enough.

Newey referred to the fundamental uncompetitive nature of the current engine 
when he said: “It’s one thing being in the position where you’re not 
competitive but you can see your way out of it. It’s another thing when you’re 
not competitive and your partner doesn’t seem to be willing to engage.

“I honestly don’t know the reason for it. It seems to be: ‘Yes, we hear you 
say’, talk. In pre-season testing, we had 12 days and a filming day in which I 
think we had six major failures. So our mileage was very restrictive through 
engine problems and as measured by the torque sensor through those tests, the 
power we have is exactly the same as last year.”

Newey is also unhappy about the way the engine has become more important in 
the modernFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> car. 
“There’s three main performance differentiators if you like, the driver, the 
chassis and the engine, and with the current regulations, the engine is 
disproportionately important, whilst the chassis regulations have become very, 
very restrictive,” he says.

“The car is not designed for you but there is very little room for manoeuvre. 
The cars are a combination of fairly prescriptive regulations that have become 
more prescriptive every year for six seasons.

“The cars are converging. You’ve only got to look at the cars out there. Apart 
from the small differences in the nose shape if you painted all the cars white, 
you’d need to be a reasonably good observer to know which one was which.”

It is Newey’s hatred of politics that is another reason for his disenchantment 
with F1. Politics drove him out of McLaren and may have had a bearing on his 
decision not to join Ferrari, the most political of all teams, who last year 
were prepared to offer him a fortune, even by F1 standards, to move to Italy. 
Newey is still overseeing the design of the Red Bull, but is now devoting his 
time to other projects, such as helping design a boat forBen Ainslie’s 
America’s Cup challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/04/ben-ainslie-adrian-newey-americas-cup-f1>
.

“I felt ready to get involved in other areas, really,” he says. “So far it’s 
mainly been at the simulation level. We’re now getting to a point with the 
aerodynamics and layout and hydrodynamics of the boat as well, so I have 
started to get involved with that as well.”

Newey’s move is a strange one, but not for the former Mercedes technical 
director Bob Bell, who says: “Adrian’s got an inescapable attention to detail. 
And he will invest a huge amount of effort into detail.

“On top of that he’s original. He sees the bigger picture, the complete car, 
so it has his hallmark over the whole thing. It’s not a collection of diverse 
solutions that have been brought together by different people.”

It still seems a strange move, though, for a man who has never shown any 
particular interest in boats. Newey says he has also started working on a road 
car. “It is the early stages but we are up and running.

“We’re talking to various people in terms of partnerships but at the moment 
we’re doing it off our own back and are looking for a partner. We are keen to 
get something going.”

Newey said that he had already got drawings down on paper. But would the new 
car be powered by Renault? “I can’t talk about perspective partners,” he said 
diplomatically.
 