
Kayaking, Uganda  


Jinja, Uganda, is a town on the banks of the Nile that is gaining a reputation 
as the extreme sports capital of east Africa. This is, in part, thanks to the 
range of whitewater rapids on the nearby stretch of the river Nile. It is where 
Sam Ward (Team GB freestyle kayaking coach) and Emily Wall (two-time British 
champion) decided to set up their school, Kayak the Nile. "I have kayaked 
across five continents," says Emily, "yet I've chosen to call the Nile home. 
The whitewater we have here is unique: not only are the rapids warm and deep 
(with no rocks or crocodiles), but the sun shines and the water flows all year 
round."

Expedition days start on tranquil Bujagali Lake, a large expanse of 
picturesque flat water, with practice runs breaking in and out of fast-moving 
water before finally, with much trepidation, you kayak the churning grade-three 
rapid that is aptly named Jaws. This stretch of the river, with its selection 
of grade-five and grade-six rapids (not for learners) attracts adrenaline 
seekers from around the world. There are a number of reasons why Uganda is an 
amazing place to learn to whitewater kayak: average air temperatures of around 
22C (which means shorts and T-shirts, not wetsuits), dam-controlled water 
(meaning you get a consistent run over the rapids) and plenty of routes to try. 
There really is something for everyone, regardless of ability or confidence 
level.
• One-day introduction to whitewater kayaking £70, +256 772 880322, 
kayakthenile.com <http://kayakthenile.com/>

Biking Kilimanjaro, Tanzania and Kenya

Walking up Kilimanjaro is a well-known adventure but what about cycling around 
it? Starting in the Chyulu hills on the Kenyan side, the route keeps the great 
mountain in sight while traversing the Maasai plains – red-dirt roads, termite 
mounds, grazing savannah animals – towards the market village of Loitokitok. It 
then then crosses into Tanzania and skirts the south side of the mountain, 
going through rainforest and banana plantations plus villages of the Chagga 
people.
• The 10-day trip including most meals, three nights in a hotel and six nights 
camping, costs £2,425pp including flights (land only £1,645). 01768 773966,
keadventure.com 
<http://www.keadventure.com/trip/akmb/mountain-biking-around-kilimanjaro.html>

Island safari, Madagascar

Based on Nosy Be, a small but busy island off the north-west coast of 
Madagascar, this adventure takes you by dhow or houseboat along the coast to a 
backwater of coral reefs, ylang-ylang plantations, lemurs, mangroves and rustic 
campsites. The coast is exquisite, with great snorkelling, including sightings 
of turtles if you're lucky. But this is not a luxury tour: nights are in simple 
A-frame huts. The joy is in getting off the tourist track into a timeless and 
a laid-back Madagascar few get to see.
• From £420 for six nights including all meals but not flights. +27 21 783 
3536,madagascarislandsafaris.co.za 
<http://madagascarislandsafaris.co.za/dhow-safaris/> 

Great white shark dive, South Africa
 A great white shark off Gansbaai, South Africa. Photograph: Franck 
Robichon/EPA 
Cage diving with sharks has attracted bad publicity because of "chumming": 
filling the sea with blood and guts to attract the animals. Apex does not do 
that, instead using local knowledge to find the sharks. Gaansbai is the best 
spot to see great whites between October and January as they come looking for 
snacks from the 40,000-strong fur seal colony. If you've never done it, this is 
an adrenaline-pumping experience. You slide into the water protected by the 
cage, and the sharks, ever curious, mosey past. At other times of year it is 
better to take a boat to Seal Island – with August the peak time for 
spectacular breaching behaviour.
• One-day trip from Gaansbai including breakfast and dive equipment, £80. If 
no sharks are sighted you get a voucher to do it again. +27 79 051 8558,
apexpredators.com <http://www.apexpredators.com/>

Walk the Rim of Africa, South Africa

A 372-mile trail that curls around the base of the continent, the Rim of 
Africa is a charitable venture that is working to connects a host of nature 
reserves, wildernesses and private ranches into a single world-class trail. The 
full hike would take 52 days, some of them quite gruelling, but there are 
shorter options along a route that starts in the Cederberg mountains in the 
west and finishes in the Eastern Cape at the Outeniqua mountains. This is 
proper mountain backpacking; facilities are few and far between but the rewards 
are immense with fabulous views, flora and fauna, and remote caves where you 
might come across ancient rock paintings.
• Seven-day guided tour from £550, including all meals. + 27 76 453 2366, 
rimofafrica.co.za <http://rimofafrica.co.za/Rim_of_Africa/Welcome.html>

Sand and shore, Algeria
 Camels in Timimoun, Algeria 
Algeria is opening up as a fascinating destination for the intrepid traveller. 
This exploratory tour is a good introduction for the first-time visitor, 
covering some of the highlights of the country in a nine-day trip: the 
spectacular M'zab valley with the old Roman port of Tipaza, the fascinating 
Berber town of Tlemcen, and Algeria's second city, Oran. There's also the 
capital, Algiers, which offers an engaging mix of modernity, Ottoman grandeur 
and colonial chic.
• £1,695pp including all meals, but not flights. Departs 29 March. 020-7736 
3968,wildfrontierstravel.com 
<http://www.wildfrontierstravel.com/gb/group-tours/algerian-sands/2000569>

Biking the High Atlas, Morocco

Starting in Ouirgane, 40 miles south of Marrakech, this epic bike ride goes 
through a mountain landscape of stark limestone peaks and verdant valleys. The 
going is not easy: roads are never more than rough tracks and frequently just 
mule paths – in fact some stretches are unrideable and mules will carry the 
bikes up. But the rewards are enormous, with beautiful stone-and-adobe villages 
unchanged in centuries plus amazing views across the Atlas mountains.
• An eight-day trip with six days of biking and hiking, departing October 
2014, costs £870. 020-8150 6131,epicmorocco.co.uk/mountainbiking 
<http://www.epicmorocco.co.uk/tour/high-atlas-traverse/>

Get (really) off the beaten track, South Atlantic
 Jamestown, capital of St Helena. Photograph: Alamy 
An island you can only get to after a five-day boat trip must be a serious 
lure for the intrepid. But in 2016, when the airport opens on St Helena (where 
Napoleon was exiled in 1815), this speck, 1,750 miles from the nearest land, 
will lose the sense of isolation that provides much of its charm. For now, you 
get there on the world's last working Royal Mail ship, which has launched a 
19-day Hideaway Tour taking in the island's main sites (including the Boer POW 
camp, Napoleon's residences and the famous giant tortoise at Plantation House) 
as well as 10 days on the boat (part of the adventure). Add in tiny Tristan Da 
Chuna, 1,510 miles south and you can tick the most remote inhabited island in 
the world off your list.
• 19 days from £2,745 all-inclusive. 020-7575 6480, rms-st-helena.com 
<http://rms-st-helena.com/>

On the wild side, Zimbabwe

Gonarezhou national park 
<http://www.zimparks.org/index.php/parks-overview/national/gonarezhou> is one 
of Africa's true wilderness areas, a 5,000sq km slice of rugged forests and 
rivers in south-east Zimbabwe. Along with neighbouring Kruger national park in 
South Africa and Mozambique's Limpopo national park, it forms part of the vast 
Greater Limpopo ecosystem. Wildlife here can be wary: the park reopened in 1994 
after years of being off-limits due to war – and there's a real sense of 
remoteness. In the heart of the park is the Chilo Gorge Safari lodge, run by 
Clive Stockil, a renowned conservationist who has spent 40 years working with 
rhinos in theSave Valley <http://savevalleyconservancy.org/>. Walks from the 
lodge include a 3km trail to the Chivilila Falls, and you can spend three 
nights in a bush camp deep in this magical part of Africa.
• A seven-night trip including flights, two nights at Chilo Gorge Safari Lodge 
and three nights camping costs from £2,910 all-inclusive, including 
international flights. 020-8232 9777,expertafrica.com 
<http://www.expertafrica.com/>

Township Tour, Cape Town, South Africa
 Meeting children in Khayelitsha township 
Founded by local men Loyiso Mfuku and Mvuyisi Mbono, this Cape Town trip will 
take you to a part of the city not usually seen by outsiders: the toughest of 
townships,Khayelitsha <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khayelitsha>. Home to 
400,000 people, it is a world in itself with shacks sitting right by smart new 
homes. It is a place filled with energy (positive and negative), and a great 
spot for street food, markets and restaurants. The tour also teaches you basic 
Xhosa language skills (with clicks) (with clicks), takes you to a school, 
introduces local music as well as food and drink, and finishes with 
storytelling at the recycling yard.
• Full day tour £20pp, based on two-three people. Accommodation in local B&Bs 
can be arranged. +27 21 360 4505,khayelitshatravel.com 
<http://www.khayelitshatravel.com/>
 