
In the lingo of mergers and acquisitions, it'd be safe to call this a knockout 
bid. If you thought the world was in recession, media in structural chaos and 
the best days in advertising last seen in the 1960s - then Dentsu's full offer 
forAegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> tells a different story. The 
sleeping giant of Japan is prepared to pay 240p a share, or 17 times earnings, 
and even about 2.5 times sales for Britain's second-biggest quoted advertising 
group - the media buyer and digital specialist.

It's not hard to see why Dentsu is paying up. Aegis racked up 9.9% organic 
growth last year, which may come as a surprise to weatherbeaten Brits - but 
reflects that fact that if you globalise and invest in the right areas (read: 
digital) there is money to be made. Yet it is astonishing how few British media 
businesses are able to expand into growth markets; advertising, at least, is 
one of the areas where the British have been able to make headway.

Aegis says about 37% of its turnover was in digital last year. The company's 
advertising buyers helped persuade General Motors - a client - into dropping 
its spend on Facebook just before the social network's IPO. But if Facebook 
isn't so hot, Google is - clients want SEO advice or strategies for key word 
advertising - and digital is growing fast. In addition, about 20% of Aegis's 
business comes out of Asia, where revenue growth was 17.7% last year. Whose 
says media is dead? You just have to be in the right place.

Relatively small Aegis had been a bid target in the highly consolidated 'big 
seven' world of advertising, the jungle where the likes of Sir Martin Sorrell 
are kings. That it hadn't been eaten before was because it had become a pawn in 
the game of larger rivals. A Publicis proposed bid at 140p in 2005 collapsed 
after French plutocrat Vincent Bolloré seized a 30% blocking stake. At the time 
Bolloré looked like he had overpaid, and was for a long time an awkard 
investor, but on a seven-year view he has been spectacularly vindicated, 
roughly doubling his money, walking away with €915m (£722m) and a €450m profit.

Few tears should be shed for Aegis, which now becomes Dentsu overseas. Much 
the most interesting question is what Bolloré will do with his near billion 
euro windfall. The stricken Vivendi - home to Universal Music and Activision 
Games and, confusingly, phone companies in France and Brazil - would be an 
interesting place to start. The Frenchman already owns 2.8% after all. 
Meanwhile, whatever Bolloré does, today's deal (and other recent activity such 
as the News Corp break up) shows that after a long period of stasis, media 
deals are back.
 