
Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis>, the UK-based media buying and 
research group, has reported organic revenues up 3.2% to £663m in the first six 
months of the year.

The Aegis chief executive, Jerry Buhlmann, said that signs of an advertising 
"rebound" would deliver even bigger organic revenue growth in the second half.

Aegis, which said that organic revenue growth was 1.1% in the first quarter 
and 4.7% in the second quarter, reported underlying pre-tax profits up 8.3% 
year on year to £48.3m. On a statutory basis, taking into account factors such 
as goodwill impairment and restructuring costs, the company's pre-tax profits 
grew from £6.6m to £25.3m.

Underlying operating profits were up 19.6% to £61m.

"We produced a strong performance during the first half of 2010, confirming 
our expectations of a return to growth," said Buhlmann, giving his first 
presentation since being promoted on 1 May. "For the second half, we are seeing 
signs of a rebound in both the advertising and market research sectors. While 
it is too early to predict a sustained longer-term recovery, we are optimistic 
about the short-term outlook for both sectors."

Aegis attributed the solid results to strong performances in faster-growing 
markets such as Asia Pacific and Latin America. Aegis said that 30% of all 
revenues now come from such markets. Research operation Synovate also returned 
to profitability, moving from a £3.2m operating loss into £4.7m of profit, with 
organic revenues up 2.8% in the first half.

Aegis Media, the division comprising media buying networks including Carat and 
Vizeum, reported organic growth of 3.4% to revenue of £414.5m in the first 
half. However revenue at its Europe, Middle East and Africa operations fell by 
0.4% year on year.

Buhlmann was positive about the expectations for Aegis as a group for the full 
year, but added a note of caution about economic uncertainties, "most notably" 
in North America and western Europe.

"For the full year, we expect group underlying operating profit to be in line 
with current market consensus, with modest improvement in group operating 
margin, and a continuing trend of improvement in organic growth at both our 
businesses in the second half of 2010, compared to the first half," he said.

Net debt increased from £257m at the end of 2009 to £398m at the half year.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 