 Asne Seierstad's book about an obscure Kabul bookseller and his family and 
their experience of surviving the tragedy of civil war is a world bestseller - 
but its subject, Mohammed Shah Rais, is an angry man. The young Norwegian 
writer had a good idea - to live with Mr Shah for a few months and write his 
story - and at the time he thought it was a good idea too. Now he says of the 
book: "It is defamation of me, my family and my nation."
So, in a move that has unnerved the publishing world, Mr Shah has decided to 
do what no Afghan, or indeed anyone who has been the subject of such a book 
from a poor country, has ever done before. He has flown to Europe, determined 
to drag Ms Seierstad through the courts and campaign for the destruction of her 
work. "It is slander and salacious. I hate her," he rages.

Ms Seierstad, 33, is Scandinavia's best-known war reporter. In spring this 
year she covered the Iraq war from Baghdad. But one year earlier, after having 
reported on the fall of the Taliban in Afghanistan, she lived for several 
months with Mr Shah and his family. The resulting book, The Bookseller Of 
Kabul, has sold more than half a million copies in Scandinavia alone. It has 
been sold to publishers in 17 countries - including the US where it is due out 
next month - and has received rave reviews in Britain. No work of Norwegian 
non-fiction has ever been so successful.

Not surprisingly, it has propelled Ms Seierstad to fame and fortune. What is 
so gripping is her portrayal of the innermost thoughts of Mr Shah's family. 
Perhaps he thought he would be presented as a hero. After all, as he tells her: 
"First the communists burnt my books, the mojahedin looted and pillaged, 
finally the Taliban burned them all over again." But he comes across as a 
cruel, tyrannical patriarch. The women of his family, except for his new 
teenage bride, are treated like dirt. His sister, especially, is a virtual 
slave. His 12-year-old son is made to sell sweets rather than go to school.

So in the cruellest of ironies Mr Shah, who in the book is called Sultan Khan, 
is not only demanding "compensation" and "damages", but also says that many 
people, himself included, "would be happy to see it burned". Over the past 
three weeks, he has been conducting a media blitz in Norway. Soon he will head 
to Sweden and Denmark and then to the Frankfurt book fair, Europe's greatest 
publishing market.

The case has opened serious questions about the ethics of journalists and 
authors from rich countries writing about people from poor countries with very 
different cultures.

Friends of Ms Seierstad say she is angry that many who applauded her success 
over the past year have begun to board a bandwagon denouncing her. As one 
friend says: "This is not about the book, it is about Asne, and it's because 
she has become so successful that people are jealous and want to take her down."

Ms Seierstad is defiant. She says she made an agreement with the family that 
if there was anything they did not want published they should tell her. "And 
there were things," she says. Now Mr Shah has called her a liar, but she says 
that the book is simply a straight tale of what she heard and witnessed, 
especially the brutal treatment of Afghan women.

She says: "Lots of Afghan women in Norway have been calling to support me." If 
the case goes to court, she adds, she has no fear, because her lawyers have 
told her Mr Shah has no legal case. "I know I will win."

Still, the denunciations have upset her - like those from the Norwegian 
anthropologist and Middle East specialist Professor Unni Wikan, who doubts the 
authenticity of much of the book - "especially some of those bits she gives in 
quotation marks". He said: "There is no way she could have possibly had such 
access to people's hearts and minds. The moment I saw it in Norwegian, I 
thought it would be a catastrophe when it came out in English. She has revealed 
the secrets of the women, which is shameful and dishonourable. It will be 
regarded as an affront for its lack of respect for Afghans and Muslims."

In the book Ms Seierstad writes how Mr Shah's first wife is humiliated when he 
takes a second bride and "how sometimes she hates him for having ruined her 
life, taken away her children, shamed her in the eyes of the world". When a 
poor carpenter steals postcards from Mr Shah, the bookseller insists on his 
imprisonment, despite his own family's entreaties that the carpenter's children 
"might die of starvation".

Mr Shah, one of whose shops is in the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul, says 
all this has impugned his honour and that of all Afghans. So he has engaged a 
high-profile lawyer in Norway, Brynjar Meling. Another of Mr Meling's clients 
is Mullah Krekar, a leader of Ansar al-Islam, an Iraqi Kurdish group alleged to 
have close links to al-Qaida, who is currently living in Norway.

Ms Seierstad's publishers are braced for the coming fight. Anders Heger, 
literary director of Cappelen, the book's Norwegian publishers, says: "We're 
not frightened. We're supporting the book all the way."

The author is also gearing up for the battle. "It is a total clash of 
civilisations," she says. "I am very surprised. I knew, and told [the Shah 
family] in advance, that they might not like the book, but I think it is 
important to write about real life in Afghanistan.

"I'm not saying there is abuse particularly in this family, but this is still 
a society where women have almost no human rights."
 