
There are five cinemas within 20 minutes’ walk, but on Saturday night, only the
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> Oval is featuring 
Showdown XLI. Under the stadium’s lights, Eddie Betts dips and turns. At times 
he appears to outrun his own feet. In a split-second he gets a metre on four 
people wanting to jump on his head. He makes people leap from their seat a time 
zone away. That he has been doing this for 250 games over 12 years is enough 
not to confuse him with talent’s idiot cousin, luck. Eddie Betts is “box 
office”.

 Back in 2005, Carlton took Betts with the third pick in the pre-season draft, 
stuck him under Brendan Fevola, and left him there. For five seasons, those 
Carlton teams were a circus. But watching Betts towards the end of his last 
season at Carlton – a year after he was the club’s leading goal kicker and 
runner-up in the best and fairest – was like watching an actor with a brilliant 
range of expression going through the motions in a movie directed by a 
superannuated coach and a script written with a paint-roller.

Port Adelaide hit fan who threw banana at Eddie Betts with indefinite AFL ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/banana-thrown-at-indigenous-player-eddie-betts-during-afl-match>
But when Betts made the decision to leave Carlton, he went home and cried for 
three hours. The day he left, thousands dropped their heads and sighed. 
Eight-year-olds with posters on their walls sobbed for days. Betts was 26 years 
old. In his nine seasons he had kicked 290 goals, which was good enough for 
Carlton to decide that they couldn’t afford to keep him.

At 5ft 8in, if you piled up Betts’ Adelaide contract in cash he could probably 
hide behind it. But there would be no need, as there is barely a Carlton (or 
football) supporter that would begrudge him what he has. Betts’ manager and his 
Under-18 coach at Templestowe, Tom Petroro, has said that when he first met 
Betts, he had “virtually no money or clothes or anything”. It is a sad echo of 
the story of Jeff Garlett, who lived in his car for a year while playing with 
Swan Districts. Nothing has come easy.

 You could also mount an argument that he is underpaid, given it is shy of the 
dollars Carlton sent up in thick white smoke on a footballer whose time at the 
club has been both not terrible and, in the context of his contract, not 
completely credible. While Dale Thomas may be the antithesis of a young and 
optimistic era at Carlton, Betts is the name in bold at the top of the poster 
for the thrill-a-minute Crows. “Every time I go near the ball, they cheer my 
name,” Betts told SEN on Friday.

 On Saturday, Betts kicked five goals in Adelaide’s crucial 15-point win over 
Port Adelaide, and set up a few more. As much as a wave needs water, his want 
to score is elemental – as is his want to entertain. Betts is considered one of 
the greatest small forwards in the modern era. When you account for artistic 
expression, he surely must bethe greatest. He is a footballer, an entertainer 
and a role model. And while many footballers shrink from this responsibility, 
Betts embraces it. Once you are aware of his backstory on the mean streets of 
Kalgoorlie, his is an example that is relevant and inspiring for so many. “It’s 
not just being a role model for Indigenous players, it’s non-Indigenous players 
and young kids that look up to you,” Betts told the Herald Sun in 2010.

Adelaide win Showdown as Betts brings up 250 AFL games with five goals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/swans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match>
Betts’ 250th game provided the ideal opportunity to celebrate a brilliant 
footballer that captures all we love about our game. But moments after Betts 
kicked his fifth goal, an ignorant, tightly wound ball of hate threw a banana. 
That somebody would take a celebration and ignite it with the accelerant of 
racism should come as no surprise to those of us who watched theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> play to the old guard of the Political 
Correctness Revolution last year with its disingenuous response to Adam Goodes’ 
vilification.

If the response sent a message it was that football continues to help less 
committed racists scratch their itch. And all this two years after Eddie 
McGuire saw fit to make his King Kong joke on his morning commercial radio 
show. That the banana thrower also allegedly mouthed “monkey” means only those 
who take their cues from a Sam Newman set piece will not see this for what it 
is. The signal could not be louder – this is no dog-whistle. Throwing bananas 
at black players has been a notorious racist attack in European football for 
nearly 50 years.

John Barnes, the former English international who endured racial abuse 
throughout his career, believes that football reflects a society taking time to 
shed its ingrained prejudices. In 2011, he told the Daily Telegraph that he had 
endured thrown bananas and monkey chants for years.

As mentioned in the introduction to The Biggest Game in Town: An Analysis of 
the AFL’s Vilification Policy, the photograph of Barnes kicking bananas off the 
pitch at Everton in 1987 has come to represent race issues in English football, 
as much as Wayne Ludbey’s image of Nicky Winmar famously raising his jumper at 
Victoria Park in 1993 has for the AFL.

Betts didn’t leave the Carlton circus to play at a zoo. The AFL has a rare 
opportunity in Australian public life to be an agent for social change. Along 
with Port Adelaide they must ensure the person responsible for this act is 
punished in a way that it sends a message even the most mindless can comprehend.

Adelaide’s potential to go deep into September – and even into October – gives 
us the opportunity to see Betts on the game’s biggest stage. We are the 
beneficiaries of his greatness. This is what we should be celebrating.

The kids who cried when Betts left Carlton, cried because their hero left. 
That their hero was Indigenous should be feted in the same way that Betts 
celebrates his talents, with a joie de vivre.

The same joie de vivre that was on show on Saturday night at the Adelaide 
Oval, when dipping and turning and kicking goals and outrunning his own feet 
and making people leap from their seats a time zone away, Betts proved once 
again he is “box office”.
 