
The Hawks rediscover the need for speed

One of the many ways West Coast showed up Hawthorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn> in the qualifying final was in 
exposing the Hawks’ lack of speed. With Isaac Smith hobbled by a leg injury and 
Brad Hill down on form, too much of Hawthorn’s run and carry was left to Cyril 
Rioli – and we all know those fragile hamstrings mean No33’s best work is done 
inside forward 50.

Hawthorn trounce Adelaide by 74 points to reach AFL preliminary final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/18/hawthorn-trounce-adelaide-by-74-points-to-reach-afl-preliminary-final>
What a difference a week makes. The Hawks looked like they were running on top 
of the ground as they made light work of the Crows on Friday night. In part, it 
was due to their trademark slick ball movement and willingness to play on at 
all opportunities, but in part it was the form of their two speedsters when the 
game was there to be won. Smith looked a different player to the one who was so 
severely limited against the Eagles, providing valuable run and spread and 
burning off David Mackay to drill a long goal in the first quarter. He finished 
with 21 possessions, eight marks and two goals – a far cry from his hampered 
effort in the west.

Hill, too, had been down of form of late. At his best, the dual premiership 
player uses his blistering speed and creativity in equal measures. There were 
signs in the first quarter – gut running to make space, showing poise with the 
ball - that he was returning to his best. Throw in the welcome return to form 
of Luke Breust, who was goalless in three consecutive games heading in but 
booted six to leave Adelaide’s backline all at sea, and there are three 
significant weapons Ross Lyon has to factor for this week. The Hawks threw down 
the gauntlet on Friday night, and it’s up to the Dockers to respond. What a 
tantalising contest it will be.

Adelaide make a grave error in the coaching box

A few eyebrows were raised during the week when Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> interim coach Scott Camporeale 
said he’d back in his side to continue their attacking ways against the 
reigning premiers. “Sometimes you can worry more about the opposition than what 
you want to achieve,” he mused. “We will have plans, but we will also back our 
systems in.”

Beating the young Bulldogs in a hugely entertaining elimination final – in 
which the 109-102 scoreline resembled a basketball match more than anAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> final – was one thing, but it was 
always unlikely the same run-and-run ideology was going to work against a team 
like Hawthorn.

If anything, West Coast and before them Port Adelaide and Richmond provided 
the blueprint to beat the Hawks. Top of the list: pressure the ball carrier 
(the Eagles did this to such great effect in the second quarter of the 
qualifying final that the Hawks went at just 49% kicking efficiency) and 
restrict Hawthorn’s uncontested marks around the ground. Fail to do these 
things, and the Hawks will simply cut you up time and time again.

The semi-final was already over by the time Jordan Lewis slotted his side’s 
eighth goal after the quarter-time siren – but sirens should have been sounding 
in the Crows’ coaching box at the fact Hawthorn had a staggering 37 more 
uncontested marks in the first stanza alone.

It’s not that Adelaide doesn’t boast firepower of their own, but only Patrick 
Dangerfield and Sam Jacobs were anywhere near their best. Ultimately, to beat 
Hawthorn, you need some brilliance on the field and some brilliance in the box. 
Adelaide’s gallant season came to an end with a little bit of the former and 
not enough of the latter.

Should he stay or should he go?

With Adelaide’s season done and dusted, all eyes now turn to star midfielder 
Patrick Dangerfield, still yet to reveal his playing intentions for 2016 and 
beyond. The best player to remain unsigned this late in a season since Lance 
Franklin in 2013, Dangerfield has been linked to a return to the Victorian 
coastal town of Moggs Creek and a hefty contract with the Cats for at least a 
year, and an increasing amount of Geelong insiders seem confident they will 
land their man.

Body language experts had a field day trying to analyse Dangerfield on Friday 
night. Was a pre-match pep talk by Rory Sloane a “so long, thanks for the 
memories” or simply talking tactics? Was the comforting arm around the shoulder 
by Scott Thompson just two team-mates sharing the pain of a loss or was the 
veteran saying goodbye? Was Dangerfield’s obvious emotion after the final siren 
simply the shellshock of a finals belting or something more?

Given Dangerfield is one of the favourites at Monday week’s Brownlow count, 
and the free agency window doesn’t open until 9 October, it’s highly likely the 
speculation will drag on for another fortnight.

Unlike Lachie Henderson, Adam Treloar and Jake Carlisle, all of whom have 
already requested trades, free agents who’ve changed clubs have tended to keep 
their cards close to their chest until the free agency window officially opens. 
Until then, all Adelaide and Geelong supporters can do is keep their fingers 
crossed he chooses them.

Sydney’s paper-thin forward line fails

If Lance Franklin’s withdrawal from the finals series had Sydney’s premiership 
hopes hanging by a thread, the sight of Sam Reid clutching at his torn 
hamstring early in the qualifying final was the final nail in the coffin. The 
key forwards joined midfield guns Kieren Jack and Luke Parker on the sideline, 
and it was simply too much for the Swans to handle.

Kangaroos bound into last four as Swans bow out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/kangaroos-bound-into-last-four-as-swans-bow-out>
At times on Saturday night, Sydney’s forward line consisted of second-gamer 
James Rose, rookie Isaac Heeney and 17-gamer Dean Towers. It was as threadbare 
as threadbare gets. Adam Goodes, who quietly announced his retirement after the 
loss, floated around but aside from kicking the game’s first goal had little 
impact. As for Lewis Jetta, he may have well have already booked his plane 
ticket back to Western Australia by the time he was subbed out after a 
lacklustre seven-possession effort.

No matter how much “Bloods spirit” you can instil in a side, no team could 
kick a winning score in a final with that much inexperience up forward. What 
would John Longmire have given for a second Kurt Tippett? The maligned big man 
was ended the season in superb form, equally as effective as the Swans’ 
starting ruckman as he was up forward. He kicked two goals on Saturday, both 
from strong marks, but was forced to spend the bulk of the game trying to 
nullify Todd Goldstein in the ruck. The dramatic decline of Mike Pyke this 
season has the Swans scrambling to recruit a ready-made ruckman for 2016, but 
Tippett’s career-best form has shown that he’s adept in either role. He was one 
bright spot in what was otherwise a below-par year for Sydney.

The North Melbourne conundrum

North Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne> made 
history on Saturday night, becoming the first eighth-placed team to make it to 
the preliminary final under the current finals system. Their two finals 
performances – a come-from-behind win against Richmond and a commanding win 
over the depleted Swans – have been near faultless. Yet for the second year 
running the Kangaroos find themselves heading interstate to face a white-hot 
opponent in the penultimate round, with few even willing to give them a chance 
of an upset.

Adam Goodes leaves a hole that only the truly great can fill | Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/20/retiring-adam-goodes-leaves-a-hole-that-only-the-truly-great-can-fill>
North Melbourne are the anti-Richmond. While the Tigers have looked a million 
dollars during the home and away season only to fall short three Septembers in 
a row, the Kangaroos switch it on when it matters but don’t win enough games 
during the season to give themselves a genuine opportunity to challenge.

During the season, they were smashed by Gold Coast and let a seven-goal lead 
slip against Collingwood. If they’d won both of those games they could have 
realistically found themselves challenging for top four in the final round. 
Last year, they beat the Dockers and Swans away, as well as the Hawks but 
inexplicably fell short against the Lions and Blues.

This is not to knock a superb performance on Saturday night – far from it. Any 
team with the midfield grunt of Andrew Swallow, Jack Ziebell and Ben 
Cunnington, the outside class of Brent Harvey and Shaun Higgins, the twin 
towers of Drew Petrie and Jarrad Waite up forward and the game’s best ruckman 
is clearly more than capable of doing plenty of damage. Pleasingly, the 
Kangaroos were switched on for four quarters, and were able to withstand some 
fierce Swans pressure in the third.

But the problem with North Melbourne isn’t what they do in September, it’s 
what they do in the 22 weeks preceding it. Perennial finalists like Fremantle, 
Hawthorn and Sydney know how crucial it is to bank enough wins to finish in the 
top four. If the Kangaroos develop the ruthless streak required to do the same, 
they may stop finding themselves faced with such enormous challenges to make 
the big dance. Because as the past two finals campaigns have shown, their best 
is all but good enough.
 