
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> and Geelong remained 
tight-lipped on the prospect of a blockbuster trade for Patrick Dangerfield 
when the AFL trade period got underway in Melbourne on Monday.

Dangerfield’s move to the Cats is a major piece of the trade period puzzle but 
representatives from both clubs declined to comment as they entered Etihad 
Stadium for the opening day of talks.

The 25-year-old is a restricted free agent but Geelong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong> are yet to lodge free agency 
paperwork with the AFL, which points to a trade being worked out with the Crows.

Adam Goodes credits Swans fans for giving him strength to carry on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/adam-goodes-sydney-swans-champion>
The Cats’ first-round draft pick of No9 will probably have to come into play 
for them to secure Dangerfield, who wishes to move home to be closer to his 
family, who live in the Victorian surf coast hamlet of Moggs Creek.

Representatives from all 18 clubs are scheduled to meet on the first day of 
the 11-day trading period, with several clubs expressing a desire to get some 
trades done early in the piece.

Collingwood recruiting manager Derek Hine confirmed that securing want-away 
GWS midfielder Adam Treloar is the Magpies’ main focus.

“Our priority is to get Adam done and we’ll look at other potential [trades] 
post that,” Hine said. “We’ve had some preliminary discussions with GWS.”

Brisbane midfielder James Aish has also requested a trade to Collingwood but 
the Lions remain steadfast in their position that they won’t be trading the 
former top-10 pick.

The Pies are set for a busy few days with Paul Seedsman, Ben Kennedy and 
Nathan Freeman all requesting trades. Seedsman is yet to declare his 
destination of choice, but Kennedy wants to join Melbourne and Freeman wants to 
play for St Kilda.

“We’re not going to be silly about it but clearly Nathan’s a first-round draft 
pick,” Hine said of negotiations for Freeman. “We’ve had some preliminary 
discussions with St Kilda and we’re really comfortable with where that’s going.

“I’d like to get that done sooner rather than later but nothing surprises me 
during this.”

It seems likely Melbourne utility Jeremy Howe will be on the move, with Gold 
Coast and North Melbourne among his keenest suitors. 

Carlton have shown interest in several GWS players, including Adam Tomlinson. 
But the Blues will also be busy organising trades for highly rated duo Chris 
Yarran and Lachie Henderson, who have made it clear they want to join Richmond 
and Geelong respectively.

The Giants are set to play hardball with key position player Cam McCarthy, who 
is being chased hard by Fremantle. McCarthy wants to return to his home state 
of WA despite signing a contract extension with the Giants earlier this year.



 