
Preamble:
So then, anyone out there not agree that Egypt are the best team we've seen in 
the tournament so far? Ivory Coast have intermittently harnessed their 
undoubted offensive power, Angola's front pair are nifty too, Gabon have been 
as well-drilled as we've come to expect under Alain Giresse, while by 
recovering from the brink of humiliation Cameroon have shown they retain their 
famed resilience, but no side has looked as consistently fluid and cutting as 
Hassan Shehata's crew – and that despite injuries to key players. All of which 
begs several questions, such as: isn't it a shame they're not going to be at 
the World Cup? Wouldn't it be intriguing to see how Shehata – on course to 
equal CK Gyamfi's Nations Cup record of three victories – would fare as coach 
of, for example, a Premier League club? And doBenin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benin> have any chance of winning today?

The answer to the last question is probably no, of course: not only because 
Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> have only a rested a few 
players, and in previous competitions have proved fearsome oponents even when 
already qualified, but also because Benin are deprived of their best palyer, 
artful PSG schemer Stephane Sessegnon, though at least his absence is enforced 
this time (he's suspended) unlike two years ago, when the German manager who 
took over the Squirrels just before the tournament inexplicably omitted him 
from the starting line-up in their most important game.

And another question: isn't the identity of today's referee an agreeable 
surprise? I've long wondered what he's been up to since the demise of Take Hart 
...

Egypt: 1-Essam El Hadari; 2-Mahmoud Fathallah, 3-Ahmed Al Muhammadi, 
19-Mohamed Abdelshafi, 4-Moatasem Salem, 5-Abdelzaher Al Saqqa; 8-Hosni Abd 
Rabou, 17-Ahmed Hassan, 12-Hossam Ghali, 21-Ahmed Raouf; 10-Emad Motaeb.

Benin: 1-Yoann Djidonou; 3-Khaled Adenon, 7-Romuald Boco, 5-Damien 
Chrysostome, 12-Felicien Singbo; 13-Pascal Angan, 18-Seidath Tchomogo, 4-Djiman 
Koukou, 20-Arnaud Seka, 11-Mouri Ogonbiyi; 8-Razak Omotoyossi.

Referee: Mr Bennett

3:58pm: I'm getting a little anxious: with only moments till kick-off, there 
is no sign of an end to the car race that Eurosport are currently showing ...

4pm: Ah, that was pleasantly abrupt: with not so much as a pointless montage 
to a soft rock soundtrack, Eurosport have veered from the Monte Carlo rally to 
Benguela, just in time to show the pretty woman that the camerman have picked 
out amid the sparse crowd - all over the world, it seems, the blokes who cover 
football have similar briefs. By which I mean 'assignments', of course - I've 
no idea what manner of underwear the Angolan cameraman is wearing, and rather 
hope he doesn't deign to reveal it ...

1 min: Ah, there I was lavishing praise on the camerafolks (whom I rather 
unforgivaly assumed were male) when it turns out they are not even pointing at 
the match we were expecting: contrary to their advertised schedule, Eurosport 
have decided to show us Nigeria v Mozambique ...

2 mins: Egypt are already a goal up against Benin thanks to El Mohamady, which 
means (a) victory here will put Mozambique through (b) my preamble is still 
sort of relevant.

5 mins: Mozambique venture towards the Nigerian box for the first time, only 
for Shittu to unceremoniously boot the ball back up the other end.

8 mins: Obasi profits from slack defending before cutting into the box and 
unleashing a swirling shot from a 16 yards that the keeper pushes away. It 
wasn't a particularly tough save - the shooter's angle was quite tight - but in 
a tournament in which the standard of keeping has been of the abyss (even by 
the usually accomplised Carlos Kameni, though not in fairness, by Didier Ovono) 
it deserves a mention. "In response to your question," begins Tom Maxted. "no, 
it is not a pity that Egypt are not at the World Cup. Otherwise England would 
have to face them." On the bright side, a Pharoahs' victory there might have 
increased Shehata's chances of being headhunted by a Premier League club.

9 mins: See that change of photo? Performed with Okocha-esque skill. You can 
thank Gregg Roughley for that. It might be the last piece of Okocha-esque skill 
we see thius afternoon, alas, because the Super Eagles, for all their crispness 
and solidity in midfield, continue to lack creativity.

13 mins: Mozambique attempt to familiarise themselves with the ball via some 
gentle passing in their own half, but once they cross half-way, Nigeria win it 
back. "Given your comment about the referee, it's ironic that the match has 
morphed into Mozambique v Nigeria," chuckles Chris Brock, who's clearly playing 
to the gallery.

16 mins: Here, at last, are the line-ups:
Nigeria: Enyeama, Shittu, Obasi Ogbuke, Yakubu, Mikel,
Odemwingie, Kaita, Mohammed, Etuhu, Echiejile, Apam. 
Subs:Ejide, Aiyenugbu, Yobo, Kanu, Nwaneri, Martins, Yussuf,
Olofinjana, Obinna, Odiah, Uche, Taiwo.

Mozambique: Kampango; Campira Samuel, Khan, Fanuel, Paito; Simao, Elias 
Pelembe, Miro Lobo, Genito; Dario.
Subs: Cossa, Lama, Hagy, Goncalves, Helder Pelembe, Parruque, Francisco 
Massinga, Vaz, Zinedine, Josemar, Sitoe.

18 mins: A sudden shift of pace and Mozambique thrust through the Nigerian 
midfield and find themselves in a promising position. Tico Tico laid the ball 
off to Paito, who had torn up from the back ... in time to spank the ball over 
the bar from 24 metres. Or thereabouts.

19 mins: That last break by Mozambique underlined the sluggishness of the 
Super Eagles. They have been ponderous and predictable in possession, so much 
so that their opponents appear lifted and now seem convinced their suprioer 
dynamism could be enough to give them the upperhand ...

21 mins: About a dozen dozen of you have pointed out that the Egypt-Benin 
match is on Eurosport 2, which, I guess, means it's about time I admitted I do 
not have access to Eurosport 2. Over there, it seems, Egypt are now 2-0 to the 
good. Here, meanwhile, Obasi has just perpetrated the miss of the tournament! 
After a freekick was nodded back across the goal by Shittu, Obasi headed into 
the supine keeper's arm from one yard! Unbelievable! "it was too easy," 
suggests Efan Ekoku from the gantry.

24 mins: Yakubu waddles after an intended through-ball, but Pelembe beats him 
to it and wallops the ball out for a throw-in.

26 mins: Odemwingie receives the ball some 15 yards out, swivels sharply and 
lets fire with a fine low shot. Kampango gets down well to thwart everyone's 
favourite Uzbekistan-born Nigerian international.

28 mins: Freekick to the Black Mambas. From 25 yards Lobo finds the target, 
but Enyeama deals with it comfortably.

30 mins: When Tico Tico wound up a shot from 35 yards, ridicule seemed the 
most likely outcome ... but in fact the 36-year-old hit a splendid effort, 
despite being off-balance, and forced a good save from Enyeama.

33 mins: Paito races down the left, looks up, and then sends a superb effort 
goalward from a good 25 yards out. Enyeama parries it again.

35 mins: Dominguez booked for felling Mikel - it actually wasn't him but Simao 
who committed the foul, which suggests the referee has made a mistake of 
identity -I can't mock him for that, however, because it is becoming apparent 
to me that the team sheet I have published bears little relation to the actual 
line-ups, at least not when it comes to Mozambique. This was one from our 
official suppliers, but it contains a couple of inaccuracies. I've changed it 
now though.

37 mins: Awful defending presents Yakubu with a one-on-one chance, but in 
keeping with the sluggishness of the Nigerian team, the Everton striker 
hesitates long enough for Pelembe to get back and dispossess him. It is only 
cleared as far as Odemwingie, however, and then his blocked shot rebounds to 
Obasi, who sends a rasper fractionally wide from the edge of the box.

39 mins: Bila booked for backchat or some such.

40 mins: Yet another fine long shot from the Black Mambas - this time Enyeama 
tips Miro's shot behind via the post. The keeper roars at his defenders for 
their repeated refusal to deny space for such shots, but is becalmed by the 
ensuing corner, which is feeble.

42 mins: Paito is having a terriffic game, continually bombing forward from 
left-back. This time he elected to cross rather than shoot, but it was 
fratctionally too high for Dario.

GOAL! Nigeria 1-0 Mozambique (Odemwingie 44') After all the decent efforts 
from distance by the Black Mambas, it's a Super Eagles show produces the best 
one: Odemwingie picked the ball up some 22 metres out and then sent a low 
left-footer past Rafael, who beaten by the power and swirl.

Half-time: Nigeria are on course for the knock-out stages, though have 
certainly not shown enough to suggest they will beat whoever they meet there 
(most likely either Cameroon or Gabon). Indeed, a Mozambique comeback here is 
by no means out of the question, as they were the more vibrant team for much of 
that first period.

Still half-time: The Nigeria players have taken to the pitch early, and are 
currently engrossed in a manly huddle in the centre-circle. Enyeama, for some 
reason, has changed jersey, switching from a bright yellow number into an all 
black one.

46 mins: Nigeria resume the game, and if the first few seodns of this half are 
anything to go by they will play with greater zip than in the first period.

GOAL! Nigeria 2-0 Mozambique (Odemwingie 47') That surely ensures Nigeria's 
presence in the next round. Mozambique's offside trap was embarassingly wonky, 
allowing Yakubu to skip free down the left and slide the ball across the face 
of goal to Odemwingie, who dutifully slotted it into the net. Too easy.

49 mins: Mozambique seem crestfallen since the second goal, and Pelembe seemed 
to have serious difficulty mustering the enthusiasm to chase after an aimless 
punt forward from Yusuf. Eventually he did decide to stretch out a leg and 
divert it to safety, a nanosecond before Yakubu collected it. The Nigerian 
would have been through on goal otherwise.

51 mins: Samuel smashes a freekick over the bar from 23.35 metres. "I have a 
Master's Degree in Philosophy and a big bucket full of motivation, but very 
little cash and zero job satisfaction," whinges Scott W. "I am, you might say, 
at a low ebb. But with the darkest hour coming before the dawn, I was hoping 
that you could ask your readers - the nice ones, not the smart-alecky ones - to 
suggest things to do with myself. I would oh so love to make a difference. Or, 
at least, to enjoy myself." Who amongst ye has the wherewithal to give meaning 
to this philosophy graduate's life?

54 mins: A snappy interchange of passes culminates with Mikel threading a 
perceptive ball through to Odemwingie ... but the linesman nullifies it all by 
wrongly raising his flag for offside.

56 mins: With the prospects of Mozambique storming back to win their first 
match in this tournament receidign faster than Prince William's hairline, 
Nigeria are entertaining themselves by knocking the ball around leisurely at 
mid-way.

58 mins: Miro clatters into Kaita well late, and is deservedly booked. 
Meanwhile, no enlightenment for Scott W is forthcoming from our seemingly 
equally nonplussed readers.

60 mins: During a break in play the camera cuts to the erstwhile buccaneering 
Paito, who's now gazing forlornly at the ground, as if he believes all hope is 
lost. Either he's convinced the Black Mambas' deficit is insurmountable, or 
he's deliberately impersonating our friend, Scott W.

63 mins: It's all gone a bit scrappy. Nigeria aren't particuarly bothered 
about seeking another goal, and Mozambique's belief has died. The game seems to 
be petering out. "Tell Scott W to go back to uni and get a proper degree!" 
bellows a sympathetic correspondent, who's named Kirsty and proudly adds that 
she is a highly-valued bachelor of arts.

65 mins: On the sideline Obafemi Martins has his hand down the front of his 
shorts, suggesting he's either preparing to enter the fray, or he has an idea 
of how Scott W might make better use of his time.

66 mins: Nigeria change: Martins comes on for Yakubu. Mozambique change: 
Josemar is introduced for Bila.

69 mins: That match perks up! Top-class football all round - Dominguez 
controlled the ball wonderfully on the right, then spun and crossed to Dario, 
who's strong header was acrobatically turned away by Enyeama. And with that, 
the standard of counsel for Scott W is also raised, slightly. "As one 
philosophy graduate to another, my advice is this," intones Andew T. "Retrain 
in seriously weird physics, invent a time machine, go back in time, talk your 
younger self out of philosophy and into seriously weird physics,
then your younger self will invent the time machine sooner and so be able to 
spend all the time you've wasted in this philosophical low ebb travelling 
through time and impressing historical ladies with your predictive acumen. And 
visit the races a lot."

71 mins: Another Nigeria change: Etuhu off, Ayila on.

74 mins: A dainty dummy by Odemwingie was the highlight of that little bout of 
possession play from Nigeria, and they were not terribly bothered when they 
eventually lost the ball deep in Mozambican territory.

76 mins: Paito lofts another centre towards the, well, centre. But Shittu 
clears. "I have two words for Scott W: civil service," wibbles Peter Wahlberg. 
"As both a philosophy graduate and government drone I can personally attest 
that he can take that big bucket of motivation and become one of the 10% who 
actually earn their money. Otherwise, might I suggest a move to Mozambique?" 
Presumably you did not write that email while earning your money, Peter?

79 mins: Much half-hearted faffing. "At the risk of being 'one of the 
smart-aleky' respondents, I would suggest that in terms of looking for 
somewhere to make a difference and achieve something in life, Scott W asking 
those who spend their working hours following a text version of Nigeria v 
Mozambique may notquite be the best people to ask," lectures Michael Hunt, who 
is presumably well aware of the fact that his name can be abbreivated to 
somethign bart Simpson might use when calling Moe's Tavern.

81 mins: Martins scurries after a long ball and Rafael hurtles off his line to 
collect. He pounces on it but then careers out of the box with the ball still 
in his hands! That's a yellow card for him, and a freekick in a dangerous 
location for Nigeria. Mikel rolls it to Odemwingie, who curls it over the bar.

83 mins: Mozambique substitution: Danito on, Dario off. Nigeria decide to make 
a change too, bringing off Odemwingie and throwing on Nsofor, he of the above 
photo. "The Black Mambas are not Mambas anymore merelyminhocas, which means 
earthworms rather than big chuffing Mambas!" So can I say that the early birds, 
in the form of Super Eagles, have eaten the worms?

GOAL! Nigeria 3-0 Mozambique (Martins 86') Paito, impressive going forward but 
apparently not so clever defensively, was robbed by Mikel at the edge of the 
area. The Chelsea player\s shot was beaten away by Rafael, but the keeper was 
helpless to prevent Martins slamming in the rebound. "I didn't write it while 
earning enough money, no," protests Peter Wahlberg quite a lot. "Though 
continuing education is always encouraged, so in a sense I'm working, as I'm 
now the only American who knows what 'wibble' means."

89 mins: Nigeria stroke the ball around, Mozambique scuff ineffectively in 
their wake. Only Rafael prevents further embarassment, thwarting Nsofor with a 
solid block after Martins had put his striker partner through with a neat pass.

90 mins: Any chance of a consolation goal for Mozambique evaporates when, with 
team-mates awaiting a cross, Samuel blazes into the sidenetting from an absurd 
angle.

Full-time: Nigeria are through to the last eight. Fleetingly they showed the 
quality that could make them a threat in this tournament - Odemwingie was 
especially bright - but for much of the game they were ponderous and if 
Mozambique had possessed a little more quality around the box it could have 
been a very different result. The Super Eagles and Egypt, 2-0 conquerors of 
Benin, will learn their quarter-final opponents tomorrow, and you will be msot 
welcome if you decide to follow that right here. Bye.
 