
It says much for the baffling politics of Nigerian football that a week before 
the Cup of Nations began there were moves afoot in the sports ministry to have 
Stephen Keshi replaced as coach. And it says much for the 52-year-old's 
strength of character, his combination of thick skin, single-mindedness and 
good humour that he was able to ignore all the distractions so that he stood on 
the touchline in Johannesburg on Sunday night beaming as only the second man – 
after the Egyptian Mahmoud El Gohary – to win the Cup of Nations as both player 
and coach.

He should have come here 17 years ago in this tournament as the captain and 
centre-back of a team whose younger incarnation went on to win Olympic gold 
later that year.Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> would have been 
favourites but, when Nelson Mandela criticised the execution by Nigeria's 
military regime of the dissident novelist Ken Saro-Wiwa, the president, Sani 
Abacha, withdrew the side. Although he shrugged off questions of destiny, Keshi 
perhaps felt he had unfinished business.

After all the near misses, the penalty shootout defeat on home soil in 2000 
and the five semi-final defeats since, Nigeria's great quest finally came to an 
end, serenaded in by the massed green and white hordes, at least two of whom 
were clutching chickens painted in national colours, while another wore a loaf 
on his head with the message: "Eat them like bread".

When Sunday Mba scored Nigeria's winner in the quarter-final against Ivory 
Coast, he became the first player from the domestic Nigerian league to score at 
the Cup of Nations since Emmanuel Okocha in 1990 and as such provided 
emblematic vindication of Keshi's much criticised decision to select six 
players from the domestic league. A week later and the Sunday service was 
resumed as Mba put Nigeria ahead five minutes before half-time.

The Super Eagles had begun more purposefully, bossing possession in the early 
stages, but aside from one Efe Ambrose header from a Victor Moses free-kick, 
they created few clear-cut chances. This is Burkina Faso's way, sitting deep, 
luring the opponent on and striking through the pace and strength of Aristide 
Bancé and the more subtle skills of Jonathan Pitroipa and Charles Kaboré behind 
him. Only a well-judged interception from Godfrey Oboabona – another of the 
domestic players – prevented Pitroipa playing in Bancé but, just as it seemed
Burkina Faso <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso> had stalled the 
Nigerian charge, Mba struck, controlling an awkwardly dropping ball after 
Moses's initial shot had been blocked, running on and jabbing a neat finish 
inside the right-hand post.

When they went behind against Ghana in the semi-final, Burkina Faso responded, 
showing a previously unsuspected attacking side to their game. Bancé was 
sensational that day but on Sunday he was superbly marshalled by Oboabona. 
Pitroipa, meanwhile, seemed to have a hamstring problem and was effectively 
snuffed out by Ambrose while Mikel had the better of his battle with Kaboré.

Only after Elderson Echiéjilé, the attacking Nigerian left-back, had been 
carried off did Burkina Faso begin to pose a threat. As if sensing a weakness, 
Kaboré drifted right and he and the substitute Wilfried Sanou tormented 
Echiéjilé's replacement, Juwon Oshaniwa. When Prejuce Nakoulma played in Sanou 
after 77 minutes it took a brilliant stretching fingertip save from Vincent 
Enyeama, Nigeria's experienced goalkeeper, to turn the ball wide.

That, though, was as close as they came and, although Nigeria contrived to 
squandered three counters by a combination of falling over and miskicks in the 
final minutes, the truth is they were comfortable enough. There was even the 
opportunity for a cameo appearance from Joseph Yobo, one great centre-back's 
gift to another.

Man of the match Sunday Mba
 