
Preamble 

Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> are long overdue a trophy – 
they won the African continental trophy in 1982, although their Under-20 side 
won the World Cup – but have failed to sparkle in the tournament so far and 
have the added difficulty of being in the absent Togo's group.

Michael Essien won't be there to add experience and bite to the Black Stars 
midfield after succumbing to another injury. Chelsea are coping well without 
him but Ghana may not.

Ivory Coast are already through, and if Burkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso> win they will join the 
Elephants in the quarter-final. If Ghana win they will go through. A draw would 
put Burkina Faso's Stallions through.

Afternoon. The Black Stars really need to twinkle today if they're to avoid an 
upset and qualify for the quarter-finals. Without Michael Essien's drive in 
midfield they looked lethargic against Ivory Coast, but one would assume (a 
dangerous business in this most surprising of tournaments) they'll be too 
strong for Burkina Faso this afternoon. But – and it's a big but admittedly – 
if Burkina Faso's Stallions can put in the kind of rearguard performance that 
earned them a point against Ivory Coast, they could cause a big old shock. And 
if the score is 0-0, they'll qualify without having scored or conceded a goal. 
Anyway, enough of that.I predict: Burkina Faso 0-2 Ghana

Today's teams

Burkina Faso: 1 Daouda Diakite; 5 Bakary Kone, 17 Paul Koulibaly, 4 Hamadou 
Tall, 2 Mady Pananadetiguiri; 8 Mahamoudou Kere, 7 Florent Rouamba, 18 Charles 
Kabore, 14 Jonathan Pitroipa; 19 Issouf Kone, 21 Habib Bamogo.
Ghana: 22 Richard Kingson; 12 Lee Addy, 7 Samuel Inkoom, 2 Hans Sarpei, 15 
Isaac Vorsah; 19 Emmanuel Agyemang-Badu, 13 Dede Ayew, 23 Haminu Dramani, 10 
Kwadwo Asamoah; 14 Mathew Amoah, 3 Asamoah Gyan.
Referee: Eddy Maillet (Seychelles)

The teams will be out at the November 11th Stadium (so called because it was 
the date Angola gained Indendence from Portugal in 1975) in Luanda very 
shortly. The crowd looks pretty sparse which is a shame considering the 
importance of the match.

The anthems have just quivered through the humid Luanda air so we'll have 
action in the next couple of minutes. But first an email: "Have you ever hoped 
a player is injured early more in an MBM than I imagine you are hoping with 
Mady Pananadetiguiri?" wonders Nick Dunkeyson. I've just seen the team graphic 
on Eurosport and they could hardly fit him into the right back spot on the 
screen. From hereonin he will be known by his first name, Mady. Sorry to have 
to duck out of it, but I don't want to be hoping anybody gets hurt. I'm a 
peaceful kinda' guy.

1 min: Peep! We're underway with Ghana dressed in red and yellow stripes 
shooting from right to left on my tellybox. Burkina Faso are dressed in all 
white. Ghana spread the ball to the right very early on and win a free-kick 25 
yards out on the right. They'll cross this in ...

2 min: They shoot instead. I believe it was Asamoah. It was a woeful effort 
swinging out and well away from goal.

4 min: Ghana play the offside trap to perfection to catch out Pitroipa. 
Burkina Faso will need to be similarly very well organised today in order to do 
spring a surprise.

7 min: Ghana have stepped up the pace in midfield and are quick into the 
tackle. Amoah bites and drives to 10 yards outside the Burkina Faso goal before 
rifling a shot at goal which is hurried and well over the bar.

11 min: There's been an injury to Bamogo for Burkina Faso which wastes a few 
minutes. Meanwhile, I'm being bombarded with all kinds of questions from a 
whole host of interested MBM readers. "I hear Burkina Faso are known as the 
Stallions," ponders June Ashdon. "Any idea why this is?" No, no idea June. Have 
you? Anyway, back to matters on the pitch Ghana are targeting Mady at right 
full-back and trying to work some crossing opportunities but their final ball 
hasn't been up to it yet.

14 min: Ghana slow down the pace of the game and seem content to play patient 
passing football. It's a great example of slow, slow, slow, quick as Gyan pings 
a ball into the feet of Asamoah, who gets a kick in the achilles. Free-kick to 
Ghana ...

16 min: The ball is played in deep to Asamoah, who is limping gingerly, but 
Bakary Kone leaps highest and heads the ball into the air for Diakite to catch. 
He sticks his boot in the air to ward off any competing challenge. Bit cheeky 
that - the ref ought to have a word.

19 min: "The key for me is Ghana need to take advantage of the lack of pace in 
the Burkinabe defence," reckons Stuart Anders. "As in the air they looked 
pretty solid against Drogba and the Ivorians. Tight game I think, but I going 
to say Ghana to sneak through 1-0." Well, you seem to know your stuff Stuart. 
I'm going to stick with 2-0 Ghana from what I've seen so far. They look the 
classier side and I think Burkina Faso will tire of defending so doggedly 
eventually.

20 min: It's been a bitty game so far. Burkina Faso win a free-kick all of 
35-40 yards out. Kingson lines up the Ghana wall as if he's expecting a shot 
... but they make a hash of it and Ghana win back possession.

22 min: Here's an answer for June Ashdon. "They are called Stallions because 
the horse plays an important part in Mossi-culture (the Mossi are the major 
ethnic group in Burkina Faso)." Thanks to Andrea Riester for that. Burkina Faso 
are beginning to look more threatening. Pitroipa tries to latch onto a 
wonderfully dinked ball over Inkoom from Rouamba but it just runs away from him 
and Kingson gathers the ball in goal for Ghana.

25 min I'm wondering whether there are more trumpets in the ground than fans. 
There's a fair old racket and a relentless calypso-sounding beat behind it. To 
be honest, it's more interesting than what's going on in the match. Burkina 
Faso overhit a long free-kick which runs harmlessly through for a goal-kick. 
Then Ghana make a mess of clearing the ball before winning a free-kick after 
some more shirt-pulling from Burkina Faso.

Goal! Burkina Faso 0-1 Ghana (Ayew, 30 min)

31 min: Diakite comes a long way off his line to punch clear a lofted ball 
into the box. He gets good distance on it but it drops on the right for Amoah, 
who curls a good ball into the box where the marking is nonexistent and Ayew 
heads into the left-hand corner without jumping. That was a poor goal to 
concede, especially after Burkina Faso looked to be getting a foothold in the 
game.

33 min: Ghana give away a soft free-kick 40 yards from goal on the right. 
Kabore stands over it and drives a deep ball into the back post where Ghana 
defenders are few and far between. Luckily for them, the ball clears Pitroipa 
and runs out for a goal-kick.

35 min: Pitroipa has taken a knock for Burkina Faso. He's their best player 
and as he's carried off on a stretcher there's an anxious look on the face of 
Burkina's head coach. They play on with 10 in the hope that the influential 
Pitroipa will recover. Meanwhile, Ghana attack down the left and get a cross 
into the six-yard box which Asamoah can't get on the end of.

39 min: Tall steps out from the centre-back position to cover for Mady who has 
gone walkabout at right full-back. He times his tackle to perfection, but then 
watches a team-mate give away a needless free-kick. Ghana waste it though, much 
to Tall's relief.

41 min: "Re 22 min," begins Colin Greer. "Pardon my ignorance, but do Lions 
play an important part in English culture?" Hmmm. No Colin, but isn't most of 
English culture imported? Curry, Ikea, Starbucks ... etc and so on. I hate 
being English.

43 min: Pass. Kick. Foul. Pass. Kick. Foul. That pretty much sums up the last 
few minutes and much of the first half. It's been stop-start and low on 
quality. The dry pitch can't be helping the pace of the game, but too often in 
midfield the ball is being given away. Pitroipa is back on for Burkina Faso but 
he is moving gingerly.

45 min: Pitroipa tries to beat two Ghana defenders by bursting straight 
through the middle of them, but they shut the door on him on the edge of the 
18-yard box and the danger is averted. A long ball from Burkina Faso to 
Pitroipa almost works as it beats the defenders but Kingson is quick off his 
line and gathers the ball just before the Hamburg player's toe can poke it over 
him into the goal.

45+1 min: Pitroipa has burst into life at the end of the first half. He roasts 
his marker on the right wing ands cuts inside, where he does a stepover to beat 
the onrushing defender before trying a double drag-back and falling flat on his 
face as the blood rushes to his head. He was trying too hard then, bless him. 
But at least he was trying - and sometimes that's all you can do in life. Peep!

Half-time

Ghana are rather fortunate to be a goal to the good. On the balance of play 
neither side deserves to be winning. At least it's well set up for the second 
half with Burkina Faso having to score a goal to qualify. And all this means we 
might have a more exciting 45.

Here's an intriguing email
"Most of my guards in a gold mine about 150 kms north of Ouagadougou have 
their ears pinned to the radio," writes Simon Lang, who I am already envisaging 
sat among mountains of gold coins throwing them around like he's the fat kid at 
the end of the Goonies. "But alas reception is not too hot. But the weather is 
...42 at the moment! I am updating them regularly. Although I am British, I am 
supporting Burkina, and expect them to win this game. But I am an optimist!" 
Your prediction of a win might be a little too optimistic Simon, but from what 
I've seen of Pitroipa I reckon he could be the key to the goal and the point 
which would earn Burkina a place in the quarter-finals. Is anybody reading this 
currently in a more interesting place than a goldmine? Prison, perhaps?

More emails

On the subject of just why the 'eck England have got lions on their badge: 
"The Three Lions come from England's coat of arms and go back to the days of 
Richard the Lionheart," writes History's Adrian Cooper. "What more appropriate 
symbol could John Terry wear on his chest when leading England? Both men have 
been thought to be great leaders with fine tactical minds - one by general 
consensus and the other by... erm... John Terry. Still, it's the thought that 
counts."

45 min: Ghana's goalkeeper Kingson gets down on his knees and looks 
heaven-bound as he says his prayers before the second-half starts. Peep! We're 
off. Tall snuffs out an immediate Ghana attack by sticking his size 10 (a 
guestimate, I admit) under it and clearing deep into the Ghana half.

47 min: Asamoah picks the ball up on the right wing for Ghana after Burkina 
Faso's defence let the ball bounce over them. Asamoah takes one touch and 
shifts the ball onto his right foot, but drags the ball a yard wide 
disappointingly from 18 yards out.

49 min: Bamogo gathers the ball on the right wing for Burkina Faso. He takes a 
sharp touch with the outside of his right foot to turn and face his marker 
before unleashing a blunderbus of a strike which whistles yards over the bar 
when he had more time to weigh up his chances.

50 min: "If a nickname is derived from something that plays an important part 
in the culture then perhaps England should be known as The Pissheads with 
Scotland as The Indomitable Pissheads." Thanks to Stephen Peake for that. 
Perhaps Stella could sponsor England and Tennants could sponsor Scotland 
Stephen?

51 min: Bamogo gets another chance for Burkina Faso on the right as he picks 
the ball up and attempts to reach the byline, but he tries too hard to be 
clever and is eventually dispossessed by two Ghanaian defenders. Too many 
Burkina Faso players are overplaying the ball and being for want of a better 
word, greedy.

53 min: Kone breaks for Burkina Faso after Ghana waste a corner, swinging it 
into the back post where no players were present. But Kone finds himself short 
of support and has to go backwards to Kere, who wastes possession.

54 min: Ghana break on the right where Kone is absent. Inkoom burst past his 
marker to the byline and plays a delicious ball into the corridor of 
uncertainty between the goalkeeper and his defence, but Asamoah doesn't gamble 
on the chance and the ball rolls away to safety.

57 min: An injury to Hamadou Tall, who has been impressive for Burkina Faso, 
allows Allan Cox to point out my ineptitude. "Re: 2 min 'Burkina Faso play the 
offside trap to perfection to and catch Pitroipa out. They'll need to be very 
well organised today in order to do something.' Their offside trap isn't that 
great if they're catching their own player out." Oh come on Allan. It's an 
interesting tactic though, eh?

60 min: A free-kick for Burkina Faso after a clumsy foul on the right 
hand-side of the 18-yard box 25 yards out. The ball is whipped in dangerously 
to the back post where Kone stretches, but just can't get his foot onto it to 
divert it into the goal.

63 min: Substitutiuon for Bakina Faso. Kabore is off and Balima is on. Another 
free-kick for Burkina Faso as Badu nudges Pitroipa in the back and is booked 
for his trouble. The ball is lofted into the box where Ghana's defence fails to 
clear the danger. The ball drops to Kone, 10 yards out, but he swivels and 
blasts the ball over on his right foot. He got all excited then. Needed to be 
more like The Fonz instead of Richie.

65 min Tall has been sent off for Burkina Faso for absolutely nothing. Asamoah 
Gyan was running through behind Tall with the ball nowhere near him. Tall leant 
into Gyan, who is a good five inches shorter and held him off. It was 
obstruction at most, but Gyan threw himself to the ground and fooled the 
referee into thinking he'd been elbowed.

68 min: Asamoah Gyan turns and makes a dog's dinner of a half-volley from 10 
yards. He got a bobble, which is karma for his filthy cheating. Serves you 
right Gyan! The game has been spoiled by that sending off. Burkina Faso gamely 
try to attack, but Pitroipa is all on his own against three defenders and can't 
work miracles.

70 min: Bamogo has gone off for Burkina Faso and has been replaced by Dagano. 
He's an old head, which for me is not what they need. What they need is 
somebody who can do the running of two men. Unfortunately Chuck Noris doesn't 
qualify to play for Burkina Faso.

72 min: Kingson deals well with a long ball into the box as Burkina Faso 
continue to force the play forwards. Ghana haven't kept possession as well as I 
thought they might since the sending off. They still seem to be playing on the 
break.

74 min: Dramani beats his marker for pace in the right channel for Ghana, but 
he takes an age to get his shot off - and when it does come it's an ugly slice.

76 min: This is embarrasing for Dramani. He goes clean through on the right 
hand channel again as Ghana start to take control ... and he slices the ball 
wideagain, when the goal was gaping. Amoah is on for Adyei, who is a young 
Milan player, apparently.

78 min: Koulibaly makes a heroic tackle for Burkina Faso to prevent Adyei 
getting a shot on goal. Ghana take the corner while Koulibaly is getting 
treatment, which seems a tad unfair considering Burkina Faso are now down to 
nine men. They've really beendone by that sending off. Koulibaly can't continue.

80 min: Ghana seem to have a man spare everytime they go forwards, which is 
probably because they do in fact have a man spare every time they go forwards. 
Koffi is now on for Koulibaly to plug the gap.

82 min: A Ghana player misses a header from a huge kick from Diakite in goal 
for Burkina Faso. He leaps for the ball, tumbles through the air and smacks his 
noggin into the hard turf, which one imagines would daze him somewhat. 
Meanwhile the nickname riff rumbles on. Here's Adrian Cooper ... "If the 
England team were to be known as the Pissheads and the Scotland team the 
Indomitable Pissheads, given that they have neither a decentralised government 
or their own version of the 10 pound note, would that make the Wales team the 
Domitable Pissheads?" I'll pass on that Adrian.

85 min: Ghana have been a huge disappointment. I know they're missing Essien 
and Muntari in midfield but they have looked shaky at the back and a shower 
when going forwards. Burkina Faso are still attacking in the vain hope of 
getting the goal that will take them through. They probe down the right wing 
but struggle to get a final ball in. Back they come again ...

87 min: A long ball is pumped forwards from Diakite towards Pitroipa on the 
edge of the Ghana box, he takes a nudge to the back and hits the deck 25 yards 
out. Free kick. This is a real chance ...

90 min: The powerhouse, Kone, lines it up. He races in and looks prepared to 
leather it, but tries a curler instead and sends it high over the bar. That was 
a W.A.S.T.E.

90+2 min: Four minutes of injury time. Dagano gives the ref an earbashing as 
he turns on the edge of the box for Burkina Faso and tries to get a shot off 
only to be ruled to have fouled his marker. Poor decision again.

90+3 min: At last a great ball in from the right from Burkina Faso. It is 
played low into the box with pace towards Dagano but Kingson bravely rushes in 
and gathers the ball at the big forward's feet.

Full time 

Ghana progress to the quarter-finals after an unconvincing display. They 
didn't dominate the game in the way many expected them to and I doubt they'll 
get past the hosts, Angola, in the last eight. Burkina Faso were hard done by. 
They had looked the more dangerous team prior to the sending off, which was 
never a booking, never mind a red card. Thanks for all your emails.

Goodbye.
 