
At the final whistle, John Boye, Samuel Inkoom and Prince Tagoe stood, 
shirtless and disconsolate on the edge of the pitch, seemingly unable to 
believe their defeat. With a scream Davies Nkausu hurtled past, carrying a 
Zambian flag in his outstretched arm. Christopher Katongo wasn't far behind 
and, as the rest of the squad joined them, they danced delighted in the centre 
circle.

And so, after their 1-0 win, Zambia head on to Libreville, a city that, for 
them, stands as plangent as any in the annals of tragedy. It was two minutes 
after take-off from Libreville that the plane carrying the Zambia team to 
Senegal for a World Cup qualifier in 1993 exploded, killing all on board. The 
greatest of all Zambian players, Kalusha Bwalya, survived only because he 
played for PSV Eindhoven and so was making his own way to the game. He is now 
the president of the Football Association ofZambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zambia>.

"It means a lot," he said on Wednesday night. "We are pleased. Everybody's so 
happy to be where we are. We thank God every day for the path we have taken, 
for the direction that we have, but it's the boys who have done it. I think 
when we go to Libreville that we will get emotional. I think there will be a 
reconnect before the game with the new team and the old team and hopefully we 
can end it well on Sunday."

Emotion has been a key part of Zambia's progress. "We could only get to 
Libreville by reaching the final, so we did it," said their coach, Hervé 
Renard, a man who just over seven years ago was being sacked by Cambridge 
United. Now, wearing the white shirt in which he is yet to lose a competitive 
game in two tournaments (a fateful switch to blue cost Zambia their game 
against Cameroon two years ago, and he seemingly counts the penalty shootout 
defeat to Nigeria in the quarter-final as a draw).

"There's something written that we have to go to play to honour the memories 
of the Zambia national team that died in 1993," Renard went on. "It was 
catastrophic for the nation. The 12 million people of Zambia are waiting for us 
to go back to Libreville. Immediately after we arrive, we will go to the place. 
We just have to think of them and play for them and play for Zambia because 
it's a fantastic country."

But really, this was another tactical triumph for Renard. He brought in Nkausu 
for Chisamba Lungu, allowing Francis Kasonde to move from right-back into 
midfield, so the central pair sat very deep. That meant that even when Asamoah 
Gyan won knockdowns – which, given how hampered he clearly was by his calf 
injury, probably wasn't as often as he would have liked – Zambia always had 
four men around ready to pick up the loose ball. Yes, Zambia had some fortune, 
not least when Gyan had his eighth-minute penalty saved by Kennedy Mweene, but 
by and large they restrictedGhana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana>, 
letting them have the ball and trusting that they wouldn't do anything too 
dangerous with it.

Lungu came on midway through the second half. By then Ghana were frustrated, 
with John Mensah and Gyan both struggling. Soon both had gone off. Zambia 
suddenly had an extra attacking thrust. Rainford Kalaba charged, laid in a pass 
to Emmanuel Mayuka on the edge of the box and continued his run. John Boye was 
momentarily distracted, which gave Mayuka just enough space to turn and hook a 
shot with just enough curve in off the post.

Before the Cup of Nations began, the Ivory Coast coach, François Zahoui, 
admitted, "We don't respect opponents so we go to each Cup of Nations as 
favourites and come back disappointed." His response has been to opt for an 
approach of conservative pragmatism that has carried them to the final on the 
back of a defence that is yet to concede a goal. Wednesday night's 1-0 win over 
Mali meant their five games in the tournament have brought nine goals for and 
none conceded.

Ghana, perhaps, have taken on the Ivorian mantle of underachievement. For the 
third Cup of Nations in a row they reached the semi-final, and for the third 
Cup of Nations in a row they go home with nothing. There were happy predictions 
that having finished third and then second, Ghana would complete their ascent 
by winning in Libreville on Sunday, but football doesn't dole out trophies just 
because it's somebody's turn. You wonder, though, whether a sense of 
entitlement had filtered through to the players, whether confidence became 
overconfidence.

Perhaps it's unfair to say the players were complacent, but there was 
certainly a complacency about certain Ghanaian journalists. "When you lose 
tomorrow," one said to the Zambia coach in the pre-match press conference, 
"will that still be the highlight of your career?" And then there is the odd 
antipathy based around the Ghanaian insistence that Renard was only ever a 
fitness coach and not Claude Le Roy's assistant in his time as coach of Ghana. 
Technically, in terms of job title, that's true, but Renard saw his role as 
more than that. When asked who it would benefit that Renard had coached so many 
of the Ghana side, Sulley Muntari's response was comically blunt. "He was never 
my coach," he said. "He looked after my fitness."

Whatever the reason, Ghana looked like potential champions only against Mali. 
They scraped by Botswana, laboured to a draw against Guinea and got through an 
ugly quarter-final against Tunisia thanks to an awful goalkeeping mistake and a 
breakdown of Tunisian discipline. Injuries to key players hampered them, as did 
the fact they had a day less to prepare than Zambia and had to travel from 
Franceville while their opponents were in situ, but their bench was found 
wanting, and the fear now must be that they become locked in the cycle of 
entitlement and failure familiar to so many other sides with supposed golden 
generations.

Zambia, meanwhile, have no such anxieties as they continue to ride their wave 
of emotion. "This is the moment," said their captain, Christopher Katongo. 
"This is the final. The tears will be dropping from the fans when they watch 
the final. When we step on the field, we have to do everything we can to get 
this cup."
 