
As the dust settles after the quarter-finals, the landscape looks strangely 
unfamiliar. The favourites, Ivory Coast, have gone; the hosts, South Africa, 
have gone; and Egypt, who dominated the tournament in the last half of the 
first decade of this century, didn't even qualify. So the Africa Cup of Nations 
will go either to one of the traditional powers of African football, Ghana or 
Nigeria, both of whom nurse the pain of years without a title, or to a first 
time-winner, Mali orBurkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso>.

Ghana, who face Burkina Faso in Nelspruit, haven't won the tournament since 
1982 when CK Gyamfi returned to lead them to a third title, 17 years after he 
had led them to defend the title they had won under him two years earlier. The 
present coach, James Kwesi Appiah, was part of that squad and could become only 
the second man, after the Egyptian Mahmoud El Gohary, to win the Cup of Nations 
as both coach and player. So too could Stephen Keshi, theNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> coach who 
captained the side that won the tournament in 1994.

It is significant, Appiah believes, that after regular dabbles with Europeans 
– he is the first Ghanaian to manage the national team in a decade – both West 
African giants are prospering under local coaches. "There's no difference 
between a foreign coach and a local coach," he says. "But the thing they tend 
to get is respect. The management shows respect to the coach, the media shows 
respect to the coach and automatically the players follow."

Having served as an assistant coach under Goran Stefanovic a year ago, Appiah 
represents both continuity and a return to faith in Ghanaian coaching – but he 
still isn't taken entirely seriously. Shortly after the 2-0 quarter-final 
victory over Cape Verde, he was asked if he were planning to resign. "It's not 
easy building a national team to participate in competitions and to perform," 
he said. "A local coach needs support when things aren't going well. You need 
people behind you saying you can do it. But in the case of a black coach, there 
are so many people who will turn around and say: 'We said you couldn't do it. 
You're nothing.' They try to bring you down. Once the media starts, the 
management gets involved too and it puts so much pressure on you. You get 
distracted and there's no way you can make it."

Keshi, meanwhile, has faced criticism from the off – and there have been 
suggestions that Nigeria's sports minister Bolaji Abudullahi tried to depose 
him a matter of days before the tournament. As one Nigerian columnist put it 
after the 2-1 quarter-final victory over Ivory Coast, probably Nigeria's most 
striking result since they beat Spain 3-2 at the 1998 World Cup, even in glory 
he disappointed fans who had been preparing for the condemnation and ritual 
dismissal that traditionally follows Nigerian Cup of Nations campaigns.

The "Big Boss", as he is known, has responded with magnificent 
bloody-mindedness. In press-conferences he happily takes the fight to any 
journalist he feels is trying to needle him. He is funny, punchy and, uniquely 
among Nigerian managers of the past decade, gives at least the impression of 
being utterly in control. "Everybody wants to tell you who to play, how to 
play," Keshi said. "If you have 10 Nigerians, you'll have 10 lineups. You have 
to close your eyes and your ears and do what you think."

The result is a squad that appears unified behind him, not least because he 
has culled any dissenters. Shola Ameobi, Peter Odemwingie and Obafemi Martins 
were among those left out essentially for not being committed enough. Even 
Mikel John Obi served a brief time in exile; he has returned to produce his 
best form for the Super Eagles, overshadowing Yaya Touré in Sunday's 
quarter-final. Keshi's hardline approach meant calling up six home-based 
players – one of the advantages of domestic coaches, of course, being that they 
have an in-depth knowledge of national leagues that outsiders could never hope 
to match.

Keshi was severely criticised for that, but it was Sunday Mba of Warri Wolves 
who got the winner against Ivory Coast – becoming the first player from a 
Nigerian club to score in the Cup of Nations since Emmanuel Okocha in 1990 – 
while Godfrey Oboabona of Sunshine Stars has excelled at centre-back after 
being blamed for Burkina Faso's equaliser in the first group game, when he lost 
his footing on the sandy surface at the Mbombela Stadium.

Ostensibly Nigeria have a harder task than Ghana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> if they are to set up a West 
African derby in the final, as they face a Mali side that with a quiet 
doggedness has become the third-highest side in the continental rankings. They 
are a physically imposing outfit who seem able to absorb prodigious amounts of 
pressure and in Seydou Keita they have a captain who is not just a fine player 
but also an eloquent spokesman for his nation. He, as much as anybody, has 
stimulated the "special spirit" of which the coach Patrice Carteron has spoken. 
"It was more difficult a few months ago and when the country was invaded," 
Carteron said. "Now the players just want to give a present back to the 
country. The atmosphere in Mali is unbelievable – people are much happier 
because we are getting close to the end of the war and because the national 
football team is in the semi-finals. It is a fantastic story."

Burkina Faso, meanwhile, while rather less technically gifted than Ghana, have 
the great advantage of facing them on the dreadful pitch at the Mbombela, where 
they have played each of their four previous games. Ghana weren't even able to 
train on it after a torrential thunderstorm on Monday night. Although Appiah 
spoke of his players being able to adapt, it can't but help the Stallions that 
they have had 390 minutes' head start.

"We try to circulate the ball from left to right, try to find the openings," 
said Pal Put, the Burkina coach. "Every time you need to take an extra touch to 
control the ball so you give time to the opponent to organise themselves. It's 
not easy if you see the ball is bobbling on the field to have the confidence to 
take the ball or to hit the ball. Sometimes you hesitate – not just in an 
offensive way but a defensive way so you don't take many risks. It's always a 
little bit less spectacular." Spectacular or not, Burkina's progress has 
prompted mass celebrations in Ouagadougou, especially given Put's target was 
simply to collect four points and so surpass Burkina's previous best 
performance on foreign soil.

For Nigeria, this is a fifth semi-final in the last seven finals; for Ghana a 
fourth in a row.Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali> finished third 
last time round. Burkina are just delighted to be there.
 