
Good afternoon everybody.  You can read all about today's quarter-finalists in 
Jonathan Wilson's excellent preview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/jan/25/ahmed-hassan-rigobert-song-egypt-cameroon>
, while I embark on the customary Frantic Afternoon Scrabble Around Cyberspace 
In Search Of Africa Cup Of Nations Starting Line-Ups. They usually appear on 
the news wires about 10 minutes into the first half, which obviously isn't 
ideal. This is a difficult game to call, but on the evidence of what I've seen 
so far this month, I think the Indomitable Lions have better players than 
Egypt, but the Pharaohs are the better team.

Pre-match niceties:  Still no line-ups, but we'll soldier on without them for 
the time being. It's a repeat of the final from two years ago, between two 
sides who've won theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> 10 times between them. 
Egypt are out on the pitch, waiting for Cameroon to arrive. Samuel Eto'o grabs 
his mascot by the hand and leads his side out.

National anthems: Who'd be a Eurosport commentator or match summariser? We're 
halfway through the national anthems and theystill haven't shown the list of 
names for either side's starting eleven.

1 min: After a fairly poorly observed silence for those who died in the 
earthquake in Haiti,Cameroon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon> 
kick off. They're playing in their usual strip of green shirts, red shorts and 
yellow socks. Egypt's players line up in red shirts, white shorts and black 
socks.

2 min: Ahmed Hassan gets bundled off the ball by Gilles Binya, who wins the 
first corner of the match for Cameroon.

3 min: Emana swings the corner into the near post and out of play. Despite the 
ball being conspicuously not inside the quadrant when he took the corner-kick, 
the linesman didn't seem to mind.

4 min: Cameroon are having the better of the early exchanges, having set about 
their task with vigour. On the rare occasions they're not in possession, 
they're busily hustling and harrying the Egyptians off the ball.

5 min: Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> win a free-kick deep 
inside their own half after a foul by Samuel Eto'o. Wael Gomaa welts the ball 
past the halfway line for a moment's respite.

6 min: At last - some hot team action. 

Egypt: 1-Essam El Hadari; 2-Mahmoud Fathallah, 6-Hani Said, 20-Wael Gomaa, 
7-Ahmed Fathi; 14-Sayed Moawad; 8-Hosni Abd Rabou, 17-Ahmed Hassan, 3-Ahmed Al 
Muhammadi; 9-Mohamed Zidan, 10-Emad Motaeb.

Cameroon: 1-Idriss Carlos Kameni; 12-Henri Bedimo, 8-Geremi, 3-Nicolas 
Nkoulou, 5-Aurelien Chedjou; 6-Alexandre Song, 18-Enoh Eyong, 20-Georges 
Mandjeck, 10-Achille Emana; 9-Samuel Eto'o, 17-Mohamadou Idrissou.

Referee: Jerome Damon (South Africa)

8 min: Hassan tries to drive the Egyptians forward, only to be fouled by 
Achille Emana. He goes down theatrically, holding his ankle. I don't think 
there's too much wrong with him.

9 min: Geremi plays the ball up the right flank for Georges Mandjeck to chase. 
He wins a corner, from which Wael Gomaa concedes another.

10 min: Emana takes the corner and Cameroon win another one ... then another. 
This is getting very tedious.

11 min: Egyptian midfielder Wael Gomaa gets a talking-to from the referee for 
pushing and shoving in the penalty area between corners, then Emana sends in 
his third corner in quick succession. Egypt clear.

13 min: Samuel Eto'o skins Ahmed Fathi for pace down the right wing, but the 
full-back recovers sufficiently well to put the ball out for another corner. 
Nothing comes of it.

15 min: Alex Song fouls Mohamed Zidan a couple of yards outside the Cameroon 
penalty area. Egypt get the free-kick.

16 min: Hosni takes the free-kick, the wall jumps and the ball deflects off 
them for a corner. Sayed Moawad sends the ball into the mixer, it's back 
towards him down by the touchline, so he sends it in again. Cameroon clear. 
This is a very scrappy game.

18 min: Hosni Abd Rabou gets booked for a foul on Enoh Eyong.

19 min: Alex Song plays an excellent ball up the left flank for Enoh to chase. 
There's too much pace on it and the Cameroon winger can't keep the ball in play.

20 min: Song gets caught on the ball deep in his own half, forcing a team-mate 
to make a crucial interception as Egypt countered courtesy of Ahmed Fathi.

22 min: "Come on Egypt!" writes Ollie Spero. "Arsenal could do with Alexandre 
Demetri Song-Billong back!" Speaking of Alexandre Demetri Song-Billong, the 
great man was very lucky to escape a yellow card just now, fouling Mohamed 
Zidan in the Cameroon left-back position, then handling the ball deliberately.

24 min: From the free-kick conceded by Song, Egypt go close. The ball is 
crossed into the penalty area and Zidan puts a free header high over the bar.

GOAL! Cameroon 1-0 Egypt (Hassan 25og) Cameroon go ahead courtesy of an Ahmed 
Hassan own goal from an Achille Emana corner to the near post. Emana's corner 
was marvellous - he whipped it into the near post and if Hassan hadn't helped 
the ball on its way, it would almost certainly have gone in anyway.

28 min: Egypt go close when Cameroon goalkeeper Kameni rushes off his line to 
collect a through-ball, only to be beaten to it by - I think - Zidan. His 
header goes wide, but not by much.

29 min: Cameroon defender Henri Bedimo goes down injured after a clash with 
Ahmed Fathi. He'll live.

31 min: Cameroon win another corner and the ball's sent across the edge of the 
six-yard box. Idrissu beats Gomaa in the air, but scuffs his header. The ball 
goes out for another corner, which Egypt clear.

32 min: Egypt attack and Fathi plays a clever pass from the centre of the 
field out towards the left corner for Zidan to chase. There's a wee bit too 
much leather on the ball and it runs out of play for a Cameroon goal-kick.

35 min: Cameroon win a free-kick deep inside their own half. Song plays a long 
ball up towards the towering centre-forward Idrissou, but his marker, Hani 
Said, clears for a throw-in.

GOAL! Cameroon 1-1 Egypt (Hassan 36)More of the comedy goalkeeping for which 
this tournament is renowned allows Ahmed Hassan to atone for his own-goal. He 
shoots from about 35 yards out and the ball bounces in front of and over 
Cameroon's goalkeeper Idriss Kameni on it's way into the bottom left-hand 
corner.

39 min: Wael Gomaa gets booked for a harmless challenge on Samuel Eto'o. He's 
followed into the book by Geremi, with both cautions appearing to be for 
dissent.

41 min: Geremi plays a long ball towards Idrissou, but not for the first time, 
the pass is too high for the Cameroon frontman.

30 min: The good people at Eurosport inform me that the right-footed shot with 
which Ahmed Hassan equalised was 34 metres out. It was a decent, dipping drive, 
but it shouldn't have troubled Kameni.

44 min: "Is there any limit to the size of goalkeeper's equipment?" asks Colin 
Greer. "Perhaps giant clown gloves and shoes (and wig?) would be useful, as 
they could block more of the goal." Well?

45 min: Achille Emana tries his luck with a speculative shot from distance, 
forcing a smart save from Essam El Hadari in the Egyptian goal. I don't think 
the Egypt keeper was expceting that - it seemed to take him by surprise.

45 +1 min: There'll be a minimum of two minutes' worth of added time.

45+2 min: El Hadari is pressed into service again, charging off his line to 
beat Idrissou to an excellent through-ball from Samuel Eto'o, who's in a more 
withdrawn role today, playing behind Idrissou out near the right wing.

Half-time

Half-time analysis: "Colin Greer could be onto something here," writes Adrian 
Cooper. "Is this why David James was sporting that silly afro a couple of 
seasons ago. With just the right amount of hairspray it could have added 
valuable inches to the amount of the goalmouth that he could cover. Surely 
there would also be an argument for fielding goalkeepers that aren't exactly on 
the svelte side? Could this be why Roberto Mancini has put pizza on the Man 
City menu?"

"That header on 23 minutes was one of the worst I've ever seen," writes Pete 
in Birmingham. "He put it into orbit!" Yeah, sorry about that. I probably 
didn't do it justice, but it's been a very long and tiring day. If this match 
goes to extra-time, there's a very good chance I'll burst into tears.

Second half: Egypt get the second half underway. I don't think there's been 
any changes to either side.

46 min: The ball is played in behind the Egyptian defence, where Wael Gomaa 
foolishly waits for it to bounce before hacking clear. He was at full stretch 
there, with Idrissou lurking behind him.

47 min: Shocking defending from Chedjou, who allows a long ball from deep 
inside the Egyptian half to bounce when he should have headed clear. Motaeb 
pounces for Egypt, but goalkeeper Kasmeni saves his centre-half's bacon with a 
fine save.

49 min: It's all Egypt at the moment, mainly because of terrible defending 
from Aurelian Chedjou. He's having a nightmare. They waste two chances in quick 
succession, the pick of them a wild slash from Zidan from 13 yards out that 
fizzes narrowly wide.

51 min: Cameroon win another corner, which Achille Emana plays short to Alex 
Song. The pair combine to creat a decent shooting angle, but Emana's shot is so 
bad that it goes out for a throw-in on the other side of the pitch.

53 min: There's a break in play when Gomaa requires treatment after landing 
awkwardly in the wake of an aerial tussle between himself, Idrissou and Egypt 
goalkeeper Essan El Hadari.

54 min: Samuel Eto'o wins a free-kick in the centre-circle after being fouled 
by Mahmoud Fathallah. The ball is played to Georgeds Mandjeck on the edge of 
the Egypt box and he rifles a low drive about half a metre wide of the right 
post.

56 min: There's a bit of argy-bargy between Cameroon centre-half Nicolas 
Nkoulou and Emad Motaeb. I think Nkoulu got booked for his part in it after 
pushing the Egypt striker in the chest.

58 min: Now Nkoulou requires treatment after a collision with Sayed Moawad. 
All these stoppages for free-kicks and injuries mean the second half hasn't 
really got going yet. It's very scrappy.

59 min: Samuel Eto'o tees up Enoh, who shoots over the bar from the edge of 
the penalty area.

60 min: Not for the first time, a promising looking Cameroon attack breaks 
down once Alex Song enters the equation. He's not having one of his better 
games and keeps giving the ball away.

61 min: Throw-in for Cameroon in the Egypt left-back position. Geremi sends 
the ball towards the penalty area and Egypt clear.

62 min:Emana stings El Hadari's palms with a drive from distance. The ball 
breaks to Sayed Moawad, who heads it out for a corner under pressure from 
Geremi. Egypt clear.

64 min: Egypt win a throw-in in front of their own dug-out. The referee stops 
his watch upon noticing that the Egypt goalkeeper El Hadari has removed a glove 
and is nursing an injured wrist. A quick spray from the magic aerosol later and 
he's fit to continue.

67 min: Egypt substitution: Zidan off, Khaled Gedo on ... I think.

68 min: Cameroon get a free-kick 35 metres out from the Egypt goal, right of 
centre. Geremi clips it around the wall and tries to sneak the ball in at the 
foot of the right upright. His effort is on target, but El Hadari scampers 
across his line to save.

69 min: The longer this match goes on, the more Cameroon look like winning. 
They're doing all of the pressing, which means Egypt are playing very deep and 
their two strikers are completely isolated up front.

71 min: Hassan gives away his third free-kick in the past eight minutes, this 
time on the halfway line. I'm not sure how he's escaped a booking because they 
were all fairly meaty challenges.

72 min: There's another stoppage as Enoh gets treatment after a collision with 
Hani Said. He'd played a one-two with Samuel Eto'o and was on his way to 
collect the return pass on the edge of the penalty area when he ran straight 
into immovable object that was the Egyptian defender

75 min: Cameroon win a corner, which Geremi sends it in to the near post. His 
delivery is poor and goes straight to an Egyptian, who clears.

76 min: Cameroon win another free-kick in the middle third. Geremi pumps the 
ball towards the Egypt penalty area, but Fathallah heads it clear.

77 min: "This match provides ample time to do some in-depth research into 
clown gloves," writes Wouter Ijzermans from the Netherlands. "In response to 
Colin Greer's comment I can confirm that Fifa's rules of the game state that: 
'A player may use equipment other than the basic equipment (shirt, shorts, 
shinguards, stockings and shoewear) provided that its sole purpose is to 
protect him physically and it poses no danger to him or any other player'. 
Clown gloves and shoes certainly pose a danger for anyone with decent taste so 
they must be out of order."

79 min: Cameroon win another free-kick about 45 yards from the Egypt goal. 
Geremi strikes it through the wall, but the pace is taken off it on the way and 
Egypt hack clear.

80 min: Motaeb gets penalised for a foul on Alex Song, when it looked very 
much like the Cameroon defender had fouled the Egyptian in the Cameroon penalty 
area. That's a let-off for Song.

82 min: Eight minutes to go and unless there's another goal, we'll have 
another 30 afterwards. Come on Egypt! Come on Cameroon! Somebody ... anybody 
... please, please,please score!

84 min: Egypt substitution: Hossam Ghaly on, Hosni Abd Rabou off.

85 min: El Hadari rushes off his line to collect a cross from the right wing. 
It's all Cameroon at the moment - Egypt are holding on for extra time. The 
feckers.

86 min: Muhammadi looks nervously at the referee after Idrissou went down 
under a challenge from him in the Egypt penalty area. Much to his relief, the 
ref points to the corner instead of the penalty spot.

87 min: Cameroon substitution: Emana off, Webo on.

88 min: Egypt go close at the death, when Emad Motaeb sidefoots into the 
side-netting from about six yards out. He really should have done better after 
getting on the end of a marvellous cross-field pass from Sayed Moawad.

90 min: There'll be three minutes of added time.

90+1 min: Nkoulou plays a long ball up to Idrissou and the centre forward 
knocks it down. Samuel Eto'o isn't ideally placed to pick up the knock-down and 
the chance goes a begging.

90+2 min: Peep! Peep! Peep! There'll be half an hour of extra time, possibly 
followed by a penalty shootout. Cameroon were the better side throughout, but 
Egypt had several good chances to win it, particularly at the beginning and end 
of the second half.

ET1: Cameroon kick-off the first half of extra time and immediately bring a 
save out of El Hadari when Samuel Eto'o shoots low and hard from outside the 
penalty area. The Egypt goalkeeper gets down to his left and saves.

GOAL! Cameroon 1-2 Egypt (Gedo 92) THe substitutite Gedo intercepts a very 
sloppy backpass from Geremi to his goalkeeper, takes the ball around Kameni and 
slots it into an empty net. That's another howler.

ET 4: I stand corrected - Gedo did not in fact take the ball around Kameni, he 
nutmegged him.

GOAL! Cameroon 1-3 Egypt (Hassan 95) More bad goalkeeping. Calamitous, in 
fact. Egypt win a free-kick about 30 yards out in the left channel. Ahmed 
Hassan hits a scorcher which Kameni punches on to his upright The ball bounces 
on the line and out of the goal, but the linesman tells the referee to give 
award the score.

ET7: Cameroon win a corner. SOme of their players are looking seriously 
shellshocked after those two sucker-punches.

ET8: The ball's floated in to the near post, where it gets flicked on. Nkoulou 
heads it and Samuel Eto'o tries to divert it goalwards with a bicycle-kick. He 
misses the ball completely and it goes wide.

ET9: Cameroon win a free-kick on the right-hand side of the field about 25 
yards out from goal. Moawad gets booked for time-wasting as Egypt form their 
wall, then Geremi sends the free-kick out for a corner off the aforementioned 
human shield.

ET12: Cameroon have nobody to blame but themselves for the pickle they 
currently find themselves in. All three of the goals they've coneded have been 
defensive abberations - two dropped clangers from the goalkeeper and a dreadful 
backpass from Geremi, from whom you'd expect better.

ET14: Egypt are now firmly in control, forcing Cameroon's players to chase 
shadows as they pass the ball around between them, content to keep possession 
and try to run down the clock.

ET15: There'll be one minute of time extra time in first half of extra time.

Half-time in extra-time The players make their way over to the side of the 
pitch for some liquid refreshments, with Cameroon goalkeeper Idriss Kameni 
looking thoroughly ashamed of himself. He'll feel even worse when he sees the 
replay of the game, as the third goal he shipped shouldn't have stood. My first 
impression was that the ball bounced over the line, but replays show I was 
mistaken.

ET16: And we're off again, with Burnley's Andre Bikey coming on for - I think 
- Geremi.

ET17: Cameroon resort to Route One, but a long ball from the back is allowed 
to bounce straight to El Hadari in the Egypt goal.

ET17: Great hold-up play from Idrissou, who tries to play Webo through on 
goal. The substitute is penalised for being needlessly offside.

ET18: A sly shirt-tug by a player in red earns Cameroon a free-kick in the 
Egypt left-back position, from which they win a corner.

ET20: Then another, from which Egypt break courtesy of Hossam Ghally. He 
over-runs the ball, shows too much of it to Kameni and allows the goalkeeper to 
save.

ET21: Aurelien Chedjou gets sent off for a professional foul on Gedo. He's had 
a terrible game and his side will actually be better off without him. He let a 
long ball bounce when he shouldn't have, then wasn't strong enough to hold off 
Gedo, who'd spotted an opportunity. As the Egyptian headed off for the 
Cameeroon goal with the ball at his feet, Chedjou grabbed him around the waist 
and brought him down.

ET24: Egypt continue trying to play down the clock by passing the ball around 
Cameroon. They look more like scoring a fourth goal than conceding a second. 
Cameroon are dead men walking.

ET25: Samuel Eto'o's poor tournament continues - he tries a shot from distance 
that sails wide. The camera cuts to the Cameroon bench, where Geremi and others 
look absolutely distraught.

ET26: Alex Song wins a corner for Cameroon, which Georges Mandjeck takes deep. 
It's headed wide by Bikey. Egypt substitution: Hassan, who has scored two goals 
for his own side and one for Cameroon this evening, off. Abdelshafi on.

ET28: Cameroon win a free-kick just inside the Egypt half, which Alex Song 
welts into the penalty area. The ball pinballs about a bit, before El Hadari 
gathers for Egypt.

ET30: Peep! Peep! Peep! It's all over - the holders Egypt go through to the 
semi-finals after taking advantage of some calamitous defending from Cameroon, 
who were actually the better team for lengthy periods of the match. They've 
thrown this one away, although the goal that sealed their fate was very 
contentious - it definitely didn't cross the line and should not have been 
given. Anyway, that's all from me - thanks for your time and enjoy whatever's 
left of your day. I'm off for a long overdue lie-down.
 