
There were a lot of tears in Libreville on Sunday. There were the tears of 
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, overwhelmed by having missed the decisive penalty in 
Gabon's shootout defeat toMali <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali> and 
there were the tears of Seydou Keita as he used his side's progress to the 
semi-final for the first time in 10 years to highlight the crisis overwhelming 
his country.

Keita began the tournament fronting an Oxfam campaign to raise awareness of 
the food crisis sweeping the Sahel after a year of poor rains. His words on 
Sunday were even more emotive, and came with a ringing immediacy. His face as 
he stepped up to take the final penalty looked drained, but his nerve remained 
sure and he converted with a precise, low shot.

The tears then were from Aubameyang, distraught in the centre-circle. He has 
been one of the players of the tournament, a powerful and mobile forward who 
had come to embody his country's emergence as possible winners. Sylvia Bongo, 
the first lady, took to wearing an Aubameyang 9 shirt, as did a lot of the 
crowd. As he stepped up to take his penalty, his anxiety was obvious; it wasn't 
an awful shot, but neither was it particularly near the corner and Soumbeila 
Diakité saved relatively comfortably low to his left.

Aubameyang, eventually, was helped from the field by his father, himself a 
formerGabon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gabon> international, and 
himself wearing a yellow T-shirt bearing his son's No9. Often tears on a 
football pitch feel self-indulgent, the spoiled multimillionaire brat bawling 
because he's missed out on yet another medal. Here, though, as the fans who 
remained gently applauded, it was easy to have sympathy for a man who clearly 
felt he had let his country down – and a country that will probably never have 
a better chance to win the Cup of Nations. Who can imagine the pressure when 
the president's wife wears your shirt?

Still, his pain was soon placed into context by Keita's words. "I'm appealing 
to the people to stop," Keita said. "It's not normal, we don't do that. We need 
peace, we are all Malians. The president of the republic needs to do the most 
he can to stop it. We are celebrating our win but at the same time we feel very 
sad. There is a sadness among the players."

The Tuareg have been fighting a separatist war in the north-east for years, 
with major outbreaks of fighting between 1990 and 1995 then from 2007 to 2009. 
They are a nomadic people, wandering across the desert regions of Algeria, 
Libya, Mali, Mauritania and Niger, largely ignoring national borders. Colonel 
Gadaffi sponsored that second uprising, intending to destabilise the government 
in Bamako.

After it was defeated, many of the rebels fled to Libya, where they helped 
shore up the Gadaffi regime. When Gadaffi fell, between 2,000 and 4,000 people 
– depending whose account you believe – fled across the border into the 
mountains of north-eastern Mali, laden with arms and cash. It's they who are 
behind the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad (the north-eastern 
part of Mali comprising Timbuktu, Kidal and Gau). The Malian government accuses 
them of links with al-Qaida, although they deny it.

The NMLA has attacked towns in the region, and at least 20 people were killed 
in fighting around Timbuktu at the weekend. It's estimated 15,000 Malians have 
fled into neighbouring Niger and Mauritania, while rioting in Bamako – in 
protest at the army's inability to stop the NMLA – has led several Tuarag to 
flee the capital for fear of reprisals.

Among journalists there are two sorts of Cups of Nations veterans: those who 
say Burkina Faso 1998 was the best ever tournament and those who prefer Mali 
2002. For those of us who remember what a happy, friendly place Mali was 10 
years ago, the realisation of how bad the situation has become was particularly 
shocking. I remember Mopti – which proudly declared itself "the Venice of 
Africa" – as a sleepy town on the Niger, from where the ferry left for 
Timbuktu. George Weah played his final ever international there and, as the 
Liberia team bus drove across the causeway to the stadium, which stood in the 
middle of a marshy lagoon, he was welcomed by the local scout troop waving 
flags. Now the threat of kidnapping is so high that Mopti is a no-go area for 
foreigners. Half the country is effectively in a state of war.

Libya came to this tournament to play for unity, for their new government. 
Mali, too, are playing for their people. In pure footballing terms, they have 
been the least impressive of the four semi-finalists, and many neutrals 
probably felt a sense of disappointment at being denied a semi-final between 
Gabon and Ivory Coast. In front of a packed Stade de l'Amitié, that had the 
potential to be a classic; as it is, it's doubtful more than 3,000 to 4,000 
will turn out for a game between François Zahoui's conservative Ivorians and 
Alain Giresse's dogged Mali. (Poor attendances are a perennial Cup of Nations 
issue: it's not just high ticket prices, although that clearly doesn't help, 
but also the fact that most of the population has no disposable income – and so 
any price would be too high – and, as Mark Gleeson, the doyen of African 
football journalists, pointed out, the absence of a football-going culture in 
most of Africa).

Mali, though, have shown great resolve in seeing off Guinea and holding off 
Gabon before finding a late equaliser – apparently drawing strength from the 
rumpled and phlegmatic figure of Giresse, who regards the pitch from the 
touchline with the weary resignation of a restaurateur surveying his last pair 
of customers after a long night. When they needed to, they found an extra gear 
to come from behind to beat Botswana. Ghana beat them comfortably enough, but 
Ivory Coast will have to do more than merely wait for mistakes, which is 
largely how they've played until now.
 