
Preamble Who needs Arsenal and Manchester United when you've got the final of 
the Africa Cup of Nations? The tournament began with the tragic shooting of the 
Togo team bus which left two people dead and has now, for some reason, led to
Togo being kicked out of the next two editions of the tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/30/togo-africa-cup-nations-ban>. 

The footballing side of things got under way with possibly the most amazing 
comeback ever seen in a football match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/10/africa-cup-nations-angola-mali>
, and is ending with a final containing the two most successful teams in the 
tournament's history. Along the way there have beenaccusations of match-fixing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/18/algeria-angola-deny-fixed-draw>
 and some of theworst goalkeeping ever seen in football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/24/goalkeepers-africa-cup-of-nations>
. Amazingly these two things aren't connected.

Egypt were 10-1 or higher in some places before the tournament began, an 
amazing price when you consider they are going for their third consecutive 
title today, whileGhana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> are 
looking for their first win since 1982. All their victories in this year's 
tournament have been 1-0 so anything could happen today.

The teams are in ...

Ghana: Kingson; Addy, Inkoom, Sarpei, Vorsah; Agyemang-Badu, Ayew, Agyemang, 
Asamoah, Annan; Gyan.
Egypt: Al Hadari; Al Muhammadi, Said, Gomaa, Moawad; Fathi, Abd Rabou, Hassan, 
Ghali; Zidan, Motaeb.

Referee: Koman Coulibaly (Mali)

"It's Asamoah Gyan. He's Egypt's danger man," the Eurosport commentator says 
in a rhyme that might well be the highlight of their coverage today. He follows 
that up by saying that the game is tomorrow, when in fact it starts in 12 
minutes. Still, not only was it was a good rhyme but it's accurate too. Gyan is 
their danger man. It may even be a Haiku

The teams are on the pitch. There are plenty of empty seats in the 11 November 
Stadium in Luanda. Still, the people who are there have heavily daubed 
themselves with face paint, so that's the main thing. Here comes Sepp Blatter. 
I bet the players are glad they've reached the final now.

Prediction time ... I'm going to go for Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> 2-1 Ghana, possibly after 
extra-time

We're about to get underway. Egypt's star man Mohamed Zidan has a heart and a 
football shaved into his head with an equals sign in between. We can only 
assumed he is telling us that he loves football, which is good, I suppose

1 min: The referee Koman Coulibaly from Mali blows his whistle and we're 
underway

1 min: A good start from Ghana, who are all in white, with Inkoom crossing 
from the right and then launching a long throw which the Egypt defence deal 
with fairly comfortably.

3 min: The Ghana goalkeeper, Wigan's Richard Kingson, isn't taking his goal 
kicks because of a tight groin. That never really works. It's like having a 
runner in cricket. On the pitch, Ghana have started much brighter

5 min: Ghana work it nicely down the right hand side but Inkoom's cross is 
cleared by Gomaa. Egypt have switched from a back three to a flat back four and 
so far they haven't looked very comfortable.

7 min: A free kick to Ghana in a dangerous position after Asamoah is brought 
down. Gyan shoots from 30-yards but it hits the wall and goes for a corner

8 min: More terrible goalkeeping from Al Hadari, who comes for the corner but 
gets nowhere near it. Gyan tries an overhead kick which goes over the bar. I 
think I could be a goalkeeper in this tournament

11 min: Egypt have settles a bit now and are knocking a few passes around. 
Ghana's Lee Addy then does a Peter Kay-style 'have it' clearance which sails 
out of play. That was impressive

13 min: Ayew is fouled by Moawad on the right. The referee gives the free but 
should have played advantage. Asamoah swung in the free kick which wasn't dealt 
with all that comfortably and goes for a corner. This time Al Hadari does 
better and comes through a group of player and punches clear. I'm not sure if I 
could have done that.

16 min: Great challenge by Said on Annan who was trying to get into the box. 
That was an important tackle. At the other end Ahmed Hassan shoots from 
distance but it sails over the bar

18 min: Gomaa makes a mess of heading Inkoom's cross. The ball falls to Ayew 
but his shot from outside the box is wayward and drifts behind

19 min: A notable trait of this tournament - and I would say an admirable one 
at that - is that at seemingly random moments someone will just kick the ball 
as hard as they can in whatever direction they are facing, regardless of 
whether it's off benefit to their team or not. We need more of this. Much more

22 min: Asamoah hits a swerving, dipping left-footed shot from distance but Al 
Hadari gets his body behind it and saves well. That's the first real effort on 
goal in the game so far

24 min:Another great challenge by Said, this time on Agyemang. Ghana are still 
looking more dangerous. Gary Naylor is in. "No doubt it'll lead to a ban for 
the "miscreant", but wouldn't it be great for one or more of the players to 
reveal a T-shirt slogan supporting their Togolese brothers, some of whom are 
set never to play in the ACN again?" They would probably need to score first, 
Gary. They can't just go about revealing t-shirts in the middle of a midfield 
tussle. Or can they?

27 min: Gyan gets in behind the Egypt defence on the left but he lacks support 
and his cross is headed clear by Gomaa

29 min: For all their dominance so far Ghana look like they could 
seld-destruct at any minute. Not literally, obviously, but defensively. Zidane 
curls in a really dangerous free kick from the left but Lee Addy gets a really 
good header and clears

32 min: Badu goes in really hard on Said in the centre circle. The referee 
gives a free but no yellow card. Said lies flat on his back contemplating 
whether or not he has the energy to get up. They roll him onto a stretcher and 
cart him off. Egypt can't really afford to lose him. They won't, he's back on.

34 min: Zidan tries a one-two with Hosni on the edge of the Ghana area but the 
striker's return ball isn't accurate enough and Ghana clear

36 min: I would like to say the two teams are just sizing each other up, but 
actually it's just not very exciting so far. Ghana are still the better team 
though.

39 min: Apparently there are still journalists and fans arriving into the 
ground so maybe they know something we don't. The second half is going to be 
great

40 min: Best chance of the game for Egypt. Fathi took a free kick from the 
right. It beat everyone - including Hassan at the back post - but the Egypt 
captain stuck out a hand to try and deflect it in Thierry Henry-style. Maybe he 
heard that kind of thing is allowed now. Ghana want a yellow card but the ref 
doesn't see it and signals a goal kick

43 min: "Ghana have played the last three matches in Luanda, on the spongy and 
Estadio 11 de Novembro's uncertain pitch, and they've ground out three 1-0 wins 
there," writes Steven Villereal. "Egypt's passing game hasn't really translated 
to the grass "here"."

Half-time: The whistle goes and it's goalless at the break. Ghana have been 
the better team and seeing as they have won their last three games 1-0 they 
will feel they can snatch it in the second half. Egypt will need to improve 
their passing on a fairly ropy pitch, as Steven pointed out, if they are to win 
the tournament for the third time in a row.

"Thanks for the MBM - it's a help in catching up," says Peter Wahlberg. "My 
computer thoughtlessly marooned with my roommate behind a locked door, I was 
worried that I'd miss all the action. Coming in at half-time I realise I forgot 
it was the Africa Cup, though for all I know this could have been a stunning 
exhibition of goal kicks or a pageant of unrewarded and unpunished dives." 
Thanks Peter. Is anyone else trapped somewhere? Apart from reading this, of 
course

Release Gedo seems to be the gist of the half-time interval. Gedo is, of 
course, Egypt's and the tournament's leading scorer with four goals but is only 
on the bench

46 min: No Gedo, but we're underway in the second half

47 min: Yellow card for Opoku for a challenge on Al Muhammadi. The Ghana 
player complains but it is a truly vicious tackle. The Egypt player is alright, 
just about. Now there is another yellow for Moawad for handball. At least the 
referee has come to life

49 min: "Trapped watching Egypt...in Egypt," says Alice Allsop. "Following it 
online with you as although we actually LIVE in Egypt - it's not being 
broadcast on terrestrial!! Go Pharoahs!!!"

50 min: Egypt have looked livelier this half - which is good news for Alice at 
least. Another yellow now - this time for Al Muhammadi for a foul on the man 
who nearly snapped his leg in two a moment ago. Gyan hits a curling free kick 
which Al Hadari tips over the bar. Amazingly the referee doesn't see it and 
gives a goal kick.

54 min: "This is without doubt my least favourite CAN," says Kwame Cinquez. 
"Quality, application, indigenous coaching standards, even the stadia has been 
sub-standard. Gone are the days of Jay Jay Okocha, Diouf, Nonda, Bwalya and the 
once brilliant Kanu.... I am worried for African teams in South Africa 2010." 
That's the spirit, Kwame. Egypt aren't in the World Cup of course, but Ghana 
could do alright with the likes of Essien back in the fold.

55 min: Ayew has another long range shot which goes miles wide. A change for 
Egypt. Abdelshafi replaces Moawad, who was on a yellow card

57 min: "Do Egypt get their nickname because they're a bunch of Mummys' Boys?" 
ponders Gary Naylor. I really hope it hasn't taken you this long to come up 
with that.

58 min: Former Spurs player Hossam Ghali tries his luck from long range but, 
much like his career at White Hart Lane, it goes nowehere. Now he's got a 
yellow card for hauling back Asamoah

60 min: "Trapped in the house by a foot of snow in North Carolina, watching 
Egypt-Ghana on Al Jazeera internet feed in Arabic," says Paul Fox in an email 
that throws up many questions. "Expecting a knock on the door any minute from 
the CIA. What is interesting though, is that Zidan's nickname also appears to 
be Zizou, and that there is apparently no Arabic equivalent for offside, 
advantage or second half- the only words I understand from the commentary. 
Other than that, the skill level is about the same as that of a Guatemala- 
Honduras game. The Europeans or South Americans are going to win the WC again, 
aren't they?"

61 min: Gyan hits a long range shot from distance which hits the side-netting. 
The keeper had it covered. Not sure if you can be arrested for watching Al 
Jazeera, Paul, but let us know if there is a knock at the door. As for the 
World Cup, in my opinion it is a European team or possibly Brazil and that's 
about it

64 min: Ghana are throwing a few more players forward now, with Egypt looking 
to hit on the counter. One goal will win this, which obviously isn't the most 
risky prediction ever, but that's all I've got

65 min: "All these yellow cards are making me nervous; anxiously waiting for 
Gedo. Go Egypt!," says Sylvia Schoonderbeek in Dubai. We should see Gedo soon. 
I don't know what they are waiting for really. The stadium is full now, which 
is just odd

67 min: Chance for Egypt. Ahmed Hassan played a lovely ball to Motaeb but his 
control is poor and Kingson gathers

68 min: More Egypt pressure now and a penalty appeal for a push on Hassan as 
he tried to get on to Motaeb's cross. I don't think that is a penalty

70 min: We have Gedo! He replaces Motaeb. "Even the goalkeepers look secure in 
this game which is a sure sign that the CAN is determined to spoil everyone's 
fun," says Ian Copestake. The stadium, which is now full despite being empty 
for most of the game, are doing the Mexican wave, It doesn't get more fun than 
that, Ian

73 min: Ghali gives the ball away on the edge of his own area. Ayew attempted 
to get the ball onto his left foot to shoot but was brought down by Ghali. The 
referee says no foul. Moments later Gyan tries a curling shot from the edge of 
the area. It sails just over the bar. Good effort

76 min: Opuku takes a short free kick on the left to Badu, who is knocked to 
the ground by Zidan. The referee gives a free in a shooting position. That 
looks a harsh decision to me

78 min: Gyan curls the free kick which is straight at Al Hadari who decides to 
punch, for some reason, and it goes for a corner

79 min: Great chance for Ghana. Gyan's pass got deflected into the path of 
Inkoo who squared across the goal but Opoku couldn't get on the end of it. 
Ghana look the most likely to win it now

81 min: "The Ghana coach is looking increasing frustrated by the chances his 
team are spurning and as a result seems rapidly to be turning into
Latka from Taxi," says Ian Copestake. The Egypt manager, on the other hand, 
looks a little like Norm from Cheers.

83 min: Gedo's first involvement is a cross from the left which sails out for 
a goal kick. Maybe we're expecting too much from him?

84 min: Goal!! Ghana 0-1 Egypt I spoke too soon. It's the substitute Gedo who 
has got it. He played a lovely one-two with Zidan and curled a brilliant shot 
from the inside right of the area past Kingson. It's his fifth goal of the 
tournament and they have all come as a substitute.

87 min: Ghana have made a change and strangely they have taken off Gyan, their 
leading goalscorer. "Brilliant by Gedo, the supersub if ever there was one," 
says Kwame Cinquez. "Unlucky on Ghana, but they were fortunate to beat Nigeria. 
Gyan is the oldest looking 24 year old I have ever seen .."

89 min: Both sides make changes. Ghana, who are trying to rescue the game, 
bring on Addo for Opoku. Egypt, who are trying to waste time, take off Fathi 
and bring on Moatasem

90 min: Asamoah shoots when he should have crossed and it goes wide. That 
coould be their last chance. Three minutes of stoppage time

90 min + 1: Ghana are on the attack but Egypt have everyone behind the ball. 
The goal was the one moment of real class in the whole game. Ghana look 
devastated

Full time: Egypt have won the Africa Cup of Nations!!!! The whistle goes, a 
little too early as there was one lengthy stoppage in the three minutes, but it 
doesn't matter now and Egypt are champions for the third successive time. Ghana 
had a great chance in injury time, but it was substitute Gedo's goal - his 
fifth as sub in this tournament - which won the cup for Egypt

Several of the Egypt players are celebrating by climbing onto the crossbar. 
This is led by goalkeeper Al Hadari. Ironically, the goalkeeping in the 
tournament wouldn't have been much worse if the keepers had spent the whole 
tournament up there. "Celebration horns have started in Cairo," says Alice 
Allsop. "Beep Beep Be Be Beep they all go - and will keep going all night!"

Final summary: Egypt have been the best team of the tournament and are 
deserved winners. Ghana, however, were probably the better team in the final, 
but never made the most of their possession and paid the price when Gedo came 
off the bench with 20 minutes to go. Ghana at least have the consolation that 
they have a World Cup to look forward to and, with this young team plus the 
likes of Michael Essien, they have reason to be optimistic about their chances 
of getting out of their group in South Africa. Egypt get to keep the trophy as 
it's their third successive victory. That's for all your emails. Sorry I 
coudn't publish them all.
 