
Miners are making a mixed showing, as investors remain cautious over a 
possible slowdown in China, a key consumer of commodities.

But African Barrick Gold is heading sharply lower, down 46.7p or 15% to 
261.4p, after its majority shareholder sold a 10% stake. Canada's Barrick Gold 
Corporation has pocketed nearly £113m by disposing of 41m shares at 275p each, 
as it raises capital to help offset the recent slump in the gold price. The 
move will still leave it with a 64% stake in African Barrick, and it said it 
would continue to support management as they continuing trying to turn the 
business around. But it seems to dent hopes of a bid for the business. Investec 
said:
 Barrick tried to sell part or all of its interest in African Barrick to China 
National Gold Group in 2012 but the deal fell through last year. Barrick's 
share price has risen 11% since the start of the year versus a 65% increase for 
African Barrick.

Barrick has been a distressed seller of assets, and the sharp run up of 
African Barrick as it works to turn its business around headed up by new 
management clearly opens the door to sell some of Barrick's holding.

Charles Gibson, analyst at Edison Investment Research, said:
 Barrick's sale seems to place a cap on the price of African Barrick. Prior to 
today's announcement, we valued African Barrick at $5.63 (£3.38) per share at a 
gold price of $1,345 an ounce, based on the value of its maximum potential 
dividend stream to investors, discounted at 10% - ie quite close to the level 
of 321p that the shares reached last week.

Within that valuation there were the usual risks, plus the risk that 
management wouldn't be able to make recent cost savings stick. The fact that 
Barrick is prepared to sell at this level suggests that they may see things in 
a similar way. This seems to place a cap on the price. Whether this is in 
reality or investors' minds doesn't much matter. Absenting a significant move 
in the gold price, management's options seem fairly limited. They can either 
exceed their cost saving targets, develop a new project or engage in some 
corporate activity to add value. 
Elsewhere in the sector Anglo American has added 11.5p to 1444.5p, Rio Tinto 
has risen 16p to 3155.5p butFresnillo has fallen 2p to 894p and BHP Billiton 
has slipped 13p to £18.09.
 