
Cycling: Riders back in the saddle 

Team GB's medal-winning track cyclists return to action next weekend in the 
first international event to be held at the Sir Chris Hoy Velodrome in Glasgow, 
due to host the cycling events at the Commonwealth Games in 2014.

Such was the post-Games interest, tickets for all three days of the UCI Track 
World Cup competition at the 4,000- capacity venue sold out within an hour of 
going on sale, although fans can still follow the action, beginning on Friday 
for three days, on the BBC.

Seven gold medal-winning British Olympians will compete. Among the men are 
team pursuit winners Ed Clancy and Steven Burke, alongside Philip Hindes and 
Jason Kenny, who took gold in the team sprint. All four set world records in 
London.

The women's squad also features the world record-holding trio of Dani King, 
Joanna Rowsell and Laura Trott who won team pursuit gold on a thrilling evening 
at the velodrome in August. They are joined by Jess Varnish, who is coming back 
strongly after disqualification for a changeover infringement with Victoria 
Pendleton at the Games. Having won in the team pursuit at the first World Cup 
event in Colombia with new partner Becky James, her sights are firmly fixed on 
Rio 2016.

Equestrian: Dujardin drops top spot 

Charlotte Dujardin has lost her place at the top of dressage's world rankings. 
The Olympic champion and her horse, Valegro, won team and individual gold at 
the Games, Britain's first Olympic dressage medals and enough to secure the No1 
ranking.

But World Cup successes for Holland's Adelinde Cornelissen on Jerich Parzival, 
means they have regained the spot they held for 14 months from June 2011. 
Valegro has been for sale since the Games but a buyer has yet to be found so 
the British pairing are to be reunited at the International Horse Show in 
December, to the delight of Dujardin who tweeted: "My wish came true! I am 
riding at Olympia this year and it's on Valegro #overthemoon".

Rowing: Stanning returns to duty 

Heather Stanning who, alongside Helen Glover, won Britain's first gold medal 
of 2012, in the women's pair, has returned to her day job as a captain in the 
Royal Artillery. She will continue to serve for the next two years, including a 
tour of duty in Afghanistan, before returning to the boat, with Glover, in 2014 
targeting a repeat of their London success in Rio.

"In an ideal situation, I would row all the way through but going back to the 
army is something I want to do," she said. "My first day back was great. I 
didn't take my medal with me to training, I didn't even think about it. I got a 
lot of grief for that and sent back to my room to get it."

Sailing: Fourth Ainslee award

Ben Ainslee, who became the most successful sailor in the history of the Games 
when he won his fifth Olympic medal this summer after a titanic struggle with 
Denmark's Jonas Hogh-Christensen has been named the InternationalSailing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sailing> Federation's sailor of the year for 
a record fourth time. The British yachtsman is currently developing his new 
America's Cup team in San Francisco.
 