
Nothing. After two weeks of round the clock Olympics coverage, nothing. Unless 
you count the Jeremy Kyle Show or Homes Under the Hammer. As I said, nothing. 
Even for a person who is quite used to waking up with feelings of nothingness, 
the Monday morning after an Olympics closing ceremony is a bad moment. What am 
I going to do with myself, now there is no taekwondo to watch? You'd have 
thought the BBC would have at least had an Olympics reduction programme to ease 
the withdrawal pains. A montage of highlights or a fencing bout between an 
unknown Serbian and Algerian that I somehow missed first time round.

Where is Cary Cooper? Normally at moments of intense national mourning, the 
Professor of Organisational Psychology is somewhere to be found in the papers 
offering words of comfort on how to cope with feelings of loss and abandonment. 
Not this time. I check hisTwitter feed <https://twitter.com/ProfCaryCooper>. 
All I can find is: "Asked by journs whether halo effect of Games will spillover 
into a bad econ If UK can organiz&amp;perform in a world class event why not in 
biz". Not sure what amping is, but even so it seems a curiously pointless 
question to be asking the great man. It's getting through the next few days I'm 
worried about, not how the economy is doing. We all know it's tanking.

With no Cary to hand, I'm rather left to my own resources. But hopefully I'm 
better prepared than most as I've had to deal with countless Olympics and World 
Cup comedowns ever since 1972, the year I first became an armchair athlete. 
It's too late to offer you two of my coping mechanisms as these have to be 
instigated while the Games are ongoing. The first is to be prepared for the 
end, so it's not a surprise: during the middle weekend when John "Fingers" 
Inverdale was telling the nation that "The games are now really beginning to 
hot up", I was telling myself they were already half over. The second was to 
guard myself against the loss by watching two TVs at the same time on Sunday 
afternoon. It was surprisingly easy to watch Anthony Joshua win gold in the 
boxing at the same time as Manchester City beat Chelsea in the Community Shield 
and helped to ease the transition back to normality.

If you've booked a summer holiday, cancel it. It may seem like a good idea to 
follow two weeks of intense television watching with a well-earned break, 
putting your feet up on a beach somewhere but, take it from me, it really 
isn't. From many years of experience, I've discovered that the last thing you 
want after the Olympics is plenty of time to do nothing. It only increases the 
feelings of emptiness and pointlessness. Far better to be trudging off to work, 
complaining loudly about how dull everything seems. I took my holidays before 
the Olympics. That way I was match fit for hours of television and didn't have 
to worry about missing the start of the football season next Saturday.

Try to accept that the Olympics really are a two-week suspension of disbelief 
in which you can delude yourself that you really are interested in handball and 
dressage. If you're in any doubt about this, turn to Eurosport or ESPN, the 
spiritual home of any number of incredibly dull sports, for some aversion 
therapy. With no plucky Brit in with a shout of making it into the last 16, 
you'll wonder how on earth you spent so much time over the past fortnight, 
watching something you have no real interest in. Take it from me, there are a 
great many sports only worth watching every now and again. That's why the 
Olympics only comes round every four years.

Don't fall for the smooth talking president of the International Olympic 
Committee, Dr Jacques Rogge, when he says that the London Olympics were the 
best ever. He said that to Athens and Beijing as well. He says it to every host 
nation. That's his job. We may have thought that London Olympics were the best 
ever, but the Chinese were almost certainly moaning about how their Games were 
better.

And if that sounds a bit mean spirited, what are the chances in four years' 
time you will be saying how much better the London games were than Rio? For 
now, though, try to think like the Chinese. It's less painful.

Remember that being an armchair athlete is a full-time job. The true TV 
Olympian never sleeps. On Monday on Sky Sports there was the all important 
Capital One cup first round football match between Oldham and Sheffield 
Wednesday. Ninety minutes of unadulterated joy. And on Tuesday there's Swindon 
against Brighton. It may not be Turkey v Czech Republic in the Greco-Roman 
wrestling but, on reflection, maybe that's not such a bad thing.
 