
TRIATHLON Brownlee junior pursues world championship title



Jonny Brownlee has an excellent chance of finishing the year on a high by 
claiming the world title in New Zealand. The Olympic bronze medallist holds an 
180-point lead over Spain's Javier Gómez, who took silver in London, going into 
Sunday's WorldTriathlon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/triathlon> Series 
Grand Final in Auckland. A podium finish would therefore seal the crown and 
sign off 2012 in style, following his success at the Games. Brownlee's older 
brother, Alistair, who clinched gold in London this summer, has dominated the 
sport in recent years and won his second world title 12 months ago. However, an 
achilles injury has ruled him out of contention, handing Jonny a personal 
fillip ahead of the season's denouement. "Whatever happens on Sunday I have had 
a fantastic year," he said. "To finish it off with the world title would really 
be something special, but I know I have to stay focused in the lead-up and get 
everything right if that is going to happen. To win the world title would be 
incredible, especially to follow Alistair as the champion."

ROWING GB elite celebrate jubilee

Members of Team GB's Olympic team have returned to Dorney Lake this weekend 
for the Diamond JubileeRowing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rowing> 
Championships, to celebrate 60 years of the Queen's reign. Great Britain won 
four golds, two silvers and three bronzes at London 2012, making them the most 
successful Olympic rowing team for a second successive Games. The gold 
medallists Kat Copeland and Alex Gregory are expected to race on Sunday while 
Andrew Triggs-Hodge, Pete Reed, David Smith and Naomi Riches will also be in 
action. Hopefuls for the Rio Olympics in 2016 have the chance to prove 
themselves, as the event forms part of next season's trials. Olympians and 
Paralympians will be racing in their club colours to take on the best domestic 
rowers in the country.

… and finally

Andy Murray is set to be given the freedom of Stirling following his Olympic 
gold medal, becoming the third person to receive the honour … The post-London 
countdown to the Glasgow Commonwealth Games in 2014 is already under way, with
Sir Chris Hoy playing a prominent role. Hoy has been promoting the city's new 
velodrome with trials riderDanny MacAskill …While fellow track cyclist Victoria 
Pendleton and the gymnast Louis Smith have been strutting their stuff on 
Strictly Come Dancing, the gold medallist long jumper Greg Rutherford has been 
laid up in hospital, recovering from a hernia operation. He tweeted: "So I just 
woke up! I was terribly uncomfortable last night! Hernia surgery is painful!"…
Jessica Ennis continues to be honoured by her home city of Sheffield. After a 
stand at Bramall Lane was renamed after the heptathlete, she now becomes the 
latest Olympic star to be tasked with switching on Christmas lights – Ennis 
will top the bill at Meadowhall shopping centre in November.
 