
Hockey: Jolly sticks all round 

Interest in hockey has increased dramatically in the wake of strong 
performances this summer, with England Hockey reporting that its "Give it a go" 
campaign has attracted some 23,000 participants since it began at the opening 
of London 2012.

At the Games the men's team just missed a medal, losing 3-1 to Australia in 
the third-place match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/11/london-2012-olympics-hockey-great-britain>
, while thewomen won their play-off to take bronze against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/08/london-2012-argentina-team-gb-hockey>
. 15,000-strong sell-out crowds attended what turned out to be a surprisingly 
popular sport at the Games, with the Riverbank Arena hosting boisterous and 
enthusiastic fans throughout the tournament.

Team GB's Alex Danson who finished joint top-scorer, alongside her team-mate 
Crista Cullen, has experienced the upsurge in popularity. "We have seen some 
amazing changes in our sport because of the Olympics," she told
insidethegames.biz <http://insidethegames.biz>. "At my own club, Reading, there 
have been so many people coming along wanting to get involved and that is 
great. The key is to keep this going and I definitely think we can."

Danson hopes this will be facilitated by the opening of the Olympic hockey 
centre at Eton Manor in the Olympic Park next year. "Having a central base will 
be great and it is a tangible legacy from the Olympics," she said. The venue 
will also host the 2015 EuroHockey Nations Championships, a chance to see if 
the big numbers return.

Swimming: Promising pool signs

Team GB's Hannah Miley, fifth in the 400m individual medley at London, broke 
her own three-year-old British record to win silver in the 200m individual 
medley at the European Short-Course Championships in France this week.

Miley's time was just under half a second faster than her previous best and 
she was followed in with a promisingly strong performance from her young, 
fellow Olympian, Siobhan-Marie O'Connor, who finished fourth with a personal 
best in her first senior short-course final.

BBC Sports Personality: Time for a long shortlist 

The shortlist for the BBC's Sports Personality of the Year award will be 
announced on Monday and is expected, unsurprisingly, to be dominated by 
Olympians. With so many sporting achievements to include, the list has been 
extended to 12 and after criticism last year when no women were nominated, has 
been drawn up by an expert panel coming to a consensus on the nominees. The 
winner will be decided by a public vote on the night of 16 December.

Athletics: Judoka justice revisited 

Ashley Gill-Webb, the man accused of throwing a bottle on the track just 
before the start of the men's 100m final in London, will stand trial at 
Stratford Magistrates Court on 3 January. It wasa sordid little incident that 
nonetheless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/06/bottle-thrown-olympic-100m-final>
 offers the chance to reprint the best tweet of the Games and one with a 
pay-off that would surely be a welcome addition to so many other sporting 
missives. It was, of course, the Dutch world judo champion Edith Bosch's 
description of her reaction at the time: "A drunken spectator threw a bottle on 
to the track! I HAVE BEATEN HIM ..." she tweeted. 
 