
Swimsuits on ... and off 

Britain's swimmers begin their journey to Rio 2016 this week, after a 
disappointing Games, as the new season begins at the European Short Course 
Championships in Chartres on Tuesday.

British swimming has just concluded a review of its performance in London, 
where TeamGB won only three medals, two bronze and one silver, having had an 
official target of five to seven. It was a haul that reflected poorly on the 
team, compounded by the extensive funding the sport had received in the 
build-up, with an average spend per medal of £8.4m compared with £2.2m on 
cycling.

Hannah Miley, a strong hope for London 2012 who finished only fifth in the 
400m individual medley, will be joined by five other fellow Olympians as part 
of an 18-strong squad and TeamGB's head of communications, David Richards, was 
expecting the team to move forward before anticipated cuts in funding expected 
to be announced next month. "This is the start of the Olympic cycle," he said. 
"It's a case of giving the next generation, the Rio-targeted athletes, an 
opportunity to get involved in a full team environment."

The event will not be televised but fans wanting to see a bit more of the 
athletes may enjoy the 2013 calendar, (on sale Friday,shop.swimming.org 
<http://shop.swimming.org/>), in which London 2012 Olympians and Paralympians 
including Fran Halsall, Nick Robinson-Baker and Ollie Hynd, shed their 
swimsuits in aid of the Breast Cancer Campaign.

Cycling: Lights, camera, action

For cycling's modfather, a part in Quadrophenia might be the fantasy but 
Bradley Wiggins will make his real feature debut this week in a film covering 
his career over an extraordinary 12 months.

A Year In Yellow airs on Sky Atlantic this Wednesday at 10pm. Directed by John 
Dower, who made the superb Frazier/Ali documentary,Thrilla in Manila, the film 
tells Wiggins' story from the inside, his life on and off the track, exposing 
how the rider coped through winning the Tour and Olympic gold. "It's good that 
John stalking me for an entire year has paid off," noted Wiggins before the 
sideburns hit celluloid.

Triathlon: Brownlee on the run

Alistair Brownlee has said he would like to try to compete in the 10,000m at 
the 2014 Commonwealth Games. Brownlee's time in the 10km section of the 
triathlon en route to gold was only 97sec behind Mo Farah's medal-winning run 
on the track. "I wasn't far off [Farah's time] but it is still hundreds of 
miles away in terms of making that time up," he told the BBC. "But I would love 
to give it a go. Over the next few years, if anything gives me a chance to try 
some different things, new challenges, [I'd be keen]."

Taekwondo: Fight club

Still flushed from the Games, GB Taekwondo is already looking for new talent 
for Rio. The Fighting Chance: Battle4Brazil scheme invites male and female 
combat athletes to apply for backing to make the switch to taekwondo (
uksport.gov.uk/forms/fightingchance2016 
<http://www.uksport.gov.uk/forms/fightingchance2016/>). It has some pedigree 
already: Lutalo Muhammad, who won bronze in London, was discovered by the 
original Fighting Chance scheme in 2009.
 