
Sailing: Ainslie's improvement

Ben Ainslie, who on Tuesday was nominated for the International Sailing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sailing> Federation Rolex World Sailor of 
the Year, has returned to action as captain of the JP Morgan BAR crew in the 
America's Cup World Series in San Francisco Bay. On Thursday he finished first 
and third in the first two of seven fleet races. The results represented a big 
improvement for Ainslie, who won his fifth Olympic medal in London but finished 
10th out of 11 when the first meeting in the series was held in August. "It 
comes down to practice and time in the boat, just like anything else," he said 
of his improvement. "If you don't train and put the effort in you're not going 
to get the results." The regatta ends on Sunday, with the series resuming in 
Venice next April.

Rowing: Pilgrims call on Searle

Greg Searle, who won bronze in the men's eight in London at the age of 40 – 
his third Olympic medal, 20 years after the first – has been invited to deliver 
a pre-match team-talk to the players of Plymouth Argyle. "Greg has achieved a 
lot in sport, which the players can relate to," their manager, Carl Fletcher,
told the Herald 
<http://www.thisisplymouth.co.uk/Olympic-star-invited-Plymouth-Argyle-team-talk/story-17039615-detail/story.html>
. "You have to have respect for people that perform in the Olympics." Fletcher 
recalled that while he was a player at West Ham the team talk had once been 
given by the club's veteran tea lady. "It was just different and it eased the 
tension slightly. It puts a different perspective on things," he said. "The 
lads loved it. It was very interesting and it was something that I would take 
on and use." Searle, whose father was born in Plymouth, is a fan of the club.

Football: Park's pension protected 

It has been confirmed that Park Jong-woo, the bronze medal-winning South 
Korean who wasbanned from attending the medal ceremony 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/south-korean-told-miss-soccer-medal-ceremony-180431035--sow.html>
, will receive his full Olympic medallist's pension. Park celebrated his team's 
win over Japan in the bronze final by holding up a sign reading "Dokdo is our 
territory", referring to a group of islands in the Sea of Japan whose 
sovereignty is disputed by the two nations. The political demonstration 
provoked ire among Olympic officials, and he has yet to receive his medal. He 
will, however, receive the 525,000 won (£290) that South Korean bronze 
medallists are given every month for life.

Rowing: Spracklen's suspect exit

Generations of Canadian Olympic rowers have gathered at Elk Lake to protest 
against the decision byRowing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rowing> Canada 
not to extend the contract of their veteran coach, Mike Spracklen. The 
75-year-old Englishman coached Steve Redgrave to gold in the 1984 and 1988 
Olympics before moving to Canada the following year. His first success with 
them came in 1992, and his last when the men's eights claimed a silver medal 
this year. "Mike has meant a lot to every one of us," said Kyle Hamilton, a 
gold-medallist in 2008. "He's a legend in the sport."

And finally …

Tom Daley returns to the pool in the world junior diving championships, which 
start in Adelaide on Monday …Lolo Jones, the American hurdler who came fourth 
in the 100m hurdles in London, is to try her hand at bobsled … theFood 
Standards Agencyhas hailed food safety at the Olympics – where 14 million meals 
were served and only 22 food safety incidents reported – as "a triumph for the 
UK" … Olympic athletes dominated the British Showjumping Awards Ball on 
Tuesday, withNick Skelton riding off with the Rider's Rider of the Year and the 
Personality of the Year titles
 