
Diving: Daley's diving delight



Tom Daley <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tomdaley> claimed his second gold 
medal of the week to crown Great Britain's best ever performance at the World 
Junior Diving Championships in Adelaide. The Olympic bronze medallist stormed 
to victory in the boys' 10m platform to follow up his victory alongside Jack 
Laugher in the 3m synchro earlier this week. The 18-year-old from Plymouth 
produced a superb sequence of five dives, scoring 108 points with his fourth 
and 99 with his fifth – for which he was awarded perfect 10s by five judges and 
9.5 by the other two. His total of 663.95 left him 52 points clear of China's 
Yang Jian, whose compatriot Chen Aisen took bronze. Britain's other competitor, 
Daniel Goodfellow, did not make the final, while Lydia Rosenthal finished 11th 
of 12 in the girls' B 3m springboard. That meant Britain finished the week with 
three gold medals, two silver and one bronze.

Swimming: Rudd gets another gong

Jon Rudd, the Plymouth-based coach whose star pupil, Ruta Meilutyte, won 100m 
breaststroke gold in London, has been awarded the Cross of the Knight of the 
Order for Merits by the president of the swimmer's native Lithuania, Dalia 
Grybauskaite. "Hard work, wise advice, psychological support and your ability 
to steer the athlete to the right path have yielded brilliant and joyful 
results to Lithuania," he was told at a ceremony in the Presidential Palace in 
Vilnius.

Basketball: Spanish pay out

The Spanish Olympic Committee have paid €11,500 (£9,300) for damage caused by 
their basketball team to the Olympic Village after they lost to the USA in the 
men's final. The move came after the head of the London Legacy Development 
Corporation, Dennis Hone,told the Guardian the team had "trashed their 
apartments" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/10/olympic-park-next-incarnation-dennis-hone>
, a report that waspicked up by Spanish media 
<http://deportes.elpais.com/deportes/2012/10/11/actualidad/1349959979_808140.html>
. The team had been split between two apartments, each containing six players. 
Both sustained significant damage.

Rowing: Crow's medal moment

The Australian Kim Crow, the only rower to compete in two events in London and 
a medallist in both, was given a replacement bronze during a ceremony at the 
British High Commission in Canberra this week, after she dropped and broke the 
original following her return from the Games. But Crow – who has been named the 
new chair of the Australian Olympic Committee Athletes' Commission and vowed to 
improve by 2018 the sometimes suspect behaviour of Aussie athletes – was foiled 
in her plan to put the broken medal to good use as a coaster when Locog 
demanded that it be returned.

Speeches: London's musical mayor

A sample of Boris Johnson's speech to Olympians at last month's victory parade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2012/sep/10/london-victory-parade-boris-johnson-video>
 is to feature on the new album by The Soldiers, to be released later this 
month. The group's first three albums reached Nos 4, 10 and 11 in the charts, 
meaning that Johnson is set to become the most unlikely political 
kind-of-hitmaker since Neil Kinnock appeared in the video of Tracey Ullman's 
1984 No23 smash My Guy's Mad At Me. have been significant successes – Coming 
Home reached No4 in the charts in 2009, Letters Home peaked at No10 in 2010 and 
Message to You reached No11 last year. Johnson is now set to be the most 
unlikely political kind-of-hitmaker since Neil Kinnock appeared in the video of 
Tracey Ullman's 1984 No23 smash My Guy's Mad At Me.

… and finally

Sextuple Olympian archer Alison Williamson is to turn on the Christmas lights 
in Stafford … Gold medal-winning boxerAnthony Joshua will do the honours in 
Radlett … five-time Paralympic medalistStephanie Millward has been awarded the 
freedom of Corsham … The town of Centennial, Colorado, has revealed the cost of 
their post-Olympic party for the swimmerMissy Franklin, who won four golds in 
London – $58,000 (£36,200), including $33,385 on a giant video screen, $14,736 
on public relations and $320 on a balloon arch.
 