
Paralympics: Zanardi looks to Rio

The former motor racing driver Alex Zanardi, who won two golds and a silver in 
the paracycling at the Games, has said he intends to try to compete at Rio. The 
46-year-old, who recently completed a test for BMW, had not expected to attend 
another Paralympics but now believes there is yet more to come. "There is more 
[development] at the bottom of the barrel to be scratched up, [which] is why 
this sport is so exciting," he toldAutosport magazine. "London was London and 
that was the end of a great adventure. But now there is no reason why I cannot 
start a new one."

Taekwondo: Stamper back in action

Martin Stamper, who narrowly missed out on a bronze medal in London, returns 
to fight at the French Open this weekend, an event at which he won silver last 
year. Already committed to trying to make the Rio Games, he sees the Open as 
the beginning of that journey. "I just want to get back and feel good in the 
ring again," he said. "My last experience was not just a defeat; it was defeat 
in the Olympics and four more years before I can hopefully do better."

BBC Sports Personality: Runners and riders

With 11 of the 12 Sports Personality of the Year nominations going to Olympic 
and Paralympic athletes, here is the first of a cut-out-and-keep guide to all 
of them, as an aide memoire for the night itself.

BRADLEY WIGGINS First British winner of the Tour de France; time trial gold.

Skills Cycling, bell ringing, sideburns.

Personality Interesting, spiky, contrary. On the Olympics: "I want to go there 
and win it but I don't want to be part of Lord Coe and his band of merry men."
Odds4-11

Other honours Awarded cycling's Vélo d'Or – cyclist of the year.

On his side Mods. Halfords.

NICOLA ADAMS Flyweight gold

Skills Boxing, most influential of Britain's LGBT people, according to the 
Independent.

Personality Feisty, punchy, honest. On women: "We're at a stage now where it's 
all about equality. If a woman wants to play a sport, she can. There's nothing 
stopping us."Odds 250-1

Other honours The Joe Bromley Award for outstanding services to boxing.

On her side Boys and girls shouting "fight, fight, fight" in the playground.

ELLIE SIMMONDS Gold: 400m S6 free-style and 200m SM6 individual medley.

Skills Swimming, winner of the 2008 Young Sports Personality of the Year.

Personality Determined, emotional, mature. "I'm a normal person, just a lot 
smaller. I get on with it. Everybody should do that. You only live once and you 
need to enjoy life."Odds 50-1

Other honours Pool named after her at former primary school.

On her side Teen swimmers nationwide.

ANDY MURRAY US Open champion; men's singles gold.

Skills Tennis, gurning, calling for towels.

Personality Moody, weepy, taciturn. On winning the US Open: "It has been a 
long, long journey to this point, so I don't know if it is disbelief or 
whatever, but I am very, very happy on the inside. I'm sorry if I'm not showing 
it as you would like."Odds 9-1

Other honours Not one but two gold postboxes, in Dunblane and Wimbledon.

On his side The British, for the moment: andymurrayometer.com 
<http://andymurrayometer.com> 
 