
On Tuesday, our Prime Minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, thought he’d 
quietly take out his political trash. But he was caught red-handed.

The concept of “taking out the trash” was famously featured in the classic TV 
political drama, The West Wing. Put simply, it means saving up all your bad 
news, and then releasing it all on one day. The idea is that the details get 
lost in flood of information, limiting the political damage.

Earlier this week, using the cover of the Christmas break, this was exactly 
the trick Malcolm Turnbull tried to pull. And he’s been busted. Big time.

 In less than a day, the Turnbull Government confirmed it was cutting $30bn 
from schools, pulled more money out of Medicare, and announced that two 
ministers, Mal Brough and Jamie Briggs, were being dumped from the front bench 
due to scandal.

Mal Brough steps aside as minister while police investigate Slipper affair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/mal-brough-steps-aside-as-minister-while-police-investigate-slipper-affair>
Yet again, this whole episode exposes Malcolm Turnbull’s poor judgment.

Mr Turnbull showed poor judgment in thinking no one would notice him sneaking 
out all the bad news out over the summer break. But Australians weren’t fooled. 
We don’t like being taken for mugs, especially by our own prime minister.

Mr Turnbull showed poor judgment in thinking that while he rips $30bn from 
schools (an average $3.2m from every school), no one would remember the 
Liberals’ election promise that no school would be worse off.

Mr Turnbull showed poor judgment in thinking Australians would say nothing 
about his cuts to Medicare being used to plug the budget deficit his Government 
has doubled.

But most concerningly, Mr Turnbull showed poor judgment in relation Mal 
Brough, right from day one.

There were red flashing lights around Mr Brough from the beginning. 
Allegations of illegal conduct by Mr Brough in the Ashby affair were already 
out there. Malcolm Turnbull should never have appointed him in the first place, 
an appointment that was obviously to repay Mr Brough’s effort as the Turnbull 
numbers man in the attack on Prime Minister Tony Abbott.

Even after Mal Brough had his property raided by the Australian Federal 
Police, Mr Turnbull didn’t act. Finally now, in the quiet period around 
Christmas, when he thinks nobody is listening, the Prime Minister puts out a 
short statement dumping Mal Brough (and Jamie Briggs) from the ministry.

Malcolm Turnbull was defending Mal Brough right through the last days of 
parliament. The prime minister failed to explain why he took the decision to 
dump Mal Brough now. If Mal Brough had Malcolm Turnbull’s full confidence a 
month ago, what’s changed?

Malcolm Turnbull loses two ministers but the stench of one could linger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/malcolm-turnbull-loses-two-ministers-but-the-stench-of-one-could-linger>
All of this shows a prime minister who’s not prepared to face up to his 
responsibilities, who’s not prepared to be straight with the Australian people 
about why he’s made a decision.

When there’s a good news story it’s “Malcolm in the middle” of the press pack, 
but when there’s anything difficult to answer he’s nowhere to be seen.

He went missing for four days after the mid year economic update. And he’s not 
fully explaining himself now.

He’s like a doctor who only wants to breaks good news to a patient, and calls 
in the pathologist if the tests show up something nasty that needs explaining.

The prime minister says he wants to have a conversation with the Australian 
people – that means fronting up for the tough talks, not just the easy ones. 
And it means being answerable for the dodgy judgment of appointing Mal Brough 
in the first place.
 