
Canoeing: McKeever the Womble

Ed McKeever <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ed-mckeever>, Team GB's K1 gold 
medallist at Eton Dorney, who mastered a look of unmitigated disdain whenever 
asked to comment on whether he felt flattered by the description of him as "the 
Usain Bolt of the water", was back in a boat last week on the river Lea at 
Bromley-by-Bow, a few blazing paddle strokes downstream from the Olympic Park. 
The accountancy student took a break from his exams to join the Big Waterways 
Clean Up, fishing out litter from the river. "I spend most of my times on 
rivers so it's nice to have them clean," he said. Perhaps water Womble could 
now displace the Bolt and "human hydrofoil" nicknames that left him so 
demonstrably unimpressed last summer.

Christmas No1: A song for 2012

Two London 2012-inspired singles are vying for the Christmas No1 spot, hoping 
to restore some cachet to the once much coveted accolade that has failed to 
recover its kudos over the past 20 years despite the noble efforts of Mr Blobby 
and the Spice Girls. First up is I Wish for You the World, recorded by a choir 
of Games Makers, written by Alistair Griffin, the composer of Sky's Formula One 
coverage theme tune, with proceeds to be donated to the British Olympic 
Foundation and Paralympic Association. True Colors by the British 
Paraorchestra, featuring the Kaos Signing Choir for Deaf and Hearing Children, 
will help fund ParalympicsGB at the Sochi 2014 Winter Games. Let (friendly) 
battle commence.

BBC Sport's Personality: Runners and riders

With 11 of the 12 Sports Personality of the Year nominations going to Olympic 
and Paralympic athletes, here is the second part of our guide to all of them, 
as anaide-memoire for the big night a week today

BEN AINSLIE Finn gold, his fourth Olympic title in successive Games

Skills Beating, tacking, gybing, running, winning. And the most Medusa-like 
Paddington Bear-stare in sport

Personality Intense, prickly, vengeful. "They've made a big mistake. They've 
made me angry and you don't want to make me angry."Odds 150-1

Other honours World sailor of the year for the fourth time

On his side Nautical coves, pipe smokers, Incredible Hulk enthusiasts

KATHERINE GRAINGER Double sculls gold after three silvers since 2000

Skills Rowing, acting as an onion for the nation's tear ducts.

Personality Resilient, tenacious, playful: "Some people ask: 'Was it a 
relief?' No, it was utter joy"Odds 200-1

Other honours British Rowing's Olympic Athlete of the Year

On her side Scots, David Beckham, Sir Steve Redgrave, the eternally hopeful

SIR CHRIS HOY Team sprint and keirin golds made him Britain's most successful 
ever Olympian

Skills Speed, following Johnny Cash-clad man on white battery-powered bicycle

Personality Determined, cheerful, relentless Odds 200-1

Other honours University of Edinburgh's alumnus of the year

On his side Thigh fetishists, admirers of decent, nice chaps

DAVID WEIR T54 800m, 1500m, 5,000m and marathon golds

Skills Middle- to long-distance wheelchair racing supremo and victory roarer 
nonpareil

Personality Focused, implacable, positive Odds 33-1

Other honours Freedom of City of London

On his side Humans. Werewolves 
 