
Cycling: Track joy for James 

Victoria Pendleton has given up the track for Strictly Come Dancing and a 
wedding next summer, but British Cycling's succession planning means her heir 
is already hoovering up the titles. This week Becky James added the 500m time 
trial and sprint titles at the national track championships to her achievements 
and hopes to make it a hat-trick by defending her keirin title on Sunday night. 
The 20-year-old from Abergavenny capped a fine week for her family – her sister 
Rachel was fifth – and for Wales, with Owain Doull becoming the men's 
individual pursuit champion and Tredegar's Paralympic gold medallist Mark 
Colbourne winning the 200m FS time trial and 3km Para-Cycling Pursuit titles.

Equestrian: Springsteen's swoop

Two of TeamGB's quartet of team showjumping champions, Peter Charles and Scott 
Brash, will get a rousing reception at the Horse of the Year Show that begins 
at Birmingham's NEC on Wednesday. Charles, though, will not have his winning 
horse, Murka's Vindicat W, with him, having accepted an offer to sell the 
10-year-old gelding to the US jumper Jessica Springsteen. The Boss's daughter 
missed out on a place in the London 2012 team but is reported to be determined 
to make it to Rio in 2016 and sees the multimillion dollar purchase of "Vinnie" 
as vital to her ambition of glory in Brazil.

Gymnastics: Thomas on show again

Tickets at the Olympics were oversubscribed, but there is a chance to see some 
live action in Glasgow on 8 December. Kristian Thomas, who won team bronze in 
August, this week confirmed he will compete at the World Cup event at the new 
Commonwealth Arena, which should give handy experience of the venue before 
2014. Tickets available attinyurl.com/8rj65au <http://tinyurl.com/8rj65au>

Sailing: Another medal to come? 

Great Britain's 121st medal of the 2012 Paralympics may yet be won in the 
middle of October, six weeks after the closing ceremony. That is when a ruling 
from the court for arbitration in sport is due on ParalympicsGB's appeal 
against the penalty imposed on John Robertson, Stephen Thomas and Hannah 
Stodel, which relegated them from third to fifth in the Sonar class and 
deprived them of a bronze medal. "The Games is over but it's not over," Stodel 
told the BBC. "We're in limbo, waiting to find out whether we've got the medal 
that we won on the water."

And finally …

USA's Kerri Walsh‑Jennings, who won beach volleyball gold with Misty May, has 
revealed she was carrying her third baby while competing in London …Tom Daley 
will return to the pool for the first time since winning Olympic bronze when he 
competes at the World Junior Diving Championships in Adelaide, Australia, from 
8 October …Oscar Pistorius will play in the Alfred Dunhill Links Championship 
at St Andrews, Carnoustie and Kingsbarns starting on Thursday.
 