
Equestrianism: Charles on new mount 

Britain's Peter Charles was in action again on Saturday having been part of 
the gold-winning team at the Games, but on a new horse after his Olympic steed, 
Vindicat W, was bought by Bruce Springsteen's daughter, Jessica, two months ago.

He finished third on Murka's Odie de Frevent in the final major World Cup 
qualifier of the year at the London International Horse Show, won by Marc 
Houtzager, the Dutchman beaten into second place byTeam GB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-gb> at the Games.

The competition forms part of the Rolex World Cup series which runs through 
the winter reaching its climax at the final in Gothenburg, Sweden from 24-28 
April next year. Charles was among an impressive complement of London Olympians 
competing in the competition including his GB team-mates Nick Skelton, riding 
Big Star, Ben Maher on Tripple X and Scott Brash on Hello Sanctos.

There's another chance to see them in action on Sunday night at the horse 
show's Grand Prix event, which counts towards world ranking points, live from 
6pm via the BBC's red button and on Eurosport.

Boxing: Big budget windfall threat

Despite being the biggest winner in UK Sport's new budget plans ahead of the 
2016 Rio Games, with an increase of 44.5% from £9.5m to £13.8m, boxing has been 
warned that it must come to an agreement across Great Britain to ensure the 
full funding is delivered.

Team GB won five medals at the Games, including gold for Anthony Joshua, Luke 
Campbell and Nicola Adams. However, UK Sport's chief executive, Liz Nicholl, 
has warned that receipt of the budget is dependent on the Welsh and Scottish 
Amateur Boxing Associations accepting the British Amateur Boxing Association as 
their ruling body. Currently, they have refused to do so, although the English 
AmateurBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Association has agreed.

The funding, while ring-fenced, is on probationary terms and may be withdrawn 
should the associations not come to an agreement. "The British Amateur Boxing 
Association is the ruling body for the sport in Britain and all the home 
federations, including the Welsh and the Scottish federations, must respect 
them as the overall ruling body," said Nicholl. "They have a year for this to 
happen before we meet again to review the situation."

Sitting volleyball: Award winner devastated

Less pleased with the budget was Martine Wright, who won the Helen Rollason 
Award for outstanding achievement in the face of adversity at last Sunday'sBBC 
Sports Personality of the Year show. She was unhappy at the news that UK Sport 
have cut sitting volleyball's funding from £800,000 to nothing.

Wright, who lost both of her legs in the 7 July bombings and competed for 
Britain at the Games, said: "My immediate reaction was devastation. We have 
lived and breathed sitting volleyball and for someone to say all that hard work 
means nothing, and it's down to medals, is tough. It's really hard to break the 
cycle – how can you get the medals without the money?"

Britain failed to win a match during the Paralympics but were accepted to have 
put in gutsy performances at their debut in the Games. Wright, however, 
remained unbowed by the decision. "Two and a half years ago no one even knew 
what sitting volleyball was. Now we've got hundreds of kids turning up to 
taster days," she said. "All we need is a ball, a net, and our bottoms. We will 
go out and find private funding." 
 