
Population ageing represents a victory for society, for modern public health 
and healthcare, and for individuals who now have a greater chance to live a 
long life. This isn't to say that ageing doesn't come with problems. But the 
ageist narrative of old age as a time of misery, loneliness and ill health 
reinforced by apocalyptic language like "grey tsunami", "ticking timebomb" or 
"burden" represents older people as a threat when they are just us a few years 
down the line or our own parents or grandparents. And although funding for care 
and pensions is a challenge,older people can make a net contribution to the 
economy through paid work 
<http://www.emeraldinsight.com/journals.htm?articleid=17009839>, volunteering, 
spending and caring.

It is true that with increasing age, people will live with multiple long-term 
conditions, not single diseases; that some will become frail, or experience 
dementia or poor mobility. Right now, around five million people in the UK are 
carers for an older relative with demand due to outstrip supply. Around one in 
five older people also report loneliness or isolation – the biggest threat to 
their self-reported wellbeing.

For all this, people from 70 to 80 have the highest happiness ratings and 
around two thirds rate their health as good or excellent and tell us they don't 
live with a life limiting long-term condition. They adapt and so long as they 
can remain engaged in meaningful activity and relationships, feel safe and 
secure, the odd medical problem isn't a deal breaker. .

When the NHS was founded, 48% of the UK population died before 65. Now, it's 
14%. Life expectancy at 65 is already about two decades and by 2030, it will be 
till 88 for men and 91 for women. Traditional retirement, pensions and marriage 
weren't supposed to last this long, being a middle aged son or daughter wasn't 
the norm, and our housing stock was not built to reflect this.

Even in our wealthy and advanced society, there are major inequalities in 
rates of premature death (defined onPublic Health England's map as death before 
75 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2013/06June/Pages/Early-death-map-shows-english-health-inequality.aspx>
), and healthy and absolute life expectancy at 65, depending on geography, 
socioeconomic and ethnic groups.

Many determinants of poor health in old age are entirely lifestyle related and 
so potentially preventable, with around half of all ill health in old age 
related to five risk factors – obesity, lack of exercise, smoking, heavy 
alcohol use and low consumption of fruit and vegetables, accounting for as much 
as a 14 year difference in life expectancy. Smoking aside, research shows that 
the British public aren't doing much to change these risk factors.

Both the World Health Organisation and the Marmot report 
<http://www.instituteofhealthequity.org/projects/fair-society-healthy-lives-the-marmot-review>
 on health inequalities set out the need for a life course approach to healthy 
ageing. From birth onwards, good perinatal care, vaccination, nutrition, 
housing, heating, workplace stress, exercise and relative poverty, social 
support networks and fear of crime can all impact on longevity, health and 
wellbeing. And they carry on mattering well beyond 65 even though serial public 
health plans and strategies have ignored the ageing population – perhaps 
reflecting medical and research values.

So far I have discussed primary prevention of ill health. But of course, 
however much we invest in prevention people will get ill. We have made major 
inroads in reducing deaths from common killers but what happens when people do 
develop a long-term condition, a related complication or acute crisis has big 
influences on subsequent health in ageing. At the moment we have plenty of 
evidence of big care gaps, variations, poor access to services and for people 
with multiple conditions or frailty, poorly coordinated services which don't 
talk to each other and don't provide older people with the support they need. 
Often this care is blatantly age discriminatory.

Whose job is it to ensure people age in better health and inequalities are 
reduced?

People should be encouraged to self care, change lifestyles and seek support 
earlier when running into problems like obesity, unfitness or damaging alcohol 
consumption. But this requires support from government – not a responsibility 
deal with ministers too cowardly to put any pressure on the food, tobacco and 
drinks industry and their lobbyists. People need to save more for old age. 
Health and social care need adequate funding to support the needs of an ageing 
population. Social care has suffered savage funding cuts at a time of rapid 
population ageing. And demand is outstripping supply in the NHS, with a service 
model designed around younger people with single conditions and not the older 
people who are the main service users. This in turn needs a sea change in 
training, skills and values of staff and more reliance on the voluntary and 
housing sector and wider communities as well as meaningful support for carers.

When it comes to those wider determinants of health both central and local 
government have to take responsibility for age friendly housing, communities 
fit and safe for people to grow old in, fuel poverty, adequate pension 
settlements, education, decent workplace conditions and adequate pension 
provision. I am not sure that English governments of any colour have really put 
their backs into this – as the House of Lords 2013Ready for Ageing report 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/public-services-committee/report-ready-for-ageing/>
 made clear.

Let's see what is in the manifestos, and whether anyone sticks to them.
 