
The FA has not sent a scout to Mali after the heart scare suffered by Tord 
Grip, who had planned to be here. But Sven-Goran Eriksson is unlikely to suffer 
palpitations when he watches the video of this win by Nigeria, a team the 
England coach must prepare to face at the World Cup in June.

The Super Eagles should have won their opening Pool A match more comfortably 
than this yesterday, the more so after the introduction of Nwankwo Kanu livened 
up an attack which had faded after a bright start. Yet Nigeria's performance 
was far from terrifying and they looked shaky in defence, particularly in wide 
areas, allowing Algeria several chances to score.

Had Kanu's finishing matched his approach work he would have had a hat-trick, 
but such problems are familiar to Arsenal fans. The more likely source of worry 
looks to be Jay-Jay Okocha, who showed flashes of his skill and passing talent 
playing behind the front two. And Tijjani Babangida, a pacy if erratic 
substitute, could also exploit England's weaknesses on the left while Julius 
Aghahowa, who scored just before half-time, also had his moments on Nigeria's 
right.

Most encouraging for England was the vulnerability of the Nigeria defence. The 
full-backs Joseph Yobo and Ifeanyi Udeze, chosen ahead of Celestine Babayaro, 
looked uncertain. With sharper finishing Algeria, who did not qualify for the 
World Cup, would have escaped with a draw.

On this evidence Eriksson would do well to instruct his players to put early 
balls behind the full-backs for David Beckham and whoever operates on the left, 
possibly Kieron Dyer. Getting the full-backs to overlap could also bring 
success when the teams meet in Osaka on June 12 for their final group match.

There were frequent gaps, with Yobo and Udeze exposed not only by their 
positional weakness but the structure of the team. Finidi George, the farthest 
left of Nigeria's midfield, tended to operate fairly centrally and on the other 
flank Babangida and Aghahowa pushed forward rather than tracking back 
religiously.

If Michael Owen is wondering how he might fare against Nigeria's 
centre-halves, it looks promising. Shakhtar Donetsk's Isaac Okoronkwo, 
partnering Taribo West, was exposed for pace in the first half. England would 
do well to isolate him.

Nigeria have been short of friendlies in the build-up to this tournament, a 
1-1 draw with the Ivory Coast providing their only practice, and the coach 
Shuaibu Amodu is expecting improvement. "It might not have been the standard we 
expect from Nigeria but we should not be overly disappointed," he said. "It was 
the first game and first games of tournaments go like this sometimes. The most 
important thing is we won.

"It may not have been a good performance but it wasn't as if there were no 
chances. Now we have taken off with a win we must not go to sleep. The Nations 
Cup will give us a good indication of what the team can offer in the World Cup 
and we will use that as a benchmark."

Nigeria, in front of a mere 10,000 crowd, began authoratitively, with Okocha 
showing several fine touches, but lost their way and Eriksson may take 
encouragement from the display of Algeria's Rafik Saifi.

The midfielder, who impressed for Troyes against Leeds this season, caused 
problems with his passing and his runs. Paul Scholes, bursting from deep, could 
thrive.

Algeria were looking increasingly confident when Aghahowa picked up a loose 
ball, ran into the area and sent a low shot inside the near post. In the second 
half Moulay Haddou should have equalised, though Nigeria, prompted by Kanu, had 
several chances too.

Togo, meanwhile, drew 0-0 with Ivory Coast in Pool C. With Mali their 
opponents on Thursday - South Africa play Ghana the same day - and Liberia the 
opposition in their final group match, it may be a while before England can 
really judge.

 Algeria (4-4-2): Gaouaoui; Zafour, Meftah, Bradja, Haddou; Mansouri, Saifi 
(Kharkhache, 86), Kraouche, Dziri (Belbey, 79); Ghazi, Tasfaout (Akrour, 62).

 Nigeria (4-3-1-2): Shorunmu; Yobo, West, Okoronkwo, Udeze; Aghahowa, Oliseh, 
George; Okocha (Lawal, 78); Agali (Kanu, h-t), Alyegbeni (Babangida, 78).

 Referee : F Tangawarima (Zimbabwe).
 