
There’s a moment during our shoot with Agyness Deyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/agyness-deyn> when it becomes obvious what 
all the fuss is about. She is wearing a gold sequinned tunic teamed with 
knee-high socks, the perfect stage for the show that is her ludicrously long 
legs, and as she sidles past the crew in the hallway, everyone is taken aback. 
The girl who arrived in a corduroy jacket and brogues an hour earlier is gone, 
and a bona fide supermodel has taken her place. In her broad Lancastrian 
accent, Deyn politely asks how much time we have left, before adding that she 
had “better go put summit else on then”, and slides away, leaving everyone 
a little dazzled in her wake.

Not so long ago, in the pre-Cara era, Deyn was one of those first-name-only 
supermodels: for a time, it was all about Agy. In 2008,i-D magazine 
<http://i-d.vice.com/en_gb> put her on its cover with the simple word “icon”; 
the fashion world and the tabloids fell for the former chip-shop girl from 
Rossendale with the peroxide-blond crop (“the Agy”, naturally), while Zara 
commissioned mannequins inspired by her body.

When she wasn’t on the catwalk, she was being photographed on the fashion week 
front rows, next toNick Grimshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nick-grimshaw> and Lily Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lilyallen>, behind the DJ decks with Alexa 
Chung <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung> or in the back of black 
cabs withPixie Geldof <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/pixie-geldof>. Most 
of all she hung out with fashion designerHenry Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/henry-holland>, her best friend from 
home. When she first moved to London she lived with him (secretly) in his 
university halls, and the two went on to conquer the fashion scene with their 
blase northern swagger.

Deyn remembers the time she and Holland gatecrashed a Teen Vogue party in New 
York and were introduced to American Vogue editor Anna Wintour. “I was maybe 19 
or 20, wearing a Jeremy Scott jumper dress with burgers and hot dogs all over 
it, and she invited me and Henry to theCFDA awards 
<http://cfda.com/cfda-fashion-awards> [the Oscars of fashion]. I didn’t know 
who she was, but I thought she was great. I said yes, and I remember thinking, 
‘This is so glam.’ I had never experienced parties like that. It was crazy.”

But Deyn’s former life seems remote when she arrives at our shoot in her 
civilian clothes (pencil skirt and jumper teamed with ankle socks), at 32 
looking more like the prettiest girl in the sixth form than a cover girl. It’s 
not that she’s not strikingly beautiful: her face is perfectly proportioned, 
with plump lips, neat nose and blue, almond-shaped eyes. But the Agy crop has 
grown out, replaced by distinctly normal shoulder-length brunette hair. “Yeah, 
I don’t really get recognised any more,” Deyn says. “And my mum loves it! When 
we were growing up, my sister had white blond dreadlocks and I shaved my head. 
Now my sister has long hair, too, so my mum is like, ‘Oh, you both lookso 
lovely.’”

After eight years living in the States, her accent is as broad as ever. Deyn 
moved to New York in 2006, and for the last three years has been living in Los 
Angeles, generally avoiding the media glare, except for the odd paparazzi shot 
of her in a supermarket with her husband,Giovanni Ribisi 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000610/> (the actor best known as Phoebe’s brother 
in Friends). But despite her three-year hiatus from modelling, Deyn has still 
very much got it. “Is she back? Is she back?” various fashion brands ask our 
stylist, who was inundated with clothes for Deyn to wear on the shoot: everyone 
wants her to be seen in their stuff.
 Agyness Deyn at London Fashion Week, 2008. Photograph: Rex Features 
The answer is, well, no, not really. Deyn is more interested in acting, 
specifically her new film,Electricity 
<http://on.aol.com/video/electricity-trailer-518512675>. The new hair is not a 
style statement, either; it’s for her next film, Sunset Song (she’ll be cutting 
it off again once shooting has wrapped). “When people ask what I do, I say I am 
an actor,” she says, though this took a little bit of getting used to on her 
part. Deyn had done a couple of short films at the tail end of her modelling 
days, but it was only after she finished filmingPusher 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1921070/?ref_=nm_knf_t2> in 2012, in which she 
played a heroin-addicted stripper, and overheard director Luis Prieto describe 
her as an actor, that she felt the career shift was real.

Her next two films see her take lead roles. In Electricity, based on the 
bestselling book by Ray Robinson, there is barely a shot without Deyn in it. 
She plays Lily, a young woman with epilepsy who is dealing with the fallout of 
a troubled family life – a strong, committed and occasionally gruelling 
performance. In multiple scenes her character suffers fits, and the brutal 
physicality of epilepsy is vividly depicted. Deyn slams to the floor 
face-forward in one scene, and thrashes about naked in another. This took its 
toll. “At the beginning of the shoot, we were painting the bruises on. But by 
the end I had that many of my own that we had to cover them up for continuity. 
I wasn’t doing anything unsafe, but I bruise like a peach, and whether you fall 
on a mat or fall on a floor, you’re still falling on something.”

Deyn has already received feedback from one person with epilepsy, who emailed 
the director. “He said that he’s never really been able to articulate what it’s 
like, and it was so moving to watch… the film has helped him be OK with it. 
I read his message and burst into tears.” It’s those moments, Deyn says, that 
make being in the public eye worthwhile, “to emotionally connect to people. 
That’s the joy of it.” But what about the flipside, all the unwanted attention? 
“Sometimes I think I am not really that famous. But fame is not such a bad 
thing. It’s just the way you see it and the way you experience it.”

She is fiercely protective of her private life, so much so that back in June 
2012 the tabloids had a field day when it was announced she had “quietly 
married in Los Angeles over the weekend”, especially because no one knew she 
was even dating Ribisi. Added to that, Ribisi is a Scientologist and Deyn is 
not. Did she not have to convert? I explain that I’m Jewish, and that the 
subject of conversion comes up a lot. “It’s my husband’s religion,” she shrugs. 
“It’s like you going out with a Catholic, and obviously you know a little bit 
about it, but it is what it is.”

Narrow-mindedness of any kind makes her angry, she continues. “Life’s too 
short. You should accept everyone for who they are. Whether it’s people’s 
taste, people’s sexuality, race, religion.” She’s speaking in generalities, but 
it’s clear she’s talking from experience – of people with preconceived ideas of 
“something they don’t really know much about”.
 Agyness Deyn with her husband, actor Giovanni Ribisi. Photograph: Paul 
Redmond/WireImage 
Electricity’s director, Bryn Higgins <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0383343/>, 
says one reason Deyn was right for the role of Lily is because she “has lived 
a lot in a short time”. What does she think he meant? “I suppose by the time 
I was in my early 20s, I had done a lot. I went from being up north, having a 
normal job, and then all of a sudden going around on the world on my own. I’d 
be in China for a day and then on a plane to America to do something else. 
There was a two- to three-year period when I was just on the go. It was like 
I was thrust on the world.” Plus, she says, this was all in her 20s, that 
decade of self-discovery, which she’s glad to have finished with. “You get to 
30 and you’re like, thank God, my 20s are over!” Surely her 20s were more 
chaotic than most? “Yeah, but all of my friends are the same. You get there and 
think, ‘I made it!’”

She remains as close to her old friend Henry Holland as ever. He visits her in 
LA and she sees him when she’s back in England, but these days their 
get-togethers are a touch more tame: “We go out for Sunday roasts, take the 
dogs for a walk, watch telly together.” When she’s away, she misses it – the 
countryside walks with her family up north, the dampness in the air (“It’s so 
dry in LA”) and the tube in London. She also misses the people. “You don’t 
really have to say anything and you feel understood,” she says. She especially 
misses her mum, a former nurse who is on the shoot today, a warm and homely 
presence who often visits her on set. “She will come and stay for weeks, cook 
my tea, make me a brew and just look after me.” Out with her model daughter in 
London, Deyn’s mother says she has to walk around elongating her neck, to iron 
out any wrinkles for the paparazzi. She is clearly very proud, though at one 
point laments the fact that none of her three children has yet given her 
grandchildren, prompting an eye-roll from Deyn.

If she sounds a little homesick, her LA life doesn’t seem all bad, with lots 
of hiking and horse-riding in the mountains. Ribisi and Deyn go out for dinner 
with friends, and occasionally on to a friend’s bar, but she is usually in bed 
by 10.30 or 11pm and up again at 6am. “I just enjoy that pace.”

And her new routine of lying low in LA in between shoots suits her – she seems 
calm and grounded, and unfazed by any preconceptions about her acting talents, 
or about her new life in the hills. She puts this down to being from the north: 
“There’s something uncomplicated about northern women, a get-up-and-go thing.”

And with that she hugs me and heads off to prepare for Electricity’s premiere, 
where she plans to keep it “very low key”. On the red carpet later that night, 
she wears her own black silk shirt-dress and low heels, her hair down and 
loose, just a touch of red lipstick. The next day, she receives a fraction of 
the column inches of her former years – something, I suspect, she is quite 
pleased about.

• Electricity is released on 12 December. For more information, go to 
sodapictures.com <http://www.sodapictures.com/film/electricity/>
 