
I don't know if this is a testament to the alchemy of fashion photography, or 
to the visual versatility of this particular supermodel, but my first thought 
when she walks in is, oh, here's the makeup artist. Or the personal assistant, 
perhaps. Whoever she is, she's bang on time – so in the tradition of supermodel 
folklore, maybe she's come to announce that her boss will be a gazillion hours 
late? Then the woman offers a smiley greeting in a soft Lancashire accent, and 
I realise she must beAgyness Deyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/agyness-deyn>.

She doesn't look anything like Deyn. She doesn't even really look like a 
model. Which is weird, because Deyn was the first British model since Kate Moss 
to break through from the catwalk into national consciousness, her trademark 
tousled blonde crop so recognisable that for a while young women in salons 
across the country weredemanding an "Agy" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2008/jun/18/fashion.women>. Named model 
of the year at the British fashion awards in 2007, and honoured by an entire 
issue of i-D devoted to herself, she has been the flagship face of Burberry, 
Vivienne Westwood and Giorgio Armani among many others, while subverting the 
luxury brand aesthetic with a look best described as army surplus meets jumble 
sale chic. Deyn has dated rock stars, sung on a Rihanna music video, and 
defined a version of cool that style magazines invariably like to describe as 
edgy and fierce.

The woman I meet isn't fierce at all. But then, she's no longer a model 
either. She is incredibly polite and attentive, to the point where she can come 
across as almost meek, and talks slowly and carefully, the words punctuated by 
long pauses while she considers her thoughts. After modelling for 11 years,Deyn 
has decided to swap the catwalk for the stage 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2011/dec/21/agyness-deyn-the-leisure-society>, 
and this week will appear in her first play, a four-handed comedy called The 
Leisure Society. It is, she readily admits, quite a change.

"For modelling, you have to be such a strong person in a way – or seen to be a 
strong person, do you know what I mean? But in acting you have to get in touch 
with all the vulnerability that you carry." She's been rehearsing for eight 
hours every day, and talks about it with a sort of awestruck reverence.

"When I started doing little bits of acting I was like, this is what I'm 
supposed to be doing, you know? Going to this place where there's this 
fulfilment in kind of like letting go, and also that part of really getting in 
touch with yourself, to be able to understand a different character, and then 
portray that to whoever's watching it, and to be able to penetrate them in a 
way that touches them. And there's this unsaid kind of bond with us all [in the 
cast] which is so powerful, you know? It's like this family, there for each 
other; I feel held by the other people who are doing it, which is so great, cos 
like with modelling for so long it's a very solo project, and quite lonely. 
Being part of – well, it makes me feel emotional just talking about it – being 
part of this with these great people – it's just like so cool."

Deyn plays Paula, the 21-year-old date of a thirtysomething divorcee who takes 
her to dinner to meet a well-heeled couple he has been friends with for years. 
The couple had planned on ending their friendship with him that night, but 
Paula's presence proves to be sexually explosive; she and her date describe 
themselves as "special" friends, an arrangement known to fans of Sex and the 
City as "fuck buddies", and the evening takes an increasingly bizarre series of 
turns as the older couple's attempts at worldly sophistication unravel into 
erotic confusion. I've read the script, and it's extremely funny.

"The writing is genius," agrees Deyn. "It's a back-and-forth of absurdity. 
Paula's 21, and I suppose when you're 21 you have no filter, you have no 
concept of, like, consequences, but it's not like a conscious thought – 
everything is a bit black and white, cos you've just not had enough experience. 
When you're young you say it how it is, and even your views are, like, 'This is 
totally the truth', cos you don't know any difference, so there's a real 
confidence in your way of thinking."

Was she like that at 21? "Yeah! And I kind of feel like I have to put me as I 
am now to one side, cos you know, I'm 29, I feel like that's the age when you 
start to think about life. What is this all about? Who am I?"

Even simply being photographed as herself, no longer as a model being paid to 
sell something, can be confronting. "When you're doing it as yourself it's a 
bit different. When you're doing it yourself, it's, OK, this is me. And I 
suppose it does make you explore it; am I OK being who I am?" Does it pose the 
question, who am I?

"Yeah, definitely," she agrees, her eyes widening. "So it's really different. 
But really nice too. I suppose it's a challenge, but also a relief."

Deyn seems to become less comfortable when she talks about her old career as a 
model. She's the first professional beauty I've met who doesn't pretend to have 
been an ugly duckling – "No, I suppose as a little girl I was really pretty. I 
was cute" – which makes a lovely change. But apart from that, she appears to be 
bound by the fashion world'somertà, which prohibits any acknowledgement of the 
industry's notorious darker sides – bitchiness, eating disorders, insecurity – 
or of any ambition to be a model at all, a career that convention dictates must 
arrive by surprise, like a baby delivered by a stork.
 Childhood friends Henry Holland and Agyness Deyn in New York in 2008. 
Photograph: Charles Eshelman/FilmMagic 
Deyn was born near Rochdale in Greater Manchester, to a postal worker and a 
nurse, and though they divorced when she was 12 her childhood sounds happy; a 
normal provincial upbringing, with a part-time job in the local fish and chip 
shop. Her great childhood friend remains her best friend today –Henry Holland, 
now a successful fashion designer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2009/nov/08/henry-holland-interview> – 
and in the past she's said that as dreamy teenagers, "Henry would say: 'When 
you're a famous model', and I'd say: 'When you're a famous fashion editor.'" 
But when I ask her now why she'd wanted to be a model, she says: "I'd never 
really thought about it until I got spotted." Hadn't she won a local modelling 
contest at 16? "Yeah but it never crossed my mind that it could actually be a 
career." What else had she been considering? "Who knows, who knows," she offers 
vaguely. "Don't know."

At 18 she was spotted by a scout in London, while visiting Holland at 
university. For the next five years she worked as a jobbing model, not making 
much of a name for herself but having a ball; another childhood friend joined 
the pair in London, and they were like, she grins, "the three musketeers". It 
wasn't until a New York agent signed her in 2006 that she suddenly became an 
overnight star,filling the vacancy of Britain's new supermodel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2007/may/13/fashion>, previously 
occupied by Kate Moss.

"That still like blags my head when people say that. Even now I'm only just 
thinking like that. It was really mental." There must have been a moment when 
she knew she'd joined the ranks of supermodels? "No, I never really clocked on 
to that." Even when her hairstyle had its own name? She looks fleetingly 
embarrassed. "I suppose, yeah, there was a bit of that. I think in the moment I 
had realised," she reluctantly concedes, "but I don't know whether not really 
accepting it was a way of actually not getting caught up in it. Maybe."

When I ask how much truth there is in the bitchy reputation of modelling, she 
replies cautiously: "Um, my experience is that I just went to work and I had 
fun." A long pause. "And then I went home, and then I wasn't at work any more." 
But there was quite a bit of bitching about Deyn, because gossips claimed that 
when she became fashion's sensational new star, she knocked several years off 
her age to disguise the fact that she had already been around for ages. When I 
bring this up she freezes, her face a blank guard, so I ask if it's true, as 
I'd read, that she resorted to bringing her passport to interviews to prove her 
age. She relaxes and laughs.

"Really? That would have been clever. No, when I decided I would really do 
modelling I was like 18, and I think at the time that was quite old for a new 
face, so we knocked off a few years." The deception has long since been 
corrected. "But it was my birthday last week, and Henry was saying how old 
would you have been? Cos it got really complicated – when personal and work 
collide – and Henry was like: 'But it looks like I started being friends with 
you when you were four or something!'"

She seems to tense again when I ask about the other curiosity in her 
biography. Deyn was born Laura Hollins, and according to which account you 
read, she changed it a) because her agency told her too many models were 
already called Laura, or b) she and her mother saw a magazine cover that said 
"Change your name, change your life!", so they both did, or c) she consulted a 
man who claims to be Britain's only "name analyst", Laurence Y Payg, and uses a 
3,000-year-old Chinese technique to create a more "positive" name. His 
technique sounds a lot like numerology – spelt with its superfluous Ys, her new 
name apparently equates to the number 21 – and Payg has publicly credited it 
with all Deyn's subsequent success. As I run through these explanations, she 
gazes back with an unreadable expression that could be hiding annoyance, 
confusion, amusement, or almost anything. Can she explain what happened?

"Yeah, in two seconds. Yeah, I started modelling, and they said there are 
loads of Lauras – you can change your name. I was like, OK, and then I thought 
about it and said OK, I'll be called Agnes; my grandmother was called Agnes." 
It was as simple as that? "Yeah." But didn't her mother, a Reiki master, also 
change her name – and Deyn's sister too? Yes, she acknowledges warily. And she 
changed the spelling because of numerology? "Laurence helped me change my 
name," she says matter of factly. "Erm ... yeah, that's it."

I think she means that a), b) and c) all happened, in that order, but when I 
point out that numerology is quite an esoteric notion, she looks blank again. 
"I suppose I'm open to trying new things, do you know what I mean?" I quote 
Payg to her – "Soon after her name change, Agyness's career sky-rocketed. 
Absolutely nothing else about her circumstances changed ... and yet everything 
suddenly changed." Does she really believe that's why it happened? "I don't 
know," she murmurs, looking uncomfortable. "Who knows?"

I get the impression that Deyn finds interest in her private life quite 
difficult to deal with, and would rather come across as vacant than revisit 
subjects which have left her feeling bruised by the media. She put her $2.5m 
New York apartment on the market recently, andphotos of its wildly baroque, 
lavishly idiosyncratic interior 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/house-and-homes-blog/2012/jan/17/agyness-deyn-loft-style>
 (conch-shell chairs, a coral and seaweed mural, leopard skin carpets, lion's 
head taps) caused quite a sensation in the press. When I ask how that felt, 
though, she claims to be unaware of any coverage. "I did the decor with a 
friend of mine, and had a lot of fun doing it. But it's for sale now, and 
that's it really."

I assume she must be fabulously rich, but when I say so she looks astonished – 
which I think is another way of seeing off unwelcome intrusion. "Well, I 
suppose I've never really had a lifestyle that needs upkeep. I don't get cabs; 
I'm on the tube with my Oyster card. I've never really changed my lifestyle."

But at moments she can also be disarmingly vulnerable. Having dated Josh 
Hubbard, guitarist with the British band the Paddingtons, and then Albert 
Hammond Junior of the Strokes, she is currently single, and volunteers: "Yeah, 
single for three years now. I think I've forgotten how to function in a 
relationship. I hope I meet someone, cos it would be nice to have someone to 
share your joys and accomplishments and hard times with. To have a comrade in 
life. I'd like a relationship that was like two tree trunks side by side, 
strong but independent."

It's quite hard to reconcile her fiercely edgy supermodel image with this 
sweetly shy, almost earnest ingenue, and she agrees: "I think I was able to put 
on more of a brash front a lot more when I was younger. Now it's a bit harder, 
so now I kind of embrace the feeling awkward, maybe a little bit socially 
inept. But in a good way." But just as I'm leaving, I get a glimpse of the 
person I would guess her close friends know. She explains that she is currently 
living here in the five-star Corinthia hotel where we're meeting – and meets my 
look of surprise with a playful grin.

"Yeah, I love this place. I was sat outside chilling out yesterday – I feel so 
chilled here, I actually feel like it's my house – like, what are all these 
people doing in my house?" she jokes. "And I was talking to this chap, chilling 
out after rehearsing all day, and we were just chatting and stuff and I didn't 
know he's the owner, the guy that built it – and he lives here – and I'm like 
going," and she starts to laugh, "S'all right this hotel, isn't it?"

The Leisure Society is at Trafalagar Studios 2 from 28 February to 31 March. 
Tickets are available fromatgtickets.com/trafalgarstudios 
<http://www.atgtickets.com/venue/Trafalgar-Studios>
 