
For 12 years, two sides have dominated African football. Of the last six Cups 
of Nations, five have been won by either Egypt orCameroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon>, a record which means that 
almost whatever happens when the two meet in this afternoon's quarter-final in 
Benguela, the game will have an epic quality.

The 34-year-old Ahmed Hassan and the 33-year-old Rigobert Song have inspired 
their nations through that period of success, and they will tussle for the 
seventh time in a competitive international this afternoon, both knowing that 
if they lose, it is likely to be their final appearance in a Cup of Nations. 
For Song in particular, this tournament has felt like an anguished raging 
against the dying of the light.

At times in the 21 minutes he was permitted against Tunisia, Song's tackles 
seemed designed less to win the ball than to make a point. They were somehow 
mannered, over-precise, over-fierce; they were tackles that said "I'm still 
here: don't forget me".

And the truth is that, for all Song's history of gaffes, Cameroon did seem 
more secure with him than without him (perhaps because Aurélien Chedjou, who 
replaced him in the starting line-up, seems rather too determined to follow in 
the great man's footsteps, scoring a headed own goal from 25 yards that was a 
masterpiece of Song-like over-enthusiasm).

In the mixed zone afterwards, as though feeling he had already said enough in 
those 21 minutes, Song spoke to no one, striding through in a dreadlocked 
swoosh, pausing only to kiss a veteran French journalist. It was almost a regal 
exit, but for all the sense of belonging of a man who until Friday had started 
every game Cameroon have played in a Cup of Nations since 1996, the sense 
remains that Song has become the Joan Crawford of African football, as each day 
passes trying with greater desperation but no greater success to hide the signs 
of ageing.

He has always, of course, been an erratic defender. Combative and courageous 
he may have been, but disaster has lurked in every stride.

As Paul Doyle commented when Song came on last Friday, the stage was set for 
him to score the winner; you just didn't know at which end. Even by his 
standards, this has been a self-destructive tournament.

It was his miscontrol that allowed Daniel Cousin to score Gabon's winner in 
the opening game. Against Zambia in the second, he mystifyingly headed a cross 
towards his own goal. Cameroon's goalkeeper, Carlos Kameni, made a smart reflex 
save, only for Jacob Mulenga to tap in the rebound.

Mulenga then got away from Song, and was brought down by Kameni to give Zambia 
the penalty from which they levelled at 2-2. If Paul Le Guen decided he had 
become a liability, the evidence was hard to contest. Yet in those final 20 
minutes against Tunisia, the old majesty was back. Even if Samuel Eto'o now 
wears the armband, it was Song who led the team through uncertainty to the 
quarter-final.

Hassan, if anything, is even more central. He was in Egypt's squad in 1996, 
but never made it off the bench. Two years later, in Burkina Faso, he scored 
their opener in the 2-0 win over South Africa in the final – "the turning point 
of my career", as he defines it – and has been ever since the key intelligence 
in anEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> side looking for an 
unprecedented third straight Nations Cup. The wit and precision of his passing 
has no equal in the modern African game, and he will today win his 170th cap, 
surpassing his compatriot Hossam Hassan's African record.

Two years ago in Accra, Song and Hassan were opposing captains in the final, 
both seeking their third title. Cameroon, having been thrashed 4-2 by Egypt in 
the group, shifted from 4-4-2 to 4-2-3-1 and were successfully frustrating the 
defending champions when Song was caught in possession by Mohamed Zidan, who 
squared for Mohamed Aboutrika to score the only goal.

Eto'o has openly been talking of revenge, but he also suggested yesterday, 
recalling the lessons of two years ago, that he would prefer a 4-4-1-1 
formation. Deploying two forwards rather plays into the hands of Egypt's 
three-man back-line: Wael Gomaa and Mahmoud Fathalla can play as man-markers 
with Hani Said sweeping.

Play with only one up, though, and it disrupts their marking structure. Hassan 
rightly points out that Said is more than comfortable stepping into midfield, 
but then he is forced to pick up the deep-lying striker (which could be Eto'o 
playing behind Mohamadou Idrissou, or Achille Webó, so impressive on Friday, 
playing behind Eto'o), leaving either Gomaa or Fathalla as the spare man, a 
role in which neither seems especially comfortable.

For all their recent domination of the Cup of Nations, Egypt are inspired by 
recent failure. Hassan even describes their defeat by Algeria in a World Cup 
qualifying play-off last November as his hardest episode in football. "Maybe 
that game was the most disappointing moment of my career," he said. "I've 
played in a lot of World Cup qualifiers and I know that might have been my 
last. All our supporters are angry because we missed the World Cup, but this 
might make them a little bit happier."

Hassan insists he would not exchange his three Nations Cup triumphs for a 
World Cup appearance. "For every player in the world it's a dream to play in 
the World Cup," he said. "But it didn't happen, so we have to turn that page 
and see what comes up next. Of course, the World Cup is a big thing but if you 
go there you know it's very hard to win it, but I've been African champion 
three times and I wouldn't give medals away just for three games in the World 
Cup."

And yet, as the reality that their careers are nearing an end closes in on 
Song and Hassan, there is a sense that both are playing to determine their 
legacies.
 