
Egypt are through to the semi-finals of the Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>, but their victory 
over Cameroon was achieved in controversial circumstances. Leading 2-1 in 
extra-time through Mohamed Gedo's 92nd minute strike, Egypt put the game beyond 
doubt three minutes later when Ahmed Hassan's free-kick was wrongly judged to 
have crossed the line after being punched on to the bar by Cameroon's 
goalkeeper Carlos Kameni.

Egypt's third goal was also Hassan's third of the match, though in an odd turn 
of events he could not claim the match ball as his own, as one of those strikes 
was put past his own goalkeeper to giveCameroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon> an early advantage.

Despite the injustice of Egypt's third, Cameroon could only have themselves to 
blame for their defeat. They went ahead after 25 minutes when Achille Emana's 
dangerous corner was mistakenly diverted into his own goal by Egypt's captain 
Hassan, but were unable to hold on to their lead for long.

The influential Hassan, who set an African record with his 170th international 
appearance, demanded the focus be placed on him. Having scored at the wrong 
end, he restored parity after 36 minutes when Kameni blundered badly by 
allowing his shot to bounce in front of him and find the bottom corner. The 
Espanyol goalkeeper, normally a reliable performer, had a game to forget.

Although Cameroon increasingly took the game to Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> in the second half, they could not 
turn their dominance into anything more rewarding. Their star man, Samuel 
Eto'o, seemed strangely out of sorts, although he did briefly flicker into 
life, testing Essam El Hadary with a fierce shot, before firing over shortly 
afterwards.

Unable to find a winner, Cameroon became their own worst enemies at the start 
of extra-time. Geremi's suicidal backpass was of the calibre to give him 
nightmares for years to come, and the Egypt substitute Gedo nipped in to nutmeg 
Kameni and deliver a blow from which Cameroon would not recover. Hassan's 
controversial free-kick merely rubbed salt into a gaping wound, and Egypt will 
now face their fierce rivals Algeria on Thursday for a place in the final.

What little hope Cameroon had of an unlikely escape was extinguished when 
Aurelien Chedjou was dismissed for a professional foul. Chedjou had been 
preferred to Rigobert Song in defence, ending the veteran's run of 36 
successive Africa Cup of Nations matches. Instead it is Egypt who can 
concentrate on extending records, as they go in search of their third 
tournament win in a row.
 