
Working on one of Concern's projects to increase access to primary education 
in the Nsamana village of Southern Malawi in 2005, aid worker Marie Flaherty 
noticed that many of the children were well over four feet tall before they 
began attending classes. She learned that the tall children came from the Njoho 
village on the other side of the Shire River. The headmaster told Flaherty that 
the Njoho children must reach four feet before they could safely cross the 
Shire every morning without drowning.

In response, Flaherty secured extra funding from Concern for the construction 
of a new school in Njoho. She returned to Njoho a year later, and to her 
surprise, found the school deserted, with weeds breaking through cracks in the 
concrete walls.

Asking Njoho residents why the new school lay empty, the villagers looked at 
Flaherty in bewilderment. They could not send their children to the modern 
school because their ancestors had always attended the original one across the 
river, several Njoho parents told her.

The Njohos didn't want another school. What they needed was a bridge.

Flaherty's failure to canvass local opinions before going ahead with her 
well-intentioned plans to school the Njoho children captures in microcosm one 
major reason why development funds often get wasted. And when a project fails, 
for whatever reason, it lends support to the increasingly popular arguments of 
those who insist that throwing money at Africa's problems is just more dead aid.

Prominent thinktank representatives, esteemed development scholars, and 
iconoclastic African intellectuals like Dambisa Moyo trace the aid trail from 
Western to African nations. These aid experts maintain that cash injections 
from the West to impoverished African areas perpetuate, and even worsen, the 
desperate situation on the ground.

Their proposed solution: don't keep giving alms to the begging bowl; instead, 
concoct a plan to coach Africans to pull themselves up by the boot-strings; 
then cut off the supply of cash. Otherwise, aid sceptics predict, the 
continent's kleptomaniac dictators and their cronies will continue to siphon 
off aid funds to finance their sumptuous lifestyles. Meanwhile, the bottom 
billion of the world's most wretched stay starved, half-crazed from malarial 
fever, or slowly dying of HIV/AIDS, argue aid critics.

The clamour of charity spokespersons making the case for more aid and more 
legally-binding commitments from Western donors is equally loud, however. 
Backed by countless charity calendar events, rock star campaigners, and 
Nobel-Prize winning economists, an army of development activists pressurize 
governments to donate the seven pence from every £10 of Gross National Product 
that they promised to the developing world at the Gleneagles G8 summit in 2005.

Aid advocates insist that this extra money is vital if African countries are 
to have any realistic chance of reaching the targets set by the Millennium 
Development Goals.

"If we don't want to renege on all our pledges again, then we need to push the 
aid agenda through for 2015. Saying aid is useless – that's just 
headline-grabbing tactics now," says John Smith of One International, an 
advocacy organisation pressing for greater quantity and quality of foreign aid.

Smith admits to past mistakes in the handling of aid funds. For years the UK's 
Department for International Development aid and other governments' was 
conditional upon African countries opening up their economies to cheap imports 
from Western countries, and purchasing goods and services from Western 
suppliers. "We're trying to end the scandal of aid coming with strings 
attached. There's all this evidence showing that tied aid is 30 per cent less 
effective than untied aid – that is, aid without strings. So we think it's OK 
to scrutinize aid, but you don't want to thrown the baby out with the 
bathwater."

The campaign to improve the clout that aid makes gathered momentum in the wake 
of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness in 2005, followed by the Accra 
Agenda for Action in 2008. These events brought together senior ministers from 
over 150 countries, with the express intention of redesigning the architecture 
of the aid system.

With 148 signatories to the Paris Declaration, it seems that obituaries to aid 
need rewriting. The new charter commits donor and recipient governments to work 
together in monitoring the way they channel aid into various projects. The top 
priority of the Declaration states: "Development will be successful . . . and 
aid fully effective only when the recipient country takes the lead in 
determining its own development goals and priorities and sets the agenda for 
how they are to be achieved."

Jesse Griffiths, a researcher at ActionAid, believes the reforms delivered at 
Accra have accelerated the pace of positive change on the ground. "Aid is more 
effective these days. Until recently the UN was obsessed with writing these 
token reports. Some guy measured the UN library stacks on development. They 
came to 17.5 kilometres in length," she says. "Signing treaties is one thing. 
Acting on them is another. Now there is a feeling that we should stop covering 
everything in ink and just target programmes that work at the grassroots level."

Back in Southern Malawi, Concern followed closely the recent Accra debates on 
how to maximise the impact their work can make on the local community. "After 
the school debacle, I looked at myself and thought, 'What am I trying to do as 
an aid worker?' The Accra agreement has changed things. Now we are more versed 
in a language that looks at the intended and unintended consequence of our 
work" says Flaherty. "That school was not meant to be a monument to me. But if 
you are not careful, it can end up looking that way."

Flaherty's first task when she returned to Njoho last September: to sit down 
with village representatives and arrange for a team of workers to knock the new 
school. Working alongside the locals, Concern has since used the rubble from 
the demolished school to help build the foundations of a new bridge spanning 
the Shire. Numbers attending the old school have doubled in the last six months.

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 