
Although it's almost a showbusiness cliche, the notion of the performer 
grappling with shyness is hard to reconcile with some of the attention-grabbers 
who make loudest use of the old line.Aidan Gillen 
<http://film.theguardian.com/Player/Player_Page/0,,45383,00.html>, the Irish 
actor who made his name as the outlandish Stuart inQueer as Folk 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wQyB4-jLoH0>, is different. He is shy, and not 
remotely in a self-dramatising way.

His arms form a protective tangle when he sits down in a Soho hotel, and his 
gaze flits back and forth to a spot awkwardly adjacent to my own. Then there's 
the conversation. Originally from Dublin, Gillen is the very opposite of the 
blarney-spouting Irishman. As he once put it, he hates small talk. But then he 
doesn't appear to be a great fan of big talk either. He speaks in haltingly 
pregnant sentences, filled with tormented pauses that make you feel as though 
each word has been given up only under sufferance.

Yet for all his "fumbling and mumbling", as he puts it, Gillen comes across as 
a thoughtful, perceptive and quietly amusing character, if you're prepared to 
withstand a few periods of disjointedness in the dialogue. Alas, many directors 
and casting directors are not. And for this reason, he says, he doesn't 
audition well.

"It might take me an hour to get to feel at ease with somebody. I don't find 
it easy to go into a room full of 10 people and give it all away. In the pilot 
season in Los Angeles I've done that a couple of times. You go in and read for 
all these shows, and I don't like it and I'm no good at it and it doesn't work 
for me."

Ironically, perhaps, Gillen's two best known characters – the priapic Stuart 
in Russell T Davies'sQueer as Folk and Tommy Carcetti 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kdpG92dsx1A>, the ambitious young mayor in The 
Wire – were swaggering, verbose extroverts. But in Shadow Dancer 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1770734/>, a taut new psychological thriller set 
in Belfast during the Troubles, he is an IRA hardliner of few words and limited 
physical expression.

The film, made by James Marsh, who directed the highly acclaimed documentary 
Man on Wire, focuses on the tense relationship between Colette, an IRA informer 
(Andrea Riseborough), and Mac (Clive Owen), her British intelligence service 
handler. Gillen plays Colette's uncompromising brother, Gerry. He's full of 
praise for Riseborough, describing her performance as "fantastic".

"When I met James to talk about the film, I knew it was a supporting role – 
not that I have any aversion to playing a supporting role – but it became 
apparent that he was going to strip it back even more, which was interesting."

The result amounts to very little actual screen time, but it's a spare, still 
performance that lingers in the memory.

Initially he was wary about the subject matter. "I wasn't keen to be part of 
anything that was too provocative or incendiary," he says. "And I have turned 
some other things down for that reason. You know the peace up there is quite 
fragile, even though it's two decades in the making. It's a delicate situation 
and I don't want to be part of some grenade that's just rolled into the middle 
of that."

Although the film steers a largely neutral course, it's notable that, unlike 
several other films involving the Troubles, it does not sentimentalise or 
sanitise what active membership of the IRA involved. The paramilitaries are 
depicted as ruthless ideologues, locked in the righteous certainties of their 
beliefs every bit as much as they're trapped by their limited social horizons.

"Yeah," Gillen agrees. "I know. Of all the films made in the last 20 years 
that have theNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
conflict as a subject, this is probably the least sympathetic to Republicanism. 
Not by much, and yet it's still fair. It's quite heavy and profoundly sad."

A slender and youthful 44-year-old, Gillen grew up in Dublin, where he felt 
quite removed from events north of the border. It wasn't until 1990 that he 
first visited Belfast, when the atmosphere was still very tense. "You could run 
into anything," he recalls. But he developed a strong affection for the city 
and now he spends much of his time there, because Game of Thrones, the HBO 
sci-fantasy hit in which he appears as the schemingLittlefinger 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3fAOOJpaKaU>, is filmed at the old Harland and 
Wolff shipyards.

In the old days the shipyard was the preserve of a Protestant workforce, but 
now the film studio boasts mixed crews. "The change is quite amazing," he says. 
"There's still a fair way to go and the scars are deep, but it's come such a 
long way."

When Gillen was young, instead of looking north, he looked east, towards 
London. That's where the work was for aspiring actors, and that's where he went 
as a 19-year-old. He started out acting at the Bush, and slowly built up a 
portfolio of performances in well-received new plays at places like the Royal 
Court and Hampstead theatres. "There was a sense of urgency and risk," he says. 
"You get a buzz from that."

There were also periods of loneliness.

"They were formative years because I was spending a lot of time on my own. I 
was just about getting by with a few odd jobs and a bit of dole but I became 
quite dependent on the feeling I got from productions when they came along. 
That became something I became hungry for. And it's not real. They're 
make-believe relationships, and families and situations. But I guess that's 
what acting's about. It's not a new concept, is it?"

His first breakthrough on television was in the much-missed Screenplay strand, 
inSafe, a film directed by Antonia Bird. Since which he has divided his time 
fairly evenly between the stage, TV and film, with no more discernible pattern 
than a determination not to repeat what he's already done. Sometimes that has 
proved tricky because there are many parts for which he is simply not likely to 
be considered.

"For instance, I did this film a couple of years ago that I thought would be 
fun, and it was fun, a film calledBlitz <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1297919/> 
[a violent serial killer caper] with Jason Statham. I knew there was no way 
they'd come to me for that part, so I just put some shit in my hair, got my 
tracksuit out, and rolled up. If I just did the things that I'm going to get 
asked to do, they'd all be the same."

When he turned up as the cocky Carcetti on The Wire, it was said that he'd 
been cast on the strength of Queer as Folk. In fact, in a roundabout way, he 
owed the job more to Harold Pinter. The pair acted together in 1997, in Jez 
Butterworth's film adaption of his own play,Mojo 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119690/>. Their conversation over an off-set 
lunch brought new and prolonged meaning to the phrase "Pinteresque pause", with 
both men trading long silences.

"I don't feel obliged to speak," Gillen explains, possibly a little 
superfluously. "I can read people, and if the other person doesn't want to say 
anything, I'm fine with that. People say things when it's time to say them."

Some time later, David Jones, the late British director, was looking to cast 
Gillen in his New York production of Pinter'sThe Caretaker, and he called the 
great playwright to ask his advice. Jones told Pinter that Gillen was unable to 
fly over to audition, meaning that he would have to restrict his assessment of 
the actor to a phone conversation.

"Well that will be an interesting conversation," said Pinter, "because he's 
not going to say anything."

Primed by Pinter, Jones clicked with Gillen and cast him alongside Kyle 
MacLachlan and Patrick Stewart. The production was a success and it was Gillen, 
rather than MacLachlan or Stewart, who won the best reviews. One of the 
producers ofThe Wire, Robert Colesberry, saw Gillen's performance and 
recommended him to the show's casting director. Sadly Colesberry died before 
filming started on the third season ofThe Wire, in which Gillen's character was 
introduced.

"They told me, 'Well we have to cast you now, even if you're no good, because 
that was Bob's last wish.' That was their kind of humour," Gillen says with a 
grin that leaves you uncertain whether he shared it.

It must have been a challenge, I say, to arrive in the middle of an 
established cast, in a critically exalted show, and play such a confident 
character in a pivotal role.

"I didn't find it daunting," he says matter-of-factly. "I knew how good it was 
and I was very excited by the idea that we didn't know where it was going and 
by the prospects of working with people likeDavid Simon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2009/aug/29/david-simon-edinburgh-interview-full>
, George Pelecanos, Richard Price and Dennis Lehane. And Simon in particular, 
his personality was so unlike the majority of people you might meet in film and 
television. The intelligence, dedication, humility, and just being interested 
in getting a job done and having something to say, and not any of the other 
stuff – the fame and fortune and where you sit in a restaurant. Maybe it's a 
Baltimore thing."

Gillen, who now lives on the west coast of Ireland with his wife and two 
children, liked Baltimore, whereThe Wire was set and filmed, and after his 
first season of working on the show he rented a terraced house and made friends 
with the locals. As regards socialising on the show itself, Gillen was not a 
member of the hard-partying group that included Dominic West, Clarke Peters and 
Wendell Pierce.

"I kind of kept to myself," he says. "Even within the drama, I tended to be 
with a certain group of characters. I did go out with them [the West gang] a 
couple of times but I don't like to go crazy when I'm working. I can see that 
it could have been really entertaining, but I kept it quiet. I stayed in an 
apartment building with a lot of those guys the first year and you'd be liable 
to have someone kicking on your door at three o'clock in the morning, 'We're 
going out man!'"

Gillen, it seems clear, is more of a staying-in kind of guy. With his 
saturnine looks, soft Irish accent and considerable acting talent, he could 
easily have slipped into a charismatic caricature many years ago. But instead 
he retains an integrity and humility that's almost surreptitiously charming.

When I tell him at the end of the interview that it's the photographer's turn 
to have her go, he looks like a man with a toothache in the dentist's waiting 
room.

"I find still photographs make me quite self-conscious," he says, as though a 
rolling tape doesn't. "I said to James Marsh, I'd love to be better at being 
still. It's something that I want to get comfortable with. Because then," he 
adds, breaking into a knowing smile, "I can say even less."
 