
It's not easy to interview someone who you've last seen masturbating. But so 
it is withAidan Gillen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aidan-gillen>. As I 
approach him in the National Film Theatre foyer, I can't help recalling a scene 
I've just watched. He plays venal City banker Gus in the forthcoming BBC 
credit-crunch drama Freefall; after clinching some ghastly multi-billion 
sub-prime deal that ultimately leads to the debt-ridden immiseration of 
thousands, Gus retreats to the office loos to celebrate in the manner he deems 
most proper. Never has the cockney rhyming slang "merchant banker" been quite 
so luridly literalised.

Harold Pinter described Gillen as "dangerous" after seeing him appear in a 
2003 Broadway production of The Caretaker. As I walk towards him he wraps and 
unwraps his legs around each other repeatedly. His whole demeanour is an 
heroically uncomfortable array of twitches and leers.

"Having talked to a lot of those guys in banking, I realised that high finance 
is very exciting," he says as we settle down in the bar. "It probably is 
terribly exciting to watch these deals fall into place." But surely not so 
terribly exciting as your character finds it? "I don't know. I don't want to 
get too wanky about it, but I can totally sympathise with him. There's pleasure 
in his life but there's nobody to share it with. Hence, you know, that scene."

Gillen is no stranger to, you know, challenging scenes. A decade ago in Queer 
As Folk, he played Stuart, uttering the infamous lines: "I'm a faggot-ass, 
fudge-packing, shit-stabbing uphill gardener. I dine at the downstairs 
restaurant, I dance at the other end of the ballroom. I'm Moses and the parting 
of the red cheeks . . . And I am not a pervert." (Gillen, a former Dublin altar 
boy, recalls watching some sex scenes from Queer As Folk with his mother. "She 
said: 'How are they actually doing that?' And my brother-in-law said: 'It's 
trick photography.'") His performance was, like the series, widely praised. It 
was also typical of his astute preference for edgy small-screen dramas in 
recent years.

Before Queer As Folk came the role of Gypo in Antonia Bird's Safe. At one 
point Gypo, a young homeless man, plunges a bottle into his chest in order to 
get free hospital treatment. More recently, Gillen starred as Baltimore mayor 
Tommy Carcetti inThe Wire <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire>, a political 
reptile who unexpectedly grows a spine and a conscience while in office.

How did Gillen get the role? "They were casting the net wide getting actors 
who aren't recognised, so that's how us lot [he means the British and the Irish 
– Dominic West and Idris Elba also starred] got into it. It worked. I'd just 
been in The Caretaker on Broadway, which meant nothing perhaps to TV audiences 
there, but showed I could do what they wanted. Also many American actors don't 
really want to blot their resumés by appearing as scumbags. British actors – 
and Irish ones too if I'm anything to go by – are less bothered about playing 
disgusting or even flawed people. They're often the most interesting roles, 
after all, but in the US they can be career death."

Gillen's resumé, then, might not make much sense to an American actor: it 
teems with reptiles, chancers and scumbags (he was particularly effective as 
Mick, the swaggering, volatile pipe dreamer in The Caretaker, and as the slimy 
real-estate agent Richard Roma in a West End production of David Mamet's 
Glengarry Glen Ross). But he is proud of it. "There's a common thread through 
Antonia Bird, Queer As Folk and The Wire," he says. "I have been in control of 
what I've been doing, of the career I've put together." I'm not sure how that 
control includes, say, his turn in the Jackie Chan-Owen Wilson buddy-chop-socky 
sequel Shanghai Knights, but let's not spoil the story.

"I've made a point of trying not to play the same part, and of moving between 
theatre and film and TV. The idea is that by the time you come back you have 
been away for a year and people have forgotten you. If you like having time 
off, which I do, that's a good career strategy. Or at least, it's my strategy 
to keep my head together. I keep going back to Ireland to reboot. And then 
return, showing up as someone else."

Freefall marks Gillen's return to British TV drama after too long away. "When 
I was 19 growing up in Dublin, I wanted to come to London. I'd done a lot of 
Irish stage work, which was great [in Billy Roche's A Handful of Stars, for 
instance], but London was a magnet . . . the place where the great TV dramas 
were made. It was like someone wanting to be in a rock'n'roll band now."

His fellow Wire star Dominic West has said that the UK lacks quality 
contemporary drama on TV. He told Radio 4's Today programme recently: "If you 
turn on American TV, there's a huge choice of nothing you want to see and, 
unfortunately, I think that's the case here now as well . . . we don't seem to 
be able to do contemporary stuff." Does Gillan agree?

"So-called reality TV, which dominates British channels, is destroying what 
made it cherishable to me and lots of others in the first place. I loved Alan 
Clarke, Ken Loach and Alan Bleasdale's work. In fact the first TV dramas I ever 
saw were Screen Twos produced by David Thompson, who also produced a lot of 
Alan Clarke. And now David produces Freefall, so it shows the kind of British 
TV drama I admired is not quite dead."

That said, Gillen has now retreated to live in Ireland and works there as much 
as he can. "I just wanted to get back home. I have always been travelling – New 
York and London. I want to give my kids a proper home." He lives with his wife 
Olivia O'Flanagan in Kerry, and his children Berry and Joe attend a 
Gaelic-speaking school. "They have been brought up in London but because they 
have Irish parents they seemed to have an Irish accent – then when they got out 
to Ireland they sounded like Oliver Twist."

His latest project is to star in the first Hammer film of the 21st century. 
Called The Wake Wood, it doesn't sound like the camp Hammer horror that made 
films starring Ingrid Pitt and Peter Cushing so diverting 40 years ago. "No, 
it's nothing like that. It's an Irish film written by a guy I know 
[writer-director David Keating]. It's the kind of horror film that I like – The 
Exorcist and The Wicker Man."

The film tells the story of a couple, Patrick (Gillen) and Louise Daley (Eva 
Birthistle), whose nine-year-old daughter is killed in a dog attack. To escape 
their grief, they relocate to a remote rural community. The locals introduce 
the couple to a secret, pagan ritual that will allow them three more days with 
Alice before she is returned to the ground for ever. But what will they do when 
it's time for Alice to go back? Gillen sensibly won't divulge.

Why did he take the role? "I like to mix it up and do something completely 
different." It was, he says, "literally the smell of the paint" that made him 
become an actor in the first place: "I was building and painting the sets. I 
didn't want to go to college or work in an office or have a nine-to-five job. I 
knew that quite clearly before I left school." He is 41 now, and in the 
intervening years says he "definitely thought about stopping more than twice. I 
have been doing this since I was very young. If I could wind it back I would 
have another life – I would like that, but I would also like to have this life 
too. For me, now, working and children is it. There's nothing more to life"•

Freefall is on BBC2 tonight at 9pm. The Wake Wood will be released later this 
year.
 