
When David Zucker was a schoolkid in Milwaukee in the 1960s, one of his 
teachers made a prediction. "She said to me once, when I was fooling around in 
class, 'Zucker, I know one day I'll be paying good money to see you make me 
laugh, but right now, get your ass back in that chair and crack that book!'"

She was right. This badly behaved schoolkid would go on to reinvent US screen 
comedy with a movie calledAirplane! <https://www.theguardian.com/film/airplane>
, which he co-directed and co-wrote. Today, speaking in Manhattan, David is 
feeling a little rough. He was out the night before, it turns out, celebrating 
the film's 30th anniversary with the movie's co-creators, his younger brother 
Jerry and their lifelong friend Jim Abrahams. "I just couldn't get out of bed 
this morning," he says.

Well may they celebrate. Airplane! made $83m on its first release in 1980 (on 
an outlay of a mere $3.5m), and launched an entire comedy franchise, from the 
Police Squad TV shows to the Naked Gun movies they grew into – reconfiguring, 
in the process, one-time 1950s romantic leadLeslie Nielsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leslie-nielsen> into a comic hero. Somewhere 
along the way, Zucker, Abrahams and Zucker (ZAZ for short) also inspired 
Saturday Night Live, launched another comedy titan of the 1980s, John Landis, 
and even gave the Farrelly brothers their big writing break.

I first saw Airplane! in Florida in August 1980, one of an audience that was 
convulsed for 90 non-stop minutes. Before Airplane!, jokes in comedies came 
along reliably though intermittently – but watching Airplane! was like being 
strafed with a joke-howitzer. There was no time to stop laughing before another 
dozen jokes came at you. This was a live-action Mad magazine movie-parody: 
smartass, juvenile, subversive and played absolutely straight by a cast of 
stone-faced matinee idols drawn from the very movies that Airplane! spoofed. 
(Robert Stack, who plays pilot-on-the-ground Rex Kramer, had starred in the 
cheesy in-flight melodrama The High and the Mighty in 1954.)

And all this from three guys who say they barely knew which end of the camera 
to look into when they got started. "We spent so much time trying to persuade 
everyone else that it would be funny," says Jerry Zucker, "that we started to 
believe it ourselves. So we were pretty gung-ho when it came out and weren't 
that surprised it was a hit. But no one ever envisioned it still being around 
30 years later."

This was the early 1980s: the DVD wasn't around and video was in its infancy. 
"Movies didn't yet have that second life," David says. "We never thought 
Airplane! would become this, this . . . " He laughs at the preposterousness of 
the idea. "Cultural icon!"

ZAZ were three wiseass Jewish kids from the suburbs of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 
raised on TV shows and the high, wide and handsome Technicolor movies of 1950s 
Hollywood. Their favourite TV show was Leave It to Beaver, the archetypal 
white-suburban family comedy – which just makes it even sweeter that the white 
woman in Airplane! who "talks jive" is Barbara Billingsley, who played Beaver's 
mum.

"We just had this normal midwestern upbringing," says David, who, since the 
Naked Gun movies, has also directed BASEketball, about some goofballs who 
invent a new sport, and (after his post-9/11 realignment from Democrat to 
Republican) An American Carol, about an anti-American film-maker who is visited 
by three ghosts. "We knew we weren't hot stuff. We weren't sophisticated, we 
weren't New York, we weren't LA – we weren't even Chicago! We were Milwaukee, 
which is a bend in the road: nothing originated there. In our high school, we 
were never, like, worried for our physical safety, but verbally you could be 
cut down in a second by insults, wisecracks or whatever. It was all done to be 
funny, but it could get mean. So a quick wit was required."

"None of us were great students," says Jerry, who turned 60 this year, "so we 
distinguished ourselves by being class clowns."

"There were at least five guys in my class who were way funnier than I was," 
says David, 62, "but they had it in them to get real jobs after graduation."

'We wanted jaws to ache' 

The boys found themselves in Los Angeles in the 1970s and by 1975 were running 
their own sketch-revue show, the cultish Kentucky Fried Theatre. "The pace you 
see in Airplane! developed through the live theatre show," Jerry says. "We 
weren't really actors, just performers, so we were cheaper. We didn't even have 
the ability to make characters. All we could do was write jokes and act them 
out. We literally couldn't stand being on stage and not getting a laugh. A lot 
of people said their jaws ached after the show – and we wanted to get that on 
to film."

Thirty years later, they discovered that NBC producer Lorne Michaels had 
visited this live show in 1974 and said: "I want to dothat on live network TV!" 
The result was Saturday Night Live, an instant hit and now the longest-running 
comedy in TV history.

The first ZAZ film was The Kentucky Fried Movie, which they only fell back on 
when they couldn't get Airplane! financed. And since they didn't know the first 
thing about film-making, they hired a then-unknown young director called John 
Landis to direct it; Landis would go on to become a colossus of the 80s and 
90s, the maker of The Blues Brothers, An American Werewolf in London and the 
Thriller music video. Kentucky Fried, a wholesale transfer to film of their 
stage spoofs of TV ads and bad dramas, included, in its 20-minute chop-socky 
spoof A Fistful of Yen, the germ of Airplane!. Although they liked Landis, says 
David, they wanted their suggestions adhered to "100% of the time – not 
just 89%".

David recalls the happy accident that led them to make Airplane!. "For 
material, we'd leave the VCR on all night and see what turned up. One morning 
we got interested not in the commercials, but in the actual movie that was on. 
It was called Zero Hour!. So we purchased an option on the rights."

Zero Hour! (yes, they even stole the exclamation mark) was a 1957 potboiler 
written by Airport's Arthur Hailey, and the trio swiped its absurd 
food-poisoning-at-30,000ft plot – and a lot of its dialogue – then besieged it 
with their full comedic powers. They also targeted the whole Airport disaster 
movie franchise, and snagged a powerful, sympathetic producer at Paramount, 
Howard W Koch, who had once headed the studio and lent heft in casting roles.

Getting all the actors on board took some persuasion: there was Peter Graves 
of Mission: Impossible, who plays Captain Oveur; Nielsen, the star of Forbidden 
Planet, who plays Dr Rumack; Lloyd Bridges of Sea Hunt, the man in the tower; 
and the stony, growly Robert Stack of Written on the Wind and The Untouchables, 
playing Rex Kramer, the man who talks the aircraft down.

"Graves took one look at the script," says David, "and just about threw it in 
the trash. Well, can you blame him? He's playing a paedophile and every line he 
has is horrifying." Jerry adds: "I know – and the defining line of his very 
varied career will be, 'Billy, have you ever seen a grown man naked?'" He 
laughs. "Stack got it right away, though. Lloyd Bridges was asking once about 
his motivation or something and Stack says, 'Lloyd, there's a spear gonna fly 
into the right wall and a watermelon's gonna burst on stage left. Believe me, 
no one's looking at us!'"

Never open a Concorde window

I suggest to Jerry that Airplane! was almost made redundant by Airport '80: 
The Concorde, the final Airport movie, which verges on self-parody. At one 
point, George Kennedy purrs to Sylvia Krystel: "Why d'you think they call this 
a cockpit?" In another scene, he opens a window (during supersonic Mach 4 
flight) to shoot at Russian jet fighters with a handgun.

"I totally remember that," says Jerry. "The studio learned their movie was 
getting laughed at in all the wrong places, and they actually changed the 
poster to read something like, 'The thrills are great – and so are the laughs!' 
But we had more laughs. We even offered Lloyd's part to Kennedy, who wanted to 
do it. But he couldn't kill off his Airport cash-cow. We got him for The Naked 
Gun, though."

Nowadays, of course, Airport '80 is a forgotten piece of late-night TV rerun 
trash, while Airplane! remains as fresh and ridiculous as the day it was 
released. "And," says Jerry, who had further hits with Ghost and First Knight, 
"people who weren't even born when it came out – 10-year-old kids, even – know 
Airplane! off by heart. It's a wonderful thing for a movie to live so long."

Ready for take-off: Five films indebted to Airplane!

The Naked Gun 

Once Jerry and David found they had touched a nerve, they kept on pressing, 
first with Airplane! spin-offs, then with the Naked Gun trilogy, and these days 
with the (increasingly iffy) Scary Movie franchise. Leslie Nielsen remains 
indefatigably committed to the genre spoof, cameoing in everything from 
Superhero Movie to Spy Hard.

There's Something About Mary 

Peter Farrelly, half of another slapstick sibling director partnership, has 
likened watching Airplane! as a young man to seeing Led Zeppelin in concert. 
His first job in showbiz came after he sent a script to David Zucker. The scene 
in which Ben Stiller battles an apparently innocuous pup is almost a straight 
lift from Airplane!.

Final Destination 

Airplane! demolished the disaster movie genre that had been such a 70s staple. 
So while the Final Destination franchise gave it a new lease of life two 
decades later, it was shot-through with all the post-modern spin an awareness 
of Airplane! demanded.

Fargo

So silly were some of Airplane!'s gags ("Surely . . ." "Don't call me 
Shirley") that a poker-face was a prerequisite. This deadpan sensibility, 
staying earnest in the face of extreme stupidity, has found its classiest 
practitioners in Joel and Ethan Coen. Even their most highbrow work, such as A 
Serious Man, has some Airplane! inheritance.

Black Dynamite 

Scott Sanders's uproarious blaxploitation spoof, just released in the UK, 
shows how the Zuckers' legacy keeps on giving. Those Airplane! scenes in which 
the superfly dialogue of two black men is treated to subtitles (and later 
translated by an old white woman) touched on taboos film-makers today are 
applauded for even approaching.

Catherine Shoard

• Comic masterpiece or dated nonsense? Have your say about Airplane! below
 