
I’ve learned to live without anonymity. I haven’t been in a grocery store or 
subway for years. It’s hard for my children to go out publicly with me. Fame is 
different now than it was 20 years ago – I don’t know what the hell it is now! 
If I have a rare time of being somewhere and not being recognised, it’s a 
luxury.

It’s never been about money for me. There were times when I was young when I 
could have used money: after college I was often unemployed and at one time I 
slept in a storefront for a few days. But I’ve never been materialistic. Except 
that I am, of course, because my lifestyle makes me a spender!

My grandfather, James Gerardi, taught me about work. He was a plasterer and 
work – any kind of work – was the joy of his life. So I grew up wanting to – 
it’s what I’ve always chased. The joy of work is what keeps me going.

The conclusion of my teachers was that I needed a dad. I wasn’t an 
out-of-control teenager, but I was close. My parents divorced when I was two 
and my father wasn’t in my life from then. I wanted to be different with my 
children [Julie, 25, and twins Anton and Olivia, 14]. I wanted to be 
responsible to them, so I divide my time between two coasts.

Kids changed my perspective. Before I had my three, I’d walk around in my own 
head, not noticing anything. Acting used to be everything; now, because of 
them, it’s just a small part.

I’m not lacking in friends. We can all get caught up in our lives, our 
careers, but I’ve always understood there’s a certain tenacity needed for 
friendship.

The lowest point of my life was losing my mother, Rose, and grandfather – they 
died within a year of each other. I was 22 and the two most influential people 
in my life had gone, so that sent me into a tailspin. I lost the 70s in a way, 
but then I gave up drinking in 1977 and decided to focus on the work.

I understand the value and power of social media, although I don’t really do 
it myself. I have a Facebook page that 5.4m people “like”. What does that mean? 
I don’t know, although I do appreciate that these platforms are good for 
getting your message out there.

Michael Corleone <http://godfather.wikia.com/wiki/Michael_Corleone> in The 
Godfather was and still is the most difficult role I’ve played. I didn’t see 
him as a gangster; I felt his power was his enigmatic quality. Unfortunately 
the studio couldn’t see that at first and were thinking of firing me. It was 
during my early career, a major movie with Marlon Brando, and no one other than 
Francis [Ford Coppola] wanted me for the part.

My grandparents came from a town in Sicily called Corleone. Fate? Yes, maybe – 
it’s very strange. But then life has so many twists and turns.

People think there is rivalry between me and Robert De Niro. I know Bobby 
pretty well. He’s a friend and he and I have gone through similar things. I 
love what he does with comedy; it’s pure genius.

I believe I have reached my stride, which is why I persist. As long as you 
have passion for the art, keep working, because age catches up with you.

An Experience with Al Pacino takes place in Leeds on 16 May. For tickets go to 
olexyproductions.com <http://olexyproductions.com/> or 
roccobuonvinoproductions.com <http://roccobuonvinoproductions.com/>

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 