
I am the middle child – my brother is nearly two years older than me and 
my sister is three years younger. You get the worst of both worlds. The 
youngest is the vulnerable one who needs a lot of love and the older one gets 
the responsibility. What does the middle one get? Frustrated. Then he becomes 
an attention-seeker and ends up on stage.

Making my mum laugh was the best thing as a young child. I would lie on my 
back and move my legs backwards and forwards – that was windscreen wipers. I 
remember her getting me to do it for someone else. She'd say "Do your 
windscreen wipers" and I'd do it and they would laugh.

My mother, Shirley, died of leukaemia when I was six. I felt that loss very, 
very keenly and it wasn't dealt with at all. There wasn't bereavement therapy 
or counselling. In fact, the attitude was the least said, the better. My father 
was left to bring up three children while working full-time in the City.

Mum was never told she had a terminal illness. The assumption was that she 
couldn't cope with the knowledge because she had young children, and because 
she was a woman she would somehow collapse. It was misogyny. My mother was 
strong and would have coped. The more I think about it, especially now I am a 
parent, I am absolutely staggered it was allowed to happen. If I had a terminal 
illness, I would want to make provisions and have discussions on how to prepare 
the children. It is brutality to deprive someone of that. It was a terrible, 
terrible wrong that wrecked a large part of my life.

In my third year of primary school, as I started to thrive, my father decided 
that I should be pulled out and put into a public school in Essex, which he and 
his father had gone to. I was the youngest kid there, but no one took any 
special interest in my needs. By the time I was 12 I started getting into petty 
thieving, shoplifting and smoking fags. By 15 I wanted to burn the school down. 
I absolutely hated every single atom of the building, the grounds, the staff … 
everything. I was quite troubled in my 20s and early 30s. Jo Brand is a very 
good friend and recommended a therapist. It was an act of kindness that I am 
eternally grateful for. I saw my therapist for eight years.

It's difficult to talk about my relationship with my father and brother. It 
has been very fraught over the years and I rarely see them. I am close to my 
sister, though. She has two boys and I see more of them.

I have two kids – Susie, three and Robert, two. Fatherhood changes your 
priorities and how you feel about work. I've gone back to doing more standup 
now, which I am enjoying. It suits me because I can do two or three shows, then 
I am at home for the rest of the week. It is much better than spending four or 
five months filming a drama and on set 12 hours a day.

I met my wife, Katie [Maskell, a children's author] backstage at [quiz show] 
QI and we married in 2007. One of the reasons I was able to form a relationship 
with Katie and be ready to have a family is that I had done a bit of work on 
myself. It was a while before I was able to make the right choice and meet the 
right person and be able to have the relationship I have now. I realise now, 
having only got married at 40, that it was a long road to get there. I went 
through years of psychotherapy, messy relationships and 15 years of living on 
my own in a flat. Now my marriage and family life is the most important thing 
to me.

Alan stars in Jonathan Creek on Fridays at 9pm on Drama, a Freeview channel
 