
The radio broadcaster Alan Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones>
 is fronting a new advertising campaign against the Abbott government’s changes 
to environmental laws to stop “environmental saboteurs”, saying the laws “put 
at risk not just our environment but our very democracy”.


Jones urges people to contact their local member to protest against the 
changes to the Environmental Protection Biodiversity Conservation Act in ads 
that began running on Sky TV on Monday and were authorised by a spokeswoman for 
the Lock the Gate alliance.

Greg Hunt promises Alan Jones greatest scrutiny in history on Shenhua coalmine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/16/greg-hunt-promises-alan-jones-rigorous-due-diligence-on-shenhua-coalmine>
“I may live nowhere near the Liverpool plains or the Great Barrier Reef, but I 
sure as hell am concerned that they are protected,” Jones says. “The latest 
move by the Abbott government puts at risk not just our environment but our 
very democracy. It is quite simply unbelievable.

“This legislative restriction is divisive, it isolates us. It means we are not 
allowed to care.”

The government announced in August that it would try to repeal all of section 
487 of the Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act. The move 
came in response to thefederal court decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/05/approval-for-adanis-carmichael-coalmine-overturned-by-federal-court>
 to overturn the approval for Adani’s proposed $16bn Carmichael coalmine in 
Queensland because the federal government had not considered all the relevant 
information.

The Abbott government insisted the changes to the law would stop only what it 
calls environmental “vigilantists” and “vandals” – the groups that brought the 
federal court challenge – and not farm groups.

But farming organisations believe they will also be denied standing to 
challenge federal environmental approvals in the court and this could stymie 
several planned challenges to federal approval of the controversial $1.2bn
Shenhua Watermark coalmine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/21/uncertainty-over-shenhua-mines-effect-on-groundwater-a-huge-risk>
 on the fertile Liverpool plains of New South Wales, a mine also vehemently 
opposed by Jones.

Any person wanting to mount a challenge would have to prove they had been 
directly and personally adversely affected.

The changes are opposed by Labor and the Greens and appear unlikely to pass 
the Senate. A Senate committee is looking into the changes and will report in 
October.

The former federal court judge Murray Wilcox has told the inquiry 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Environment_and_Communications/EPBC_Standing_Bill/Submissions>
 that the changes would increase the time and cost of legal challenges but fail 
to achieve the government’s aim of stopping them.

Wilcox, who has 50 years of experience in environmental law, said the act was 
“working well” and the government’s case to change it was “gung ho and full of 
bluster” but ignored crucial facts.


“I suggest the committee recommend the bill not be adopted,” he said. “It will 
serve no useful purpose; on the contrary, it will complicate and prolong those 
few legal actions that are brought.”


Brandis said the government was repealing section 487 of the federal 
environmental legislation because it “provides a red carpet for radical 
activists who have a political, but not a legal, interest in a development to 
use aggressive litigation tactics to disrupt and sabotage important projects”.


The federal environment department said it would take six to eight weeks to 
reassess the Carmichael project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/05/coalition-will-take-six-to-eight-weeks-to-revise-its-carmichael-coalmine-approval>
 after it emerged the environment minister, Greg Hunt, had not properly 
considered the mine’s impact on two vulnerable species, the yakka skink and the 
ornamental snake.

The Minerals Council of Australia has criticised the Adani decision in similar 
terms to the government. “The gaming of the environmental approvals processes 
by a handful of protest groups now borders on the farcical,” said its chief 
executive, Brendan Pearson. “The inevitable dividend from continuing green 
sabotage is fewer jobs, lower real wages and lower living standards.”

Before the Howard government changed the EPBC Act to insert the clarification 
about which groups had legal standing to bring challenges – the section the 
Abbott government now wants to remove – Wilcox said judges had already 
“recognised that people sometimes felt deeply about an administrative decision, 
including a decision regarding land use or development, even though it did not 
adversely affect their pockets; but the person thought the decision contrary to 
the public interest”.


The Howard government’s changes recognised this and “worked well”, according 
to Wilcox.

“As anticipated, the section has eliminated arguments about standing, with 
consequential savings in cost and time. As others have pointed out, section 487 
has not opened any floodgates; only about one-half of one per cent of decisions 
under the EPBC Act have been subjected to an application for judicial review.

“After 15 years of successful operation, why now the fuss? Apparently because 
a respected north Queensland conservation organisation had the temerity to 
point out to the federal court (correctly) that the minister had made a 
decision approving Galilee basin coalmining without taking into account 
information (that his department held) about the possible effect of mining on 
two endangered reptile species.

“When this was pointed out, the minister very properly conceded that the 
omission rendered his decision legally invalid and, supported by the proposed 
miner (Adani), asked the court to make a consent order setting aside his 
decision, so that he could look at it again. What was so terrible about that? 
Is species extinction unimportant? If so, the biodiversity provisions should be 
removed from the EPBC Act.”

He said environmental groups only proceeded with challenges when advised they 
had a strong chance of success because of the danger that the could be ordered 
to pay costs.

“That is why environmental NGOs have such a high success rate in litigation. 
If there is a strong legal case, where is the public interest in preventing it 
being put before the court? Surely we all favour a system that encourages 
adherence to the law.”

“The bill is futile … It is a safe bet, if this bill is passed … the only 
change from the present situation will be that the parties, and so the courts, 
will spend time examining the details of the applicant’s association with the 
relevant issue or place. And people wonder why litigation is so expensive.”

A spokesman for Lock the Gate said the group had run a social media campaign 
to raise funding to put the ads to air, and had a series of advertisements 
planned to try to stop the legal changes.


Lock the Gate set up this page 
<https://lockthegate.nationbuilder.com/skynewsad_donate> to crowdsource 
funding, specifically targeting federal politicians through Sky.

“With your help we can make sure each and every federal politician hears the 
powerful voice of Alan Jones blaring through their parliamentary offices this 
coming week, as they return for the first time after the parliamentary break,” 
the page said.
“By chipping in now, you will be asking them directly to stand up for 
communities and defend Australia from reckless coal and gas mining giants who 
are putting our nation at risk.

“All we’re asking for is a fair go, and the basic right to be heard in a court 
of law.”
 