
Alan Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-moore>, the comics legend 
who created the vigilante V in his acclaimed graphic novel V for Vendetta, has 
waded into an old friend’s battle to bring his wife to the UK, publicly 
donating £10,000 to Graham Cousins and expressing his “continuing incredulous 
disgust” over the way Cousins and his wife have been treated.

Cousins, a 60-year-old window cleaner, married his wife Paula Cousins, from 
Mozambique, three years ago, but the two have fallen foul of the Home Office’s 
minimum income threshold of £18,600 a year required for a foreign spouse to 
live in the UK, and Paula remains in Mozambique. Introduced in 2012, the law is 
estimated to have meant that33,000 couples cannot bring their spouses in to the 
UK or remain with them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/09/couples-protest-18600-minimum-income-rule-foreign-spouse-uk>
.

“We have spent six weeks out of three years together because of this,” said 
Cousins. “We speak three times a day. We’re 110% genuine and we’ve proved that 
many times … but they keep moving the goal posts.”


Cousins has run his own window-cleaning business for almost 30 years, but is 
now part-time, meaning he does not meet the £18,600 a year minimum. He says he 
was therefore required to have £62,500 in savings – an amount he will have from 
Monday, following Moore’s donation, but which he says he has been told needs to 
be in his account for six months.

He has, he says, written to David Cameron twice about the issue, and has met 
with his local MP, to no effect. “I wake up every morning without my wife. 
David Cameron wakes up every morning with his wife,” he said. “I don’t support 
any political party – I just want my wife back.”

In Moore’s letter 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=916133781755346&set=a.460729530629109.100842.100000761973782&type=3&theater>
, he explains that he is making the gift because of his “continuing incredulous 
disgust over the manner in which Mr Cousins and his wife Paula have been kept 
separate for what is now a period of years”.

At first, writes Moore, “I found it difficult to suppose that there wasn’t 
some unpleasant racial issue at the heart of the continual rejections. Now, 
after witnessing two intervening years of what seem to me to be deliberate 
goalpost-moving regarding the amount Mr Cousins is expected to have in his bank 
account before his wife can enter the country, I am led to ask if the official 
cash amount demanded of those making an appeal is, simply, ‘more than they can 
afford’? And I ask again, if the basis for this is not racism, would somebody 
be kind enough to explain what this reasoning is actually based on?”

This is, ends the author, “a shameful way to run an immigration service”, and 
his gift of £10,000 “is made in the hope that it may contribute to breaking 
this wretched and inexplicable deadlock”.

Cousins and Moore have known each other since their 20s. “Alan’s a good 
friend, and he just said ‘I’ve had enough of this’,” said Cousins. “He’s put 
his money where his mouth is. There are good people out there – it’s just the 
men in suits.”

The Home Office said: “We welcome those who wish to make a life in the UK with 
their family, work hard and make a contribution. But family life must not be 
established here at the taxpayer’s expense.” The rules governing British 
citizens who wish to bring a non-EU spouse to the country were “based on advice 
from the independent Migration Advisory Committee … approved by Parliament and 
upheld by the courts”, the spokesperson continued. “All cases are carefully 
considered on their individual merits, in line with the immigration rules and 
based on evidence provided by the applicant.

Since Moore’s donation was made public, Cousins’s case has spread across the 
web, with a series of small donations made toa crowdfunding page set up by his 
son <https://crowdfunding.justgiving.com/helpbringpaulacousinshome>. “If it’s a 
good enough argument for Alan Moore, it’s good enough for me,” wrote one 
anonymous donor on the page.

Cousins said he was lucky to be in a position with “good and influential 
friends, but some people don’t have that luck. So as soon as our own case is 
sorted, I will campaign for the rest of the people who are affected by this.”
 