
The Brookings Institution stands alongside Harvard, Yale, and Princeton, among 
the nation's elite intellectual institutions. This is why it so striking that 
it chose to invite former Federal Reserve board chairman Alan Greenspan to give 
thekeynote address at a forum on reforming the home mortgage finance system 
last week <http://www.brookings.edu/events/2011/0211_mortgage_market.aspx>.

It would be difficult to imagine a more disastrous failure than Alan Greenspan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan>. Tens of millions of 
people are unemployed, under-employed, or have given up looking for work 
altogether, as a direct result of Greenspan's ineptitude. Millions of families 
are facing the lost of their homes. More than one quarter of mortgage holders 
are underwater with their mortgages.

The huge baby boom cohorts saw most of their life's savings disappear when the 
collapse of the bubble destroyed their home equity. They are now approaching 
retirement with almost nothing to rely upon other than their social security.

This is the direct result of Alan Greenspan's incompetence as Fed chair. He 
either did not recognise the $8tn housing bubble or somehow did not think it 
was a big deal. This was a monumental misjudgment. The housing bubble was 
really hard to miss for anyone who can read a chart and knows arithmetic. For 
100 years, nationwide house prices had just tracked the overall rate of 
inflation. Suddenly, in the mid 90s, coinciding with the stock bubble, house 
prices began to substantially outpace the overall rate of inflation.

By 2002, house prices had already risen by more than 30 percentage points in 
excess of the overall rate of inflation 
<http://www.cepr.net/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=405>. At the 
peak of the bubble in 2006, the inflation in house prices had exceeded the 
overall rate of inflation by more than 70 percentage points, creating that $8tn 
bubble in housing wealth.

There was no remotely plausible explanation for this, based on the 
fundamentals of either the demand or supply side of the housing market. 
Population growth and household formation were much slower during the bubble 
years than in prior decades. Income growth had been healthy in the late 90s, 
but went in reverse in the 2000s. On the supply side, the country was building 
homes at near record rates, so supply constraints obviously could not explain 
the runup in prices.

Anyone looking for an explanation would also have to explain why rents were 
going nowhere. The fact that the vacancy rate had already hit a record high as 
early as 2002 should have been another really big bright warning sign that 
housing was in an unsustainable bubble. If it was impossible for competent 
economists to miss this assessment, it should also have been impossible for 
them to think it could deflate harmlessly. The bubbles in residential and 
non-residential construction led to enormous overbuilding in both sectors. The 
"wealth effect" associated with the $8tn transient housing bubble was 
generating close to $500bn in annual consumption.

This meant that the combined drop in construction and consumption demand from 
the collapse of the bubble was almost certain going to be in excess of $1tn. 
Did Greenspan think he had something in his bag of tricks as Federal Reserve 
board chairman that would allow him to quickly replace more than $1tn in annual 
demand?

Absent some new source of demand (which has not appeared), it was inevitable 
that the collapse of the bubble would lead to a prolonged period of high 
unemployment. This was all 100% predictable; but Greenspan did not predict it – 
because he was not doing his job.

Incredibly, in spite of this disastrous performance as Fed chairman, Alan 
Greenspan is still being feted in elite circles. Perhaps this is due to the 
fact that the people who sit in these elite circles openly celebrated Greenspan 
as he drove the economy off a cliff. He was declared the "Maestro 
<http://www.amazon.com/Maestro-Greenspans-Fed-American-Boom/dp/0743204123>" by 
one of the country's top reporters. At the annual meeting of central bankers in 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, theleading lights of the economics profession debated 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/08/24/AR2005082401700.html>
 whether he was the greatest central banker of all time, as he prepared to 
leave his post.

In other words, Greenspan may have ruined the lives of tens of millions of 
people and cost the lives of tens of thousands (yes, people die because of 
inept economic policy: they kill themselves, they don't get healthcare that 
they need, and they die from alcoholism and despair), but he does not bear the 
blame alone. Most of the people who hold top positions in policy and academic 
circles share blame for disaster – refusing to do the simple analysis that 
would have allowed them to see this disaster coming.

The pain and suffering caused by Alan Greenspan's incompetence vastly exceeds 
the harm that our worst enemies could even dream of inflicting on the United 
States. Yet, apparently, he can always count on a position of honour at the 
Brookings Institution. Heckuva job, Alan!
 