
Stop blaming the comedians <http://www.beyondthejoke.co.uk/> and start blaming 
the people that make the TV programmes. That seems to be Alan Davies's stance 
on the recent controversy over the men behaving boorishly on The Big Fat Quiz 
of The Year. Jack Whitehall and James Corden were accused of making tasteless 
jokes about the Queen and Susan Boyle, but Davies jumps to their defence, 
getting into a froth as thick as the one on the coffee he is drinking in a 
north London cafe.

"That thing with James Corden, it was just vulgarity which the editor should 
have cut. In the middle of all that banter it was just an exchange, it's not 
for [newspapers] to be the arbiter of taste." Comedians, he suggests, are 
society's current fall guys and he wonders why sections of the press appear to 
have a vendetta against them – "there are bigger criminals in the world".

The Chingford-born gagsmith, who is returning to standup after a decade away, 
including two dates at the Hammersmith Apollo next month, does not agree with 
suggestions that panel shows are all past their sell-by date, which is not 
surprising as he makes a tidy living as a regular on QI. But he does have 
issues with them. "I get asked to do others and I usually give it a thought and 
then on balance decide I'd rather stay at home. I do 16 QIs a year, I think 
that's enough. I did a lot of panel shows 20 years ago. You can't do them all 
your life or you go a bit mad."

QI is enjoyable for him because it is less aggressive than the other 
male-dominated formats. "There's not so much testosterone. That's deliberate 
and that's how I like it. Mock the Week is not for me at all. Those are the 
extremes. I'm good mates with [its host] Dara O'Briain, but don't like having 
to elbow my way in for space."

He is particularly troubled by one Mock The Week alumnus. "Frankie Boyle is a 
really good comedian, he can fire a gag like a gunshot, but I'm very 
uncomfortable about jokes about kids with Down's syndrome. I know a parent who 
has a Down's syndrome child and I know how upsetting that would be for them to 
hear." Anything about children really touches this father of two: "I'm a Labour 
person but it was really heartbreaking for David Cameron and his wife when they 
lost their son. It must have been unimaginable."

Jimmy Carr manages outrage better than Boyle, reckons Davies. "He is so 
calculated he is like a hand grenade, so shocking and near the knuckle: 'I gave 
my girlfriend an orgasm, she spat it back in my face' – I had to follow him 
saying that at the Royal Albert Hall."

Davies believes comedians should be able to talk about anything as long as 
they are funny enough. "There are no taboo areas, it depends how talented you 
are. If you are really great, like Richard Pryor, you can go anywhere, but at 
the moment there are people who are not that great and all they are doing is 
causing offence."

Davies, by contrast, tends to cause offence offstage, usually via Twitter. 
Last year the obsessive Arsenal supporter got into hot water with Liverpool 
fans when he criticised their team for not playing on the anniversary of the 
Hillsborough tragedy. He also became embroiled in the Lord McAlpine brouhaha by 
retweeting the peer's name, and later told his 450,000-plus followers he had 
apologised to McAlpine. "It's best I don't talk about it," he says.

Shock is not his schtick. Davies's non-confrontational QI style is similar to 
his humour onstage, where he often portrays himself as the victim. In his stage 
show, Life Is Pain, he sends up his bemusement at modern technology, bemoans 
the strains of parenthood, and recalls how the death of his mother when he was 
six had a traumatic effect on him. He confesses to soiling his pants and 
burying them in the garden. One cannot imagine Boyle saying that.

He insists that choosing comedy as a career was not about getting the love of 
an audience to compensate for his mother's absence. "I was always an 
attention-seeker. My mother made me what I am before she died. I remember her 
laugh and I wanted to make her laugh. People were buying me joke books, I 
always loved sitcoms."

There are other programmes besides panel shows that he does not think he will 
be appearing on in the immediate future, though not out of choice. Davies feels 
that the chatshow circuit is virtually sewn up by acts handled by the 
"super-agent" Addison Cresswell's Off The Kerb, pointing to examples of 
interviews where host and guest are both Off The Kerb clients. "When you see 
Alan Carr interviewing Jack Dee or Jonathan Ross interviewing Lee Evans, you 
think 'thank God for The Graham Norton Show'."

Despite occasional eruptions Davies is noticeably mellower than he was when I 
interviewed him at the start of the millennium. He married the children's 
author Katie Maskell in 2007. "Marriage is immediately stabilising," he says. 
Therapy helped too. "Jo Brand suggested I should go." He is clearly more at 
ease with himself. "I guess it's having a bit of distance. When I was in my 20s 
I was very ambitious to get on, even if I didn't know where to. I was so 
ambitious I got business cards with my phone number on them. I showed one to Jo 
Brand and she took it and tore it up."

During his career he has seen plenty of clowns who could also benefit from 
time on an analyst's couch: "There are two types of comedians, self-harmers and 
golfers. The second lot are out on the golf course, they love being famous, 
playing golf, having their Rolls-Royce and house in Barbados, with no guilt. 
For others there is a sense that you had to pay your dues – 'my life is shit'. 
Why not just play golf and enjoy it?"

He is filming a new Jonathan Creek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathan-creek> story to be broadcast 
at Easter and has just got back from a day's filming near Watford, a location 
which reflects BBC belt-tightening. "We can't go more than 56 miles from TV 
Centre or they have to put everyone up overnight." Davies did not get a big pay 
cheque for dusting off Creek's duffel coat, something he indirectly blames on 
the Off The Kerb boss too. Sachsgate, suggests Davies, was the tipping point, 
after which contracts were more closely scrutinised: "It was Jonathan Ross's 
contract that made it a big story. That was the responsibility of his agent 
Addison Cresswell. Now everyone is having their money slashed because of it."

His shorter, less tousled hair today suggests that Jonathan Creek has had a 
bit of a makeover. Davies lets on that Creek's hair is fake. Partly, anyway. "I 
foolishly had my hair cut so they clip bits in. In the past they used to bring 
me beautiful nut-brown hair, now they bring me this straggly, greasy, semi-grey 
tramp's hair."

Despite the self-deprecation he still looks youthful. While he is old enough 
to be Whitehall's father he still sees himself performing for many years yet, 
like his idol Billy Connolly. "I'm only 46, I've got a long way to go. I'm like 
a fine wine. I'm maturing. Is that right? Or am I like a mature cheese? Stinky."

Alan Davies is appearing at the Hammersmith Apollo 
<http://www.hammersmithapollo.com/alan_davies_2013-02-16_2013-02-17_.html> on 
16 and 17 February

Read more by Bruce Dessau here <http://www.beyondthejoke.co.uk/>
 