
The Brazilian Paralympian who dramatically beat Oscar Pistorius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius> in Monday's 200m T43/44 
final started using his taller prosthetic running blades just three weeks 
before the London Games, it has emerged.

Alan Oliveira <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alan-oliveira>, who shocked 
the South African reigning champion by beating him for the first time in nine 
years, moved from his hometown of Belem to Sao Paulo a year ago to train with 
the elite Brazilian squad.

The runner said he measured 177cm in his non-racing prosthetics, but changed 
to new blades that increased his height to 181cm three weeks before the
Paralympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics>. Under 
International Paralaympic Committee (IPC) rules he is allowed to run on blades 
that give him a height of up to 184.5cm.

"The coaches and I decided to try a higher blade. I tried the new height for 
the first time last year and it was difficult to get used to them. I decided to 
try them again earlier this year and it went a little bit better. Three weeks 
ago, we decided to really go for it," he said.

"The prosthesis don't run alone. Of course they are good for an improvement 
but there is not a significant time difference."

Oliveira's previous fastest time was 22.45s at last year's Brazilian national 
championships. But Brazil's team leader, Ciro Winckler, said his improvement 
was also the result of better coaching and facilities in Sao Paulo, together 
with the fact he had matured physically.

One of Pistorius's complaints was that the current rules allow athletes to 
chop and change their height at will, as long as they remain within the legal 
limits determined by an IPC formula.

Pistorius races at a height of 184cm because he continues to use blades that 
are sanctioned for non-disabled competition, despite the fact that he could 
wear prosthetics that extended his height to 193cm under the IPC rules.

The IPC earlier revealed that Pistorius expressed concerns over the blade 
length of another athlete weeks before he was beaten by Oliveira in Monday 
night's final.

The IPC communications director, Craig Spence, said Pistorius had phoned him 
when he was having dinner with his parents to express concerns over one 
particular athlete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/03/oscar-pistorius-blade-length-ipc>
, who was not named.

Spence said the claims were investigated but that the athlete was found to be 
within the rules. He said the point was raised again two weeks ago by 
Pistorius's representatives and the IPC suspected it might come up during the 
Games.

Immediately after the final, Pistorius said Oliveira and Blake Leeper, the 
American bronze medallist, were racing on blades that were "unfair" because 
they added four inches to their height. He claimed they were recording 
"ridiculous" times.

He later apologised for the timing of his comments but not the content and the 
IPC agreed to meet him to discuss his concerns.

"He shared his views. He was very emotional. We agreed we would take his 
comments away and raise his concerns in a less hostile environment. The 
cauldron of the Olympic Stadium was not the place to go into the rules and 
regulations," said Spence.

The IPC has confirmed that the blades of all eight athletes were within the 
legal length, according to a formula that estimates the height of the athlete 
and adds 3.5% to allow for the fact that they run on their toes rather than 
their heels.

"We measured all eight athletes in the call room prior to the race. All eight 
were legitimate to race. The measurement is based to proportionality of the 
body. Clearly, we don't want athletes running on stilts. There are rules in 
place regarding the prosthesis size," said Spence.

The IPC said it would look into whether there should be a change in the rules 
so that athletes had to race on the same height of blades consistently.

"We will listen to Oscar's questions on whether variation in that height is 
something we need to look upon. At the moment, the rules go with the maximum 
allowed height. When these formulas were developed they were discussed with 
athletes and coaches and feedback collected," said Spence.

He denied Pistorius was a special case in light of his high profile and said 
the IPC had a good relationship with all of its athletes.

The IPC's medical and scientific director, Peter van de Vliet, conceded that 
harmonising rules across disabled and non-disabled sport was difficult.

The South African waged a legal battle with the IAAF to be able to compete 
alongside able-bodied athletes after proving the blades gave him no additional 
advantage.

"Ultimately, we have two governing bodies involved and it becomes quite a 
challenge to harmonise rules in this regard. We do have our own technical rules 
that are independent of other governing bodies," said Van de Vliet.

Spence said it was good for Paralympic sport to see rivals emerging to 
challenge the supremacy of Pistorius, who had not lost a 200m race in nine 
years. He said it would be unfortunate if the row overshadowed Oliveira's 
victory.

"Alan has not just come out of nowhere and won Paralympic gold. He won bronze 
in the 100m at the world championships and was very competitive in the 200m. He 
is a good and strong athlete. He has not come out of nowhere and surprised us," 
he said.
 