
After writing some of the most famous and critically acclaimed comic books of 
all time, including Watchmen, V for Vendetta, From Hell and The League of 
Extraordinary Gentleman,Alan Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-moore> has confirmed that he is 
retiring from the medium.

At a press conference in London for his latest work, Jerusalem, a weighty 
novel named after William Blake’s poem exploring the history of Moore’s native 
Northampton through several lives, Moore said he had “about 250 pages of comics 
left in me”.

Alan Moore finishes million-word novel Jerusalem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/10/alan-moore-finishes-million-word-novel-watchmen-v-for-vendetta>
He added: “And those will probably be very enjoyable. There are a couple of 
issues of an Avatar [Press] book that I am doing at the moment, part of the HP 
Lovecraft work I’ve been working on recently. Me and Kevin will be finishing
Cinema Purgatorio 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/avatarpress/alan-moores-cinema-purgatorio>
 and we’ve got about one more book, a final book of League of Extraordinary 
Gentlemen to complete. After that, although I may do the odd little comics 
piece at some point in the future, I am pretty much done with comics.”

The decision came, Moore explained, when he realised he felt too comfortable 
in the medium. “I think I have done enough for comics. I’ve done all that I 
can. I think if I were to continue to work in comics, inevitably the ideas 
would suffer, inevitably you’d start to see me retread old ground and I think 
both you and I probably deserve something better than that,” he said.

“So, the things that interest me at the moment are the things I don’t know if 
I can do, like films, where I haven’t got a clue what I am doing, or giant 
literary novels. Things I wasn’t sure I’d even have the stamina to finish … I 
know I am able to do anything anyone is capable of doing in the comic book 
medium. I don’t need to prove anything to myself or anyone else. Whereas these 
other fields are much more exciting to me. I will always revere comics as a 
medium. It is a wonderful medium.”

In a passage of Jerusalem, one character reflects: “He never looks at comics 
these days, even though they’ve become fashionable to the point where adults 
are allowed to read them without fear of ridicule. Ironically, in David’s view, 
this makes them a lot more ridiculous than when they were intended as a 
perfectly legitimate and often beautifully crafted means of entertaining kids.”

Moore acknowledged this was “probably an author’s message”. He said: “I am 
sure there is probably a very good reason for the hundreds of thousands of 
adults who are flocking to see the latest adventures of Batman, but I for one 
am a little in the dark for what that reason is.

“The superhero movies – characters that were invented by Jack Kirby in the 
1960s or earlier – I have great love for those characters as they were to me 
when I was a 13-year-old boy. They were brilliantly designed and created 
characters. But they were for 50 years ago. I think this century needs, 
deserves, its own culture. It deserves artists that are actually going to 
attempt to say things that are relevant to the times we are actually living in. 
That’s a longwinded way of me saying I am really, really sick of Batman.”


Moore famously had a falling out with DC Comics, the owners of the Batman 
character, when he worked with them in the 1980s, over creator’s rights and 
merchandising. Since then, he has said he wishes his name to be removed from 
all comic work that he does not own, including Watchmen and V for Vendetta, 
which both remain properties of DC Comics.

He is also a vocal critic of Hollywood’s treatment of his comics. At the 
London press conference, he confirmed that Jerusalem would not be adapted into 
a film, “or not at least if I have any say in the matter”.

In 2014, Moore said in an interview that he planned to retire from public life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/21/superheroes-cultural-catastrophe-alan-moore-comics-watchmen>
 after writing a lengthy rebuttal to online accusations of sexism and racism in 
his work. “Better that I let my work speak for me, which is all I’ve truthfully 
ever wanted or expected, both as a writer and as a reader of other authors’ 
work,” he wrote.
 