
Residents of the northernmost community in the US have voted to change their 
city’s name to its traditional Iñupiat Eskimo name.

A slim majority of voters in the largely Inupiat city of Barrow in Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> approved efforts to change the 
community’s name to Utqiagvik (pronounced “oot-GHAR-vik”) in their local 
election on 4 October. The vote was tight, with 381 in favor and 375 against it.

Mayor Bob Harcharek, who does not have indigenous heritage, said: “Basically, 
it reinforces the cultural identity of the people.”

With the name change, the city also is seeking state approval to change its 
stop signs to the Iñupiat word – nutqagin – the mayor said. If necessary, the 
English word “stop” also will be added, in smaller type.

Harcharek noted that early missionaries set up schools in the area where 
students were forbidden to speak in their native language and were punished if 
they did so. “It caused some social psychological problems,” he said.

Barrow city council member Qaiyaan Harcharek, the mayor’s son, introduced a 
local ordinance in August that began the process ratified by voters. The 
younger Harcharek is Inupiat on his mother’s side.

Alaskan village threatened by rising sea levels votes for costly relocation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/18/alaska-shishmaref-vote-move-coastal-erosion-rising-sea-levels>
“We are now in an era where the reclamation of tradition is critical to the 
perpetuation of identity as Iñupiat,” he wrote in an email Friday. “The people 
of Utqiagvik voted to regain our traditional name. Hopefully, it signifies the 
beginning of a decolonizing revolution. Regaining our traditional names is just 
one step towards that healing.”

Another Alaska community in recent years to change its name is the western 
Alaska village now known as Nunam Iqua, which was known as Sheldon Point until 
voters approved the new name in 1999.

Barrow’s vote follows a high-profile name change in Alaska. Last year, the 
Obama administration decided to bestow the traditional Alaska native name to 
North America’s tallest mountain,from Mount McKinley to Denali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/31/barack-obama-mount-mckinley-native-american-name-denali>
, an Athabascan word meaning “the high one”.

There’s also an ongoing effort to rename Devils Tower national monument, a 
giant rock butte in north-east Wyoming. Local American Indians and others are 
seeking to have it switched to Bear Lodge.

Among those unhappy with the Barrow change is William Phillips, a 
non-indigenous local married to an Iñupiat woman. Phillips, who voted against 
the change, owns the Barrow souvenirs and gifts shop and is a 22-year resident 
of the town located more than 700 miles (1,120km) north of Anchorage.

He hasn’t decided if he’ll change the shop’s name as well.

Phillips believes the name change will come with enormous cost to the city to 
make changes reflecting the new name.

“Most of the yes votes probably were proud native people who think they’re 
going to revitalize their culture,” he said. “And in fact there’s other ways to 
do that instead of putting all the expenditures right back in the community 
that we can’t afford already.”

The city of nearly 5,000 is following state code to implement the change. Bob 
Harcharek said a notification was mailed as required to the lieutenant 
governor’s office this week, noting the name change becomes official 45 days 
after notification.

The town was named in 1826 after Sir John Barrow, 2nd Secretary of the British 
Admiralty.

It’s not immediately clear what the city’s new Iñupiat name means. Some say it 
means “a place where snow owls are hunted” while others say it essentially 
means a place for gathering potatoes, even though potatoes are not native to 
the area.
 