
Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> has admitted 
he is considering his position as England's one-day and possibly also Test 
captain. Asked if he sees himself carrying on as captain after another crushing 
defeat – this time by seven wickets at the Sydney Cricket Ground to seal a 3-0 
capitulation in the one-day international series – Cook was for the first time 
significantly ambivalent about his future.

"I think we're going to have to make a decision on that stuff and take stock 
after the next two games," he said. "I think there will be a lot of changes. I 
think English cricket needs a bit of a change as well. Obviously the last few 
months we haven't played the cricket we're capable of doing and we have to look 
at the reasons why."

Pressed on whether this means he will step down, Cook replied: "It's been two 
weeks since someone asked me that question and a lot's happened in two weeks. 
We've kept losing games of cricket and I haven't been able to turn it round."

England are on course to equal their all-time-worst, 10-match losing streak in 
international cricket at the next game in Perth on Friday, after what has been 
a continental-scale sporting humiliation that Cook admits has been personally 
very wearing.

"I wouldn't say it's been the most pleasant 48 hours for me," he added. 
"That's what comes with the territory when you lose games of cricket as 
captain. Losing in Australia, when you've lost for three and a half months, 
it's not exactly a great place to be."

One thing Cook was clear on is his desire to remain in the one-day team. For 
all his recent travails he remains one of England's more successful top-order 
short-form batsmen of recent years. "I want to be part of a successful one-day 
team for England," he said. "I feel I'm a good enough player to do that, my 
record suggests I can do it."

Cook also confirmed he would not be taking a leave of absence after England 
lost the one-day series, given that a week from now he will be going home in 
any case, as the tour reaches its Twenty20 endgame. "I've got a job to do to 
try and turn this round and try to win one of these games. I'm competitive, I 
leave everything out on the pitch. I wouldn't ever question why I would play in 
the next two games."

Should Cook decide to step down at the end of this series the most obvious 
replacement at one-day level would be Eoin Morgan, who has looked a cut above 
the rest of England's top order in Australia. He also captained the team well 
last summer and has a refreshingly abrasive and shrewd cricketing brain. The 
Test team is another question altogether, with the lack of obvious alternatives 
perhaps having a bearing on any decision to retain Cook in the coming weeks.

If Cook's press conference at the SCG was a slightly painful affair it was 
made all the more poignant by the presence of Michael Clarke at the back of the 
room and waiting to speak to the gathered media. When the Australian captain's 
turn came he was asked straight away if he felt any sympathy for his opposite 
number. After a long pause he said: "I don't think feeling sorry for an England 
captain is the right thing to feel."
 