
Andrew Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss> has backed 
Alastair Cook as the right man to lead England this summer and to adapt his 
captaincy to the style of cricket played against New Zealand in the recent 
one‑day series that has recaptured the public’s imagination.

“I think Alastair is at a phase of his career where he is not afraid to try 
new things to try and get success,” said the former England captain. “I know 
from my own experience that when you’ve been involved with English cricket for 
a long time it’s quite nice to have that sort of fresh change of thinking and I 
am sure he and Trevor [Bayliss] will forge a very strong partnership.”

The England director of cricket would not be drawn on whether this will be 
Cook’s last series as captain although he did stop short of giving him his 
backing beyond this summer. “At the moment, he is the right man for the job. 
None of us knows what’s going to happen over this five-Test series. It would be 
wrong for me to speculate but I do know that Alastair is incredibly motivated 
for this series and he is in a better frame of mind going in to it than he has 
been for a quite a while”.

Strauss, who knows more than anyone how life as England captain evolves, 
believes that his Test captain recognises that there is a new style of cricket 
that England need to continue playing to be successful and to keep the public 
on side. “I think everyone involved in English cricket got a real lift from the 
two series against New Zealand, in the way those games were played and the type 
of cricket England played. It made us all appreciate and understand the 
importance of engaging with the public.

“Ultimately we are in the entertainment business and people have a choice 
whether they turn on cricket on television or go and watch a cricket match or 
do something different. We’ve got an obligation to make the product one that 
people want to watch.”

The last time Strauss sat down in front of the media things looked very 
different. He was under fire about Kevin Pietersen, for the way the sacking of 
Peter Moores was handled and in the shadow of England’s disastrous World Cup 
campaign. Fast forward two months and things could not have really gone any 
better for him, his decision to back Eoin Morgan as one-day captain has already 
been vindicated by the attractive limited-overs matches against New Zealand. 
Strauss is too classy to be smug but in a very short space of time he seems to 
have achieved at least one of his goals; reconnecting with the English cricket 
watching public.

Strauss was speaking at the Kia Oval to promote Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> for Heroes, an all-star T20 match 
in which he will playing alongside many other cricketing stars.

The match is being played to raise money for Help for Heroes and Strauss was 
keen to remind us, that despite all the pre-Ashes aggression, this is cricket 
not war.

“In the context of what we’re talking about today, it makes you realise it’s 
not about life and death, it’s games of cricket between two very passionate 
sides who want to desperately win. But I don’t think we need to build it into 
something it’s not. I think the war rhetoric when it comes to the Ashes is 
unhelpful.”

In that vein, Strauss thinks that Bayliss is absolutely perfect for the job. 
“He won’t take it too seriously but as an Aussie he will be determined to win. 
He’s a really solid individual who will react well to the pressures that come 
with the job.”

England’s Ben Stokes says he can handle any Australian intimidation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/02/england-ben-stokes-australia-intimidation-cricket> 