
If Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> has looked 
a little short of friends in Australia these past few weeks then he does at 
least have the most dogged of allies in Ravi Bopara, a team-mate since the age 
of 14 and a player who in the last three years has flourished in one day 
internationals under Cook's captaincy.

With England decamped to Perth in preparation for Friday's fourth and 
penultimate ODI match, Bopara took the opportunity not just to soft-pedal the 
suggestions from Cook that he might be on the verge of giving up the one-day 
captaincy, but also to offer a passionate and touching show of support for a 
man who has been his captain off and on since their days as Essex juniors.

In the course of a refreshingly candid 15-minute question and answer session 
at the England team hotel, Bopara described Cook as, among other things: "a 
tough character", "the best player England have", "definitely the man", 
"definitely a good leader", "in a good place" "well spoken", "always smiling" 
"definitely the man" (again), "100% the man", "England's leader", "the right 
man for the job", "the right character", "the right player", "our best player" 
and (again) "the man".

After a fortnight of bet-hedging, issue-ducking and encoded official 
statements, Bopara's performance was a refreshingly unequivocal show of 
fraternal support from a man who, seven years on from his precocious 
international debut, has matured into an astute and well travelled England 
cricketer – precisely the kind of ally Cook needs right now as he negotiates 
the last twitchings of a horribly traumatic tour.

Perth may be the world's most remote major city, and the fourth match of this 
series may be a dead rubber following England's capitulation in Sydney. But 
these last two ODIs have a compelling Cook-centred inner momentum all of their 
own, with England's captain on course for the unique cricketing low of his own 
personalised ten-match Aussie Cookwash.The series is in effect about Cook now, 
if only as an uncomfortably voyeuristic exploration of the outer limits of one 
man's cricketing humiliation.

With this in mind, Bopara was hearteningly steadfast. "[Cook] is in good 
spirits," he said. "He's a tough character and not much fazes him; it never has 
in the many years I've known him.

"There is no-one out there who can do the job he can do. He is one of the best 
players in the England side and has been for a number of years. His experience, 
his calmness, the respect he has from the rest of the guys, he is definitely 
the man."

Bopara dismissed Cook's own suggestion in Sydney that he might resign the 
one-day captaincy as the product of a natural post-thrashing low ("he's only 
human") and stated his belief – as shared by Andy Flower at the end of the Test 
series – that whatever it is Cook is learning from the current mauling would 
simply be thrown away were he not given a chance to put things right. "He is 
the man to pull us out. I don't see anybody else who can. Everybody sees it the 
same way. He is our leader. That's how we see it."

Whatever the outcome Cook does have a strong case to stay in the ODI team, 
having scored four hundreds and averaged 41 since his return in the summer of 
2011. His captaincy record, though, is a matter of declining momentum. Of 
Cook's last 23 matches as captain, 13 have been lost and just four matches won 
overseas since the apparent new dawn of the 3-0 series win in Abu Dhabi against 
Pakistan in 2012.

Bopara's point on the apparent lack of alternatives is salient. Eoin Morgan 
captained England well last summer and has an assertiveness and sense of 
on-field smarts that would provide a timely sense of contrast. But he has only 
returned to his best batting form in the last six months and remains, alongside 
Stuart Broad and – in a more mischievous parallel universe, Kevin Pietersen – 
the only feasible option among the senior players.

If it was heartening to hear Bopara's words of support for a man he remembers 
on first impressions as "a skinny kind of guy who couldn't hit the ball off the 
square" it is hard to avoid the feeling that the only real argument for keeping 
Cook as captain is the lack of an obvious pre-groomed successor in any format – 
or in other words another failure of management.
 