
Sgt John Thompson, a British special forces flight engineer during the second 
world war, was considered missing in action for more than 70 years. Not any 
more.

His 92-year-old sister, Dorothy Webster, received his ring on Monday from a 
family inAlbania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> together with a 
box of debris from his Halifax bomber. The plane, with a seven-member crew on 
board, had crashed in the eastern European country on 29 October 1944 while 
transporting assistance to local anti-Nazi fighters.

In 1960, Jaho Cala found Thompson’s finger with the ring on Sinoi mountain, 25 
miles (40km) north of the Albanian capital, Tirana. He kept the ring and hid it 
at his home, afraid to show it to the then-communist authorities.

Cala asked his son Xhemil to look for the family of the owner and after he 
died Xhemil contacted the embassies of the US and Britain – the two countries 
that helped liberate Albania from the Nazis a month after Thompson’s death.

After three months, the British embassy confirmed that the ring was Thompson’s 
and told his family and the families of the other six crew members.

“70 years we’ve waited. We can’t believe that we’re here today celebrating 
this after all this time,” said Webster, who was accompanied by other family 
members at a ceremony at the Albanian defence ministry. “My father would have 
been thrilled to pieces with it all.”

“All these years it has been a story of loss,” said one of her sons, Alan 
Webster. “We now know almost everything that happened. It’s a sense of closure. 
We know where John is. He’s over there in the mountain.”

Alan’s brother Brian said their grandparents never locked their house in 
Matlock, Derbyshire, because they were waiting for their missing son. The 
authorities never told them anything about Thompson because he was part of “a 
secret operation in Albania”, the family said.

After the US and UK embassies started to piece together bits of evidence 
surrounding the ring, the words “Joyce & John” engraved inside it helped 
identify it as belonging to Thompson and his newly wedded wife, Joyce. She 
married again after losing John and has since died.

With only the ring and a little plane debris found until now, Barry Hill, 
another of Thompson’s nephews, said they would come again in some months to go 
to the crash site.

Albania was first occupied by fascist Italy in 1939 and then by Nazi Germany 
in 1943. Led by the Communist party, its partisans liberated the country on 29 
November 1944.
“Your brother, Mrs Webster, helped liberate my country. Let his memory remain 
unforgettable,” said the Albanian defence minister, Mimi Kodheli.

Xhemil Cala said he was relieved to have fulfilled his father’s request to 
return the ring to the owner’s family. “I will go to his grave and say rest in 
peace for your dying wish has been fulfilled,” he said.
 