
We were all here, and we all saw it. Over the past three years, Labor picked 
itself off the mat, consigned its toxic civil war to history, and regained its 
institutional sense of self – to great electoral effect. In just one cycle, 
Labor has put itself back in contention for government.


Progressive voters, flexible and optimistic souls, have shown themselves 
inclined to forgive the past transgressions and get behind the ALP once again. 
Recently, when I wrote a couple of stories highlightinglow-level tensions 
between Bill Shorten and Anthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/08/labor-caucus-smiles-mask-shorten-albanese-tensions>
, some readers rounded on me for stirring up trouble.

In the minds of these readers, I am a person so minutely into the tortured 
personality politics of theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> that I need to invent 
mischief to make myself happy. This would make me an unbelievably sad person if 
this were true, and fortunately it isn’t. I was just shining a little 
torchlight into a dim corner to let you know something was coming. And sure as 
night follows day, the something materialised.

The something started with Albanese taking his time to rule out challenging 
Shorten for the Labor leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/04/anthony-albanese-rules-out-challenging-bill-shorten-for-labor-leadership>
. Just a bit of post-election theatre to raise the collective pulse rate. Then 
things escalated when the jockeying started around the new shadow ministry.

A clear majority of the left faction had made a decision that it did not want 
one of Shorten’s key supporters, the Victorian leftwinger Kim Carr, to remain 
on the front bench. Being a key ally of Shorten’s wasn’t seen as reason enough 
to keep his position on the left ticket.

Kim Carr to remain on expanded Labor frontbench after right faction's backing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/22/kim-carr-to-remain-on-expanded-labor-frontbench-after-right-factions-backing>
The push to dethrone Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/22/kim-carr-to-remain-on-expanded-labor-frontbench-after-right-factions-backing>
 united the key national left figure, Albanese, Labor’s deputy leader, Tanya 
Plibersek, and a bunch of other up-and-coming left factional power brokers – 
but Carr, a veteran of Labor’s internecine conflicts over many decades, was 
never going to take humiliation lying down.

Because Carr wouldn’t quietly vacate the field, Shorten and key rightwing 
figures around him were forced to go into bat for a figure that had been 
ostracised, and seen to be ostracised, by the majority of his own faction. 
Shorten getting involved didn’t dissuade the left from pressing the point. The 
trenches were fortified. Jaws were set. Arms were crossed. The roiling 
continued.

Albanese (and others) versus Shorten and Carr was the first high-stakes 
head-to-head we’ve seen inside Labor for quite some time. We don’t really need 
to parse the ins and outs of the power struggle, we don’t need to know in 
intimate depth who is chest-bumping and why, because these points don’t matter 
for Labor as much as this next question: will things now calm down, or will 
they escalate?

It’s too soon to say, but here’s three broad points we can make.

Bill Shorten <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> was 
always going to enter a new phase of leadership, a more challenging one in many 
respects, post election. Outside the world of politics, being within striking 
distance of a major life goal is generally incentive to double down and close 
the deal. Politics, though, can be a perverse business. If Labor feels itself 
within striking distance of government, it is possible that various people will 
begin to prioritise their own ambitions and aspirations because it is now safer 
to do that than it was when the collective lore was it will take us three terms 
to get back.

The next point is about sliding doors. Over the past three years, Shorten went 
out of his way to be master of Labor’s “internals”. He worked assiduously to
cultivate relationships with everyone who mattered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/bill-shorten-election-2016-labor-alp-essay>
, pursuing a collaborative leadership style that allowed him to exercise 
institutional leadership in a way that worked incredibly effectively for Labor. 
The one person he didn’t seek a relationship with or an accommodation with was 
Albanese. People close to Shorten insist Albanese was never the slightest bit 
interested in cosying up, and people close to Albanese insist Shorten was 
always too paranoid about him to reach a detente. In any case, Albanese was 
always held at arm’s length. I wonder if Shorten regrets that now? I wonder 
whether things would have played out any differently at this juncture if he had 
played that relationship differently?

Quotas for women: maybe the conservative side of politics is just more 
misogynist | Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/quotas-for-women-maybe-the-conservative-side-of-politics-is-just-more-misogynist>
The final point is about consequences. Hanging on to Kim Carr was absolutely 
necessary from Shorten’s perspective for a bunch of institutional reasons I 
won’t bore you with. It was necessary enough for the Labor leader to press the 
point, but the decision is not without knock-on effects. A nasty split in the 
left faction is now out in plain sight, and the shadow cabinet dynamic will be 
awkward to say the least. Perhaps everyone will shake themselves down and press 
on productively, perhaps they really are that grown-up, but even if they are, 
now Kim Carr will sit in a shadow cabinet in a diminished position, knowing a 
great number of senior colleagues do not want him there. That dynamic is not 
good for morale, or esprit de corps, or trust.

Pulling out of all the ins and outs and looking at the big picture, Labor 
figures individually – and the party collectively – now have some big decisions 
to make. The voters have had a gutful of politicians being more obsessed with 
their own status and entitlements than the quality of their public service. The 
voters have also had a gutful of political parties indulging their internals at 
the expense of cogent programs for government.

If Labor wants to fall back into old corrosive habits, the verdict from 
Australian voters will be savage and swift. Everyone – the leader, the people 
who might in all of the circumstances want to be leader, the newcomers, the old 
hands – whatever the respective merits of their various positions, need to bear 
that short voter fuse in mind when they gather again around the shadow cabinet 
table to begin the long process of muscling up for the next parliamentary term.
 