
Deforestation <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/deforestation> and soil 
erosion has exacerbated flooding in Albania that has forced the evacuation of 
hundreds of families, the country’s prime minister has said.

Heavy rains have again been forecast for Friday, and prime minister Edi Rama, 
who has so far resisted calls for him to declare a state of emergency, warned 
of the potential for disaster.

“There are some critical hotspots where disasters can occur,” Albania’s prime 
minister Edi Rama told the Guardian at his office in Tirana. “We have had 
reasonable assessments that this will not happen but in the end it will depend 
on the weather.”

“We have an organic problem that is inherited because of soil erosion, 
deforestation and bad management of rivers,” he continued. “We could have very 
bad surprises. The dam reservoirs are old and have not been maintained. This is 
where the most dangerous part of this scenario is.”

Over the last two decades, many Albanian trees close to powerful rivers such 
as the Vjosa, Osum and Shkumbin have been chopped down by poor villagers 
desperate for wood, and by entrepreneurs clearing the way for buildings and 
dams in a construction boom that has largely benefitted foreign firms.

The trees had held soil in place for centuries – acting as a sponge during 
rainfalls – but without them, soil erosion has accelerated flood damage.

Fears that flood defences around the city of Vlore could now fail are 
especially acute. In just two days, 220mm of rain fell in nearby Gjirokaster – 
the usual amount for the whole of February.

In Novosela, where the Vjosa river burst its banks on Sunday, agricultural 
plains were still under water.

Besnik Kush, 32, a construction worker in the town said that at the flood’s 
peak, the mighty Vjosa river rose by 20cm an hour until it was a metre above 
normal levels, flooding roads, train tracks and then local houses.

“It was very scary,” he said, “I have three children and I was sleepless all 
night with fear. We were thinking of moving to higher ground where we would be 
safe.”

The town’s mayor, Loy Husar, 70, said that the deluge was the worst he had 
seen in his life. “If the rains come again like that, the Vjosa will rise by 
two-three metres and we will need helicopters to rescue us,” he told the 
Guardian.

The floods are Albania’s second worst on record – only a disaster in 1971 was 
worse.

“What we are experiencing, not only in Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> but across Europe, gives us very 
considerable food for thought about climate change,” Rama said. “There have 
been so many talks about it and so few real measures against it.”

 * This article was corrected on 5 February 2015. It originally stated that 
Albania had declared a state of emergency over the floods.
 