
The main whistleblower behind the BBC Panorama documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/03/mo-farah-training-camp-documentary-alleged-drug-use-alberto-salazar->
 that accused Mo Farah’s coach, Alberto Salazar, of violating a series of 
anti-doping rules says he is “disappointed but not surprised” that an audit set 
up by UK Athletics found no evidence of wrongdoing. Panorama reporters also 
stood by their story, which they said was based on interviews with “around 20 
former athletes or staff who had raised concerns about alleged doping or about 
the methods of Salazar”.

Their intervention came after a UK Athletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> performance oversight group, 
composed of the former 100m sprinter Jason Gardener, Dr Sarah Rowell and the 
Paralympic wheelchair racer Anne Wafula Strike, found there was “no reason” to 
doubt UKA’s confidence in the Nike Oregon Project, where Farah has trained 
under Salazar since 2010. Its decision means that Farah will stay with his 
coach, who has guided him to two Olympic and five world titles since he moved 
to the US in 2010 but is under investigation by the US Anti-Doping Agency.

UK Athletics review clears Mo Farah to continue working with Alberto Salazar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/18/alberto-salazar-mo-farah-uk-athletics>
But the audit’s lack of scope, and the intentions of UK Athletics, were 
immediately called into question by Steve Magness, whose allegations against 
Salazar were a key part of Panorama’s documentary.

In a statement to the Guardian Magness, a former assistant coach to Salazar, 
said: “While I have respect for the athletes who conducted the investigation, 
they were given an impossible task, given that they could only look at the 
interaction between UKA and the group in Oregon,” he said. “Considering most of 
that interaction was above anyone’s pay-grade who stepped forward in the 
investigation, the results could only ever go one way.”

Magness, who showed Panorama photographic evidence that appeared to suggest 
that Farah’s training partner Galen Rupp was taking testosterone as a 
16-year-old, also criticised UKA for its approach since the allegations first 
surfaced in June.

“I think we all need to realise that as the national governing body you send 
the message of what the entire sport stands for in your country,” he said. 
“They set the standard from the elites to our youth. Simply looking at the 
admitted behaviours, it’s clear UKA is sending a message that performance is 
all we care about, everything else be damned. And if I’m a UK athlete, that’s 
quite concerning.”

Meanwhile Mark Daly, the reporter on the Panorama documentary, told the 
Guardian: “It goes without saying that we stand by everything in our film.

“We have a document that said one of his star athletes had been given 
testosterone at 16,” he added. “Salazar has admitted to administering the same 
banned anabolic steroid to his adult sons to see how much it would take to 
trigger a positive drugs test. And subsequent to our programme airing the US 
Anti-Doping Agency also took the unprecedented step of announcing it is 
investigating Salazar and the allegations in our film.”

Both Salazar and Rupp have strenuously denied the accusations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-issues-denial-doping-statement>
 with Salazar issuing a vigorous and detailed 12,000-word rebuttal, and there 
have never been any suggestions that Farah has done anything wrong.

In a statement UK Athletics confirmed its oversight group had also found no 
evidence of impropriety. “In July we said that there was no evidence of any 
impropriety on the part ofMo Farah <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mo-farah> 
and no reason to lack confidence in his training programme,” it said. “The 
oversight group have restated that view. They have also found no reason to be 
concerned about the engagement of other British athletes and coaches with the 
Oregon Project.”

UK Athletics was unable to say whether Salazar would be staying in his role as 
an unpaid adviser to its endurance programme. However, it did confirm “coaching 
and support for Mo Farah will remain the focus of our engagement with the 
Oregon Project”.

Meanwhile the Guardian has spoken to several people who had dealings with the 
oversight group, who said that while it was well-intentioned they felt it 
lacked the legal and investigative capabilities to examine the allegations 
properly.

While Usada’s inquiry into Salazar is being run by the top American lawyer 
Bill Bock and the former New York City police detective Victor Burgos, UKA 
asked a former 100m runner to jump in at the deep end. Some critics have also 
questioned the lack of scope of the audit, which was not asked to examine the 
doping claims against Salazar but rather Farah’s training programme with the 
Nike Oregon Project, the endurance programme within the Oregon Project and the 
lessons learned for the wider UKA endurance programme.

Said Daly: “Given UKA had no jurisdiction to investigate anything related to 
the doping claims, and given that the central plank of our film was about 
doping, one wonders what the point of UKA’s investigation actually was. 
Therefore, since it is only Usada who have the jurisdiction to investigate the 
claims in our film, it seems sensible to wait and see what that inquiry yields.”
 