
Of the allegations


At best they are misinformed. At worst they are lying. I told both media 
outlets that their stories contained false information before they were 
published. I have now offered evidence that they are false. I hereby demand the 
BBC and ProPublica immediately publish a retraction of their false statements.

On Galen Rupp


Claims made around Galen’s prednisone use are false. Claims made around 
Galen’s use of TUEs [therapeutic use exemptions] and manipulation of the TUE 
system are false. Galen has received only two TUEs in his running career since 
2010. Galen is one of the hardest-working, most honest and genuine athletes I 
have ever known. Galen has never taken a banned substance in violation of the 
Wada [World Anti-Doping Agency] code.

On the Oregon Project


The Oregon Project will never permit doping and athletes must fully comply 
with the Wada code and IAAF rules. We proudly embrace science and technology to 
give our runners every legal means for success and, more importantly, to 
protect their health and wellbeing. I will never permit doping. Oregon Project 
athletes must fully comply with the Wada code and IAAF rules. At no time do we 
use science in violation of the code. Here success is earned with talent, hard 
work, dedication and fair play and that’s how it is going to stay. Let the 
haters hate – we’re going to keep winning through hard work, dedication and 
fair play.

Alberto Salazar denies allegations: ‘I will never permit doping’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-issues-denial-doping-statement>
On himself


My drive and determination as an athlete is well known. I pushed myself as far 
as my body could go. In fact, I trained and ran so hard it nearly killed me and 
I still suffer today the negative physical effects of my excessive training. I 
have that same drive and determination as a coach, combined with much more 
wisdom. I push my athletes to be the best but will not hurt my athletes like I 
hurt myself.

On the Steve Magness allegations 


While Magness makes a number of inflammatory and false statements about the 
Oregon Project and me personally, at no point does he allege that any doping 
violations occurred while he was with the Oregon Project. That’s because none 
did. Magness’ comments to Runner’s World in July 2011 directly contradict what 
he is now alleging. After a year of research at great expense the BBC and 
ProPublica journalists fail to mention that. In the BBC/ProPublica stories, 
Magness claims he left the Oregon Project because his “anxiety was rising” and 
he was disillusioned about what we were doing. That is not correct. Magness’ 
contract was terminated.

On Wada rules


I have always fully complied with the Wada code and IAAF rules. I am always 
extra cautious and take every step to ensure my athletes comply with the 
anti-doping rules.

On the BBC


Unfortunately Galen and I were the ones these “reporters” decided to damn with 
their “publish at all costs” philosophy. It is our reputations they have 
harmed. Innocent athletes’ careers tarnished with nothing but innuendo, hearsay 
and rumour. Some have tried to console me by saying public attacks like these 
are the price of success in today’s world. You win [and] people will try to 
tear you down. That’s not my world.

On use of thyroid and asthma medicine


Athletes are not pushed to take medications. Of 55 athletes only five have 
been diagnosed with hypothyroidism after I had started coaching them. Only 
eight have been diagnosed with exercise induced asthma. Claims I have 
manipulated the test for exercise induced asthma are false, and the testing 
referenced is standard protocol as any basic research would show.

On TUEs


In the BBC/ProPublica stories and in additional stories I have seen since, a 
number of people have alleged that I attempt to manipulate the TUE process for 
Oregon Project athletes. That is completely false. Kara Goucher’s claim that 
someone can make a couple of statements to a doctor and get a TUE is absurd and 
demeaning to the TUE processes of Usada and the IAAF. The Usada and IAAF TUE 
process is very rigorous. Medical doctors must submit substantial medical 
records to support an athlete’s request for a TUE. The medical professionals at 
the IAAF and/or Usada then closely scrutinise those documents. It is not a 
rubber stamp that can be easily manipulated.
 