
The controversial athletics coach Alberto Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar> has responded to doping 
allegations saying: “I believe in a clean sport and hard work. I will never 
permit doping” and demanding that allegations made against him are retracted.

In an open letter on the Nike Oregon Project website 
<http://nikeoregonproject.com/blogs/news/35522561-alberto-open-letter-part-1>, 
Mo Farah’s coach, who had remained silent since the allegations on BBC’s 
Panorama on 3 June that he gave the banned steroid testosterone to Galen Rupp 
when the 10,000m Olympic silver medallist was a 16-year-old, issued an 
extraordinarily detailed 12,000-word rebuttal that tackles all the major 
allegations against his coaching methods.

The statement coincided with reports the US Anti-Doping Agency is 
investigating Salazar. According to Associated Press more than a dozen 
witnesses have been interviewed and Usada is pursuing documents and other 
evidence from Salazar.

Usada spokeswoman Annie Skinner released a statement that said, “USADA takes 
all reports of doping seriously and we aggressively follow up on all 
information we receive in order to fulfill our oath to protect clean athletes 
and the integrity of competition.” Her statement did not directly mention 
Salazar.

Of his Nike Oregon Project, under which he coaches several of the world’s 
leading distance runners, Salazar stated: “The Oregon Project will never permit 
doping and athletes must fully comply with the World Anti-doping Agency code 
and IAAF rules. We proudly embrace science and technology to give our runners 
every legal means for success and, more importantly, to protect their health 
and wellbeing.” He goes on to insist that Rupp “suffers from severe allergies 
and breathing issues. He is medically diagnosed as suffering from both asthma 
and Hashimoto’s disease, a thyroid disease. Galen has never taken a banned 
substance in violation of the Wada code.”

Salazar also challenged allegations that he made athletes take asthma 
medication to enhance their performance. He stated: “Claims I have manipulated 
the test for Exercise Induced Asthma are false and the testing referenced is 
standard protocol as any basic research would show.”

No allegations have been made against Farah, who is also trained by Salazar 
and is Rupp’s training partner, but the double Olympic champion has been forced 
to defend his reputation since the documentary was broadcast. Farah recently 
travelled to Oregon to meet Salazar and seek reassurances from the coach.

Salazar appeared to address the position that athletes under his guidance have 
found themselves in since the allegations were made. “I am saddened that these 
false allegations have been allowed to run with little care for the carnage in 
their wake,” he said. “It is our reputations they have harmed. “Some have tried 
to console me by saying public attacks like these are the price of success in 
today’s world. That’s not my world. That’s not the Oregon Project. Here, 
success is earned with talent, hard work, dedication and fair play … and that’s 
how it is going to stay.”

Salazar says of the Panorama allegations: “Unfortunately, Galen and I were the 
ones these ‘reporters’ decided to damn with their ‘publish at all costs’ 
philosophy. It is our reputations they have harmed. Innocent athletes’ careers 
tarnished with nothing but innuendo, hearsay and rumour.”

The statement addresses at great length the allegation that Rupp has made 
consistent use of controversial Therapeutic Use Exemptions (TUEs), under which 
an athlete can receive a medical certificate from anti-doping authorities to 
compete while using otherwise banned substances.

Salazar says that Rupp has received only two TUEs in order to compete since 
2010. “Galen takes asthma medication so he can breathe normally – not so he can 
run better,” the statement said.

It also addresses allegations made by Panorama that Salazar shipped a package 
of medication for Rupp inside a paperback book when he was competing in the UK 
in February 2011. Salazzar said the delivery method was to ensure the package 
cleared customs but it contained no substances banned under the Wada code.

The BBC said of Salazar’s statement: “Almost two months after Mr Salazar was 
first made aware of the allegations, we welcome his more detailed response. We 
are confident in our programme and that it was right to air the allegations of 
the witnesses who appeared on it.”BritishAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> also responded to Salazar’s 
statement. UKA said: “The content of the statement will be referred to our 
Performance Oversight Group for consideration in their ongoing internal review. 
We emphasise once again that the Panorama programme contained no allegations 
against any British athletes, nor have any been made subsequently.”
 