
Key planks of Alberto Salazar’s impassioned defence against claims that he 
bent anti-doping laws are under strain after several witnesses disputed his 
version of events in his 11,750-word response to the BBC Panorama’s documentary.

The Guardian has also obtained emails that appear to contradict Salazar’s 
claims that he terminated the contract of his assistant coach, Steve Magness, 
because he was not good enough to train elite athletes. The emails, sent just a 
month before Magness left the Nike Oregon Project in June 2012, show Salazar 
was happy for Magness to lead sessions in a 10-day period while Salazar was 
away and to become the coach of the 3,000m steeplechaser Lindsay Allen.

Ten allegations against Alberto Salazar, his response and where this leaves us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/allegations-alberto-salazar-response>
It was Magness who made the most serious allegations against Salazar and Galen 
Rupp, the 10,000m silver medallist at London 2012 – including claims that Rupp 
had used testosterone as a 16-year-old and that Salazar had tested testosterone 
gel on his son, Alex, to see how much could be used without breaking 
anti-doping rules. But while the two men have fallen out spectacularly, emails 
sent in May 2012 suggest Salazar still respected and trusted his No2.

In one email, sent on 8 May, Salazar tells Magness: “I just spoke with Lindsay 
and I think that’s a great idea for you to take over her coaching. I was trying 
to move to that eventually but didn’t want Lindsay to think that I didn’t want 
to coach her. She needs to train with other top woman runners to fulfil her 
potential. With Tara [Erdmann] hopefully coming in you will have three women 
all training together. If you injure her, I will kill you. Ha ha! See you both 
on Friday.”

Salazar’s joke shows that he is a much more rounded character than his 
critics, who tend to focus on his intense, win-at-all-costs mentality, 
appreciated. At the same time, they call into question his account in his open 
letter in which he is deeply critical of Magness. In it he wrote: “Magness 
lacked the personality, inter-personal skills and drive to be able to coach 
elite athletes. He appeared to be intimidated by them and he retreated. He 
could not run a practice session by himself. He appeared to be unable to 
motivate the athletes as they ran or observe them. Ultimately, my top runners 
refused to work with him.”

But another email from Salazar in early May – which was sent to David Hendry, 
the strength and conditioning coach at the Nike Oregon Project, and Darren 
Treasure, the high performance sports consultant – told them: “I’m going to 
stay with Matthew [Centrowitz] in Portland and keep him motivated. Steve knows 
the guys good enough that I have complete confidence he’ll take care of all of 
them.”

As Magness said in a statement sent to the Guardian: “it seems strange that he 
would hand over his star athletes for 10 days leading up to the Olympic trials 
and say that he has ‘complete confidence’ in my ability to look after them if 
he felt what he now claims about my abilities as a coach. That doesn’t fit the 
narrative Salazar is currently attempting to weave.”

Meanwhile Dr Jeffrey Brown, the doctor who Salazar says carried out tests to 
ensure his athletes were not sabotaged by testosterone cream, also appeared to 
dispute his claims. In an interview with the US news website ProPublica, which 
cooperated with Panorama, Brown said he had not prescribed a controlled 
substance for Salazar’s sons or other research subjects as part of an 
experiment.

“No, absolutely not,” Brown said. “I didn’t do that, and would not do that. I 
would never do that.” He said that he was merely advising Salazar on how to 
conduct research on potential sabotage “in a hypothetical situation”. He said 
that Salazar’s exploration of potential testosterone sabotage was 
admirable.Brown also denied claims that he had prescribed the thyroid 
medication Cytomel to Kara Goucher in 2011 for her weight loss, telling 
ProPublica that while he could not discuss individual patients, “I would never, 
ever give somebody Cytomel for weight loss, ever”. The massage therapist John 
Stiner also insisted he was telling the truth when he revealed that Salazar had 
told him he was taking AndroGel, a banned testosterone gel, for his heart. 
Salazar had claimed that he told him it was for energy but Stiner told 
ProPublica: “I told 100% the truth. I’ll take 20 lie detector tests.Of course 
he said I’m lying.”

Alberto Salazar rebuttal: starting pistol for a race heading for the courts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-statement-nike-steve-magness-mo-farah-bbc-panorama-claims>
However Salazar received a glowing endorsement from Greg and Jamie Rupp, the 
parents of Galen Rupp, who said that he had been like “a second father” to 
their son. “I was very jealous of Alberto for a little while when Galen was in 
high school,” said Greg Rupp. “He would tell Galen to do something, and Galen 
would hop to it. But I couldn’t have picked a better role model for Galen to be 
involved with. Alberto is just a good person.”

They said that neither ProPublica nor the BBC attempted to contact them before 
publishing their allegations. “They were just such outrageous allegations, and 
baseless and just not true,” Jamie Rupp told the Oregonian. “For both of us, 
one of the hardest things to wrap our brains around is what would motivate 
people to make those allegations based on nothing.”

UK Athletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> have not commented 
on the latest claims and Mo Farah, whom Salazar has coached since 2011, has 
also not spoken since releasing a statement on his Facebook page last week 
saying he had never taken performance-enhancing drugs.
 