
Alberto Contador <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-contador> retained 
themaglia rosa but stage nine of the Giro d’Italia belonged to the Astana team 
as Paolo Tiralongo took the stage win and the general classification hopeful 
Fabio Aru stole back another second on Contador.

Tiralongo emerged from an 11-man break to take the victory, pulling clear of 
Cannondale-Garmin’s Tom Jelte Slagter on the final climb of the day asAstana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/astana> put their strength in depth to 
tactical use.

After the remnants of the break, Aru led home an elite group to finish 10th on 
the day, sprinting over the last few metres to cut his overall deficit to 
Contador to just three seconds.

Team Sky’s Richie Porte remained in close attendance, as did another Astana 
rider, Mikel Landa Meana, who led the quartet up much of the final climb as 
they worked together to distance the Etixx- Quick-Step rider Rigoberto Uran, 
who lost 46 seconds as he finished in the main pack.

Contador, riding with a dislocated shoulder after a crash on stage six, will 
go into Monday’s rest day with a slim lead, while Astana have three riders in 
the top five of the standings.

Aru sits on the heels of the Spaniard, with Porte third, 22sec back. Landa 
Meana is 46sec back and Dario Cataldo 76sec down in fourth and fifth 
respectively, providing Astana with plenty of options going into the second 
week.

When the squads were named for this year’s Giro, Astana - whose season had 
been under a cloud until the threat of having their racing licence revoked was 
lifted last month - appeared to have placed their priorities elsewhere with the 
likes of Vincenzo Nibali, Michele Scarponi, Jakob Fuglsang and Lieuwe Westra 
absent, but there can be no argument regarding their performance so far.

They were able to play an intriguing tactical game as the rolling 215km stage 
from Benevento to San Giorgio del Sannio provided some fascinating racing.

While Tiralongo positioned himself in a high-powered early breakaway that also 
included the 2012 Giro winner Ryder Hesjedal, Astana kept Contador’s 
Tinkoff-Saxo squad on their toes at the front of the peloton with Cataldo 
attacking at one point.

The break led by as many as five minutes but the group began to splinter on 
the descent of the second major climb of the day, with Slagter racing clear.

The Dutchman opened up a gap of around 90 seconds on the rest of the 
breakaway, and looked well placed when Tiralongo’s first attempt to catch him, 
an attack with around 40km to go, was soon ended by his breakaway companions.

But Tiralongo went again as the road ramped up with 15km to go and soon caught 
Slagter, before racing clear inside the final five kilometres.

Behind, Aru was the first of the main protagonists to make a move, with the 
24-year-old Italian attacking at a similar point to Tiralongo.

Contador, Porte and Landa Meana swiftly followed and they soon opened up a 
30-second gap on the group containing Uran, seen as the other major GC 
contender in the field.

That gap soon tumbled again as the quartet squabbled over who should do the 
work on the front, but they got the message and a second attack swiftly 
distanced Uran.

After Tiralongo crossed the line, easing over having begun his celebrations a 
good hundred metres or more from the finish, LottoNL-Jumbo’s Steven Kruijswijk 
followed in second, 21 seconds down, just ahead of Slagter and the main group 
of remaining breakaway riders.

Aru was a little under a minute behind his team-mate, but his late sprint saw 
him take back one of the four seconds he had been in arrears to Contador, while 
Porte clung to the Spaniard’s wheel to avoid losing time himself.

While the positions of the top three were largely unchanged, Uran now has it 
all to do as he sits down in seventh place, 2 minutes 10 seconds off Contador’s 
pace.
 