
In my last week of using drugs in the summer of 2005, I had a moment of 
clarity during a binge that combined codeine cough syrup, Ativan pills and 
ground-up Oxycontin that I was snorting. I was stumbling around the room – I 
was always a mess of bruises from head to foot in those days – trying to decide 
whether or not to take all the rest of the Ativan in the bottle when it 
occurred to me to ask myself, “Why is it that I can never get high enough? What 
exactly is it I’m trying not to feel?”


Can we all agree to stop Instagramming our cocktails? | David Ferguson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/04/instagram-cocktails-recovering-addicts-alcohol-drugs-technology-triggers>
And I realized that it was myself. The tangled mess of fears, doubts and 
regrets, stinging failures and squandered possibilities I was always trying to 
stay one step ahead of was actually me – and the oblivion I was after was 
essentially a dress rehearsal for death.

“Well, that’s deep,” I thought, then inhaled another line of powdered 
“hillbilly heroin”. I got drunk and high with the urgency of someone trying to 
put out a kitchen grease fire.

I tried, and failed, again and again at trying to moderate my intake of 
intoxicating substances on my own. I would say I was just going to have a 
couple of drinks, swallow two Valium, what could that hurt? And then, within a 
matter of days or weeks, it was on again. I was careening numbly and dumbly 
through life, breaking everything I collided with.

I tried exercise and therapy and veganism and acupuncture and yoga and 
meditation, but ultimately the hunger for total numbness and oblivion always 
came back, even after months of clean time. Finally, I opted for total 
sobriety. Though there are increasingly people who say that “normal substance 
use” is the goal we should be working towards, I think that’s just not an 
option.

And it appears the science bears me out. Recent research out of Sweden 
<http://psychcentral.com/news/2016/09/15/quitting-alcohol-may-be-easier-than-cutting-back/109896.html>
 has shown that people trying to recover and rebuild after the life-hurricane 
that is alcohol addiction who try to manage and control their drinking don’t 
fare as well in the long run as those who swear off entirely.

When I was 10 years old, my mother went to AA to kick her addiction to alcohol 
and benzodiazepines. She, too, survived overdoses and suicide attempts, then 
got clean and sober and stayed that way for 36 years untilshe died of cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/03/we-dont-lose-our-mothers-reality-more-violent-that-that>
.


In her last days, hundreds of people streamed through her hospice room – 
people she’d sponsored in AA, their kids and grandkids. More than one person 
shook my hand and said without my mother, they’d have been long dead.

After a week, the hospice administrators essentially asked us to leave because 
we were too loud. We were laughing too much, singing old Roberta Flack songs 
together, handing out cake and cookies and other snacks, holding each other up 
through the pain.

My mother died at home, borne away on morphine and constant pain, but she died 
surrounded by people who loved her and whose lives she had enriched.

An ex-boyfriend whom I’ll call Alex, wasn’t so lucky. He quit drinking and 
joined AA for a couple of years, then relapsed. On a crack, alcohol and crystal 
meth binge, he contracted HIV during a blackout.

He struggled back into the program, took antiviral meds, and was pulling his 
life together when he suddenly fell off the radar again. He had decided he was 
going to do some controlled drinking, but stay off drugs.

Weeks later, I read on Facebook that he was dead. They found his body face 
down on the basement floor of a crack house in New Orleans.

The Gothenberg University study 
<http://psychcentral.com/news/2016/09/15/quitting-alcohol-may-be-easier-than-cutting-back/109896.html>
’s lead author, Dr Kristina Berglund, found that “patients whose goal was total 
abstinence were more successful than those who had chosen to control their 
drinking … Our study shows that, regardless of agreement on goals and methods, 
in the end it is more difficult to stick to controlled drinking than to give it 
up entirely.” This has been my experience and the experience I see twice a week 
(or more) at meetings. AA may not be for everyone, but it has worked for me.

Living with addiction is like having a monster in your house that breathes 
fire and has chainsaws for hands. Like the creature inThe Babadook 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2321549/reference>, it’s going to live with you 
forever and it will kill you if it gets out of control.


Having a recovery program has enabled me to build a cage for that monster. 
Every now and then my addiction howls and rattles the bars or whispers 
seductively that if I just let it out for a little air, it won’t hurt anyone, 
promise. Bitter experience has shown me, however, that everyone in my life is 
safer if I keep that cage locked.

If you are struggling to manage your relationship with drugs and alcohol, I 
urge you to seek help beyond yourself, whether it’s in a recovery program or 
with an addiction counselor. It’s like those old Charter Hospital commercials 
from the 1990s said, “If you don’t seek help with us, please, seek help 
somewhere.”
 