
On July 12 1989, one of the greatest actors of his generation was reflecting 
in his diary on the death of another. If Sir Alec Guinness's thoughtswords of 
praise for SirLaurence Olivier <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/olivier> were 
extracted, as theatre promoters routinely do with critics' write-ups, it could 
read as a rave review.

The full text, revealed for the first time in the actor's personal archive 
just acquired by theBritish Library 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/british-library>, tells a different story. 
In his impeccably neat tiny script, Guinness wrote of Olivier: "I greatly 
admired his extraordinary courage … as a comedian he was superb … technically 
brilliant … he was a great actor."

But he also wrote: "Like so many people whose ambition drive them to great 
eminence, he had a cruel and destructive streak. Side by side with his 
generosity, he could be unpleasant, possibly even vindictive. Consciously or 
not, he made attempts to destroy John G [Gielgud], [Michael] Redgrave, [Paul] 
Scofield and if he had been given the chance, me."

The theatre knights meet again in the library. The vaults also hold the 
archives of Olivier, Gielgud, and an actor of whom Guinness writes with 
uncomplicated affection, Ralph Richardson.

Olivier and Guinness were near contemporaries, born respectively in 1907 and 
1914, and met constantly on stage and elsewhere over more than half a century.

Guinness said: "There was a touch of pretension about him, and his public 
speeches were fulsome and awful. I first met him in 1935, in Romeo and Juliet. 
We all thought he looked and behaved like the leader of a dance band. But his 
Romeo was as arresting and beautiful as his Mercutio was vulgar and gimmicky."

That production was famous for the fact that Olivier and Gielgud opened as 
Romeo and Mercutio respectively, and then swapped roles.

Guinness conceded: "Many of us were … too admiring of John to value Larry's 
qualities fairly." However, he then added a snide line recalling: "The sniggers 
that went round when he said, during a rehearsal I think, of the procession at 
George V's jubilee … 'I had a wonderful view of the whole corsage'."

Guinness was unforgettable in a string of classic Ealing comedies, including 
Kind Hearts and Coronets in which he played eight different characters, and for 
his long collaboration with the director David Lean, including with the film 
The Bridge on the River Kwai in 1957, for which he won an Oscar.

He was also acclaimed as John le Carre's spy George Smiley, in the television 
adaptation of the novels. However to fans of a certain age his true stardom 
came in the 1970s, as Obi-Wan Kenobi in the original Star Wars trilogy.

Roly Keating, chief executive of the British Library, said he was particularly 
thrilled with the acquisition, as somebody "mildly obsessed" with the Ealing 
comedies.

The Guinness archive, acquired from his family for £320,000, including funding 
from the Friends of the British Library, includes 100 volumes of diaries, and 
almost 1,000 letters to family and friends often illustrated with little 
cartoons.

One letter from 1938, when Guinness was missing his wife, the actor Merula 
Salaman, and wondered what she was doing, has a sketch of her praying, riding a 
horse, and dancing naked on a table top.

His diaries often have a slightly Pooterish tone, with careful notes about the 
weather, his blood pressure and his finances. In 1983 he buys sweaters as 
presents for his son and grandson, "Italian and handsome but fiendish prices, 
£170 and £125". Both diaries and letters reveal him as deeply superstitious.

Also in 1983, soon after learning of the death of Richardson, he was putting 
on "a very heavy grey overcoat" and felt somebody invisible help him on with 
it. "I felt a shiver of fright, made the sign of the cross and then laughed … I 
laughed I believe because I thought it was the sort of thing Ralph might have 
done."

In 1944, while on active service in the Navy volunteer reserve, he wrote to 
his wife with words heavily underlined, saying he had heard something 
extraordinary in the night. "An audible sinister voice said in my ear 
'TOMORROW'. It didn't say anything else, but its meaning was too clear. It 
implied 'by tomorrow you'll be dead'."

However, he concluded cheerfully, the voice was "so wicked I felt something 
like hope". His ship was then wrecked in a storm. But he survived uninjured.

Another letter from 1938 records his provincial performance before a London 
run. The theatre director Tyrone Guthrie had cast him as Hamlet – partly 
because Guinness had never known his father and had got on badly with his 
mother.

Guinness tells his wife it is "V important!" that she buys and posts to him a 
book on Freud (for 8 shillings and sixpence which he promises to repay). He 
mentions Buxton in the missive, the place where he was performing. "I hate this 
place as much as I adore you. The people are too tedious – their brain cavities 
are the size of walnuts."

Although Guinness published extracts from his own diaries in two volumes, 
entitled My Name Escapes Me, and A Positively Final Appearance, his 
communications have never been published in full and the letters remain 
uncatalogued.

The British Library intends to put some of the collection on display soon, and 
to open the archive to scholars next year.
 