
The encouraging statistic for Newcastle United fans is that their new signing 
Aleksandar Mitrovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/21/newcastle-alesksandar-mitrovic-anderlecht-confirm>
 scored 36 goals in his two seasons at Anderlecht. The worrying statistic is 
during that time he picked up two red cards and 13 yellows. He is big, 
explosive and talented but there is a streak of wildness. Perhaps it is only 
natural, given he is 20, but there are times when he can seem rather younger 
than that.

If Mitrovic on the pitch is tough, passionate, committed and no stranger to 
controversy, off it he often seems as though he is on some sort of standby 
setting. He walks and talks slowly, and spends most of his time outside 
football with his family, his girlfriend, Kristina, or watching television.

Newcastle confirm signing of Aleksandar Mitrovic from Anderlecht
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/21/newcastle-alesksandar-mitrovic-anderlecht-confirm>
His regular changes of outlandish haircut – “life’s boring enough without 
always having the same hair,” he says – should not be taken as an indication he 
is some kind of peacock or playboy. The comparison to Mario Balotelli was made 
early in his career but it is one Mitrovic rejects. “Balotelli is not my role 
model,” he said. “I like him as a player very much and he is very talented. He 
could have been at the very top but my style does not have anything with him.”

His models, rather, are Didier Drogba  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/didier-drogba-montreal-impact-chelsea>
and, more recently, Diego Costa. “He runs, scores, defends, is passionate and 
is a team player,” Mitrovic said of the Spain international. “I want to be like 
that.”

Effort certainly is not an issue. Mitrovic’s fitness coach, Andreja 
Milutinovic, who worked last season with Internazionale, describes him as one 
of the most professional players he has worked with, saying Mitrovic has never 
been late for training and has his own programme he follows outside of team 
practices. The Serbian journalist Aleksandar Stojanovic once joined him in 
training at Partizan and was struck by his silent concentration lifting weights 
and then in hill sprints in Kosutnjak forest in Belgrade.

Despite that, there was a time when Mitrovic was accused of being overweight; 
the result, it turned out, of his mother’s cooking. More recently, he 
reportedly returned toAnderlecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> from international duty 
apparently the worse for wear from, it was said, having stuffed himself with 
pizza. He has switched to natural shakes, introduced more fish to his diet and 
tries not to eat too late at night to keep his body fat down. The fact is, 
though, as he himself acknowledges, he likes to eat and, for all his efforts in 
the gym, he seems to be somebody who puts on weight easily.

Eating aside, however, there is a single-mindedness about Mitrovic, a will to 
win perhaps best seen at the European Under-19 Championship in 2013 whenSerbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serbia> beat France in the final and he 
was named player of the tournament. “He is dedicated to the team,” said the 
then coach, Ljubinko Drulovic. “Did you see him in the final coming back to our 
penalty box when France were attacking – not a set piece but during open play? 
He is a team player. He likes to win. He even criticised some players for not 
doing their duties in defence, saying to one: ‘If you don’t follow your 
full-back again I’ll come and beat you up, understand?’”

Alongside that there is a recklessness, a thoughtlessness, a hot-headedness 
that can get him into trouble. Mitrovic scored against Borussia Dortmund last 
December and celebrated by sticking his tongue between index and middle 
fingers, a gesture that was widely condemned for being sexually suggestive. 
“It’s personal,” he said. “I don’t want to talk about it but it’s not what they 
think. They should have asked me about it and now, as they did not, and they 
have accused me, I don’t want to speak about it.”

It has been suggested that what he was actually miming was cutting the tongues 
of his critics. Not there have been too many of them. Belgian journalists seem 
to have regarded him with affection, as a big likable kid who occasionally does 
something a bit daft.

In another Champions League game, against Paris Saint-Germain the previous 
season, Mitrovic and the midfielder Luka Milivojevicclashed with Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/07/zlatan-insult-terrible-moustache-psg-anderlecht>
 “He swore at us in Serbian,” Mitrovic said. “What did he think we were going 
to do? Back off?”

Backing off is something he has never done. Mitrovic is aggressive and 
self-assertive, somebody who works ferociously hard – even if he occasionally 
eats a little too much. He’s got the physique and the technical ability and if 
at 20 he is a little gauche, so what? Far more important, surely, is that he 
has a determination and an edge.

He is far from the finished product but there is plenty of raw material to 
refine.
 