
The poems of Alex Comfort (Obituary, March 28) have been almost ignored by 
critics and anthologists. Clarity was the problem. His anti-war poems spoke 
straight out, but the literary fashion was ambiguity. All were calls to action 
- love, disobedience, kindness, pacifism and anarchism. Far too challenging.

The philosophy behind the poems ruled all his work. As he wrote in 1946: "I 
recognise two obligations - to do nothing to increase the total of human 
suffering, and to leave nothing undone which diminishes it." In 1994, he told 
me that he still held these principles, adding "but I've become more of a 
Buddhist than I was. It's more a philosophy than a religion, not dependent on 
the supernatural."

Many of his best poems are like bulletins from some terrible battle: "Beware. 
The blood of a child does not smell so bitter/ If you have shed it with a high 
moral purpose."

When I first read them, during the Korean war, Comfort's poems shook me. I 
studied them and learned them; so did many of my generation of poets - at least 
those who preferred the hot prophecy of Comfort's Art And Social Responsibility 
to the pronouncements of Eliot.

We must have a collected edition of Comfort's often wise and funny, gentle, 
ferocious and erotic poems.

• From And All But He Departed, published by Routledge and Kegan Paul (1951): 

Seeing the news film 

Consummatum est. It will long since
 have been finished. You who walk 
 from the screen's edges into the dark have gone 
 outside our pity. Finished days ago - 
 that road now empty. And yet one of you 
looked straight at us, who hid in time and space 
and warmth and food behind the round glass eye. 
One turned her back. A child carried a child. 
A child ran searching, will always run. No sound 
out of his desperate oval mouth - what we have written 
we have written: nothing will change it. If 
we shout Look, she is there he will not hear. 

So passing us whose tender pity wraps 
the infant princes and the baby bears 
behind the glass of the lens you did not ask for 
pity or revenge, only an answer - 
Why you? Why we? You did not say 
You too, it shall be so with you - before 
democracy's fat glad commentary 
hustled you out of being. You stay with us 
an after-image of the colder light 
on a white ground, dark - on the white ground 
dark, beside the path, a liberated child. 

And I the child will run always, but never knowing 
a senile general and ten frightened men 
for whose prestige I, suddenly lost, 
 being four years old, and seeming 
after long searching to have fallen asleep 
am here, cannot be buried. In this immutable dream. 
Once we could kill people and they would die. 

This is the record, this is finished. Wash 
that from our fingers, if we can. 

• Alex Comfort, January 1951
 