
Alex McLeish <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> hopes to 
complete the signing of Robbie Keane on a two-month loan from LA Galaxy over 
the next few days and has reiterated his message that Aston Villa have no 
intention of selling Darren Bent during this transfer window.

Keane's talks with Villa are at an advanced stage and the Midlands club are 
confident that a deal is close, enabling the Republic of Ireland international 
to make his debut against Everton a week on Saturday, when he is likely to come 
up against his Galaxy team-mate Landon Donovan, who is on loan at Goodison Park.

Villa will cover Keane's £42,000-a-week wages during his time at the club and 
there is also expected to be a loan fee in the region of £500,000.

Although Villa are trying to reduce their wage bill and are not expected to do 
much business during the window, Randy Lerner, the club's owner, gave McLeish 
the green light to pursue Keane.

"It's not far away," the Villa manager said, when asked about Keane. "We're 
trying to get things cleared [for him to play next week]. The club have 
sanctioned it. They didn't think it was too big a risk.

"Robbie's got good experience. He's good in the dressing room and he's highly 
motivated because he's got a certain competition [the European Championship] to 
play in at the end of the season with his country, so he wants to maintain his 
level."

McLeish believes that the 31-year-old's arrival will benefit others at the 
club, including Bent, who has been linked with a move to Liverpool. Villa, 
however, insist that they have not been contacted by Liverpool and are also 
adamant that the England international is not for sale.

Asked whether he had spoken to Bent about the transfer speculation, McLeish 
replied: "We kid him on. There's the banter: 'When you off?' – that kind of 
stuff. He says: 'You probably know more than me,' but I don't. He's another one 
that I don't think will be going anywhere.

"We've heard stories saying this one and that one is going to try and buy him 
but we say he is not for sale and, secondly, nobody has contacted us."

It promises to be a long month for Villa if the rumours about Bent refuse to 
go away but McLeish believes the striker will not allow his head to be turned. 
"I hope it's not been unsettling for him. We really need him to play at his 
best," he said. "He got a goal last week at Chelsea which will have been great 
for his confidence. We need Benty at his top form. I'm sure he's got the 
professionalism and the mentality to handle any of this."

James Collins is another player that has been linked with a move away from 
Villa, with the central defender reportedly attracting interest from Queens 
Park Rangers. McLeish said that he would have expected to have heard from Neil 
Warnock, the QPR manager, if that were the case. The Villa manager did, though, 
leave the door a little ajar. "Eighteen months to go [on his contract], I am 
sure that if we can't agree a new contract with James, the club would still be 
able to recoup what they paid for him or more," he said. "He's a very 
experienced player."
 