


Alex McLeish <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> has admitted 
that Aston Villa are fighting for survival but the Scot remains confident he 
will avoid the ignominy of back-to-back relegations from the Premier League. 
Although Villa are five points clear of safety with a game in hand, they have 
enjoyed only one victory in their last eight league matches and travel to 
Liverpool on Saturday looking nervously over their shoulders as Bolton, Queens 
Park Rangers and Wigan all won last weekend.

McLeish was in charge of Birmingham City when they were relegated on the final 
day of last season – a fate he also suffered three years earlier at St Andrew's 
– and the Villa manager does not want to contemplate the prospect of taking a 
team down for a second successive campaign. "I don't believe it will happen. 
That is my school of thought," he said.

"I know the media will bring it up, that's fine, I can handle that. It will 
maybe be on the tip of everyone's tongue. [But] it is not something I believe 
will happen."

It has been a difficult period for Villa on the pitch and a traumatic time off 
it with the news that Stilian Petrov has been diagnosed with acute leukaemia. 
Randy Lerner, the club's owner, flew back from the United States this week to 
visit the Bulgarian, who has been undergoing treatment in London. Lerner later 
went to the training ground where he addressed the players about Petrov's 
condition and also offered them some words of encouragement for the last eight 
games.

"He wanted to speak about [Petrov]," said McLeish. "I said [to him]: 'Just 
have a chat with the lads in general, I think they would appreciate it because 
I'm sure they're fed up with my voice every single day and it's always nice to 
hear somebody else's voice, especially the owner's.' He spoke well. He spoke 
about Stilian's illness and about the lads and their own battles over the next 
few weeks, and wished them well. He's obviously concerned that we try and get 
back up the table a little bit – that's natural. [But] he never put them under 
any pressure or never had to say any Churchillian speech, or anything like 
that. It was just a natural moment."

Villa's squad remains severely depleted ahead of two games in the space of 
three days, at Anfield on Saturday and at home against Stoke City on Easter 
Monday. As well as Petrov's absence, Villa will once again be without Darren 
Bent, Richard Dunne, Carlos Cuellar, Ciaran Clark and Jermaine Jenas for both 
fixtures. Alan Hutton has recovered from a calf strain but Charles N'Zogbia is 
doubtful and Andreas Weimann is also struggling.

"We don't have the experienced squad to cope with [two games in the space of 
three days] but we've certainly got numbers," McLeish said. "There will be a 
lot of unfamiliar names that will take the field or be on the bench.

But we are confident that we can go in with these guys."
 