
There is a sense of deja vu at Aston Villa. A little less than 12 months after 
Gérard Houllier's brief and thoroughly underwhelming reign as manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jun/01/aston-villa-confirm-gerard-houllier-departure>
 came to end, Alex McLeish drove out of the club's Bodymoor Heath training 
ground for the last time on Monday, sacked on the back of a season that proved 
to be even more disastrous than the one that had gone before.

Villa, in other words, have got two managerial appointments wrong in quick 
succession. They can ill afford to make it a hat-trick.

In the case of Houllier, there were mitigating circumstances, with Martin 
O'Neill's decision to walk out on Villa five days before the start of the 
2010‑11 season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/aug/09/martin-oneill-quits-aston-villa>
 leaving the club high and dry when it came to scouring the market for a 
replacement. Houllier, however, still felt like a left‑field choice. He had not 
managed in the Premier League for six years and had suffered serious health 
problems in the past which would resurface later in the season and contribute 
to his early departure in June last year.

What followed was a mess. Villa invited Steve McClaren for an interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jun/16/steve-mcclaren-confirms-aston-villa>
 but then cancelled on him after an angry backlash from supporters on message 
boards. Next theytried and failed to lure Roberto Martínez from Wigan Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jun/10/roberto-martinez-aston-villa-wigan>
. And then they made the decision which is still hard to fathom to this day, 
not because McLeish was with Birmingham City, Villa's arch rivals, but because 
he had just suffered his second relegation in three Premier League seasons and 
was synonymous with a negative brand of football that leads to draws and a lack 
of goals.

Villa, in short, got what it said on the tin when they gave McLeish a 
three-year contract last summer. Although McLeish is an amiable man and has 
handled the abuse he has received this season in a dignified manner, the brutal 
truth is that his teams are boring to watch. Villa won only sevenPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> matches all season, 
managed just 37 goals in 38 matches and finished with 38 points, only two more 
than relegated Bolton Wanderers.

Randy Lerner, the club's owner, has not been able to visit Villa Park on many 
occasions this season but he watches matches on a live feed from the United 
States and has sat in frustration at the depressing events unfolding in front 
of him. Last month, however, Lerner had first-hand experience of just how bleak 
things had become on and off the pitch at the club, when he dropped in to Villa 
Park for the game against Bolton. Villa lost 2-1 and the supporters directed 
ferocious abuse at McLeish. It was the tipping point for Lerner.

He made the decision to stick with McLeish for the final three games of the 
season but it was never going to be any longer. McLeish's position had become 
untenable. Attendances had plummeted, the fans protests were loud and clear and 
results were calamitous. Two points were collected in the games against West 
Bromwich Albion and Tottenham Hotspur to drag Villa over the line before the 
season finished with anabject display against Norwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/may/13/norwich-city-aston-villa-premier-league>
 which sealed McLeish's fate. "Brutal" is how one club insider described the 
performance at Carrow Road.

Villa had to act and they did so swiftly, cutting McLeish loose less than 24 
hours after the season ended. Lerner and Paul Faulkner, the club's chief 
executive, got that decision right and now they must follow it up with an 
appointment that will galvanise and revive the club and give the supporters 
something to cling to after two miserable seasons. Lerner admitted as much in 
the statement that accompanied confirmation of McLeish's dismissal yesterday 
afternoon.

"We need to be clear and candid with ourselves and with supporters about what 
we have lacked in recent years," Lerner said. "Compelling play and results that 
instil a sense of confidence that Villa is on the right track have been plainly 
absent. The most immediate action that we can take is to look carefully at our 
options in terms of bringing in a new manager who sees the club's potential and 
embraces our collective expectations."

Villa are still putting together their shortlist but they want a young and 
hungry manager who will reinvigorate the club, which should be music to the 
ears of the club's fans. Martínez, who is the early favourite, Brendan Rodgers 
at Swansea City and Norwich City's Paul Lambert would all appear to fit the 
bill, and it is possible an appointment could be made as early as next week.

Hiring and firing managers has become an expensive business for Villa, who 
revealed in their last set of accounts that they spent £12m in "exceptional 
charges" in 2010-11 relating to changing the club's "management personnel". 
McLeish's sacking will come at a cost and it looks likely that more 
compensation will have to be paid to another club for their manager. It has 
never been in doubt that Lerner is willing to put his hand in his pocket for 
Villa. What he now needs to do, though, is recruit a decent football manager.
 