
The X Factor <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> winner 
Alexandra Burke's first single, a version of Leonard Cohen's Hallelujah, is the 
fastest-selling download ever across Europe despite only being available since 
yesterday.

Burke's single has sold more than 105,000 copies since going on sale at 
midnight on Saturday, fewer than two hours after she won the fifth series of 
the ITV1 reality show. HMV is already predicting that she has the Christmas No 
1 "all wrapped up".

The hefty download sale has already put Burke at the top of internet sales 
charts, including iTunes and HMV.com, with the CD version of the single not out 
until Wednesday.

Burke's sale eclipsed the previous fastest download of 82,000 in one day — the 
previous X Factor winner Leona Lewis's debut release, A Moment Like This, two 
years ago.

By comparison, Take That's recent No 1 single Greatest Day sold 9,488 
downloads on its first day, while Girls Aloud's chart-topping hit The Promise 
sold 7,600 downloads on the day of its release.

Gennaro Castaldo, an HMV spokesman, said: "We're seeing a phenomenal rush to 
download the Hallelujah single from our website. It's both our fastest and 
biggest-ever selling download, and Alexandra already has the Christmas No 1 all 
wrapped up.

"The physical CD single, which comes out on Wednesday, will give the release 
another huge boost, and it's now about how many copies Alexandra may go on to 
sell. HMV is ordering massive extra stock to keep up with the unprecedented 
demand."

A peak audience of 14 million viewers tuned in on Saturday for The X Factor 
finale – the highest ever rating for the reality show.

Burke already has an official website set up – www.alexandraburkeofficial.com 
<http://www.alexandraburkeofficial.com> – where users can order her debut 
album, even though she has not recorded any songs for it, apart from 
Hallelujah. Unsurprisingly, the song is already at the top of the Play.com 
pre-sales chart.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 7239 9857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 