
Alex McLeish <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> has 
criticised Charles N'Zogbia for expressing his frustrations on Twitter after 
the Aston Villa winger claimed he was not enjoying his football.

N'Zogbia has had a mixed first season at Villa Park since his £9m summer move 
from Wigan Athletic and let his emotions spill over afterSunday's 2-1 defeat at 
his former club Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/feb/05/newcastle-united-aston-villa-premier-league>
 – tweeting that he was not enjoying his football "for the first time in my 
career".

McLeish said: "I've said it before, that Twitter and the social networks is 
not a world familiar to me. Years ago, players would have hammered down the 
manager's door when they were frustrated rather than letting their feelings 
known on the internet.

"But it amounts to the same thing in that you just can't tell people you are 
frustrated, you have to do something about it by consistently playing well. If 
Charles is not enjoying his football, then he needs to do something about it on 
the pitch – and that applies to everyone and not just Charles N'Zogbia.

"It is not a coincidence the best moment Charles has had in a Villa shirt have 
come when he has been working hard – and that's when you get the best rewards 
in anything."

Meanwhile, Villa supporters are being urged to attend a proposed pre-match 
protest against McLeish's managership ahead of Sunday's home match against 
Manchester City.

A statement posted on the Vital Villa fans' website claims the current record 
of six wins in 24 Premier League games is "relegation form", with the Villa 
players "seeming to be in open revolt".

The statement reads: "Alex McLeish is not the man to lead Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>. He had a full pre-season, 
was given £20m (approximately) to spend and has players of the calibre of 
Darren Bent, Gabby Agbonlahor and Stephen Ireland to work with (also the most 
promising batch of home-grown players produced in years).

"Despite all this, we find ourselves 13th in the table and without a home win 
since Bonfire Night. Now after the debacle of Sunday, with the players now 
seeming to be in open revolt, the future is looking very bleak indeed. We need 
to act now before it is too late and the unthinkable happens.

"If you support this, please join us 3pm on Sunday, Trinity Road Stand by the 
McGregor Statue. If you don't then please ignore this."

Some sections of supporters were unhappy when McLeish made the switch from 
local rivals Birmingham to replace Gérard Houllier as manager last summer, but 
it remains to be seen whether there will be substantial tangible support for 
the proposed protest on Sunday.

Villa sold Ashley Young and Stewart Downing for a combined £35m to Manchester 
United and Liverpool respectively last summer, and spent around £17m in signing 
N'Zogbia, Shay Given and Alan Hutton, plus Jermaine Jenas on loan from 
Tottenham.

McLeish was aware of the constraints he was under and often admitted he has 
been instructed to reduce what he has called the "astronomical" wage bill by 
the club's owner, Randy Lerner.
 