
It was the sort of question that Alex McLeish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> could easily have ducked by 
trotting out the line about "trying to finish as high up the league as 
possible" but instead, the Aston Villa manager gave a brutally honest answer. 
Asked whether he would take Villa's current 15th place as a final league 
position if he was offered it now, McLeish laughed a little uncomfortably 
before replying: "Aye, probably, yeah." His mind ticked over for a few seconds 
as he digested the idea a bit more. "I think, absolutely."

It was a response that provided a measure of just how concerned McLeish is 
about Villa's predicament and, although the supporters who are keen to see the 
back of him will probably seize upon it as evidence of an unacceptable lack of 
ambition, the reality is that survival is all that matters right now for the 
Midlands club.

These are worrying times for Villa. Although they have a five-point cushion 
separating them from the bottom three, as well as a game in hand on four of the 
five clubs below them, McLeish's side are anything but comfortable.

They have won only one of their last eight league matches, are without a long 
list of first-team players, including the captain, vice-captain and top scorer, 
and have a tricky run-in to negotiate, starting with Saturday's visit to 
Anfield, where Liverpool are desperate to end their own poor run.

After that Villa are at home against Stoke, on Easter Monday, followed by a 
trip to Manchester United six days later and then Martin O'Neill's eagerly 
awaited first return to his former club, as manager of a renascent Sunderland 
side, the weekend afterwards. By that point, we should have a decent idea of 
whether Villa will be feeling the heat during the remaining four matches, 
against Bolton (h), West Brom (a), Tottenham Hotspur (h) and Norwich (a).

The fixtures would be testing for McLeish's strongest XI, let alone the 
patched-up teams he has been putting out lately. Serious injuries to key 
players Darren Bent and Richard Dunne, together with the dreadful news that 
Stilian Petrov has been diagnosed with acute leukaemia, has ripped through the 
spine of the team and left McLeish short of leaders as well as numbers. Villa's 
starting lineup in the home defeat against Chelsea last Saturday included six 
academy graduates aged 23 or under. On the bench there were four teenagers who 
have never made a first-team appearance.

The contrast with the squad that Gérard Houllier, McLeish's predecessor, had 
at his disposal this time last year is stark. Although Villa had the same 
points tally from 30 games and, coincidentally, also travelled to Merseyside 
(to face Everton as opposed to Liverpool) on the back of a home defeat the 
previous Saturday that plunged them into relegation trouble, Houllier was able 
to call on seasoned internationals to turn their fortunes around. Villa 
collected 15 points from a possible 24 to secure an unlikely ninth-place finish 
that went some way to papering over the cracks of an otherwise dismal campaign.

Good luck, however, with trying to find a Villa supporter who expects 
something similar to happen again. Bent, who scored six times in the final 
eight games last season, is still recovering from an ankle injury and will not 
play again for Villa this term. The other influential attacking players last 
season, Ashley Young and Stewart Downing, who scored or set up 31 of Villa's 48 
league goals, departed in the summer for Manchester United and Liverpool 
respectively. The creative void has been huge.

After Gabriel Agbonlahor, who has five assists to his name, no other Villa 
player has laid on more than two Premier League goals this season. In fact, the 
full-backs, Stephen Warnock and Alan Hutton, have set up as many goals as 
Charles N'Zogbia, Stephen Ireland and Marc Albrighton, three of the flair 
players who McLeish would have expected to provided a regular supply line.

Against that backdrop, it is little wonder that the rest of the statistics 
look so dire. Villa have won only seven league matches this season, and if they 
lose at Anfield they will have their lowest-ever points total at this stage of 
a Premier League campaign. All of which would be yet more ammunition for the 
sizeable anti-McLeish movement.

McLeish insisted this week that he has no regrets about taking the Villa job, 
although the Scot will surely feel differently if his fourth season in the 
Premier League ends with a third relegation, after previously taking Birmingham 
down twice. "I took my chances to come to England," he said. "It has been a 
little bit of a rollercoaster. We are working this season with a lot of young 
players but, combined with the experienced players, I believe these guys will 
see us through this rocky spell."

They better had otherwise the financial pain for Villa will be considerable. 
In February, Villa reported that they lost £54m in the year from 1 June 2010 to 
31 May 2011. Their wage bill has proved to be unsustainable in the Premier 
League and with no provision in the contracts for pay cuts in the wake of 
slipping into the Championship if they go down, it was put to McLeish that 
relegation does not bear thinking about. "No, it doesn't," he replied. "So 
that's why I believe that we'll stay up."
 