
Algeria have reached the semi-finals of the Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>, but Fabio Capello's 
general manager, Franco Baldini, will have little of note to report back on 
England's World Cup opponents. Baldini was not in Luanda to see Algeria defeat 
the tournament favourites Ivory Coast in Sunday night's quarter-final, having 
returned to Italy last week after their final group game.

A delayed flight also caused him to miss Algeria's win over Mali in their 
second group game, meaning the only time he saw Rabah Sadaane's side live was 
against Angola, a game that petered into a mutually beneficial goalless draw 
once news came through after three minutes that Mali were 2-0 up against Malawi 
and a point apiece would almost certainly take both sides through. As an 
assessment of Algeria in a competitive context before they faceEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> in group stages in South Africa 
this summer, it must have been as good as useless.

Even now, one suspects, Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> 
can't quite work out how they've reached the semi-finals. In their opening game 
of the tournament, which they lost 3-0 to Malawi, a team 73 places below them 
in the world rankings, they were utterly, crushingly abject. That they could 
have held off Egypt in that World Cup qualifying play-off last November seemed 
inconceivable.

Rumours abounded about discontent within the squad, even of an 11th-hour visit 
from members of the federation to the pre-tournament training camp in France to 
patch up relations, but on Sunday in the 3-2 win over Ivory Coast they were a 
team transformed. Where they had been flat, they were spirited; where they had 
lacked defensive coherence, they were disciplined; where they had seemed 
­lifeless, they had verve. Kolo Touré might have had a goal incorrectly ruled 
out for offside in the final minute of extra-time, and the timewasting of their 
goalkeeper, Faouzi Chaouchi, might have been disgraceful, but as Sadaane 
reflected: "We deserved this victory."

What, then, brought about the change? "It was just the heat in that first 
game," said the Rangers centre-back Madjid Bougherra, who scored the second 
equaliser in injury-time on Sunday. "We found it very hard to adjust, coming 
from Europe, to play early in the afternoon. When we got used to it and we 
could play in the evening, we had no problems. Game after game we are getting 
better. "

Early on, Ivory Coast showed they were still vulnerable to players who ran at 
them at pace, but anybody who saw Malawi's Moses Chavula and Davi Banda 
doubling up on Karim Matmour, terribly exposed at right-wing-back, and imagined 
Ashley Cole and Steven Gerrard doing something similar in the World Cup is 
likely to be disappointed.

Algeria may not be a particularly good side in their own right, but they have 
the doughtiness to take advantage of the weaknesses of others.

In the semi-finals they will face arch-rivals Egypt, who overcame Cameroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon> 3-1 after extra-time tonight. 
The Egypt captain, Ahmed Hassan, contributed an own goal, the equaliser and a 
controversial third for Egypt as they kept up their bid for an unprecedented 
third successive title.

With the score standing at 1-1 after 90 minutes, Mohamed Nagui and Hassan 
scored in extra-time to extend Egypt's record unbeaten run at the Cup of 
Nations to 17 games.
 