
Alibaba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> Group’s sales for its 
Singles’ Day shopping festival have topped $14bn (£9bn), a 60% rise on the 
Chinese e-commerce giant’s performance a year ago.

The numbers were boosted this year by adding the sales from various new 
channels, including its affiliates and investees. Overall sales on Wednesday 
reached 91.2bn yuan ($14.3bn/£9.4bn).


 The results are preliminary and unaudited, Alibaba said. Of the total value 
of transactions, 68% came through orders placed on mobile devices.

 Six years ago, Alibaba turned 11 November into China’s equivalent of Cyber 
Monday in the US. It has now become larger than both Cyber Monday and Black 
Friday combined, and it is closely watched as a barometer of the company’s 
performance.

 “Alibaba is positioned as the number one player in the Chinese e-commerce 
market, so it has to be seen to be maintaining, or gaining ground really,” said 
Duncan Clark, the chairman of the Beijing-based tech consultancy BDA.

Forget Black Friday and Cyber Monday: 100m shoppers splash out on China's 
Singles' Day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/10/china-singles-day-1111-expected-to-break-records>
 Its shares were trading down 2.1% at $79.71 in New York just after 17.00 GMT 
on Wednesday, after the shopping festival results were announced.

Another of China’s main online retailers, JD.com, said it had completed more 
than 20m transactions by the same time. About an hour and a half later, one-day 
orders had passed the combined total of its five previous Singles Days, it 
tweeted.

Alibaba said its logistical division and its partners would use more than 1.7 
million people, 400,000 vehicles, 5,000 warehouses and 200 planes to handle 
deliveries.

Singles’ Day was originally a mock celebration in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> for people not in relationships, but 
in 2009 Alibaba co-opted the event and turned it into a consumer-fest for all, 
featuring steep discounts and other promotions aimed at attracting droves of 
online customers. Alibaba’s sales data has also been closely watched as a gauge 
of Chinese consumption as economic growth slows.

 One of the new sales channels pumping up Alibaba’s Singles’ Day sales this 
year was Suning Commerce Group, in which it bought a 20% stake in August. 
Suning’s in-store sales will count towards Alibaba’s total gross merchandise 
volume, as long as they go through final processing online, an Alibaba 
spokesman said.

 The company also stressed its focus on international e-commerce this Singles’ 
Day. “Within the next five years, we expect China will become the world’s 
largest e-commerce market for imported products,” Alibaba’s president, Michael 
Evans, told reporters on Wednesday.

 The event could be risky for brands, however, said Brian Buchwald, the chief 
executive of the consumer intelligence firm Bomoda.

 “If you’re a new brand to the market, you don’t want to train your consumer 
to wait for a sale but you also need to use this holiday to break in with a 
top-spending consumer,” he said.

 “In the end, you want the consumer to come back and pay full price.”

 Speaking at the company’s Singles’ Day celebration in Beijing, Jack Ma, 
Alibaba’s eccentric founder and executive chairman, told reporters the event’s 
annual growth in the future should be more than 50%.

The company mounted a television spectacular at Beijing’s Olympic swimming 
venue, featuring Chinese and foreign celebrities including Daniel Craig and 
Kevin Spacey.

In comparison with Singles’ Day, desktop sales for the five days from 
Thanksgiving until Cyber Monday in the US were $6.56bn, according to the 
internet analytics firm comScore.

Alibaba, which has its headquarters in the eastern Chinese city of Hangzhou, 
does not sell products directly but acts as an electronic middleman. It 
operates the country’s most popular consumer-to-consumer platform, Taobao, 
which is estimated to hold more than 90% of the market.

JD.com, which is listed on the Nasdaq, reportedly filed a complaint with the 
government last week, accusing Alibaba of monopolising the market by 
restricting suppliers from participating in other operators’ promotion events 
on 11 November.

Alibaba, which is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, shrugged off the 
allegations and said it owned the Singles’ Day brand.
 