
An anti-counterfeiting group said on Friday it was suspending Alibaba’s 
membership following an uproar bysome companies that view the Chinese 
e-commerce giant as the world’s largest marketplace for fakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/28/alibaba-in-row-with-chinese-regulator-over-fake-goods>
.

The International Anti-Counterfeiting Coalition also told members it had 
failed to inform the board of directors about conflicts of interest involving 
the group’s president, Robert Barchiesi.

Earlier it was reported Barchiesi had stock in Alibaba, had close ties to an 
Alibaba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> executive and had used 
family members to help run the coalition.

Hackers in China attack 20m accounts on Alibaba's Taobao shopping site
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/04/hackers-in-china-attack-20m-accounts-on-alibaba-taobao-shopping-site>
The coalition, in a letter to members sent after the report came out, said 
conflicts were not disclosed to the board “because of a weakness in our 
corporate governance procedures.” It said the failure was not because of 
“inaction on Bob’s part,” referring to Barchiesi.

The coalition said it is hiring an independent firm to review its corporate 
governance policies.

In its letter, the board said as a result of members’ concerns, it was 
suspending a new class of membership under which Alibaba had recently joined. 
The move would affect two other companies that signed up under the new rules.

Jennifer Kuperman, Alibaba’s head of international corporate affairs, said 
companies such as Alibaba were important for solving the problem of 
counterfeiting.

“Whether or not we are a member of the IACC, we will continue our productive 
and results-oriented relationships with brands, governments and all industry 
partners,” she said.

Chinese internet giant Alibaba buys South China Morning Post for $266m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/chinese-internet-giant-alibaba-buys-south-china-morning-post-for-266m>
At issue is the independence of a small but influential coalition that lobbies 
US officials and testifies before Congress.

Alibaba’s membership could help shape the global fight against counterfeits. 
Fakes damage companies’ bottom lines, can harm consumers who unknowingly buy 
such products, and feed a vast underground money-laundering industry that 
supports criminal syndicates.

In recent weeks Gucci America, Michael Kors and Tiffany have quit the 
Washington DC-based coalition, which has more than 250 members.

Several ties between the group’s president and Alibaba have been found:

 * Barchiesi has owned Alibaba stock since its 2014 listing in New York. The 
IACC said the holdings represent “a small percentage of his investment 
portfolio.” 
 * Matthew Bassiur, who took over as vice president of global intellectual 
property enforcement at Alibaba in January, hired Barchiesi’s son, Robert 
Barchiesi II, to work at Apple in 2011. Alibaba said that hire was made on 
merit. Apple declined to comment. 
 * Bassiur is a founding board member of the ICE Foundation, which supports US 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement employees. Since 2013, the foundation has 
been run by Barchiesi’s other son, James Barchiesi. That same year, the 
foundation’s board voted to award a contract for “fiscal and operational 
management” to a private company, also run by James Barchiesi. The foundation 
has received grants of $10,000 from the anti-counterfeiting coalition every 
year since 2012, tax filings show.

Yahoo abandons plan to sell $31bn stake in Chinese e-commerce site Alibaba
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/09/yahoo-abandons-plan-sell-alibaba>
Kuperman said Bassiur’s expertise would help the company “further instill 
trust in our marketplaces”.


“We are highly confident in his abilities and proud to have him at Alibaba in 
this critical global role,” she said.

Robert Barchiesi had also come under fire for his stewardship of the coalition 
and allegations of conflicts of interest on the move to include Alibaba.

“It’s crossed the line ethically,” said Deborah Greaves, a partner at Brutzkus 
Gubner law firm and a coalition board member from 2011 to 2013. She said she 
did not know Barchiesi had stock in Alibaba until Friday. “Really problematic,” 
she said.

“Everything the IACC does that makes Alibaba look better potentially drives up 
the price of the stock,” said Greaves, whose firm is a coalition member. “As a 
board member, I would never have bought stock in Alibaba.”

The storm has laid bare the loathing some feel for a company heralded as one 
of communist China’s greatest capitalist success stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/27/alibaba-confounds-china-slowdown-with-32-revenue-rise>
.

Alibaba confounds China slowdown with 32% revenue rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/27/alibaba-confounds-china-slowdown-with-32-revenue-rise>
Critics had feared Alibaba would use IACC membership to gain legitimacy while 
papering over fundamental flaws in how it does business. Gucci and other brands 
owned by France’s Kering Group allege in US court filings that Alibaba 
knowingly profits from the sale of fakes. Alibaba has dismissed the case as 
“wasteful litigation”.

Michael Kors’ general counsel has called Alibaba “our most dangerous and 
damaging adversary”.

The coalition’s tax filings show that, in addition to the ties to Alibaba, 
Robert Barchiesi runs his organization like a family business. The coalition 
paid companies founded and run by one of Barchiesi’s sons nearly $150,000 from 
2012 to 2014 for rental costs, accounting, IT support and advertising. It 
employs the son’s wife, Kathryn Barchiesi, as a program manager.

Though the coalition attests its financial statements were reviewed by an 
independent accountant, tax filings show the accounting firm was owned by 
Barchiesi’s son.

In a statement, the coalition said the family connections had been disclosed 
and the contracts were fairly valued. “The board of directors of the IACC 
believes that Mr Barchiesi’s performance as president has been exemplary, and 
he has the board’s full confidence and support,” the statement said.

The group told its members the same in its letter, which it said was a 
response to an anonymous letter sent to board members on Wednesday that 
detailed a list of concerns about governance. The letter threatened a mass 
walkout unless Alibaba was pushed out. The writer claimed to represent a group 
of concerned members, but that could not be verified.

“What you have allowed this organization to become is utterly disgusting and 
changes must be made immediately,” the email says.

The move to suspend Alibaba comes before the IACC’s spring conference in 
Orlando next week, where the Chinese company’s founder Jack Ma was scheduled to 
speak.
 