
Chinese regulators accused the e-commerce giant Alibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> of permitting sales of fake 
goods and hurting consumers in a report that was withheld until now to avoid 
disrupting the company’s US stock market debut.

The US government and others have accused Alibaba of allowing sales of 
counterfeit goods but Wednesday’s report was the first time the Chinese 
government has criticised a company that is a leading star in an internet 
industry communist leaders are eager to develop.

Alibaba, one of China’s biggest private companies, responded on Wednesday with 
a statement accusing the regulator of bias and misconduct in a rare break with 
the obedient public tone of Chinese businesses in dealings with authorities.

The sternly worded report by China’s state administration of industry and 
commerce said Alibaba allowed unlicensed merchants to use its Taobao and Tmall 
platforms and failed to protect consumers’ rights.

The report was the result of a meeting in July between regulators and Alibaba 
Group Ltd management but the regulator said its release was postponed to avoid 
affecting progress towards the company’s New York stock market listing.


Alibaba went public in September after raising a record $25bn in an initial 
public offering, and yesterday Yahoosaid it would spin off its remaining stake 
in the company to shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/27/yahoo-spins-off-stake-alibaba-spinco-avoid-tax-bill>
.


Alibaba accused the SAIC official in charge of internet monitoring, Liu 
Hongliang, of unspecified “procedural misconduct”.


It said the company will file a formal complaint with the agency.

Such public defiance is almost unheard of in a Chinese system in which 
companies nearly always respond to official criticism by promising to reform.

“We welcome fair and just supervision, and oppose selective omissions and 
malicious actions,” said the statement from Alibaba. “Obtaining a biased 
conclusion using the wrong methodology has inflicted irreparable and serious 
damage to Taobao and Chinese online businesses.”

Alibaba did not immediately respond to a request for details of what it 
believed to be misconduct.

“Illegal business exists on Alibaba Group’s trading platforms, and for a long 
time the company has failed to pay adequate attention and failed to take 
measures to stop it,” the government report said. “This not only is the biggest 
crisis of integrity faced by the company since its founding, but also has hurt 
other internet companies that try to operate legally.”

It said Alibaba allowed “illegal advertising” that misled consumers with false 
claims about low prices and other details. It said some Alibaba employees took 
bribes and the company failed to deal effectively with fraud.

The report said regulators and Alibaba would work together to improve 
management but gave no details of planned changes.

Alibaba, founded in 1999 by Jack Ma, a former English teacher, was one of 
China’s earliest internet companies. Its IPO made Ma China’s richest 
entrepreneur with a net worth of $25bn.

Alibaba earned $485m in the three months ended in September, which was its 
first quarter as a publicly traded company, and generated revenue of $2.7bn. It 
said the total amount of goods sold rose 49% and the number of active buyers 
rose 52% to 307 million.

The US commerce department added Taobao in 2011 to a blacklist of “notorious 
markets” linked to sales of pirated and fake goods. The company was removed the 
following year.

In December, the company said it had removed 90m listings for goods that might 
have violated intellectual property rights. The company said it spent $161m 
from the start of 2013 through late 2014 on blocking counterfeit goods and 
improving consumer protection.

In January, Alibaba and the US consumer product safety commission announced an 
initiative under which the Chinese company will prevent vendors from exporting 
to the United States goods that are the target of recall orders.
 