
The Pulitzer prize-winning author Alice Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-walker> has refused to allow an 
Israeli edition of her classic novel The Color Purple to be published because 
she believes the country "is guilty of apartheid and persecution of the 
Palestinian people".

In a letter to Yediot Books, published on the website of the Palestinian 
Campaign for the Academic and Cultural Boycott of Israel 
<http://www.pacbi.org/etemplate.php?id=1917>, Walker explained her decision. 
Although a Hebrew edition of the award-winning novel was published in the 
1980s, the author was a juror on a tribunal that met in South Africa last 
autumn to discuss the Palestine situation. Walker said the testimony she heard 
was devastating.

"I grew up under American apartheid and this was far worse," she wrote. 
"Indeed, many South Africans who attended, including Desmond Tutu, felt the 
Israeli version of these crimes is worse even than what they suffered under the 
white supremacist regimes that dominated South Africa for so long. It is my 
hope that the non-violent BDS (Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions) movement, of 
which I am part, will have enough of an impact on Israeli civilian society to 
change the situation."

Walker, who took part in the 2011 aid flotilla to Gaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/25/alice-walker-gaza-freedom-flotilla>
, cited an earlier example of her attempts to "rid humanity of its 
self-destructive habit of dehumanising whole populations" in her letter: when 
the film of The Color Purple was completed, she lobbied against it being shown 
in South Africa.

"It was not a particularly difficult position to hold on my part: I believe 
deeply in non-violent methods of social change, though they sometimes seem to 
take forever, but I did regret not being able to share our movie, immediately, 
with (for instance) Winnie and Nelson Mandela and their children, and also with 
the widow and children of the brutally murdered, while in police custody, 
Steven Biko, the visionary journalist and defender of African integrity and 
freedom," wrote Walker. "We decided to wait. How happy we all were when the 
apartheid regime was dismantled and Nelson Mandela became the first president 
of color of South Africa. Only then did we send our beautiful movie! And to 
this day, when I am in South Africa, I can hold my head high and nothing 
obstructs the love that flows between me and the people of that country."

The author thanked Yediot Books for its request to publish The Color Purple, 
the story of a poor black girl in the deep American south between the wars, and 
said she "would so like knowing my books are read by the people of your 
country, especially by the young, and by the brave Israeli activists (Jewish 
and Palestinian) for justice and peace I have had the joy of working beside".

"I am hopeful that one day, maybe soon, this may happen," added Walker. "But 
now is not the time. We must continue to work on the issue, and to wait." 
Walker signed off with the hope that "a just future can be fashioned from small 
acts".
 