
Why am I going on the Freedom Flotilla II to Gaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza>? I ask myself this, even though the 
answer is: what else would I do? I am in my 67th year, having lived already a 
long and fruitful life, one with which I am content. It seems to me that during 
this period of eldering it is good to reap the harvest of one's understanding 
of what is important, and to share this, especially with the young. How are 
they to learn, otherwise?

Our boat, The Audacity of Hope, will be carrying letters to the people 
of Gaza. Letters expressing solidarity and love. That is all its cargo will 
consist of. If the Israeli military attacks us, it will be as if they attacked 
the mailman. This should go down hilariously in the annals of history. But if 
they insist on attacking us, wounding us, even murdering us, as they did some 
of the activists in the last flotilla, Freedom Flotilla I, what is to be done?

There is a scene in the movie Gandhi that is very moving to me: it is when 
the unarmed Indian protesters line up to confront the armed forces of the 
British Empire. The soldiers beat them unmercifully, but the Indians, their 
broken and dead lifted tenderly out of the fray, keep coming.

Alongside this image of brave followers of Gandhi there is, for me, an 
awareness of paying off a debt to the Jewish civil rights activists who faced 
death to come to the side of black people in the American south in our time of 
need. I am especially indebted to Michael Schwerner and Andrew Goodman who 
heard our calls for help – our government then as now glacially slow in 
providing protection to non-violent protesters – and came to stand with us.

They got as far as the truncheons and bullets of a few "good ol' boys'" of 
Neshoba County, Mississippi and were beaten and shot to death along with James 
Chaney, a young black man of formidable courage who died with them. So, even 
though our boat will be called The Audacity of Hope, it will fly the Goodman, 
Chaney, Schwerner flag in my own heart.

And what of the children of Palestine, who were ignored in our president's 
latest speech onIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and 
Palestine, and whose impoverished, terrorised, segregated existence was mocked 
by the standing ovations recently given in the US Congress to the prime 
minister of Israel?

I see children, all children, as humanity's most precious resource, because it 
will be to them that the care of the planet will always be left. One child must 
never be set above another, even in casual conversation, not to mention in 
speeches that circle the globe.

As adults, we must affirm, constantly, that the Arab child, the Muslim child, 
the Palestinian child, the African child, the Jewish child, the Christian 
child, the American child, the Chinese child, the Israeli child, the Native 
American child, etc, is equal to all others on the planet. We must do 
everything in our power to cease the behaviour that makes children everywhere 
feel afraid.

I once asked my best friend and husband during the era of segregation, who was 
as staunch a defender of black people's human rights as anyone I'd ever met: 
how did you find your way to us, to black people, who so needed you? What force 
shaped your response to the great injustice facing people of colour of that 
time?

I thought he might say it was the speeches, the marches, the example of Martin 
Luther King Jr, or of others in the movement who exhibited impactful courage 
and grace. But no. Thinking back, he recounted an episode from his childhood 
that had led him, inevitably, to our struggle.

He was a little boy on his way home from yeshiva, the Jewish school he 
attended after regular school let out. His mother, a bookkeeper, was still at 
work; he was alone. He was frequently harassed by older boys from regular 
school, and one day two of these boys snatched his yarmulke (skull cap), and, 
taunting him, ran off with it, eventually throwing it over a fence.

Two black boys appeared, saw his tears, assessed the situation, and took off 
after the boys who had taken his yarmulke. Chasing the boys down and catching 
them, they made them climb the fence, retrieve and dust off the yarmulke, and 
place it respectfully back on his head.

It is justice and respect that I want the world to dust off and put – without 
delay, and with tenderness – back on the head of the Palestinian child. It 
will be imperfect justice and respect because the injustice and disrespect have 
been so severe. But I believe we are right to try.

That is why I sail.

The Chicken Chronicles: A Memoir by Alice Walker is published by Weidenfeld 
and Nicolson. A longer version of this article appears on Alice Walker's blog:
alicewalkersgarden.com/blog <http://alicewalkersgarden.com/blog>

After the excitement of the Arab Spring, has the Palestine issue slipped out 
of view, asksEmine Saner

Just over a year ago, in the middle of the night, Israeli commandos boarded a 
Turkish ship in international waters just off the coast of Israel, opened fire 
and killed nine activists. The Mavi Marmara was one of six ships in the Freedom 
Flotilla, which was attempting to break the Israeli blockade of Gaza, and the 
actions of Israel's military brought widespread international condemnation.

This time, as Freedom Flotilla II sets sail over the next week, with 10 ships 
carrying many of the same activists who travelled last year, including Swedish 
writer Henning Mankell, American human rights campaigner Hedy Epstein, and 
writer and academicAlice Walker <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-walker>
, the Israeli government's response will be closely watched.

This week Ron Prosor, Israel's ambassador to the UN, wrote a letter saying: 
"Israel calls on the international community to do everything in their ability 
in order to prevent the flotilla and warn citizens … of the risks of 
participating in this type of provocation." The purpose of the flotilla, he 
said, is "to provoke and aid a radical political agenda". He later added: 
"We are very determined to defend ourselves and to assert our right to a naval 
blockade on Gaza."

"The threats of violence won't deter us," says Huwaida Arraf, one of the 
flotilla organisers. "Nobody is going in to this lightly, but we feel it has to 
be done. Israel has to realise its violence against us is not going to stop our 
growing civilian effort to challenge its illegal policies. The size of this 
flotilla, the number of people involved in organising it, even after Israel 
killed nine of our colleagues last year, is testament to that."

She says half a million people applied for the few hundred places: depending 
on how many of the 10 boats are seaworthy in time, there should be around 400 
people on the flotilla.

The campaign began in August 2008, when 44 activists on two small fishing 
boats set off from Cyprus and managed to reach Gaza. Later that year, the Free 
Gaza Movement, as it became known, organised several other voyages, usually 
sending single boats containing small but symbolic supplies such as medicine 
and toys, and volunteers, including doctors, lawyers and politicians. Amid 
allegations of violence and hostility from Israel's naval forces at sea, the 
activists decided they would need to send a flotilla, and after months of 
fundraising and negotiating with NGOs from other countries, particularly 
Turkey, several ships met in the Mediterranean sea in May last year with the 
intention of reaching Gaza.

"We didn't make it to Gaza and we lost a lot of colleagues," says Arraf, 
"but one of the things that was achieved was that people realised what Israel's 
policies meant, and the violence Israel was using to maintain them. We think 
our action will put pressure on Israel to end its blockade on Gaza, and we hope 
the respective governments of all the people participating will take action and 
do what they should be doing, instead of having their nationals putting their 
lives at risk like this."

There is a danger, says Chris Doyle, director of the council for Arab-British 
understanding, of the Palestinian issue being overlooked – in the west at least 
– as focus shifts to countries going through the extraordinary changes in the 
Arab spring. "There is a danger that people forget how important this issue is, 
and that it is boiling. It is still an unresolved issue. At a time when 
international politicians – Obama, Cameron, Sarkozy and others – are 
concentrating so much on other areas of the region, the issue of Palestine has 
not gone away."

"Everyone has been so amazed and shocked at the beauty of the Arab 
revolutions, seeing these incredibly brave and wonderful citizens, that it 
quite naturally seizes the attention, but at the heart of the Arab revolutions 
is Palestine," says Karma Nabulsi, an academic and expert on the Middle East. 
"I would say it hasn't been properly covered in the west, but Palestine is 
central to what people – the Arab media, the people who are participating in 
the Arab revolutions – talk about all the time."

So where does Palestine fit into the Arab spring? Doyle says: "A Palestinian 
spring is more than possible. Many senior people within Fatah and the 
Palestinian authorities have been saying this is the way to go because the 
negotiations are not seen as credible, and they will have to adopt different 
tactics. I think that, on the one hand, those tactics could be against the 
Israeli occupation, but also it represents a threat to the Palestinian 
authority itself, both to Fatah and Hamas."

The flotilla "gives people heart and encouragement, that the struggle for 
freedom has friends and supporters", says Nabulsi. "What the flotilla did last 
year, these plucky little boats, was bring the entire world to look at what 
[the Israeli government] were doing. Not just because of the brutality of the 
response of the military, but it shows how simple gestures get to the heart of 
the issue – breaking through the silence and the siege, and all the things that 
seem so big and impossible to do. They did it and they're going to do it again, 
and that's what is so remarkably brave."
 