
Pratibha Parmar's film Beauty in Truth <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2186685/>, 
about your life and work, makes for fascinating viewing: you've done so many 
different things in so many different places with so many different people. Is 
that how it feels to you?

I'm still living at least five parallel lives, honestly! I wonder about it. I 
have no idea how that happens. But, yes, I live in Mexico, I live in Hawaii and 
I live in northern California and all my life has been like that. It's as if I 
got all of this energy from ancestors who were not permitted to leave the 
plantations for 400 years and I got all of their desire to be part of the world.

The film begins with your upbringing in Jim Crow Georgia, one of eight 
children, the daughter of sharecroppers. Your family had very little money, but 
you did have an extremely determined mother.

I think many people in my community had very different kinds of mothers: they 
had mothers who acquiesced in the system of male and white-supremacist 
domination and my mother never did. She just could not do it. It just wasn't in 
her.

You started writing as a child. Can you remember what you wanted to say?

I wanted to have a room of my own. It would be decades before I read Virginia 
Woolf and had her beautiful rendition of that thought, but I knew that was what 
I needed. The story that my mother tells is that, when I was crawling, she 
would look for me and I would have goneround the back of the house, and she 
would find me scribbling with a twig in the dirt.

You went to a school that your parents had helped to build and then went on a 
scholarship to college. But afterwards you went back to the south. Why?

In each of us, there is a little voice that knows exactly which way to go. And 
I learned very early to listen to it, even though it has caused so much grief 
and havoc, and I think that is the only answer. I was offered a scholarship 
that would have taken me to Paris, but I turned it down because I realised that 
my true responsibility was to go back and try to help people who were exactly 
like my family. So I listened to the little voice and got on the plane and went 
to Mississippi.

In your writing, you've tried to give a voice to your own family and to others 
like them.

I have, because I've wanted them to be seen in their radiance, in their 
humanity and their struggles and toils, which are so like everybody else's. 
There's nothing, really, I've found in my family that I couldn't find in almost 
any family on the planet, given the same circumstances.

Would you say that was your first motivation as a writer, to bring these 
hidden lives to light?

When I was 13, my sister was a cosmetologist – she made up the bodies in the 
funeral home. One day, she showed me the body of a woman who had been murdered. 
Her husband had shot her in the face. Now, many people would hear this tale, 
and they would categorise it; they would try to box it into some little corner, 
but actually that kind of brutality against women is endemic and it's now 
coming more and more out into the open.

That's something to see at the age of 13.

It had a big impact on me. And her daughter was in my class, and had the same 
name as my own grandmother, who had been shot to death. I think that, when you 
start out writing, it's often like following the thread of Ariadne: you never 
know which minotaur you're going to find. But you often find one – or two or 
three!

You were involved with the civil rights movement and with feminism, the latter 
especially when you moved to New York and worked with Gloria Steinem onMs 
Magazine <http://msmagazine.com/> in the 1970s. 

I love the women's movement and I never thought of it as belonging to any 
particular segment of the population. I loved working atMs Magazine, especially 
because of Gloria, because she understood that I really needed a room of my 
own, even there.

What are your feelings about contemporary feminism?

The conundrum, in a way, is why, after all the struggle, and all the teaching 
– teaching was so important: we taught each other, and we taught other women 
and girls – women, at this point, are comfortable referring to themselves as 
guys, and basically erasing their femininity at every opportunity. I don't get 
it.

It's been 30 years since The Color Purple was published. Does it seem that 
long?

No, because time is always current, in some ways – there are people who are 
just discovering the novel today. And they write to me with the same fervour as 
someone else wrote 30 years ago. So the story is alive in that way and, even 
though I myself have written many books since then and rarely think about it in 
the same way that a fresh reader is thinking, it has its presence.

The attacks on Steven Spielberg's film version were extremely venomous. How 
did that affect you?

People abused me publicly, people who would start out by saying: "I have not 
read this book. I have not seen this film,but..." And the other side of that 
was that I was being censored, when they take your books out of schools, for 
years and years and years. It was hard and yet, again, I turned back to the 
ancestors, who actually are that little voice that says: "We know what we're 
doing," and I founded a publishing company, calledWild Trees Press 
<http://isbndb.com/d/publisher/wild_trees_press.html>, and started to publish 
other unpopular people.

In your fiction, you've always been determined to tell the truth. Is that what 
motivates your activism, too?

It's our only hope. The truth is the only guide. If you are led by a lie, of 
course you're going to fall off the planet.

You travel the world as a protester, but you also love solitude. How does that 
work?

It's quite an effort. I'll be 70 next year and 50-something years have been 
spent in writing and in activism, actually being on top of mountains and 
standing in crowds of people protesting. My road is a multi-directional road... 
What is helpful, though, is that I don't tend to respond to what is not calling.

You're very open about what it's cost you in terms of personal relationships, 
for example with partners and with your daughter [Walker and her daughter, 
Rebecca, areestranged 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/03/29/AR2007032902320.html>
].

I accept it. What can I do? I am this being who, for whatever reason, feels 
completely dedicated to the whole of humanity. I do. I deeply regret any harm, 
or any perceived harm, that I may have done to anyone by any behaviour of mine. 
I absolutely always tried to do the very best that I could with the spirit that 
I have.

What projects are you working on now?

I have two books. One is called The Cushion in the Road – it's about how, as a 
meditator, as someone who loves solitude, loves to be at home, I have my 
cushion and I sit there, but then the world calls and off I go.

And the other?

It's a book of poetry called The World Will Follow Joy. It starts with a poem 
about the Dalai Lama called "What Makes the Dalai Lama Lovable?" [laughs]

Do you still get great pleasure out of writing?

If it were not like that, why would I do it? It's about joy, if nothing else. 
That's what I think humanity has forgotten. This planet is for joy.

You sound like a pretty joyful person.

Well, why not?

Alice Walker: Beauty in Truth will have its world premiere on Sunday 10 March 
at Southbank Centre's WOW – Women of the World festival;
southbankcentre.co.uk/wow <http://wow.southbankcentre.co.uk/>
 