
I was born in Liverpool in 1946, just after the war. Everyone had had a pretty 
rotten time of it for six years, so I was this lovely addition to the family. 
My sisters, Pamela and Sylvia, are 10 and 12 years older than me, so I was 
spoiled.

Mother nurtured my talent. My mum, Marjorie, was a housewife and she 
encouraged my acting. I would constantly borrow her clothes to play dress-up. 
We got a telly when I was seven and I would watch people such as Hylda Baker 
and Beryl Reid and impersonate them. Very often my mum would say: "Oh, turn the 
television off. There's nothing on. Come on, Alison, do us some Hylda Baker."

My mum used to have a phrase: "They've got you on toast." It means they saw 
you coming. When I see shoes that cost £500, I think: "Come on! What is going 
on?!" I once spent a fortune – and I mean like a week's wages – on a tube of 
moisturiser, because I thought, I'm in my 60s and I'm going to treat myself. I 
put it on and a couple of days later I got spots. In the bin it went. I thought 
of my mother. Now I use Nivea, which costs £3.99, and my skin is fine.

My father's mother, Agnes, came round one day when I was about 20 and at drama 
school. I got dressed up and pretended to be a neighbour bringing back some 
eggs that she had borrowed from my mum. And my grandmother didn't know it was 
me! When eventually it was revealed, my grandmother said: "Oh, you should go to 
drama school and be an actress." She'd forgotten.

My parents loved each other. My mum often used to say to me: "Your father's 
such a wonderful man. When I married him, his mother said to me: 'If you walked 
100 miles, you'd never meet a better man.' And it was true." That was a lovely 
thing for her to say to me.

My dad, George, was quite artistic. It is sad, really – he worked in an office 
all his life when he should have gone to music college or art school, because 
he played the violin and could paint beautifully. I have a lot of respect for 
him for working at a job that was probably not his true calling, but his father 
had died when he was 13 and they needed money. A story told at his funeral 
makes me very proud. While he was playing the violin in an amateur works 
orchestra, he had struggled with a difficult bit and heard his violin making 
this awful noise. The conductor said, "Stop! Stop!" and my dad apologised for 
messing up the piece, but the conductor said: "Don't apologise, George: you 
were the only person that attempted it." Everyone else had been pretending, and 
my dad had at least had a go. It was important for my sons to hear those 
stories: that my dad was an honest man who tried.

I have a great relationship with my sisters. We get together every few months 
and every 15 July if we are all free we visit our parents' grave in Liverpool. 
Usually my sons, Toby, 35, and Leo, 31 [from her marriage to film director Mike 
Leigh], come along. It is important not to forget that we had good parents and 
grandparents.

My mother always looked her best. She never went to the shops without lipstick 
on, and would say to me: "Put a bit of lippy on, you'll feel better." I've 
found it to be true. She even painted her toenails until the age of 80 and did 
her nails two weeks before she died at 82. I'm going to do that, too.

• Love and Marriage is on Wednesdays at 9pm on ITV
 