
I have yet to meet anyone more excited about the royal wedding than 
photographerAlison Jackson <http://www.alisonjackson.com/>. "Of course I'm 
excited," she laughs, over coffee at Hamiltons gallery in London's Mayfair. 
"It's A, if not THE, story of our time: royal line marries air hostess line," 
she giggles. "How utterly brilliant."

Spotting the potential of "lookalikes for satirical means" while a photography 
student in the 1990s, Jackson turned a seemingly gossamer concept into 
portraits and mock-docs, winning a Bafta in 2002 forDoubletake. Focusing on 
compromising fake footage of the Beckhams and the Blair/Bush "special 
relationship", the TV series cemented her role as a post-Warhol, post-Spitting 
Image celebrity voyeur.

It's this deep-rooted obsession with TMZ celebrities that has now led her to 
Review of 2010, "a satirical mixture of reality takes with real news, intercut 
seamlessly so that you can't tell what's real and fake".

Expressive and Kylie-tiny with a wave of blonde hair, Jackson does not look 
unalike Princess Diana. This is unnerving for two reasons: one, were Diana 
alive, they'd be the same age and two, Diana's death was precisely the moment 
Jackson became celebrity-mad.

"People mourned Diana's death more than their relatives. It was shocking. But 
Diana was the perfect celebrity and marked the birth of the celebrity magazine."

The royals – "a guarded, censored brand" – remain the meat of Jackson's most 
successful work and in timely fashion, she's now moved on to the royal wedding 
– "my main focus for 2011". Her latest shot, capturing the moment William and 
Kate stopped being virgins, will appear inRoyal Family at the Hayward gallery 
in March.

Filming topically for Sky has been "taxing, tiring and solitary". She shoots 
at breakneck speed and achieves the grainy, peeping shots by using three phones 
– a BlackBerry, an Android and an iTouch – attached to a stick and filming 
simultaneously with everything turned around in about 12 hours.

But it's sourcing lookalikes that is trickiest: "Finding a Julian Assange has 
been a nightmare. And I've yet to find a good Charles. David [Beckham] can do 
everything, but Kate [Middleton] has about three versions – hair and body, face 
and the soundalike."

She found Barack Obama working in a shop in Thailand "but he can't speak 
English which is problematic" and she once, in desperation, ran up to Nicolas 
Cage to tell him what a wonderful lookalike he was ("His face!").

Is there anyone left? "I'd love to do Piers [Morgan]. Do you think he would 
mind?" He loves publicity, I reply. "He'd be easy then. I'd just use Susan 
Boyle. They're identical."
 