
'If you want to play old-time music, you've got to pay attention to your right 
hand ..." andAlison Krauss <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alisonkrauss> 
offers to demonstrate bluegrass bowing technique. It begins with a barely 
perceptible shimmer of the wrist. Gradually the movement gathers force and 
travels along her arm until her whole body begins to sway in a graceful, 
sinuous wave. "Isn't that pretty?" she smiles.

Outside America, Krauss is mainly perceived as the ethereal half of the 
platinum-selling partnership with Robert Plant that produced the 2007 album 
Raising Sand. At home in the US she is a major star, having sold more than 11m 
albums solo and with her band, Union Station; she has won more Grammys – 26 of 
them – than any other female artist. She doesn't turn 40 until next year, yet 
in terms of overall Grammy wins she has only Sir Georg Solti and Quincy Jones 
left to beat.

It's not her nature to flaunt it, however. Her hotel suite is of the 
discretely expensive kind, though there's no sign of an entourage, nor does the 
slight figure wearing faded jeans bear much resemblance to the woman who 
performed at the 2004 Oscars ceremony wearing $2m diamond-encrusted slippers. 
She shakes her head at the recollection. "Bizarre. I've no idea why they chose 
me to wear them. I must have had the worst feet of anyone who was there."

It's a typical reaction from an artist who states that her music promotes 
"simple values, God, family, working hard, the romance of loving the girl next 
door". Yet though Krauss depicts herself as a conventional kind of girl, her 
life has been anything but ordinary. Brought up in small-town Illinois, she 
developed a taste for old-time music and had barely reached her teens when she 
was nominated by the Society for the Preservation of Bluegrass in America as 
most promising fiddler in the mid-west. When she was 14, the band she played in 
sent a demo to the roots-music label Rounder. They kept the golden-voiced 
violin player but ditched the band.

Softly spoken and slightly other-worldly, Krauss often gives the impression of 
belonging to a different era. She claims not have seen Oh Brother Where Art 
Thou? – the film that introduced her music to a wider audience – all the way 
through because she doesn't own a television. She has chosen to base her career 
within the narrow confines of bluegrass; an earthy, blue-collar, essentially 
conservative form of folk music, which makes it all the more surprising that 
that her biggest-selling record to date should have been an album of obscure, 
country blues covers made with a British rock icon with whom she seemed to have 
little in common except her hair. Yet the strange alchemy of Raising Sand drew 
on the Celtic folk seam that ran through Led Zeppelin's music, as well as 
Krauss's own fondness for British rock and pop. "Growing up I used to love 
bands like Free and ELO and the Rolling Stones," she says. "When Robert Plant 
got in touch it made perfect sense to me."

Most people's response to making an album that sold in excess of 2.5m copies 
would be to make it again. Yet after two years touring and promoting the 
record, Krauss and Plant went their separate ways: he to continue his 
American-roots exploration with the Band of Joy, she returned to Union Station, 
the bluegrass ensemble with which she has performed for over 21 years.

They did return to the studio to cut some tracks for a follow-up, but the 
session was aborted. "The magic had gone, nothing happened," she says. "Maybe 
it was too much to expect lightning to strike in the same place twice. There 
may be another project with Robert down the road. We still talk and laugh about 
things. I enjoyed my time with him tremendously."

Paper Airplane is Krauss's sixth studio album with Union Station, and the 
first she has made with the band since 2004. It was a longer gap than she would 
have wanted, but Union Station is a band of individual virtuosos each of whom 
have significant solo careers of their own. She describes them as "more like 
family than a band". Do they ever fight? "Do we ever! They're all such huge 
talents and everybody's used to being the boss. But then our individual 
differences create a sound that can't be replicated any other way."

You sense that Krauss's role is that of big sister to whom everyone ultimately 
defers. "Well, there has to be someone who feels strongly enough to say OK: 
this is what we're gonna do. And as I have to sing most of these tunes, it has 
to feel right for me."

Krauss rarely records her own material, though she is an unerring judge of 
other people's songs. This time, however, she found that her usual confidence 
deserted her. "It turned out to be anything but an easy record to make, 
basically because I wasn't well. I was suffering from terrible migraines and 
unable to sleep. After we'd been recording for a week, I realised what we had 
wasn't working. It's impossible to make a record when you're ill because it 
affects how you listen to things. You can't make decisions. It all sounds 
terrible."

Krauss halted sessions and turned to one of her former discoveries and most 
dependable collaborators, songwriter Robert Lee Castleman. Yet she found that 
he too was suffering a creative drought:

"He was at a dead end. His words were: 'Oh, Alison, I can't find it. I go to 
the ocean, I drive through the desert, I've driven back to all the places where 
I've been heartbroken, but there's nothing there.'" Krauss's response was to 
grill some cheese sandwiches, after which Castleman announced that he'd thought 
of a melody. "Later the same evening he called and told me that the song was 
finished and was called Paper Airplane. It became the title track on the record 
and everything else fell into place from there."

Paper Airplane is a plaintive record, even by Krauss's melancholic standards. 
The standout performance is her interpretation of Richard Thompson's song 
Dimming of the Day, written in 1973 and first sung by Thompson's wife Linda at 
a point when the couple were going through a divorce. "It is such a beautiful 
song. Almost too painful to sing," she says. "The performance on the record is 
the first time we played it all the way through. Initially, I got choked up and 
had to stop. Then guitarist Jerry Douglas said: 'Well, that's what you get for 
having a girl in the band.'"

Among the ballads are some blistering traditional bluegrass tunes sung by Dan 
Tyminski, whose keening tenor on the classic Dust Bowl Children sounds like an 
entire Steinbeck novel compressed into three chords. "You know, for most of its 
life bluegrass has had this stigma of being all straw hats and hay bales and 
not necessarily the most sophisticated form of music," Krauss says. "Yet you 
can't help responding to its honesty. It's music that finds its way deep into 
your soul because it's strings vibrating against wood and nothing else."

The record mixes classics by the likes of Jackson Browne with songs written by 
the new generation of American roots musicians that Krauss has done much to 
promote. She has always been generous in support of younger musicians; though 
some of them, such as "new-grass" stars Nickel Creek have already flourished, 
split-up and gone on to successful solo projects of their own, which only seems 
to emphasise how long Krauss seems to have been around. Yet it seems a bit 
early to begin referring to her as the grand old lady of bluegrass.

"The grand old lady of bluegrass?" she ponders. 'Well, wouldn't that be a 
wonderful title to have? I hope I do enough to earn it some day."

Our allotted time is up, though Krauss is struck by a sudden thought and 
springs to her feet. "You know," she declares, "if you really want to fiddle 
the old-time way, you've got to learn the dance."

The dance? "Yeah. The contra-dances, hoedowns. It's all in the rhythm of the 
bow. The great North Carolina fiddle player Tommy Jarrell said, 'If a feller 
can't bow, he'll never make a fiddler. He might make a violin player, but he'll 
never make no fiddler.'''

Which is how I come to leave her, stamping out imaginary music in an expensive 
hotel suite, happily fiddling into thin air.

Paper Airplane is out now.
 