
It is a well trodden path and if it is good enough for Her Majesty's 
Government when they are taking flak, it is good enough for theECB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb>. Their chief executive, David Collier, 
has announced that an independent review will be instigated after the Ashes 
whitewash. It will look at all aspects of the England set-up, including the 
coaching staff, the captain, how to identify talented youngsters, whether 
preparations can be improved and how central contracts could be modified to get 
better performances out of players.

Yesterday was supposed to be the climax of the Sydney Test, one of the great 
occasions in the cricketing calendar. Instead, because of England's latest 
subsidence, it was a less edifying day of blathering and backside-covering from 
senior ECB officials. 'We need to start planning today,' Collier said. 'Look at 
the Aussies; the day they lost the series [in 2005] they started planning for 
the next one.'

Duncan Fletcher was also offering positive thoughts. 'Five-nil is, in fact, 
better than the 4-1 on the last tour,' he said, which sounds daft but makes 
some sense: this tour party is much younger and more likely to learn from 
playing in Australia than the team of 2002-03. 'I believe I can take this side 
forward. I'm sure I have the confidence and backing of the players. I will look 
at my position after the World Cup.' By which time the review panel should have 
reported to the ECB.

Collier justified the formation of the panel by pointing out that 'we are 
entering a new four-year cycle after the Caribbean World Cup, which takes in 
two Ashes tours and the 2011 World Cup. We have to examine how to give the 
England team the best possible support. We have got to examine the selection 
process and get the structure right.'

Fair enough, but the day on which he decided that an independent review body 
was necessary betrays the motivation behind the idea: 29 December in Melbourne 
and England had just been thrashed, their worst performance of the tour. It was 
starting to look ugly. The ECB had to be seen to be doing something.

The review will be led by an independent chairman, regarded as a 'big hitter', 
- John Major's name has been mentioned - and will have five to seven members 
with experience of Test captaincy and coaching. None of the names has been 
finalised, but visits to the Sky commentary box will be on the agenda for 
Collier and whoever is persuaded to be chairman.

Collier noted that the Australians, after their defeat in 2005, drafted in 
Allan Border and Mark Taylor to aid their investigation, so it is not hard to 
work out how the review panel is expected to evolve.

Nasser Hussain and Mike Atherton have strong, independent minds, although the 
latter is not spending any time in England between the end of the triangular 
series here and the World Cup in the Caribbean. Alec Stewart would be willing 
to contribute, as would Angus Fraser.

The review panel will be housed by worthy men, it will be well intentioned, it 
will be difficult to get all its members in the same room at the same time and 
it will achieve little. At the moment it will help the ECB if it merely 
convinces the critics that 'something is being done'.

Collier also mentioned that he had had two meetings with his counterpart at 
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia, James 
Sutherland, in which they discussed changing the Ashes cycle so the series do 
not take place in a World Cup year. The likeliest way to achieve that was to 
play back-to-back series, which would have the treasurers of both boards 
licking their lips.

He also scotched the notion that the ECB had let slip the services of Troy 
Cooley. He said that there had been no haggling over terms and that the primary 
reason for the bowling coach's return to Australia was his young family.

Earlier, Fletcher had expressed himself to be happy with Cooley's replacement, 
Kevin Shine, and all his backroom staff. He was also happy with his team. This 
included Steve Harmison, even though he might have looked tired and 
uninterested. 'There were occasions when he [Harmison] came off the field angry 
because he wanted to bowl more and Andrew [Flintoff] had taken him off,' 
Fletcher told a surprised gathering.

The England coach was happy with the preparation of his team, pointing out 
that Glenn McGrath started the series without any games for New South Wales. 
And he would be happy if Shane Warne were drafted in to help England, although 
given Warne's unflattering comments about Fletcher, this may be asking too much.

So, apart from the 5-0 scoreline, Fletcher seemed happy, even if he did not 
look it. He also hinted at leadership changes. Asked about Flintoff and the 
captaincy, he said: 'It was one of our biggest fears that he would have too 
much of a workload. With such an inexperienced bowling side it was a difficult 
job for him. He is inexperienced; he's never captained a county side. He's had 
a lot on his shoulders.'

When Ricky Ponting was asked whether Australia were an easy team to lead, he 
smiled and said: 'Probably.' It was a humble response, yet true; his team have 
had the benefit of great players. But the side could have disintegrated after 
the 2005 Ashes series. Ponting's steeliness and honest self-examination made 
sure that did not happen and he was quick to point out the impact of 
Australia's retiring coach, John Buchanan.

He even had praise for England. 'People will look at the score and think they 
crumbled,' Ponting said. 'I don't know their players and wouldn't like to 
comment on their character or lack of it. All I know is, at times in this 
series we had to play exceptional cricket.'

By the fifth Test in Sydney, the Australia team were delivering almost perfect 
Test cricket and, as a consequence, Ponting had just experienced 'the best six 
or seven weeks of my cricketing life'.

Australia were awesomely good throughout, with great players stretching 
themselves and maximising their potential. England did not always help 
themselves, but on this tour they were beaten by a far superior team. Expect a 
review body, headed by a very important person and after much very serious 
debate, to reveal this fact to the nation.
 