
The weight of responsibility upon Ally McCoist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> goes beyond a standard 
professional onus. McCoist has progressed from a Rangers supporter to the 
club's record goalscorer and now, in their time of desperate need, the manager. 
On Friday, an emotionally charged McCoist spoke of his willingness to carry an 
on-field burden as Rangers battle administration.

"I've got no idea if we'll ever find out why this happened. I hope we do," 
McCoist said. "It's a professional and personal obligation I feel I've got. 
It's quite unbelievable what's happening at the club. I am 100% aware of my 
responsibilities to this club right now. I have 100% focus to give the 
supporters what they want – which is giving them their club back."

McCoist's emotional attachment to Rangers means he has never been tempted to 
walk away from the club despite the off-field turmoil. "I'm ready for it," he 
said. "I can't sit here and say I know what road we will go down or what we 
will do. But again, it's important that theRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> fans know that there's somebody 
there who will do their damnedest for them. A lot of them are disillusioned and 
shattered. I saw boys in tears outside Ibrox as generations of the same family 
think about their team. I know the responsibility I have. Effectively, I'm 
representing them. I'm fully aware what is expected of me as a football manager 
to help the fans through this situation."

McCoist revealed Sir Alex Ferguson, a former Rangers player, is among a group 
of managers who have been in touch with him to offer support during the past 
few days. "Sir Alex just offered encouragement for everyone, for the 
workforce," McCoist said. "Sir Alex has not been through it, but like a lot of 
the managers who have he knows it is about more than the team. It is about the 
football club."

Less sympathetic sentiment has emanated from Celtic. Rangers' city rivals have 
bridled at the suggestion they need a strong challenge from Ibrox to aid their 
own cause. "I'm a big fan of the Old Firm, a massive fan," McCoist said. "The 
Old Firm – for the vast majority of the time since Scottish football began – 
have been the two most successful clubs and best supported clubs. I'm a big, 
big fan of the Old Firm and I'd like to see them stand together."

McCoist will not know until next week about the scale of the inevitable staff 
cuts. The manager has been heartened, however, by the approach of the club's 
administrator. "I had a very constructive and beneficial meeting with Paul 
Clark from Duff & Phelps," McCoist said. "I totally understand his situation, 
his stance and where he is coming from. He understands my views on things. But 
really, at this moment in time, my views on things don't count that much.

"Importantly, for me and from my point of view, as much as he has a job to do, 
he is very understanding of the stature of the job he is faced with. By that, 
I'm not saying he is going to go easy or do special things. But I am delighted 
by the fact he seems to be very understanding of the colossal job he's got."

In football terms, a 10 point penalty imposed on McCoist's team leaves them a 
distant second by 14 points to Celtic. "We have not lost the league 
championship yet but, make no mistake about it, the league championship is 
secondary in the priority of the football club," McCoist said. "It's about 
people's livelihoods."

Almost lost in this madness is the fact Kilmarnock visit Ibrox for a league 
match on Saturday afternoon. Whyte will be absent, but the ground is set to 
sell out as supporters rally to back their club in these hours of need. "I hope 
it is the most highly charged atmosphere I've ever known at Ibrox," McCoist 
said. "I can speak for all of the players, coaches and management staff when I 
say we can't wait for tomorrow.

"I really cannot wait for it. I firmly believe it is when you will see what 
the institution that is Rangers Football Club is all about. There's not a 
ticket to be bought. There are some wonderful stories about people living 
abroad buying tickets and passing them on to family members or former 
neighbours in Scotland. As black a few days as we have had, I think Saturday 
will see the real Rangers start marching towards the light at the end of that 
tunnel."
 