
It was far from the most audible chant at Ibrox last Saturday, but it was 
probably the most notable.Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>
 fans who enjoyed the success – and excesses – of David Murray's ownership 
would never have envisaged a day where they were urged to clap their hands if 
they hate the tycoon.

Those leading the singing were youngsters, a generation with no direct 
knowledge of what it was like to follow Rangers in the barren years immediately 
before the arrivals of Graeme Souness and later Murray at Ibrox.

Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> is a 
better-placed witness. The Rangers manager was a key part of the team that 
claimed nine titles in a row and had aspirations of competing meaningfully in 
European competition. That is the positive Murray legacy.

The obvious flipside was the reckless spending which left Rangers in the firm 
grip of the Lloyds Banking Group. From there, Craig Whyte picked up the club 
and presided over the recent slip into administration. An element of the 
Rangers support hold Murray responsible for this almighty mess but McCoist 
still chooses to back his former chairman.

"One thing that's guaranteed with being involved with this club, no matter at 
what level, is that you're going to get stick somewhere along the line – 
whether as a player, manager, coach or on the board," says McCoist. "It's 
guaranteed. I know David Murray as well as a lot of people and better than 
most. He'll admit he made mistakes and, of course, he made mistakes but I am of 
the opinion that when he was in charge of the club he always did his best for 
the club.

"People will have their own views on the whole situation, Mine? I'll always 
remember David Murray for being good for the club and for doing his best for 
the club. Like any ownership, it's peaks and troughs but as the person I am, I 
always like to look at the peaks."

The quest of Rangers' administrators to secure the Uefa licence that would 
allow them to compete in European competition next season also highlights a 
parallel. On the final day of the 1985‑86 season – best remembered for Celtic 
pipping Hearts to the championship – McCoist scored a penalty to seal his 
team's European place.

"That was the day Celtic scored five at St Mirren. Graeme Souness came in and 
was surprised at the state of our dressing room – we had just qualified for 
Europe and we were devastated," says McCoist with a smile. He would be more 
morose if European entry is denied this time around.

"It [not to qualify] would be a massive blow but you'd have to say it's a 
distinct possibility at the moment. The administrators are doing their best and 
while there's a chance you've always got to remain optimistic. But you'd 
have to say there's a danger of us not having European football next season."

McCoist has been circumspect about Whyte's running of Rangers. The manager 
admitted, though, that the fact funds from future season ticket income were 
used by the club owner to pay off a debt to the Lloyds Banking Group riled him. 
"If that's the case I would have to say I would find it unacceptable," McCoist 
adds.

Somehow Rangers' record-scoring striker must maintain a strong degree of 
on-field focus. Motherwell's form has left Rangers in a battle to secure second 
place in the Scottish Premier League, a stark contrast to the title challenge 
McCoist hoped to preside over when the campaign opened.

"I've pointed out the benefits of finishing higher up the league to the 
administrators," he says. "I've pointed out the importance of finishing second. 
The financial rewards are there for everyone to see. There's a big difference 
between finishing second and third.

"The job of the football club is to provide a team that goes on to the park 
and hopefully gets a result on matchdays. That's the one thing we can never get 
away from because the fans turn up to watch their football team and the 
administrators are aware of that, as indeed we are.

"They haven't taken the approach of saying: 'Ach, the league's over,' which is 
really encouraging. If you don't put the best quality on the park that you can 
then fans won't come and watch you, which generates finance as well."
 