
Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> has insisted 
his job as the Rangers manager is safe despite losing a close ally, the chief 
executive Graham Wallace, as a consequence of Mike Ashley’s increased influence 
at Ibrox.

The Newcastle United owner effectively took control of the troubled club on 
Monday when the board confirmed it had accepted his offer of a £2m emergency 
loan facility, raising doubts over McCoist’s future following the departures of 
Wallace and former finance director Philip Nash.

Ashley owns 8.92% of Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> 
and is prohibited from increasing his stake above 10% having signed an 
agreement with the Scottish Football Association three years ago. However, 
having demanded the removal of Wallace and Nash from the board, Ashley will 
appoint their replacements as a condition of the loan and has two of the club’s 
assets, the Albion car park next to Ibrox stadium plus the Edmiston House 
facility, as security. The Sports Direct founder already holds the naming 
rights to the stadium and runs the club’s retail division.

Wallace’s resignation as the chief executive was also announced with Nash 
having exited Rangers last week. Derek Llambias, Ashley’s former managing 
director at Newcastle, and Stephen Mucklow have been touted as likely 
replacements, with Wallace’s departure a serious setback to McCoist who had 
worked closely with the one-time Manchester City chief operating officer over 
the past 11 months.

The Rangers manager claims to have received assurances his position is secure 
during talks with plc chairman David Somers and football board chairman Sandy 
Easdale. Speaking on the eve of Tuesday’s League Cup quarter-final against St 
Johnstone, McCoist said: “Having spoken to both gentlemen, they have confirmed 
to me they want me to continue my job as Rangers manager and, as you would 
expect, to concentrate my thoughts on the game tomorrow night.”

Easdale, who represents 26% of the club’s voting rights and has welcomed 
Ashley’s growing involvement, added: “I have not spoken to Ally. He is the 
manager and he continues to be the manager. We have not got any ideas of 
changing the manager. That is not on the agenda.”

Wallace and Nash opposed Ashley’s loan deal and had little option but to leave 
when it was favoured over an offer from the Sale Sharks owner Brian Kennedy. 
Ashley’s long-term intentions for Rangers remain unclear, along with the 
implications for Newcastle, though Easdale claimed the sports retailer “has not 
intimated to me” that he wants to take overall control of Rangers.

The football board chairman, speaking after rumours emerged that Rangers would 
run out of money by Tuesday without a loan, added: “Mike is a very wealthy 
individual and really does want to help the club so I can only see it being a 
good thing. I would hope this would bring stability. We have got to look 
forward now. The fans have heard so much over the years, but I feel we now have 
somebody who is interested in helping the club and we can only look at it as a 
positive thing.”

McCoist also portrayed Ashley’s interest-free loan as a positive for Rangers 
despite the latest upheaval. “I’m obviously saddened by the departure of 
Graham,” he said. “On behalf of the staff and the players I would like to thank 
him very much for his input. Graham was great to work with and was 100% 
committed to taking the club forward. The news of Mike’s involvement is good 
news. I’ve said all along the club needs investment, so we’ve got it.

“I spoke to the chairman David Somers on Monday morning for about 15 or 20 
minutes and I spoke to Sandy Easdale on the phone as well. A lot of it will 
remain private but what I would say is that both board members are very pleased 
and comfortable with the situation. The chairman gave me an indication of why 
they have decided to accept the investment from Mike. They are happy with that 
and I have to respect that.

“I don’t expect to speak to Mike but I would speak to any shareholder or any 
board member for the benefit of the club. Change is always a concern but I have 
been told that this change is moving the club forward, which is absolutely 
fantastic.”

Rangers confirmed in a statement to the Stock Exchange that Ashley’s loan had 
been made in the name of his company, Mash Holdings Limited, and “shall be for 
a six-month term and is interest free. The facility will be used by the company 
for general working capital purposes. Under the terms of the facility, Mash has 
the right to appoint up to two directors on the board of directors of RFCL.”
 