
Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> believes he 
still has the confidence of the Rangers board, despite reports suggesting that 
Sandy Easdale wants him to be sacked.

The Ibrox manager is facing mounting pressure after his side suffered a woeful 
defeat to part-time Alloa in Wednesday’s Petrofac Training Cup semi-final.

The Daily Record reported on Friday morning that Easdale, the Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> football board chairman, and his 
brother James, a PLC director, were leading calls for McCoist to be replaced. 
However, it is understood that the cost of terminating the manager’s contract 
would be £1.4m, a sum well beyond the club’s means.

Unless the Newcastle United owner, Mike Ashley – who also appears to be 
pulling the strings at Ibrox after handing the club a £3m loan – funds that 
cost, McCoist will not be dismissed and he has no intention of resigning.

Asked if he still had the backing of the board, McCoist said: “Absolutely 
yeah. I haven’t heard otherwise. I imagine that question has been asked 
following some of the comments in some of the newspapers this morning.

“I haven’t read them all but nobody has told me otherwise that I don’t have 
the support of the board. I don’t feel the need to seek reassurance.”

McCoist faced angry chants from fans as his side dropped nine points behind 
their Championship rivals Hearts with a 2-0 defeat at Tynecastle last month. He 
was criticised again at the Indodrill Stadium on Wednesday but says he retains 
his focus.

“I think I’ve still got a job to do. I’ve said all along that the job is to 
get the team back to the top flight, where we feel we belong. That hasn’t 
altered. My focus hasn’t altered. I was aware it would be a bumpy ride with a 
few hiccups along the way and that is proving to be the case.

“But we can’t allow ourselves to shift our focus away from getting back to the 
top flight. One more defeat certainly won’t be the breaking point for me. You 
have got to be strong and you’ve got to be focused. That will always be the 
case for me.

“Have I lost the confidence of the fans? No, no. As you would fully expect and 
understand, there has been a lot of discontent and unhappiness with Wednesday’s 
result. I totally understand and respect that. But you always get a reaction 
from poorer results.

“Everybody has times in their job that are not so good. Wednesday was one of 
those, to put it mildly. But you do come back to earth and realise that you 
can’t lose your focus. All I can do is assure the supporters I will be doing my 
level best, 100%, to turn these performances around.”

A high court judge in London, meanwhile, has removed a jail threat that had 
been hanging over the former Rangers owner Craig Whyte following the launch of 
civil court proceedings.

An arrest warrant had been issued after he failed to attend a high court 
hearing relating to a dispute with a ticketing firm, but Mr Justice Newey on 
Friday discharged an order after Mr Whyte appeared in court. Proceedings were 
adjourned.
 