
The high-profile stand-off between Ally McCoist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> and the Rangers board ended 
on Sunday, with the manager placed on gardening leave from Ibrox. Rangers’ 2-0 
defeat of Livingston 24 hours earlier, at a sparsely populated Ibrox, has 
proved McCoist’s last in charge.


McCoist tendered his resignation a week past on Friday, a scenario which 
triggered a 12-month notice period. Yet relations between the 52-year-old and 
theRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> board had already 
broken down, meaning a more immediate exit was more mutually beneficial. 
McCoist insisted during the intervening nine days that he would serve his 
notice, a stance which never looked to be more than contractual posturing.

A meeting between McCoist and Rangers’ directors on Sunday led to an 
indefinite compromise and McCoist being removed from front-line duties. The 
timing is far from coincidental; the club’s board members face a stormy annual 
general meeting on Monday and have now sought to take sting out of at least one 
issue.

“We would like to thank Ally for all his hard work and dedication over the 
last few years, but we feel it is now in the best interests of all parties to 
move on,” said a Rangers statement. “Assistant Manager Kenny McDowall will take 
over his duties until the end of the season.”

McCoist succeeded Walter Smith in the summer of 2011, thereby finding himself 
in charge of Rangers during a spell which included administration, liquidation 
and the re-starting of football business in Scotland’s lowest professional 
tier. Despite cantering through the third and second divisions, McCoist’s 
Rangers routinely failed to impress on resources vastly superior to anyone else 
in the country bar Celtic.

McCoist leaves Ibrox, where he earned legendary status as a player, with 
Rangers nine points adrift of Hearts , having played one game more than the 
Edinburgh club. Already angry with off-field affairs, an element of the Rangers 
support has made its unhappiness with McCoist’s management perfectly plain in 
recent times.

Billy Davies is the leading candidate to succeed McCoist but, as with 
everything that happens at Rangers nowadays, certainty is a nonexistent 
commodity. McCoist, for starters, remains on the payroll, earning an annual 
salary of £750,000-a-year. Until that is formally resolved or fresh income is 
secured, little can change. Davies has made it known to those close to him that 
he would relish the Rangers role, seemingly regardless of background chaos.

At Monday’s meeting, the strength of Mike Ashley’s grip on Rangers affairs 
will most likely be tightened rather than explained. Ashley and Rangers have 
both been charged by the Scottish FA in relation to allegations of dual 
interests in clubs. The Newcastle United owner has signed an undertaking not to 
go past a 10% stake in Rangers but has since exerted a strong influence, 
including with the appointment of Derek Llambias as chief executive.

It is widely anticipated that Rangers will announce the imminent launch of a 
new share issue at their AGM. The club had previously announced it needs £8m to 
continue as a going concern throughout 2015. Ashley is the most legitimate, and 
possibly only, figure to underwrite such an issue, thereby increasing his stock 
past its current 8.92% level. Rangers’ directors are likely to hail Ashley as 
the only man to revive the club’s fortunes, a matter fans will audibly 
counteract by detail of the Sports Direct tycoon’s watertight control over 
merchandising affairs at Ibrox.

The Scottish FA has another dual interest case ongoing, relating to 
allegations against Neil Rankine’s connections to Livingston, East Fife and 
Dumbarton, which is suddenly highly relevant in the context of Ashley and 
Rangers. A result on the Rankine case is thought to be forthcoming in the near 
future.
 