
Fevered debate as to when precisely Ally McCoist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> will vacate office as the 
Rangers manager will be matched only by that over whether his tenure can be 
deemed a success following the tendering of his resignation.

McCoist has a 12-month rolling contract and that length of notice must be 
served unless severence is agreed. The fact that McCoist took this step at all 
owed everything to the 52-year-old’s disquiet over the way Rangers are being 
run, added to the impact that the stresses of his situation are having on him 
and his family. The falling-out was typically confusing, typically muddled, 
typicallyRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> in 2014.

Rangers slumped to a pitiful 2-0 defeat at Queen of the South on Friday night, 
leaving them nine points adrift of Hearts in Scotland’s second tier having 
played a game more. News of McCoist’s resignation had broken in the hours 
preceding the game. Immediately before kick-off the manager’s comments 
confirmed he was in the midst of a game of brinkmanship with Rangers’ board. 
Like everything at Ibrox these days this issue revolves around money.

“I can assure the Rangers fans I’m 100% committed to getting Rangers into the 
top flight,” McCoist told BT Sport. “I’ll continue in my job and hopefully get 
them back into the top flight.”

This has been pretty much the extent of his ambition with the club for a 
while, with the suggestion that he would then call time on a reign which began 
in 2011. The intervening three years have seen administration, liquidation and 
the restarting of on-field affairs in Scotland’s lowest professional tier.

McCoist is handing the Rangers board an awkward situation. The club surely 
cannot afford to pay up the remainder of the manager’s one-year rolling 
contract immediately. There are also senior figures within the Ibrox boardroom 
who have clear misgivings about McCoist’s ability.

McCoist has simply called their bluff, if with a very heavy heart. The 
directors, for their part, will want McCoist to depart without much or any 
money at all. His position is now untenable.

A snapshot of how curious the present Rangers set-up is comes from the 
day-to-day control as administered by Derek Llambias. The former Newcastle 
United chief executive is officially a nonexecutive director at Ibrox, 
parachuted into place by Mike Ashley,but has a remit way beyond his title.

Ashley, Newcastle’s owner, holds only a 9% stake in Rangers but has loaned the 
club millions of pounds, a deal that safeguards his highly lucrative retail 
stranglehold. The Llambias task seems simple: to cut costs at a business which 
recently confirmed it needs to source around £8m in the next 12 months, by its 
own admission “the first tranche being required in early 2015 to meet 
day-to-day working requirements”.

This is the same club that earlier blasted through £70m in 18 months. There is 
a common suggestion that Rangers have been badly run; that is not the case for 
various individuals who have profited considerably from a troubled scenario.

Against this backdrop sympathy for McCoist is inevitable. There is an 
alternative, compelling narrative, though. It has proved a troublesome one for 
the Rangers support, as it would any fanbase who had so idolised an individual 
when breaking all records as a centre-forward.

Rangers exited the lower- league cup at the hands of Alloa Athletic from a 
position of 2-0 in front in the semi-final, a moment that was instantly 
identifiable as a breaking point for wavering fans who had previously backed 
their manager.

During Rangers’ rise from Division Three there has been no positive football 
legacy at all. Players, some of whom were recruited on ludicrous salaries of up 
to £7,000 a week, have stagnated or regressed. This season’s League Cup, in 
which Rangers will play Celtic in the semi-final, marks the first time a 
McCoist team have looked consistently half useful when facing higher-ranked – 
but lower-paid – teams.

McCoist is also the last remaining link to a Rangers who enjoyed better times. 
They are no closer to returning there, regardless of exactly when the manager’s 
identity changes.
 