
Man up!

From Stephen, age 24

What can I do to get a girlfriend? I have been in a few two-year 
relationships, and I've had the occasional date. But I'm the kind of guy that 
girls don't tend to look at twice when they see me out and about. I'm 5ft 6in 
(1.7m), small build, and not all that good looking. I am active and hard 
working, and I've been going to the gym every day for two months to build 
myself up. But I still don't have much luck! Past girlfriends tell me that I'm 
too much of a nice guy and I've got to "man up".
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies
Research has shown that taller males have more mating opportunities. But other 
research has found that when looking for long-term breeding partners physical 
attractiveness and sexiness is far less important to females than commitment 
and social skills.

I'm guessing you are dating women of a similar age to yourself; past 
girlfriends may have said you are too nice, but they were not at the 
settling-down stage in their life. When you get into your thirties women 
looking for long-term commitment will be attracted to your naturally 
cooperative personality. Having a "gsoh" (that's "good sense of humour" in 
Lonely Hearts parlance) is considered to be a desirable social skill, so brush 
up on your repertoire of jokes and stop worrying!

Dunbar, R, (2000) Male mating strategies: a modelling approach. In: P Kappeler 
(ed), Primate Males, Cambridge University Press, pp 259-268.
Dunbar, R, Wayforth, D. (1995) Condition mate choice strategies in humans, 
evidence from "Lonely Hearts" advertisements. Behaviour 132: 755-779.

Single for four years

From Ellie, age 36
I'm a 36-year-old female, and have been single for four years. I'm young 
looking, told I'm attractive most days, have a wide circle of friends and am 
educated to postgraduate level and in a successful career. I am having little 
success meeting a suitable man to settle down with however. What could I do to 
improve my chances?
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies:
You describe yourself as sociable, solvent, attractive and intelligent. Many 
highly eligible females, like yourself, find searching for a mate a soulless 
process.

A female chimpanzee leaves her natal group and transfers to other chimp 
communities for breeding proposes. She will have no family or friends to 
welcome her and thus on joining the new group she must accept the lowest status 
and try to build on her lowly position.

Maybe in your search for a mate you need to move right away from your wide 
circle of friends. Join adult education classes or a new sports club, or music 
group – find a social centre where there will be a wide selection of males and 
females unknown to you. In this situation you will have to rely on your 
sexually selected physical and behavioural charms to win over strangers.

He can't sleep …

From Rosa D, no age given
Our 14-year-old son reports that for the last couple of months he has found it 
very hard to get to sleep at night. He normally goes to bed around 9.30-10pm in 
the week as he has to get up early (6.45am) for school. Obviously, I don't want 
him to get stressed about it as this will only make it worse.
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies:
As an adolescent, your son is at the transitional stage between childhood and 
adulthood that is unique to humans. All other apes go from being juveniles to 
young adults with little time to practise adult-like behaviour before it 
counts. You will need to be flexible and accommodate his behavioural and 
physical changes as he continues to develop.

Apart from the owl monkey, the higher primates are predominantly diurnal 
(active during daylight hours) but so-called cathemeral sleep patterns are 
frequently exhibited. Cathemeral behaviour means that several naps are 
interspersed with activity over a 24-hour period. Cathemerality can benefit 
individuals, for example during times of competitive feeding, capture of prey 
and avoidance of predators. Chimps have been observed to hunt at night, and 
some humans, perhaps including your son, feel more alert after dusk.

Trust your maternal instincts. Get him to talk to you about school: he may 
have some worries.

A few other tips. Primates are highly mobile animals and adapted to walking, 
leaping and climbing: in other words your son needs daily exercise to tire 
himself out before sleep.

You should also feed him up at suppertime and at bedtime give him a warm milk 
drink. Tell him no predators are coming and to read his chemistry textbook in 
bed, which will soon send him to sleep.

Tattersall, I, (2008) Avoiding commitment, cathemerality among primates. 
Biological Rhythm Research, vol 39, issue 3, June, pp 213-228.

Carole is UK-based and as such any advice she gives is intended for a UK 
audience only.
 