
Amanda Seyfried <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amanda-seyfried> has the 
face of an extra terrestrial. An extremely pretty extra-terrestrial, mind, with 
huge eyes and small features framed by a head of expensively coloured and 
rolled blonde hair. To complete the look, she sits ensconced in an enormous 
white towel, to combat the aggressive air conditioning of the hotel we're in. 
"I've done eight junket days already," she says, "but I would lay on a street 
naked for this movie."

This movie is Les Misérables, and its relentless publicity trail has taken her 
to Toyko, New York, LA and now London, before it's back to New York then LA and 
countless other cities, as the awards season hots up and the leading films' 
actors try to jazz-hand their film into acclaim.

If this is Seyfried's "moment", it has been a long time in coming. Her debut 
movie role was in 2004, inTina Fey 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tina-fey>'s excellent Mean Girls. 
Playing Karen Smith, the well-meaning but spectacularly dim member of 
high-school clique the Plastics, she showed real comic cadence. It was a 
breakthrough role for her (the same applying for co-star Rachel McAdams), but 
it wasn't until 2008 that she achieved her first lead. Fortunately for her, it 
was as part ofMamma Mia! <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125168>, the 
big-screen adaptation of the Abba musical, which went on to become a surprise 
global smash.

It may have been a substantial hit at the box office but Mamma Mia didn't wow 
critics, and Seyfried is yet to find a vehicle that has allowed her to do both. 
Her face may be on the poster of every film she's in, but the roles and acclaim 
that have met some of her peers have proved elusive. Perhaps it's been the soft 
material (the cliched Dear John, oppositeChanning Tatum 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/channing-tatum>; the unmemorable Letters To 
Juliet with Gael García Bernal), or the lack of a franchise, the likes of which 
Kristen Stewart has enjoyed. With the help ofThe King's Speech 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/137858/king-s-speech> director Tom Hooper 
and, incongruously, 70s porn legend Linda Lovelace, however, 2013 could prove 
to be a decisive turning point for her.

First up is Les Mis, Hooper's first outing since his Oscar-winning spree. 
Seyfried had to fight hard for the plum role of Cosette, but she was determined 
to bag it. So she did.

'I had three weeks after Lovelace before I started on Les Mis, but I couldn't 
get myself out of Lovelace until I turned up on set'
 Amanda Seyfried with Eddie Redmayne in Les Misérables. Photograph: Allstar 
"Thank God for Les Misérables, and Lovelace really, to show two opposite ends 
of the spectrum in such a short amount of time," she says. "Usually the 
industry takes note of that, and you're always so desperate for the industry to 
take note of you, especially when you're trying to prove yourself. I'm 
super-thrilled about both. There's always the possibility they might think I 
suck, but at least I'm trying. I know that I'm working hard."

A biopic of the notorious Deep Throat star Linda Lovelace will debut at this 
year'sSundance <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/sundancefilmfestival>, and that 
should tick off the indie credentials. It comes saddled with less commercial 
pressure than Les Mis, but it's a far more complex role. Delving into the porn 
star's past, it deals with the years of abuse she experienced at the hands of 
husband Chuck Traynor. "To understand someone's experience is always hard, but 
to play someone who you can't relate to at all… I'm not virginal, but nor am I 
in any way, shape or form comfortable with my sexuality to the point that Linda 
came to be. The hardest thing was understanding the struggle, the depth of her 
depression, pretending everything was OK while being beaten the shit out of 
every day. I had three weeks after the movie before I started on Les Mis, but I 
couldn't get myself out of Lovelace until I turned up on set. It was kind of a 
relief to play someone who was the complete opposite."

On the back of both Les Mis and Lovelace, it seems Seyfried's set for success, 
at the box office, with critics, or maybe even with both. But as well she 
knows, nothing in Hollywood is guaranteed. She starred in Jennifer's Body, for 
example, the disappointing follow-up toDiablo Cody 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/diablo-cody>'s Juno, and in Dear John, a film 
based on Nicholas Sparks's book which never quite hit the heights of his 
earlier The Notebook. The critics didn't much care for Red Riding Hood, either.

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2013/jan/11/les-miserables-video-review?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>

"We do movies all the time," she says, "At first you get a cool movie like 
Mamma Mia or Mean Girls, and that just blows people away. They just happen to 
be hits, but then you go through a series of box office disappointments and you 
realise the experience you had making the film is completely separate to the 
experience you have when it comes out. You can't control it. It's always a 
bummer when people don't appreciate it, or accept it, or it doesn't even 
resonate, but it's a separate thing. When you know something's going to be huge 
when it's in the bag, like Les Mis… well, I've never had that before."

Seyfried's "moment" is within her grasp, and while other aspects of her life 
may have to go on hold as she grabs it, that's exactly how she wants it. "I 
have come into this confidence as an actor, I know I can act – sometimes better 
than others – and I definitely don't have that confidence anywhere else yet…" 
She expands on what she means: "Motherhood… That would be good... There's a lot 
of stuff that comes with this job that I can't tolerate, but it's worth it. 
Anybody's personal life is shitty at times and good at others, but I get to 
work with Hugh Jackman and walk on sets where you get to dress like a princess. 
I mean, come on, my life is great!"

• This article was amended on 12 January 2013. The web headline incorrectly 
named the actor as Anna Seyfried.
 