
American Hustle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-hustle> and 12 
Years a Slave emerged as the two strongest contenders for the Oscars after the 
Hollywood Foreign Press Association handed out its Golden Globes on Sunday 
night.

The 1970s-set caper took three major prizes in the film section of the awards 
show. The slavery survival story won just one, but it was a best film award.

American Hustle, based on a real-life FBI sting operation against corrupt 
public officials, took two awards for acting – best actress (comedy or musical) 
for Amy Adams and best supporting actress for Jennifer Lawrence – as well as 
best film (comedy or musical). 12 Years a Slave, the critically-lauded 
adaptation of Solomon Northup's "slave narrative", took the other top prize – 
best film (drama).

In a major surprise Chiwetel Ejiofor, hot favourite for the best actor (drama) 
award for his portrayal of kidnap victim Northup, was defeated by Matthew 
McConaughey, star of Dallas Buyers Club, which tells the real-life story of Ron 
Woodroof's attempts to treat Aids with illegally smuggled medications.

Dallas Buyers Club, in fact, outdid 12 Years a Slave as the only film other 
than American Hustle to take more than one award, after Jared Leto carried off 
the best supporting actor gong.

In an indication of how many strong contenders there are in this years' awards 
season, the remaining awards were spread evenly around other titles.

Cate Blanchett won best actress (drama) for portraying a neurotic socialite 
forced to relocate to San Francisco in Woody Allen's Blue Jasmine.

Leonardo DiCaprio was named best actor (comedy or musical) for his depiction 
of disgraced broker Jordan Belfort in the Martin Scorsese-directed The Wolf of 
Wall Street.

Gravity won the best director award for Alfonso Cuarón, seeing off 12 Years a 
Slave'sSteve McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-mcqueen> and 
American Hustle's David O Russell in the process.

And although he was not up for the directing award for Her, Spike Jonze won 
best screenplay for his oddball study of a man who falls in love with his 
computer operating system.

The Golden Globes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes> were hosted 
for the second year in a row by sharp-tongued comics Tina Fey and Amy Poehler, 
and have long been considered the ramshackle opening shot of the awards season.

With a voting base made up of less than 100 critics working for non-US media 
outfits, and a seeming arbitrary division in some categories between "drama" 
and "musical or comedy", the Globes have often thrown up eccentric results and 
entertaining sideshows.

This year was no exception. Fey and Poehler came out with some exceptional 
one-liners, with Fey suggesting the 70s-set American Hustle was originally 
called "Explosion at the Wig Factory", while Poehler theorised that the Cecil B 
DeMille award – given last year to Scorsese and this year to Woody Allen – was 
for "tiniest man with the biggest glasses".

However, there was no reward for a string of heavyweight contenders. Despite 
multiple nominations, neither Nebraska nor Captain Phillips registered any 
wins; British hopes Philomena and Rush both ended the night disappointed too, 
with the only UK winner being Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom, for the U2 and 
Danger Mouse song Ordinary Love.

In the TV half of the show, the big awards went to Breaking Bad and its star 
Bryan Cranston (the latter having been nominated for the past three years 
without a win), and the little heralded comedy show Brooklyn Nine-Nine, which 
won best series (musical or comedy) and best actor in a TV series (musical or 
comedy) for Andy Samberg.

The Liberace biopic Behind the Candelabra took two awards here, qualifying as 
a TV show though being released as a feature film in other countries. It has 
been nominated for five Bafta film awards.

The sole British winner in the TV section was Jacqueline Bisset, named best 
supporting actress for her role in the Stephen Poliakoff-directed Dancing on 
the Edge, about a 1930s jazz band. She also provided thehighlight in 
unfortunate winners' speeches <http://youtu.be/OmgFUhhibvI> as, appearing 
somewhat overcome by the experience, she delivered a rambling address to the 
audience, calling out to Ejiofor at one point, yelling "Shit!" at another, and 
talking over the orchestra's attempt to cut her off.

However, 12 Years a Slave remains the favourite to take the best picture 
Oscar, according to bookmakersPaddy Power 
<http://www.paddypower.com/bet/novelty-betting/hollywood/oscars>. They have the 
film odds-on at 1/4, with Hustle and Gravity a long way second at 5/1. And 
despite his failure to beat McConaughey, Ejiofor is still odds-on favourite for 
best actor, at 4/7.
 