
American Apparel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> has 
become so synonymous with controversy that it is easy to forget why anyone 
cared about it in the first place. But when the US chain first brought its 
lurid leggings and spandex crop tops to Britain, it broke new ground on the 
high street.

In the noughties, American Apparel’s offering was precise and unique. It took 
the cheap, sporty basics that were included as little more than an afterthought 
at its competitors and made them sexy and covetable. Its leggings were not just 
leggings, they were high-shine “disco pants” more suited to dance floors than 
yoga mats. Its crop tops and cutout leotards were edgy and highly revealing – 
perfect for its key customers, twentysomething club kids.

And by offering simple pieces in a multitude of fits and colours, it also 
catered for a slightly more grownup crowd, becoming the place your most 
fashionable friend bought her best-fitting T-shirt.

Much of the appeal lay in its branding. You knew, as soon as you stepped into 
an American Apparel shop, that it was cooler than you were: stores were 
intimidating spaces staffed by beautiful young things and soundtracked by 
booming music. Its advertising and in-store imagery was designed to unsettle 
too, presenting a gritty, lo-fi sexuality – all unretouched models of varying 
body sizes with visible nipples and pubic hair – that had more in common with 
the aesthetic of internet porn than the glossy imagery of the rest of the high 
street.

It was this edginess that brought American Apparel down when news of sexual 
harassment suits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/mar/09/american-apparel-dov-charney-harassment>
 against its founder, Dov Charney, made the company seem creepy, rather than 
arty and subversive. But while American Apparel’s branding feels out of date – 
a hangover from the days when “hipster misogynists” were more readily accepted 
by the media – its fashion legacy has been more successful.

So many of the attributes that were once unique to American Apparel – unisex 
clothes, ethical production, athletics-influenced designs and brilliant basics 
– remain important trends in fashion today.

But now that everybody else is offering these too, all that differentiates 
American Apparel is its tarnished reputation.
 