
American Apparel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> has 
appointed Paula Schneider as its first female chief executive after the 
clothing firm’s controversial founder, Dov Charney, was ousted over allegations 
of sexual misconduct. Charney was put under suspension in June, but still 
served as a consultant to the company, which became famous for its Made in 
America T-shirts and Y-fronts but was also accused of using adverts that verged 
on being pornographic.

The company said it had terminated his position “for cause” after an internal 
investigation.

Schneider, who officially takes over in January, has previously served as a 
senior executive at retail and clothing companies including Warnaco, Gores 
Group and BCBG Max Azria.

Shares in American Apparel rose 5 cents, or by 8.6%, to 63 cents in 
after-hours trading on the back of the announcement. The stock closed up 3 
cents at 58 cents on Tuesday, down 53% this year.

The company has operated under two interim CEOs since Charney was removed, 
most recently Scott Brubaker, who will continue in the role for the rest of the 
year.

Canadian-born Charney founded the company in 1998 with the help of a loan from 
his father, and piloted it to success under a “made in America” ethos.

However, it was damaged by a series of lawsuits alleging that Charney had 
inappropriate sexual conduct with female employees, and shares fell until the 
board moved against Charney, who has said that the sexual relationships he had 
with workers were consensual. The company said a special committee of its board 
decided that “it would not be appropriate for Mr Charney to be reinstated as 
CEO or an officer or employee” based on the results of an internal 
investigation.

At the same time as the harassment claims surfaced, the brand’s appeal began 
to fade as changing fashion trends and the recession caused sales to plummet.

American Apparel manufactures clothes and sells them in 245 of its own retail 
stores in 20 countries and has about 10,000 employees.

Charney launched a campaign earlier this year to get his job back and said he 
would seek severance pay of up to $25m (£15m) if he was unsuccessful.
 