
What do you do if you manage a company that has just ousted its founder 
following a string of sexual harassment allegations? The answer is to ban 
workplace romances – at least according to the fashion chainAmerican Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel>.

The retailer has barred managers from relationships with “subordinates”, while 
any romantic entanglement between staff “where one person may have perceived or 
actual influence over the other’s terms of employment must be disclosed by the 
participants to the Human Resources Department”, according to the group’s new 
code of conduct. “A ‘romantic relationship’ includes both casual dating and 
committed relationships,” the rule book adds.

The seemingly draconian move follows the departure of the fashion group’s 
founder, Dov Charney, who was sacked as chief executive last month for alleged 
misconduct. The board had suspended him six months earlier following claims he 
sexually harassed colleagues and improperly bought travel for family members 
with company funds. Charney maintains the allegations against him are 
“baseless”.

The image of the retailer, which became famous for its Made in America 
T-shirts and Y-fronts but was also accused of using adverts that verged on the 
pornographic, had beendamaged by a series of lawsuits alleging Charney had 
inappropriate sexual contact with female employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/17/american-apparel-paula-schneider-dov-charney>
. The shares fell until the board moved against Charney, who has said the 
sexual relationships he had with staff were consensual. The company said a 
special committee of its board decided “it would not be appropriate for Mr 
Charney to be reinstated as CEO or an officer or employee” based on the results 
of an internal investigation. The board then appointed Paula Schneider as the 
group’s first female chief executive.

Under Schneider’s regime, any failure to report a relationship that no longer 
conforms to company policy is a disciplinary matter. “Employees who fail to 
report a personal and/or romantic relationship as required by this policy will 
be subject to discipline. While confidentiality cannot be guaranteed, Human 
Resources will handle such disclosures in a discreet manner,” the code states.
 