
It’s not normal for the board and shareholders of a publicly owned company to 
have to watch a video on YouTube of their chief executive dancing naked in 
front of female colleagues and wonder what to do about it.

It’s not normal for the chief executive of a public company to face repeated, 
public and sleazy allegations of sexual misconduct even if the allegations are 
denied, dismissed, settled or sent to arbitration.

And it’s not normal for a group of about 30 executives at a company to believe 
that one of them is so central to the company’s success that they immediately 
ask the board to reconsider their decision to fire him.

But when that chief executive is American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> founder Dov Charney, 
the word “normal” – by his own admission – doesn’t always apply. Charney paints 
himself as above the fray of normal humanity, an exception to the usual rules.


“I was born strange,” Charney said in an American Public Media radio interview 
in June. In the same interview, Charney confided: “My biggest weakness is me. I 
mean, lock me up already. It’s obvious. Put me in a cage, I’ll be fine. I’m my 
own worst enemy. But what can you do. I was born strange.”

“Sex is inextricably linked to fashion and apparel,” said Charney in the 
interview. “And it has been and always will be. And our clothing is connected 
to our sexual expression.”

American Apparel’s board finally got sick and tired of strange and weird and 
kicked Charney out of the company he started.


Charney had been suspended by the board in June for “alleged misconduct and 
violations of company policy”; a special board committee oversaw an 
investigation by FTI Consulting into the allegations against him.


Based on this investigation, the special committee decided “it would not be 
appropriate” for Charney to be reinstated as chief executive.


Charney had been retained as a consultant to American Apparel while under 
suspension as chief executive, but this arrangement has now been terminated. 
Still, Charney and other investors in American Apparel who have been his allies 
in the past are still major shareholders in the company, so it is unlikely the 
troubled fashion retailer has seen the last of the controversial Montreal-born 
entrepreneur.


But, for now at least, Charney is out and American Apparel is moving on. 


The company has appointed respected fashion-industry veteran Paula Schneider 
as chief executive starting on 5 January. It hopes that after the unsavory 
headlines attracted by Charney, Schneider can bring stability and maturity to 
the edgy retailer famous for advertising that pushes the limits of acceptable 
sexuality.


“This company needs a permanent CEO who can bring stability and strong 
leadership in this time of transition, and we believe Ms. Schneider fits the 
bill perfectly,” said David Danziger, co-chairman of the board.


Schneider will need all her storied skills to turn around American Apparel. 
Under the leadership of Charney, its stock price, as high as $15 seven years 
ago, has been bumping along the basement of the stock market at well under a 
dollar. The company has posted roughly $300m in net losses since 2010, 
according to Bloomberg.


Schneider’s sober business credentials contrast with Charney’s self-styled 
sleaziness and edginess.


The allegations against Charney have included claims that he allowed an 
American Apparel staff member to post nude photographs on the internet of a 
former female employee who had taken legal action against him and that he 
misused company funds.


In his CNBC interview Charney was asked if he saw himself as a “Steve Jobs 
meets Hugh Hefner” kind of chief executive, even though he later played down 
his comparison to Jobs.


“That wouldn’t be for me to say, but I respect both of those individuals as 
having altered American consciousness …


“I think Hugh Hefner did a lot of great things for America. He took on a lot 
of great issues … and some of his work I think is a very important part of our 
culture today … I like what he did.”


Before Charney put American Apparel on the stock market, he was asked by TV 
interviewer Charlie Rose about going public – a move that would require 
accountability to a wide number of people. His answers were revealing.

“I wanna do it on my own terms,” said Charney. “I don’t want to 
institutionalize the company … I don’t mind keeping very accurate and very 
credible books and records … I want investors to believe in the company; I’m 
not trying to fool around with that.


“But I also don’t want to be told what to do, or how our ad campaign should be 
or what our political positioning should be – at all.”

There’s a limit to this kind of free-market don’t-tell-me-what-to-do view. 
Companies aren’t just about their chief executives. They’re also about their 
workers, their ethics and their contribution to society. Silicon Valley, for 
one, is full of such iconoclasts, who are more than happy to take the immense 
wealth that going public brings them – but then often ignore the demands and 
rights of the investors who now own their companies and the regulators who try 
to keep them honest.


These types often care little for what society deems normal.

So, the sleaze apart, Charney may just be the latest chief executive of a 
once-private business that has struggled with the grown-up responsibilities of 
running a public company with shareholders and regulators to keep happy.


Most of them, though, manage to keep it in their trousers, at least in public. 
And perhaps they will again.

 