
As bosses go, Dov Charney, the founder of US fashion brand American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel>, had an unusual 
attitude to suitable office attire and acceptable executive behaviour. He once 
hosted a meeting wearing nothing but a single sock – not on his foot – and he 
has been cited in numerous sexual harassment lawsuits brought by former 
employees.

On Thursday, however, after 25 years steering the firm famous for its Made in 
America T-shirts and Y-fronts, he was heading for the exit as his fellow 
directors fired him as chairman and declared an intention to oust him as chief 
executive after repeated allegations of misconduct against him.

Charney has made no secret of his louche tastes. The 45-year-old, who has 
described himself as "a dirty guy", strolled his factory floor wearing only his 
underpants and has been accused of using adverts that verge on pornography – 
including one featuring himself and two women captioned: "in bed with the 
boss". There have been allegations of homophobic remarks. One lawsuit claimed 
he had called one employee a "wannabe Jew" and then tried to strangle him. It 
was notoriously alleged that he had had oral sex with an employee while 
conducting an interview with a journalist.

On Wednesday night, the company ousted its maverick boss 
<http://investors.americanapparel.net/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=855505> and 
made it clear the decision "was not the result of any problems with the 
company's operations". Instead it said the decision to axe Charney "grew out of 
an ongoing investigation into alleged misconduct."

Allan Mayer, who has been on the board since 2007 and takes over as 
co-chairman, said: "We take no joy in this, but the board felt it was the right 
thing to do. Dov Charney created American Apparel, but the company has grown 
much larger than any one individual and we are confident that its greatest days 
are still ahead."

Charney built the American Apparel label into one of the world's most admired 
fashion brands. He won plaudits for his "Made in America" policy, which shunned 
the sweatshops of Asia to support US manufacturing, paying double the minimum 
wage to his mainly immigrant workforce, providing health insurance and free 
international telephone calls. Charney once boasted that he had the best paid 
clothing workers in the world.

The business still operates from a huge factory in downtown Los Angeles, and 
employs 10,000 staff, but its fortunes have declined as its founder's racy 
lifestyle has caused more and more problems, even though Charney has publicly 
dismissed the harassment claims made against him as "sexual shame tactics".

In 2011, Irene Morales accused Charney of "extreme psychological abuse and 
torment" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/mar/09/american-apparel-dov-charney-harassment>
from when she started working as a shop assistant aged 17 in 2007, although a 
judge later dismissed her $260m claim after it emerged she had sent her former 
boss explicit pictures and messages.

Charney, who is Canadian but says he felt a draw to the dynamism of the US 
from childhood, founded American Apparel as a wholesaling business in 1991 with 
a $10,000 loan from his father. A decade later he started opening shops and the 
business now has some 250 outlets in 20 countries.

The label was a sensation in the 2000s as Charney built the brand based on 
hipster chic and an image based on the sexual mores of the 1970s. The Guardian 
named American Apparel label of the year in 2008 and the following year Charney 
was a finalist for Time magazine's 100 most influential people of the world.

But as the harassment claims against Charney mounted, the brand's appeal began 
to fade.

Changing fashion trends and the severe recession of the late 2000s made young 
shoppers less keen to pay £30 for one of Charney's plain T-shirts. Sales 
plunged and debts mounted.

In February, the company hired restructuring advisers after its debt hit $240m 
(£141m), taking it close to breaking loan agreements with its banks. 
First-quarter results announced last month showed sales falling and a loss of 
$5m. Last year it lost more than $100m. The company's share price has plunged 
from around $14 in 2008 to close last night at just $0.64, down by two thirds 
in the past year.

John Luttrell, the chief financial officer, will act as chief executive while 
American Apparel looks for a permanent replacement for Charney.

But the controversial boss may not be going quietly. A report in the Chicago 
Tribune said that Charney had been shocked by his removal, and a source told 
the paper that he intended to "fight like hell" to be reinstated.
 