
Amir Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> would have loved to 
tell the world personally what he thought about another painful evening of his 
intriguing career, because he has never been one to dodge a challenge. But he 
had to deliver a second-hand message from a nearby hospital here on Saturday 
night to reassure fans and inquiring writers he had recovered fully from a 
devastating knockout by Saul “Canelo” Álvarez a couple of hours earlier.

No amount of sympathy from well-meaning friends could wash away the pain and 
disappointment he felt after a nano-second of distraction cost him 
consciousness and left him in a dazed heap at the Mexican’s feat near the end 
of six tense rounds at the T-Mobile Arena.

Canelo Álvarez knocks out Amir Khan and eyes Gennady Golovkin fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/08/amir-khan-saul-canelo-alvarez-middleweight-title-fight-boxing>
“I’m OK everyone,” he said through the promoter, Oscar De La Hoya. “That’s 
boxing for you. Congratulations to Canelo. Much love to all the fans.”

The promoter, Oscar De La Hoya, was glowing in his praise for the loser, whom 
he has always admired, declaring he would be back to challenge for world 
titles, but not at middleweight.

“We took precautionary measures and Amir Khan went to hospital,” he said. “He 
had an evaluation and he’s OK.”

De La Hoya added: “Amir Khan is one of the bravest fighters on the planet. He 
didn’t lose anything today. He will come back. I’m telling you one thing, he 
can beat anyone at 147 [lbs] or 154. There is no shame in his performance. He 
was up on one scorecard and the other two were really close. I had it even. His 
speed and amateur experience... I didn’t expect him to be this fast. He’s a 
gifted, disciplined boxer. He got caught with one punch, which was coming at 
him lightning fast with tons of power.

“Canelo said he was really frustrated in the early rounds, and that is what 
Amir does to you. I’ve always said Amir is too brave for his own good. There 
will not be another middleweight with speed like Amir Khan’s.”

Khan had “dared to be great”, as De La Hoya said of the Bolton fighter’s 
attempt to overcome the disadvantage of coming up two weight divisions and, 
briefly, he looked as if he might defy logic, the critics and the bookmakers. 
For nearly quarter of an hour, he produced probably the best pure boxing 
performance of his 35-bout professional career since winning Olympic silver 12 
years ago.

Indeed, he boxed very much on Saturday night as he did as that brilliant, 
precocious teenager in Athens against the renowned Cuban amateur Mario 
Kindelan, circling and pecking, each quicksilver jab calculated to sting 
without retribution. Alvarez was confused and frustrated – but patient.

Khan was 23 seconds from the comfort of the bell, having protected his chin 
assiduously for nearly six rounds, but he knew in the horrible aftermath of 
defeat that he had done only half the job of holding at bay a fighter who 
probably outweighed him on the night by a stone.

Before he left for hospital, Khan said in the ring, “I’m one of the fighters 
to step in the ring with whoever. I was getting in the ring with a big guy. 
Unfortunately, I didn’t make it to the end. I’m naturally a 147-lbs fighter, 
and this challenge came and it was hard to turn down. I will probably go back 
down to that weight.”

His trainer Virgil Hunter was reluctant to give the winner much credit, 
accusing him of not giving the fans “the fight they want to see”, adding, “Amir 
set the tone.”

Amir Khan knocked out by Canelo Álvarez: WBC middleweight title – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/may/08/canelo-alvarez-v-amir-khan-wbc-middleweight-title-in-pictures>
The challenger should not be faulted for his effort – which is never less than 
total – but there was an inevitability about the ending. Álvarez had been 
swinging hard, and missing more than he landed, but there was a look in his eye 
that screamed attack. After giving up the first four rounds to an opponent who 
might have been boxing on roller skates, the champion waited for an opening, 
his long right arm rifling over Khan’s limp left and crashing on to the side of 
his jaw, which swivelled like a light bulb being removed.

As the lights went out for Khan, the cheers went up for Álvarez, a hero to so 
many poor Mexicans, at home and in the United States, where they have had to 
suffer in recent months the scorn of Donald Trump, who sweepingly branded them 
as unwelcome and untrustworthy guests. This was their moment of vindication. 
Trump had sensibly stayed away. But he knew what they thought of him.

For all that, Hunter reckoned Álvarez short-changed his public. Until the 
perfect punch landed, the champion fought the fight he was allowed to by a 
switched-on challenger.

Later, attention naturally turned to the first genuine mega-fight the sport 
has had since Floyd Mayweather Jr and Manny Pacquiao finally swapped blows last 
year. That was an anti-climax. But Álvarez taking on Gennady Golovkin – who was 
ringside – to unify their strands of the middleweight championship would almost 
certainly not disappoint, and would most likely end in one of them getting 
knocked out. That is a prospect to excite fight fans.

“Golovkin, where are you?” De La Hoya shouted from the ring apron at the 
post-fight press conference, to no reply. “Wherever you are, make sure you 
answer your phone tomorrow. If we come to an agreement, we will let everyone 
know.”

Although Álvarez called out Golovkin from the ring, his connections said 
earlier in the week he was three fights away from such a match. It will not be 
an easy fight to negotiate.

Pressed on the contradiction, De La Hoya insisted, “I’m not talking to any 
other fighter – just Triple G, correct. I have all his representatives on speed 
dial. If that’s the fight that everyone wants, if that’s the fight Canelo 
wants, I’ll get some rest and started making some early-morning phone calls.”
 