
We already knew fighters are not like the rest of us. Professional boxers 
require at minimum a rare courage to enter the prize ring, society’s only venue 
where a man can be killed but not legally murdered, for a most public 
accounting of their manhood.

But there’s bravery and there’s Amir Khan’s decision to fight Canelo Alvarez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/02/amir-khan-to-fight-canelo-alvarez-las-vegas-may>
. This is something different.

Every now and then, just when longtime ring observers believe they’ve taken 
measure of the sport’s all too familiar rhythms, the powers that be throw in a 
head-scratcher. This is one of them. Khan, once stopped inside four rounds by 
Danny Garcia at 140lbs, will be fighting eight pounds above the highest 
contracted weight of his career against an opponent who commonly rehydrates to 
175lbs on fight night.

And make no mistake: Canelo is as formidable as they come, a heavy-handed 
pressure fighter on the verge of his prime who will demand the very best of 
Khan if the Englishman intends to exit upright.

Should he win, the former two-times junior welterweight champion will become 
only the fourth Briton to capture the lineal middleweight title – after Terry 
Downes, Alan Minter and Randy Turpin – and the first in nearly four decades.

If it’s not automatically the biggest fight of the year it’s certainly the 
most fascinating. No one saw it coming. Not least because Canelo is promoted by 
Golden Boy, currently embroiled in a $300m anti-trust suit against Al Haymon, 
who advises the Bolton puncher.

Khan’s most recent outing against Chris Algieri did nothing to diminish his 
status as British boxing’s favorite whipping boy. It was a showcase fight 
designed to make him look good, ostensibly a launchpad for a September 
blockbuster with Floyd Mayweather, but Khan was unexpectedly taken into deep 
waters by Algieri and forced to settle for a points win that felt profoundly 
underwhelming. (That Mayweather subsequently chose Andre Berto over Khan inone 
of boxing’s most cynical top-flight match-ups in years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/05/floyd-mayweather-andre-berto-embarrassment-boxing>
 only added insult to injury.)

Simply taking the fight earns Khan a respect that’s proved elusive since a 
tactically inept knockout loss to Garcia and 54-second destruction at the hands 
of Breidis Prescott. Canelo isboxing’s biggest star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/23/canelo-alvarez-assumes-role-as-boxings-biggest-star-as-gennady-golovkin-looms>
, having inherited the Cinco de Mayo platform traditionally reserved for the 
sport’s top draw from the dormant Mayweather. He’s coming off acareer-best win 
over Miguel Cotto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/canelo-alvarez-takes-middleweight-title-after-epic-against-miguel-cotto>
 that earned him the WBC and lineal middleweight titles, one that generated 
nearly a million pay-per-view buys or well over double Mayweather’s last fight.

Well-schooled observers will note that fight took place at a catchweight of 
155lbs, five below the division limit. As will May’s, for which the oddsmakers 
have installed Khan as roughly a 3-1 underdog.

Even if he falls short on this mad quest, Khan will be handsomely compensated 
with no shortage of options at welterweight, among them a domestic showdown 
with Kell Brook, a rematch with Garcia and even a fight with Mayweather, the 
man Khan has twice put his career on hold for and whose retirement few regard 
as permanent.

He is 29 now, more than a decade on from his star-making turn at the Athens 
Olympics. The intense criticism he’s weathered is all but prelude. But while 
observers will continue to doubt his place among Britain’s fistic greats, let 
Tuesday’s shock announcement prove his courage beyond dispute.
 