
Holding court at his training base on the eastern shore of San Francisco Bay, 
Amir Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> covered enough topics to 
suggest that next Saturday’s WBC middleweight title fight against Saúl “Canelo” 
Álvarez in Las Vegas, by far the biggest test of his 11-year professional 
career, is not his only focus.

His continuing charity work, the plans for his young daughter’s upbringing and 
even his own personal app were all on the agenda as he spoke in the break 
between two punishing training sessions. But, most intriguingly, Khan suggested 
that never mind adhering to the old adage of taking one fight at a time, he is 
not even content with one sport.

Tyson Fury a wrecking ball close to self-destruction in Klitschko buildup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/tyson-fury-wrecking-ball-self-destruction-wladimir-klitschko>
When Conor McGregor announced his “retirement” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/20/conor-mcgregor-retirement-ufc-200>
 from Mixed Martial Arts, Khan looked on intently as he ponders a future inside 
the octagon instead of the ring. Not only has he already bought a stake in an 
MMA company, but Khan has adopted some of the sport’s training techniques as he 
anticipates a rough, physical encounter against the bigger man in the Mexican 
Álvarez.

“Can I kick hard?” he grinned. “I’ll try it out on you later and you can tell 
me. I have a stake in a company called Super Fight League, which is an MMA 
company in India and we have a lot of shows in Dubai, too. We are now moving 
over into America and putting on shows there.

“Bellator and UFC are the two main MMA companies, we’re probably third after 
those two. I’ve always been a UFC fan and I like McGregor and the way he 
promotes it. If I was to fight the champion around 147lb I would fancy my 
chances. You never know what will happen in the future – I would never say ‘no’ 
to getting into MMA. I could do it under my own banner and what a way to do it. 
My speed would be perfect, it’s hit and move.

“Just look at when McGregor beat José Aldo. The guy leant forward, over 
extended and fell short, McGregor stepped back and threw the straight right. It 
was a proper boxing move. I would not let anyone get close to me, I would take 
a step back and keep it long. I also believe that us boxers punch harder than 
MMA fighters anyway.

“I was at the last SFL show in Dubai, watching closely at the guys in my 
weight. Even though I have no experience of MMA, I could have stepped in and 
done the business. I’ve already done MMA training too. It’s good for preparing 
to fight a guy like Canelo who likes to put the pressure on. It’s all about the 
feet, the feet have to be in the right position.”

Make no mistake, Khan insists his boxing career is still far from over. 
Instead, he says victory on Saturday will usher in a new era for the sport 
which is still adapting to life without the top two pay-per-view draws, Floyd 
Mayweather Jr and Manny Pacquiao. But it will not be easy.

The modest, cubic unit buried deep inside a soulless industrial estate where 
Khan does his training feels every one of the 600 miles away from Las Vegas and 
its famous shining strip. But the 29-year-old is adamant that this isolation, 
away from friends, family, wife and child was the only way to prepare for a 
fight of such magnitude. Álvarez is the heavy favourite, both physically and 
metaphorically, as Khan has jumped two divisions to face him at a catch weight 
of 155lb at the new T-Mobile Arena.

“Look, a lot of top names in boxing have retired,” he said. “I think we are 
currently standing on the verge of a new generation for boxing. I would like to 
be seen as the leader of that and by beating Canelo, I will be the leader of 
that movement for some time.” The time for talking is almost over.
 