
Lloyd's <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloydsoflondon> of London 
insurer Amlin expects to return to profit this year after £500m of natural 
disaster losses pushed it deep into the red last year.

Insurers around the world were hit by claims of $108bn (£68bn) following an 
unprecedented run of catastrophes, includingJapan's earthquake in March 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2011/mar/11/insurers-fall-ftse-worst-week>
, in what was the second-costliest natural disaster year on record.

Amlin <https://www.theguardian.com/business/amlin>, the biggest insurer 
operating in the Lloyd's of London market, reported a loss before tax of 
£193.8m last year on Monday, compared with a profit of £259.2m in 2010. Its net 
catastrophe losses of £500.8m far exceeded the expected £170m. Shares in the 
company dropped 15.6p, or 4.4%, to 335.9p on the news.

Amlin said its major catastrophe claims were mainly the result of earthquakes, 
and for the first time it suffered record disaster losses mainly from outside 
the US. With earthquakes it is difficult to estimate initial losses so it was 
forced to revise its estimates during the year. The company has bought more 
reinsurance this year to reduce risks. In addition, ACI, the lossmaking 
European commercial insurer it bought from Belgian-Dutch bank Fortis three 
years ago, suffered several large losses in the first half of the year.

Chief executive Charles Philipps described 2011 as an "exceptionally 
challenging year" for Amlin. But with reinsurance prices rising, particularly 
for UK commercial motor insurance, he expects to return to a "good level of 
profitability" this year. Amlin was able to push through average rate increases 
of 4% at the start of the year when customers renewed their policies.

Despite the 2011 loss Amlin will pay out a dividend of 23p, unchanged from the 
previous year, in a sign of confidence in its future.

Philipps said there were no plans to sell ACI, which provides marine, 
commercial property and liability insurance. "We truly still believe this 
business is capable of generating good returns," he said. "We wouldn't get rid 
of it after all the hard work."

The division is expected to "move towards" an underwriting profit this year 
after a restructuring. This appears to be a shift from previous guidance that 
the business would break even.

Roger Taylor, who has been Amlin's chairman since its creation from the merger 
of Angerstein and Murray Lawrence in 1998, will step down as at the annual 
meeting on 17 May. He will be succeeded by Richard Davey, who has sat on the 
board since 2005. He spent the majority of his career at N M Rothschild, where 
he was head of investment banking and chairman of the executive committee. A 
financial services sector specialist, he advised Lloyd's of London during its 
crisis during the early 1990s when spiralling asbestosis claims almost brought 
the insurance market to its knees.
 