
British ministers have acted like overexcited cheerleaders for Bahrain’s 
woefully inadequate human rights reforms,Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> has said, ahead of an 
expected visit next month by Theresa May on the sidelines of the annual Gulf 
Cooperation Council summit.

Ministers ought to be confronting the awkward reality that the institutions 
set up inBahrain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> with UK support 
“are seriously flawed and widely seen as a PR exercises”, Amnesty said.

The report, based on 90 interviews with Bahraini human rights activists, said 
it is “utterly disingenuous” of the British government to pretend it is 
delivering substantial human rights reform in Bahrain.

There is controversy over the value and independence of two UK-supported human 
rights institutions. Britain also has longstanding military links with Bahrain 
and is establishing a new military base in the kingdom. The Foreign Office said 
the two institutions show the government in Manama is willing to respond to 
western pressure.

The bodies, the ombudsman of the ministry of interior and the special 
investigations unit within the public prosecution, were established in 2012 
following afierce crackdown by the Bahraini government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/08/bahrain-protests-repression-getting-worse>
 on protests the previous year.

The then foreign secretary Philip Hammond said Bahrain had been making 
significant reform, telling the House of Commons it was “a country which is 
travelling in the right direction”.

However, Amnesty said the special investigations unit has failed to take 
prompt action to protect detainees from torture, investigate their allegations 
effectively or ensure their access to medical care.

It pointed out that although it was obvious Hussain Jawad, a prominent 
Bahraini human rights activist, was at risk of torture following his arrest in 
February 2015, the ombudsman’s office “failed to carry out a prompt visit to 
check the conditions of his detention”.

Jawad later said he was blindfolded, beaten with his hands cuffed behind his 
back and threatened with sexual abuse in order to extract a confession.

Amnesty also said the ombudsman’s office delayed an investigation for two 
years into the torture allegations of Mohamed Ramadhan, an airport security 
guard sentenced to death after being convicted of involvement in a bomb attack, 
despite receiving information from his family and an international NGO.

The special investigations unit has prosecuted 93 members of the security 
forces, but only 15 low-ranking officials have been convicted, Amnesty noted. 
No senior officers or officials who oversaw the serious human rights violations 
during the 2011 uprising have faced prosecution.

Out of nearly 200 cases Amnesty has recorded since the uprising, fewer than 45 
have been referred to trial. The organisation pointed out that neither human 
rights body has gained the public’s trust, partly as a result of a perceived 
lack of independence and impartiality.

Both are viewed as being too close to the interior ministry and other 
government institutions, and having failed to keep families and victims 
adequately informed of progress in their investigations.

In the most widely known case, Nabeel Rajab is facing up to 15 years in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/sep/14/human-rights-groups-urge-countries-to-call-for-nabeel-rajabs-release>
 for free speech offences that include writing an article critical of the 
government in the New York Times.

Amnesty International UK’s head of policy and government affairs, Allan 
Hogarth, said: “It was a welcome move when Bahrain set up these two bodies back 
in 2012, but it’s utterly disingenuous of the UK government to pretend they’re 
delivering substantial human rights reform in Bahrain.

“Instead of acting as overexcited cheerleaders for Bahrain’s woefully 
inadequate reforms, UK ministers ought to be confronting the awkward reality 
that these UK-backed institutions are seriously flawed and widely seen as a PR 
tool of the Bahraini government.”

Amnesty said authorities have placed severe restrictions on the right of 
Bahrainis to participate in demonstrations and other forms of peaceful 
assembly. There is an indefinite ban on all public demonstrations in the 
capital.

The security forces regularly disperse unauthorised protests, which mostly 
occur in Shia villages when protesters demand the release of political 
prisoners, sometimes using excessive force including teargas and shotgun 
pellets, it said.
 