
It has never been easier to support Amnesty International's campaigns. From 
sending tweets to signing petitions online, or even attending public rallies, 
people can demand action in a range of ways. So why does the pioneering 
human-rights organisation want us to return to old-fashioned letter-writing for 
its Write for Rights campaign? "It still works. It's still very important," 
says Kate Allen, director ofAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> UK. "In our 50th 
year, we are showing that our original founding idea, of writing either to 
authorities that are abusing human rights or to people who are on the receiving 
end of that, can still be massively powerful.

"If you're in prison, you're not going to get tweets and emails. But you may 
well get those letters and cards. And if you're not getting them, your family 
might be getting them.

"I can't remember how many times I have been told by a prisoner of conscience 
or an organisation like Women and Men of Zimbabwe Arise that our cards and 
letters bring real hope. They are a link to the outside world and give them 
knowledge that they're not struggling on their own."

Amnesty International has chosen 10 cases for its Write for Rights campaign, 
each championed by high-profile Amnesty supporters such as Ian Hislop and 
Saffron Burrows. It hopes that sending letters to those who can stop abuses 
will make a difference.

Here we profile four cases in the Write for Rights campaign, along with the 
names and addresses of the people you need to write to.

Fatima Hussein Badi, 48, housewife, Yemen 

Convicted after an unfair trial, Fatima was sentenced to death in 2001 for the 
murder of her husband, Hamoud Ali al-Jalal.

After the murder was committed, police reportedly questioned her for more than 
five hours during the night, without a lawyer present. They threatened to rape 
her unless she confessed to the crime.

To save her from being raped, her brother Abdullah decided to say that he had 
murdered Hamoud. He was executed in 2005.

According to Amnesty, Fatima had no legal representation for many of her trial 
hearings and was prevented from speaking in court. She has now been imprisoned 
for more than 10 years and is living under threat of imminent execution. 
Amnesty is calling on the vice-president ofYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> to commute Fatima's death sentence.

The Olympic silver-medal-winning cyclist Emma Pooley is also supporting her 
cause. "Over the past 50 years we have found that such campaigns can have a 
very powerful effect on presidents and generals when they realise that the 
world is watching them. And it's much harder to let an abuse continue when you 
know the eyes of the world are on you," she says.

Write to: Abd al-Rab Mansur al-Hadi, Vice-president, Office of the President, 
Sana'a, Republic of Yemen

Ines Fernandez Ortega, 34, former farmer, Mexico and Valentina Rosendo Cantu, 
26, trainee nurse Mexico

After being raped by Mexican soldiers in separate attacks in 2002, these 
indigenous women bravely reported their ordeals. However their cases were 
handled by military courts, which have a poor record of tackling abuse of 
civilians by soldiers. In August 2010, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights 
ordered a full investigation, adding that the two women should be protected and 
given compensation.

A year on and their cases have moved to the civilian courts, and there is hope 
that the soldiers who raped them will be brought to justice. Amnesty is asking 
people to write to the president ofMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> to urge him to implement the 
Inter-American court recommendations in full. Saffron Burrows, the actress and 
former model, is also championing Inés and Valentina's cause. "The courage of 
these two women needs to be vindicated by international support, so that the 
message of solidarity can embolden them, and ensure a degree of safety."

Write to: Lic Felipe de Jesús Calderón Hinojosa, President of the Republic, 
Residencia Oficial de Los Pinos, Col. San Miguel Chapultepec, Mexico DF, CP 
11850



Jabbar Savalan, 20, former history student, Azerbaijan

On 4 February 2011, Jabbar Savalan posted messages on Facebook encouraging 
protests against the Azerbaijani government. The next evening, the 20-year-old 
was arrested on his way home from a meeting of an opposition political party.

Jabbar was taken to a police station where he was searched. Police claim they 
found marijuana in his pocket but he says the police planted it on him.

In May he was convicted on drugs charges and jailed for two-and-a-half years. 
Amnesty is urging people to write letters calling for Jabbar's release. Ian 
Hislop, editor ofPrivate Eye, is also supporting Jabbar's cause. "Amnesty 
believes the charges were made up," he comments. "This is not the first time 
that drugs have been 'found' on people who criticise the Azerbaijani 
government. We believe the real reason for jailing Jabbar was to punish him for 
using his right to freedom of expression."

Write to: President Ilham Aliyev, Office of the President of the Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> Republic, 19 Istiglaliyyat 
Street, Baku AZ1066, Azerbaijan

Manolis Kypreos, 43, former journalist, Greece


Crowds of people gathered in Athens on 15 June this year to protest against 
government spending cuts. Reporting on the demonstrations, Manolis got caught 
up in the unrest. He claims he showed police his press accreditation, but was 
met with a string of verbal abuse and ordered to stop taking photographs. Then 
a policeman threw a stun grenade at him. Manolis's hearing was permanently 
damaged.

Amnesty is asking people to write letters to the Greek authorities to ensure 
that future policing of demonstrations complies with international standards. 
Carl Barat, the singer and guitarist, is also supporting Manolis's cause. He 
said: "I'm deaf in one ear myself. Manolis is deaf now because he was on the 
streets ofGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>. Journalists make 
themselves vulnerable so that key events in our world do not go unreported. If 
writing a letter can seek some recourse for what Manolis has lost documenting 
the riots, then he is worthy of that."

Write to: Christos Papoutsis, Minister of Citizens' Protection, Ministry of 
Citizens' Protection, 4 P Kanellopoulou Street, 10177 Athens, Greece
 