
In the spring of 1961 an English lawyer was sitting on the London Underground 
reading a newspaper report about two Portuguese students sentenced to seven 
years by their authoritarian regime for drinking "a toast to liberty".

As a result, on 28 May 1961, David Astor's Observer published an article by 
Peter Benenson entitled "The Forgotten Prisoners" which became part of an 
"Appeal For Amnesty".Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> was born.

What began as an individual cri de coeur became an international movement 
working to protect anyone imprisoned for the expression of dissenting opinion. 
Eventually, Amnesty International would fight for victims of torture, raise 
public money for the wretched of the Earth through successive Secret 
Policeman's Balls, and challenge the kind of state crimes associated with the 
Cold War.

Today, Amnesty champions women, children and oppressed minorities, fights 
torture, campaigns against the death penalty, defends prisoners of conscience 
and the rights of refugees, and calls oppressive regimes to account. Its 
inspiring vision is of a world in which every person enjoys the freedoms of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Amnesty began with a letter to the Observer in the age of ink-on-paper, but 
the role it has to play is every bit as critical in the digital age. While much 
of the UK was tweeting about the superinjunctions of Ryan Giggs, 
Amnesty-inspired tweets about Eynulla Fatullayev, editor of theAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> Daily newspaper, went viral 
around the world.

Yesterday Fatullayev was given a special Amnesty award for his quiet heroism. 
Fatullayev has been beaten up, intimidated with death threats, and 
finallythrown in jail. He was dramatically freed last week, a release he 
attributed to Amnesty.

Amnesty's history reminds us that the battle for free speech must be fought 
and won anew in every successive generation. After 50 years of service its 
power and its relevance are undimmed.

To celebrate Amnesty International's 50th anniversary, the Guardian and the 
Observer have started a newonline series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/urgentaction>. Every month we will publish news of 
an 'urgent action'; that is a current case of human rights abuse that Amnesty 
would like to draw wider attention to

• This article was amended on 30 May 2011. It originally referred, in its 
headline and concluding sentence, to Amnesty's "60 years of service". This has 
now been corrected
 