
THAILAND 

BENJAMIN ZAWACKI - Asia researcher (Thailand and Myanmar), 35

Benjamin Zawacki started his job as Amnesty's Asia researcher as saffron-robed 
monks were being shot on the streets of Rangoon in September 2007. Amnesty has 
been banned from operating in Burma by the ruling military junta since 2003, so 
Zawacki did what he could from his base in Bangkok – liaising with his 
in-country contacts, giving press statements and trying to contain his 
frustration that he couldn't do more. "While Thailand has serious freedom of 
expression issues that can have a chilling effect on its citizens, it is 
generally more progressive, but Myanmar [Burma] is a human rights basket case," 
he says.

"Despite any professional distance you try to establish, it's impossible not 
to become emotionally charged when you see monks being beaten on the streets, 
or just months later witness the human devastation of cyclone Nargis, where the 
authorities displayed indifference to the suffering of their own people."

A Pennsylvania native and law graduate, Zawacki spent years working in Asia 
and Africa before starting his current job. The role requires him to conduct 
independent field research and write reports into human rights abuses and 
concerns within Thailand and Burma. Although his legal and academic background 
and field experience prepared him for the intellectual rigours of the post, he 
says his main weakness as an expat researcher is understanding the enormously 
complex cultural, social and political dynamics of the countries he is 
operating in. Last year violence erupted on his doorstep when Thai troops 
battled anti-government "red shirt" protesters on the streets of Bangkok. 
Despite his years in the job, Zawacki was still shocked by how quickly the 
demonstrations turned ugly.

"The experience of seeing violence in the streets of Bangkok was startling," 
he says. "The demonstrations last year paralysed and polarised the entire 
country. It became a very difficult environment for us to operate in."

With propaganda from both sides creating an information smokescreen, his 
biggest challenge was trying to determine what was and wasn't credible 
information. "Just because there is violence doesn't mean there are human 
rights violations taking place," he says. "At the time we were under enormous 
pressure from all sides." Eventually Zawacki concluded that the government was 
using lethal force unlawfully, pitting Amnesty directly against the authorities.

"Unlike many of my colleagues around the world, I've never felt my own 
personal safety is at risk," he says. "But the pressure to get things right, to 
make the correct analysis is constant. At the same time I would never dream of 
doing any other job. I'm doing what I've always wanted to do."AK

MEXICO
 Alberto Aragon: ‘Some 22,000 are kidnapped every year’ 
ALBERTO ARAGON - Executive director, Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> Mexico, 26

"Mexico is a key country for Amnesty International, not just because of its 
strategic position but because of the widespread abuse of human rights there," 
says Alberto Aragón, head of the 3,000-strong Amnesty Mexico section, where he 
has worked for nine years. "It has become even more important since the army 
adopted a policing role in the war against the drug cartels in 2006."

Aragón catalogues every type of abuse, from illegal detention to torture and 
murder, but says what makes matters worse is that the soldiers are not subject 
to civil justice, and this has created a climate of impunity.

"There can't be a successful strategy for tackling organised crime without 
also tackling the judicial system," says Aragón. "But this impunity derives 
from the current strategy. When the president put the army on the streets he 
should have introduced measures to make them accountable. The increased levels 
of human rights abuses are a result of this."

The army's human rights record is no better in the semi-independent Chiapas 
region in the south, he continues, where most of the population is indigenous 
and many are denied the most basic rights, such as access to an interpreter 
during interrogation.

Amnesty is also involved in highlighting the infamous "femicides" in Ciudad 
Juárez where hundreds and possibly thousands of women have been murdered in the 
past 15 years. "It isn't just happening in Ciudad Juárez," says Aragón. "It is 
happening in other states in Mexico where the number of women murdered is 
scandalous. The state's response has been extremely weak. Here again we face a 
climate of impunity where the authorities do little to find and prosecute the 
perpetrators."

Attempted emigration across the border to the United States also raises human 
rights issues, and is, Aragón says, a key issue for Amnesty. "But not just 
emigration from Mexico to the US," he says. "There are unimaginable levels of 
violence committed against immigrants from elsewhere in central and south 
America in transit across Mexico to the US. Some 22,000 immigrants are 
kidnapped every year and held to ransom as a large number of them already have 
relatives in the US. This is an organised industry where as well as cash 
ransoms sometimes they demand the release of a criminal in return for the life 
of an immigrant."

Aragón admits that rights workers are continually at risk of arbitrary 
detention or even assassination but says the work of Amnesty is crucial if 
there is to be any respect for human rights in his country.SB

NORTH AFRICA
 Samira Bouslama: ‘People are scared to talk’ 
SAMIRA BOUSLAMA - Campaigner for Libya, Algeria and Morocco, 45

Samira Bouslama's eyes were opened to the "dark part" of Tunisia while 
exploring the slums in her home town of Hammamet. She was a teenager, making a 
documentary for an amateur film club, and the experience motivated her to make 
a career fighting for human rights. "Was I taking a risk? I didn't think about 
it," she says. "Living in Tunisia was a permanent struggle for your basic human 
rights. You had to perform acrobatics just to survive."

As a campaigner for Amnesty, she is currently working on an Algerian case, "a 
man called Malik Medjnoun who was accused of the murder of a famous singer and 
arrested in 1999. He was tortured, kept in detention without access to his 
family and lawyer, and he has never been tried." She met Medjnoun's family on a 
recent trip to Algeria. "It's amazing when they thank Amnesty. They told me, 
'The letters are keeping our family hoping, and keeping our brother in jail 
hoping.'"

Bouslama is also involved with Libya but the Gaddafi regime has prohibited 
Amnesty from visiting the country. "People are scared to talk by phone and send 
pictures, but we need evidence, otherwise we won't be believed. If Amnesty is 
still respected, it is because of its corroboration of information."

She is keen to return to her country and see how much has changed. "Tunisia is 
an example that gives us hope," she says. Her colleagues in the Netherlands 
received a recent note from its ministry of justice, an unheard-of occurrence. 
"I said: 'Oh my God! They answered Amnesty!' It's amazing!"GKR

UNITED STATES
 Laura Moye: ‘Four US states have ended the death penalty since 2004’. 
Photograph: Paul Abell/AP 
LAURA MOYE - Death penalty abolition campaign director, USA, 35

The daughter of former missionaries, Laura Moye was raised "to speak up for 
social justice", and during high school campaigned and performed in plays about 
human rights. But it was at university, hearing relatives of death row 
prisoners speak at an Amnesty conference, that her career path was determined. 
"I was totally blown away by the experience," she says. "I had some notion that 
the United States wasn't perfect but I wasn't aware of the extent to which the 
criminal justice system here is riddled with injustice."

Moye has since dedicated the past 13 years to campaigning against capital 
punishment for Amnesty, posted first in America's southern states and since 
2009 as death penalty abolition campaign director nationwide. She raises 
awareness through public speaking, media work and preparing reports, lobbying 
legislators and writing letters on behalf of death row prisoners.

Moye laments the failure of US administrations – even President Obama's – to 
take a lead on the issue. "The government will always say 'this is a state 
issue, it's not our responsibility'." But revelations that 139 prisoners since 
1973 have been exonerated on all charges and freed from death row have fuelled 
the abolition debate. "They've shaken people's confidence in the US criminal 
justice system. Four states have ended the death penalty since 2004, and death 
sentences are on the downturn."

She's proudest of Amnesty's work on behalf of Troy Davis, an African American 
man sent to death row in 1991 who has had three stays of execution as Amnesty 
continues to help unravel the case against him.

Moye acknowledges that it can be an emotionally draining job. "The pro-death 
penalty crowd use very emotionally charged language, describing murders very 
graphically, appealing to people's sense of moral outrage", because, she says, 
"they don't have a whole lot of statistics to benefit them since the death 
penalty is expensive and doesn't deter crime".

The ability to stay calm and objective is crucial. "You have to not get so 
emotionally attached that it's devastating when you suffer a loss because that 
wouldn't be sustainable for my long-term commitment to the issue."IC

AFGHANISTAN 
 Horia Mosadiq meets Afghan officials in Kandahar province to discuss prison 
conditions. Photograph: Amnesty International 
HORIA MOSADIQ - Afghanistan researcher, 36 

Horia Mosadiq was a journalism student at Kabul university in 1992, during the 
Afghan civil war. She and her friends would attend lectures between bursts of 
fierce fighting. One day they were told that a fellow student had been 
gang-raped and murdered in the basement of a faculty building. The university 
dean recommended, off the record, that the female students stay at home from 
then on.

When Mosadiq's family home was bombed, and her husband's leg had to be 
amputated after it was hit by rocket shrapnel, the family finally decided they 
could no longer stay in Afghanistan. They fled to Pakistan in 1995. Working in 
Islamabad as a journalist for the American news agency United Press 
International, Mosadiq was inspired by Amnesty International's work in her 
homeland. "The only voice I could hear was Amnesty's, calling on all parties 
not to target civilians, calling for respect for human rights. Everyone else 
was quiet. But not Amnesty."

She moved back to Afghanistan in 2002 after the American and British invasion, 
and jumped at the chance to work for Amnesty's Kabul office. She spent a year 
as an interpreter and translator, deciphering documents and helping to 
interview prisoners, before the office closed in 2003.

She continued to work for other human rights agencies, and in 2007 brought 
victims of war crimes to testify before the Afghan president. The repercussions 
were severe. Her husband's car was shot at, her eldest daughter was stabbed in 
the face and her three children faced many threats of kidnap. In 2008 she and 
her family were evacuated by Amnesty to London.

"I feel guilty that my children and husband should be the ones that pay the 
price for what I do," she says, remembering that time. "If it was only me, I 
wouldn't care."

In London, Mosadiq began to work for Amnesty again and now goes on regular 
fact-finding missions to Afghanistan. Her main focus these days is the 
reconciliation process between the government and the Taliban. "We want to make 
sure that ordinary Afghanis' rights and women's rights are not compromised. We 
are in frequent contact with women's groups in Afghanistan to make sure they 
are represented in the whole political process," she says.

Amnesty's influence saw the government allocate 320 seats to women at a Peace 
Grand Assembly held in Afghanistan last year, an increase from the 20 
originally set aside for them. She also argues for the rights of innocent 
people living in the midst of battle. "We want the law to be respected during 
military operations. Whatever happens, civilians, particularly women and 
children, should be protected, and any casualties should be reported 
correctly." HoriaMosadiq's family has been attacked because of her human rights 
work.GKR

ZIMBABWE
 Cousin Zilala: ‘You have to be able to look your children in the eye’ 
COUSIN ZILALA - Director of Amnesty International in Zimbabwe, 40 

Cousin Zilala was 14 when he decided he wanted to work in human rights. He had 
just witnessed a massacre in his home province of Mberengwa in Zimbabwe, where 
members of his tribe had been slaughtered by government soldiers. The memory of 
that day changed him for ever. "It sounds like the idealistic dreams of a child 
but that day I decided there was good and bad in this world, and I was fighting 
on the side of good," he says. "Whenever I think back to this moment, I feel 
that passion again."

Zilala went on to study human rights and law and then dedicated his adult life 
to helping to build up the human rights and civil society movement in Zimbabwe. 
In the late 1990s Amnesty's operations in Zimbabwe fell into crisis after the 
organisation was infiltrated by government intelligence agents. For the 
following seven years Amnesty was run by volunteers, often working incognito, 
until Zilala was brought in as director in 2006 to relaunch operations.

Today, despite new procedures Zilala has put in place to ensure that the 
organisation is never compromised again, their work remains limited. While the 
national office leads on more general human rights campaigns such as violence 
against women, they still often steer clear of direct campaigning on sensitive 
political issues, which are instead taken on by other Amnesty offices around 
the world. "Although we recognise this as a necessary security measure, there 
is understandably a demand from our own people that we speak up for victims of 
human rights abuses, including unlawful arrests and political detentions," he 
says. "We have to stay relevant while at the same time protecting our own 
staff, so it's a very difficult line to tread."

Working on human rights in Zimbabwe is still a dangerous and precarious 
profession. Zilala says that while in the past human rights had some standing 
in political circles, they are now considered to be part of the opposition. 
Although he believes he is personally shielded by the Amnesty brand, many human 
rights workers are still harassed or arrested without warning.

With fears that the precarious coalition government will collapse and the 
country will be pushed into early elections this year, he paints a grim picture 
of the months ahead. "Despite the promises of the government, police harassment 
continues, political violence continues and is getting worse," he says.

Zilala is also conscious that he is a family man as well as a human rights 
worker. He jokes that he has taught his children so well that they now demand 
he enforce their rights to more television and later curfews. "You have to 
weigh up the risks you take with regard to your family responsibilities," he 
says. "But at the end of the day nobody can liberate you unless you do it 
yourself. If you can't practise what you preach, then how can you look your 
children in the eye?"AK
 