
The Amy Winehouse <https://www.theguardian.com/music/amywinehouse> Foundation 
has partnered with a housing provider to open a home for women recovering from 
alcohol and drug addiction, on the fifth anniversary of the singer’s death.

Known as Amy’s Place, the recovery house, which will be in operation from 
Monday, is based in eastLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and aims 
to help recovering female addicts reintegrate into society and sustain their 
recovery. It will be made up of 12 self-contained apartments, four of which are 
two-bed, and can house up to 16 women.

Dominic Ruffy, the special project director at the Amy Winehouse Foundation, 
said it decided to set up Amy’s Place because of the general lack of 
women-specific services for addiction treatment in the UK, despite research 
showing that women have afar greater chance of relapse 
<http://www.oxfordhouse.org/userfiles/file/doc/NIDA.AddictiveBehaviors.pdf> 
without such support.

“There are about six women-only rehabs, and beyond that, there’s an even 
greater paucity of women-specific recovery housing beds,” he said. “There is 
only one other women-only recovery house in London and it’s only a four-bed 
with a six-month waiting list.”

 Ruffy, who has been in recovery himself, said while traditional rehab was 
usually made up of detoxification and intensive psychological treatment, a 
recovery house was a safe place for people to come out of treatment and be 
reintegrated into society, with support workers to help guide them.

“Picture a person who is 14 years old, has come from a broken home, hasn’t 
engaged at school, ends on a path of addiction and winds up at 25-26 years old 
going to rehab, learning how to get clean, and then leaving rehab and being 
told to get on with it. It can be as simple as not knowing how to go about 
getting your benefits or engaging in college.

“Our experience shows if you give people an extended period of time 
post-traditional rehabilitation treatment, you will improve the percentage of 
people who stay clean [in the] long term. We have a saying in recovery that the 
drink and drugs aren’t our problem, it’s living life clean and sober.”

Residents at Amy’s Place will be supported using a “co-production model”, 
which gives them shared control over the services that aid their recovery. To 
come up with the programme, the foundation consulted several women at the 
women-only rehab centreHope House in south London 
<http://www.actiononaddiction.org.uk/treatment/hope-house.aspx>, who described 
what their perfect recovery house would look like in terms of activities, 
workshops, personal development pathways and length of stay. Together, they 
created a three-month programme for new residents of Amy’s Place, which 
includes holistic activities such as yoga, relapse prevention groups, and 
potential skills and employability based workshops.

Laura, 35, a former heroin addict and mother of three, is planning to move to 
the east London centre after an upcoming stint in rehab. She told the Guardian: 
“I think it’s really important to have a place like this when you’re in 
recovery. It’s a new experience to come off drugs. Some people suffer from 
anxiety, some people suffer from other stuff, and it’s reassuring to have some 
support and help with finding a home and getting a job, getting back into 
normal routine life, which you didn’t have before as a drug addict. You have to 
learn it all as new.”


Laura said an all-women’s home would give her time to concentrate on herself, 
adding: “There are no men around, no distractions to help you run away.

“My aim is to be drug-free and to get back into life, and deal with my 
underlying issues that made me want to use drugs in the first place. I really 
want to leave this chapter of my life behind and start a new future with my 
kids and husband-to-be.”

Ruffy said it was important to have women-only recovery houses because “women 
tend to come into recovery with a host of complex issues, whether that’s 
physical, mental or psychological abuse”.

He said the foundation’s consultation with women in rehab showed that they all 
preferred a women-only house because “they wanted to ensure they were either 
safe and away from ex-partners, or safe from their issues around co-dependency, 
around men … It was evident there was a clear need and the women would feel 
more secure in an environment [where] they knew they weren’t going to be 
troubled by aspects from their past.”

Amy Winehouse died aged 27 in July 2011 from accidental alcohol poisoning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/08/amy-winehouse-alcohol-poisoning-inquest>
. The foundation was set up by her family following the singer’s death, and 
works to prevent young people misusing alcohol and drugs, as well as to support 
disadvantaged young people to help them fulfil their potential. It has set up 
Amy’s Place with the help ofCentra Care and Support 
<http://www.centragroup.org.uk/inside-centra/about-us>, part of not-for-profit 
organisation Circle Housing, one of the UK’s largest providers of affordable 
housing.


Michelle Davies, the London regional director of Centra Care and Support, 
said: “We want to empower young women to remain in control of their recovery by 
providing safe and secure homes, personalised services and a vibrant community 
that will build on their strengths, experiences and preferences.”

Jane Winehouse of the Amy Winehouse Foundation said: “This project will make 
such a profound difference to so many young women, enabling them to have a safe 
environment in which to rebuild their lives and put into practice all the 
learning they have acquired through their treatment journey. Fresh starts are 
difficult to make, full of challenges, but at Amy’s Place, we will give young 
women the tools and support to help make this a reality.”
 