
Dominic Ruffy tells pupils about his first day at school: “I remember standing 
in the playground and a group of kids were talking about their summer holidays. 
I was thinking, ‘Oh my God, I’m so boring.’ I’d just spent three weeks in 
California and I went over to talk to these kids, trying to make friends, and 
out of my mouth came, ‘When I was in America I sawGhostbusters’.”

Why the Amy Winehouse film is little better than the paps who hounded her
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jul/22/why-the-amy-winehouse-film-is-little-better-than-the-paps-who-hounded-her>
There was only one problem. It was a blatant lie. “So I made up this 45-minute 
story about what I hoped and prayedGhostbusters was going to be about and, of 
course, I looked a proper idiot when it came out in Britain three months later.”

It seems an innocuous enough tale, but Ruffy now believes it should have been 
a warning sign.

“I didn’t know that that was an early expression of me not feeling comfortable 
in my own skin, of not feeling I had enough self-esteem just to be me. 
Therefore, when we were at parties and I was 13 and a cool bunch of kids were 
passing joints around, then, of course, I’m going to take it because I’m doing 
everything I can to fit in.

“I didn’t know I was going to be one of those kids who would fall in love with 
those substances and would immediately start selling from home to fund it. 
Self-esteem is the underlying issue. It affects everything. Once you get kids 
talking about how they feel about themselves, about their friends, that’s the 
key.”

At 30 Ruffy was a heroin addict. But today he is clean and the resilience 
programme director 
<http://www.amywinehousefoundation.org/resilience-programme-for-schools> of the 
Amy Winehouse Foundation <http://www.amywinehousefoundation.org/>, a charity 
set up to help prevent drug and alcohol misuse among young people.

The groundbreaking programme, which sees former addicts visit schools to share 
their experiences, was born from the painful experiences of Winehouse’s 
parents, Mitch and Janis, when they were touring rehab clinics trying to find 
the right help for their daughter.

“The consistent message they got from people in rehab was that they’d never 
had any constructive education in school about drugs and alcohol,” Ruffy said. 
“They’d had policemen in. They’d been told, ‘Don’t do this, don’t do that’, but 
nobody had ever gone in and talked to them about their feelings and emotions 
like we do.”

The programme, formed in partnership with specialist addiction charity 
Addaction <http://www.addaction.org.uk>, aims to reach 250,000 pupils within 
five years. A year into the programme, 87 volunteers have been trained and a 
further 60 are in training. All the volunteers have overcome significant 
personal issues, which Ruffy explains is the key to connecting with young 
people.

“I tell that story [about Ghostbusters]and you can hear a pin drop. We’ve had 
the known school bully break down and say, ‘I did not know that me ripping the 
mickey out of the ginger kid in the corner might lead to him using drugs when 
he was older.’ If we can help these kids overcome their emotional wellbeing 
issues, they’re less likely to do drugs when they’re older. Empathy is the big 
thing. It’s getting honest with the kids and allowing them to get honest with 
us.”

The programme – now operating in 11 regions in the UK – appears to be urgently 
needed. Government figures released last week show the number of pupils 
excluded from secondary school for drug and alcohol issues is rising. 
Meanwhile, the latestSmoking, Drinking and Drug Use 
<http://www.hscic.gov.uk/catalogue/PUB17879> survey shows that just over half 
of pupils believe they are not given enough information about drug use.

We’ve had the bully say, ‘I did not know that me ripping the mickey out of the 
ginger kid might lead to him using drugs'

Some experts believe that encouraging children to talk about drink and drugs 
at school glamorises addiction. But Ruffy says: “We’re very specific. We don’t 
go in there and talk about violence in crack houses or getting high on the 
street.”

Others question whether the programme, which is supported by a £4.3m grant 
from the Big Lottery fund, is worth the money.

However, an interim report conducted by an independent team of experts from 
Harvard University and the University of Bath, shared with theObserver, has 
found that more than 70% of pupils who were questioned about their experience 
of the programme believed they were better equipped to manage self-esteem, cope 
with peer pressure and avoid risky behaviours associated with substance use.

A similar proportion said they had greater confidence to make safer decisions 
about alcohol or drug use. It is the first time an independent study has tried 
to evaluate the impact of a drug and alcohol awareness programme in schools and 
the foundation hopes the results will attract more funding from government and 
the private sector. If so, then Amy Winehouse’s parents hope some good will 
come from their daughter’s death.“The resilience programme is the legacy that 
Amy will leave,” Ruffy said. “It is a place where young people feel safe, where 
they can open up and talk about how they feel.”
 