
By any yardstick this was a “football, bloody hell!” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZfDA4pADaWo> weekend.

Fourteen goals in two games of contrasting brilliance. The first a tactical 
masterclass, ripe for deconstruction by digital magnet board. The second, total 
and utter chaos with all the common sense of a Donald Trump husting. Both were 
glorious in their own way. The latter is destined for legend.

Despite all the twists and turns along the way, the two home sides, the most 
successful pair during the regular season, progressed to the grand final.

Western Sydney Wanderers into A-League grand final after nine goal thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/24/western-sydney-wanderers-into-a-league-grand-final-after-nine-goal-thriller>
Adelaide United were magisterial in disposing of Melbourne City. The 4-1 
scoreline did not flatter them.Western Sydney Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/western-sydney-wanderers> contrived to 
turn their passage into an epic but as only goal difference separated them and 
Brisbane Roar on the ladder it was fitting they were so difficult to prise 
apart in sudden death.

Football Federation Australia could not have planned it better. Four of the 
country’s five biggest population centres validating its finals system. Its 
showpiece will now be staged at the country’s most beautiful arena and will 
witness a first time champion.

Finals models like the A-League’s succeed because of their future focus. Each 
home and away and playoff round funnels the season closer to its climax, 
steering our collective eye towards the vanishing point. We become fixated on 
what’s next.

All competitions have to end somehow, but reliance on a league table alone 
draws out the conclusion over a much greater period of time. It provides more 
opportunity to reflect and appraise. It allows for more confident scrutiny as 
the future is easier to predict. Knockout football, of the kind witnessed this 
past fortnight, offers something unscripted, urgent and visceral.

That the main event will feature Wanderers looked improbable 23 minutes into 
their semi final. Somehow they were 3-0 down to a hat-trick of goals that all 
felt against the run of play. The second typified the opening quarter of the 
match, ricocheting off Andreu’s backside beyond Andrew Redmayne.

All Wandering eyes were drawn to Tony Popovic. He stood motionless in his 
all-black business wear like a Scorsese cast member whose character notes 
included an immunity to the sight of human suffering. His unruffled assurance 
transmitted to his team and within three minutes the recovery job was underway. 
Just 33 minutes more and they were deservedly in front.

For the second final in a row John Aloisi’s substitutions changed the game. 
Tommy Oar’s industry unsettled the Wanderers and prompted Jamie Maclaren’s 
equaliser. Something was missing on the night from the Roar though, despite 
their contribution to such a memorable encounter. Thomas Broich in particular 
was off his game and the sporadic attacks on Redmayne’s goal were 
uncharacteristically skittish.

By the end of extra time Wanderers had three times the amount of shots on 
target as Roar. One of those was a near post flick from substitute Dario 
Vidosic to clinch the most extraordinary of victories.

Adelaide United blast through to A-League final, downing Melbourne City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/22/adelaide-united-blast-through-to-a-league-final-downing-melbourne-city>
Adelaide’s performance was as sublime as Western Sydney’s was ridiculous. As 
he has for most of the season Guillermo Amor got his tactics spot on. The manic 
forward pressure of the first half suffocated City, denying the visitors any 
time on the ball. By retaining Craig Goodwin ahead of Tarek Elrich at 
left-back, Amor operated with almost two left wingers against City’s 
understrength right flank.

In the second half, when the visitors wrestled a modicum of control, waves of 
retreating Adelaide attackers formed a sea of red between Eugene Galekovic and 
City’s back four, one that even Moses may have struggled to part.

When City took three points away from Coopers Stadium in round 23 they could 
point to Osama Malik’s towering performance at the base of midfield. On Friday 
his former team simply bypassed him. Ball-carriers drove into City territory at 
pace, forcing Malik to leave his station. Ball-players shifted possession with 
a minimum of fuss, denying the stopper the chance to step out and intercept.

Aaron Mooy and Anthony Caceres did not lack for effort elsewhere in City’s 
midfield but they were always chasing, never leading.

United’s attacks were brisk and incisive. Bruce Djite excelled as the pivot 
while Marcelo Carrusca, Sergio Cirio and Bruce Kamau worked around him, 
occupying space in channels with the ubiquity and irritancy of reality cooking 
shows. With a lesser goalkeeper than Thomas Sorensen the contest could have 
been over in spirit before the interval. Djite made sure it didn’t survive much 
longer after it.

Almost as soon as Strebre Delovski blew the final whistle the pull of the 
future yanked United’s celebrations out of the present. 5,000 grand final 
tickets sold within an hour, building hope the Adelaide Oval, over three times 
the capacity of the Reds’ regular venue, may be full enough not to question the 
decision to overlook home comforts.
 