
Mark Gleeson is a living legend of African football, and probably the only man 
at the African Cup of Nations who has been photographed naked for the Serbian 
edition of Playboy. It was not full frontal, which is just as well as he's 
taller than Peter Crouch. It was just a picture of his big toe, with a palm 
tree in the background, but it was important to the editorial staff back in the 
Balkans to establish that Mark Gleeson was in fact a real person.

Why? Gleeson features in a couple of books by the former Observer columnist 
and renowned football author Simon Kuper, who wrote in particular of a wacky 
trip to Swaziland with Gleeson, who describes himself as "the anorak's anorak". 
Kuper's article was translated for Playboy in Belgrade and they wanted a number 
for Gleeson.

"They called and asked me 'Are you a real person?' I said yes, and they wanted 
photographic evidence. So that's where the big toe came into the picture."

He tells me this story during one of the highlights of any Cup of Nations, the 
biennial dinner with Gleeson. Fifteen years ago he started out on a quest to do 
what nobody has ever done, and build a record of football on this continent. 
His efforts are recognised by Fifa, for whom he is the official archivist for 
Africa, and without him nobody would know how many caps they have, how many 
goals they have scored in the African Champions League, and so on and so on. 
This sort of thing is taken for granted in Europe and elsewhere, but in Africa 
next to nothing is known. Or was, until Gleeson stepped in.

As an example, I tried to find out what I could about the first tour of 
Britain by a team from Ghana, then the Gold Coast, back in 1951. The only 
mention of that historic visit is a minute of an FA committee meeting in the 
Soho Square archives which reads "It was agreed to pay the Gold Coast AFA 17s 
6d (87p) towards the costs of their tour." In Ghana there is nothing. When a 
researcher once visited the Nigerian FA records section/library he found a 
grand total of three publications.

Much of the evening's conversation revolved around Gleeson's garage back home 
in Cape Town. It holds his drum kit and other unimaginable treasures - if you 
like that sort of thing. He has photocopied team line-ups from years and years 
of matches in the top African club competitions. "CAF [the continental 
federation] burned the rest when they moved offices in Cairo recently," says a 
horrified Gleeson. He went with his wife to copy as much as he could before CAF 
moved.

He also has the complete record - and there is plenty of it - of the 'whites 
only' FA in South Africa that was suspended from world football, and piles of 
information, which took many hours of difficult research to unearth, on the 
'blacks only' league, which was scarcely reported. He wants to compile a record 
of every game played in that league before football became 'mixed' in 1976.

He knows everything, and everyone. He tells of the Brits who played in South 
Africa years ago. "I saw George Best play at the Rand Stadium, a full house. 
Bobby Moore made plenty of visits, Johnny Haynes, Budgie Byrne. In one season, 
I think it was 1999, Budgie Byrne, his two sons and his son in law all coached 
teams in Cape Town in the SA League. He was at Cape Town Spurs, his son David 
at Santos, Mark at Hellenic, and Gavin Hunt, who married Budgie's only 
daughter, Karen, was at Seven Stars. Nine weeks in, David was sacked."

"Didn't David win a cap for South Africa," asks one of our well-informed 
dining companions. "No," says Gleeson. "He got an Under-23 cap at the age of 
35, against the US."

Did you also know that Lucas Radebe played in goal for Bophuthatswana against 
a South African amateur XI? That Eusebio's dad was Angolan? That two brothers 
currently playing international football turn out for different countries, 
Uganda and Rwanda?

And did you know this: no team in world football is compelled to send its team 
lists to Fifa for archiving. There is no record of the line-ups for senior 
international matches - just scores and the venue.

"It's scandalous," says Gleeson, who is not your normal dysfunctional football 
nerd. He is a family man with children (most unusual in nerdland) and great 
company. "Now it's even worse than it used to be. Surely Fifa should recognise 
the value of this information. What are they playing at?"

He's invited me to see his garage during the 2010 World Cup. How can I say no?
 