
When I was a schoolboy in the 1970s, I used to read Alan Watkins’s column in 
the New Statesman every week. Through him I felt I personally knew and 
understood the great figures of the age: Crosland, Jenkins, Castle, Healey, 
Foot, Whitelaw, Carr, Heath. There were hardly any political columnists back 
then, while there are dozens today. It remains the case that the only ones 
worth bothering with are those who can write. Watkins had some of the gifts of 
a novelist and he brought them into political journalism.

Alan Watkins’ own expenses scandal | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/01/alan-watkins-own-expenses-scandal>
His talent for dialogue was extraordinary. Only the greatly underrated Bruce 
Anderson and the Daily Mail sketchwriter Quentin Letts possess the ear to do 
this nowadays.

Watkins was expert at human idiosyncrasy and character. He had a gift for 
inventing phrases. He was the first to employ the term “men in suits” to 
describe a delegation sent to instruct a Conservative party leader to quit. 
This became part of the language, but was generally changed to “men in grey 
suits”. Watkins considered this adaptation inaccurate, pointing out that the 
suits in question were normally blue or pin-striped rather than grey, and stuck 
to the original.

He coined “young fogey” and “chattering classes”. Later in life he wrote about 
rugby as well as politics. His autobiography, A Short Walk Down Fleet Street, 
is a comic masterpiece and I have read it many times. The book is at its 
superlative best when dealing with the Fleet Street culture of the 1960s.

Watkins was the son of a Welsh schoolmaster, David John Watkins. His son later 
wrote a charming essay about his father, describing him as a “Carmarthenshire 
schoolmaster of reclusive habits but influence within a reclusive circle”. 
Watkins read law at Cambridge, then worked for a legal journal before getting 
his break at the Sunday Express, shortly before Harold Wilson’s 1964 general 
election victory.

Watkins’s editor at the Sunday Express was the monstrous John Junor, who told 
him that 'only poofs drink rose'

These were the final days of Lord Beaverbrook, the greatest press proprietor 
of the 20th century, who dated back to the first world war. Watkins’s book 
contains a fine description of Beaverbrook. At the heart of it, however, is a 
series of portraits of the brilliant eccentrics who frequented El Vino: Maurice 
Richardson (first television critic for the Observer); Philip Hope-Wallace 
(Guardian opera critic); John Raymond (New Statesman book reviewer); Terence 
Kilmartin (books editor of the Observer); Paul Johnson (by far the greatest 
post-war British literary/political journalist); and many others.

Watkins’s editor at the Sunday Express was the monstrous Sir John Junor, who 
carefully monitored expenses and told him that “only poofs drink rosé”. Later 
he went to work for the Spectator and then the New Statesman.

His book contains a rare history of the modern political column. Watkins 
identifies the founder as Hugh Massingham, who wrote as “Our Political 
Correspondent” for the Observer after the second world war. Massingham did not 
use a byline, let alone the kind of picture byline that is universal today. He 
did not appear on television and, says Watkins, regarded himself as a private 
person.

Watkins records that Massingham started life as a shipping clerk in Liverpool, 
then set himself up in the 1930s as a social investigator, both in Wales and 
the East End. In 1945 Watkins records that he published a novel, before setting 
down to political writing. Watkins notes with approval that he never tried to 
influence events: “He wrote about politics every week, for two decades, telling 
the truth as he saw it.”

Watkins maintains that Henry Fairlie, political commentator of the Spectator 
in the early 1960s, was Massingham’s inheritor: “Fairlie shared Massingham’s 
wit and his psychological insight into politicians. But Massingham looked at 
them as the novelist he also was; whereas Fairlie saw them more as players in a 
great historical drama. Between them they changed political journalism in this 
country. If Massingham at the Observer was the pioneer, it was Fairlie in the 
Spectator who carried the change through. In retrospect what is astonishing is 
the short time he took to impose the change.”

Fairlie, records Watkins, “was always in financial trouble and failed to turn 
up for his first examination in bankruptcy, when the registrar said that the 
‘usual consequences’ would follow”. Pursued by debtors and libel actions he 
fled to the United States, where he died a heavy drinker.

When Boris Johnson invited me to become political correspondent of the 
Spectator 14 years ago, I spent a morning going back through old copies of the 
magazine and reading Fairlie’s columns.

I learnt a great deal from this generous-hearted and brilliant writer. But in 
1964 Watkins succeeded Fairlie as political writer for the paper. Though 
Watkins was too modest to say so, it was he who perfected the modern political 
column, which had been pioneered by Fairlie and Massingham. I do not think it 
is possible to write a better column than Watkins at his best.

I met Watkins in February 1992, the day I joined the parliamentary lobby as 
the most junior member of the Evening Standard parliamentary team. Emerging 
from the lift he was the first person I saw. He stretched out a hand and asked 
my name. He showed a flattering familiarity with my work, then suggested we go 
and have a drink in the press gallery bar. I loved him ever after. I am very 
grateful that I knew Watkins, who showed how a political column ought to be 
written.
 