
Not long after the news that Micah Richards’ undistinguished season in 
Fiorentina ended with a swift return to a more familiar workplaceat Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/17/aston-villa-micah-richards-transfer-centre-half>
, it was predictable that rumours would surface about Ashley Cole’s predicament 
at Roma and a possible exit strategy. The pair of them, both England 
internationals and with Premier League winners’ medals in their collections, 
had gone to Italy last summer with optimism, enthusiasm, goodwill and not a 
little intrigue – it’s not as if English players regularly trade home comforts 
for the challenge of an overseas adventure.

It is deflating to acknowledge how their Italian trips fizzled out so soon. It 
remains a peculiarity – a foible that’s a little weird to be honest – that
England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> seems to be the one 
country that does not easily export footballers. Yes, Steven Gerrard and Frank 
Lampard – finally – are due to experience their American dream in MLS. The 
absence of an English player in his prime trying his luck at an elite European 
club, however, goes on. It is around about a decade since Real Madrid took 
David Beckham, Steve McManaman and Michael Owen to La Liga. Since then, not so 
much of substance.

England 1-3 Italy | Under-21 European Championship match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/24/england-under-21-italy-european-championship-match-report>
Does it really matter? While the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> is awash with money and 
possesses a glitzy enough reputation of its own, does it have significance 
beyond a player’s personal choice where he chooses to live and work? That 
question brings to mind the long-held opinions of a couple of World Cup-winning 
grandees.

The Brazillian Carlos Alberto Parreira, who won the World Cup in 1994 and 
coached the national team in three different decades, noted the impact 
exporting players had on the seleção. Talking in 2002, he was convinced the 
tactical discipline Brazil’s most naturally gifted magicians gained in Europe 
was key. With Ronaldo then at Internazionale, Rivaldo at Barcelona and 
Ronaldinho at Paris Saint-Germain, their experiences at club level armed them 
with qualities to help them best express their talent in international 
competition.

Four years earlier, a similar message came from France’s World Cup-winning 
coach, Aimé Jacquet. It was considered a major plus point in the 
characteristics of the squad that so many key influences played outside the 
French league. Zinedine Zidane, Didier Deschamps and Marcel Desailly were all 
in Serie A during its glory years, Bixente Lizarazu played for Bayern Munich, 
Patrick Vieira for Arsenal, Christian Karembeu for Real Madrid. The lessons 
they all absorbed and brought back to Les Bleus’ party were regarded as vital.

For both France in 1998 and Brazil in 2002, it was the mix between the 
traditional qualities and style of the national team, and the international 
nous gained by its brightest sparks, that provided the important click at those 
World Cups.

With that in mind, have a look at the current Fifa world rankings. England are 
15th. Now guess the only country in that top 15 that does not currently export 
a single international player – the clue is somewhere in this paragraph, if you 
do not get it straight away for some reason.
Graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/06/football-zip/giv-21277zpKVI0Tlq2g4/>
 Current figures show England’s players as the least well-travelled of the 
major footballing nations. 
Not that exporting players is the be-all-and end-all. As it happens, apart 
from England, the closest to a fully home-playing squad is Italy and then 
Germany,the current World Cup holders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/germany-argentina-world-cup-final-2014-match-report>
, who have the next fewest number of players at clubs outside their domestic 
league based on most recent international squads. Those figures could have been 
greater, incidentally, had the likes of Toni Kroos for Germany and Marco 
Verratti or Thiago Motta for Italy, been selected.

Generally speaking, the vast majority of highest-ranking teams contain an 
abundance of players plying their trade overseas. There is one pretty 
compelling reason for this. The resources of the Argentinian or Belgian league, 
for example, and the salaries they offer, are incomparable with those of the 
big hitters in Europe. The impulse for the best Argentinians or Belgians to 
flock to a bigger, richer league is obvious. They exported 21 and 18 players 
respectively according to their most recent squads, the overwhelming majority.

Not only do they better themselves technically, playing with and against a 
higher calibre of player than they would domestically, they also have to 
develop personally to undertake the many challenges of living, working and 
integrating successfully away from home.

Chris “Magic” Waddle, as he was known during his spell in France with 
Marseille between 1989 and 1992, passionately believes the experience of 
challenging yourself as a person and a footballer in a foreign league can be 
seminal. He says young players at Premier League clubs who are regularly sent 
out on loan should spend some time in Holland, Germany, France or wherever, 
discovering a new type of football and, quite possibly, learning a bit about 
themselves, too.

Is it a coincidence that England’s best World Cup performance since 1966 came 
in 1990, the period when it was more regular for coveted English talent to go 
abroad? From that team, as well as Waddle, Gary Lineker, Paul Gascoigne, David 
Platt and Des Walker all signed for foreign clubs. Glenn Hoddle, who did not 
make that squad, was strutting his stuff in France at the time.

Today England wakes up with a familiar feeling in the aftermath of an 
international tournament flunk – a knockout cocktail of frustration, confusion, 
disappointment and blame. Now thatEngland’s latest band of under-21s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/24/england-under-21-italy-european-championship-match-report>
 have had their proper initiation into how things are, it is time to march back 
to the drawing board, yet again, to wonder how to solve this syndrome of 
repetitive disillusionment.

The latest analysis masterminded by Greg Dyke at the Football Association 
points to quotas and a bid to increase playing time for young players by 
insisting on upping the number of home-growns in each Premier League squadfrom 
eight to 12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/23/greg-dyke-fa-overseas-player-quotas>
.

Perhaps this is barking up the wrong tree, however. Encouraging English 
players to see some action cannot be a bad thing but it is the type of action 
they see that is arguably where the real fascination lies.

It is hard to envisage how either the FA, or the clubs themselves, can be 
expected to encourage players to choose the unknown; an adventure, a risk, 
instead of the familiar, the safe, and the Premier League megabucks. It may not 
be the answer to everything anyway. It is difficult not to wonder, however, if 
England’s singularity when it comes to exporting players is connected in some 
way to the catalogue of international letdowns.
 