
It’s 5am on Monday and the sound of my alarm signals the start of another busy 
week. I like to get up early as I find it useful to take some quiet time to 
allow myself to think, reflect and plan. Before starting work I have my own 
family to support so it’s the school run and then on to the office.

Based in a children in care team, I work as an advanced case practitioner for 
the new Doncaster Children’s Services Trust, an independent organisation which 
launched in October last year, and the first of its kind in the country. It’s 
exciting to be part of this set up, looking at new and innovative ways to 
deliver social care and support services to children and young people.

Doncaster launches independent child protection company | Patrick Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/01/doncaster-child-protection-company-launched>
My role is rewarding and challenging – a mixture of managing complex cases and 
supporting less experienced staff.

The first task this morning is to write a report for a young person’s “looked 
after” review 
<http://www.doncasterchildrenstrust.co.uk/looked-after-children-reviews>. This 
young girl is currently thriving with her foster family after a successful 
transition from a children’s home. She’d had a difficult time in her early days 
in care as she struggled to come to terms with her circumstances. I’ve worked 
with her for 14 months and while the amount of paperwork I do in my job can 
sometimes be a challenge, writing this report is a pleasure. She’s now doing 
well at school and has formed a really close bond with her carers, but most 
heartening of all is the fact that she’s no longer considered to be at risk of 
harm. For the first time she’s talking positively about her own future. As I 
email the document to my manager I feel honoured to have been part of her 
journey.

Next, I check my emails, responding to what I can and adding the rest to my 
“To do” list, before spending an hour with a newly qualified social worker that 
I’m supporting. I ensure she knows what tasks to focus on this week in relation 
to her own cases.

… if old ways of delivering services aren’t fit for purpose then new one​​s 
will be found

Then I receive a call from a young person placed away from Doncaster who’s 
clearly very distressed and needs support. In social work each day is different 
and plans often change at short notice, so it’s not unusual for my diary to 
alter rapidly. The young person has very complex needs and is vulnerable, and 
during my conversation with him and staff at the unit, I find that his 
behaviours are escalating. After discussing the situation with my manager we 
agree that I should visit him straight away so I cancel my existing 
appointments, grab a sandwich and head off.

Several hours later the situation is resolved and the placement is stabilised. 
Even though the current home is providing excellent care and support, it’s not 
close to Doncaster, which can cause frustration for all those concerned. But 
looking forward, the trust has made it clear that it’s determined to break with 
the past and if old ways of delivering services aren’t fit for purpose then new 
ones will be found.

Something I’m really interested in are the conversations taking place at the 
trust about changing the provision of children’s homes in the borough. Plans 
are being developed to create smaller “pop-up” homes, in ordinary suburban 
houses, that are designed specifically to meet the needs of one or two children 
at a time. The idea is to move away from the institutional environment of 
children’s homes towards a more family orientated environment, where staffing 
and support can be tailored to meet the needs of individual children. I make a 
note in my diary to keep up to speed with the project with a view to it being a 
possible future option for my client.

Arts psychotherapy: I am helping to give vulnerable children a voice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/feb/13/arts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton>
On my way home I get a call from the office; a parent has arrived whose 
daughter is soon to be adopted and she wants to see me. She doesn’t have an 
appointment but this is obviously a very emotional time for her so I agree to 
see her. I talk her through the processes to come and the importance of her 
role in working closely with us to help prepare her daughter’slife story book 
<https://www.bemyparent.org.uk/info-for-families/your-questions/what-is-life-story-work-and-why-is-it-important,128,AR.html>
. I think our talk was of some help to her.

I arrive home later than expected, which happens more often than I’d like, but 
I know my family understand and that they’re supportive of my career.

Why did I choose to be a social worker? To be honest I think social work 
picked me and I can’t now imagine being in any other profession. I feel 
privileged to spend time with the remarkable children and young people I meet. 
Despite their experiences and the adversity they’ve faced, they have 
aspirations like all young people and I feel privileged to help them achieve 
these goals. They inspire me every day.
 