
The series looked like a whitewash but it was far from a walkover. As England 
prayed for miracles to escape ultimate Ashes ignominy, defeat in all five 
Tests, they could at least take comfort in the words of Shane Warne as the 
greatest showbiz cricketer in history prepared for one final ovation.

Entering the last day of a career spanning more than 700 Test wickets, and 
goodness knows how many text messages, Warne, energised by the prospect of a 
grand finale, revealed a magnanimity that identified him as a true champion. He 
might often have inserted the knife, but he saw no reason to twist the blade.

"A lot of people have said that England have played poor cricket this summer," 
he said. "I don't actually agree with that. They have played some excellent 
cricket at times. Our fast bowling has been excellent all summer. Throw in an 
old leggie who has had a couple of good spells and we have really suffocated 
them.

"England have fought really hard. They made 370 in Brisbane batting last, 550 
in Adelaide, they knocked us over for 240 on day one in Perth, they had us five 
wickets down for 80 in Melbourne. They have played some excellent cricket at 
times, but when the big moments have come, we have won them."

Only Paul Collingwood came in for a verbal battering. The Durham all-rounder 
failed to sledge Warne off his game on the third day, and watched from slip as 
Warne's rapid 71 carried the Test away from England. Warne told Collingwood 
throughout the series that he should return the MBE he was awarded after the 
Ashes success in 2005, even though he played in only the final Test at The Oval.

"I've told him enough times that he should think about returning it, but 
that's up to him," Warne said. "He fired me up a bit and I told him that before 
in Adelaide. We were having a bit of fun out there. He made me concentrate and 
made me more determined. That's the way that he wanted to play it and that 
suited me fine."

To realise that Warne is retiring is a jolt, a reminder of one's own 
mortality. "It's been a wonderful career," he said. "I couldn't have asked for 
it to go any better. I would like to think I've made it entertaining and I'd 
like to think I've made it pretty cool. I won't be sad to go. I might be 
reflective, but I won't be crying. My body is telling me it is time to go."
 