
Hotel California, Malaga

This old gem is just east of Malaga's town centre, beyond the bullring, in an 
avenue of once-grand villas. Playa Caleta, the main city beach, swings around 
the bay, a block in front, though modern high-rises cause you to play hide and 
seek with sea views. Behind the bottle-green facade of the Hotel California 
time-warped splendour awaits, with its marble lobby and grand staircase leading 
to 24 en suite rooms. All are different in size and outlook, some with 
balconies, while its eclectic style mixes exposed brick and downlighters with 
fireplaces, stained glass and 1960s furniture. You can have breakfast in the 
large dining room or out on the patio. The family owners, led by Modesto 
Antiñolo, are particularly charming.
• +34 9 5221 5164, hotelcalifornianet.com <http://hotelcalifornianet.com>. 
Doubles from €66 

Hotel Rio Abajo, Mojácar
 Hotel Rio Abajo 
In the last few years Mojácar has morphed into a summer party town, but peace 
awaits at this prettycasita hotel, tucked down a turning off the coast road. 
Flanked by a reed-filled lagoon and low-rise apartments, it is smack on the 
windsurfers' beach, and you can usually swim here too. The attentive owners, 
Manolo and Paloma, keep the palm-dotted garden and pool in good shape, along 
with an alternative spirit. The 19 whitewashed rooms have ceiling fans and 
plenty of paintings; ask for the family room (number 204), if you have 
children. Spectacular sunrises over the sea are included, while breakfasts and 
bar drinks are extra.
• +34 9 5047 8928, rioabajomojacar.com <http://www.rioabajomojacar.com/>. 
Doubles from €50

Hotel El Dorado, Carboneras
 Almería's fortifications. Photograph: Alamy 
Film buffs should love the kitsch Hollywood stylings of this hotel, which is 
awash with gilded statues, columns, marble and chandeliers. Dedicated to the 
1960s cinematographic heyday of Almería, the nearby provincial capital, it is 
plastered with location photos from Lawrence of Arabia, Dr Zhivago and The 
Three Musketeers, which were all filmed round here. The hotel opened when 
Carboneras was just a fishing village, despite the celebrity comings and goings 
(John Lennon once stayed in the house next door). With wonderful sea and 
headland views, a pool and large restaurant, it has 30 classically furnished 
rooms, which vary in outlook but are all spacious.
• +34 9 5045 4050, eldorado-carboneras.com 
<http://www.eldorado-carboneras.com/>. Doubles from €60 B&B

Hotel Las Palmas, Carboneras
 Playa de los Muertos. Photograph: Alamy 
This slickly designed hotel is a complete surprise on the southern end of the 
beach by the fishing harbour. Ana Vicente, the bubbly owner, signed up a 
Sevillian architect to create a 10-room family hotel, with dazzling white walls 
and floors, designer furniture and art on the walls. The restaurant-bar spills 
outside through glass doors to a wide terrace but best of all are the three 
top-floor family suites with huge decked terraces, sun-loungers and sweeping 
views. A 10-minute drive away is the dramatic, naturist beach Playa de los 
Muertos.
• +34 9 5045 4306, laspalmas-hoteles.es <http://laspalmas-hoteles.es/>. 
Doubles from €70 B&B

Hotel Doña Pakyta, San José, Cabo de Gata natural park
 Hotel Doña Pakyta 
San José is the biggest resort in the wild Cabo de Gata natural park but Doña 
Pakyta could not be closer to the sea; a short staircase leads you straight 
down to the sand. Inside, you find fresh white walls, wicker furniture and 
spacious sitting areas to contemplate fabulous views across a bay framed by 
huge windows. Be lulled to sleep by the waves in one of six rooms opening on to 
a broad terrace above the beach, though cheaper rooms in an annexe also have 
balconies and partial sea views. Disappointingly, the restaurant, with its 
blinding lighting, lacks atmosphere, but San José has plenty of other dining 
options. The hotel will organise picnic lunches, four-wheel-drive trips and 
horseriding.
• +34 9 5061 1175, hotelpakyta.es  <http://www.cortijoelsotillo.es>. Doubles 
from €65

Hotel Las Calas, Agua Amarga, Cabo de Gata natural park
 Cabo de Gata natural park Photograph: Alamy 
Agua Amarga borders barren spaghetti-western territory, but this low-key 
village packs in some cool bars, restaurants, bohemian residents and fishermen. 
Beside a headland of troglodyte caves at the southern end, this attractive 
hotel makes a perfect beachside retreat. The 10 compact rooms are cosily 
furnished with satellite TV, air conditioning and skylit bathrooms; six have 
terraces with sea views and two larger ones accommodate extra children. Come 
morning, trot out for a swim, then relax in the shade the front garden's 
pergola, before heading for the owner's seafood restaurant,Los Tarahis 
<http://www.restaurantelostarahis.com/>, just steps away.
• +34 950 138016, hotellascalas.es <http://www.hotellascalas.es>. Doubles from 
€82 B&B

Hotel Family, Agua Amarga, Cabo de Gata natural park

French couple René and Michèle Bellavoir and their son, Marc, have created 
this small hotel, set back from the beach, at Agua Amarga's tranquil southern 
end. A direct path leads straight to the water's edge, though the hotel has a 
pool and lovely garden, so you may not want to move. As its name suggests, it 
is family-friendly with two rooms big enough to accommodate children. All are 
quaintly furnished with decent shower-rooms and air conditioning, plus most 
have balconies. Generous breakfasts and delicious home-cooked dinners can be 
taken in an intimate dining room or larger restaurant.
• +34 9 5013 8014, hotelfamily.es <http://www.hotelfamily.es/>. Doubles from 
€70 B&B

Hotel Cala Chica, Las Negras, Cabo de Gata natural park
 Cala Chica 
The Cabo de Gata is going upmarket at Las Negras, an enclave of visitor 
facilities on a long sweep of dark volcanic sand backed by stark mountains. The 
26-room Cala Chica – baby sister to the spa-hotel Cala Grande that looms behind 
– has smart Spanish-contemporary style, a large pool, mountain and sea views 
and airy rooms, some with heated Jacuzzis on the terrace. It is not directly on 
the beach, but a few minutes' stroll down the main street brings you there. The 
friendly hotel staff will prepare packed lunches for escapades into the hills 
or hikes along coastal paths.
• +34 9 5038 8181, calachica.com <http://www.calachica.com/en>. Doubles from 
€72 B&B

Hostal Peña Parda, La Herradura

La Herradura is an attractive, laidback town sloping down to a 
crescent-shaped, shingle beach on theCosta Tropical 
<http://www.costatropical.net/>, just east of the more famous Nerja. Backed by 
a breezy 2km-long promenade, the calm water is perfect for swimming, while 
sunken galleons are a huge draw for scuba divers. There is no cheaper or 
friendlier place to stay than the Peña Parda, a 1960s classic that faces the 
beach at the peaceful, western end. Don't expect high style – though the 18 
rooms have sunny yellow walls and ceiling fans, some with large terraces. 
Downstairs a large bar-restaurant flows outside, serving succulent lamb, 
seafood and paella.
• +34 9 5864 0066, no website. Doubles from €44

Hotel Sol Los Fenicios, La Herradura
 La Herradura. Photograph: Alamy 
The renovated Sol Los Fenicios is at the opposite end of the beach to Peña 
Parda. Only palm trees stand between the hotel and the beach, with a headland 
right beside it and blazing sunsets across the bay. As the 43-room, adults-only 
hotel is now part of the Melia group, facilities are good and rooms 
well-appointed. They all have terraces, with the ground-floor rooms opening on 
to an inner, plant-filled patio. You can laze around beside a rooftop pool or 
dine at the outdoor (buffet) restaurant overlooking the beach. The downside is 
expensive Wi-Fi and car parking.
• 0808 234 1953, melia.com/hotels/spain/almunecar/sol-los-fenicios/home.htm 
<http://www.melia.com/hotels/spain/almunecar/sol-los-fenicios/home.htm>. 
Doubles from €66 B&B
 