
It was difficult to remember Mauricio Pochettino being so angry, and no 
wonder. TheTottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> manager is noted for 
his equilibrium and he rarely gets too high or too low. Not here.

Pochettino was in the mood to give vent to his emotions after his team had 
contrived to turn a position of strength into a defeat which, rather abruptly, 
has imperilled their qualification to the knockout rounds of theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>.

As they had done at Monaco three weeks previously, they led and were 
comfortable. They squandered chances to take complete control. But this 
implosion was more dramatic. Whereas they conceded a late equaliser to Monaco, 
they allowedAnderlecht <https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> to 
restore parity in the 13th minute, following a dreadfully defended corner and, 
thereafter, they watched the tie slide away.

“Angry, frustrated, disappointed – I don’t know which is the best word to 
describe me,” Pochettino said. “We need to realise that we need to compete in 
every game, in every single minute, in each different game, in each different 
competition.”

Although Harry Kane, who came on as a substitute, had a glorious chance in the 
69th minute which, in keeping with the season he is having at club level, he 
spurned, it was Anderlecht who looked the likelier scorers of the winning goal. 
With the substitute winger, Frank Acheampong, tearing Tottenham apart on the 
left, it arrived when he crossed for Stefano Okaka and the in-form striker, who 
once had a loan spell at Fulham in the Premier League, swept home.

Tottenham had enjoyed a 10-minute patch of deep purple at the outset but it 
only made what followed more frustrating for Pochettino.

They pierced the relentless din from the home crowd with the early goal, and 
what a howler it was from an Anderlecht point of view.

Erik Lamela released Christian Eriksen and he attempted to deceive Serigne 
Mbodji, the last defender, only to be tackled by him. What happened next was 
made for the blooper tapes. The ball thwacked into the face of Leander 
Dendoncker, who was sprinting back towards his own goal, to fall for Eriksen 
and he had the time to stroke his shot low into the bottom corner.

Anderlecht heads spun. Moments earlier, Eriksen had snatched at a decent 
shooting chance and, shortly afterwards, Lamela should have doubled the lead. 
Following Eric Dier’s promptings, Eriksen set Lamela through on Silvio Proto. 
The goalkeeper, though, thwarted him at close quarters and how Tottenham would 
rue that moment. Eriksen also flashed a deflected free-kick wide.

Their loss of concentration on the corner that led to the equaliser was total 
and shocking. The ball ran over to the unmarked full-back Guillaume Gillet – 
insert Tim Sherwood joke here – and he took an assured touch before lashing 
through a crowd into the far corner.

Anderlecht boasted the pace of Imoh Ezekiel on the wing and the ferocious 
shooting power of Okaka, the summer signing from Sampdoria, who has one cap for 
Italy. Twice, he worked Hugo Lloris before the interval, fully testing the 
Tottenham goalkeeper’s reflexes on the first occasion.

Kane was fit enough only for the bench, in light of the knock he took against 
Liverpool on Saturday, and so Pochettino gave Clinton Njie his full Tottenham 
debut up front. Njie had a few nice moments but he struggled in general and 
Pochettino was forced to replace him with Kane before he got himself sent off.

Njie was booked for a lunge at Dendoncker – which was borne out of 
frustration, after a poor touch – and, two minutes later, he swung a high boot 
at Gillet, who went down. For a second, it looked as though the referee, Pol 
van Boekel, was running towards Njie with a purpose but he kept his cards to 
himself.

Pochettino took no chances and he hooked him immediately. “It’s never easy to 
play away against a good team like Anderlecht,” Pochettino said, when asked for 
an assessment of Njie’s performance.

It was open and entertaining, with Anderlecht, in particular, going for it. 
Jan Vertonghen strode out of Tottenham’s defence with the ball on more than one 
occasion in an attempt to fire his team, and he slipped a pass through for 
Lamela on 31 minutes. He put the ball in the net, only to be pulled back for 
offside.

Pochettino used Kane and Dele Alli from the bench and his determination to 
press for the result was clear. He is conscious that the club’s trip to 
Azerbaijan to face Qarabag in the penultimate group tie in late November comes 
only three days before the home Premier League fixture against Chelsea. It 
would be understandable if he wanted to spare a few of his regulars the trip to 
Baku.

Kane wasted his chance when he advanced from the left side to shoot at Proto 
and it was Acheampong who made the difference. Tottenham had no response to his 
tantalising cross and Okaka’s finish, and Dennis Praet was denied a late third 
by Lloris’s fine save.

Linesman ‘told to favour Real Madrid’ in next month’s clásico against Barcelona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/22/real-madrid-barcelona-linesman-clasico-match-fixing> 