
Anders Breivik <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik>, the 
Norwegian serial killer, has been admitted to a course at the country’s oldest 
and most illustrious university – though he will study from his prison cell and 
will not come into contact with staff or students.

Norway’s most infamous citizen, jailed for 21 years for shooting dead 69 
students at a summer camp in 2011 after a bomb he planted in Oslo killed a 
further eight people, announced his intention to study politics and write books 
in 2012.

He applied to Oslo University  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/30/norwegian-anders-behring-breivik-university>
the following year but was turned down because he did not meet its criteria. 
Since then he has taken courses in prison and now qualifies for admission.

All Norwegian prisoners have the right to pursue higher education if they meet 
the admission requirements and compete successfully against other applicants.

Breivik will study political science, during which he will learn about 
democracy and justice, pluralism and respect for human rights, minorities and 
fundamental freedoms, said the university’s rector, Ole Petter Ottersen. Prison 
regulations prevent him from accessing digital learning resources or 
communicating with other students through the internet.

University staff who do not consent to teaching him can abstain, Ottersen 
said. “Even though there are a lot of strong feelings about this, teachers and 
staff members realise we have to stick to the rules,” Ottersen said. He added 
that denying Breivik the right to study would be “a slippery slope”.

“The last thing we would do is introduce a separate law for Breivik. It is a 
person’s right to be admitted to university when they are qualified, and if you 
deny somebody that right it is the equivalent to meting out an additional 
punishment, which is not the university’s role.”

Ottersen said he had expected more objections from the public, but it was 
“remarkable” how few people had taken a stance against the university’s 
position. “One explanation is that when he was taken to court there was a 
tremendous debate whether he should be granted the same rights and 
opportunities as any other person, and that discussion concluded that he 
should.”

The university’s political science degree consists of nine subjects, five of 
which are compulsory seminars, suggesting Breivik can start the degree but will 
be unable to graduate, Dag Harald Claes, of the department of political 
science, told Norwegian media.

Lisbeth Kristine Røyneland, who lost her 18-year-old daughter Synne in the 
Utøya massacre, said: “For us it is irrelevant if he sits in his cell and reads 
fiction or whether he is studying a book of political science.” Røyneland heads 
the national support group for survivors of the attack.

Four years after Breivik’s rampage on 22 July 2011, the Utøya summer camp is 
reopening in August with record numbers attending, including Ayat al-Qurmezi, 
the 24-year-old Bahraini poet and activist, and former prime minister Gro 
Harlem Brundtland.
 