
Anderlecht picked up their first win in the Champions League group stage with 
victory over 10-man Galatasaray but still exited the competition afterArsenal 
beat Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/26/arsenal-borussia-dortmund-champions-league-match-report>
.

Anderlecht <https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> came into the 
match third in Group D one point better off than their opponents, and although 
Chancel Mbemba scored both goals in a 2-0 win, it was not enough to keep them 
in the competition.

Victory at least ensured they will finish third and grab a Europa League spot.

The home side made an encouraging start as Aleksandar Mitrovic headed over in 
the second minute before Dennis Praet tested theGalatasaray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/galatasaray> goalkeeper, Fernando 
Muslera, 60 seconds later.

Mbemba should have done better after he was found by a Youri Tielemans cross, 
but from close range he headed over the bar.

Just before the half-hour Muslera had to be on his toes to keep out a powerful 
free-kick from Tielemans. And Anderlecht kept pushing with Steven Defour 
smashing an effort onto the post from 25 yards before they finally made the 
breakthrough in the 44th minute.

Frank Acheampong’s cross into the penalty area found an unmarked Mbemba, who 
headed back across the goalkeeper and into the net.

The Anderlecht goalkeeper, Silvio Proto, was finally called into action in the 
53rd minute when he was forced to punch Selcuk Inan’s free-kick away to safety.

However normal service resumed and Anderlecht came close to doubling their 
lead but Aleksandar Mitrovic’s firm header was kept out by Muslera.

Inan was sent off after a second bookable offence before Anderlecht went 2-0 
up.

After keeping his side in the game for so long, Muslera will be disappointed 
with his contribution. Tielemans’ long-range free-kick should have been easily 
dealt with by the goalkeeper but instead of pushing it round the post he 
parried the ball into the path of Mbemba who finished from close range with 
four minutes remaining.
 