
If Eoin Morgan were to raise the World T20 trophy into the night sky of 
Kolkata it would mark an astonishing transformation. Twelve months ago, as 
England’s cricketers were limping home from the 50-over World Cup, having 
failed to make the quarter-finals, they were a source of ridicule. With victory 
over West Indies at Eden Gardens on Sunday they can be a legitimate source of 
wonder. Even if Darren Sammy’s cavalier old side win it is still possible to 
see an exciting way ahead for England’s one-day teams.

Andrew Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss> deserves 
credit here. As a batsman the impression was of a Test specialist, who notched 
up 100 caps, a batting average over 40 and an Ashes victory in Australia. His 
one-day record was highly presentable, though, for such a cloth-batted player, 
but he would struggle to get a game now even in the 50-over set-up. No doubt 
Strauss recognised his own limitations as a white-ball cricketer. But upon his 
appointment as cricket director he was even more clear-headed about the 
constant under-achievement of England in the shorter forms of the game. At last 
there was more than lip-service to the idea of an upheaval of England’s one-day 
cricket.

England teams are embracing fun so let’s not overburden them with hype | Emma 
John
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/02/england-teams-embracing-fun-emma-john>
On the broadest front Strauss urged that the standing of one-day cricket and 
one-day cricketers should change. For decades there was a tacit disdain for 
those who were “only really one-day players”, the Neil Fairbrothers of this 
world. The implication was that they were somehow lesser mortals in the 
cricketing hierarchy. Real men were Test players. This re-evaluation remains an 
ongoing process.

More immediately, Strauss made two important decisions back in May. He decided 
that Eoin Morgan would captain England in all white-ball cricket. That decision 
was not such an obvious one to take as it now appears. England had just bombed 
in the World Cup under Morgan, albeit after he had been tossed into the job 
without any time to gather his thoughts after the last-minute sacking of 
Alastair Cook by the previous regime. Theoretically, Stuart Broad was still the 
T20 captain.

It is doubtful that even Strauss anticipated how easily Morgan would embrace 
the job. He has struggled for runs in this tournament, but this is now clearly 
his team. Morgan has insisted on an aggressive, no-fear approach allied to a 
constant eagerness to listen and improve. There is no doubt that his team looks 
up to him and they relish the freedom he gives them. His shortage of runs is 
currently a minor irritant.

England v West Indies World T20 final will not be normal, says Eoin Morgan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/02/england-west-indies-world-twenty20-final-eoin-morgan>
For those fretting about his form there is the parallel of Kumar Sangakkara in 
the last World T20, won by Sri Lanka. Before the final his highest score in the 
tournament was 14 but he delivered the critical innings, 52 not out from 35 
balls in a low-scoring game. Despite two golden ducks do not rule out a 
significant contribution from Morgan at one of his old home grounds – he has 
played for the Kolkata Knight Riders with Trevor Bayliss looking on impassively 
from the bench.

After the appointment of Morgan, Strauss would go on to reveal Bayliss as 
England’s next coach. He allowed himself a smile throughout this process. The 
media were hoodwinked; Jason Gillespie in Yorkshire was proclaimed to be the 
chosen man but all along Strauss had his eyes on Bayliss. His decision also 
reflected the new emphasis upon white-ball cricket.

Bayliss’s one-day CV as a coach was especially impressive, whether with Sri 
Lanka, KKR or Sydney Sixers. The success of all the sides under his taciturn 
watch could not be a coincidence. Even better, there was already an inbuilt 
trust and understanding between the caretaker, Paul Farbrace, and Bayliss. The 
right pieces for the jigsaw had been assembled.

Chris Gayle aiming to help West Indies old guard go out on World T20 high
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/02/chris-gayle-west-indies-twenty20-england>
Even so, it is some achievement that Bayliss and Morgan are back in one of 
their old haunts for the final. Crucially, the team has continued to evolve 
throughout this tournament, which is what happened in 2010 under Paul 
Collingwood’s captaincy. Certain players have done so at remarkable speed. We 
knew about Joe Root and Jos Buttler, who are now Morgan’s senior lieutenants. 
Three weeks ago we were not so sure about some of the others, but every nation 
is now aware of the threat posed by Jason Roy in this format.

At the time his 78 from 44 balls in the semi-final against  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/30/england-new-zealand-world-t20-match-report>
New Zealand seemed to be his most significant innings. With a bit more 
hindsight his43 from 16 balls against South Africa was more important 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/england-south-africa-world-twenty20-match-report>
. England could have beaten New Zealand without Roy, but that was not the case 
chasing 230 to beat South Africa, when a whirlwind start was imperative.

Chris Jordan was a borderline choice at the start of the tournament. Now he is 
inked in, especially for those death overs. He has simplified his plans: pace, 
not too many variations and a lot of yorkers at the end. Liam Plunkett was 
wearing the yellow bib for the first two games but has been a canny presence 
ever since. Holding the new ball across the seam has enhanced his accuracy. Ben 
Stokes, whose one-day contributions have always been overshadowed by his Test 
performances, is now entrusted with those vital death overs and he is revelling 
in the responsibility.

England have learned on the hoof and they are now sure of their preferred XI, 
although they have declined to name it until they have inspected the pitch on 
Sunday afternoon. It is a fresh surface towards the side of the square and 
currently it possesses much more grass than is usual for matches here. If the 
grass remains the hope is that it will add a bit of pace and stop the ball from 
spinning so much. Hence the match could be more of a high-scoring spectacle. In 
which case England would have played six games in this country without ever 
encountering traditional “Indian conditions”. It’s been a funny old tournament.
 