
Health experts will be hoping that public anxiety about the MMR (measles, 
mumps, rubella) jab will finally go away now thatAndrew Wakefield has been 
struck off the medical register 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/mmr-doctor-andrew-wakefield-struck-off>
and can no longer call himself a doctor. But Wakefield's courting of TV, radio 
and newspapers today, in addition to the petitions, placards and protests of 
his dedicated supporters, suggest that it is far from over yet.

The GMC case was never about the science behind the controversial Lancet paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/jan/28/andrew-wakefield-downfall>, 
which in February 1998 caused a storm of distress and fear by attempting to 
establish links between measles vaccine, irritable bowel syndrome in small 
children and the onset of autism.

In fact, it was not the paper itself but Andrew Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield>, its main author, who 
suggested at a press conference that there could be a problem with the MMR 
vaccine ‑ he advised that the three jabs should be given separately.

No reputable scientists have managed to establish the link Wakefield 
hypothesised existed, and heavy hitters like the Medical Research Council and
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Protection Agency have 
consistently stated that no supporting evidence exists.

Today's verdict ‑ the striking-off of Wakefield and Prof John Walker-Smith, 
who was in charge of the department of paediatric gastroenterology at the Royal 
Free hospital in London, where the research took place and the acquittal of 
the-then junior consultant Simon Murch, who had doubts about the project ‑ was 
about ethics and honesty, not science.

It was about the attitude of the doctors to their child patients. While 
Walker-Smith made errors of judgment and ultimately paid the price because of 
his position of responsibility, Wakefield emerged from the hearings as a 
tarnished character, branded dishonest. He was found to have subjugated the 
needs of vulnerable children to his desire to prove a theory.

Effectively, Wakefield used children who were showing signs of autism as 
guinea pigs, subjecting them to invasive and unpleasant procedures including 
lumbar punctures and colonoscopies that they did not need. He misled the ethics 
committee at the Royal Free, the Lancet and the MRC, claiming these were 
children who had been referred for treatment that they needed in the normal way.

It did not transpire until much later that he also had financial interests in 
the outcome of this research. He had taken money to prepare evidence for 
solicitors who hoped to bring cases against vaccine manufacturers, allegingMMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> triggered autism in children. He also 
lodged a patent for a new vaccine against measles called Transfer Factor, which 
he claimed could also be a treatment for inflammatory bowel disease.

It was his cavalier attitude to ethics and rules, which he swept aside in his 
certainty that he was right, that has sunk his medical career. He tried out 
Transfer Factor on one of the children in his research programme but failed to 
tell the child's GP. He took blood from children at a birthday party, paying 
them £5 a time. He failed to acknowledge any conflicts of interest.

But Wakefield's disgrace will not stop him arguing over the science, flawed as 
experts say his arguments are. Based in the US, where he will still be able to 
work as a scientist ‑ if not a doctor ‑ and with a considerable following among 
the desperate parents of autistic children who get too few answers about the 
distressing illness, he will continue to portray himself as the victim of the 
British medical establishment. It is not all over yet.
 