 Andrew Smith is pleasant-looking, able, clever, well connected and already in 
the cabinet as the chancellor's No 2, chief secretary to the Treasury - all he 
needs is a voice transplant.
Parliamentary sketchwriters compete to denigrate the thin high-pitched sound 
as resembling "Kermit the Frog", with sound emerging "from a point just between 
his eyes", "like an angry meerkat doing his yappy best". With a voice like his, 
hardly anyone listens to the content of his persuasive, good-humoured arguments.

Yet his arguments, while partisan, always sound very plausible, even if he is 
guilty of indecent earnestness in a public place. Of late he has been deployed 
to puncture the costcutting proposals of Michael Portillo and has proved to be 
a useful asset since winning Oxford East for Labour in 1987. That victory also 
had the benefit of showing Labour could regain seats in the south.

His rise has been helped by his decision to ally himself with Gordon Brown, 
without alienating Tony Blair. Long pro-European, he helpfully backed the 
Maastricht treaty, while urging constructive improvements.

A southerner, Mr Smith was born in Wokingham in 1951, to an aircraftsman and a 
clerk. After Reading grammar, he went to Oxford to get his BA and BPhil at St 
John's College. He stayed there working for the Co-op, in charge of membership.

He entered politics at 25 in 1976 as an Oxford city councillor. Initially on 
the left, he organised the local anti-Falklands war committee, and was selected 
as the Labour candidate for Oxford East in the wake of the defection to the SDP 
of Labour's scholarly Evan Luard. He narrowly lost the seat to Tory Steve 
Norris in 1983 but won it by a small margin in 1987, after strongly defending 
the interests of local Cowley autoplant workers.

In the Commons he was an assiduous campaigner for his constituency and against 
Tory "misdeeds", such as the attempt of Nicholas Ridley, then environment 
secretary, to block the building of 1,300 houses on a greenfield site next to 
his home. He led the motion attacking Robert Maxwell for threatening to dismiss 
NUJ members at Pergamon Press, whose headquarters were in his constituency. He 
also signed a 1991 motion opposing war in the Gulf.

After backing John Smith for leader in 1992, he became a treasury spokesman 
under Gordon Brown. By the time Tony Blair became leader two years later, Mr 
Smith was shadow chief secretary. After the election he had to wait to take 
this cabinet job, first proving his abilities as minister for employment. 
Clearly it was thought a more suitable post for a man with a thin piping voice 
- but it did not stop him entering the cabinet as Gordon Brown's deputy in 1999.

Ask Aristotle about Andrew Smith 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4827,00.html>
 