
Andrew Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>, the 
director of England cricket, has conceded he cannot force players to go to 
Bangladesh but warned that missing the tour would mean risking losing their 
place in the team in the future.

The trip, which features three one-day internationals and two Tests, begins at 
the end of this month, was given the all-clear by the England and Wales Cricket 
Board’s security director, Reg Dickason, a fortnight ago but there remains the 
possibility that individuals,including the limited-overs captain, Eoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/06/eoin-morgan-bangladesh-chris-jordan-england-t20-pakistan>
, may opt out.

Strauss will meet the players at the ECB’s national academy in Loughborough on 
Friday and Saturday for a series of one-on-one contract appraisals when he will 
also look to establish who will be making themselves available for selection 
before the squad announcement on 16 September.

Morgan is not alone in considering whether Bangladesh, where 20 hostages were 
killed during a terrorist attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
 in the capital, Dhaka, on 1 July, is safe to tour, with the opener Alex Hales 
also also understood to be considering withdrawal. Strauss, who has full faith 
in Dickason’s report, is hopeful of a full-strength squad.

He said: “We feel it’s safe to go and I genuinely believe that and that is why 
I’m encouraging every player to use that incredibly detailed and experienced 
viewpoint from Reg to make a judgment.

“I think the reason why it’s a good thing for players to follow the security 
advice is things remain very black and white, which is: if Reg says it’s safe 
to go somewhere, it’s safe; and if it isn’t, it isn’t. I think if you’re making 
your own opinions, based on your own perceptions, then you’re in a bit more of 
a grey area there.

“That’s why I’m urging the players to take Reg’s advice, and follow that 
advice, and I’m still hopeful players will do that. I can’t force anyone up the 
steps to the plane and say: ‘You have to go to Bangladesh.’ People have their 
own decisions to make. I think, at its most simple level, the big consequence 
for not going is you are giving someone else an opportunity to step into your 
shoes and stake a claim for themselves.

“That’s just the same as if someone gets injured; you are out of possession of 
that spot in the team for a certain period of time and, if someone does really 
well, then you can’t give any guarantees. But that’s a choice people have to 
make themselves. Everyone has a different attitude to risk and different 
thoughts about what their priorities in life are.”

The Test captain, Alastair Cook, has, along with a number of players, already 
committed to the tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/29/alastair-cook-confirms-place-england-tour-bangladesh-security>
 but, were Morgan to withdraw, Strauss would temporarily lose the player he 
backed to continue as one-day captain after the disastrous 2015 World Cup and 
whose leadership has overseen a significant upturn in fortunes.

Strauss said: “Would I like both our captains to be on that tour? Absolutely. 
The captain has certain roles and responsibilities that are greater than just 
looking after themselves. He has a duty to the team – but they’re still human 
beings. They have their own thoughts, concerns, issues and views on life and 
we’ve got to understand that.”

Of concern to certain England players, in addition to the July attack, are the 
reasons behind Australia’s postponement of their tour last October. Officially 
it was because of a “credible risk to Australians in Bangladesh” in general. 
However, recent reports that the team itself was a potential target – something
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia has played down 
but not publicly denied – have raised anxiety levels.

Strauss, who said missing the tour would not necessarily rule a player out of 
the pre-Christmas trip to India, said: “Reg spoke to the players about that 
issue in the initial meeting and the process Australia went through. He 
certainly threw that into the mix when he was in Bangladesh and forming his own 
opinions on whether the risk was mitigated to an acceptable level. We all know 
the decision he made on that.”

The International Cricket Council has shelved plans for the creation of a 
two-division Test championship following opposition from Zimbabwe, Bangladesh, 
Sri Lanka and, most significantly, India. The proposed two-year league 
structure, which would have featured promotion and relegation, was considered 
by the Board of Control for Cricket in India to be potentially damaging for 
smaller nations outside the top tier.

England v Pakistan: T20 international – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/07/england-v-pakistan-t20-international-live> 