
Andrew Strauss, the newly appointed director of England cricket, knows the 
clock is ticking in his search to fill the vacant position of head coach but 
insists only those candidates aligned with his stance towardsKevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>, with the batsman ruled out 
of this summer’s plans, will be considered.

When asked on Tuesday at Lord’s whether English cricket’s relationship with 
the 34-year-old could ever be rebuilt, Strauss replied “absolutely” and claimed 
both parties “should look at ways and methods of trying to make that happen”. 
Those words felt optimistic at the time and since then the mud-slinging has 
continued, withColin Graves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/15/colin-graves-england-kevin-pietersen-chairman-recall-ecb>
, the new chairman of the England and Wales Cricket Board, the last to stick 
his head above the parapet.

England’s tough time could get trickier against strong New Zealand | Vic Marks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/16/england-tough-time-new-zealand-kevin-pietersen-peter-moores-andrew-strauss>
While Graves can now reflect on his first day in the job on Friday that was 
spentdefending himself over accusations of deceit from Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/15/colin-graves-kevin-pietersen-england>
, Strauss will step up the process to identifythe right person to replace Peter 
Moores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/09/andrew-strauss-peter-moores-ecb-revolving-door>
. But be it the front-runner Jason Gillespie, Strauss’s former Middlesex 
team-mate Justin Langer or AN Other, they must agree on Pietersen.

“Any coach who comes into the England environment will know the situation,” 
said Strauss. “And he also, if his philosophy is aligned with mine, will 
understand the importance of trust in a team environment and why we made the 
call we made [on Pietersen] – because trust doesn’t exist. So I would have 
thought he’d understand the situation and be willing to work on those terms.”

This assertion came as the former Test captain and the chief executive at the 
ECB, Tom Harrison, when not repeating the words “trust” and “clarity”, were 
trying to provide some sort of tangible vision for how the national side will 
operate. Strauss has, after all, been hired not just to rebolt the door that 
had creaked open to Pietersen at the start of March following some loose talk 
from Graves. His true brief is to set a four-year plan in motion that will 
release England from the constipated cricket that turned their World Cup into a 
long walk off a short pier and has left the Test side seemingly only ever one 
defeat from requiring open-heart surgery, despite a results column that 
suggests it is in slightly ruder health.

The early visit of New Zealand for two Tests and six limited-overs 
internationals, starting at Lord’s on Thursday, is timely. For it was their 
rocket-fuelled World Cup campaign under Brendon McCullum, when they finished 
runners-up to the co-hosts Australia, that perhaps best illustrated how a side 
can wins hearts and minds of its public by playing instinctive, attacking 
cricket.

England, low on confidence and with a fanbase divided, could do with a spot of 
that. But of all the questions he fielded on Tuesday – and bear in mind there 
was a tidal wave on the thorny subject of Pietersen – the only query he claimed 
he was uncomfortable in answering was in regards to the style of play his sides 
will strive for. Aggressive cricket is not a switch that can be flicked, 
apparently. “Everyone wants people to go out there and take the game to the 
opposition, whack them for 500 in 30 overs and bowl them out for 10. That would 
be perfect but that’s not the reality,” he said. “The style of cricket comes 
with the level of confidence of the players, the ability to get on top of 
opposition and that is going to take time, it won’t come overnight. I can’t go 
into the dressing room next week and say ‘lads, you need to score five an over’ 
– that’s ridiculous.”

Instilling such confidence, for Strauss, comes down to the team’s culture and 
identity. It is here where he intends to learn from other successful teams, 
with New Zealand’s most successful sporting export, the All Blacks, his 
favourite. While he wisely chose not to mention their famous “no dickheads” 
selection policy, the 38-year-old is taken by the mantra that their 
international rugby players must “leave the shirt in a better place”.

“The All Blacks have a very strong team identity and that sort of philosophy 
is absolutely spot on,” said Strauss. “England cricketers have got to be 
unbelievably proud of pulling on that shirt and there has got to be a whole 
culture that is associated with it. It’s not just about putting it on and going 
out and playing cricket, there has got to be something much bigger than that.

Kevin Pietersen: is this the end for cricket’s great maverick?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/17/kevin-pietersen-cricket-batsman> 
“That drives everything and it’s got to be policed and bought into by the 
players themselves. That’s the only way culture works properly. Part of my job 
is to look at other sports and work out what we can take from them.

“To be doing everything through the prism of our experiences in cricket is the 
wrong way of looking at it.”

While the creation of such a sporting culture will take time, Strauss knows he 
must move fast on the coach, with Michael Clarke’s Australia arriving at the 
end of next month for their defence of the Ashes. Having been Test captain for 
six months before England last reclaimed the urn in 2009, he is not in 
agreement with the pessimists. “There’s been a lot of people saying we don’t 
have a chance of winning this Ashes series – I don’t believe that for one 
moment,” he said. “I’m not holding my hands up and saying we will lose this 
Ashes series to Australia, I think we have got a good chance of winning it.”
 