
Viewers and critics always have their personal favourites, but some films 
achieve a masterpiece status that becomes unanimously agreed upon – something 
that's undoubtedly true of Andrei Rublev, even though it's a film that people 
often feel they don't, or won't get. It is 205 minutes long (in its fullest 
version), in Russian, and in black and white. Few characters are clearly 
identified, little actually happens, and what does happen isn't necessarily in 
chronological order. Its subject is a 15th-century icon painter and national 
hero, yet we never see him paint, nor does he do anything heroic. In many of 
the film's episodes, he is not present at all, and in the latter stages, he 
takes a vow of silence. But in a sense, there is nothing to "get" aboutAndrei 
Rublev <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-rublev>. It is not a film that 
needs to be processed or even understood, only experienced and wondered at.

From the first scene, following the flight of a rudimentary hot air balloon, 
we're whisked away by silken camera moves and stark compositions to a time and 
place where we're no less confused, amazed or terrified than Rublev himself. 
For the next three hours, we're down in the muck and chaos of medieval Russia, 
carried along on the tide of history through gruesome Tartar raids, bizarre 
pagan rituals, famine, torture and physical hardship. We experience life on 
every scale, from raindrops falling on a river to armies ransacking a town, 
often within the same, unbroken shot.

With Andrei Rublev, Tarkovsky was consciously crafting a language that owed 
nothing to literature, and it's a pity so few others followed him. In today's 
cinema, we're still served up linear, cause-and-effect biographies of artists 
as if, by doing so, we'll understand the person and be able to make sense of 
their art. Andrei Rublev operates according to a different understanding of 
time and history. It asks questions about the relationship between the artist, 
their society and their spiritual beliefs and doesn't seek to answer them. "In 
cinema it is necessary not to explain, but to act upon the viewer's feelings, 
and the emotion which is awoken is what provokes thought," wrote Tarkovsky in 
1962.

Despite its apparent formlessness, Andrei Rublev is precisely structured and 
entirely aesthetically coherent. Acts of creation are mirrored by acts of 
destruction, there are themes of flight, of vision, of presence and absence; 
the more you look, the more you see. And then there are the horses, Tarkovsky's 
perennial favourite: horses rolling over, horses charging into battle, swimming 
in the river, falling down stairs, dragging men out of churches. At times the 
screen resembles a vast Brueghel painting come to life, or a medieval tapestry 
unrolling. We're always conscious of life spilling out beyond the frame, and 
never conscious of the fact that this was made in 60s USSR. In Tarkovsky's own 
turbulent time, the film lit all manner of controversy. Its Christian 
spiritualism offended the Soviet authorities; its depiction of Russia's savage 
history upset nationalists like Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, and its challenging 
form led to various cuts. After opening in Moscow in 1966, it was suppressed 
until the 1969 Cannes film festival, and didn't reach Britain till 1973.

We don't necessarily know, or need to know, how Andrei Rublev works or what 
it's telling us, but by the end we're in no doubt it's succeeded. When in the 
final minutes, the film pulls off its most famous flourish: the screen bursts 
into colour and we're finally ready to see Rublev's paintings in extreme 
close-up – coming at the end of this epic journey, they can reduce a viewer to 
tears. As the camera pores over the details, the tiny jewels on the hem of a 
robe, the lines forming a pitiful expression on the face of an angel, the 
tarnished gilding of a halo, we feel like we understand everything that's gone 
into every brushstroke. We're reminded of what beauty is. It is as close to 
transcendence as cinema gets.
 