
In the end it was not the alcohol that got to Andrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds>, but the pressure. It was 
the training regime, the media demands, sponsorship appearances and interview 
requests. And, more than anything else, it was the special contract he signed 
with Cricket Australia forbidding him from having a drink.

"The only real regret I have in cricket? Signing that contract," Symonds 
drawls. "If I had my time again I would have said, 'You know what? There is no 
way I'm signing that.' No one else had to do it. And let's be honest, under 
that sort of scrutiny I was always going to bust at some stage."

A lot of people dream of playing international cricket. Symonds, who makes his 
debut for Surrey against Gloucestershire tomorrow, came to hate it. When he was 
seen drinking in a hotel bar before the World Twenty20 last year,Cricket 
Australia tore up Symonds's contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jun/12/andrew-symonds-australia-contract>
 and sent him home. When he landed back in Brisbane, his international career 
in ruins, it was not regret he felt, but relief.

"Losing my contract didn't hurt me, because of what playing for Australia had 
become. I wasn't having fun anymore. I wasn't enjoying it. I felt like I was in 
a cage. Always under the microscope. Once I had got home from England, and 
everything had settled down, it was a relief."

A year on, and Symonds is able to admit how serious his problems were. "I was 
diagnosed as a binge-drinker. With all the things that went with international 
cricket there was never enough time for myself. So when I got my day off, I 
would just guzzle it, guzzle it like they weren't making it anymore, just 
binge. It was not smart."

As he drank, his form deteriorated and his behaviour became erratic. He missed 
a team meeting to take a fishing trip, got into a fight in a Brisbane bar and 
called the New Zealand international Brendon McCullum"a lump of shit" in a live 
radio interview 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/sport/2009/jan/29/andrew-symonds-australia-cricket>.

"I was always someone who needed to have a release every now and then," 
Symonds explains. "I'm passionate about cricket, but it is not the be all and 
end all of my life. I like the outdoors, and I like having a good time." He 
pauses, and scratches his nose with a butcher's best forefinger. "To me life is 
about fun. You have got to make a living, but not every day is about work. My 
life became difficult to lead. With the amount of things I had on my plate – 
cricket, sponsors, media – I just ended up having no time for myself. And 
that's what wore me down. When I got my chance to have a drink I would let 
nothing get in the way of it."

The public attention made Symonds feel trapped. Twice he was goaded into 
fights by strangers he met while out drinking. "People knew they could target 
me," he says. "Whatever I did and wherever I went I felt there was a chance 
that someone was going to try and push my buttons. In the end I just couldn't 
go to the pub."

But his shoulders are broad enough to take a share of the blame. "I had 
obviously put myself in that environment and I had to be smarter about that. I 
just had to take myself out of that environment completely. I'm glad to be out 
of that, so glad to be out."

And out of it he is. These days Symonds, who was born in Birmingham but grew 
up in Queensland, is a freelance cricketer. This winter he played limited-overs 
cricket for Queensland for match-payments alone. His spring was spent with 
Deccan Chargers in the Indian Premier League, and his summer will be withSurrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/surrey>, who have signed him for all 16 of 
their Twenty20 group matches.

He stretches out his long legs in the afternoon sun. "Mate, my life right now 
is just A1. Just great. My mates back home ask me what I'm doing now, and I'm 
like: 'Well, I'm just going to London to play cricket for a few weeks.' They 
say: 'What will you do when you come back?' 'I'll probably go fishing for a 
couple of months.' They can't believe it," he says.

So why Surrey? "They are a young team, and that excited me. Young men learn 
fast, and they aren't scarred." Scars? Symonds has enough of them already.

Tickets to watch Andrew Symonds play for the Surrey Lions are still available 
for each game by calling 020 7820 5700 or visiting
www.britoval.com/fixtures-tickets <http://www.britoval.com/fixtures-tickets>.
 