
Early on in The Long Song, the narrator promises that this will not be a book 
that dwells on the Caribbean landscape. She says she has “little ink” and that:

Waxing on the nature of trees when all know they are green and lush upon this 
island, or birds which are plainly plentiful and raucous, or taking good words 
to whine upon the cruelly hot sun, is neither prudent nor my fancy.

On the whole, she lives up to her word and she is sparing in her description 
of the local countryside. The only time I can recall her dwelling on scenery is 
when she describes the background the painter Mr Francis Bear has filled in on 
a portrait of the plantation owners Robert Goodwin and Caroline Mortimer and 
the novel’s narrator, July. She shows Francis Bear at work, looking out over 
the land, but refusing to depict what he actually sees. He puts down bushes 
where there should be cottages, because he has “no intention of including the 
disgusting negro hovels”, explaining that “no one wished to find squalid 
negroes within a rendering of a tropical idyll”.

In spite of such starkness, and the ban on flowery descriptive passages, Levy 
still manages to give a strong impression of the heat, the fecundity and above 
all the colours of colonial Jamaica. It’s a novel full of bold, rich 
pigmentation. We see “yellow blooms”, “flaming red hair”, “purple petals”, 
“green lime”, “green banana”.

The aforementioned picture also contains “colourful sweetmeats” and Caroline 
is wearing a wedding gown rendered so faithfully that “the pink silk of the 
garment shimmers as if the actual cloth were painted upon it”. Other clothes 
are equally colourful: there’s a “splendid pink taffeta dress”, a much desired 
pair of yellow gloves, a blue cotton blouse, and we see militiamen in “blue 
uniforms.”

Andrea Levy's The Long Song gives the silent majority a compelling voice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/dec/15/andrea-levy-the-long-song-compelling-voice-reading-group>
In other books, such bright garments might be a source of pleasure. Here 
though, they make us uneasy. We can’t help but remember that slaves like July 
do not get to wear such bright garments. At one point we are told that she, for 
instance, has to make do with a handed-down dress that was once bottle green 
and has now faded to grey.

Given that information, the bright clothes of the Europeans take on a garish 
hue. Plenty of other colours go through a similar process of re-rinsing and 
complication. That pink satin dress, alongside another “splendid pink taffeta” 
item, and some cakes carefully “frosted in pink” start to seem sickly given the 
other references to the colour in Long Song. There’s something repulsive about 
the description of “fatty-batty” Caroline when we see her “pink-white cheeks 
puffing into a grin so wide they looked to span the room as she bounced excited 
upon her toes”. Worse still is Robert Goodwin, lusting after July with “his 
face blushed pink as a boiled shrimp as he raised his hat to her in parting.”

Such pink skin is, of course, an attribute of the Europeans on the island, and 
in the context of the novel, freighted with significance. The word “white” is 
even more loaded – and one of the most frequently used adjectives in the book. 
There are rarely more than two pages in a row where it doesn’t occur. Even more 
frequent are the words “negro”, “black”, “hottentot” and sundry other racial 
epithets. There are almost a hundred uses of the word “nigger”, as in the 
declaration from Caroline: “Marguerite, you are a good, good, good nigger.” 
Perhaps that sentence seems especially shocking here in the 21st century. But 
it’s hard to imagine the 18th-century July enjoying it any either – not least 
because Marguerite is the pet name Caroline has given her slave.

Anything implying darkness can be a potent insult in this novel. Whiteness has 
an equal and opposite derogatory implication. July gives us a “huffing white 
man”, plenty of “white bakkra”, a foolish “white missus”. Conversely, the 
Europeans see “white” as compliment, and July and other slaves celebrate 
blackness. Early on in the novel, for instance, there are striking physical 
descriptions of the beauty of the slaves. July, our narrator and herself a 
former slave, tells us about their rich smell, their physicality, a strength 
that makes the narrator compare them to trees. Their beauty is sometimes marred 
– but, chillingly, it’s because of the eyes that have been closed for them by 
the blows of an overseer, the bruises and the bleeding.

Right from the start, The Long Song confuses any black and white dichotomy. 
The first mention of black in July’s narrative comes in the sentence: “And all 
this particular distress so there might be sugar to sweeten the tea and blacken 
the teeth of the people in England.” White teeth, corrupted by darkness. What 
are we to make of that?

There isn’t a simple divide. Sure, we side with the slaves more than their 
oppressors. But Levy is at pains to show us there are many complicated shades 
here too. Then there is the way that July and other slaves obsess over how much 
white blood they contain; whether they are quadroons or mulatto, and how “high” 
their colour may be.

In more abstract moral terms, there are also complications. The slaves are not 
just helpless victims. Their position is invidious, awful, unjust, but they are 
not just passive victims. July takes pleasure in describing the ways they 
outsmart, trick, steal from, confuse and abuse their masters. She also delights 
in making fun of non-Europeans and lashing them with her wit and spite. Levy 
has pointed out that: “These were people who needed strength, courage and guile 
just to survive.” They weren’t mere saints, even if justice was on their side.

Nor are all the Europeans in the novel simply monstrous. Caroline is so 
helpless and dumb that she sometimes teeters on the verge of becoming 
sympathetic. Robert Goodwin’s fear of his father, and initial affection for 
July, give him some humanity. And even when these people do terrible, 
ridiculous and cruel things, Levy helps us to understand them. As Reading group 
contributor Mythicalmagpie says: “They did do monstrous things, butAndrea Levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrea-levy> never lost sight of the all too 
human emotions and reasoning that drove their actions; greed, fear, loneliness, 
prejudice. None of it is very worthy, but it is recognisable and explainable 
and not some aberrant evil that is out of our realm of experience. That makes 
it all the more horrific.”

Elsewhere, there is the sterling example of Linus Gray (whose name seems a 
little too good to just be coincidental). This is the Englishman who recognises 
July’s son Thomas Kinsman as his equal and more, who promotes him at his 
printing business based upon his manifest merit and eventually bequeaths all 
his personal property upon him “in honour of his loyalty and friendship, and in 
redress for the wrong done to him by his birth and fate”. Yes, Gray is the 
exception that proves the rule, favouring Thomas in the teeth of widespread 
opposition and horror at home. (It is even implied that part of the pleasure 
Gray takes in leaving Thomas so much in his will is the expectation of how much 
it will annoy everyone else.) Even so, he also exemplifies the novel’s 
complications. Levy may deal in primary colours, and her theme may be slavery, 
but Long Song never simplifies things right down to black and white. It’s a 
novel with grey areas – and is all the more interesting as a result.
 