
Actor Andrew Sachs has thanked Jonathan Ross and Russell Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/russell-brand> for boosting his profile 
with the offensive messages affair.

Last October the two presenters left a series of offensive messages on Sachs's 
telephone answering machine, revealing that Brand had slept with his 
granddaughter Georgina Baillie, and wondering aloud whether Sachs might kill 
himself after the revelation. The messages were played on Brand's Radio 2 show, 
which led to the resignation of Brand and Radio 2 controller Lesley Douglas and 
the suspension of Ross from theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> for 
12 weeks.

Sachs told the Guardian that the affair had caused pain and embarrassment for 
his wife Melody and daughter Kate, but admitted that the controversy had been 
good for his career. "I came out of it very well … my profile's up. Great! They 
did me good. Thank you very much."

The actor, who made his name as Manuel, the hapless Spanish waiter in the 
classic television comedy Fawlty Towers, is about to start a short stint in 
Coronation Street. In today's Weekend magazine he reveals that he told the BBC 
he was not happy with Brand and Ross's telephone message before it was 
broadcast and offered to give the show a proper interview, but heard nothing 
back.

Sachs said the story had been widely misreported. He had not been close to his 
granddaughter Georgina Baillie, nor was he entirely shocked, as had been 
suggested, about her line of work as a dominatrix and member of the burlesque 
dance troupe Satanic Sluts. "I knew what Georgina was doing, sort of. But there 
was a lot of misquoting going on. I didn't say much. People interpreted that as 
he's so dignified. I'm not dignified, I just didn't know what to say. What was 
there to say?"

He denied that he had introduced Baillie to a page three photographer, as his 
granddaughter had claimed. "My wife and I introduced her to an old friend of 
ours, a fashion photographer. But it was certainly nothing to do with page 
three … Georgina has her own life to lead, and she knows my wife and I wouldn't 
approve." He said he hadn't seen her since the story broke. "I think she's 
scared stiff of us. She can't cope with it. So she puts it behind her."

He said Ross had considerable talent, but let himself down with the constant 
sexual innuendo. But he remained unconvinced by Brand. "I think he's aimed at a 
much younger audience than me. No wonder he doesn't attract many of the more 
mature generation."

• Read the full interview in tomorrow's Weekend magazine
 