
The former NSW deputy premier and former state Nationals leader, Andrew 
Stoner, has dropped defamation proceedings against the broadcasterAlan Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> and the Greens MP Jeremy 
Buckingham.

The proceedings were brought over comments about Stoner’s actions in relation 
to coal seam gas and coal mining projects.

NSW deputy premier Troy Grant calls for coal seam gas ban in northern rivers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/12/nsw-deputy-premier-troy-grant-calls-for-coal-seam-gas-ban-in-northern-rivers>
Jones was not in court to see Justice Lucy McCallum order the proceedings be 
vacated, but Buckingham was in the public gallery and spoke outside court.

“This is a great day for me personally and, I think, for free speech in NSW,” 
Buckingham said.

“There were no conditions on the settlement. We did not provide an apology, we 
are not paying any of Andrew Stoner’s costs, and he didn’t get one red bloody 
cent out of the Greens, myself or Alan Jones ... We’re claiming it as a 
profound victory.”

The case was withdrawn days after Buckingham and Jones filed their defence, 
which Stoner’s lawyers sought to block from public release because it was 
“scandalous”.

It is understood the defendants’ lawyers had indicated their intention to 
cross-examine Stoner about recent revelations he had been targeted by online 
extortionists while in office.

Buckingham said the suit, launched in response to a series of monologues and 
interviews on Jones’s radio show, was a “political attack” that should never 
have been brought.

The claims aired included that the since-retired MP was “gutless” and favoured 
the mining industry’s interests over those of the community.

“This case came within days of the election, when both Mr Jones and myself 
were vigorously holding the government to account over the issues of coalmining 
in the Liverpool Plains, coal seam gas, and [the Coalition’s] standards of 
governance,” he said.
 