
Andrew Wakefield <https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield>, the 
doctor who triggered anxiety among parents over his suggestion of a link 
between the MMR vaccine and autism, was struck off the medical register today 
for offences relating to dishonesty and failing to act in the best interests of 
vulnerable child patients.

But as leading doctors and medical institutions condemned him and hailed an 
end to the controversy which caused measles, mumps and rubella vaccination 
rates to drop dangerously low, Wakefield launched a fresh war of words from New 
York, portraying himself to the media as a victim of the British establishment 
and insisting he would fight on in the interests of children with autism.

Speaking to the Guardian, he said the General Medical Council's decision to 
remove him from the register was "predictable and inevitable".

He said: "It seemed to me that they had come to this decision a long time ago, 
long before the evidence was fairly heard. This is the way the system deals 
with dissent. You isolate, discredit and provide an example to other doctors 
and scientists not to get involved in this kind of thing. That is examining 
questions of vaccine safety."

At the end of the GMC's longest case, lasting 217 days, a disciplinary panel 
found Wakefield guilty of serious professional misconduct on a number of 
charges relating to a paper published in the Lancet medical journal in February 
1998, some of them related to research ethics and others to financial conflicts 
of interest and failing to put patients first.

Young and vulnerable children were subjected, in the interests of research, to 
invasive medical procedures such as colonoscopies and lumbar punctures which 
they did not need and the ethics committee of the Royal Free hospital in north 
London, where Wakefield was based, had not approved. "The panel is profoundly 
concerned that Dr Wakefield repeatedly breached fundamental principles of 
research medicine," the GMC said.

The GMC also struck off Professor John Walker-Smith, 73, who retired 10 years 
ago as head of the Royal Free's department of paediatric gastroenterology, 
where the panel conceded he was held in high esteem. The panel accepted he 
posed no danger to patients and "was and remains a well-respected doctor whose 
contribution to paediatric medicine has been exemplary". Nonetheless, the GMC 
said he had failed in the care of vulnerable children and was guilty of 
"irresponsible and misleading reporting of research findings potentially having 
such major implications for public health".

A third doctor, Simon Murch, at the time a junior consultant but now professor 
of paediatrics and child health at Warwick medical school, was cleared of 
serious professional misconduct. He had raised concerns about the research 
project and acted in good faith under the instructions of his superior, 
Walker-Smith.

As he walked out into the sunshine today , Murch was applauded by waiting 
demonstrators, carrying banners and placards declaring GMC Conflicted, not 
Wakefield, GMC Used Fake Charges and One Jab Does Not Fit All.

Wakefield denies that the doctors acted unethically. After he was struck off 
he told the Guardian: "This is just ruthless pragmatism – how the system deals 
with doctors who step out of line. We as physicians responded to parental 
concerns as we should have done. We did exactly the right thing. These children 
had been ignored, their symptoms had been ignored and in particular the 
association parents made with the vaccine had been ignored."

Wakefield said the decision to investigate the children was taken by one of 
the world's leading gastroenterologists, Walker-Smith, on the basis of the 
children's symptoms. "It wasn't research, it was clinical investigation of 
symptoms. This was made absolutely clear from the beginning going back to 1996."

Fear of a possible link to autism led to substantial drops in MMR take-up and 
deaths in 2006 and 2008, but Dr David Elliman, consultant in community child 
health at Great Ormond Street hospital for children, and Dr Helen Bedford, 
senior lecturer in children's health at the centre for epidemiology and 
biostatistics at UCL, said in a statement that parents appeared to be regaining 
confidence. "The alleged link between autism andMMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> vaccine had been disproved long 
before the GMC hearings even began. Hopefully the whole episode can now be laid 
to rest," they said.

Adam Finn, professor of paediatrics at University of Bristol medical school, 
said society tended to admire those who stick to their opinions. But in 
science, "the real heroes are those who acknowledge the supremacy of evidence 
and retain an open mind and those who admit, with good grace, when they are 
wrong ... I remain disappointed that Dr Wakefield still does not acknowledge 
all the evidence that now exists that shows MMR is safe and supports its use."

Michael Fitzpatrick, GP and author of MMR and Autism: What Parents Need To 
Know, said: "My thoughts are with the families of autistic children who were 
dragged into futile litigation (more than 1,000 in the UK, more than 5,000 in 
the US) on the basis of Wakefield's speculative link between MMR and autism.

"Wakefield's greatest offence was his failure – over 12 years – either to 
substantiate a hypothesis with major consequences for child health or to 
withdraw it."

Timeline

February 1998 The Lancet publishes Andrew Wakefield's study linking autism to 
MMR, sparking a drop in uptake and a rise in measles

March 1998 Medical Research Council panel, ordered by government, finds no 
evidence to support Wakefield's claim

December 2001 Wakefield leaves his post at the Royal Free hospital

February 2004 Sunday Times claims parents of some children in the study were 
pursuing a legal case against MMR makers and Wakefield was being funded by 
Legal Aid Board to investigate a link

March 2004 Ten of the 12 co-authors of the 1998 paper withdraw support for 
Wakefield's autism-MMR link claim

2005 MMR uptake falls to 81%

June 2006 GMC investigation begins into alleged misconduct

July 2007 Appears at the GMC disciplinary hearings, denying misconduct

January 2010 GMC panel finds Wakefield guilty of serious professional 
misconduct during research for his paper

February 2010 Lancet retracts Wakefield's paper

24 May 2010 Struck off by the GMC

Katy Stoddard
 