
Despite a difficult eight months off the field the all-rounder Andrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> will remain a contracted 
player with Cricket Australia for the next 12 months.

In a boost for his chances of being selected in Australia's Ashes squad next 
Wednesday, the 33-year-old Symonds, who was fined for violating Australia's 
code of conduct in January, was included in a 25-man list of centrally 
contracted players announced by CA in Adelaide today.

There were few surprises on the list, which contains seven new faces. Gone are 
the retired pair Matthew Hayden and Stuart MacGill, and the opener Phil Jaques, 
the leg-spinner Beau Casson, the Western Australian batsman Adam Voges and pace 
duo Shaun Tait and Ashley Noffke are also not included.

As expected, Phillip Hughes, Peter Siddle, Andrew McDonald and Marcus North 
were handed contracts after strong Test form against South Africa.

The New South Wales off-spinner Nathan Hauritz, the only slow bowler on the 
list, was rewarded for his encouraging recent performances in the one-day game.

The promising batsman Callum Ferguson won his first CA contract as did his 
South Australia team-mate and wicketkeeper Graham Manou, whose deal is a strong 
indication he is now viewed as Brad Haddin's understudy.

"Callum Ferguson has had an impressive debut in one-day cricket and will be an 
important part of our future in that form of the game," said the chairman of 
selectors, Andrew Hilditch. "He'll be looking to take every opportunity to 
force his way into Test cricket.

"Graham Manou has been named as the other wicketkeeper on the list. No one can 
doubt his credentials following his performance in state cricket over the last 
two seasons, in all forms of the game."

The Victorian Brad Hodge holds on to his contract despite not playing for his 
country in nearly 12 months, but the batsman David Warner and the spinner Jason 
Krejza missed out.

Contracts are awarded to players based on their form over the past 12 months, 
their likelihood of playing for Australia in the next 12 months, team balance 
and the need to ensure the future development of Test and limited-overs teams.

Players are ranked from one to 25 by national selectors and paid accordingly.

CA contracted players: Doug Bollinger, Nathan Bracken, Stuart Clark, Michael 
Clarke, Callum Ferguson, Brad Haddin, Nathan Hauritz, Ben Hilfenhaus, Brad 
Hodge, James Hopes, Phillip Hughes, David Hussey, Michael Hussey, Mitchell 
Johnson, Simon Katich, Brett Lee, Graham Manou, Shaun Marsh, Andrew McDonald, 
Marcus North, Ricky Ponting, Peter Siddle, Andrew Symonds, Shane Watson, 
Cameron White.
 