
Five years after Russell Brand and Jonathan Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/29/jonathan-ross-russell-brand> 
left a series of abusive messages on your answering machine, how do you feel 
about the incident?
It was rather disgusting and terrible, awful. We had many letters about how 
disgraceful it was. You probably heard some of what they said. They still go on 
about it now. They did apologise: sent us two letters with lots of flowers. 
Very brave of them! But it was a bad time, it's the worst thing that ever 
happened to our family, worse than the Nazis. Dear, oh dear.

Was it strange to wake up one morning with a press mob outside your front door?
The same day that Russell Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/russell-brand> and Jonathan Ross were 
phoning, my wife, Melody, fell in the bathroom and was rushed off to hospital. 
She had an operation to have a new hip and I had to go back home to look after 
our dogs – we had about seven at the time – so I was busy. When Mel woke up 
from the anaesthetic, she didn't know where she was and she looked up at the TV 
screen at the end of her bed and saw me surrounded by press. She went back to 
sleep and thought it must be a nightmare. But I gave little attention to the 
press, although they were there for quite a number of days. I just kept silent.

What effect did it have on your family?
Bad. It made a great break in our relationship with our daughter, Kate, and 
our granddaughter, Georgina. Part of it is still broken. It wasn't right and it 
stayed wrong. I don't know what Georgina is like now; we don't see her any more.

Georgina joined Adam Ant's band for a while. Didn't he try to reconcile you 
all by sending a letter?
Yes, they became friends and she started singing with him. I've spoken to her 
on the phone and seen her a couple of times, but I've not noticed any change in 
Georgina. She needs to change and come to her senses, but she hasn't done that 
yet. Maybe she doesn't want to or maybe she feels she's better keeping away 
now. Anyway, there we are.

In the foreword to your memoirs, John Cleese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-cleese> has written: "If you met Andy 
socially it would never occur to you for one moment he was an actor – you would 
guess he was a senior civil servant, or a physician or an academic or a 
research scientist." Why do you think he wrote that?
I've no idea. He's a great friend, I think he wanted to be nice.

He goes on: "He's quiet, thoughtful, beautifully mannered, observant and 
extremely kind." Is that in contrast to most actors?
Ha! You'll have to ask him. But he did send me a message this week saying: 
"You owe me an expensive lunch."

What was the first conversation you had with Cleese about Fawlty Towers?
He was keen to have a waiter who wasn't very good, not very good at English, 
didn't know anything. So when he asked me to do it I said: "What sort of 
waiter?" And he replied: "A Spanish waiter." And I said: "I don't think I can 
do a Spanish accent. Can you make it a German waiter instead?" And he said: 
"No! You'd be very good at things if you were German. He's got to be Spanish."

Is it true you still have scars from your treatment by Basil Fawlty?
I got a lot of violence from John and he can't just hit you gently: boom! He's 
an evil man, but I love him. There was one time when he hit me so hard I fell 
over and I couldn't get up. After the episode, the actors usually went up to 
the bar for a drink and I was really a bit upset about it. I thought: "I've got 
to say something."

Because he hit you too hard?
Always. He never stopped. So I went up to the bar and said: "John, I'm really 
rather hurt by what you did to me, knocking me out and then not even 
apologising." He hardly noticed and said: "What are you talking about? You are 
not doing a long run in the West End. It's once in your performance. Pull 
yourself together and I'll buy you another Babycham." So that's what I got out 
of it.

You were born in Berlin in 1930 and lived there until 1938. What do you 
remember of Hitler?
My father was Jewish and didn't talk much about Hitler but all my friends were 
Aryan and our teacher was fond of Hitler and would tell us to do what Hitler 
said: "He's a wonderful man…" I had one friend who came up to me one day and he 
was a bit stumbling and said: "I'm not allowed to play with you, because my 
parents said that your father is Jewish." That was the first moment where I 
realised something was wrong.

And then your family escaped to London. How close were you to being bombed?
We were never bombed but there was lots of ack-ack going on. We lived in 
Primrose Hill in a house that belonged to the anthropologist Professor 
Bronisław Malinowski. During the war, there were huge anti-aircraft guns at the 
top of the hill, so when the Luftwaffe came, there was a battering. It was so 
loud and there were no windows in our street, in our area, but for kids like 
us, it was quite exciting.

Didn't you find lots of nude slides in Malinowski's study from his book The 
Sexual Life of Savages in North-Western Melanesia?
Yes! There were these nude women from the far east and they were all smiling 
and happy.

You are in your 80s now. Are you still keen to keep working as an actor?
Oh yes. I just like it. And because I've done quite well in the business, I 
don't want to give it up.
 