
Andrew Flintoff <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff> underwent 
surgery on his right knee last night having vowed to return as a force in 
international cricket and inspire England to World Cup glory in 2015. Buoyed by 
the excitement of Sunday's scenes at The Oval, where Flintoff celebrated his 
final day as a Test cricketer by running out Australia's captain, Ricky 
Ponting, to help England regain the Ashes, the all-rounder is convinced the 
operation will help him realise his goal of finishing his one-day career on a 
similar high.

"Obviously there are no guarantees but, having spoken to the surgeon, I'm 
confident I'll be able to get back on the field," said Flintoff, who will be 37 
by the time the 2015 tournament comes around. "There's no bigger incentive than 
playing for England. I'm still going to play cricket and still try to bowl at 
90mph. Give me a few months and you'll be watching me.

"However long the rehab takes I'm prepared to do it to give myself the best 
chance of playing international cricket again. I want to play at the World Cup 
in 2011 and the one after that too. I've finished my Test career with an Ashes 
victory and I want to finish my one-day career with a World Cup win in 2015. 
That would be perfect."

England's four-day victory in the fifth and deciding Test meant Flintoff's 
operation was brought forward by 24 hours, leaving him to steel himself to be 
"nil by mouth" from noon yesterday. Although his contribution to England's 
197-run triumph was muted until he ran out Ponting from mid-on, he said the 
crowd's response had cemented his desire to return.

"The harsh reality is that I need my knee sorting out," he said. "It's a long 
road back to fitness but I've done it before. And seeing the scenes at The 
Oval, it's made me more determined to get back fit and play in front of the 
full houses in England or abroad and try to make a difference with the one-day 
side. The surgeon's got a good idea what he's going to find. We'll see how I 
wake up after the anaesthetic but, realistically, I'm going to struggle to get 
back playing before Christmas. I've retired from Test cricket but there's a 
tour to Bangladesh [early next year] which I desperately want to be involved 
in. That could be my first cricket back."

Flintoff is equally keen to fulfil his $1.55m (£940,000) deal with Chennai 
Super Kings in the third Indian Premier League, which begins on 12 March, 
especially as he and the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board are yet to determine what 
kind of contract he will be awarded now that he has played the last of his 79 
Tests. In the meantime, he had encouraging words for the team he has left 
behind.

"We need to dominate international cricket at every level now," he said. 
"We've got the players to do it, we've got a captain to lead us and it's a 
realistic goal. Enjoy this week, celebrate, get it out of your system, and move 
on – almost be Australia-like in the way they've gone about it. They've won 
series in the past and continued to beat people. It's going to be a big Test 
series in the winter against South Africa. There are a lot of challenges in 
front of the team. With what we've got we can live up to them."

Flintoff said the emotion of ending with an Ashes victory got to him in the 
dressing room. "I admit I was tearful," he said, "and then I saw one of the Sky 
Sports cameras hovering and thought 'Nobody's seeing my crying', so I nipped 
into the toilets, gave myself a minute, got myself together and got on with the 
job of celebrating."

Flintoff added that he hopes there will be an England future for his old 
friend Steve Harmison, whose future has been the subject of recent speculation. 
Not picked in the XI until the fourth Test at Headingley, Harmison finally got 
in on the act when he wrapped up Australia's tail on Sunday evening, taking his 
Test tally to 226 wickets in 63 games, and Flintoff believes he can go further.

"If I was Steve Harmison and could bowl like that I'd keep going," he said. 
"You talk to any opposition in the world about who they don't want to face, and 
it's Steve Harmison. He could end up being one of the greats for England. I 
would urge him to carry on because he's just so good, isn't he? It's his 
decision, but I just think there's a lot more to come from him." Last night 
Harmison indicated he will carry on if selected for the winter tour. "I'll sit 
down with Andrew Strauss and Andrew Flower and if they want me to go to South 
Africa, I'll go," the fast bowler said. "If they are saying 'We're going to 
take this in another direction', then I'll gladly step aside."
 