
The BBC said "malicious intrusion, intimidation and humiliation" in its 
programmes were completely unacceptable, as it published a long-awaited report 
into taste and standards, commissioned after offensive comments were broadcast 
about the actorAndrew Sachs <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-sachs>.

Swearing between 9pm and 10pm would also be targeted. The report said there 
must be good editorial reason for using offensive language immediately after 
the watershed, and it would have to be flagged up for viewers.

The report, which looked at the use of strong language, sexual content, 
standards of behaviour and audience expectations, was ordered by the BBC Trust 
in November following the row that engulfed the corporation after presenters 
Russell Brand and Jonathan Ross left offensive messages on Sachs's answer 
machine that were subsequently broadcast onRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 2. The row prompted 42,000 
complaints to the BBC.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> said that it would issue new 
guidelines to staff and use the research in a review of its editorial 
guidelines, expected to be completed this year. "BBC programmes must never 
condone malicious intrusion, intimidation and humiliation," the report said. 
"While they are all aspects of human behaviour which may need to be depicted, 
described or discussed across the BBC's factual and non-factual output, they 
must never be celebrated for the purposes of entertainment.

"New guidance is needed to ensure that everyone involved in programme-making 
for the BBC understands that malicious intrusion, intimidation and humiliation 
are unacceptable."

The report, based on interviews with 2,700 viewers and listeners, was billed 
as the "most exhaustive piece of audience research" the BBC has ever undertaken 
on attitudes to taste and decency.

It said "greater care" should be taken over potentially offensive content when 
programmes transferred from BBC2 or BBC3 to the more family-friendly BBC1, and 
more sensitivity was needed on music stations such as Radio 1 during times such 
as the school run when "different generations may be listening together". A 
clearer policy on the bleeping of strong language, and better warnings for 
viewers on swear words was also needed, it said.

"In general, where strong language is integral to the meaning or content of a 
programme ... it should not be disguised. But when in other circumstances a 
sequence that is editorially necessary happens to contain the strongest 
language, it may be right to bleep or disguise the words, even after the 
watershed."

The BBC should "always recognise that some sections of its audiences are more 
readily offended than others," the report said, while individual channels "must 
make even greater efforts to ensure that appropriate content information is 
provided which enables informed judgments to be made by all audiences, both 
pre- and post-watershed".

The BBC Trust said it had asked the corporation's management, led by the 
director general, Mark Thompson, to allow the "most offensive language" to be 
used only in "exceptional circumstances" on BBC1 between 9pm and 10pm. 
Currently, strong language in programmes has to be referred to channel 
controllers, and the director of vision, Jana Bennett, has to sign off every 
use of the word "cunt".

The report found BBC1 was the most highly rated UK TV or radio service in 
terms of taste and decency, with 61% saying it had high standards, while Radio 
1 only registered 19% satisfaction. 46% of respondents felt standards had 
fallen in recent years, but though 33% said they were concerned about strong 
language, 70% said it was right that creativity should be encouraged even if 
some people might be offended.

The role of other media outlets in whipping up scandals was also highlighted, 
with 41% saying they had heard or read about something that caused them concern 
which they hadn't actually seen or heard themselves. The Sachs incident 
prompted only two complaints when it was initially broadcast. It was only after 
newspapers ran the story that complaints began to flood in.

"The BBC has always walked a fine line between artistic freedom and the 
avoidance of offence, but today the challenges are greater than ever," Bennett 
said.

"The BBC has a crucial role in both reflecting what audiences think or feel 
and surprising them with new ideas.Television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> would short-change licence-fee 
payers if it did not challenge them with new material. Some of us may be 
offended some of the time, but our culture will be the richer for it."
 