
Andrea Leadsom <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom>, the new 
environment secretary, supports foxhunting and once said she wanted to end 
farming subsidies.

The pro-Brexit cabinet minister, who was Theresa May’s leadership rival before 
pulling out on Monday, was a surprise appointment to the Department for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra).

Leadsom was fresh meat in the Tories’ orgy of political homicide | Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/11/leadsom-fresh-meat-tory-orgy-political-homicide>
Leadsom’s new role has alarmed environmentalists, who highlighted her previous 
confusion about whether climate change is real and her support for a repeal of 
the hunting ban.

During her short leadership campaign, Leadsom pledged to hold a vote on 
bringing back foxhunting, saying it was “absolutely not proven to be in the 
interest of animal welfare whatsoever”. She said there was a “need to 
exterminate vermin, which foxes are” and called for a “proper, licensed regime”.

After becoming energy minister in 2015, Leadsom admitted having asked 
officials whether climate change was real.

“When I first came to this job one of my two questions was: ‘Is climate change 
real?’ and the other was ‘Is hydraulic fracturing safe?’ And on both of those 
questions, I am now completely persuaded,” she told the all-party parliamentary 
group on unconventional gas and oil in October last year.

However, since then she has repeatedly made it clear that decarbonising the 
energy supply is crucial and that this will not change after leaving the EU. 
“It is an essential responsibility that we hold towards our children and 
grandchildren, as the only way to effectively counter the threat of climate 
change,” shesaid this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/05/leadsom-vows-to-continue-with-uks-climate-commitments>
.

Despite this assurance, Andrew Cooper, a Green party energy spokesman, said: 
“By appointing Andrea Leadsom – a woman who supports foxhunting and has 
consistently voted against measures to tackle climate change – as environment 
secretary, and scrapping the Department for Energy and Climate Change entirely, 
May appears to be sending a clear message that fighting climate change is 
simply not on her agenda.”

In her new job, Leadsom will have the task of devising a new system to 
allocate money for farmers that currently comes through the EU through the 
common agricultural policy (CAP).

During the campaign, she said cash for farmers should continue “in the short 
term whilst we think about what makes sense”, which may cause concern in the 
industry given their reliance on subsidies.

Leadsom hinted there should be wider a shakeup of the system, saying: “Some of 
the things that would make sense would be environmental trading credits, 
because at the moment you have farmers who have to do a bit of environmental 
planning and a bit of farming just to meet the EU requirements.

“It would make so much more sense if those with the big fields do the sheep, 
and those with the hill farms do the butterflies. That would make a lot more 
sense for the UK and it’s perfectly possible but only if we leave the EU and 
sort it out for ourselves.”

In 2007, Leadsom argued that “subsidies must be abolished” in an article on 
how to rejuvenate British farming 
<http://www.andrealeadsom.com/working-for-you/andrea%27s-blog/does-britain-need-its-own-farming-industry/64>
.

 Farmers currently get up to £3bn a year in EU subsidies through CAP, making 
up 55% of an average farmer’s income of around £20,000 in 2014.

Whatever British agricultural policy replaces CAP, Leadsom will have the task 
of working out a fair new system that protects farming livelihoods.
 