
Bestselling Ukrainian novelist Andrey Kurkov is preparing to publish the 
diaries he has keptsince protests began in the country last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/19/ukraine-protests-timeline>.

Out later this month in France and Germany, the diaries have just been 
acquired for UK publication by Harvill Secker, which will release an English 
edition in July. "He's always kept a diary, and has been asked to publish 
before and hasn't wanted to, but recent events have changed his mind," said 
editor Ellie Steel. "I don't think Harvill Secker has ever translated and 
published a book in such a short space of time. The situation changes daily in
Ukraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>, and we felt it was 
important to publish Andrey's diaries as soon as possible, as close to their 
time of writing as we can."

The diaries, said Steel, run from 21 November, the night of the first 
EuroMaidan rallies following the government's decision to stop European Union 
integration, up until the last week of April. The book will be a mix of 
on-the-ground commentary, Ukrainian political history, and Kurkov's personal 
account of living through a time of intense political unrest, said Harvill 
Secker.

The author, best known for the hit novel Death and the Penguin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/apr/08/fiction.reviews>, told the 
Guardian that he had originally wanted to write "a book for foreign readers 
about Ukraine – which would help readers to get rid of traditional clichés 
existing about Ukraine thanks to journalists and some politicians". But while 
he readied his proposal for that title, Ukraine's prime minister announced that 
the country would not sign the association treaty with the EU, and the protests 
began.

"As I have written private diaries for over 35 years I carried on describing 
my and my family's life in the diary together with the situation in Kiev and in 
the country," said Kurkov. "And then I thought that this diary, together with 
some explanations of Ukrainian history and reality, would do better now than 
just a collection of essays. So on a daily basis I wrote what was happening in 
Ukraine, in Kiev, in our village house and Kiev flat starting from 21 November 
... The events of course go on, the occupation of the Crimea and what followed 
is also in my daily notes. In fact every evening I was sending new texts to my 
translators in Berlin and Paris."

Steel said the diaries would give "unique insight" into a situation which has 
"shocked the world". "From his flat in the heart of Kiev, Andrey can smell the 
burning barricades and hear the sounds of grenades and gunshot. This is a brave 
book, and an important one," she said.
 