
Andrew Flintoff's England career is as uncertain as ever following Monday 
night's surgery, which will keep him on crutches for at least six weeks.

The 31-year-old Lancastrian has retired from Test cricket to concentrate on 
the one-day game but his next England match will be months away, possibly not 
before next summer, following a routine arthroscopy and micro-fracture 
[surgery] to two small areas in his right knee. The work was performed by the 
surgeon Andy Williams in London but no one is naming the date for a comeback, 
least of all the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board.

In a statement yesterday, the ECB said: "The recovery will require him to be 
non-weight-bearing for the first six to eight weeks post surgery. At the end of 
this six-to-eight-week period, the knee will be reviewed by his surgeon and the 
time-scale for ongoing rehabilitation further determined."

England will play three one-day internationals against Bangladesh in 
February-March. That could mark Flintoff's return. But it is more likely to 
take place in the domestic season, providing he does not get injured again in 
the IPL. England's one-day team, as with the Test team, will view Flintoff as a 
bonus rather than a fixture.

The all-rounder, meanwhile, has encouraged England to build on their Ashes 
success. "We've won the Ashes, fantastic, but if lessons can be learned from 
the past, now is the time to try to dominate as a Test team," he said. "We've 
got the players to do it, we've got the captain to lead us, and it's a 
realistic goal."

Mike Hussey, meanwhile, has revealed the physical and emotional toll of the 
Ashes defeat. The Australian batsman said: "I was shattered really, absolutely 
shattered, pretty emotional at the end of it all. Sitting down there on Sunday 
– the boys had gone down on the ground – and I was taking my pads off in the 
dressing room, it was pretty hard to take."

Hussey has a question mark over his international future even though he has an 
impressive Test average of 52.65. But his form has dipped since he made an 
astonishing start to his Test career. He averaged 85.00 in 2005, his first 
year, 80.42 in 2006 and 74.80 in 2007. Last year, though, he averaged 37.50 and 
this year it is down to 32.20 – he only part-rescued a disappointing season 
with the 121 at The Oval. The 34-year-old added: "You definitely have doubts. 
But I do know my game and just wanted to be true to my game. You have to have 
belief in that, and I got a lot of close support around the world."

Australia have crashed from No1 to No4 in the Test rankings and Hussey 
conceded: "In the cold light of day, we are probably not the best team in the 
world. We have to be honest about that."
 