
Andrew Symonds <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> loves a 
drink and he loves his rugby league, so when his beloved Queensland Maroons 
beat New South Wales Blues in the first best-of-three State of Origin finals, 
it was only natural that he would want to raise a glass or two in their honour.

Hell, watching the game on TV in England on Wednesday morning was not the same 
as actually being there, but he was on a day off. Some things just had to be 
celebrated, especially as a couple of team-mates were doing the same thing.

He wasn't about to overdo it or anything like that. All the Australian coaches 
ever harked on about these days was "exercise your skills". When it came to 
drinking he knew a thing or two. It was time for those skills to be allowed a 
light workout.

As an entry in Symonds' lengthy hall of shame, this latest "alcohol-related 
issue'' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jun/04/andrew-symonds-sent-home-world-twenty20>
 would not normally warrant a place in his top 100, were it not for the fact 
that, unlike his team-mates, he was on a final warning. And that code of 
conduct, agreed between Symonds, Cricket Australia and his psychologist, had 
strict limits on drinking, certainly daytime drinking. He broke the deal so he 
has been sent home. Cricket Australia had no other choice. It is as simple as 
that.

There have been so many last chances, so many betrayals of trust, that his 
Australia career is now surely at an end. WhatCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia's chief executive, James 
Sutherland, called "the last straw'' really will be that. He may even jump 
before he is pushed. You have seen your last of Andrew Symonds in an Australia 
shirt.

If I had realised, I would have taken more notice of a briefly roistering 
innings against Bangladesh in a World Cup warm-up at Trent Bridge on Monday. 
Instead, I only remember watching him lumber in to bowl and thinking that he 
was looking older.

Do not presume that from now on he will automatically get rich on an annual 
diet of the Indian Premier League, maybe even on England's P20, and any other 
Twenty20 tournament that may come along. If Queensland also calls time on an 
increasingly troubled career then the structures that have brought some 
discipline to his sporting life will disappear.

As a professional cricketer (hopefully not as a man, although the danger is 
definitely there), he will quickly go to seed. He will do well to hang on for 
one more year of IPL. What will be left will be the booze, the fishing, the 
sport on the telly, the most loyal of his mates (many hangers-on will vanish) 
and a few old tales about how he has blasted a cricket ball as hard as just 
about anybody who has ever lived. There are worse lives.

One of the great bar-room cricketers will no doubt gain some support down the 
pub. There will be talk of how he didn't do much wrong, how cricket has become 
po-faced, how Twenty20 started out as a bit of fun, and how one of the men most 
likely to provide that entertainment has been unfairly sent home. There will be 
tales of Ian Botham's drinking prowess (a talent that has not notably waned), 
of how Fred Trueman's exercise routine before a match consisted of marking out 
his run, and how this fitness-obsessed lot couldn't hold a candle to any of 
them.

But bar-room philosophy cannot be the approach of an Australian cricket team 
striving to achieve a notable hat-trick of one-day titles, by addingWorld 
Twenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> to the World Cup and 
the Champions Trophy, both played over 50 overs. Symonds had allegedly been 
grumpy at his diminished social life on tour, and was in danger of becoming 
disenchanted at best, a disruptive influence on the next generation at worst.

He has left us with memories of some fearsome hitting. It is only nine days 
ago – yes, just nine days – that Symonds' former Australia team-mate Adam 
Gilchrist lavished praise upon him as they both celebrated Deccan Chargers' 
victory in the IPL final. "He is a great team man," said Gilchrist. "He creates 
good spirit in the team. He's just a great personality and a wonderful talent 
on a cricket field."

It was also fun to be on an England tour of Australia when for a bit of a 
giggle he was invariably reminded of his Birmingham birthplace, so that we 
could see his eyes narrow beneath the heaps of sun cream as he would scowl: 
"I'm no Pom mate, I'm a fair-dinkum Aussie."

But the strongest memories will surround his off-the-field antics. It is hard 
to know where to start: turning up drunk for Australia's one-day international 
against Bangladesh in Cardiff four years ago; several bar-room fracas; skipping 
training to go fishing; or a slurring commercial radio interview earlier this 
year in which he called New Zealand's Brendon McCullum "a piece of shit".

Symonds' psychologist, Deirdre Anderson, who helped the great Australian 
swimmer Ian Thorpe cope with retirement, had promised Cricket Australia that 
they could anticipate more outstanding performances from "a good cricketer and 
a good man". She had added: "Alcohol may be a part of the problem but it's a 
case of assessing the person you are and the person you would like to be."

"Roy", perhaps unwittingly, has made his mind up. He is a man of great 
emotional highs and lows, and alcohol will play a part in that. In his low 
moments, he doesn't want to do the hard yards anymore. Perhaps the best that 
can be hoped is that one day soon he escapes to the wilds of North Queensland 
and the beers flow contentedly and peacefully for many years to come.
 