
Australia have left out Andrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> and Brad Hodge from the 
squad to play England for the Ashes as selectors rewarded players from the 
South Africa tour. Victorian all-rounder Andrew McDonald, who performed with 
distinction in Australia's Test triumph in South Africa, was preferred to 
Symonds and Hodge.

The squad features five players who took part in Australia's Ashes whitewash 
in the summer of 2006-07, with veterans Stuart Clark and Brett Lee returning 
after injury.

As expected, 20-year-old left-hander Phillip Hughes won a slot as an opener 
with Simon Katich. Hughes, who scored back-to-back hundreds in his second Test 
match in South Africa in March, has scored four centuries for Middlesex in the 
last five weeks.

Shane Watson was chosen for the all-rounder's berth despite his recent injury 
problems and not bowling since last December. Selectors expect him to be fully 
fit for the start of the Ashes and the ICC World Twenty20.

"Shane Watson has been named in the squad subject to fitness, but that is not 
expected to be a serious issue," the chairman of selectors, Andrew Hilditch, 
said. "He is recovering from a very mild groin strain at present and is 
expected to be fully fit for the ICC World Twenty20 in the UK and the 
commencement of the Ashes. Shane in our view has the ability to bat anywhere in 
the order and enables us to have a batsman in the top six who can provide 
quality pace support for the fast bowling group."

Nathan Hauritz was preferred ahead of Victorian Bryce McGain after performing 
well in recent one-dayers in South Africa and the UAE.

In keeping with tradition, selectors chose a back-up wicketkeeper, naming 
South Australian Graham Manou as Brad Haddin's understudy.

Hilditch said the squad contained a blend of experience and youth. It contains 
only four players who have played a Test in England and 11 first-time Ashes 
tourists.

"The core of the squad is made up of the side which successfully won the Test 
series in South Africa and includes Phillip Hughes and Marcus North who both 
scored hundreds on debut," Hilditch said.

"We expect the Ashes to be an exciting and riveting encounter, consistent with 
the great tradition of rivalry between England and Australia.

"Attempting to beat England on home soil is a great challenge for this young 
Australian squad and both Ricky and the squad are looking forward to it 
immensely. It promises to be a very exciting series."

The Australia captain Ricky Ponting said players such as McDonald and North 
had been rewarded for their efforts in South Africa, where Australia rebounded 
from a home series loss to the Proteas to hang on to the No1 Test ranking.

"It was a great triumph over there," said Ponting, who has played 26 Ashes 
Tests and was captain when Australia lost the series in 2005. "I'm very excited 
about the upcoming Ashes series, particularly after that the last series in 
South Africa."

Australia's Twenty20 squad will depart for Britain next week before the first 
Test starts in Cardiff on 8 July.

Australia squad to face England in the 2009 Ashes series: Ricky Ponting (c), 
Michael Clarke (vc), Stuart Clark, Brad Haddin, Nathan Hauritz, Ben Hilfenhaus, 
Phillip Hughes, Michael Hussey, Mitchell Johnson, Simon Katich, Brett Lee, 
Graham Manou, Andrew McDonald, Marcus North, Peter Siddle, Shane Watson.
 