
“The whole of everything is never told,” said Henry James – and often we don’t 
even get the half of it. The 300-odd-years of slavery in Jamaica from the 16th 
century until abolition in 1834 is a case in point. It was black Africans who 
were forced to endure slavery in Jamaica. But it was white Europeans who wrote 
their immediate history. In her afterword to The Long Song,Andrea Levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrea-levy> explains that she found 
precious little documentary material written by the black majority. Nearly all 
contemporary accounts of the life of slaves came from the European perspective. 
And whether they were written by well-meaning abolitionists or slave owners, 
they came, says Levy, through the “weird” filter of European racism.

Andrea Levy's The Long Song for December's reading group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/dec/08/andrea-levy-the-long-song-december-reading-group>
The Long Song is a way of “putting back the voices that were left out” and 
redressing this imbalance. “I wanted to put back the voices of everyday life 
for black Jamaicans that are so silent on the record,” says Levy. “If history 
has kept them silent then we must conjure their voices ourselves and listen to 
their stories”

This, then, is a novel where voice matters even more than usual. Seeing how 
this voice is established – powerful, overwhelming even, right from the get go 
– is one of the many fascinating things about The Long Song.

The novel opens with a forward, purportedly written by another hand, that of 
the narrator’s son, Thomas Kinsman. Conveniently enough he is a printer and so 
has been able to produce this book, which he tells us “was born of a craving”. 
This framing device seems old-fashioned – but of course, that’s how things 
should be in a book purporting to have been made in 1898. It also allows Levy a 
few pages in which to soften up we readers and prepare us for the storm ahead. 
While discussing the practicalities of the production of the book, Kinsman also 
lets us know what kind of person we are dealing with: “a sweet woman” – but one 
who tirelessly seeks him out, haranguing him, following him even to his place 
of work to tell her story. Also, “a resolute woman”, insistent upon having her 
way – even if initially fearful of the process of writing.

So when the opening proper comes it’s not as wrong-footing as it might have 
been. We already have an image of a determined woman, old enough not to worry 
too much about upsetting anyone in her audience. We’re primed to expect a few 
fireworks.

They come right away. There’s real shock value in hearing about (what we must 
presume to be) this narrator’s own conception, described with hilarious 
ribaldry, and summed up in one curt opening sentence: “It was finished almost 
as soon as it began.”

This self-described “indelicate commencement” immediately provokes questions. 
How can the narrator know so much about her mother’s rape? Is it in fact her 
own conception? Is the narrator supposed to be writing a memoir or is she 
making up a fictional story? Is she close to Kitty – the woman who is assaulted 
in the first paragraph – but who seems more worried about what to do with the 
“limp offering”, a “crumpled bolt of yellow and black cloth” her white 
assailant gives her afterwards? Or is Kitty a figment of her imagination?

Good luck if you want to ask the narrator the answer to such questions. In the 
forward we’ve already been told that she doesn’t listen to her son’s advice – 
and now she even breaks off from her only-just-begun narrative to tell us that 
her Kinsman has complained again – and that she is not having it: “Please 
pardon me, but your storyteller is a woman possessed of a forthright tongue and 
little ink.”

Better luck still if you want to argue with her about what she may or may not 
possibly know. Within the space of just one paragraph she already warns you 
that if you don’t like her style, “be on your way, for there are plenty of 
books to satisfy if words flowing free as the droppings that fall from the 
backside of a mule is your desire”.

The Long Song by Andrea Levy | Book review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/07/the-long-song-andrea-levy> 
She’s funny – but she’s also fierce. Expanding on those mule droppings, she 
urges any reluctant readers to go away to the other books “wrapped in leather 
and stamped in gold” and “whose contents you will find meandering through the 
puff and twaddle of some white lady’s mind”. European readers are not going to 
get an easy ride. There’s little love for “white ladies” here.

In the normal run of editing, thus alienating a big chunk of potential 
audience, and further suggesting to a reader that they might prefer another 
book would be met with a red pen, exclamation marks and quite a few uses of the 
word “no”. But, as I say, good luck here. Kinsman’s mother makes such remarks 
again and again. Wonderfully, for instance, she says she isn’t going to bother 
filling in too much historical background, referring us instead to a book 
called Conflict and Change. A view from the great house of slaves, slavery and 
the British Empire, adding: “… if you do read it and find your head nodding in 
agreement at this man’s bluster, then away with you – for I no longer wish you 
as my reader.”

As she lets us know that she is a narrator who isn’t going to stand for 
narrative convention, she also neatly and cleverly frees herself from the 
restraints of the usual first-person storytelling. In sowing doubt about 
whether the book is a memoir or a story (and in letting it be so definitely 
known that she doesn’t care what anyone thinks about that) she has allowed 
herself the best of both worlds. There’s a feeling of intimate knowledge, of 
high stakes and personal anger and sorrow. Of things endured, horrors 
witnessed, joys shared. But she can also swoop in and out of place and time and 
flit from person to person, scene to scene, however she sees fit.

So, in just a few short and apparently simple pages, we get a fantastic 
induction into another world. The world controlled by this woman. A woman who 
can give us intrigue – why is she so angry with white ladies, anyway? A person 
of strong, strident personality. A storyteller with no concerns about 
convention. “Stay if you wish to hear a tale of my making,” she says with 
typical defiance. I, for one, found it impossible to say no. It’s a voice that 
promises so much, after all ...
 