
'Making two a year from 1960 onwards, I could have made 20 films. Fat chance 
with our idiots", wroteAndrei Tarkovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky> in his diaries in 1970. In 
fact, Tarkovsky, the greatest and most imitated director Russia has produced in 
the last 50 years, made seven full-length films between 1962 - when Ivan's 
Childhood burst upon the world - and 1986, when The Sacrifice was completed. 
Two of these films were made outside Russia where the authorities deeply 
suspected his motives and were unwilling to accord him state funds.

In defence of the authorities (who often were indeed idiots), Tarkovsky was 
difficult to please. As an artist he felt entitled to be. I remember visiting 
the location set of The Sacrifice on the Swedish island of Faroe. It was 
bitterly cold, and since a night scene was called for, the cast, including the 
British actress Susan Fleetwood, waited for Tarkovsky, shivering in night 
attire. He was half an hour late and, according to a production assistant, had 
spent much of that time staring at himself in the mirror, readjusting his scarf 
and hat. "If he wasn't such a damned good director," Fleetwood said, "I'd have 
left long ago."

But, of course, he was a damned good director - a metaphorical looking glass, 
as one critic has said, providing man with a reflection of himself. Perhaps his 
most Russian film and, oddly enough, the film that has been most appreciated in 
the west, isAndrei Rublev <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-rublev>, 
Tarkovsky's second. It is epic in scale and scope - a commentary on the 
physical and spiritual foundations of Russia itself.

Rublev was not a fictional character but an icon painter and monk who lived 
and worked on the cusp of the 13th and 14th centuries, trained by the even more 
celebrated Theophanes the Greek. Tarkovsky attempted to paint a portrait of the 
time, as much through psychological truth as ethnographic accuracy. The 
landscape of Russia did the rest. "Our Russia - it has to endure everything," 
says Rublev at one point to the spectre of Theophanes, who replies that it 
probably always will.

The film begins with a peasant launching himself in a balloon from a cathedral 
across the landscape of medieval Russia and ends with a superb montage of 
Rublev's surviving icons. In between, Rublev witnesses the often horrific 
sufferings of a divided Russia, split between feuding princelings and Tartar 
invaders.

There are eight episodes in all, the most notable being the story of a boy 
who, to save his life, pretends he can cast a giant bell and succeeds through 
blind faith - a feat that inspires Rublev to paint again.

The film is as much about the role of the artist in society as it is about the 
emergence of the Russian nation. Rublev can only create art by sharing the 
sufferings of the age in which he lives. All Tarkovsky's films say this, and 
their spiritual preoccupations and the poetic formulation of these that sets 
them apart. You can object to his vision as messianic and sometimes 
fundamentalist. It is hard, however, to mock the impact of his films.
 