
It is not unduly curmudgeonly to point out – even in the glowing aftermath of 
Sunday's victory – that this is certainly not England's best Ashes-winning side 
of the last 50 years. By ruling out the triumphs of the 1950s under Sir Len 
Hutton and Peter May on the basis that this youthful correspondent was still in 
his nappies when Jim Laker was bewildering 19 hapless Aussies at Old Trafford 
in 1956, the list has cunningly been reduced to eight teams. But that's enough 
to start an argument.

Even if we resort to the time-honoured refuge of selectors around the world – 
the process of elimination – there are still problems ahead. For example, how 
much emphasis should be given to the quality of the opposition?

It was not Mike Brearley's fault that he captained England teams against 
Australian sides who were diminished by the Kerry Packer affair. In 1978-79 
England, with Ian Botham and David Gower emerging fast, Bob Willis bowling fast 
and Geoff Miller bewildering callow recruits with his off-spin, thrashed 
Australia's second team 5-1.The opposition possessed a kamikaze captain, Graham 
Yallop, one quality fast bowler in Rodney Hogg, and many others who would never 
have worn the baggy green in a different era.

Even in 1977 when the Australians were beaten 3-0, Packer was in the picture. 
The secret came out in May at Hove just before the Test series began and it 
soon became apparent that the rifts were already there in the Australian side. 
Moreover Dennis Lillee, Ian Chappell and Ross Edwards were absent against an 
England side that sometimes contained four Packer men of their own, Tony Greig, 
Alan Knott, Derek Underwood and Dennis Amiss. But this quartet would not 
undermine the unity of the team.

So two of Brearley's teams are already out of the running. So are those of 
David Gower in 1985 and Mike Gatting in 1986-87. Of course Botham was still 
around, the spin combination of John Emburey and Phil Edmonds, more skilled 
than the practitioners we have seen in this series, were always in harness. But 
the fact is that in the 80s England and Australia were closer to playing for 
the wooden spoon of international cricket than battling to decide which was the 
best in the world. We all knew that this accolade belonged to the West Indies 
by a mile.

We now have four sides left: those of Ray Illingworth in 1970-71, Brearley in 
1981, Michael Vaughan in 2005 and Andrew Strauss in 2009. And we cannot cling 
on to Strauss's side any longer.

Their victory may go down as the cleverest. The Australians have hit eight 
centuries to England's two. The top three wicket-takers in the series are all 
Australians. England have had to play without their "great" players. Kevin 
Pietersen could only hobble for two Test matches. Andrew Flintoff managed to 
hobble for four, but statistically neither could make much of a contribution. 
The home side's middle order often felt as limp as a slice of stale celery. Yet 
England still won. Very clever. In this instance the opposition was resolute, 
united but short of class and variety in the field.

The 2009 Australian tourists were probably more united than those of 1981. Kim 
Hughes lacked the unadulterated support that Ricky Ponting has earned over the 
years. But they did have a lead of 1-0, which was bound to increase to 2-0 at 
Headingley until Botham had "a bit of a slog". The team that Brearley was 
persuaded to rejoin was not one of England's greatest; it just happened to 
participate in one of the most astonishing series of all time.

We are down to two. Ray Illingworth's side had many obstacles to overcome. 
They were playing away; the management team was a joke. The manager, David 
Clark from Kent, appointed on the assumption that Colin Cowdrey would lead the 
side, had only one thing on common with Illingworth: neither liked the other. 
An extra Test was added to the schedule at the last minute of an already 
gruelling tour. Yet the Ashes were regained against a tough Australian side 
after two victories in Sydney and heroic performances throughout from John Snow 
and Geoff Boycott, supported by a sturdy band of hardened English pros. But 
they are now eliminated.

So the 2005 side, despite the presence of "journeymen" like Ashley Giles, 
Geraint Jones and Ian Bell, is the one still standing. In 2005 Australia still 
had their galacticos – they would hang on for their ruthless revenge in 2006-07 
– and yet they were beaten. The quality of the cricket was beyond anything we 
have seen in the last six weeks and the drama was unsurpassed even by the 
standards of 1981.

Not that I'm complaining about what we have just witnessed, you understand. 
Now argue among yourselves.
 