
Andrea Levy's story of the end of slavery, The Long Song, has won the £25,000 
Walter Scott prize for historical fiction.

Told as the memoir of an old Jamaican woman who was once a slave on a 
sugar-cane plantation in early 19th-century Jamaica, The Long Song beat titles 
including David Mitchell's tale of 18th-century Japan, The Thousand Autumns of 
Jacob de Zoet, and Tom McCarthy's experimental take on the life of a first 
world war radio operator, C, to win the award.

Levy said she was "very honoured" to have been chosen by judges as this year's 
winner. "This is a generous literary prize which focuses attention on an 
important aspect of the role of fiction. Fiction can – and must – step in where 
historians cannot go because of the rigour of their discipline.Fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> can breathe life into our lost or 
forgotten histories," said the author, who won the Orange prize for her 
evocation of a Jamaican immigrant couple in postwar London, Small Island.

"My subject matter has always been key to what and why I write – the shared 
history of Britain and those Caribbean islands of my heritage," she added. "So 
lastly I would like to remember all those once-enslaved people of the Caribbean 
who helped to make us all what we are today."

The judging panel, which included children's author Elizabeth Laird and 
journalist and historical novelist Allan Massie, said The Long Song was "quite 
simply a celebration of the triumphant human spirit in times of great 
adversity".

"Andrea Levy brings to this story such personal understanding and imaginative 
depth that her characters leap from the page, with all the resilience, humour 
and complexity of real people," they said in a statement. "There are no clichés 
or stereotypes here."

The Walter Scott prize is sponsored by the Duke and Duchess of Buccleuch, 
whose ancestors were closely linked to Scott, and uses Scott's famous novel
Waverley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780140430714/waverley> 
to pin down what constitutes historical fiction: events must have taken place 
at least 60 years before publication, making them outside the author's own 
"mature personal experience". Last year's inaugural award was won by Hilary 
Mantel, for her story of the life of Thomas Cromwell, Wolf Hall.
 