
Andrew Motion has won the Ted Hughes award for new work in poetry 
<http://poetrysociety.org.uk/competitions/ted-hughes-award/> for a radio 
programme inspired by some of the last British soldiers to leave Afghanistan.

Motion was presented with the prize at a ceremony in London on Thursday 
evening.

Established in 2009 by Carol Ann Duffy, who succeeded Motion as poet laureate, 
the award recognises the year’s most exciting contribution to poetry and is 
funded with the annual honorarium that the poet laureate traditionally receives 
from the Queen.

Motion was named winner for Coming Home, a radio performance 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/radio4/entries/7172d1d8-6828-3d11-b907-83b81596d346>
 based on recordings he made when he met soldiers returning from Afghanistan 
and their families. The poems addressed the effects of war, using threads of 
the conversations.

The prize judges were the artist Grayson Perry and the poets Kei Miller and 
Julia Copus.

Copus said Coming Home was a deserving winner. “We loved the way in which the 
listener is invited in to the writing process. First, we eavesdrop on 
conversations with the soldiers and then we witness poems hatching from those 
conversations.

“The author has gone to some lengths to absent himself from the lines and 
claims to have changed very little to produce what he calls ‘a rapid fire kind 
of poetry’, but don’t be fooled: Motion’s skilful shaping and alterations have 
resulted in a subtle and magical transformation.

“All the time we are aware of a gap between the interviewees’ words and the 
sorrow that lies behind them. It’s this gap thatAndrew Motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrewmotion> exploits to make accessible, 
innovative and deeply moving poetry.”

Motion was chosen as the £5,000 winner from a shortlist that included Patience 
Agbabi, Imtiaz Dharker, Carrie Etter, and Alice Oswald.

Motion is one of Britain’s most celebrated poets and held the title of poet 
laureate between 1999 and 2009. He is a professor of creative writing at Royal 
Holloway College, University of London and co-founder of the onlinePoetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> Archive.

His programme, broadcast on Radio 4 last year, came about after he spent time 
at the British Army camp in Bad Fallingbostel in northern Germany interviewing 
returning soldiers serving with 7th Armoured Brigade, also known as the Desert 
Rats.

In an interview with the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/09/andrew-motion-desert-rates-remembrance-day>
, Motion said: “Although I was only with them with them for a few days, it was 
extraordinarily intense and moving.”

At the same ceremony, Roger Philip Dennis, an artist and art tutor, was named 
winner of this year’s national poetry competition, the world’s biggest 
international open competition for single poems.


The judging panel of poets Roddy Lumsden, Glyn Maxwell and Zoë Skoulding 
called Corkscrew Hill Photo a “stunning poem which mixes sweetness, sentiment, 
the visual and a touch of the grotesque”.

Lumsden said: “I couldn’t quite grasp what it was about, but in the best of 
ways. I wanted to reread and make my own story from what I was being offered. 
Like all good poems, it offered the shared experience of writership and 
readership.

Dennis becomes the 37th person to win the annual Poetry Society competition, 
with its £5,000 prize. Previous winners have included Duffy, Tony Harrison, Jo 
Shapcott, Ruth Padel and Helen Dunmore.

Dennis’s work was chosen from more than 13,000 poems. Runner-up was Joanne Key 
for The Day the Deer Came and third was Fran Lock for Last Exit to Luton.
 