
As the Sydney Opera House’s Festival of Dangerous Ideas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/03/some-blunt-truths-and-a-ray-of-hope-for-the-refugee-justice-movement>
 nears the end of its first day, a well-heeled middle-aged couple are browsing 
the pop-up bookshop selling works by the festival’s headliners. The woman taps 
her husband on the shoulder and holds up a copy of Andrew Bolt’s new book, 
Worth Fighting For.

“Darl, why don’t we get this for your dad?” she asks teasingly, a grin on her 
face.

Her husband, dressed impeccably in a tweed suit jacket and trilby hat, visibly 
recoils at the suggestion, looking her up and down as though a spell has 
suddenly fallen from his eyes and he’s discovered he’s been tricked into 
marrying a snake.

“Jesus, Janet, no! What are you thinking?”

Needless to say, the festival is not Bolt’s usual crowd. The yearly talkfest 
has a reputation for attracting well-moneyed progressives of the pre-prime 
minister Malcolm Turnbull variety, which made Bolt’s appearance as the guest of 
choice for the regular “How Many Dangerous Ideas Can One Person Have?” fixture 
something of an odd fit.

Bolt and the festival hardly have the most cordial of histories. In 2014, he 
railed againstthe programmed appearance 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/blogs/andrew-bolt/honor-killing-speech-cancelled-critics-blamed/news-story/0db8d6142c7c687e88d78bdeae294ea1>
 of writer Uthman Badar, who was to speak on the ethics of “honour killings”, 
and contributed to the event’s swift cancellation. Two years later, the 
announcement that Bolt himself was being given a prime spot on the lineup 
likewise prompted outrage, with the Indigenous actorNakkiah Lui leading a 
petition 
<https://www.pedestrian.tv/news/arts-and-culture/nakkiah-lui-leads-charge-of-people-wanting-andrew-/34e14d21-778a-4e79-9eaf-16e402282b92.htm>
 to have him dropped from the event on the grounds that giving him a platform 
amounted to “legitimising his hate speech and closing your doors to those he 
vilifies”.

The Opera House, which said little throughout the kerfuffle, defended the 
decision to invite Bolt: “The FODI session is a rare opportunity to interrogate 
the views and ideas that Mr Bolt will present”.

Such an opportunity doesn’t come often. While he hardly needs additional 
platforms from which to sell himself, Bolt exercises strict control over almost 
every iteration of his public profile. His columns go to print in newspapers 
that share his ideological leanings. The guests on his TV show, The Bolt 
Report, are usually either his fellow travellers or someone he wants to give a 
talking to.

Some blunt truths and a ray of hope for the refugee justice movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/03/some-blunt-truths-and-a-ray-of-hope-for-the-refugee-justice-movement>
So there was a genuine reason for someone not of Bolt’s political persuasion 
to go along: how would this very prolific, powerful influence on our political 
landscape do in an arena not of his choosing? Against a live, unpredictable and 
probably hostile audience willing to challenge him?

The answer, unfortunately, was not forthcoming; the long-awaited Great Clash 
of Ideas in the hopefully named Drama Theatre never materialised. What 
transpired instead was an hour-long fizzer: half puff-piece interview, half 
talking points regurgitation.

Besides his standard denunciations of the ABC, the Racial Discrimination Act, 
climate change “warmism” – “In what other field of human endeavour do you hear 
‘the science is settled’? What kind of moron says that?” – Bolt happily used 
the furore around his appearance to play the martyr card when it suited. “The 
security you’ve had to arrange for this event, it’s not to save you!” he joked 
to the audience early on, putting forward an argument that his dangerous ideas 
place himself in more danger than anybody else.

FODI cofounder Simon Longstaff, who MCed the event and interviewed Bolt for 
close to an hour, was less of a foil than he was a wet napkin. Strange gaps in 
Bolt’s free speech-at-all-costs mantra went unchallenged – like when he 
wondered out loud why “people can protest wherever they like” and why 
protesters feel the need to “create a great nuisance to other people”. 
(Presumably Black Lives Matter co-founder Alicia Garza, who headlined her own 
event two hours later, would have a thing or two to say about that.)

Nor did Bolt’s own campaign to remove Badar from the lineup in 2014 come up. 
At the end, Longstaff thanked the crowd for facilitating “a celebration of 
reason, rather than righteous indignation”, adding that he “can’t stand the 
yelling that goes on”.

The hour might have benefited from a bit of yelling, if only to liven things 
up a bit. The fifteen minutes for questions at the end didn’t bring the robust 
debate and interrogation the Opera House hoped would justify Bolt’s appearance, 
with proceedings quickly devolving into a weird, slightly unsettling love-in.

“Thank you so much, you’re brave, you’re courageous, we love you,” gushed one 
young questioner. Another, who began his question with the phrase “as a 
libertarian”, spent the next five minutes talking about what we can learn from 
the French Revolution. The single audience member who asked a mildly 
challenging question, inquiring if his position on human-induced climate change 
was softening given new evidence, was yelled at to “get out” by someone in the 
crowd and scoffed at by Bolt himself.

For a festival that prides itself on being “dangerous”, arguably the biggest 
sin FODI committed in pencilling Bolt in was that of being boring. People who 
agree with Bolt showed up to cheer him on, people who don’t went to watch race 
discrimination commissioner Tim Soutphommasane instead and security ensured no 
one too suspicious-looking did any event hijacking. After all that fuss, no one 
in the audience came away with anything different to what they carried in.
 