
Overlooked during the week for a place on Australia's Ashes tour, Andrew 
Symonds <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> today reminded the 
selectors of his all-round worth by helping Deccan Chargers to a six-run 
victory over Bangalore Royal Challengers in the final of the Indian Premier 
League in Johannesburg.

Symonds smashed 33 in 21 balls to help lift Deccan – last year's whipping boys 
– to 143 for six in their 20 overs, then took two wickets in two balls as the 
Bangalore run-chase faltered. Some late boundaries left Bangalore needing 15 
off RP Singh's final over, but the last pair of Robin Uthappa and Anil Kumble 
could manage only eight.

For Symonds, who had been the tournament's most expensive non-Indian player 
until the signings of Andrew Flintoff and Kevin Pietersen, this was payback 
after a walk-on part in last year's competition. His partnership of 40 in 32 
balls with the South African opener Herschelle Gibbs changed the mood of the 
match after his captain Adam Gilchrist had fallen in the first over of the game 
and was followed soon after by Tirumalsetti Suman to leave the Chargers 
struggling on 18 for two.

And after Kumble, the veteran leg-spinner who finished with four for 16 from 
his four overs, had bowled Symonds, Gibbs anchored the innings to finish with 
an unbeaten 53 off 48 balls. Even so, a total of 143 for six felt no better 
than par.

Bangalore, the other easybeats from the 2008 IPL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ipl>, lost Jacques Kallis early, bowled by 
the tournament's leading wicket-taker RP Singh, but were back in the game when 
their pinch-hitter Roelof van der Merwe carted three quick sixes.

But when Van der Merwe was stumped off the left-arm spin of Pragyan Ojha for a 
21-ball 32, the Bangalore innings began to unravel. Rahul Dravid was bowled 
round his legs by Harmeet Singh, before Symonds removed the New Zealand 
dangerman Ross Taylor, caught at deep backward square, and Virat Kohli, stumped 
down the leg-side, in successive balls. After that, all Deccan just needed to 
keep their cool.

The result completed a remarkable turnaround for the Hyderabad-based 
franchise, who last year finished bottom of the eight-team league with just two 
wins in 14 league games. This year they snuck into the semi-finals only because 
their net run-rate was superior to that of Kings XI Punjab, but a comfortable 
win over the tournament favourites Delhi Daredevils in the semi-finals was the 
prelude to tonight's victory.
 