
Andrew Flintoff has urged England to establish themselves as the top side in 
world cricket 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2009/aug/23/strauss-england-no1-test-team-ashes-oval>
 after their Ashes success against England. The all-rounder, who is hoping to 
be back with the England one-day set-up in six months' time for the tour of 
Bangladesh once he has undergone surgery on his long-standing knee problem, was 
keen for the team to maintain their consistency after sealing a 2-1 series win 
at The Oval yesterday.

"What I think we need to do is, if there's any lesson to learn from 2005, it's 
to go for domination, to try to get No1 in the world," said Flintoff. "We've 
got the talent, we've got the side to do it. It's just a case of believing it 
and putting it into practice. There's no reason why we can't be the best in the 
world. We're a very talented team – but we can't get carried away."

Flintoff revealed that winning the final Test inside four days means he will 
undergo exploratory surgery tonight rather than tomorrow as was planned. He 
will then start another extensive period of rehabilitation in an attempt to 
become England's premier limited-overs cricketer.

"The fortunate thing about winning a day early is that they have brought my op 
forward," he said. "I can get that done tonight – then it's all about getting 
fit."

"The harsh reality is now that I need to get my knee sorted out. It's made me 
more determined to get back to playing fit. Last week was a hard one for me, 
lots of talks with the surgeon but the incentive is wearing the three lions and 
I desperately want to wear them again, albeit in one-day matches and Twenty20s."

"The surgeon has a good idea of what he's going to find. I think it'd be wrong 
for me to speculate on that. Then like I say the rehab ... We'll see when I 
wake up after the anaesthetic and see where I'm at with it.

"Realistically I think before Christmas I'm going to struggle. Obviously I've 
retired from Test cricket but there's a tour to Bangladesh which I desperately 
want to be involved in. So realistically I think that could be my first cricket 
after this Test."

As for his immediate goal when he regains fitness, Flintoff said: "I want to 
be the best one-day cricketer in the world and I can set my sights on that."

The 31-year-old Lancastrian is confident he is leaving the England Test set-up 
in a healthy state.

"One comforting thing is, having seen yesterday and the past five Test 
matches, is that I'll disappear and the England side will be in good hands," he 
said. "The likes of [Jonathan] Trott [have] come in and everybody's forgetting 
about KP. Our best player has not played the bulk of this Test series. So the 
future of the side is in good hands."

Flintoff paid particular tribute to captain and man of the series, Andrew 
Strauss. Strauss was overlooked for the role in favour of Flintoff during 
England's disastrous Ashes whitewash Down Under in 2005-06, but took over the 
captaincy from Kevin Pietersen last winter.

"I think in a roundabout way we got to the right man for the job," he said. 
"There was lot of speculation [about who would be captain] between me and him 
for the last Ashes series. I said before, I probably took one for the team 
there. We got beat but it's enabled Straussy through different circumstances to 
take over.

"Straussy leads by example, not just with his batting but with the way he 
conducts himself. He's a popular lad. I'm sure in four or five years' time when 
someone else is sat in this chair being asked what Andrew Strauss was like as a 
captain ... [They'll say] he was a belter."

Flintoff's last act in Test cricket was effectively his run out of Ricky 
Ponting 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2009/aug/23/andrew-flintoff-farewell-fling-ashes-vic-marks>
 in Australia's second innings to end a stand of 127 for the third wicket, and 
he admitted that it had been difficult to make the decision to retire.

"I loved playing Test cricket – it feels strange talking about it in the past 
tense. Having the opportunity to play Tests at my home ground [Old Trafford] 
and walk out at The Oval should never be taken lightly.

"It's one of those things you don't want to end – but like all things it comes 
to an end at some point and I couldn't ask for a better way for it to finish. 
To win the Ashes twice is everything. I'm proud to be English and represent my 
country and I feel very fortunate to do it on and off for the last 10, 11 years 
or so."
 