
The former Sky Sports <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports> presenter 
Andy Gray has admitted that he considered killing himself after being sacked by 
the broadcaster for making sexist remarks about a football official and a 
fellow colleague.

The 56-year-old Gray made the admission in an interview with London's Evening 
Standard in which he also said he has found the decision to sack him and the 
stain it has cast on his reputation hard to accept.

Asked if he has considered taking his own life since his dismissal, he said: 
"Yes. I would be lying if I said I didn't. I had never felt like I have felt 
from January 25th [last year] onwards."

And despite resuming his media career with a job as a Talksport presenter 
alongside Richard Keys – who resigned shortly after Gray was sacked – the 
former Everton and Scotland striker has found it hard not to dwell on what 
happened at Sky.

"It happened on a Saturday morning," recalls Gray. "I got a call on Monday 
from Andy Melvin [deputy head of Sky Sports] just telling us, 'Don't come in 
today for Monday night football.' It escalated from there for some reason, I've 
no idea why."

Gray was later sacked by Sky's head of sport, Barney Francis, after footage 
emerged of him making sexist remarks about the assistant referee Sian Massey to 
Sky's pitchside reporter Andy Burton and also of an incident caught on camera a 
month earlier in which he made a suggestive comment to his colleague Charlotte 
Jackson.

Gray is still adamant that the incident does not cast him in a true light. 
"This was a private bit of banter released to the social media and for some 
reason the press etc tore us apart," he said. "I have no problems with a woman 
referee. It wasn't a criticism, it was a light-hearted quip.

"I wish I'd never said it and, if I caused Sian any problems, then of course 
I'm terribly disappointed. Richard [Keys, who resigned after he was seen 
laughing with Gray in the footage] phoned her, apologised on our behalf and she 
said, 'Don't be so stupid, guys.'"

As for what happened with his colleague Jackson, Gray said: "Again, it's 
probably an old man trying to be funny. It was no more than that. Charlotte 
knows us very well. For 17 years, my life was a dressing room and everyone 
who's been in a dressing room knows what kind of banter goes on.

"It's a place where you can get ripped apart at times by your fellow players. 
We had that type of dressing room at Sky where we wanted people to feel 
comfortable and we had conversations about many things.

"In 20 years in studios up and down the country I've heard people saying 
things off camera that would make your hair curl. I do not see myself as 
sexist. Not in a million years. I have four daughters and I was brought up by a 
wonderful mother on her own. She's 91 and is distraught about what happened."
 