
The shadow home secretary, Andy Burnham, has said he would not be afraid of 
“challenging or contradicting” national Labour policy if he were elected mayor 
ofGreater Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> in May 
2017.

Speaking after he was declared the party’s candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/andy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor>
 for the role, the MP for Leigh said he would not hesitate to take different 
policy positions to the Labour leader if it was the right thing for people 
living in the region.

“I’d always be respectful of the position of the leader of the party, but my 
primary job will be to represent the people of Greater Manchester and to make 
their voices heard on the national stage even if that means at times 
challenging or contradicting nationalLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> policy,” he said.

Burnham won 51% of a vote from party members in the region, beating the area’s 
police and crime commissioner and interim mayor, Tony Lloyd (29%), and the MP 
for Bury South, Ivan Lewis, who was a government minister under Tony Blair and 
Gordon Brown (19.8%). Burnham won the contest with 3,792 votes to Lloyd’s 2,163 
and Lewis’s 1,472, on a turnout of 65.3%.

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, congratulated Burnham on his victory, saying 
the mayoral race would be an opportunity for Labour to take its message of 
social justice to the region’s 2 million voters in next year’s election.

The shadow home secretary said he would stand down as an MP at the “first and 
earliest opportunity” if he won the race to become mayor next May, as appears 
likely given that almost all of Manchester’s council seats are filled by Labour.

Asked during a press conference after the announcement whether he would resign 
from the shadow cabinet, Burnham said: “Next month there will be a decision on 
the leadership of our party going forward and it will then be for the leader of 
the party to decide whether or not I remain in the shadow cabinet.”

“I think Labour does need to break out of its Westminster-centric mode,” 
Burnham later told the Guardian. “I’m standing in this to give Labour a 
stronger northern identity, to stop our voice being drowned out by Scotland – 
which is what I perceive to have been happening in recent times – and to put 
Labour back in touch with the voters that we’ve lost here.

“I see this as a crucial part of Labour’s rejuvenation in the long term going 
back to the grass roots, because I don’t see Westminster Labour coming up with 
the solutions any time soon.”

The shadow home secretary said the “London perspective on life” dominated 
British political debate and had left many people feeling abandoned.

“People voted leave [in the EU referendum] for a whole complicated set of 
reasons, with that being one of them. Mainstream political parties will not get 
many chances to respond to what people are saying before they look elsewhere.”


Despite having been an MP for 15 years, and a frontbencher for about eight of 
those years, Burnham denied that he was part of the Westminster bubble he 
claimed to oppose. “In the cabinet pre-2010, I was speaking about the failure 
to respond to legitimate concerns on immigration,” he said.

“I stood in 2010 for the leadership complaining about a London-centric Labour 
party and I did it again last year. I don’t think people can accuse me of 
always being part of the club … I’ve always criticised it and challenged it.”

If he were to win in May and relocate from Westminster, the mayoral hopeful 
said he would miss his many friends and the power parliament affords to effect 
change quickly. “But I won’t miss the slight snobbery of the place, the slight 
dislike of accents, the old-school ways of doing things, the Oxbridge and 
public school atmosphere,” Burnham added.

The creation of elected mayors is a condition of a series of devolution 
arrangements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/03/the-guardian-view-on-english-devolution-grab-the-chance>
 agreed by the former chancellor George Osborne and a series of “metro” 
regions, including the West Midlands, Greater Manchester, the Liverpool and 
Sheffield city regions, the Tees valley, the north-east, and Greater 
Lincolnshire.

The mayor of Greater Manchester, a city region with a population of 3.5 
million which covers Bolton, Bury, Manchester, Oldham, Rochdale, Salford, 
Stockport, Tameside, Trafford and Wigan, will have control over a portfolio of 
public services and a £900m, 30-year investment fund, and will sit on a board 
that oversees a devolved £6bn health and social care budget.

Voting to select Labour’s candidates in Greater Manchester, the West Midlands 
and the Liverpool city region closed at 12pm on Friday. To be eligible to vote, 
Labour members were required to live in the relevant city region and have been 
a member of the party before 19 July 2015, a rule that has excluded a high 
proportion of the party’s new membership. The poll was conducted using the 
alternative vote system, and votes were cast by post and online.
 