
Andy Burnham (Let’s take back control of the immigration debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/take-back-control-immigration-debate-labour>
, 17 December) says that Labour activists have “had no answer” about free 
movement of labour for those (often prompted by the rightwing press) who 
expressed concern about pressure on jobs, wages, housing and schools. Some of 
us did. There were some jobs that local people would not take, not just 
low-paid jobs. In construction, or driving buses, firms had to recruit in 
eastern Europe. If wages are depressed, that’s down to the weakening of trade 
unions. If housing and schools are under pressure, that’s because – even with 
imported workers – private housebuilders can’t turn a big enough profit, and 
the Tories stopped local councils from building houses, while Tory education 
policies deliberately make it impossible to plan properly for new school places.

There are positives about immigration, once you get past the nonsense that 
people come here for benefits. With our ageing population and a dropping birth 
rate, immigrants pay taxes to fund our pensions and social care. And anyone 
wanting to be mayor ofGreater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> must know that the 
north-west, if it is to grow, faces a labour shortage (not just in skilled 
trades).

Two years ago, just as the Tories were starting to wind up the rhetoric on 
immigration, I was at the opening ofManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> City’s football academy, where 
George Osborne was guest of honour and announced £50m of government funding on 
sport facilities around the UK – in a facility that cost £200m (of foreign 
investment) for that one site. It was built on the former dye works of Clayton 
Aniline – a company founded by a French immigrant. I spent the rest of 
Osborne’s speech compiling a little list of local firms founded by European 
immigrants or their children – Ferranti, Renold Chains, Beyer, Peacock, Brunner 
Mond (part of ICI).

I’m not sure what Andy’s “compromise” and “voice of reason” really means. 
Unless he buys into Theresa May’s nonsensical stance of “we want the best 
possible deal” (who would want the worst possible deal?), he’s effectively 
supporting “hard Brexit”. There really isn’t much room for compromise – the 
real problem is that “do you want hard or soft Brexit?” wasn’t on the ballot 
form. And if Andy wants to revive manufacturing industry in the area, he’ll 
need to know where the workers will come from.
Rev Canon Cllr Steve Parish
Warrington

• Unfortunately Andy Burnham has a point: Labour is out of touch not just with 
the lives of many of its traditional voters, but also with its socialist 
principles. Working-class people who complain about employers’ unscrupulous use 
of more “flexible” labour from eastern Europe are essentially accused of lying: 
for example, when Diane Abbott asserted that it has not had a negative impact 
on jobs, wages and conditions (Labour won’t win elections as ‘Ukip-lite’, 
Abbott warns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/26/labour-will-not-win-a-general-election-as-ukip-lite-says-diane-abbott>
, 26 November), she denied their lived experience. Their stories of the 
block-filling of jobs and lower hourly rates are dismissed as Daily Mail 
propaganda by middle-class liberals and leftists whose own comfort blinds them 
to the possibility of any motive other than a dislike of foreigners.

Yet many employment agencies specialising in eastern European workers openly 
market themselves to companies on the basis of lower costs, and promises that 
they will be able to avoid the expense of holiday and sick pay as well as 
national insurance. Some also boast that there will be no hiring/firing 
complications and no risk of industrial tribunals. And the grateful employers 
in turn peddle the reactionary lie – too often swallowed by Labour as well as 
the media – that the unemployed are unemployable layabouts. A hyperfocus on 
identity politics has driven some parts of theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> movement into what is essentially 
neoliberal economics – supporting, as Burnham suggests, big business to traffic 
workers for maximum profits.

Labour should spotlight what agencies and employers have been doing in 
response to the availability of workers from lower-wage and poorer-conditions 
economies. It should do this not because it will gain electoral support or even 
close out Ukip but because it is the right thing for a principled socialist 
party to do.
Peter McKenna
Liverpool

• Can this be true? A senior Labour politician Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> talking sense about EU 
immigration and the European left’s political irrelevance thanks to its 
cosmopolitan, kamikaze championing of the free movement of people.

If Brexit and Trump have taught us anything, it’s that it was the two “I”s, 
immigration and insecurity, that were behind their success. As the extreme 
right gains traction all over the continent, even the European left and 
centre’s most bone-headed advocates of the four freedoms will have to bow to 
the democratic winds of change and call for them to be limited. They were not 
after all carved in stone by Moses.

As the complexity, long timetable and costs of Brexit become clearer, once 
controlling the free movement of people is on the table, then a second 
referendum, or a parliamentary vote on the Brexit on offer, could lead to a 
very different result. Were Labour to pursue such an approach it could unite 
the huge numbers of remainers and Brexiteers who want both controls on 
immigration and a mutually beneficial relationship with our European 
neighbours. But will the likes of Diane Abbott and Jeremy Corbyn listen? If not 
they will to their shame almost inevitably lead the Labour party into political 
oblivion.
Colin Hines
East Twickenham, Middlesex

• Carwyn Jones, first minister of Wales, is wrong to criticise Labour’s 
immigration policy as too London-centric (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/08/corbyn-line-on-eu-immigration-risks-helping-ukip-warns-welsh-first-minister>
, 9 December). The value of free movement is not simply that it benefits London 
and other big cities; its value is that it has the capacity to stimulate 
economic activity and enterprise across the UK. Where the UK relies on free 
movement from other EU states to supply low- and medium-skilled workers, the 
evidence does not show that there is a pool of British citizens who are thereby 
displaced from work. Nor does it show that there is a material impact on wages 
and salaries. EU migration and the taxation of EU citizens in work leads to a 
net fiscal gain and provides the resources for the government to fund any extra 
provision of public services.

The LSE study Brexit and the Impact of Immigration on the UK 
<http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/brexit05.pdf> (May 2016) notes that “there 
is absolutely no statistically significant relationship (negative or positive) 
of EU immigration on unemployment rates of those born in the UK”. The report 
also notes that “wages of UK-born workers changed at much the same rate in 
areas with high EU immigration as in areas where the change in EU immigration 
was low”.

UK workers are protected by UK employment laws, buttressed by EU provisions as 
to working time; they are also protected by the fact that the ambit of 
contribution-based social security schemes and other schemes for social 
assistance is regulated at UK level. There is no case for damaging what works 
well. Designing a system of work permits solely to placate misplaced sentiment 
will not do. Concerns about the impact of the recession, globalisation, fiscal 
austerity and the failure of the government to make adequate provision for 
education, housing and healthcare in particular areas, need to be directed to 
the government rather than blamed on free movement.
Adrian Berry
Barrister, Garden Court Chambers

• Andy Burnham’s missing the point. It’s a fundamental misunderstanding to see 
single market access as a benefit against which free movement of people is a 
cost. Free movement is a win-win benefit. The only people who think it isn’t 
are people who never go anywhere, or whose children cannot conceive that they 
might one day study in Stockholm or work in Warsaw. Burnham calls this limited 
and limiting view of the world part of a “balanced approach”. It is no such 
thing. It is a continuous tilt against social mobility. We have failed to 
communicate the benefits of the broadest possible geographical view of work, 
study and travel. The answer is not to pretend that the broad view is some 
flawed pipedream of metropolitan elites; it is to show everyone, everywhere, 
how to enrich their lives through the possibility of movement.
Jon Harris
Knebworth, Hertfordshire

• On Sunday (18 December), the International Organisation for Migration 
<http://www.iom.int/> marked International Migrants Day by celebrating the 
positive impact of migration and diversity throughout the world and the 
overwhelming contributions of migrants to both their host countries and their 
countries of origin. We also remembered the many innocent lives lost on 
dangerous journeys in search of safety. In these increasingly uncertain times, 
we encourage everyone to come together to protect the safety, dignity and human 
rights of migrants. Migration is inevitable, necessary and desirable when well 
managed and it is up to each and every one of us to push outside our comfort 
zones and build a community of shared humanity; one of which we can be proud.
Dipti Pardeshi
Chief of mission, IOM UK

• I can’t understand why the Labour party is in such a muddle over immigration 
controls (Editorial: Sleaford exposes Labour’s lack of direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/guardian-view-on-sleaford-byelection-may-day-corbyn-calamity>
, 10 December). Surely the answer is to be consistent in your approach to 
regulating capitalism. Free markets don’t work perfectly. Social democracy is 
about ensuring that capitalism works in the interest of the mass of the people. 
It follows that rents may have to be controlled and landlords regulated; that 
employers must be made to pay a minimum wage, observe health and safety laws 
and not dismiss their workforces unfairly; that bank should not take 
unnecessary risks; that the media industry should not be dominated by a few 
providers. In these and many other ways markets are regulated.

Why then should the labour market be exempt from planning, control and 
regulation? Just because it is racist to prevent immigration solely on the 
grounds of nationality or skin colour, that shouldn’t deter a potential 
government from calling on labour market restrictions on rational, economic 
grounds. An oversupply of certain kinds of labour might threaten the existing 
workforce in an unacceptable way, and immigration should therefore be reduced; 
a shortage of labour or skills hinders economic growth and should lead to an 
increase in immigration. Approaching labour market problems from a rational, 
social-democratic perspective would be a way out of the Labour party’s current 
dilemma.
Arthur Gould
Loughborough, Leicestershire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 