
From turmoil to Ashes winners in only eight months – for Andy Flower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> it could not be a more 
impressive start to his England coaching career. But Flower is not one to lose 
focus. After a night of celebration he left the team's hotel for a jog soon 
after 8am to "blow a few cobwebs out".

He has never sought celebrity but as he ran alongside the River Thames he did 
not go entirely unnoticed. "Some of the guys on their way to the office were 
shouting 'well done' and that was brilliant," he said. "It has worked out 
rather well."

Outside the hotel, as England's players fought their way through photographers 
and well-wishers, a barbers' quartet was singing Jerusalem – surely for the 
last time, one can only take so much – but Flower insists that there will be no 
repeat of 2005 when England caused many to conclude the regaining of the Ashes 
brought a softening of focus. Flower recoils at suggestions that England are 
equipped to beat all comers.

"I have heard the phrase 'dominate the world' but I think it is getting ahead 
of ourselves using those sorts of terms," he said. "This side has a long way to 
go. We are only No5 in the world and there is quite a big margin between No5 
and No4. We have to bridge that first. We have proved we are a tough team but 
we are an inconsistent team. It has been lovely to go around the country and 
see the passion on people's faces. We have this hunger as a team and everything 
stems from that."

Flower inherited a fractured dressing room in the new year, not one where 
team-mates were at odds with each other but, after the spat between the coach, 
Peter Moores, and captain, Kevin Pietersen, that caused both men to lose their 
jobs, one in which togetherness was bound to be weakened. "We put down a few 
guidelines and principles, and the guys have embraced those principles," said 
Flower. "It is about putting the England team first above individual goals and 
ideals, something this team has done very well."

Flower must now continue England's development in Test cricket without Andrew 
Flintoff and decide whether Steve Harmison has a future in the team. Harmison, 
who has been contemplating retirement, indicated last night that he will 
continue if called up for the tour of South Africa which begins in November, 
and Flower had earlier hinted that he sees a role for the fast bowler going 
forward. "I hope he will carry on playing but this is his decision to make," he 
said.

As for Flintoff there was praise for his fighting qualities as he had another 
operation – "to fight back like he has is a testament to his strength of will 
and body" – but he evaded suggestions that Flintoff might inherit the first 
ever ECB full one-day contract as he commits himself entirely to the short 
forms of the game. Flower said: "We just have to see what happens with this 
operation. He might be out for a year. In time we can re-evaluate the 
situation."

Flower reserved unstinting praise for the captain, Andrew Strauss. "He is a 
very good leader and a strong man. In the changing room when the team needs a 
strong figure he has been there. I said when he took over that he would make a 
great captain for England and this Ashes success is some of the evidence of 
that."
 