
Andy Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-gray> has reportedly 
agreed a settlement with Sky following the termination of his contract after 
videos of his sexist behaviour were leaked on to the internet.

There had been talk of Gray expecting to receive a payment of between £3m and 
£4m from the broadcaster. However, a report in the Mail on Sunday said Gray was 
"offered and accepted a much smaller sum from his employer of 20 years". An 
unnamed Sky source was quoted as saying Gray's payout "really is a mere 
fraction of the £4m". Sky refused to comment today when contacted by the 
Guardian. Gray's lawyers, Schillings, and his public-relations representatives 
also refused to comment on the report.

Gray had been suspended following an off-air conversation with his 
co-presenter, Richard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/24/richard-keys-andy-gray-sexism>
, in which they questioned the ability of women to run the line. Gray said: 
"Women don't know the offside rule." Their conversation happened after Sian 
Massey was appointed as assistant referee in Wolverhampton Wanderers' defeat by 
Liverpool last month.

In the midst of the Gray-Keys storm, Massey was withdrawn from two subsequent 
assignments: a League Two fixture between Crewe Alexandra and Bradford City and 
Corby Town's match against Eastwood Town in the Blue Square Bet North. However, 
she was again involved yesterday. The World Cup assistant referee Mike 
Mullarkey declared an injury on Friday, with Massey replacing him for 
Chesterfield's 2-2 draw with Aldershot in League Two.

Aldershot's manager, Dean Holdsworth, said: "I thought she did her job as well 
as the guy on the other side of the park. She was professional, shook hands 
before and after the game and I thought she was fantastic." A spokesman for 
Professional Game Match Officials, the body that appoints referees and their 
assistants, said: "We looked for an appropriate opportunity to bring Sian back 
as soon as possible. She was one of four changes made on Friday."
 