
TalkSport presenter Andy Gray has accepted £20,000 from News of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> publisher News Group to 
settle his phone-hacking claim against the newspaper.

The newspaper group was also ordered to pay £100,000 in settlement with actor 
Sienna Miller.

Gray was one of five phone-hacking test cases that were due to go to court in 
January next year.

Gray's legal costs will also be met.

News International said in a statement: "News Group Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> announces today that it has 
reached an agreement with Andy Gray to pay him £20,000 in damages plus 
undisclosed costs.

"This concludes the action Andy Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-gray> was taking against NGN over 
voicemail interception in relation to the News of the World."

News International announced last week that a former high court judge, Sir 
Charles Gray,had been appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/16/phone-hacking-news-of-the-world-compensation-scheme>
 to administer its phone-hacking compensation scheme, which it is setting up to 
encourage victims to settle instead of pursing their civil claims through the 
courts.

It is offering to pay them 10% more than the amount the courts are likely to 
award in damages, plus legal costs, once the scheme is set up later this year.

The company has set aside up to £20m to pay off claimants it believes have a 
reasonable chance of winning their court cases.

Gray's was to be one of fives cases due to be heard in January 2012 along with 
those of Labour MP and former minister Chris Bryant, interior designer Kelly 
Hoppen, actor Jude Law and football agent Sky Andrew.

One of the five reserve cases chosen by judge Mr Justice Vos in May is now 
likely to be heard as part of next year's trial in place of Gray's case.

They are being brought by Nicola Phillips, a publicist who used to work for 
Max Clifford, former MP George Galloway, former England footballer Paul 
Gascoigne, Mary Ellen Field, who was employed as a business adviser to Elle 
MacPherson, and comedian Steve Coogan.

Lawyers representing Gray and others were in the high court on Monday seeking 
a court order which would force the Metropolitan police to hand over 11,000 
pages of documents seized in a 2006 raid on the home of Glenn Mulcaire, the 
private investigator who was on the News of the World's books.

They claim an archive of material retrieved by Scotland Yard five years ago 
will help them prove Mulcaire was targeting their clients at the request of 
News of the World journalists.

The archive also includes several mobile phones and 111 recordings Mulcaire 
made, which are stored on cassettes and MiniDiscs.

Hugh Tomlinson QC told the high court on Monday that the archived material 
would enable claimants to discover when their mobile phone messages were first 
intercepted and uncover the "modus operandi" used by Mulcaire.

The Met is resisting the order because it claims releasing the archive would 
jeopardise the privacy of other victims who have not yet been named. Jason Beer 
QC, for the Met, said it would take 30 weeks and cost up to £180,000 to redact 
the documents so that the victims' identities are not revealed.

Vos will rule on whether the archive should be made available to a small group 
of the claimants' lawyers on Monday, unless they can reach an agreement with 
Scotland Yard on how to proceed before then.

• This article was amended on 28 June 2011. Wording in the original omitted to 
make clear the News Group Newspapers' payment to Sienna Miller was the subject 
of a court order. This has been corrected

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 