
Andy Garcia is always described as a Hollywood A-list actor, and technically 
speaking this is accurate. His fame began almost a quarter of a century ago 
with the gangster movie The Untouchables, followed in 1990 by an 
Oscar-nominated performance in Francis Coppola's The Godfather: Part III, which 
elevated him to the cinematic stratosphere and inspired much excitable talk of 
Garcia as the newRobert De Niro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro> 
or Al Pacino. Since then there have been other leading roles in box office hits 
– When a Man Loves a Woman, Desperate Measures, and most recently Ocean's 
Eleven, Twelve and Thirteen. And yet, there has always been a vague sense of 
unfulfilled promise.

Why is it, some critics have asked, that Garcia never quite made it? He has 
all the smouldering Latin volatility, the darkly dangerous good looks. Why 
didn't he become the next De Niro or Pacino? But a better question might be, 
how did Garcia make it as far in Hollywood as he has? For in truth, he is not 
really an A-list actor type at all.

We meet in the lobby of a hotel in Rome, where I fail to recognise him. No one 
else appears to notice him either – though that may be due to his bushy 
moustache, which makes him look like Inspector Clouseau. Unchaperoned by any 
personal assistants or PRs, he radiates no starry charisma, but at 54, looks 
middle-aged and discreetly European in a pale linen suit and leather sandals. 
He's in Rome on a family holiday with his wife of 28 years and three of their 
four children, and I was surprised that he'd interrupt their vacation to talk 
about a low budget, independent movie – "pretty much a BBC drama", as he 
describes City Island. But as well as starring in the movie, Garcia is also the 
producer – and, as he explains with a slightly weary smile, "There is a certain 
pride of fatherly love."

City Island is a sweet, faintly farcical family comedy about a corrections 
officer, Vince Rizzo, played by Garcia, who secretly longs to act. He pretends 
to be playing poker games while actually taking acting classes – but his wife 
grows suspicious, and assumes he must be having an affair. Their daughter, 
meanwhile – played by Garcia's real life eldest daughter – is pretending to be 
at college, but has really dropped out and become a pole dancer, while her 
teenage brother harbours secret sexual fantasies about an obese neighbour. Into 
this tangle of deceit arrives Rizzo's long lost son, who Rizzo bails out of 
jail and brings home to live with the family, without telling him or anyone 
else that he is, in fact, his son.

As soon as Garcia read the script, he knew he wanted to produce the film. "It 
was just, 'I want to make this movie, it's a beautiful script.' But I thought 
it was funny enough and charming enough that we'd get a bite from a studio 
who'd say, 'Right, when can you start?' And then immediately there is the 
reality of, well, no one is interested in your movie.

"We got turned down by all the studios. They say, 'It's a beautiful script – 
but it's going to depend on the execution.' And I think, 'Yeah. So will 
Spiderman!' But instead you go, 'OK, I hear the game,' and you're on your own. 
Another challenge. So you go out and raise the money yourself." He pauses, 
before adding drily, "I'm still waiting to get paid. That's another problem 
with producing movies. You pay yourself last. But you know, you do these things 
because you want to get the movie made."

City Island is the sixth independent film Garcia has produced. "And it's very 
romantic to say I'm the producer – but I know what that entails," he grimaces. 
If it's such a thankless struggle, I say, why not just do more big-money 
blockbusters, and enjoy an easy life? But it quickly becomes clear that Garcia 
identifies more instinctively with the trials of the long-suffering artist than 
with celebrity success."I ask myself those questions sometimes," he reflects, 
nodding thoughtfully. "But no, I think you're a slave to your own sensibility, 
and your own artistic desires and dreams, and I'm still motivated by them. I'm 
certainly not going to wait around for someone from Hollywood to call me. I 
can't control if anyone's thinking of me, or wants to put me in a movie, I 
can't control that. So I don't preoccupy myself with that world, because that 
world's an ever-changing animal, and there are new flavours of the month every 
month, and you might be one, one month, and then not the next. I'm blessed that 
I've been in that game in my life, but what I'm concerned with on a daily level 
is what I'm interested in."

Those calls do come, he adds. "Sure. And if someone calls and says will you 
come and do Ocean's Eleven, well if I'm stimulated by it then I'll do it. But I 
don't measure a movie by its box office, you know. It would be impossible, and 
ridiculous, to do that. All the movies that stimulated my sensibility when I 
was a young actor, and the things I was influenced by – today a studio wouldn't 
make them. So I still have that romantic idealism about the independent 
film-maker. The sense that you go off and you've got to do your own thing."

I ask if he feels like an outsider in Hollywood, and for a moment he looks 
mildly annoyed. "Well I don't know if I'm an outsider or not." He pauses to 
consider. "I think probably there's a part of me that at times I feel like I'm 
sort of on my own. So I don't take it personally." What does he mean?

"Well I don't know, if Tom Hanks was attached to City Island would a studio 
have made the movie?" Probably, I agree, taking it for a rhetorical question – 
but to my surprise Garcia looks suddenly stung.

"Now that doesn't mean they don't like me. They might say Tom Hanks is more 
commercial in this product than Andy is. Can Andy do comedy? Can he do whatever 
it is? I really don't take those things too personally. They're just artistic 
challenges. I've been blessed in the industry, I've got nothing to complain 
about, I've got friends at all levels of the industry, I don't . . ." and he 
tapers off into silence. "But yeah," he agrees quietly. "By my very nature I 
tend to feel comfortable sort of swimming upstream a little bit."

Garcia is not an awful lot of laughs. He has a likably respectful, 
old-fashioned courtesy, and an almost professorial bearing of studied calm. But 
there is something careworn about his demeanour, and I get the impression of an 
old school paterfamilias – a traditionalist who regards the world beyond his 
personal domain as faintly tawdry, even morally questionable. It's easy to see 
why he's played so many law enforcement roles, for there is a stern 
undercurrent which at times can make him almost intimidating. He clearly 
prefers to be in control, and I have a hunch he's not too keen on submitting to 
authority.

The actor is invariably described as a "practising Catholic". When I ask him 
what exactly that means, he says, "Well, I have four children. What does that 
tell you?" It's an oddly opaque answer – it's not as if he has a dozen, after 
all – but pressed to elaborate, all he'll say is, "Well, I was raised a 
Catholic, and I believe in the teachings and values of Jesus Christ." But he 
doesn't pray every day – nor does he go to confession. "I confess, but I don't 
go to confession." To Garcia, it sounds as if even a priest is a middle manager 
he'd rather do without.

"My feeling," he explains, "is if you have to confess something then I don't 
need an intermediary. I don't need a buffer between myself and God. But I try 
to avoid confession, because I try to avoid the need to confess. That's 
basically my philosophy. I try to live my life so I don't have that much to 
confess."

Three of his four children are now adults, the eldest two in their mid-20s and 
both professional actors. Like their father, none has ever so much as flickered 
on the tabloid gossip radar, or displayed any weakness for the vice and 
psychodramas commonly associated with Hollywood royalty. They all still live in 
the family home in Los Angeles – "Not that they don't want to move out. But 
they can't afford it," Garcia says, looking not displeased with this 
arrangement. There are no trust funds in place, he explains, and "That was a 
very deliberate decision. You want to help your child, and support them, but 
they also have to have challenges." He says he loved working with his daughter 
Dominik in City Island – but unlike the family they play in City Island, have 
there been no explosive secrets or revelations in the Garcia household? "No big 
ones, no. Not yet, not yet."

If I was a member of his family, I'm pretty sure I'd keep any secrets I had to 
myself. For an actor, Garcia comes across as unusually censorious, almost to 
the point of prudish; when a female casting director once asked him to remove 
his shirt, he retorted, "I will if you will," and stalked out of the audition. 
When I mention a line from City Island – that an actor is a "professional 
fuck-up" – he winces, and quickly corrects me. "No, I think the line is 
something like 'acting is for crazies'." At the time I thought I'd offended him 
by misquoting the script, but I checked later and the line was "professional 
screw-up", so he didn't get it quite right either, and I wonder if it was 
instead my profanity that bothered him. Not once during the entire interview 
does Garcia utter a single swearword.

Whatever its wording, however, the film's line does echo a widely held belief 
that acting is a career for the emotionally ungrounded. At least one of the 
characters in City Island – a flighty young aspiring actor, living an elaborate 
lie – certainly conforms to the cliche. But when I ask Garcia if he'd agree 
that it's generally true, an uncomfortably long silence suggests otherwise.

"Well, you know," he says eventually, "all the successful actors I've ever met 
– I mean really successful actors, with long careers, who've continued to 
produce work, not flash in the pans? They ain't too crazy. George Clooney ain't 
crazy, Brad Pitt ain't crazy, Jeff Bridges ain't crazy, Robert De Niro ain't 
crazy. Ain't no dummies in this world, I'm telling you. Not in the league I'm 
talking about."

When it comes to politics, however, there can be no debate that Garcia's views 
cast him in a minority among Hollywood liberals. He won't tell me which way he 
voted in the last election – which is interesting, because every other American 
I've interviewed has been very keen to mention that they voted for Obama. Did 
the president not get Garcia's vote?

"It's not important," he says stiffly. Then, "Put it this way. I'm of the 
philosophy that I want less government in my life, basically. I believe in a 
flat tax, and I believe in putting money in the hands of people who can hire 
more people, and buy more goods, and spread the wealth by employing people. And 
the more the government takes away from its citizens, and the citizens depend 
on the government – that's just not where I wear my hat. I don't believe that 
government should be in charge of my life and I don't believe the government 
should make decisions for me and my family. I don't depend on the government to 
help me. I want to have the opportunity to work hard, and get the benefits of 
my work, and help others with the rewards that I reap."

These opinions may be unfashionable in Hollywood, but among Miami Cuban 
emigres they are entirely orthodox, and it's with that community that Garcia 
still identifies most closely. Garcia was born in Cuba under the Batista 
dictatorship, but following the revolution his family fled to Miami when he was 
five. InCuba <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> his father was a lawyer, 
his mother an English teacher, but they arrived in Miami penniless, bringing 
nothing but the classic American dream. The family worked its way back to 
middle class prosperity, allowing Garcia to study acting at Florida University, 
then leave for Hollywood, where he waited tables for seven years before 
establishing himself as a name.

"I'm American completely, and I think I appreciate America more than a lot of 
Americans do," he says with feeling. "In fact I know I do. Because America has 
offered me the freedoms that were taken away from me in Cuba, and so I have an 
enormous appreciation and respect and gratitude for that country, and I value 
what it stands for." But he talks about Cuba with all the wistful anger and 
longing of an émigré, and the animated passion of an activist; he campaigns for 
the release of political prisoners, supports the dissidents, and predicts the 
imminent demise of the Castro regime. Only then, he says, will he return to the 
island of his birth.

I ask Garcia if he ever wonders how his life would have turned out had he 
never left.

"Well, I really don't know if I would have been an actor," he ponders. "I 
don't think so. My father would have had a farm, and I probably would have been 
engaged in that. I probably would have gravitated towards music, which I still 
do. But acting? I don't know if I would have been stimulated to act if I were 
in Cuba. If I were to bet, I would say no."

There can be few actors of Garcia's stature who share his ambivalence – even 
reluctance – towards their profession, which must make his Hollywood success 
all the more remarkable. If he didn't need to earn another penny, I think he 
might happily give up acting altogether, and produce and direct his own films 
instead. When I say so, for a moment he stiffens, and then he smiles.

"Yeah, I would be completely stimulated by that," Garcia says softly. "I don't 
need to act. I enjoy acting, but I don't need to act."
 