
Angela Merkel has expressed "contempt" for the disgraced Anglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> executives caught on 
tape mocking Germany's involvement in the institution's €30bn (£25.7bn) bailout.

The German chancellor delivered a strong condemnation of the revelations, 
which have emerged in recordings of Anglo Irish management as they discussed a 
2008 bailout by the Irish state, followed soon after by a full-blown rescue of 
the country by international authorities.

"I really have nothing but contempt for this," said Merkel. "It really damages 
democracy, the social market economy and everything that we are working for." 
Sounding outraged, three months before a general election where Germany's role 
in shoring up the eurozone will be a sensitive issue, Merkel added: "This is 
simply very hard to swallow for people who go to work normally every day, who 
earn their money."

In one excrutiating exchange on the tapes, an executive giggles as a colleague 
recites "Deutschland über Alles" to mark the fact that an Irish guarantee of 
bank deposits had lured German savings to Dublin.

The Irish taoiseach, Enda Kenny, admitted in the wake of Merkel's comments, at 
a summit of European Union leaders on Friday, thatthe furore had damaged the 
country's standing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/jun/28/irish-pm-enda-kenny-bankers-video>
.

Describing the revelations as a "thunderbolt", the prime minister said: "This 
has damaged our reputation." The tapes were leaked to the Irish Independent 
just as the country ends its six-month rotating presidency of the EU.

The tapes, Kenny said, "show the contempt and the arrogance and the insolence 
of senior personnel working in that bank towards everybody, towards government, 
towards citizens, the impact on every company, every community, every family in 
our country. They shine a bright light on the vulgarity of what went on there." 
On the tapes, the bank's former director of capital markets, John Bowe, that he 
picked the initial bailout sum of €7bn "out of my arse".

Attending his first meeting with EU leaders since the scandal erupted in 
Ireland, Kenny said that everyone at the summit understood that the 
misdemeanours were from the past and predated his premiership. He promised 
judicial and parliamentary inquiries as well as criminal proceedings, where 
warranted.

"We do need to be able to examine the culture of the so-called tiger years 
which led to this situation of a toxic nexus between the banking world and the 
world of government and senior personnel," said Kenny. "These tapes from Anglo 
are actually a thunderbolt, but they shine a light on a very dark period of 
Ireland's recent past that we want to get away from."

Kenny described the scandal as a "sad saga that has affected every single 
family, every single person, every single company and every single community in 
our country … The people who worked the system, who controlled the system, who 
were the system, they have a lot to answer for."
 