
Barn owls thrive across Anglian Water's operations. And ospreys – which had 
not bred in England for more than 150 years – are hatching in greater and 
greater numbers at Rutland Water, the company's largest reservoir.

It's no coincidence. Biodiversity management has been a key environmental 
commitment for over a decade and is part of Anglian Water'slove every drop 
sustainability strategy 
<http://www.anglianwater.co.uk/about-us/EDCA9E86306447CD91E9169E4A427B7B.aspx>.

First launched in 1999, the water company's biodiversity action plan is now in 
its second 10-year phase, having first focused on 45 species and 14 priority 
habitats; on the management of Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI); and 
on specific projects to protect wildlife across its water sites.

With over 3,500 sites and 47 SSSIs – including eight nature reserves open to 
the public – Anglian Water aims to reduce the fragmentation of natural habitats 
across the region.

The scheme also helps it to explain how careful use of water can sustain 
growth and help tackle climate change, while demonstrating a public 
contribution to regional biodiversity. It also reduces work on maintaining 
amenities.

But the company is not tackling the challenge alone.

Working with Defra, The Wildlife Trusts, employees and the public, the company 
will cover 60 species and 16 priority habitats between now and 2020. For this 
next stage, it has identified the most important 200 water and wastewater sites 
and appointed a biodiversity surveyor to work with site managers on protection 
projects.

In fact all 1,600 employees can get involved.

The company's biodiversity field guide and website 
<http://www.anglianwater.co.uk/environment/> help staff to identify and report 
species and habitats and – on international biodiversity day last year – many 
took part in a "snapshot" survey: 958 intranet visits were made; 234 records 
taken; and 127 different species were recorded – including six protected 
species. Seasonal surveys will now be held four times a year.

Customers are involved, too. In association with Keep Britain Tidy, the 
RiverCare project has enabled nearly 50 local communities to "adopt" 
watercourses. There are now more than 1,000 volunteers taking part in litter 
picks, wildlife surveys and habitat projects.

The number of volunteer hours has risen from 3,780 in 2004 to more than 15,000 
in 2010 and in January, volunteers met with Defra to add their voice to the 
natural environment white paper consultation.

Anglian Water spends in excess of £500,000 a year on biodiversity projects, 
and results are encouraging. In 2010, 99.43% of protected sites were 
"favourable" or "recovering" – ahead of the government's target of 95%. The 
goal is for 100% to be favourable by 2020.

As a national biodiversity champion for the previously extinct pool frog, the 
company has worked with Natural England and the Herpetological Conservation 
Trust to reintroduce a thriving population.

In partnership with The Wildlife Trusts, the Environment Agency and local 
authorities, it is working with landowners to manage habitats for selected 
species, such as otters in Cambridgeshire.

Today, five osprey nests are established at Rutland Water and 200 owl and 
kestrel nest boxes are being monitored. And, this year, a new project with 
Plantlife International aims to protect nine UK plant species, including field 
wormwood and rare spring sedge.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 