
The former chairman of Anglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> has been found not 
guilty of charges that he illegally loaned tens of millions of euros to prop up 
the share price of an institution that nearly bankrupted the Irish state.

Seán FitzPatrick smiled in court in Dublin after the verdict was read out. 
"There's no point in Mr FitzPatrick coming back here tomorrow," Judge Martin 
Nolan told the court.

Speaking to reporters afterwards, 65-year-old FitzPatrick thanked his wife, 
three children and friends for standing by him, as well as "the men and women 
of the jury" for their verdict. He praised his legal team for their "dedication 
and hard work" during the mammoth trial, one of the longest and most complex in 
European financial criminal history.

The 12-person jury will decide on the fate of FitzPatrick's co-accused on 
Thursday. Former Anglo Irish executives William McAteer, 63, and Pat Whelan, 
51, deny charges of giving unlawful financial assistance to 16 individuals in 
the summer of 2008. Wearing his trademark navy suit and pink tie, FitzPatrick 
shook hands with his two co-accused after the verdict was read out.

The judge had previously directed that FitzPatrick be found not guilty in 
connection with loans to Ireland's one-time richest man, Seán Quinn, because of 
a lack of evidence. He also cleared Whelan of seven counts relating to the 
amendment of loan facility letters sent to the so-called Maple 10, a group of 
rich Irish investors allegedly used to buy out the Quinn family's shares in the 
bank.

The trial focused on moves by the bank to unravel Quinn's secret holding in 
the institution, built up via financial instruments called contracts for 
difference – or highly leveraged bets on an increase in the Anglo Irish share 
price.

By July 2008, with financial ruin looming for Anglo Irish Bank due to 
excessive lending in Irish property boom, Quinn controlled about 28% of the 
shares in the ailing bank.

The Maple 10 investors were lent a total of €450m (£370m) by Anglo to buy 
about 10% of the shares that Quinn controlled. Quinn's wife and five children 
were also lent €169m to buy nearly 15% of the stock. The three former Anglo 
Irish executives had been charged with offences connected to Section 60 of the 
Irish Republic's Companies Act.

In February, prosecutors said that executives at the bank decided to do 
something "absolutely illegal" by lending money to the individuals. 
FitzPatrick, who was chief executive of the bank from 1986 to 2005, said his 
successor, David Drumm, told him the plan to lend the money was "kosher and 
above board", according to interview notes that police read out during the 
trial.

Earlier on Wednesday the jury was unable to reach a unanimous verdict in the 
case and was then instructed by the judge that they could decide on a 10-2 
majority.

About €30bn of taxpayers money had to be pumped into Anglo Irish in 2008 in an 
attempt to stave off a systemic collapse. The bank has since been nationalised 
and renamed as the IrishBanking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> 
Resolution Corporation.

Earlier in the trial, the court heard that Quinn admitted to the Republic's 
Financial Regulator that he needed to be "reined in" over his borrowings from 
the bank.

Quinn borrowed billions not only to buy shares in the bank but to also fund a 
global property portfolio. His downfall due to the financial crisis in 2008, 
the world property crash and Anglo Irish Bank's collapse embodied the wider 
demise of the Celtic Tiger economy.

FitzPatrick appealed to the media to respect his family's privacy claiming it 
had been violated over the last six years. He refused to take questions from 
the media gathered outside the court house in Dublin.

By 2010 FitzPatrick had been declared bankrupt and became the only one of 
Anglo's seven non-executive directors arrested over the loans-for-shares deal. 
He returned toIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> from the USA 
after hearing that investigators wanted to question him.
 