
The fallout from the Anglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> tapes with executives 
singing "Deutschland über Alles" while joking about German money rescuing the 
financial institution has provoked disgust in the country, a senior ally of 
chancellor Angela Merkel has said.

Michael Fuchs, deputy leader of Merkel's Christian Democratic Union party in 
the Bundestag, described the recordings as "unbearable".

In a series of phone calls senior bankers at the toxic, debt-ridden bank laugh 
about German largesse on the night the Irish government rescued Anglo Irish 
Bank from collapse with large injections of cash from European partners 
includingGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>.

The outrage in Germany is deeply embarrassing for the current Fine Gael-Labour 
coalition in Dublin as the government seeks to reduce the Republic's debt 
burden to the EU, the European Central Bank and the IMF.

Fuchs told RTE radio on Wednesday: "We are offended. If you have a feeding 
hand you shouldn't bite into it."

He added "it's really dangerous" language as German politicians are trying to 
convince local taxpayers to support European countries, such asIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. "It's absolutely unbearable that 
somebody is talking like this."

In one conversation – taped just two days after 30 September 2008 bank 
guarantee – Anglo Irish Bank's disgraced former CEO David Drumm giggles while 
his colleague John Bowe recites lines from "Deutschland über alles".

Bowe accepted in a statement that the language used in the taped recordings of 
internal bank conversations "was imprudent and inappropriate".

The behaviour of the Anglo Irish executives has turned them into national hate 
figures in the Republic and now, it appears, also in the country which has 
supplied most of Europe's money to prop up not only the Irish banking system 
but also the entire state.

As Anglo Irish Bank moved towards the fiscal abyss, Drumm is heard joking, 
"another day, another billion", referring to the flight of deposits out of the 
doomed bank before the bank guarantee in September 2008. At the time the 
outflow was running at over €1bn (£847m) a day.

Meanwhile Irish prime minister Enda Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enda-kenny> has said he may have to seek a 
referendum asking the Irish people for greater government powers to investigate 
the banking crash that almost bankrupted Ireland.

Speaking in the Dail the taoiseach said he was considering a second referendum 
that would grant the state more power to hold searching inquiries.

The tapes appear to confirm that Anglo Irish bankers hoodwinked the then 
Fianna Fáil-led government back in 2008 with a vastly underestimated price for 
the bank rescue. John Bowe, then the bank's director of capital markets, is 
heard on the tapes explaining where got the figure of €7bn needed to save Anglo 
Irish from oblivion.

He quips that he picked the figure "out of my arse". In fact, Anglo Irish 
Bank's rescue cost the Irish and European taxpayers, particularly the Germans, 
€30bn.
 