
While the Greeks trash their banks in rage against austerity, the Irish, it 
seems, are happier to laugh off their troubles by writing musicals about their 
busted financial institutions.

The story of the bank that almost bankrupted Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is about to be retold as a stage 
show, with the villains of the piece – from greedy bankers to politicians such 
as the former taoiseach Bertie Ahern – played by puppets. Or, according to its 
writer Paul Howard, could that be muppets?

Anglo: the Musical, opening at Dublin's Bord Gáis theatre next week, recounts 
through songs and drama how theAnglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> fuelled the property 
boom and then collapsed, costing the Irish taxpayer up to €30bn to date.

"There is a lot of doom and gloom out there," said the co-producer Donal 
Shields. "So the idea of the show is to try and put on some form of 
entertainment, and spread some sort of happiness in the situation that we are 
in. We are not trying to trivialise it but at the same time it's still an 
opportunity to laugh about it all."

Shields accepted that the Irish appeared more inclined to send up their grim 
fiscal situation than go out and riot. "We have a great history of satirists, 
going back to Jonathan Swift, and we like to send ourselves up. It's in all of 
us. We have this ability not to take ourselves too seriously," he said, as 
young men and women passed by with their hands up the insides of Enda Kenny, 
Brian Cowen and Angela Merkel dolls.

Howard, who last year penned a mock biography of Trigg, the pet dog of the 
former Manchester United and Ireland captain Roy Keane, was forced to make late 
changes to his script and score for legal reasons. He wrote the original 
version in March, before the arrest and charging of key figures in Anglo Irish 
such as its former chief executive Sean Fitzpatrick, whose characters had to be 
taken out of the show.

"I never thought I'd be writing a musical about a bank but the producers came 
to me with the idea," Howard said. "Anglo Irish Bank is after all the biggest 
episode in our country's history since independence. It's shaped the last four 
years and it's going to shape this country for generations to come in a very 
negative way. So it was a huge challenge to mine the laughs out of all that."

The storyline revolves around a young Irish couple living on the fictional 
island of Innisdail, off the Irish Atlantic seaboard. Set initially in the time 
of the Celtic Tiger boom, Anglo Irish arrives on the island and offers the pair 
an €890m loan to develop their home. The subsequent property crash leaves the 
couple – and the rest of the island, and indeed the whole state – bankrupt and 
near destitute.

Among the songs is Put Another Nought on the End … He's a Friend. The use of 
puppets in the production raises the question of who was pulling whose strings 
during the boom years in Ireland – the politicians or the builders and bankers.

One man who will miss opening night is Sean Quinn, once Ireland's richest man, 
who borrowed hundreds of millions of euros from Anglo to buy property as far 
away as South America and Ukraine. Last week he wasjailed for contempt of court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/02/sean-quinn-jailed-contempt-dublin>
 for preventing the seizure of his international assets by Anglo's successor, 
the Irish Bank Resolution Corporation.

Asked whether he envisaged writing a musical about global financial scandals 
such as the collapse of Lehman Brothers, Howard said: "No, something closer to 
home. The rise and fall of Sean Quinn. Call it Quinnasty!"
 