
The Irish government was on Wednesday night pushing through legislation in 
parliament to liquidate the debt-ridden, now nationalisedAnglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank>.

The dramatic move is to prevent the Republic from having to pay a €3.1bn 
promissory note (an IOU), to Anglo Irish Bank bondholders due at the end of 
next month. It will ease the huge debt burden on the Dublin government.

Anglo's €28bn promissory note would be replaced by sovereign debt that may not 
need to be repaid for decades. The liabilities and assets of the failed bank 
would be transferred to the Irish central bank, with outstanding loans going to 
National Asset Management Agency (Nama) – the Irish state bad bank.

On Wednesday night the chairman of what remains of Anglo Irish, now known as 
the Irish Bank Resolution Corporation, was reported to have said: "The board is 
liquidated as of now, the functions of the board are being taken over by 
[accountants] KPMG."

Ireland's prime minister Enda Kenny and finance minister Michael Noonan have 
been seeking a deal in the EU that would reduce the massive costs of shoring up 
the now bust bank, which had to be taken under state control.

The Fine Gael-Labour coalition has staked its fiscal reputation on the ability 
to drive down the cost of saving banks such as Anglo Irish by seeking the 
support of fellow Europeans.

Anglo Irish was the bank that helped to almost bankrupt the Republic. Top 
banking executives at Anglo Irish are under criminal investigation for 
allegedly using the bank's assets to lend billions of euros to property 
speculators and business figures gambling on the global property market. The 
bank's former chief executive, Sean FitzPatrick, together with former finance 
director Willie McAteer and former managing director Pat Whelan, have all been 
charged with unlawfully helping a group of Irish millionaire businessmen buy 
shares in the bank. The investors include the Republic's one-time richest man, 
Sean Quinn, and his family.

FitzPatrick left the bank at the height of the banking crisis in 2008 and was 
declared bankrupt in July 2010.

Emergency legislation was scheduled to pass through both houses of the 
parliament last night and if the European Central Bank in Frankfurt agrees to 
the proposal, Ireland's Central Bank will take over the balance sheet of IBRC 
under the new deal. Both houses of the parliament in Dublin had been put on 
stand-by to debate the expected emergency law.

The move to kill off Anglo Irish will prompt questions as to why successive 
governments didn't liquidate the bank when it collapsed and had to nationalised 
three years ago.

It was the dire state of Ireland's banking system that forced the country to 
call in the IMF and its eurozone partners for a €90bn three-year loan in 
November 2010. The UK also contributed cash as Ireland is such a key trading 
partner.Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has since had six 
austerity budgets as it struggles to balance its books.

In the latest budget in December 2012 a controversial new property tax was 
introduced and child benefit was cut.
 