
Former executives at the Anglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> broke company law and 
carried out lending practices that were "absolutely illegal", a Dublin court 
heard on Wednesday.

Three ex-bosses flouted the rules when the now-defunct institution lent 
hundreds of millions of euros to 16 people in the summer of 2008 at a time when 
its share price had collapsed, the Irish state's prosecutor said.

On day one of the trial of former executives Sean FitzPatrick, William McAteer 
and Patrick Whelan, Paul O'Higgins, the senior counsel for the Irish Director 
of Public Prosecutions said the bank's lending to these individuals had 
"nothing whatsoever to do" with normal lending practices.

The trio all pleaded not guilty to charges that they had unlawfully provided 
financial assistance to the 16 individuals, who includeIreland's one-time 
richest man, Sean Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/03/sean-quinn-freed>.

In his opening speech to the 15-strong jury – a historic first in juror 
numbers in Irish legal history – the state's lawyer said the bank was so 
desperate to get members of the Quinn family to borrow from it, even as it 
struggled for survival in the summer of 2008, that its executives followed some 
of the Quinn family to holidays in Portugal and the south of France.

O'Higgins told the trial that when holidaymakers saw their bank manager 
turning up at their resort they would be expected to "run for the sand dunes". 
But Anglo Irish bosses where so keen to convince the one-time tycoon's family 
to purchase the banks' shares with more borrowings that they went to resorts in 
the south of France and Portugal in 2008 to track them down, O'Higgins told the 
court. At the time Quinn and his companies already owed the bank over €2bn 
(£1.7bn) before they were offered more loans that summer, he said.

He said that around the time Anglo Irish Bank chiefs were offering the loans 
worth tens of millions of euros, the bank's share price had plunged from €17 
per share in 2007 to €4.50 in the summer of 2008. The loans which the state 
says were illegal totalled €175m to the Quinn family and related companies, and 
€450m to the so-called Maple 10 group of Irish investors.

The trial in Dublin is likely to last up until 31 May, the court was told. It 
will hear from hundreds of witnesses and examine millions of documents. Quinn 
is a witness alongside several members of his family who will give evidence at 
one of the most complex and controversial trials in the history of European 
financial crime. There was no sign of any of the expected protests outside the 
court buildings close to the city's Phoenix Park on Wednesday morning as the 
three former executives arrived.

The opening proceedings, in a packed court No 19, were taken up with finding a 
15th juror. At the start of the trial, the judge, Martin Nolan, told the 
courthouse he had received a letter from a male juror that led to him being 
relieved of his duties. The trial continues.
 