
A controversial sculpture by artist Anish Kapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/kapoor>, on display in the gardens of 
the Palace of Versailles – and informally dubbed the “queen’s vagina” – was 
vandalised again on Sunday, this time with antisemitic graffitti, officials 
said.


The giant sculpture was attacked in June and then cleaned, but Kapoor said 
that this time the graffitti would remain on the work, to bear witness to 
hatred.

Officially known as “Dirty Corner”, the sculpture comprises a huge steel 
funnel, which the 61-year-old British-Indian artist has described as “very 
sexual”.

It and the rocks around it were sprayed in white paint with phrases such as 
“SS blood sacrifice”, “Queen sacrificed, twice insulted”, “the second RAPE of 
the nation by DEVIANT JEWISH activism”, and “Christ is king in Versailles”, the 
palace management said.

President Francois Hollande condemned the vandalism as “hateful and 
antisemitic” and Prime Minister Manuel Valls said he felt disgust, adding that 
the perpetrators would be severely punished.

The culture minister, Fleur Pellerin, said the vandalism was an “attack on 
freedom of creation” and the phrases were “unacceptable”.

My artwork has been vandalised. How should I respond?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/19/anish-kapoor-versailles-sculpture-vandalised-how-should-i-respond>
“This is no more or less an act which reveals a fascist vision of art,” she 
said, after going to Versailles to inspect the damage.

The steel-and-rock sculpture, which faces the royal chateau, is 60 metres (200 
foot) long and 10 m (33 ft) high.

Shortly after the sculpture was unveiled in June, vandals splattered it with 
yellow paint.

But Kapoor, after discussing the new attack with France’s culture authorities, 
told the daily Le Figaro he would not restore the work as he did the first 
time, and instead would keep the “abominable words” as part of the sculpture.

“I had already questioned the wisdom of cleaning it after the first vandalism. 
This time, I am convinced that nothing should be removed from these slurs, from 
these words which belong to antisemitism that we’d rather forget,” Kapoor said 
in comments Le Figaro published in French.

“From now on, in the name of our universal principles, these abominable words 
will become part of my work, they will overlay it and stigmatise it.”

A source close to the investigation commenting on the inscriptions said the 
likely suspects were “individuals with ultra-conservative leanings”.

“We have some ideas about those who fit the profile,” the source added.

For his part, Kapoor said he was struck by the spirit behind the vandalism and 
its “connection with the terrible situation between Syria andEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

“This is what leads to the exclusion of our Syrian brothers and sisters. Shame 
onFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> for the act of a 
hate-filled minority! This is a violent attack against the human spirit and 
culture.”

The sculpture is one of several by Kapoor which are on show in the gardens and 
inside one room of the palace until November.

Kapoor has previously described the piece as “the vagina of a queen who is 
taking power” but later appeared to step back from this description.

“The point is to create a dialogue between these great gardens and the 
sculptures,” he said before the display was unveiled.

Kapoor’s exhibition is one of the most controversial at Versailles since the 
authorities opened the palace and its grounds to contemporary artists, hosting 
works by American artist Jeff Koons in 2008 and by Japanese artist Takashi 
Murakami in 2010.

Kapoor, who has said he wants sculpture to be about belief, passion or 
experience rather than form, has become known for his massive public works.

His work is not the first to spark anger in France.

In October 2014, vandals deflated a massive sculpture shaped like a sex toy, 
by American sculptor Paul McCarthy, at Paris’s Place Vendome.

McCarthy then decided to take down the work, which had both outraged and 
amused Parisians.
 