
Artist Anish Kapoor has revealed that a project in which the world’s longest 
slide will be built around his Olympic Park sculpture was “foisted” upon him by
Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, mayor of London, to 
make the artwork more profitable.

From June, Kapoor’s 114-metre-high (374 ft) structure – which was erected in 
2012 on the Stratford Olympics site – will have a 178-metre (583 ft) tunnel 
slide wrapped around it, designed by renowned experimental artistCarsten Höller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/carsten-holler>.

The public will be able to slide down the corkscrew tunnel, the longest in the 
world, which will twist and turn 12 times before ending with a 50-metre 
straight run to the ground.

But Kapoor, a Turner prize winner, said he had only approached fellow artist 
Höller to design the slide after the mayor of London had stipulated that the 
ArcelorMittal Orbit tower needed to become more of an attraction “in order to 
raise revenue”.

Kapoor said he had initially been very resistant to Johnson’s idea, as “it 
felt to me as if it was turning the whole thing in the wrong direction”.

He said: “It was not always my thinking. The mayor foisted this on the project 
and there was a moment where I had to make a decision – do I go to battle with 
the mayor or is there a more elegant or astute way through this?

“I knew of Carsten’s work so I thought, well, who better than a fellow artist 
to join up with and make this a positive story rather than a negative … 
luckily, and thankfully, Carsten was open to it, so we found a way round this.”

Kapoor’s controversial red sculpture, which was dubbed “Boris’s folly” when 
designs were first revealed, was found to belosing £10,000 a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/olympic-parks-orbit-tower-costing-taxpayer-10000-a-week>
 in 2014. It was originally forecast to bring in annual revenues of £1.2m from 
ticket sales of £12 to get to the top, but visitor numbers were only 200,000 – 
150,000 short of predictions.

The sculpture itself cost £19m, £16m of which was paid for by the sponsor, 
steel company ArcelorMittal, and £3m by the government.

But Kapoor said the success of his artwork could not be measured purely in 
“pounds and pence” and said he had a problem with the sculpture being viewed 
only as a commercial attraction.

“It may be theoretically losing money, but the fact that it has over 200,000 
visitors, I think that’s a considerable gain,” said Kapoor.

“One makes artworks for other reasons than profit. I understand this is run as 
a so-called attraction, which I have problems with personally … I want it to be 
slightly more highbrow than that, without wanting to be pompous about it. 
There’s a difference between a fairground ride and art.”

This will be the third time Höller’s slides have been installed for public 
enjoyment in London. In 2006, he installed a series of metal slides in the Tate 
Modern’s Turbine Hall, and brought them back in 2015 for his exhibition at the 
Hayward Gallery.

The slide around Kapoor’s tower will be 76 metres high, and will include a 
tight corkscrew section namedbettfeder, the German word for bedspring. It will 
be a stainless steel tube, but windows will be dotted along the slide for 
people to see out of as they shoot down at speeds as fast as 15 mph (24km/h).

Höller said he wanted people to embrace “the amusement side of it”.

He said: “A child might be here purely for the slide, while the serious art 
lover might see this in purely formalistic terms. I personally like the 
confusion, that you don’t know what it is but it still creates a very unique 
experience.”

The slide will officially open to the public on 24 June, and will cost £5, on 
top of the £12 to get to the top of the tower, though Kapoor said he “wished it 
was cheaper, frankly”.

“We are hoping Boris will be the first one down,” the artist added, “and that 
this will still be Europe when he gets to the bottom.”
 