
When did you first decide you wanted to be an author?

 I was probably about 10 when I decided to be an author, though I can't 
pretend it was the only thing that crossed my mind when I was a child. As a 
daydreamer, I considered most exciting-sounding careers at one time or another: 
spying, acting, singing, changing sex and playing football for Manchester 
United men's team... the list goes on! However, if I look back on my childhood 
now, I can see that being an author was my calling. I was always writing - 
plays, poems, diaries, stories - and I loved making stuff up, pretending to be 
characters in books or organising detective clubs to solve imaginary crimes. It 
makes sense that I have chosen a job that requires me to invent stuff for a 
living.

How did you first get your book published?

 I wrote the book in lots of little notepads while travelling round the world. 
When I got home, I typed it all up, which took AGES, then sent the first three 
chapters to two literary agents. The first rejected it, but the second signed 
me up straight away. She sent the book to lots of different publishers in lots 
of different countries. Within a few weeks, I had a two-book deal in the UK and 
had sold the rights all over the world. It was all tremendously exciting!

How did it feel to see your work in print?

 When you're working on a book, it looks so unprofessional – just scribbles in 
a notepad or words on a computer screen – so I couldn't wait to see My Sister 
Lives on the Mantelpiece as a proper novel. It finally arrived in the post one 
morning a few weeks before publication, and I tore open the box to see my story 
as a brand new, shiny hardback, complete with its own front cover and blurb! I 
held it for about an hour and showed it to everyone that I know. In terms of 
actually seeing it in a shop, I was in London with my husband and we saw it in 
a Waterstones in Covent Garden. It was very surreal; I kept expecting other 
customers to know that I was the author of the novel!

 What helps you focus when you write?

 Meditation and walking. I meditate before I start writing or if my brain 
feels "busy" halfway through the day. It's nothing weird (no chanting, I 
promise...) and it simply involves sitting still and slowing my breathing for 
twenty minutes, allowing my thoughts to settle down and my mind to clear. If I 
am really stuck on a bit of the book, I try to get out walking with my dog. 
Even if I don't solve the problem while I am out, I always come back to the 
computer feeling refreshed and ready to tackle the book again.

 Do you find it easy reading back your own work?

 Yes and no. I constantly read back my own work, saying it aloud to make sure 
that it sounds right before moving on to the next paragraph. I can often hear 
when something is clumsy or a bit overdone, so it's a good thing to do. 
However, once something is supposed to be finished or is published, it becomes 
much harder to read my own work, as it is far too late to change anything if I 
find a mistake or a bit I don't like!

What usually inspires your books? What inspired Ketchup Clouds?

 With My Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece, it was a film about the terrorist 
attacks in USA on September 11 that made me want to write the novel. The whole 
plot simply occurred to me a few hours after watching the film and I knew 
exactly how I wanted it to end before I even wrote the first word.

With Ketchup Clouds, it was different. I had to build the idea quite 
carefully. Initially, I was inspired by the themes. I was keen to explore love 
and guilt, so I had to come up with a character and plot that enabled me to do 
that. After a lot of false starts, I imagined this girl, Zoe, who has killed a 
boy that she is supposed to like, and has completely gotten away with the 
crime. However, she is burdened by terrible guilt and decides to write a 
letter, confessing anonymously to someone who might understand. I came up with 
various recipients for Zoe's letters (the Pope and Santa Claus to name but 
two!) before deciding upon a man on Death Row. This part of the book was based 
on personal experience: as a teenager, I wrote to a prison inmate in America 
after getting involved in a "penpal" scheme through Amnesty International.

The strange thing about writing to someone you've never met, someone who has 
done something wrong, is that you become far more open about your own flaws 
than you would with a friend. Because you'll never meet them, you can tell them 
anything, so he seemed the perfect person to receive Zoe's secret letters.

 Ketchup Clouds has a very colloquial style. Do you find it easier to write in 
third or first person?

 Definitely the first person. It's the thing I enjoy most about writing – 
getting into someone's head and trying to capture their unique voice and way of 
seeing the world.

How did it feel putting yourself in Zoe's shoes?

 It was quite intense, to be honest. She is struggling with such a lot of 
guilt, and spends a lot of time feeling rather sad, that I did find the writing 
process quite draining. However, there were lots of exciting bits, too. It was 
thrilling to imagine how she would feel when Aaron turned up at the library, or 
when Max took her hand for the first time at the party... For some reason, I am 
still very connected to my teenage self, so I don't find it difficult to 
pretend to be 15 again.

Do you plan first when you write, or just start typing?

 I try to plan, but I am usually so impatient to start writing that I get 
about halfway through a chapter-by-chapter synopsis then screw it up and dive 
straight in. I am not one of these writers who need to know everything about 
the plot before they can write a word. In my head, I know how the story is 
going to end, roughly what's going to happen in the middle, and where it will 
begin; the rest I leave to chance. I find I have my best ideas when I am 
writing, anyway, rather than planning. A chapter will take off in a surprising 
direction three hours into a working day, or something random will occur to me 
part way through the novel, and it's nice to have the flexibility to follow 
those whims if so desired.

What can we expect for your future writing career?

 I am working on my third book at the moment, which I am due to hand to my 
editor in May. It will be another book for young adults and hopefully published 
in 2014. I also have an exciting idea for a book for younger children, which 
I'd love to crack on with if I get a spare five minutes.

What advice would you give to someone interested in becoming an author?

 Enjoy writing, first and foremost. I know it's difficult, but try to write 
without worrying about being published. It is meant to be a fun, creative 
process and I don't think you can write well if you're constantly second 
guessing yourself, wondering what an anonymous agent or publisher might think 
of your work.

 Be disciplined, making sure you put your work first and get it done, with no 
excuses. If you want to be a writer, you have to write, everyday if at all 
possible.

 Read as much as you can in an active rather than a passive way, considering 
what makes a novel effective; if you can identify the novel's success criteria, 
hopefully you can use this knowledge to inform your own work.

 Oh, and start small. Why not try writing a short story first? If you aim to 
write a story in 5000 words, you've got a good chance of finishing it. This is 
far better than setting out to write a novel and only ever getting to the third 
chapter! You need to practise beginnings, middles and ends, and also editing 
skills, so it's a useful to start small to make sure you get that experience.
 