
The son of the murdered journalist Anna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya> today accused the 
Russian authorities of "stupidity" after they prevented the head of the press 
freedom organisation, Reporters Without Borders, from travelling to Moscow.

Jean-François Julliard, the general secretary of Reporters Without Borders, 
had been due to take part in a news conference today commemorating the third 
anniversary of Politkovskaya's murder. But he was unable to travel afterRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> refused him a visa.

A second representative from Reporters Without Borders, Elsa Vidal, was also 
barred. Politkovskaya's daughter Vera described the decision by the Russian 
government as "extremely strange" and "absolutely not understandable This 
appears to be political."

Politkovskaya's son, Ilya, added: "It's really stupid. I think Reporters 
Without Borders is not an organisation you need to be afraid of."

He conceded the decision to blacklist the press freedom body was probably made 
by "middle-level foreign office officials".

The move raises further doubts about Russia's willingness to solve 
Politkovskaya's murder after she was shot dead, on 7 October 2006, by a 
professional killer in the lift of her Moscow apartment block.

In February four suspects accused of involvement in her murder were acquitted, 
following a bungled prosecution case.

Russia's high court called for a fresh murder inquiry earlier this year. So 
far, Russian investigators have failed to identify the person who ordered her 
killing – known in Russian as thezakazshik – or the alleged hitman, a Chechen 
man called Rustam Makhmudov.

In February a jury cleared two of Makhumdov's brothers of involvement, as well 
as a former Moscow police officer and a member of Russia's FSB spy agency.

"Time is running out. The more time passes the less chance there is to find 
the people who took part in my mother's killing," Vera said.

Asked whether she was optimistic that the killer would eventually be brought 
to justice, she said: "The most important thing is that there should be no 
[state] interference.'

Russia's investigative committee claims Makhumdov has fled Russia and is 
hiding somewhere in westernEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

Sergei Sokolov, the deputy editor of Novaya Gazeta ‑ the opposition newspaper 
where Politkovskaya worked – said Makhmudov was "nearly" arrested in April. He 
gave no further details. He also said investigators had identified other 
"suspects".

Today's anniversary follows a dismal year for journalists and human rights 
activists in Russia. In July the activistNatalia Estemirova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/23/chechnya-natalia-estemirova> – a 
close friend of Politkovskaya's – was abducted from her home in Grozny, 
Chechnya. She was shot dead in neighbouring Ingushetia. Following her murder 
Novaya Gazeta said it would no longer maintain a correspondent in Chechnya.

In a statement issued from Paris today, Julliard said he had intended to come 
to Moscow to show solidarity with Politkovskaya's family and colleagues.

"We wanted to be there all the more this year, as it has been a terrible one 
for journalists and human rights activists with the surge of violence in the 
North Caucasus, a region that Anna knew particularly well," he said.

He added: "We are shocked by this decision, especially as we have always acted 
openly with the Russian authorities. They decided to prevent us from expressing 
our solidarity with Russian journalists and human rights activists. Moscow does 
not want us to address the Russians directly. But we will not give up."

Memorials are taking place tomorrow in several European capitals to 
commemorate Politkovskaya's life and mark the anniversary of her murder.

The journalist's sister Elena, who lives in London, is organising a meeting at 
St Bride's church in Fleet Street. There will also be meetings in Paris and 
Moscow.

A total of 22 journalists have been killed in connection with their work in 
Russia since March 2000. "To our great regret there is a culture of total 
impunity with regard to crimes against journalists," said Tikhon Dzyadko, 
Reporters Without Borders' representative in Moscow.

Russia was ranked 141st out of 173 countries in the 2008 Reporters Without 
Borders press freedom index.
 