
Another measure of the task awaiting Anna Meares was underlined in 
record-breaking clarity as the individual sprint began on Sunday morning. In 
her attempt to rip away the title fromVictoria Pendleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoriapendleton>, the reigning and 
increasingly regal Olympic champion, Meares had to digest yet more unpalatable 
evidence of the monumental form her old rival has unearthed with perfect timing.

Pendleton shattered the Olympic record in qualifying with a time of 10.724sec. 
Even though Miriam Welte rode marginally quicker at altitude in Colorado two 
months ago, Pendleton's personal best on Sunday is now widely regarded as the 
"real" world record. The 31-year-old British sprinter, who won her second 
Olympic gold medal in Friday's evening's keirin final, again looked as majestic 
as she was flat-out fast.

Meares has two days left to vanquish the doubts that last year she thought she 
had conquered forever. Having lost to Pendleton in the team sprint on Thursday, 
and twice in the keirin, momentum has swung away from Meares. The velocity and 
the force appear to be with Pendleton – in a way that has not been apparent 
since 2008.

After Meares returned from the Beijing Olympics, having been humbled in the 
sprint final, she asked Australia's coach, Martin Barras, what she had done 
wrong. She had been beaten so convincingly by Pendleton that, as they flew out 
of the last turn, Meares surrendered and sat up in her saddle. The wide-screen 
television picture showed the British world champion crossing the line with no 
sign of Meares behind her. It had been, as Pendleton always vowed, an 
"annihilation".

"You did nothing wrong," Barras supposedly told his shocked sprinter. "You've 
just never raced against someone that fast. No one has …"

Barras's assessment carried additional weight because he had briefly coached 
Pendleton when she was first selected for the GB elite squad in 2002. The 
French-Canadian had worked in the same role at the Manchester velodrome that he 
has since assumed with Australia. He had also been forced to change his mind 
about Pendleton because, when they first met and before he even saw her ride, 
he said: "Miss Victoria, I'm going to find you very annoying."

He regarded her as being too puny in physique and girly in temperament to 
become an elite sprinter. Meares, in contrast, with her formidable strength, 
conformed to the Barras archetype. Yet, in the intervening six years, Pendleton 
had developed such ferocious speed that Barras believed, reluctantly or not, 
that "Miss Victoria" was simply unbeatable.

Meares absorbed that blunt assessment of Pendleton's superiority and resolved 
to work harder. She had made the final in Beijing seven months after cracking a 
vertebra in her back that could have left her a quadriplegic had it been a 
clean break. So Meares had the toughness and determination not to give up 
against Pendleton.

It took a long time but, eventually, early in December 2010, Meares finally 
beat her nemesis again in a World Cup event in Melbourne. Pendleton, in 
conflict with her coaches, had wanted to miss the sprint to concentrate on the 
keirin but she was ordered to race Meares despite having not trained for the 
sprint. Meares's subsequent victory was her first defeat of Pendleton in five 
years.

Meares's spirits were transformed and she dominated for the next 14 months – 
and Pendleton was forced to relinquish the world sprint title she had held 
since 2007. It was during this bleak period for Pendleton, with Meares also 
becoming world champion in the team sprint and the keirin, that insiders in 
British cycling concluded that the Australian was almost unbeatable. It seemed 
as if the Barras perspective had been reversed and transplanted to Manchester.

Pendleton, in her complex way, is perhaps even more determined than Meares. 
She has uncovered something beyond just her old arrogant strut. Her speed is 
now venomous.

Meares, in turn, appears to be riding with slightly dented confidence. She 
admitted that she and Pendleton "took chunks out of each other" in an epic 
series of races at the London World Cup in February – and she was shaken by the 
way her bitter rival then seized her sixth world sprint title in Melbourne. The 
first few days of Olympic racing have established a pattern that the Australian 
may struggle to shift. Meares won her first two rounds of match sprints in the 
afternoon, dispatching Kayono Maeda and Monique Sullivan, but Pendleton was in 
an almost disdainful mood. The Olympic champion's victories over the 
19-year-old Ekaterina Gnidenko and the vastly experienced Willy Kanis were so 
comprehensive that Meares could be forgiven for shuddering inside.

Yet, as a definitive fighter, Meares will return for Monday's quarter-finals 
with renewed intent. She knows she needs to ride faster than ever before – as 
well as banish from her mind Barras's old lament that there is "nothing" she 
can do when Pendleton carries such conviction.
 