
1. Start small!

My first tip would be to start small and not over face yourself with writing a 
book. This is simply because it is really daunting to try and write seventy 
thousand words, when instead you can try and write a creative piece that is a 
thousand words, and have the lovely experience of finishing something that has 
a beginning, middle and end – a story, but on a small scale. What is great 
about this is that you get to practice being a writer; you get to plan and plot 
and write and edit without getting bogged down by a large project.

2. Practise!

I know that sounds terribly dull, but it is the only way to get better, so my 
second tip would be to write, write and write some more, in as many different 
ways as you can. Be creative. Be versatile. When I was growing up, I wrote 
diaries, and I wrote plays, and I wrote very, very bad poetry! I also wrote to 
a man on Death Row. Even though this wasn't a creative exercise, it was an 
interesting experience because I was describing my life to a stranger who had 
no idea who I was. I had an audience, and I wanted him to write back so I tried 
to make my letters entertaining. So, don't limit yourself to stories. Write as 
much as you can, in whatever way that you can. Consider getting a pen pal, or 
sign up for the school newspaper. Any time that you spend with a pen and paper 
in your hand is good practice for being an author.

3. Build good writing habits!

Tip three is linked to tip two. If you want to be a writer, you have to write, 
and you have to take it seriously. I don't mean you have to make it dull or 
tedious or really, really highbrow and frightening, but you do have to make a 
commitment to learn your craft. Make a promise to yourself to sit down once or 
twice a week, and make sure you do it. Part of writing a book is having the 
discipline to turn on your computer and work every single day, no matter how 
you're feeling or what else is going on in your life. You have to be 
professional and you have to put it first. Start with the right attitude now.

4. Have fun!

Saying all that, my fourth tip would be to keep in mind that writing is a 
creative process and it is supposed to be fun! It is about having the 
discipline to make yourself do it, but while you are doing it, remember to play 
and enjoy the process. There is a pressure to think that you need to write 
something that is publishable, but take that pressure off and write something 
just for you. Delight in words. Experiment with ideas. Play games, like 
choosing four random items in a drawer and making a story out of them, or 
googling an image and trying to write a short story from that 'character's' 
perspective. If you're enjoying the process, your work will shine.

5. Read!

Obviously, the age-old suggestion: read as much as possible – but my tip for 
this is slightly different. Read what you don't like, as well as what you do. 
Become a critical reader. Every time you're bored by a book, don't toss it to 
one side, but ask yourself why you're finding it tedious. If a character 
doesn't quite work for you, try to work out what it is that is stopping you 
from making a connection. If an ending is disappointing, think about how you 
would have liked it to be different. You can learn so much from books you hate! 
They're a great place to figure out the type of writer you want to be.
 