
Annie Proulx <https://www.theguardian.com/books/annie-proulx> is my hero. A 
private, unassuming and generous woman, she swept in at the age of 56, a 
fully-formed and great American writer.

She has a fascination with the nuts and bolts of things; her early books were 
practical manuals on home-brewing and advanced fence-making. This attention to 
detail expands into the dovetail joints and structural failures of life itself, 
and better allows her spectacularly to disassemble her unfortunate characters, 
loosing them among the traps and tripwires of American life: the poverty, the 
husks of what was love, the harshness and beauty of nature. Yet always the 
nobility of human stoicism shows through, tinctured with wise, deep humour.

Who can forget homeless Quoyle and his brood, plonked in a grim motel in The 
Shipping News? Or that fierce old survivor in "The Half-Skinned Steer", stuck 
in a car during a blizzard, knowing the last game is almost up? She is one of 
the truly great story writers of our time. There are no fancy-pancy suburban 
crises; first paragraphs are as big as whole novels. The prizes came as America 
recognised itself behind the tattered curtain.Close Range was a masterpiece – a 
writer in clear-sighted love with her subject. Further Wyoming stories have 
become richer and stranger: "Man Crawls Out of Trees", "Tits-Up in a Ditch".

She is a kind encourager of other writers. As a house guest in Wyoming, there 
are great anecdotes to be enjoyed, along with masterful margaritas and buffalo 
steaks; through the low windows sweep limitless sightlines, the ground cratered 
with bopping prairie dogs. Then there is the run of a library full of wonders: 
obscure medical texts, maps, local lore and gruesome oddities.

A poor correspondent myself, I file her jewelled emails separately since they 
reward rereading: rheumy sketches of human foibles, and unforgettable images – 
those vast Wyo skies, swept free of contrails after 9/11. Sometimes, in their 
art and in person, a hero doesn't disappoint.
 