
British tour operators were last week desperately trying to reassure 
holidaymakers that Antigua remains a safe destination, despite the brutal 
honeymoon murder of Catherine Mullany. Early signs were of a collapse in new 
bookings to the island amid reports of soaring crime figures and a homicide 
rate that, per head of the resident population, was three times that of New 
York.

The island's tourist officials, however, are stressing that these statistics 
don't take into account the fact that the population of 80,000 is swollen by 
more than 250,000 tourists each year. Moreover, they say, Dr Mullany was the 
first tourist to be killed on the island for more than a decade.

'First and foremost our thoughts and prayers are with the families and 
naturally, we are all deeply shocked by such a random act of violence,' said 
Carol Hay, UK director of tourism for Antigua and Barbuda. 'However, even at 
this tragic time, it is important that we maintain a sense of perspective.'

Antigua is the fourth most popular Caribbean island for British holidaymakers. 
Last year it attracted 96,800 Britons, an 8 per cent increase on 2006, and more 
than from any other country. Tourism bosses will be relieved that last week's 
attack happened in what is low season for the island.

'The incident is shocking and incredibly tragic, but we've been a little bit 
taken aback by the gusto with which some of the tabloids have addressed the 
issue,' said Paul Cleary, managing director of Caribtours. 'Clearly Antigua 
does have a problem, but up till now it hasn't affected tourists, and we're not 
advising our clients to do anything different.'

Last year there were 19 murders on Antigua, and Dr Mullany was the tenth 
victim this year. The Foreign Office updated its advice on the island last 
week, pointing to 'an overall increase in crime over recent months' and warning 
tourists they should 'avoid isolated areas, including beaches after dark'.

Nevertheless, many operators said they had been surprised by how few people 
were cancelling existing bookings. Both Virgin Holidays and Kuoni, two of the 
biggest carriers to the island, said none of their customers had cancelled 
trips.
 