
When Antonio Valencia was carried from the pitch breathing oxygen from a 
cylinder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/sep/15/antonio-valencia-united-champions-league>
 last night, Sir Alex Ferguson lost the man who currently represents his only 
reliable attacking force. Since the injury – a combination of a broken bone in 
the lower left leg and a dislocation of the ankle – seems likely to keep him 
out for the remainder of a season that has only just begun, his absence could 
have a profound effect on Manchester United's fortunes on all fronts over the 
coming eight months.

Ferguson will be acutely aware of the precedent of Alan Smith, his former 
forward, who suffered a similar injury in February 2006 during an FA Cup tie at 
Anfield. Smith was then aged 25 – the same as Valencia now. He was rushed back 
into action after seven months, and has subsequently scored only one goal in 
four-and-a -half years – in the 7-1 drubbing of Roma in April 2007, shortly 
after which he was transferred to Newcastle United. Smith was watching from the 
directors' box at Old Trafford yesterday as Valencia made his stretcher-borne 
exit.

The Ecuadorian international was bought from Wigan Athletic for a fee of 
around £16m in the summer of 2009 as a straight replacement for Cristiano 
Ronaldo – and the term is appropriate, since Valencia does not pretend to 
possess the Portuguese virtuoso's range of tricks or his gift for innovation. 
His virtues are those of speed, strength, directness, intelligence and 
altruism, and they made a major contribution to Wayne Rooney's total of 35 
goals last season.

With Valencia on the right and Nani on the left, Ferguson appeared to have 
assembled a pair of wingers recalling the partnerships of George Best and John 
Aston in the 60s and Andrei Kanchelskis or David Beckham and Ryan Giggs in the 
90s. Some long-standing United watchers would also have been reminded of Steve 
Coppell and Gordon Hill in the 70s – another combination of a hard-working, 
relatively straightforward provider of chances with a more mercurial and 
unpredictable performer on the opposite flank.

Although he may lack the obvious charisma of a Best, a Hill, a Giggs or a 
Ronaldo, Valencia possesses virtues that are just as valuable. His dedication 
to the team effort is as obvious as his disdain for showing off, and his 
athleticism is matched by quick feet and a fast wit. He can use his pace to go 
past a full back on the outside and drive in a first-time cross, but he is also 
capable of sensing when the target players have not yet arrived and can check 
back before beating his opponent again and delivering a carefully judged ball 
into the area at the right moment.

His willingness to defend is another asset that endears him to his manager, 
and it was from a position deep in his own half that, 20 minutes into the first 
half yesterday, he delivered a long ball down the inside-right channel that 
left Rangers' defence completely exposed for virtually the only time on the 
night. It was aimed at Rooney, who found himself tearing towards the visitors' 
penalty area with Javier Hernández keeping pace on his left and only the 
redoubtable David Weir between them.

The teenaged Rooney would have raced forward and smashed the ball at full 
stride inside the angle of near post and crossbar. A few years later the mature 
Rooney would have weighed up the situation and produced a perfectly weighted 
pass to his partner, giving the defender no chance to make an interception. The 
Rooney of September 2010 passed it straight to Weir.

That was the moment at which, had it turned out differently, all but the 
Rangers contingent in the 74,408 crowd would have begun to feel that they were 
being given their money's worth. Instead, on a night when Ferguson very 
obviously sent out a weakened team, they went home wondering how the coinage of 
Old Trafford's "big European nights" could have been so devalued by the 
structure of the modern Champions League.

It was also one of several anticlimactic moments in which the spirit of the 
players and the crowd seemed to be deflated. With the exception of one earlier 
looping header from Hernandez, United's chances were restricted to a series of 
long-range drives from Darron Gibson, only one of which required a save from 
Allan McGregor.

Ferguson's response to the loss of Valencia will be drawn from a limited range 
of options. Apparently he believes that Nani is more effective on the right, 
which gives him four possible choices on the left. First is Park Ji-sung, who 
had poor World Cup and seems to have lost some of his lustre. Second is the 
36-year-old Giggs, who must be used sparingly. Third is the 21-year-old 
Frenchman Gabriel Obertan, a considerable disappointment since his arrival from 
Bordeaux last summer. Fourth and last is the 20-year-old Bébé, the Portuguese 
winger so mysteriously acquired for £7.4m from Vitória de Guimarães last month.

The answer may be a switch to something closer to the 4-3-3 formation in which 
Rooney, Ronaldo and Carlos Tevez thrived a couple of years ago, without 
conventional wingers. But the loss of Valencia's contribution will be deeply 
felt.
 