
Sir Alex Ferguson said he expects his young players to take up the slack left 
by Cristiano Ronaldo's departure after seeing Antonio Valencia and Anderson 
score the goals to takeManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> through to the final 
of the Audi Cup.

Neither was a likely scorer as Manchester United overcame Boca Juniors in 
front of 61,000 in the Allianz Arena. Anderson had never scored for United 
while Valencia, making his debut, had found the net only three times for Wigan 
last season.

Ferguson's chief concern about allowing Ronaldo's his move to Madrid was how 
to replace his goals. At first glance Valencia was hardly a like-for-like 
replacement for a man who scored 68 times in his last two seasons.

Nevertheless Valencia would rarely have faced a keeper as uncertain as Boca's 
Roberto Abbondanzieri. After his defence had backed off to allow Valencia a 
sight of goal, the Argentina keeper allowed the ball to squirm under his body 
and dribble over the line.

"The goal was the result of a mistake by the keeper but he opened up space for 
himself to make the shot," Ferguson said. "He knows himself that his 
goalscoring record at Wigan is not good enough but we will work to assess why 
his record is so poor and playing alongside the players we have at Manchester 
United will give him more opportunity.

"If you are young and have the ambition, then Manchester United is the right 
club for you," the manager added. "I expect to see an improvement from the 
young players I have here. Nani is 22 and Anderson is 21 – they are boys really 
but they are playing at the highest level of football and we can provide a 
platform for them at Old Trafford.

"We did not play particularly well. Boca were the better team in the second 
half and they deserved something out of the game. I think we have realised that 
after touring the Far East we have come up against much better opposition – and 
it shows."

Anderson's free-kick, which opened the scoring in a 2-1 win, raises the 
intriguing possibility that, despite his complete lack of goals, the Brazilian 
may be the right man to take the set-pieces that Ronaldo monopolised at Old 
Trafford. Ferguson, however, suggested he had not come to a decision as to who 
Manchester United's penalty-taker would be.

"It depends on who the 11 players are on the pitch," he said. "I have been 
thinking about it for two weeks now and there is no firm decision. On the day 
it could be [Ryan] Giggs or Nani or Anderson. But what I hope this goal does 
for Anderson is give him the confidence to shoot because that is something that 
has been lacking in his game."

Given how hard he strikes the ball, Anderson's lack of goals is mystifying. In 
United's last game in Hangzhou he had struck the post and Ferguson had joked 
that the only way he would ever find the net was by making the goals bigger. 
The nets in the Allianz Arena are standard size and when Anderson's free-kick 
crashed into the top corner, the entire Manchester United bench came to the 
touchline to applaud.

Two up at half-time, United should have cantered to victory, especially given 
what has become a feature of their pre-season – Wayne Rooney's lung-busting 
runs. Once in the first half he charged through no fewer than four Boca 
defenders and might have won a penalty.

However, Boca Juniors showed considerable fight. Ten minutes after the 
interval Federico Insua volleyed a deep cross that United's left-back, Fabio da 
Silva, was in no position to meet past the goalkeeper Tomasz Kuszczak.

Boca Juniors immediately stepped up their game and might have equalised 
through another penetrating cross from the right. This time it was met not by 
an Argentinian boot but the head of Craig Cathcart.

The 20-year-old Ulsterman, who was making his debut for United, headed the 
ball squarely on to his own crossbar. He, like Valencia, could have had a debut 
to remember – but not for the right reasons.
 