
At the very end of an evening when it had all too frequently been tempting to 
dubAntonio Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-valencia> a 
poor man's Cristiano Ronaldo, the Ecuadorian's adroit winning finish served as 
a timely rebuke.

Much as they miss Ronaldo, United are coping well enough without him and, 
courtesy of Valencia's 86th-minute strike, now top Group B boasting a 100% 
record. With progress to the next phase all but assured, Sir Alex Ferguson is 
now free to concentrate on Sunday's vital Premier League fixture at Liverpool.

Rather like United as a whole, Valencia improved as the night unravelled and a 
patient first-half display gave way to a higher-tempo second period. "He's 
emerging very well," said Ferguson, whose team equalled Ajax's record of 14 
straight away games without defeat in Europe. "Valencia's got strength, 
crossing ability and balance, goal-scoring was his weakness at Wigan but he's 
now scored a couple in two games. His confidence is growing."



• Barry Glendenning's minute-by-minute report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/oct/21/cska-moscow-manchester-united>
• United forced to opt for Russian cuisine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/oct/21/manchester-united-champions-league-moscow>
• Digger: United cool on pitchside advertising  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/oct/22/manchester-united-champions-league-advertising>



United, missing the injured Wayne Rooney, were arranged in a mirror image of 
CSKA's 4-2-3-1 configuration and, like Juande Ramos's side, began slowly, 
initially struggling to sustain any sort of attacking momentum.

With early scoring chances at a premium, a rare moment of excitement arrived 
when Nemanja Vidic – fit again and restored to a defence also featuring Fabio 
da Silva as an overlapping left-back – hesitated momentarily, ceding possession 
to his fellow Serb, Milos Krasic.

The much coveted forward – AC Milan are especially keen – dodged two markers, 
before sending a shot whizzing over the bar.

Vidic had been warned that, for players accustomed to operating on grass, the 
ball's bounce on the Luzhniki's artificial stadium can seem disorientating.

No matter, CSKA were appearing slightly bewildered by United's left-wing 
combination of Fabio and Nani. So much so that when the excellent Paul Scholes 
– sitting deep in central midfield alongside John O'Shea – lobbed a diagonal 
ball in Nani's direction the Portuguese's resultant cross very nearly resulted 
in the hitherto worryingly isolated Dimitar Berbatov scoring with a 
close-ranger header.

If Berbatov was seeing far too little of the ball, CSKA fed Krasic at every 
opportunity. From his nominal right-sided attacking position he drifted all 
over the place, frequently dribbling considerable distances. While Krasic, who 
sports almost as much luxuriant blond hair as Robbie Savage, sometimes hogged 
possession when a simple pass would have served his team better, his raking 
angled shot that skidded fractionally wide of Edwin van der Sar's far post 
emphasised that Ferguson's defence were up against a dangerous enemy. "Krasic 
is very talented," agreed United's manager.

Despite gradually tightening up his marking of the Serb appreciably, Fabio 
probably did not do quite enough to earn a starting place at Anfield, where 
Vidic could possibly be in danger of replacement by Jonny Evans – a substitute 
here – after looking a little rusty at times. And never more so than when 
permitting Alan Dzagoev to intercept his loose back-pass and leaving Van der 
Sar to smartly repel the ensuing danger.

As half-time approached United's travelling support found themselves with 
disappointingly little to cheer about – unless you can't Gary Neville's 
somewhat startling speculative left-footer from distance which bounced onto the 
roof of the net.

Instead the moment when Berbatov, having adroitly turned his minder, swung a 
boot at a Valencia cross but ended up swiping thin air seemed horribly 
emblematic of United's travails.

Whether from Gorton or Gorky Park, their fans could have been forgiven for 
spending half-time wishing Ronaldo was still around but Ferguson may have been 
more concerned by the way his defenders stood off Tomas Necid at the outset of 
the second period.

Fortunately for Vidic and Rio Ferdinand – later replaced by Wes Brown in a 
pre-Anfield energy conserving move – Necid failed to strike the ball cleanly, 
leaving Van der Sar with a simple save but it was a moment to make even Rafael 
Benítez feel slightly optimistic.

CSKA thought they had taken the lead when the increasingly influential Dzagoev 
shot into the bottom corner but the dramatic red flares lit by Muscovites were 
ignited prematurely as that effort was rightly disallowed for a blatant offside.

It served to galvanise United and almost immediately the previously 
underemployed Igor Akinfeev – a keeper very much on Ferguson's radar and 
extravagantly praised by the Scot afterwards – saved brilliantly to keep a Nani 
header out following Neville's cross.

With his side suddenly near omnipotent, Ferguson sent Michael Owen on in 
Scholes's stead, switching to 4-4-2 in the process and, shortly afterwards, 
Valencia hit the bar. When Nani whipped in a left-wing cross and Berbatov 
flicked on, the swivelling Ecuadorian did rather better, squeezing a 
close-ranged angled strike beyond Akinfeev.

The only cause for Ferguson's mood to darken was the decision by Russian 
customs officers to incinerate the post-match meal specially sent out from 
Manchester for the team's flight home, replacing it with Russian speciality 
cuisine.
 