
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and 
Rangers took a point apiece but they ended the night with nothing else in 
common. The visitors are known for effectiveness away from home in European 
football but few had envisaged a draw at Old Trafford in the Champions League. 
The outcome should leave Sir Alex Ferguson in discomfort since the much altered 
selection he fielded proved not at all equipped for the task.

The identity of the teams and the nature of the result seem to imply that 
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> had somehow come through 
an ordeal full of terror. In reality the organisation of Walter Smith's side 
was outstanding and they were unruffled. It was their opponents who looked 
agitated, with the substitute Ryan Giggs booked in stoppage team for his 
protests that a penalty ought to have been awarded against Maurice Edu for 
handball.

• Ferguson expects Valencia to miss the rest of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/sep/15/antonio-valencia-united-champions-league>
• Rangers defender wishes Valencia a speedy recovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/sep/15/antonio-valencia-injury-rangers>
• Daniel Taylor's player ratings from Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/sep/15/champions-league-ratings-manchester-united-rangers>
• Read Rob Smyth's minute-by-minute report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/sep/14/manchester-united-rangers-live-champions-league>

The referee, Olegário Benquerenca, considered it inadvertent. He had also been 
indifferent when Chris Smalling made some contact with the visitors' defender 
Kirk Broadfoot inside the United area after 71 minutes. Even so, it was not a 
night for quarrels. If the match is remembered, it will be for the grave and 
accidental damage done toAntonio Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-valencia> when he was caught by 
Broadfoot. He has suffered a broken leg and dislocated ankle and a long absence 
lies before him.

It took five minutes before the Ecuadorian could even be carried to the stand. 
With the exception of that distressing moment, this was an insipid occasion. 
That, in turn, illustrated how deft Smith is in planning this type of exercise. 
On the eve of the match Ferguson had applauded the acumen of his friend and 
former colleague but could not have guessed that it would be quite so telling 
here.

The United manager has even left himself open to the charge of complacency. 
Ferguson's selection showed that the opening fixture in Group C had not 
dominated his thoughts entirely. Darren Fletcher was the one player retained 
from the starting line-up deployed at Goodison on Saturday. There was a recall 
for Wayne Rooney, Rio Ferdinand was fit to make his first appearance since May 
and Smalling was allowed his first start after the summer move from Fulham; the 
clean sheet indicates that his inclusion was no handicap. It was more 
significant that Javier Hernández and, in particular, Rooney made scant impact 
in attack.

Rangers made them peripheral figures for most of the time. Many a side have 
come to Old Trafford with the intention of keeping 10 men behind the ball and 
the bulk of them have been overcome eventually. Smith's side were different 
because their concentration never faltered and the methodical tone was 
sustained to such an extent that little incident was permitted.

There was an early hint of the frustration ahead for United when, in the 35th 
minute, a low drive from Darron Gibson went narrowly wide. Visiting fans who 
had arrived determined to enjoy themselves come what may also had cause in that 
period to be happy. The home crowd was not stricken by apprehension but neither 
had they been entertained. Rangers sat back and United, despite being well 
acquainted with that approach, were hapless in their bid to come up with an 
answer. Indeed it was the visitors who had more shots on target, four to three.

Rangers are a club with parlous finances, dependent on journeyman and making 
great demands of David Weir, a 40-year-old centre-back who should take pride in 
this result for the rest of his days. Regardless of the inclusion of wingers in 
Valencia and Park Ji-sung, Ferguson's side had persistent trouble in turning 
the Rangers defence and mostly shuffled passes in front of it. When the home 
crowd chanted Rooney's name in the first half it was an entreaty to make a 
difference rather a celebration of his efforts. There really had been no cause 
for the visitors' goalkeeper, Allan McGregor, to waste time and so receive a 
yellow card. The widespread blandness provoked reservations about the depth of 
United's vaunted means.

The excuse that this was bound to be an anticlimactic night for Ferguson's men 
must be brushed aside. For all the camaraderie with Smith and the affinity he 
has with the opposition as a former Rangers player, the United manager can only 
rebuke his players. If some of that scolding occurred at the interval, there 
was no reaction to it.

This has been an exasperating spell for United, who were held to that 3-3 draw 
at Goodison despite holding a 3-1 lead until stoppage time. It is perplexing 
that an entirely different sort of fallibility afflicted the team at Old 
Trafford. Rangers will have departed in blissful content. United, on their 
part, must throw off this torpor before Liverpool arrive on Sunday.

 