
Antonio Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-valencia> has 
returned to England and will play no part in Manchester United's pre-season 
tour of the United States.

It was always unlikely Valencia would be involved, as he has been on Copa 
América duty with Ecuador. However, a nasty ankle injury sustained in his 
country's opening match of that tournament ruled out any possibility of a cameo 
role.

And, while he does not believe the problem is serious, the Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> manager, Sir Alex 
Ferguson, is taking no chances and has told the player to head back to United's 
training complex for treatment.

"Antonio has gone straight back to Manchester," said Ferguson after the 4-1 
win over New England Revolution in Boston. "He got an injury playing in the 
first game for Ecuador so he is back in Manchester.

"It is nothing serious but he wasn't going to be taking part in the rest of 
Copa América, so there is no point in him coming out here if he is injured. We 
have the facilities back at Carrington. That is the best place for him."

It was a long-term ankle injury for Valencia last season that persuaded 
Ferguson to reinforce this summer with the signing of Ashley Young, who made 
his first appearance for United in front of 51,000 at the Gillette Stadium. He 
produced a number of decent crosses from his wide role and showed enough signs 
to suggest he will have no problem settling in.

"That was his position until last season when they started playing him behind 
the strikers in a more advanced role, like the way we use Wayne Rooney," said 
Ferguson. "His capabilities are such that he can play at wide left, he can play 
in behind the strikers and he can play wide right.

"He showed tonight he's a fantastic crosser of the ball. I think he hit three 
fantastic crosses in the game, which maybe isn't something we're used to with 
the way we play. But if we do get used to it then there's goals there. I was 
very satisfied."

Following a goalless first half, Michael Owen broke the deadlock just after 
the break. Federico Macheda added two more, with Park Ji-sung wrapping up a 
comfortable win. United now head to Seattle for a week-long stay, with the 
chief executive David Gill joining them on Friday.

Gill was at a European Club Association meeting in Zurich yesterday, which 
would have provided an opportunity to speak with Internazionale about the 
possibility of signing Wesley Sneijder.

The Old Trafford outfit rejected suggestions Gill had flown on from 
Switzerland to Milan in an attempt to thrash out a deal. There is nevertheless 
a growing feeling Sneijder is Old Trafford-bound although, with Gill now 
heading across the Atlantic, any transfer may not be completed for a little 
while yet.
 