
Manchester United's proud record of having not lost a Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group game on their own 
ground for eight years is still intact, rescued by another of those feats of 
escapology in which Sir Alex Ferguson's team specialise. Paul Scholes's 
84th-minute header and a stoppage-time own goal rescued them just as it seemed 
their 22-match unbeaten home run in this competition would be snapped apart 
like a dried twig.

Two-one down at half-time, United had looked on course for the heaviest home 
European defeat when they conceded again two minutes after the restart. At that 
stage they looked hapless, lacking potency in attack, riddled with errors in 
defence. But no team has greater powers of recovery than the Premier League 
champions. Ferguson's men dug deep, reasserted themselves and the late 
onslaught was so relentless, so determined, that they probably deserved the 
good fortune that accompanied Antonio Valencia's shot being helped by a 
sizeable deflection.

The upshot is that United have qualified from Group B with two games to spare 
and, ultimately, there were more than enough positives to balance out what had 
gone before. "If you want excitement come to Old Trafford," a smiling Ferguson 
said. "It's one of the great pleasures of being the manager of this football 
club – that you can get finishes like that. Fantastic."

Nonetheless, there was plenty for Ferguson to ponder too. The defending was 
poor in the extreme and on Sunday they have to go to Stamford Bridge to play 
Chelsea. United are intrepid travellers, but it is not difficult to imagine 
Carlo Ancelotti showing his players a video of this match to highlight where 
the visitors might be vulnerable.

Ferguson had said after the 2-0 defeat of Blackburn Rovers on Saturday that, 
behind Rio Ferdinand and Nemanja Vidic, there is not a better central defensive 
partnership in the Premier League than Wes Brown and Jonny Evans but, on this 
evidence, it looks like misplaced flattery. Fábio da Silva had a difficult 
evening deputising for Patrice Evra and Ferguson, regretting his choice of a 
4-4-2 system, spoke of his team being "strung out very easily".

When United had played at the Luzhniki Stadium two weeks ago CSKA had been 
moderate opponents. On this occasion, however, the Russians were facing an 
experimental side missing its first-choice defence and with Federico Macheda 
getting a Champions League debut alongside Michael Owen in attack because 
Dimitar Berbatov had a knee injury and Wayne Rooney was on the bench after the 
birth of his son.

Perhaps the list of absentees could be cited as one reason why United started 
so sluggishly. Or maybe it was complacency, knowing that they had done the hard 
work in this group by winning their opening three matches. Whatever the 
reasons, it threatened to become a disturbing evening for the home side once 
Alan Dzagoev eluded Brown and Evans to lash a spectacular left-foot shot beyond 
Edwin van der Sar after 25 minutes.

The lead lasted only four minutes when Owen, having already wasted two good 
chances, drove in a loose ball after Nani, with a clever flick, had turned on 
one of Valencia's right-wing crosses and, at that stage, the crowd could have 
been forgiven for thinking the home team would take control.

Instead, CSKA quickly carved open another hole in United's defence, this time 
for Milos Krasic to run through unchallenged and go around Van der Sar before 
firing into the exposed goal.

United's shortcomings were encouraging their opponents and, if the natural 
assumption was to believe Ferguson's men would start the second half strongly 
after a wedding set's worth of crockery had been smashed in the dressing room, 
it could not have been more different. On 47 minutes CSKA's third goal 
originated from nothing more basic than a free-kick from the left, swung in by 
Dzagoev and over Fábio's jump for Vasili Beretzutski to head in at the far 
post. Ferguson, in mitigation, said it was the first set-piece goal his team 
had conceded for nearly a year.

United might have found a quicker route back into the game had the Portuguese 
referee, Olegário Benquerença, not ruled that Darren Fletcher had dived when he 
had actually been tripped by Aleksei Berezutski inside the penalty area. 
Ferguson described it as "unbelievable" and this time nobody could accuse him 
of being unduly harsh on the match officials.

But United did not lose their nerve. Rooney's introduction lifted the crowd 
and Macheda headed against a post before Scholes headed in Gary Neville's 
free-kick. It was unrelenting pressure and the clock was approaching 91 minutes 
when Valencia's 25-yard drive struck Georgi Schennikov and into the net. The 
CSKA defender Deividas Semberas was then sent off for his second booking but 
not even United could conjure up a winner.
 