
The Rangers defender Kirk Broadfoot spoke of his horror at witnessing the 
injury which could rule Antonio Valencia out for the season and wished the
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
player a quick recovery.

Valencia will undergo an operation this morning after suffering a horrendous 
injury after a seemingly innocuous incident involving the full-back. TV replays 
showed the midfielder's foot pointing in the wrong direction and he was 
eventually taken off on a stretcher, with Broadfoot in obvious distress.

"I'm not too sure what happened," he admitted. "I just slid in and looked 
round and his bone was sticking out. We tried to get the physio on to help him 
because you don't like to see that. These things happen and hopefully he makes 
a fast recovery.

"I've never seen anything like that so close before. You see things like that 
on television and it's not good but to see it there in front of you, it doesn't 
look nice and I just hope he recovers quickly."

Sir Alex Ferguson revealed after the goalless draw with the Scottish champions 
he fears Valencia will be out for the rest of the season. "It is a dislocation 
or a fracture and he gets operated on tomorrow [Wednesday] morning," he said. 
"It was an innocuous challenge but when you saw the Rangers player waving, you 
knew it was a bad one.

"It is a bad blow for the boy. It is similar to the injury Alan Smith got and 
you are talking about the rest of the season."

Broadfoot was deployed in an unfamiliar left-back role as his manager Walter 
Smith opted for a packed five-man defence. The gameplan paid off, with Rangers 
by far the happier team as they returned to Ibrox with a point from the
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> opener.

"I played in pre-season in that position so I knew what my job was. I knew the 
gameplan and I just stuck to my gameplan," said Broadfoot. "We are just 
delighted to come to Old Trafford and get the point to be honest. It does feel 
like a win because not a lot of teams come here and get a point so we are 
delighted.

"We deserve credit for coming to Old Trafford and getting a point because not 
many teams do that. I'm sure if you were to ask any team in the Premier League, 
they would be delighted to come to Old Trafford and get a point. People might 
say it's negative but we had chances to win the game, albeit not as many as 
them, and we are happy with the point."
 