
It is pouring with rain, thunderclouds gathering with theatrical intensity 
over the Soho streets, yet whenWilliam Boyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/william-boyd> walks into the room he is 
absolutely dry. Mysteriously, he does not seem to be carrying an umbrella or 
even wearing a raincoat, but his brown hair is fluffy at the edges and his 
striped scarf, tucked neatly underneath the lapels of his jacket, is pristine. 
There is not a hint of dampness about him.

And yet, partly because I have been re-reading Any Human Heart in preparation 
for our meeting, I'm not entirely surprised by Boyd's unruffled appearance. 
After all, this is the author who constructed a 500-page novel purporting to be 
the personal journals of Logan Mountstuart, a fictional writer whose 85-year 
life spanned each decade of the 20th century. Boyd's technique was so 
convincing that, at the time of its publication in 2002, many readers believed 
Mountstuart to be real. The novel came complete with footnotes and an index 
that included a reference to "William Boyd, biographer of Nat Tate". Boyd had 
indeed written a 1998 biography of Nat Tate, an American artist from the 1950s. 
It was just that Nat Tate was also a figment of Boyd's imagination (the name is 
a contraction of the National and Tate Galleries).

Confronted with this textual hall of mirrors, it is hard not to feel that the 
58-year-old Boyd, the author of several acclaimed novels and screenplays, is 
capable of making us believe anything he wishes. Perhaps, I find myself 
thinking, the rain outside doesn't actually exist; perhaps Boyd has simply made 
it up.

"I like to invent things," he concedes with a smile, speaking with a soft but 
noticeable Scottish lilt – his parents came from Fife, although he was born in 
Accra, Ghana (then the Gold Coast), in 1952. "I think the well-functioning 
imagination, supplied with the necessary facts and figures, actually gets you 
very close to the truth, whatever that is." Does he believe that fiction is in 
some sense more truthful than the dry, hard facts of history? "If you do it 
well, I think you get a picture that is without the constraints of the 
historian or the biographer. You can push the envelope."

In Any Human Heart, Boyd's eighth novel, he set out to tell the story of the 
20th century, not as a chronological catalogue of world events but rather by 
showing how important moments impinged on the life of an ordinary man. The 
result is a seamless blurring of fact and fiction – Mountstuart crosses paths 
with many of the century's most influential cultural and political figures, 
including Virginia Woolf, Ernest Hemingway, James Joyce and the Duke and 
Duchess of Windsor – but at the core of the book beats a fictional heart. 
Pivotal historical occurrences – the build-up to the second world war or the 
political encroachments of Mussolini in Italy – frequently merit only a 
distracted line or two in the middle of a description of a successful dinner 
party or a particularly memorable holiday.

"I think, in a way, that's part of its appeal," says Boyd, who has also 
written the screenplay for the Channel 4 adaptation, "because you live his life 
as he does. It's not that classic third-person, past-tense account that you get 
in novels, or particularly biographies or autobiographies, with hindsight 
shaping everything. The journal takes everything that life throws at you as 
significant: that girl met in the pub could be your next wife or someone you 
never see again. So you have to reproduce that sense of living life on the 
hoof, of living life as we all do, with the future this blank void in front of 
us and not guessing the significance of anything."

Still, there were certain people and events that Boyd knew he wanted his 
protagonist to collide with. "Yes, this is the great bliss of writing novels in 
that anything you're interested in can become grist to your mill. I knew he was 
going to meet Virginia Woolf, for example," Boyd says, laughing.

Woolf is given short shrift in the book, with Mountstuart dismissing her as a 
supercilious shrew. "I think I taught Virginia Woolf for too long – too many 
tutorials onTo The Lighthouse," Boyd says by way of explanation (he was a 
lecturer in English Literature at St Hilda's College, Oxford, from 1980 to 
1983). "But a lot of Logan's betes noires are my betes noires, whether it's 
Woolf or Jackson Pollock or the Duke and Duchess of Windsor or whoever. I sort 
of steered his life towards places or encounters or events that would allow me 
to explore my prejudices and my likes. It's sort of deliberate, but it seems 
random – he winds up in Nigeria during the civil war because I was living there 
then and wanted to write about it."

Unsurprisingly, Any Human Heart required a great deal of research. Boyd spent 
30 months reading hundreds of books, including the complete works of William 
Gerhardie, a renowned 1920s author who then faded into obscurity alongside the 
brighter light cast by Evelyn Waugh, and who provides the key model for 
Mountstuart: "Gerhardie published his last book in 1940 but he died in 1977, so 
there were 37 years of silence, which is actually what I think is interesting."

Boyd says he was used to the idea of "thorough scholarship, but researching a 
novel is so different from researching a thesis because actually you're looking 
for something that catches your eye. You're like a magpie looking for something 
shiny that will serve your purpose."

The Duke and Duchess of Windsor are among Boyd's most successful 
characterisations. The duchess is depicted as a woman of potent sexual 
charisma, who speaks slightly too closely to people's faces, with the effect of 
making them feel they are intensely fascinating. The duke, by contrast, is 
skewered with the telling detail that he never says thank you. In the screen 
adaptation, this caused much consternation with actor Tom Hollander, who plays 
the duke and had to keep curtailing his natural politeness while filming. "He's 
constantly taking things – money, cigarettes, whatever – and never says thank 
you once," Boyd says. "Of course, in the novel you can point that out, but in 
the film it's sort of subliminal."

But one of the challenges of choosing to write a fictionalised journal is that 
the plot becomes necessarily shapeless and loose-ended: there is no overarching 
narrative thrust. Plot lines are lost and seemingly integral characters drop 
out of Mountstuart's life without warning. As a result, whenAny Human Heart was 
first published eight years ago, it met with mixed reviews. Was Boyd ever 
worried that the lack of structure would be too confusing for the general 
reader?

"Yes, I was, and I think particularly because I knew it would be a long book… 
My worry was: could that intimate confessional tone of voice and its intense 
subjectivity be continued over 500-plus pages and seven decades? The answer is 
yes, I think, but it was a real worry initially.

"You end up having to take enormous pains to seem artless and spontaneous. So 
that paradox is there: all your instincts are saying: 'Tell the story, move 
things along', but actually you realise that life doesn't conform to the 
narrative of a novel, so you have to meander, there have to be passages of deep 
boredom and tedium, and there have to be false starts and dead ends in order to 
make it seem real."

Despite the reservations of some reviewers, Any Human Heart has proved 
enduringly popular. Boyd says he receives more letters about it than any other 
book he has written. But although he has met with success, he never seems to 
have received the same critical acclaim as, say, Ian McEwan or Martin Amis. 
Perhaps Boyd dislikes the thought of showing off in print. At his core, he 
remains a storyteller who refuses to let his lyrical style overwhelm the 
narrative substance of his plots. Does he feel there is a tendency among modern 
writers to ignore the importance of a good story?

"It depends. Fashions come and go, but I think at the root of a novel is story 
and character."

He is, he says "ridiculously, absurdly pleased" with how the television 
adaptation has worked out: "I'm almost embarrassed to say how pleased I am. I 
rather cheesily feel proud."

Then, with a final smile and a nod, he leaves, our hour together destined to 
be just one more meeting in a life full of random occurrences that might or 
might not turn out to be important. The rain, I notice, has cleared.

Any Human Heart is on Channel 4 at 9pm tonight and for the following three 
Sundays <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/any-human-heart>
 