
Thousands of people around Australia are expected at dawn services, gunfire 
breakfasts and marches on Monday forAnzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day>.

It will be the 101st anniversary of the Gallipoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallipoli> landing and the 100th anniversary 
of Anzac Day itself.

Attention will also turn to the western front and the battlegrounds of 
Pozieres and Fromelles, and it is also the 50th anniversary of the Battle of 
Long Tan, which took place during the Vietnam war.

Peter Greste: journalist and campaigner awarded Anzac Peace prize
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/22/peter-greste-journalist-and-campaigner-awarded-anzac-peace-prize>
Queensland

More than 25,000 people are expected to gather for Queensland’s major Anzac 
Day dawn service in Brisbane.

The Brisbane service <https://anzacday.org.au/annual-anzac-day-ceremonies> is 
the state’s largest and attendance more than doubled last year for the 
centenary.


This year is also the 100th year for the Anzac Day Commemoration Committee, 
central to the day’s events, which was established at a public meeting in Bowen 
Hills in January 1916.


“Queenslanders generally aren’t aware that the Anzac Day tradition has its 
roots right here in Brisbane,” CEO Hedley Lockyer said.


“It may not have happened in any other state in Australia, or any other 
country for that matter, had it not been for that public meeting.”


Since then the committee has kept the same bipartisan structure, with the 
premier as chair and the opposition leader as vice-chair, he said.


To mark the anniversary, the State Library of Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> digitised the first 
minute book, which records its earliest meetings.

“We do take pride in the fact that we’ve been around for 100 years,” Lockyer 
said.

“Hopefully we can keep the spirit alive for another 100.”

Brisbane is expecting a maximum of 26C on Monday, with a possible shower.

Gold Coast

The dawn service at Currumbin Beach on the Gold Coast 
<http://www.goldcoast.qld.gov.au/thegoldcoast/anzac-day-7448.html> has been 
growing in popularity and is now one of Australia’s largest regional events.


An art project organised by the Currumbin RSL at the Rock of Remembrance has 
seen a net of about 5,000 plastic poppies laid over the landmark.


Independent Queensland shops will not be able to trade until 1pm, but food and 
grocery stores can open earlier.

New South Wales

Thousands of war veterans, their descendants and current service staff will 
march past the Anzac memorial in Sydney’s Hyde Park 
<http://rslnsw.org.au/commemoration/anzac/> for the first time this Anzac Day.


Sydneysiders will gather at the Cenotaph in Martin Place for the dawn service 
where representatives fromNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales>, New Zealand and 
France will lay official wreaths to mark the 100th commemoration of the Anzac 
landing at Gallipoli.


At 9am the Anzac Day march will proceed south from Martin Place along 
Elizabeth street, instead of the usual George street route, finishing with the 
Act of Remembrance as marchers pass the Anzac memorial ahead of a commemoration 
service at 12.30pm.


“More and more of our older veterans and even some younger will be in 
wheelchairs, and this route is very comfortable for wheelchair movement,” New 
South Wales RSL president Rod White said.


The state’s veterans affairs minister, David Elliott, said the change provided 
a chance to honour the monument, which serves as a “very, very important part 
of our Anzac story”.

Official commemorations will conclude with a short sunset service back at the 
Cenotaph in Martin Place at 5pm.

Sydney is expecting partly cloudy conditions for Monday, with a maximum 
temperature of 23C.

Western Australia

More than 110 dawn services will be held in Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia> on Anzac Day, 
including at the fire-ravaged town of Yarloop.


The Yarloop bushfire in January destroyed 181 properties, including 162 houses 
and the heritage-listed Workshops, but the community is determined to 
commemorate Anzac Day.


The Bureau of Meteorology says there is a very high chance of rain in Perth, 
with as much as 10mm forecast, but more than 70,000 people filled Perth’s Kings 
Park at last year’s service and the RSL expects similar numbers on Monday.

People are being encouraged to use public transport, with early trains and 
buses operating for the dawn service, which will begin at 5.50am.


A gunfire breakfast will be held after the dawn service in the Stirling 
Gardens.


In Perth the Anzac Day parade 
<http://www.rslwahq.org.au/commemoration/anzac-day.aspx> will start at 9am, 
travelling from St Georges Terrace to Langley Park where the commemorative 
service will be held at 11am.

Victoria

Vietnam war veterans and the South Vietnamese who helped them will lead the 
Anzac Day march in Melbourne this year.


It’s the first time they will lead the march down St Kilda Road to the Shrine 
of Remembrance <http://www.shrine.org.au/Remembrance/Ceremonies/ANZAC-Day-2016> 
as they mark the 50th anniversary of the Battle of Long Tan.


In one of the defining chapters of Australia’s military history, 108 
Australian troops defeated a Viet Cong force of more than 1,500 soldiers.


The Vietnam war was held against a backdrop of controversy back home, marked 
by antiwar protests and fierce opposition to conscription.


“As we pause to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Battle of Long Tan, 
it’s fitting that Victoria’s Australian and Vietnamese veterans will lead the 
march for the first time,” veterans minister John Eren said.


A dawn service will be held at the Shrine of Remembrance at 6am, an official 
wreath laying service at 8.15am and an Anzac Day march along St Kilda road to 
the shrine will begin at 9am.


Large crowds are expected in the city and hundreds of others are expected to 
pay their respects at cenotaphs and RSLs across the state.

Melbourne is expecting sunny conditions for Monday, with a maximum temperature 
of 24.


South Australia

A $10m memorial walk to pay homage to a century of service by thousands of 
Australians in armed conflicts around the world will open in time for this 
year’sAnzac Day services in Adelaide <http://rslsa.org.au/ANZACDAY>.


The walk runs from the city’s war memorial, in North Terrace, to the Torrens 
parade ground, the gathering place for many military units as they prepared for 
overseas deployment.


It has been built largely on land given up by Government House in one of the 
most significant developments in recent years to honour the country’s 
servicemen and women.


About 6,000 current and former military personnel will march in Adelaide on 
Monday in the annual parade that continues to attract thousands.


It will follow the annual dawn service where crowds have topped 10,000 in 
recent years, including a growing number of young people, something welcomed by 
the Returned and Services League.


“The remarkable increase in youth participation has added an important 
dimension to our annual program of commemoration,” RSL state president Tim 
Hanna said.


Along those lines, hundreds of young people from service groups will stage a 
vigil at the war memorial in the 12 hours before the dawn service and several 
thousand are expected to take part in Camp Gallipoli, where school students set 
up swags and sleep in the open to experience something of what the Anzacs did 
more than 100 years ago.


Year 12 student Benson Macallister, 17, took part in Camp Gallipoli last year 
and was excited to do it again in 2016.


“World War I is a significant part of Australian history and it is so 
important for young people to remember the suffering that the Anzac soldiers 
and their families went through,” he said.


Fellow student Michelle Roylance said being woken before dawn by a bugler was 
a special experience as they remembered those who fought and died.


“So many people suffered and so many lives were lost. We owe it to the Anzac 
soldiers to remember their sacrifice,” she said.


The Bureau of Meteorology is predicting a sunny day for Adelaide with a 
maximum temperature of 24C.

Tasmania

Disconnected military veterans are on the radar of Tasmania’s RSL this Anzac 
Day.


While the national focus is set firmly on Monday’s traditional services and 
parades, state president Robert Dick has been visiting regional areas hoping to 
reach out to those who need and deserve a helping hand.


“People are discharging from the ADF [Australian Defence Force] and losing 
contact with the RSL without realising they are entitled to support,” Dick said.


“We are out there telling them we are not just about clubs and commemorations, 
we can help with entitlements,” everything from an employment program to 
healthcare entitlements.


In some cases the people were quite young, having enlisted at age 18 and after 
four years service found themselves trying to adjust to life outside the 
military, he said.


Dick insisted it was just as important to care for Australia’s young veterans 
as it was to remember those who had sacrificed their lives at war.


Monday’s Anzac Day commemorations will give a special nod to the 440 
Tasmanians killed 100 years ago on a bloody battlefield in northern France 
while protecting the small village of Pozieres.


The six-week conflict was costly for Australia.


“There was a high contingent of Tasmanians who were a part of Pozieres because 
it was a focus of the 12th Battalion, in which Tasmanians were actively 
involved,” Dick said.


Despite 2015 being the much-publicised Anzac centenary, Dick said many 
significant events would mark the 100th Anzac year in 2016, including the 
battle of Pozieres and the battle of Fromelles.


“We have a lot more members of the public saying they have become more 
involved in Anzac Day because they are starting to realise the sacrifice that 
these men made,” he said.


Other important milestones in 2016 would include the 75th anniversaries of the 
Siege of Tobruk and the Battle of Crete. A two-star Greek general will be in 
Hobart to lay a wreath during the Anzac Day main service to pay tribute to 
Australia’s support in Crete in 1941.

Earlier in the day, dawn services will be held at more than 60 centres across 
Tasmania <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania>.

Hobart is expecting sunny conditions for Monday, with a maximum temperature of 
22C.

ACT

For the Gallipoli centenary last year an estimated 120,000 braved the cool 
Canberra weather to attend the dawn service outside theAustralian War Memorial 
<https://www.awm.gov.au/commemoration/anzac-day/>. Police estimated half as 
many but it was still a record turnout.


A year on from the centenary, it’s not anticipated as many will attend this 
Monday morning, but prime minister Malcolm Turnbull will attend the national 
service at the war memorial.

And elsewhere …

On Gallipoli there’ll be the traditional dawn service, though it’s not 
expected to be on the same scale as last year’s centenary event. The Lone Pine 
service, traditionally held later in the morning, has been replaced by a 
wreath-laying ceremony on the afternoon of the previous day.


In Iraq Australian and New Zealand troops – engaged in training Iraqi forces 
to fight the Islamic State group – will mark the 101st anniversary of Gallipoli 
with a dawn service.


There’ll be similar commemorations at Australian bases in Afghanistan and the 
United Arab Emirates.
 