
The global partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/dec/01/china-india-aid-partnership?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 on aid effectiveness, unveiled to great fanfare in Busan, South Korea, in 
2011, was supposed to bring together all the pieces of the puzzle that make 
development work. It is the only forum for aid donors and recipients, emerging 
economies, civil society, the private sector and foundations to focus on the 
quality of development assistance.

But almost two years on, the global partnership is at risk of fading away 
because of a shortage of funding, reflecting a lack of high-level political 
interest. Busan built on previous aid effectiveness commitments made in Paris 
and Accra on the principles of aid ownership (by developing countries), 
inclusive development, transparency, results and accountability.

At the time, Busan was hailed as a breakthrough as it brought on board – after 
some behind-the-scenesarm-twisting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/29/china-pulls-out-aid-partnership-busan?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 – the new players in the aid landscape, particularly China, Brazil and India. 
These countries agreed, on a voluntary basis, to abide by the Busan principles.

The global partnership sounds very grand, but the legwork is being done by a 
secretariat consisting of officials from the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the UN Development Programme (UNDP). 
The secretariat's job is to organise meetings of the steering committee, 
co-chaired by Justine Greening, the UK's international development secretary, 
Armida Alisjahbana, Indonesia's planning minister, and Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, 
Nigeria's finance minister.

The big event is supposed to be a ministerial meeting early next year. 
However, voluntary contributions to the secretariat have been slow in coming 
and there is a shortfall of $4.5m (£2.9m) across the two organisations, with 
the shortfall particularly acute for UNDP.

Some of the most valuable work done under the global partnership is the 
development of amonitoring framework 
<http://effectivecooperation.org/?page_id=19> consisting of 10 indicators that 
measure progress in improving the effectiveness of development co-operation in 
specific areas: the transparency and predictability of aid; gender equality; 
participation of civil society; and the contribution of the private sector. At 
a time of shrinking aid budgets – the UK is a notable exception – quality of 
aid becomes paramount. The framework would seem to be an important tool for 
assessing quality.

The global partnership "holds all the partners to account with an annual 
monitoring exercise – the only 'performance assessment' for the aid industry," 
said Brenda Killen, head of global partnerships and policy at the OECD. "This 
latter point is essential for the developing countries. They can demand better 
behaviour from their partners because the Busan principles – and the Paris and 
Accra commitments on which they are based – are being watched."

Developing countries can use the global partnership forum to question why 
donors are backtracking from one of the key principles of aid effectiveness: 
ownership, which means developing countries calling the shots on development 
strategy. The most visible manifestation of ownership is budget support, where 
donors channel money through national government systems. But funds for budget 
support from the UK, a vocal champion of ownership, have declined. According to 
the UK Aid Network (Ukan) and NGO umbrella group Bond,global budget support has 
fallen steeply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/jul/24/donors-global-south-development-aid>
, from $4.4bn in 2010 to only $1.3bn last year.

The global partnership also ensures developing country needs are brought to 
the attention of G8 and G20 leaders, which set global policy but do not include 
the poorest countries. The G8 and G20 are currently discussing tax issues. The 
global partnership is the forum where the views and needs of the developing 
world can be transmitted to those bodies. Okonjo-Iweala has used the global 
partnership to press for more tax transparency to help Africa get its fair 
share of tax receipts from multinationals.

Yet, despite its potential value to poor countries, the global partnership 
suffers from its links to the OECD, still viewed by many in the G77 group of 
developing countries as a club for the rich. For those in the OECD, this misses 
the point that the global partnership is a practical coalition focused on 
learning and improving development practice. Considering its teething problems 
it is hard to say whether the global partnership's travails are embryonic or 
terminal.

"The partnership promised to change the complicated dynamics between donors 
and recipient countries, putting country ownership at the centre and ensuring 
the best use of aid in tough economic times," said Clare Coffey, policy adviser 
at ActionAid. "But there is very real concern that its blood sugars are too low 
and so it is not making headway, at least not in its core aid effectiveness 
work. To get the partnership back on track may require the role of the support 
function [OECD and UNDP] to be revisited, as well as strengthening 
participation of civil society."

For Donald Kaberuka, the president of the African Development Bank, the 
decline of the global partnership would be a waste. "Busan was a good 
compromise – it put each party's responsibility on the table and said 
development belongs to the developing country," he said.
 