
It was John Milius who first came up with the idea of transposing Joseph 
Conrad's Heart of Darkness to a Vietnam war setting. Milius wrote the first 
drafts of the screenplay; former war correspondent Michael Herr later added 
narration. George Lucas was down to direct, but it was Francis Ford Coppola who 
finally set out to make what was intended to be the ultimate statement about 
the madness of war. It turned out to be equally about the madness of movie 
making. Captain Willard (Martin Sheen) hitches a lift on a Navy patrol boat up 
the Mekong river to Cambodia on a mission to terminate "with extreme prejudice" 
a certain Colonel Kurtz (Marlon Brando) who is reported to have gone native in 
rather a nasty way. But it's a long journey, and before he confronts the 
renegade colonel, Willard must first face all manner of trippy imagery, 
including the American Air Cavalry strafing a Vietnamese village to the sound 
of amplified Wagner, Robert Duvall declaring that he loves "the smell of napalm 
in the morning", a riot triggered by frugging bunny-girls, a Californian surfer 
on LSD andDennis Hopper <https://www.theguardian.com/film/dennis-hopper> as a 
madly babbling photojournalist.

After this build-up, it's hard to separate the film from the circumstances of 
its production. Brando's arrival on set unprepared and overweight, 
necessitating his being shot only from certain angles in dim lighting, has now 
been incorporated into film-making legend, described in George Hickenlooper and 
Fax Bahr's documentary Hearts of Darkness: A Film-maker's Apocalypse. For the 
opening shot, set to Jim Morrison singing "This is the end", several acres of 
palm trees in the Philippines were doused with 1,200 gallons of gasoline.

"There aren't too many places in the world you could do it," said Coppola. 
"They'd never let you in the US; the environmentalists would kill you." Leading 
actor Martin Sheen (who replaced Harvey Keitel two weeks into the shoot) 
suffered a heart attack, and a typhoon destroyed the sets. The budget soared 
from $12m to $30m and shooting dragged on from the scheduled six weeks to 16 
months. With the director struggling to edit millions of feet of footage 
(literally) and come up with an ending, industry wags dubbed the unseen film 
Apocalypse When? and predicted it would be a disaster.

In the event, though, the finished film was a qualified, critical success and 
won the Palme d'Or at Cannes. Reviews were mixed, but within a year or so it 
had established itself as a modern classic, with young adult audiences in 
particular revelling in the hallucinatory visuals and quotable one-liners such 
as "Saigon... shit!", "Charlie don't surf!" and "Never get out of the boat!" 
Hollywood had largely steered clear of the war in Vietnam while it was being 
fought, but Coppola's film spearheaded a small cluster of attempts during the 
80s to revisit it, albeit almost exclusively from the navel-gazing perspective 
of the Americans. In 2001, Coppola released an extended version called
Apocalypse Now <https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now> Redux which 
restored 49 minutes of footage cut from the original film, most notably a long 
sequence featuring Christian Marquand and Aurore Clément representing the 
legacy of French colonialism. "We had access to too much money, too much 
equipment, and, little by little, we went insane," said the director. The 
experience certainly seemed to knock the stuffing out of Coppola, who has since 
failed to make anything even half as passionate or spectacular.
 