
Apocalypse Now <https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now> is not the 
greatest film of the decade, or even of the year. The world premiere at the 
Cannes festival on Saturday was actually nothing of the sort; rather, it was 
the latest (but not the last?) in a long series of previews which have gone on 
over the past year. […]

One doesn't have to be a purist to think that a director ought to know how his 
films should end, and what scenes to cut and which to include, without having 
to ask audiences all over the world for their opinion.

Again, Coppola has a ready answer to this objection: the film has been 10 
years in the making, and he feels too close to it to make any decisions 
himself. I couldn't help thinking of the Balzac short story, The Unknown 
Masterpiece, in which a painter works for decades in secret on his masterpiece 
which, on his death, when it is finally seen, turns out to be totally black, so 
much has he worked on it. The genesis of Apocalypse Now indeed goes back 10 
years – to an original script by John Milius which was based on anecdotes and 
stories from Vietnam veterans, the title being borrowed from the Revelations of 
St John the Divine. But Milius needed a story to hang it all on, and Coppola 
suggested Conrad's Heart of Darkness. Later this literary luggage was enlarged 
to include TS Eliot's The Wasteland, and The Hollow Men, Jesse L Weston's From 
Ritual to Romance, and Sir John Fraser's The Golden Bough. Finally, the 
narration was written by Michael Herr, author of the book Dispatches.

This may sound like cultural overkill, and indeed it is, and it shows. The 
most successful part of the film is the first half when Captain Willard (Martin 
Sheen) is sent up the river to find and kill Colonel Kurtz, whose methods are 
deemed by the high command to be "unsound". This is of course meant to be 
heavily ironic since American methods in Vietnam might be considered to be 
unsound.

In any case, this first half is very flashy cinema: [it] is also very pretty, 
with red smoke bombs, atmospheric fog haze and other artistic effects. Even the 
napalm sequences are visually ravishing. But when we finally get to Mistah 
Kurtz (Marlon Brando), everything changes. Literature begins to take over, and 
we get Dennis Hopper quoting Eliot "We are the hollow men" and "This is the way 
the world ends, not with a bang but with a whimper." […] The last half, says 
Coppola, was more of an experience than a movie – whatever that may mean.

I suppose one wouldn't be so hard on the film if we hadn't been hearing about 
it for years and it hadn't cost more than £15m, and if one hadn't been 
expecting so much from it. Funnily enough, like Michael Cimino, Coppola insists 
that Apocalypse Now is not really about the Vietnam war: rather it is about 
man's perpetual necessity to chose between good and evil. OK, I suppose, but 
when he added that "it struck me like a diamond bullet in my head that I wasn't 
making the film, the jungle was" one begins to have doubts about whether he 
really knew what he was doing. […]

Unfortunately Coppola has made an all-too pretty movie precisely because he 
has not looked in to it too much.
 