
Apple’s Apple Pay mobile payment system will be available in China from 18 
February for Industrial and Commercial Bank ofChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> (ICBC) customers, bank 
representatives said in social media posts on Tuesday.


The technology giant had previously said the system would launch in China in 
early 2016, making itApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> Pay’s 
fifth country as it accelerates development of a planned new revenue stream. 
ICBC is China’s biggest lender by assets.

 An Apple spokeswoman declined to comment on ICBC’s posts on the projected 
launch. The lender is set to be joined by a raft of peers: Apple’s China 
website lists 19 Chinese lenders as official Apple Pay partners, and state 
media reported two other lenders will also go live with the service from 18 
February.

 Greater China is Apple’s second largest market by revenue, but the company 
faces an uphill battle to match that prowess quickly in mobile payments.

 Apple Pay’s beginnings have been less than auspicious in other markets, 
including skepticism from retailers in its home market. But in China, Apple 
Pay’s issue will be how to compete with dominant and entrenched players, 
serving shoppers well used to paying for goods and services with their handsets.

 China is the world’s biggest smartphone market. By the end of 2015, 358 
million people, more than the population of the United States, had already 
taken to paying by mobile phone, according to the China Internet Network 
Information Center.

Dominating those payments are China’s two biggest internet companies: social 
networking and gaming firm Tencent Holdings Ltd and e-commerce companyAlibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> Group Holding Ltd, through its 
internet finance affiliate Ant Financial Services Group.

 Tencent operates WeChat Payment, while Ant Financial runs Alipay.

 Apple Pay has also struggled to gain traction with banks in some countries. 
In Australia, the four main banks are holding out against the new entrant. The 
company in Britain faced resistance from big banks over fees before relenting.

 Earlier on Tuesday, China’s state radio reported on its website that China 
Guangfa Bank Co Ltd and China Construction Bank Corp said on social media they 
would also launch Apple Pay on 18 February.

 A China Construction Bank spokesman declined to comment, while Guangfa could 
not be reached for comment.
 