 Archie Norman's promotion to the Tory frontbench as shadow environment 
secretary in 2000 has not been a success. Sometimes stumbling and inarticulate, 
though undoubtedly bright, Mr Norman was no more qualified for this job than 
for his previous post as chief executive and deputy chairman of the 
Conservative party.
As an intelligent and focused individual, this failure must have come as a 
shock. He has self-belief - shown by his fixed grin - and he cannot understand 
how others do not share his faith.

Both in and outside politics, his rise has been meteoric. The son of doctors, 
he was educated at Charterhouse, Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and the Harvard 
Business School. He worked at the efficiency experts McKinsey's, where William 
Hague was one of his protégés.

He went on to hold directorships on Geest and Railtrack boards before becoming 
the group finance director of Kingfisher, then Britain's largest retailer, at 
32. Within five years, he was group chief executive and by 42 he was chairman, 
earning £3m a year.

Although he had been involved in various business-associated political 
campaigns, including one on the net book agreement, it was only in 1996, on the 
advice of Francis Maude, that he decided to go for safe Tunbridge Wells, 
vacated by Sir Patrick Mayhew. Mr Norman won easily, although his majority was 
halved to 7,506.

But his inability to cope adequately in the Commons shows how difficult it is 
to translate skills learned in other fields into parliament. "Just because Asda 
checkout girls smile at him, he thinks he's got the common touch," joked Lord 
Parkinson.

In the Commons, he backed William Hague for the leadership. In return, Mr 
Hague made him vice-chairman of the party, and entrusted him with its reform 
and reorganisation. The resulting "Blueprint for change" irritated many in the 
party proposing to double membership from 300,000 (a failure so far), encourage 
more female and ethnic members and merge the party's voluntary and professional 
wings.

MPs were indignant that he wanted the election of leaders to be decided by 
party members and his "bonding session" for MPs at Eastbourne was boycotted by 
Sir Edward Heath, Michael Heseltine and Nicholas Soames.

His politics are straight Hagueite: against the euro and sceptical of the 
national minimum wage. His pride stems from his claim: "I am the only FTSE-100 
chairman ever to sit in the Commons". Unfortunately for Mr Norman, he might 
just be the last.

Ask Aristotle about Archie Norman 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-3914,00.html>
 