
"Remember, this is an expedition, not a cruise," declares our leader Boris 
Wise.

Projected on the wall behind him are a series of maps of the maze of islands 
of the Canadian Far North. These aren't just any maps though; these are 
real-time satellite charts, specifically detailing the extent and density of 
sea ice in the area. For the past five days they have been the focus of intense 
scrutiny.

We are hoping to navigate, from east to west, the Northwest Passage – the sea 
route between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans along the north coast of North 
America explored from the 15th century as a trading route with Asia. Once 
attempted only by experienced polar explorers, the journey is now being offered 
by small, select expedition cruise ships and a few modern mariners. This is a 
very special trip. Although I have been to the Arctic several times, I will be 
visiting areas I have never been to before.

As we soon discover, there is no guarantee of success on this traverse. The 
ice-choked waters of this part of the Arctic change constantly with the 
currents, winds and ice melt. Some years the Northwest Passage can be virtually 
ice-free; at other times even icebreakers can't get through. In March this 
year, spring temperatures plummeted to -40ºC, creating new large pans of thick 
sea ice, and these are now blocking our path.

Our home for this 12-day trip with One Ocean Expeditions 
<http://www.oneoceanexpeditions.com/arctic/index.php> is the Russian research 
vessel Akademik Ioffe. A veteran of polar conditions, the Ioffe takes 
adventurous passengers on specialist cruises to the Arctic and Antarctic as 
well as operating as a floating scientific base. It is an ice-strengthened 
ship, not an icebreaker, and we soon discover that we cannot achieve our goal 
without assistance.

As Boris cycles through the charts, swirls of bright colour expand and 
contract, each colour on the screen representing the ever-changing coverage and 
density of ice. Green denotes stretches that could be navigable by a small 
boat, those in yellow and orange could be crossed with an ice-strengthened 
vessel, and red indicates areas of thick ice that can be penetrated only by an 
icebreaker. It's like watching clouds form and disperse.

Our first choice of route, Peel Sound, between Prince of Wales and Somerset 
Island, is blocked by a swath of red. The narrow "key" to the Northwest 
Passage, the Bellot Strait, between Somerset and the Boothia peninsula, the 
northernmost point of mainland Canada, also looks impassable, with its western 
exit plugged by ice. Fast tidal currents run through the strait, carrying large 
icebergs. If we don't pick the right moment, it will be like driving down a 
narrow one-way street, crashing headlong into juggernauts rushing in the other 
direction.
 Polar bear and cubs, spotted from the boat. Photograph: Kari Herbert 
Our voyage began in Kangerlussuaq, western Greenland. From there we headed 
north to the modern town of Sisimiut and then on to Ilulissat, home to the 
largest and fastest-calving glacier in the northern hemisphere. The 40km-long 
Icefjord sends an astonishing 20m tonnes of ice a day into the frigid waters of 
Disko Bay.

A wooden walkway snakes up from the town towards the fjord, raised up over 
boggy tundra. "Extreme Danger!" a sign along the path announces: "Risk of 
sudden tsunami waves, caused by calving icebergs. Death or serious injury might 
occur."

The spectacular fjord is worth the risk. An icescape extends as far as the eye 
can see. Today a gargantuan berg, tens of stories high, is lodged in the fjord, 
blocking the channel. On my other visits here, icebergs the size of St Paul's 
cathedral have drifted past, doing slow pirouettes.

Later, with Canadian and Nunavut (the newly named territory of northern 
Canada) flags flying, we head west across the Davis Strait, then north towards 
Pond Inlet, at the top of Baffin Island, where we're surrounded by humpbacks 
and pilot whales as a storm builds. Then we meet the ice, and the bears. In 
total we encounter around 25 bears on the voyage: some turn tail, but others 
are more curious, including a mother and two cubs who stroll towards us over 
floating pans of ice to within a few metres of the ship.

We cruise in zodiac inflatables to remote bird colonies, and yet more bears 
appear. We skirt the southern edge of Bylot Island then head north towards 
Devon Island. A Royal Canadian Mounted Police outpost was established in 1924 
here at Dundas Harbour, marking Canada's early efforts to wrestle with 
sovereignty in this part of the far north. The men chose a stunning spot 
overlooking the entrance to Lancaster Sound. In Inuktitut this place is called 
Talluruti, which means 'a woman's chin with tattoos on it' – referring to the 
crevasses that cover Devon Island's shoreline in dark streaks.

The outpost has been abandoned: it's too difficult to sustain human life here. 
The wind and weather have beaten down the doors and windows of the small huts, 
but mementoes of the men's time here survive – a chest of drawers with its 
paint peeling, a sewing machine on a window sill, empty bottles of Hudson's Bay 
Scotch Whisky, a copy of a Jeeves and Wooster novel on a folding chair. Two 
years of this solitude was too much for one of the men: he committed suicide 
shortly before he was due to be picked up.
 Francois Etienne Musin’s 1846 painting of HMS Erebus in the North West Passage
Although there are no humans here there is plenty of wildlife – as we land a 
polar bear disappears over the hills behind us. We see a peregrine falcon and 
an enormous, brilliant white arctic hare. Nearby are the remains of other 
dwellings: those of the earliest Thule Inuit, who reached this area 1,000 years 
ago, before they continued their great migration toward northern Greenland. 
Built from rocks and turf, the homes would have looked like permanent igloos, 
with roofs created from whale jawbones, covered with skins and turf. Our Inuit 
guide, Atuat, toes some scat and tells us a large herd of muskoxen were here 
just last week.

The highlight of the voyage is Beechey Island, off the south-west of Devon 
Island. I was last here some 20 years ago, and remember finding it a desolate, 
eerie place. Today couldn't be more different, with a fresh covering of snow, 
and sunlight piercing bruised clouds. On this tiny islet the first signs of an 
ill-fated Victorian search for the Northwest Passage were discovered.

In May 1845 two ships, the Erebus and the Terror, newly fitted with steam 
engines, set sail from London to cheers from a huge crowd. It was Britain's 
most significant Northwest Passage expedition to date, led by seasoned explorer 
Sir John Franklin. The ships were last seen by whalers as they headed north 
into Baffin's Bay. Franklin and his 128-strong crew were never seen again.

In 1850, the remains of one of Franklin's camps was discovered. Strewn over 
the desolate beach was an assortment of relics, and nearby three graves marked 
by simple headboards.

We gather at Beechey Island, as my polar historian husband Huw Lewis-Jones 
leads a service of reflection for Franklin and his men. As snow blows across 
the graves, we lift our cups of whisky and toast those that have gone before 
us, knowing that however much difficulty we get into on this voyage, we will 
surely return home.

We rendezvous with a Canadian Coastguard icebreaker the Henry Larsen 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CCGS_Henry_Larsen> and follow in her wake as she 
bites through the ice ahead of us. "Bear!" someone shouts, pointing to a lone 
bear standing on the ice. We can't stop: if we fall behind, the ice could close 
in around us.

We enter Bellot Strait with both engines running in case one fails in this 
notoriously difficult channel. Musk oxen watch us with steady eyes as we motor 
pass Zenith Point, the most northerly tip of the North American mainland. A 
white line appears on the horizon at the western end of the strait. Ice. The 
Larsen's helicopter is launched, scouting the conditions.
 Beechey Island, the Northwest Passage. Photograph: Mark Robinson 
After we've trailed the icebreaker for some 20 hours, conditions improve and 
we squeeze into open water. With a blast from the foghorn the Henry Larsen 
heads north, back into the pack.

As we near King William Island the wind picks up. It is here that Franklin's 
Erebus and Terror were beset by ice for 19 months before being abandoned, and 
here that Sir John Franklin died, his body lowered beneath the ice.

Victory Point on its north-west coast, appears ahead of us illuminated in 
golden light. Franklin's men erected a cairn here and within it placed a record 
of their demise. It was the only written evidence discovered by later 
searches:"28 May 1847… All well". The following year the note was revised. A 
new message, scribbled in the margin reads: "Sir John Franklin died on 11 June 
1847 and the total loss by deaths in the expedition has been to this date 9 
officers and 15 men." In the years to follow, more gruesome discoveries were 
made, including items that suggested that some of the men had resorted to 
cannibalism.

King William Island is still a source of fascination for those interested in 
the Franklin mystery. This year another Canadian government expedition will 
try, using state-of-the-art sounding and imaging equipment, to discover the two 
lost ships.

With ice threatening to press in on us, strong currents, and winds reaching 
gale force, we stand on the tilting deck and look across to the low beach of 
this historic site. We are thankful that we are not marooned here.

It has been a spectacular journey. We have seen whales, bears, birdlife, 
natural phenomena, and more: we have lived through the history of human 
exploration here, in the most poignant way. Our trip proves to us that even 
with our excellent onboard staff, daily ice charts, satellite communications 
and icebreaker support, navigating the Northwest Passage is still an 
unforgettable challenge.
 