
Argentina has complained to the British ambassador in Buenos Aires over 
military exercises including missile launches which the UK is planning to hold 
next week in theFalkland Islands <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/falklands>.

Argentina’s government says it was informed by Britain that the exercises will 
be held between 19 and 28 October, and will include the launching of Rapier 
missiles.

In the note presented by the deputy foreign minister, Carlos Foradori, to 
Ambassador Mark Kent on Friday,Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> asked Britain to call off the 
“illegitimate” exercises.

“The behaviour of the United Kingdom contradicts the principle of the peaceful 
settlement of controversies supported unanimously by countries in the region,” 
the note said.

A spokeswoman for the British embassy in Buenos Aires called it a “routine 
exercise” that takes places about twice a year.

 Argentina has for decades claimed sovereignty over the British-run islands it 
calls the Malvinas and the dispute led to a brief war in 1982. The overwhelming 
majority of the islands’ 3,000 inhabitants say they want the islands to remain 
a British overseas territory.

Argentina and UK agree to ‘remove obstacles’ to Falklands development
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/argentina-and-uk-agree-to-remove-obstacles-to-falklands-development>
Argentina lodged its complaint just a month after the two countries agreed to 
work together toward removing measures restricting the oil and gas, shipping 
and fishing industries on the remote islands.

 Argentina’s pro-business president, Mauricio Macri, has sought to improve 
relations since taking over in December after diplomatic tensions mounted under 
his predecessor, the populist Cristina Fernández de Kirchner.

 But in a blunder that embarrassed the administration last month, Macri 
claimed he and the British prime minister, Theresa May, had agreed, during a 
brief encounter at the United Nations general assembly, to discuss the 
sovereignty claim.

 Argentina’s foreign minister, Susana Malcorra, later walked back the remarks 
after Britain denied that the issue of sovereignty had come up.

 In Friday’s statement, the foreign ministry said it had learned of the 
planned military exercises on Thursday. It said the exercises “contradict the 
principle of peaceful conflict resolution” and called the Falklands 
“Argentinian territory illegitimately occupied by the United Kingdom”.

 In last month’s agreement, the two sides also agreed to establish additional 
flights between the Falklands, located about 435 miles off the coast of 
southern Argentina, and third countries in South America.

 The last bout of serious tension over the Falklands occurred in June last 
year when an Argentinian federal judge ordered the seizure of millions of 
dollars in assets owned by oil drillers operating in the area.

 