
Phillips, 67, shot to fame in the 70s, creating provocative routines for the 
dance troupe Hot Gossip. She was a judge onStrictly Come Dancing for six series 
until she was replaced by Alesha Dixon in 2009. Her choreography features in 
Andrew Lloyd Webber'sThe Wizard of Oz <http://www.wizardofozthemusical.com/> at 
the London Palladium.



What are the highlights of this production of The Wizard of Oz?

Rob Jones's set design is extraordinary. It really does take you on a journey, 
from Kansas, through Oz, and back again. And when I say things fly, I don't 
just mean witches! It's really quite special, a visual treat. The other 
highlight for me is Michael Crawford, who plays the Wizard. He's so 
hard-working. And you know we've got Danielle Hope as Dorothy, chosen by the 
public [through BBC1'sOver the Rainbow talent show], and she's such a breath of 
fresh air. She's lovely to work with.

What's your favourite dance number?

A dance to a new song written by Andrew, as Dorothy is about to arrive in the 
castle. It celebrates the moment they believe the Wicked Witch is about to get 
the red shoes and uses the skill of the dancers most of all – it's a very 
contemporary piece.

How is choreographing a musical different from, say, a music video?

I think when you're doing a musical, you have to be attuned to the director's 
vision. You're working with a variety of people, singers and dancers, so you 
have to create movement and dance that is for all abilities. You have to 
further the story through the dance. There's not a lot of time to do dance for 
dance's sake, as you would for a music video. In a musical, I believe that 
choreographers are under a great deal of pressure. There's not always the 
freedom to do what you want to do, because if it ends up being too long the 
dance breaks are the first thing that will go, because you can't make the story 
shorter.

What does the company think of you?

I think they think I'm bossy but fair. I'm sure some of them can't stand me 
but I just get on with it!

Do people still come up to you and talk about Strictly?

I don't think a day of my life goes by when I don't get a tweet, a Facebook 
message, a stop in the street, a newspaper article… it doesn't really die down.

Does that surprise you?

Yes. Totally. And I sometimes wonder, will I ever be bigger than that moment? 
At times it seems that I'm so surrounded by it that that's all I am to people.
 