
Dad was a barber and Mum looked after the three of us and helped in school 
doing lunches. I was the middle child with an older brother, Ian, and younger 
sister, Karen. I grew up in Manchester and still think of myself as a 
Mancunian. We had an old record player, and music filled the house. Both my 
parents loved ballet and old musical films. We would go to the Manchester 
Palace and watch from the back row of the gods.

I always knew I wanted to dance and when I was eight, I started ballet lessons 
at a church hall. They all wore pink ballet shoes but I wore green, as they 
were cheap, and I remember everyone staring at me.

We always had to watch the money when I was young. My sister had dance lessons 
too, but she stopped so I could have an extra class. She loved dance and it is 
incredible that she gave it up for me. I have never forgotten that.

It was very, very tough when Mum died. It was not long from when she was 
diagnosed with leukaemia to when she passed away. I was 15, still a child.

I loved her so desperately.

Life was extremely difficult as my dad was not a healthy man – when he wasn't 
well we would take it in turns to skip school to look after him.

When I was 23, I moved to London. It was not an easy thing to do. We had made 
a pact to stay together and support each other after Mum died, but my family 
could see how important it was for me.

I formed a group called Hot Gossip <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1wwilCs4Jqg>
. The dancing was very sensual and sexual. There was an outcry when we appeared 
on TV. Mary Whitehouse complained, there were even questions in parliament – 
and my career as a choreographer was made. I don't think my family were 
concerned by the raunchiness as I was adult enough to do what I wanted by then.

I always wanted children, and it was a dream come true when I discovered I was 
pregnant with Alana when I was 36. I was a single parent until she was six, 
when I got together with Angus, who, to all intents and purposes, is her 
father. He is brilliant. We met on a Freddie Mercury video shoot and have been 
together ever since.

When I found out I was pregnant again, aged 47, it was quite a surprise. It is 
quite an age difference, but Alana adored having a baby sister, and the gap 
between her and Abi has narrowed incredibly as they have got older.

Alana is more like me and we have had many fights along our rocky path, less 
so now. Alana always says I am much easier on Abi and let her get away with 
things. Abi is very gentle, so I am gentler with her.

Alana, 32, is a makeup artist and is responsible for my hair and makeup so 
that is wonderful. Abi, 21, has just trained to be a florist and is out there 
pounding the streets looking for a job like everyone else. It is hard when you 
are brought up without money, and my life has been about making sure my girls 
don't suffer in the way I did. But I still want them to have a strong work 
ethic.

My brother and sister are grandparents and I would absolutely love that. I am 
not pushing it, but I can't wait to be the kind of grandmother I believe my 
mother would have been.

• Midnight Tango, produced by Arlene Phillips and Adam Spiegel, is at the 
Aldwych theatre, London, until 31 March and then touring,midnighttango.co.uk 
<http://www.midnighttango.co.uk/>
 