
Sadler's Wells theatre, London, on a weekday morning, and the building is 
raucous with school groups. They show each other dance moves, troop raggedly up 
and down the stairs, and when they pass the dark-haired woman posing for 
photographs on a landing – body taut, feet planted as if in anticipation of a 
swordfight, shoulders back, smile seducing the camera – they turn and gawp as 
one. One girl, slim in black dance clothes, bounces up and down, pointing 
excitedly, mouthing, "It's Arlene Phillips!"

Phillips has been in and out of the limelight for the last 30-odd years, but 
she has never been as famous as she is right now. Being a judge onStrictly Come 
Dancing <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> 
started this particular phase, but being dumped as a judge, in June, was what 
really did it. Over 1,000 viewers complained to the BBC, others took to 
messageboards and blogs. Many more were disappointed to see she was gone – 
viewing figures dropped by nearly 1 million after the first week of the current 
series. Harriet Harman was mocked for mentioning the case in parliament, but 
given that Phillips, 66, was promptly replaced by Alesha Dixon, a woman 35 
years her junior, while all the men – Craig Revel Horwood, 44, Bruno Tonioli, 
53 and Len Goodman, 65, and presenter Bruce Forsyth, 81 – stayed put, it was 
hard not to think Harman might have a point when she said: "As equality 
minister, I am suspicious that there is age discrimination here."

"Women follow me around," says Phillips. "On a British Airways flight, at 
Liverpool station – everywhere." They accost her in supermarkets, on the 
street. The day we met, "a lovely sweet girl [in a sandwich shop] said, 'Oh, 
miss dancing lady, we all miss you, would you like coffee?'" And they are 
surprisingly tactile: "I have people coming up and putting their arms around me 
all the time. I have had more hugs in the last few months than I've had in a 
lifetime!" Her distinctive voice – husky, with a discordantly high tinge to it 
– rises in incredulity.

You can see why they might feel they could. Although Phillips has a 
well-deserved reputation for fierceness (the tabloids, with their flair for a 
bathetic phrase, dubbed her the "Queen of Mean" for calling Fiona Phillips a 
"floundering fish", and telling John Sergeant he was "more Mickey Rooney than 
Fred Astaire"), she is self-flagellating too, which leads to a strange mixture 
of confidence, control-freakery and vulnerability.

Because she is nothing if not a professional, she has to believe her departure 
from Strictly was fair, if only for self-protective reasons. That and the fact, 
I suspect, that she has been asked back by the BBC to be a judge on So You 
Think You Can Dance, the BBC's X-Factor-esque talent show for aspiring dancers, 
and it would be unwise to upset her bosses. But it didn't look fair, I say. The 
panel was unbalanced already, with three men, so why get rid of the only woman? 
The answer is pointedly expressed, if not very revealing. "That's the $64,000 
question, isn't it? Why the one woman? I don't really have an idea. One can 
only surmise I wasn't right for the new look." Does she think it was an age 
issue? She stumbles a little on this one. "I can't, you know I can't, I really, 
I really don't think it was, I really don't think it was an age issue. I don't 
know why the three – you know, the three boys – are there but I you know you 
have to … you have to trust that somebody was looking at the show and thinking 
this is right for the show … and you know, I loved the show ..."

She must see why people worry, I say. Regardless of the purity (or not) of the 
BBC's motives, the public effect is the same, isn't it? "Again I think that 
debate is almost a separate thing. I don't think it relates to me and what 
happened in Strictly. Not at all. Not at all."

But the hurt shows, and she can't help it. It's like grief, or a wound, 
much larger in some ways than the occasion really warranted – it's only a TV 
talent show, after all. It's not until two hours later, and a change of 
location, from a sunny office in Sadler's Wells, where she has just joined the 
board, to her aggressively modern home in Belsize Park, north-west London, that 
I work out some of the reasons why. When I ask how she felt when it happened, 
whether it was painful, her voice drops to a whisper. "It's never stopped being 
painful. It never goes away. Saturdays have become like, you know, the Boomtown 
Rats – I Don't Like Mondays. I don't like Saturdays."

Phillips grew up in Manchester "a little kid who always danced.

"Put music on and I would dance. And as long as I can remember I wanted to be 
a ballerina." Her parents, who loved ballet, couldn't really afford lessons, 
but in her own words, she was such a demanding child that they had no option. 
An aunt and uncle helped, and by 12, she says, "I was working Sunday mornings 
in a cake shop, I was doing a paper round before school. I was doing everything 
I could to earn money to go to my classes." The lessons were often harsh. 
Sticks were used; Phillips was often in tears. And ballet proved an early 
introduction to the tyranny of biology. "I was probably around 14 or 15 when I 
became really conscious of those girls who were going on to the Royal Ballet 
school, and that I was not Royal Ballet school material, not by a long stretch. 
It took me a long time to understand that there is no amount of wanting and no 
amount of desire and no amount of hard work which allows you to become a 
classical ballerina if you're not physically given the gifts."

At about the same time, her mother was diagnosed with leukaemia. Her father 
became ill from the stress, so she and her younger sister took it in turns to 
care for their mother, and their elder brother went out to work. Because the 
youngest was so young, her mother particularly wanted Arlene to do it, but 
Arlene wanted to dance. "You know I wish I had spent those days doing what she 
asked … at 15 you're still a child; I certainly was immature and probably 
selfish. Even though I was told that she was going to die it was never 
a reality. I just felt like she couldn't, she wouldn't.

"I try not to spend my life feeling guilty – I feel guilty about so many 
things – but it doesn't go away."

She's aware that these days she lavishes on her two daughters the mothering 
she didn't get, and that perhaps she sometimes overdoes it.

She left school in the middle of her O-levels to dance full-time; she came 
down to London to take a week of ballet classes, see what she could learn in 
the capital – but two days before she was to go home she saw a sign for an 
American jazz class taught by Molly Molloy, tried it, and was hooked. "It was 
like a lightbulb. I knew I wasn't going to go back."

She babysat for Ridley Scott (which led to her first big break when he asked 
her to choreograph an ad for Lyons Maid ice cream) and started a dance group 
with the best students from her classes. Called Hot Gossip, they performed one 
night a week at Maunkberry's nightclub on Jermyn Street and rapidly became a 
cult hit. Then, when they were asked on to the Kenny Everett show, a far wider 
phenomenon. Partly it was deliberate: Phillips had no time for the kind of 
polite, happy-go-lucky, smiley dances then dominating the schedules. She wanted 
to rough things up and echo what was going on in the streets, so she devised 
routines that seemed quite raunchy at the time.

However, she maintains the bras, stockings and suspenders that set so many 
male hearts aflutter "happened because it was cheap". They were all doing odd 
jobs to keep the troupe going, and one of the men worked in a sex shop, which 
provided sets of underwear. More frisson came from the fact that the group was 
racially mixed – white women danced erotically with black men. Though 
groundbreaking, this wasn't intentional either – Phillips's classes were full 
of accomplished black men who should have been working, except that no one 
would give them jobs. And then Mary Whitehouse weighed in, and they were famous.

She has been working ever since, and over the years, managed by flamboyant 
actor-turned-agent Michael Summerton, has provided the moves for a kind of pop 
cultural greatest hits of the past 30 years: choreography for Starlight 
Express, Joseph, The Sound of Music, We Will Rock You, film choreography for 
John Huston, Ridley Scott, Clint Eastwood, even Monty Python's The Meaning of 
Life, and music video choreography for everyone from the Pet Shop Boys to 
Aretha Franklin, Whitney Houston to the Bee Gees and Robbie Williams. She has 
an OBE for services to dance.

She is currently judging auditions for So You Think You Can Dance, and is 
noticing a couple of things. "We're seeing the most extraordinary boys, 
fabulous boys, incredible boys, amazing boys. We have not seen that in the 
girls – I mean not even close." The girls seem to her more precious, unwilling 
to experiment, and she wonders whether it's because it's no longer routine to 
scream at people, demand the best, regardless of pain. "I think possibly 
teachers demand more of boys because – I'm generalising here – they're tough." 
She feels there is a trend towards caution in the professional world too. "It 
may sound wrong if I say this but [when I was starting out] the most important 
thing in life wasn't owning a property. Not to say that those aren't things 
that people should strive for, but it became more important than putting the 
work into yourself, into your [dancing]."

In the 70s and 80s she threw herself into everything London had to offer – 
"you only had to walk down the King's Road to have a good time; you didn't need 
to shop". And, at 36, she became pregnant by a man she has never publicly 
named. She took a week off between rehearsals to have Alana, who once told a 
newspaper: "It must have been the hardest thing to tell her Orthodox Jewish 
father she was having me."

She met her current partner, Angus Ion, when she was choreographing a Queen 
video (he was a set-builder). The tabloids, amused by her hyperventilations 
over young men such as cricketer Mark Ramprakash, who won the fourth series of 
Strictly, make a fuss about their 17-year age difference, but she and Ion have 
stayed together for more than 20 years, and have a daughter, Abigail, born when 
Phillips was 47.

The baby was unexpected, and even the consultants thought her an aberration. 
She found mother and baby classes impossible to go to, and dreaded the 
inevitable questions at the school gates until she met another mother who had 
had a child late. "From that moment on I sort of felt at home."

And she obviously felt completely at home on Strictly Come Dancing, even 
though she readily admits the harsh glare of primetime TV causes great 
anxieties about her appearance. She admits, too, to Botox, and face massage. 
"The truth is that I would have as many things done to my face as was needed … 
but I hate pain so it's a real balance, but were I not in fear of pain I would 
go for everything.

"I could probably have the body I've always dreamed of. I always had a bum, 
I've always had thighs, and you don't any longer have to live with what you've 
got but I do, I do." She's afraid that if she went in for extensive surgery and 
died on the operating table, it would be an unforgivable thing to do to her 
family. But she finds it hard.

On Strictly, she revelled in the chance to hold amateurs to the standards she 
had held so many professionals up to in the past. When she was replaced, she 
said: "I think Alesha will be an interesting addition. She smiles a lot and I'm 
sure she will bring that to the panel. I know her as a competitor and I thought 
she was brilliant. I would imagine she'll be very nice to the dancers." Talk 
about damning with faint praise. She won't comment now on the gap in experience 
which caused so many viewers to protest to the BBC.

In the end, the effect on her was less about BBC ageism – though that cannot 
have helped – than more private blows. Had she ever been dropped from any 
project before, I ask. She thinks. "No I haven't," she says slowly, surprise 
spreading across her face. "No, I haven't, ever."

The day before she got that news, she heard that Summerton had died."I was so 
full of grief, and overwhelmed. And so [being dropped] really tied into a whole 
lot of things which is why I can't even – it's put in a place to deal with, but 
I need to find my own inner strength to deal with it. I feel like I have to 
wrap myself in my own mother's arms."

Public voting for the Sadler's Wells online Global Dance Contest closes on 
Friday 13 November. For further details go to globaldancecontest.com
 