
Early morning in a dance studio in north-west London and Arlene Phillips 
<http://www.arlenephillips.com/Arlene_Phillips/PROFILE.html> moves across the 
hall, feet squeaking lightly on the matt black floor. In the mirrors that span 
the walls, her image springs back several-fold, showing a woman who, at 67, is 
the very embodiment of the word trim. It is there in the slender figure and the 
pretty face, of course, but in her manner, too; something slightly contained, 
something tightly spooled.

Phillips has been one of the UK's best-known choreographers for more than 
three decades, first as the orchestrator of dance troupeHot Gossip 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hot_Gossip>, then overseeing West End shows such 
asStarlight Express 
<http://www.reallyuseful.com/shows/starlight-express/about-starlight-express-1> 
andGrease 
<http://www.greasethemusical.co.uk/whos_who/creative/arlene_phillips.php>, as 
well as music videos for stars including Duran Duran, Tina Turner and Robbie 
Williams. In 2004, she became a judge on the BBC's new primetime Saturday-night 
show,Strictly Come Dancing <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strictly_Come_Dancing>
, and was suddenly transformed into a sprightly national treasure. Then, four 
years later, when she was unceremoniously removed from the programme in favour 
of pop star Alesha Dixon, she found herself at the centre of a dispute that 
even prompted comment from then-government minister Harriet Harman. These days, 
the Strictly storm having died down, Phillips has found a variety of other 
enterprises: among them appearances on the television seriesSo You Think You 
Can Dance? <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00pj22l> and the panel show Loose 
Women <http://www.itv.com/lifestyle/loosewomen/>, as well as a fashion line 
<http://www.marisota.co.uk/shop/page?pageId=4041&promo=6200&cm_mmc_o=7BBTkwCjC4zyblBfzCjC2zfzkBTAwCjCEz&gclid=CPqx48_LtqMCFRf92Aod61iheA>
, a makeup collection, and a range of jewellery for QVC.

Today we are talking about her new series of dance-themed children's books, 
all based around a character namedAlana Dancing Star 
<http://www.faber.co.uk/work/alana-dancing-star-samba-spectacular/9780571259892/>
 (the name nods to her older daughter, Alana, while the dedication is to her 
younger daughter, Abi). She was in a bookshop when she had the idea, looking 
for children's stories for young relatives. "And everything I could buy was 
about ballet," she says, sounding scandalised. "And I suddenly thoughtNo! There 
need to be books about jazz, Bollywood, hip-hop, Latin, ballroom! And that was 
it; off I went. I wanted it to be about an ordinary little girl who has magic 
adventures with a real, feelgood ending." The result is, roughly speaking, a 
marriage of Ballet Shoes, The Magic Faraway Tree and Mr Benn, with, one 
suspects, a hint of autobiography.

Phillips grew up in Prestwich, near Manchester, in a family that, while poor, 
did not skimp on their children's cultural education. "My parents were 
passionate about the ballet," she says. "They always played ballet music at 
home." One year, they took their three children to a performance of Russian 
dance at the Free Trade Hall in Manchester: "We sat at the very, very back, the 
furthest away you could be, and there was performance after performance. There 
were Georgian State dancers, there was the dying swan. And that was it," 
Phillips says. "From then on, all I wanted to do was to dance."

She began taking dance classes, but it proved a financial challenge for the 
family. "Just for me to go for one lesson a week was a struggle," she 
remembers. "I couldn't afford to do extra classes. By the time I was 12, I was 
doing paper rounds, Sunday-morning serving in a cake shop, I was doing 
everything. And one year, when I couldn't do the Monday-night class, I used to 
go and watch."

I ask how dancing made her feel then, how it still makes her feel now, and she 
grips her hands around her knee and her face seems to soften. "We'd grown up 
without any money," she says. "I mean,everything was a struggle; our lives were 
a struggle, and dancing changed all of that. Nothing mattered; it was the most 
important thing in my life." She smiles. "I think dancing always took me to a 
different place. It was hard and it was a struggle, but it took me to the kind 
of place I wanted to live in. It wasn't real life."

She looks so delighted, so at ease suddenly, that it occurs to me that in all 
the hullaballoo of Strictly Come Dancing and Phillips's celebrity persona, the 
thing that has been misplaced, oddly, is her genuine passion for dance.

At 23, she moved to London, teaching dance and helping to set up the legendary 
Pineapple Dance Studios <http://www.pineapple.uk.com/> in Covent Garden. By 
1974, she was specialising in teaching a particular style of American modern 
jazz, but found herself pulled by other influences. "Life outside of the dance 
studio was wild and different," she says. "Saturday Night Fever came out, and 
London was alive and buzzing. I was living two lives: the serious side, where I 
was studying, and the life outside, where I was wearing wild clothes and 
dressing up and going to clubs. I suddenly had an idea of combining the two – 
of taking jazz dance and combining it with this life outside."

The result, of course, was Hot Gossip, a dance troupe that began performing on 
Wednesday nights at a nightclub in Jermyn Street and quickly acquired both a 
cult following and a scandalous reputation for their daring routines and 
raunchy attire. Their first night, Phillips remembers with glee, "caused a 
riot. Ten dancers on a tiny stage, dancing to Walk on the Wild Side. Anybody 
who was anybody wanted to be there, to be seen in that little nightclub."

Numerous attempts to get the troupe on to television failed, as producers 
deemed them "too sexy". But then, in 1978, just as they were about to disband, 
Hot Gossip were invited to perform on theKenny Everett Show 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/cult/classic/kennyeverett/>. They were scantily clad and 
risque and altogether rather wonderful; not surprisingly, Mary Whitehouse 
branded them obscene. "Two days later, we were on the cover of every 
newspaper," Phillips says. "And that certainly changed my life."

For a brief while, she became "sort of a focal point of attention, thrown into 
this celebrity world, which I always call being asked to talk about everything 
that you know nothing about." But with time the fuss faded, and she was able to 
return to a kind of high-profile normality, continuing her career as a 
respected and innovative choreographer, and raising her daughters.

Phillips had first married in 1971; she was 28, her husband 21, and they 
divorced after seven years together. Two years later, she found she was 
pregnant with her first daughter, after a brief fling with a model on the set 
of a Village People video. She met her second husband, Angus Ion, on the set of 
a video, too – he was a set designer, 17 years her junior, and the couple have 
now been together 20 years. Their daughter was born in 1990, when Phillips was 
47; she credits her husband with forcing her to lighten up a little, and to 
enjoy her second chance at family life.

I wonder why she ever went back to television; why, after her flirtation with 
fame with Hot Gossip, she was wooed by Strictly Come Dancing. "It was very 
strange," she admits. "When I was first asked, I wasn't even sure that I wanted 
to do it, to go back to that kind of exposure. But I did – and life changed 
once more."
 Kenny Everett with members of Hot Gossip in the 80s. Photograph: PA 
Her voice has now acquired a bright, resilient sheen. "It became something I 
loved," she says. "It was like a family gathering on Saturday night. To be part 
of that, to be part of building up people's love of dance again, was really 
exciting. There was an explosion of dance on British television in the 70s, but 
then it became something television producers apparently thought was on when 
people put the kettle on. It lost value as far as TV companies were concerned.

"But musical theatre was surviving; outside the world of television, dance was 
growing. And then, finally, TV caught up again – Strictly Come Dancing really 
gave the OK to dance. And from there, there was no stopping it. I loved what 
Strictly was doing for dance schools, dance studios, to dance shoe companies, 
to teachers not being able to put enough hours of classes in."

So how must she have felt when it was suddenly all taken away from her? "In 
retrospect, how do I feel?" she asks herself quietly. "I feel like the divorcee 
who's not invited to the events any more." She has watched the show since she 
left, and says she will tune into thenew series 
<http://www.strictlycomedancing.tv/>.

"It changed my life completely," she nods. "So many interesting things have 
happened since my departure from Strictly – so many things I've been invited to 
do. It certainly feels like I could go anywhere and do anything. But I have to 
remember that I am a choreographer." She is, therefore, now busy overseeing 
upcoming productions ofFlashdance <http://www.flashdancethemusical.com/> and the
Wizard of Oz <http://www.wizardofozthemusical.com/>, for Andrew Lloyd Webber. 
"Ultimately, that's what I do," she says. "It's been fun and exciting to try 
other things. With my age, it feels like you should slow down – but I don't 
want to. And I'm loving everything that's happening. I'm loving life."

Are you, I ask, loving life more than ever before? "No," she replies, and she 
says it so resoundingly that even she looks a little surprised. "You know, it's 
very interesting. I've embraced what's happened in my life, but I call it 
Before and After Strictly," she says. "I think my life Before Strictly was a 
lot simpler, and I think my family, my husband preferred it that way. Now, 
After, time is pretty short." She looks a strange mixture of sad and 
emboldened, as if coiling herself back inwards. "I loved my life, I loved what 
it was, but now I've got to make as much as I can of what happened."

Phillips is, she explains, always thinking up ideas for her work. "Lying awake 
at night has been the story of my life," she says with some resignation. "I 
often have dreams that I'm dancing, and I'm the most outstanding dancer, and my 
body is doing things that my own body could never do."

She likes to keep up to speed with the latest dance crazes. "I've always tried 
to get into clubs, get into places and spaces where new moves are going on," 
she says. "I was laughing at myself in our pre-workshop for Flashdance – two 
dancers came in, and I was trying everything, getting down on the floor, and I 
suddenly looked up and thought, They must think I'm crazy!" Does she feel, I 
wonder, that she is competing with her body? She answers without hesitation: "I 
am always competing with my body. I am always thinking my body is going to do 
things it won't do."

It is, perhaps, this sense of relentless curiosity that has sustained 
Phillips's youthfulness, as much as her exercise regime or her youngest 
daughter or her younger husband. Yet it was, in fact, her return to life in 
front of the cameras that jolted her into feeling something more like her age; 
suddenly she says, she became aware of every line, every wrinkle. She has tried 
Botox and fillers, though sitting beside me today, while her face certainly 
looks smooth and youthful and heavily madeup, it does not carry the strange 
rigidity of many celebrities.

And if she doesn't have the lines to prove her years in the business, she 
certainly has the anecdotes – the names spill forth easily: Andrew Lloyd 
Webber, Bruno Tonioli, Elton John. She tells me about the trials of teaching 
Elton to dance: "He's incredible in his concerts, he moves everywhere, up and 
over the piano – but he's doing his own thing. The problem is trying to put 
somebody into a box and saying, 'Do this on this count, and then move this part 
of your body on this count . . .' Suddenly it changes everything."

And then, she confides, there was Diana Ross, who suffered more from a kind of 
reticence. "Diana Ross certainly can move and certainly can dance, but when I 
wanted her to jump on to a glass table and do a move, she was like, 'I don't do 
that!' And I said, 'C'mon! You do!'"

Phillips smiles brightly, a strange combination of showbusiness warhorse and 
youthful exuberance. "So that's what I do," she says. "It's building people's 
confidence in themselves to dance; it's believing they can do it."

Alana Dancing Star: Samba Spectacular and Alana Dancing Star: LA Moves, by 
Arlene Phillips, will both be published byFaber & Faber 
<http://www.faber.co.uk/work/alana-dancing-star-samba-spectacular/9780571259892/>
 on Thursday (£4.99 each)
 