
Here's one more Ashes story ... Sid Siddall is 61, a retired miner who lives 
in the remote town of Broken Hill, on the arid borderlands between South 
Australia and New South Wales. He has a tough, sun-worn face and, from certain 
angles, could pass for a blue-collar Kerry Packer. On the final day of the 
second Test at Adelaide he and I sat together as England, rendered virtually 
strokeless by the mesmerising Shane Warne, contrived to lose a match that, at 
the very least, should have been a comfortable draw. Sid is a knowledgeable 
cricket fan, yet he had never been to a Test match. Tickets were at a premium 
for the first four days, which is why he had gambled by turning up on the final 
day when, because of the flatness of the pitch, the match had been expected to 
do little more than drift. His luck was in.

It was not just the cricket that brought Sid to Adelaide, a seven-hour drive 
from Broken Hill: he wanted to see the Ashes urn, which was in town on its own 
tour of Australia. He had already been to see it twice since arriving in the 
city, and wanted to go again. 'I'll never have another chance to see it,' he 
said. 'It's why we're all here, after all.'

Is there a lovelier cricket ground than the Adelaide Oval, with the rust-red 
roofs of its Bradman Stand, its position on the banks of the Torrens, alongside 
St Peter's Cathedral, and with the hills in the far distance? Adelaide is a 
graceful city of churches, avenues, museums and parks. It also has one of the 
most fascinating and diverse food markets I have visited, a place where you can 
see the new, emerging multi-ethnic and multicultural Australia at work.

There were as many as 10,000 English tourists in Adelaide and, despite the 
result, to be at the Test match was to experience a sporting festival like few 
others: uncompromising on the pitch; harmonious in the stands, where the fans 
drank hard and mingled freely under burning skies; and ultimately, for all the 
dominance of the batsmen over the first four days, as thrilling as can be.

On the night of England's capitulation, the England and Wales Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board hosted a dinner at Penfolds 
Magill Estate Restaurant, in the Adelaide Hills. Some of the finest red wine in 
Australia, indeed the world, was being served, notably Penfolds Grange - Bin 95 
Grange 1996, to be precise. Not a bad way to escape the certain loss of the 
Ashes. But there was little respite for David Graveney, chairman of selectors. 
As he was leaving the restaurant, a group of English diners began to harangue 
him, bemoaning the exclusion of Monty Panesar. 'He'll be having a go soon 
enough,' Graveney said, before he left holding a small wine carrier, the chink 
of bottles inside.

You feel the isolation and terrible emptiness of Australia most acutely in the 
state of Western Australia, which is larger than the whole of western Europe 
but has a population of fewer than two million. Perth still has something of 
the frontier about it, with so much construction going on, so much land for 
sale, especially as you drive south. The state is rich in minerals and natural 
resources - in iron, alumina, gas, nickel and gold - and mining is the engine 
of the economy. Serious money is being made, but at a cost: no sooner, it 
seems, have the minerals been extracted than they are dispatched to China, 
powering the growth of one of the world's great polluters. Meanwhile, more of 
Australia is becoming uninhabitable and drought-stricken; bush fires rage; the 
settlers cling ever closer to the edges of the continent, seeking the cool of 
the sea breeze.

The most famous sea breeze of all, the Fremantle Doctor, was not much in 
evidence throughout the third Test, which once more revealed England to be a 
team of sessions and occasionally days rather than of the sustained and 
convincing performance. Perhaps the reality is simply this: in sport you can 
only play at the limit of your abilities for so long, and England, at times, 
played as well as they can - on the second day in Adelaide, on the first day in 
Perth, and on the second morning in Melbourne. But without their captain, 
Michael Vaughan, their best bowler, Simon Jones, as well as the 
often-inspirational opener Marcus Trescothick, there was no way that they could 
compete with, let alone beat, a great Australia team - a team that, once they 
lost the Ashes in 2005, were consumed by one mission: to crush England when 
they returned to Australia.

On my final evening in Australia I visited The Lucky Shag bar on the Perth 
waterfront, headquarters of the Barmy Army. Television screens were showing 
highlights of Adam Gilchrist's late afternoon evisceration of the England 
bowlers (an innings that, in effect, had no lowlights), but no one was really 
watching; instead, groups of men were dancing and, to the tune of 'Papa's Got a 
Brand New Pigbag', chanting, as you do: 'Ba-ba, Ba-ba/Mon-tee- Pan-e-sar...'

It was as if the cricket had become incidental; what mattered most was the 
journey, what happened on the road to defeat, and these guys were in Perth as 
elsewhere to enjoy themselves, no matter what the state of play. This, I guess, 
is as it should be: for all England's inadequacies, this was still a special 
tour, with record attendances and a spirit of resigned good humour among most 
English visitors. The Australians don't realise how lucky they are to have us - 
to mock, to bully, to bring in the revenue and, above all, to beat.

www.tourism.australia.com <http://www.tourism.australia.com>
 