
'I don't feel I'm known as a playwright," says Arnold Wesker, sitting in the 
comfortable basement study of his Sussex home. It's a surprising admission. 
After all, his dramasChicken Soup with Barley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/08/chicken-soup-with-barley-review> 
andThe Kitchen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/07/the-kitchen-oliver-london> have 
recently enjoyed successful revivals; Roots is currently on tour; and a 
three-play Wesker mini-festival has just opened in London to coincide with the 
writer's 80th birthday this month. Yet Wesker, knighted in 2006, still feels an 
outsider in the British theatre.

In a recent, highly revealing book of interviews, Ambivalences by Chiara 
Montenero <http://oberonbooks.com/political-themes/ambivalences>, Wesker says: 
"It's been a good life personally, but a hell of a life professionally." Given 
that he's written 44 plays – as well as fiction, poetry, essays and an 
autobiography – what exactly did he mean? "As a playwright," he explains, 
"nothing came easy. My early plays, Chicken Soup and Roots, were both initially 
turned down by the Royal Court; and The Kitchen was at first only given a 
single Sunday-night showing. Then there was a debacle with The Journalists, 
which ended up with me suing the RSC, who had commissioned it, after the actors 
refused to perform it." The play, which questioned the morality of journalists, 
has never been staged professionally in Britain.

Wesker continues: "The National also bought the rights to The Old Ones, but 
then turned it down at the instigation of [theatre critic] Kenneth Tynan. And I 
felt God took a hand when Shylock, my response to The Merchant of Venice, was 
due to open on Broadway and the lead actor,Zero Mostel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/aug/16/comedy.theproducers>, died. It 
may sound churlish to say I'm not recognised but, since the plays didn't appear 
as they were written, there's no sense of development or evolution in my 
career."

Wesker says all this without audible bitterness, simply a sense of regret that 
his work often had difficulty reaching the stage. But, before coming to why 
this may be, let's look at his unequivocal early success with plays rooted in 
personal experience. Where dramatists today often start writing straight from 
college, Wesker – like his contemporariesHarold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/pinter> and John Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnosborne> – brought to theatre a wide 
knowledge of life. His experience in a Paris restaurant informs The Kitchen, 
his East End Jewish family's ardent socialism pervades Chicken Soup with 
Barley, and his sister's dream of creating a rural retreat is the key to I'm 
Talking About Jerusalem. Similarly, Wesker's two years' national service in the 
RAF is directly reflected in the brilliant Chips with Everything, first seen at 
the Royal Court in 1962.

"As a young communist," says Wesker, "I was not at all sure I should do 
national service. I met with the secretary general of the Young Communist 
League to talk through my confusion. He said, 'Arnold, go in and work from 
within.' So I did, but some aspects of it offended me and I refused, exactly as 
in the play, to do a bayonet charge on a dummy target. The squadron leader and 
the pilot officer tried to persuade me to use the bayonet as it was only a 
pretence. Finally, one said, 'You can be like the reed that bends in the wind 
and then, when the wind stops, comes upright again.' That appealed to me so 
much I wrote a novel called The Reed That Bends."

Intriguingly, another dramatist who had once been a member of the Young 
Communist League and had served in the RAF wrote to Wesker in 1960, praising 
his early plays. He was Terence Rattigan. Wesker proudly shows me two 
unpublished letters from Rattigan, written after the latter had been to Chicken 
Soup with Barley. "On a particularly hot Saturday matinee," wrote Rattigan, 
"and sitting alone, having left the Test match at a particularly exciting 
moment, I hardly expected to find myself, at both intervals of your play, with 
tears staining my raddled and reactionary old cheeks."

At the height of his youthful success, however, Wesker abandoned playwriting 
to found and run Centre 42: an organisation created in 1962, with the help of 
trade union backing, to discover a new audience for the arts. Wesker worked 
wholeheartedly to create festivals in Wellingborough, Nottingham, Birmingham, 
Leicester, Bristol, Hayes and Southall and set about raising the £680,000 
needed to convert the Roundhouse in London into a permanent arts centre. But, 
within a couple of years, Centre 42 was wound up by Wesker.

"I take it as my personal failure," he says. "I had enough chutzpah and charm 
to raise money for the festivals but I ran out of steam – and real fund-raisers 
don't run out of steam." At one point, he was so desperate for money that he 
contacted Lionel Bart, creator of the Oliver musical. "I offered him the rights 
to all my plays for £10,000. He said no, thank God. But, even if Centre 42 
failed, we animated the atmosphere, lots of new theatres and arts centres 
sprang up, and we had some impact on the policy of the new 1964 Labour 
government."

Wesker's experience also fuelled a fine play, Their Very Own and Golden City, 
about the failed dreams of a visionary architect, first seen at the Royal Court 
in 1966 and scarcely since. Like Wesker, I think a revival is long overdue. But 
the playwright's own dream is to see Shylock given a major London showing 
before he dies. At one pointDavid Suchet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/may/19/david-suchet-poirot-agatha-christie>
 hoped to do it in an RSC season, alongside Shakespeare's The Merchant of 
Venice and Marlowe's The Jew of Malta; the plan foundered because of the 
actor's other commitments. But the inability of Shylock (written in 1975) and 
many of Wesker's later plays to get the exposure they deserve, especially in 
Britain, leads us to the big question: Why?

"I can only think," says Wesker, "it's because the plays are not English and 
don't sit comfortably on the English scene. To explain, I can only refer to an 
article I've been asked to write for the Jewish Chronicle about what makes me 
think I'm Jewish. I quote a lecture by George Steiner in which he claims that 
it's more natural for a Jew to be a scholar than a writer, and that Kafka, 
Proust and Pasternak were all uneasy with the role of creative artists. I felt 
some sympathy with that, because my plays were being rejected and, I felt, one 
reason was that there was too much intellect in them and too many ideas. A 
reverence for the power of the intellect is for me a definition of Jewishness; 
which is one reason why I give Shylock a speech in which he says that the glory 
of Venice was founded not on trade, but on the writings of the classical 
scholars whose work had been preserved in its monasteries."

Although Wesker's plays may be animated by ideas, they are also remarkable for 
their capacity to arouse feeling: something evident from the early work right 
up to marvellous recent play Groupie (broadcast on Radio 4 and starringBarbara 
Windsor <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/barbara-windsor>) about a 
mature Cockney woman's rediscovery of her passion. But if there is one theme 
running through all Wesker's work, it is the collapse of utopian dreams and 
visions. "I think I always knew," he says, "that utopia was an impossibility, 
but what touched me was the energy of human aspiration. The last lines of Their 
Very Own and Golden City tell us, 'People are good.' I think that, essentially, 
people have the courage to go after utopias and survive their failure."

Given Wesker's own resilience, still evident at the age of 80, the words could 
just as easily apply to himself.

• Roots is at Nottingham Playhouse <http://www.nottinghamplayhouse.co.uk> 
(0115-941 9419), until 2 June. The Wesker at 80 season is at theKing's Head 
<http://www.kingsheadtheatre.com>, London N1 (020-7478 0160), until 10 June.
 