
Julia Pascal made reference to Arnold Wesker’s short spell at the London 
School of Film Technique (Obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/13/sir-arnold-wesker-obituary>, 14 
April). In a letter he sent me in 1968 he announced “the greatest impact came 
to me from the Italian and Japanese cinema which I discovered in my twenties”. 
He also recalled the movie of Clifford Odets’ Golden Boy, while his list of 
actors that made an impact included Spencer Tracey, Jimmy Cagney, Humphrey 
Bogart (especially) and Paul Muni. “Ah, Paul Muni, our Hungarian, my mother 
used to say.” Wesker is quoted in the obituary as feeling “frozen in the 
trilogy”. Yet that trilogy had the opposite effect on audiences, warming their 
hearts, not least when Beattie in Roots cried out: “Socialism isn’t talking all 
the time, it’s living, it’s singing, it’s dancing … It’s being concerned about 
people and the world.”
Ralph Willett
Sherborne, Dorset

• I’m sorry to contradict Julia Pascal, but Arnold Wesker’s Shylock was 
actually seen in Britain, though only briefly. In October 1989, in the early 
days of my time as director of Riverside Studios in Hammersmith, we hosted a 
dramatised reading directed by Wesker himself, with Israeli actor Oded Teomi in 
the lead. It played for only a week, with Arnold hoping to arouse interest in a 
full production. Sadly, that didn’t materialise. My sole clear memory is a 
personal one: having to stop my over-insistent octogenarian father from 
endangering life and limb by lecturing Arnold on his treatment of the 
Shakespearian character.
Jonathan Lamède
London 

• Your mention of Arnold Wesker going to prison in 1961 makes light of the 
full, dramatic story. In fact he had been charged with 30 other members of the 
anti-nuclearCommittee of 100 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Committee_of_100_(United_Kingdom)>, including 
Bertrand Russell, for being responsible for organising the planned mass civil 
disobedience demonstration in Trafalgar Square, on 17 September 1961. As a busy 
celebrity Wesker, to avoid prison, could have agreed to be bound over to keep 
the peace, as some “names” did, but to his credit he refused. He stayed the 
full month in prison despite his workload. He and the poet Christopher Logue 
entertained the other prisoners with readings from their writings.
Ernest Rodker
London 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 