
Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> activists in Egypt 
have reacted angrily to the arrest of prominent women’s rights advocate Azza 
Soliman, saying it marked a “chilling escalation” of pressure on civil society 
organisations.

Soliman, the founder of the Centre for Egyptian Women’s Legal Assistance 
<https://www.soas.ac.uk/honourcrimes/partners/egypt---centre-for-egyptian-women-legal-assistance-cewla.html>
 (CEWLA), is one of a number of activists, lawyers and journalists to have been 
prevented from leaving Egypt in the past month.

The rights lawyer and leading feminist said last week that she had been turned 
back on 19 November at Cairo airport. Soon after, Soliman discovered that her 
personal assets and those of her group had been frozen. On Wednesday, her 
foundation and a security source said she had been detained by police.

Who murdered Giulio Regeni? | Alexander Stille
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/egypt-murder-giulio-regeni> 
“The investigative judge has issued an arrest warrant against Azza Soliman,” 
CEWLA tweeted, adding that security forces had gone to Soliman’s house and 
taken her away to a Cairo police station.

There was no immediate comment from the interior ministry and it was not clear 
what charges, if any, Soliman was facing.

But the detention sparked immediate condemnation from Egyptian human rights 
activists, who say they are being subjected to a severe government clampdown 
targeting organisations accused of fomenting unrest during the 2011 uprising 
that ended Hosni Mubarak’s 30-year rule.

Several non-governmental organisations (NGOs), most involved in rights work, 
are embroiled in a long-running investigation, accused of receiving foreign 
funds to sow chaos. An Egyptian rights lawyer said Soliman’s arrest warrant had 
been issued by the judge who is presiding over that case.

“Why would they arrest her from her house?” asked Dalia Abdel-Hamid, a fellow 
women’s rights activist and researcher at the Cairo-based Egyptian Initiative 
for Personal Rights.

“It’s so humiliating, not just for her but for all civil society and human 
rights activists.”

Abdel-Hamid said that in other arrests in connection with Egypt’s “foreign 
funding case” – the targeting of civil society organisations accused by the 
state of receiving “illegal” foreign funding – the accused were not taken from 
their homes.

“This is an aggressive step up from what has happened previously,” she added. 
“We don’t know what this will mean or what the repercussions of this will be.”

Soliman previously stood trial after witnessing the murder of socialist 
protester Shaimaa al-Sabbagh by Egyptian police in January 2015. She and 16 
others were later acquitted.

Mohamed Lotfy, of the Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms, said 
Soliman’s arrest represented “a chilling escalation against independent civil 
society in Egypt”.

“Azza’s arrest unmasks the government’s animosity not just to human rights 
defenders in general, but also to the independent Egyptian feminist movement,” 
he said.

Najia Bounaim, deputy campaigns director at Amnesty International’s Tunis 
office, said the arrest was “the latest chilling example of the Egyptian 
authorities’ systematic persecution of independent human rights defenders.”

“We believe she has been arrested for her legitimate human rights work and 
must be released immediately and unconditionally,” she said. “Her arrest marks 
an escalation in the use of a string of repressive tactics designed to 
intimidate her and other critical voices into silence.

“There is a real risk that her arrest could signal an accelerating crackdown 
with many other human rights defenders subject to the same inquiry facing the 
risk of imminent arrest.”

Jailed Egyptian novelist Ahmed Naji's appeal delayed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/05/jailed-egyptian-novelist-ahmed-najis-appeal-delayed>
In September, a court froze the assets of five prominent human rights 
activists and three NGOs, paving the way for criminal proceedings that could 
lead to life sentences.

NGOs say they have felt exposed since late 2011, when authorities raided 17 
pro-democracy and rights groups. In 2013, a court ordered the closure of 
several foreign groups, including the US-basedFreedom House 
<https://freedomhouse.org/country/egypt>, and gave jail sentences to 43 NGO 
staff including 15 Americans who fled.

A case against dozens of Egyptian NGOs and lawyers was never closed but 
remained largely dormant until this year.

In November, parliament passed a law to regulate NGOs, which human rights 
groups say in effect bans their work and makes it harder for development groups 
and charities to operate.

The bill bans domestic and foreign groups from engaging in political 
activities or anything that harms national security, public order, public 
morals or public health – a means, critics say, to stifle dissent.

Reuters contributed to this report 
 