
Foreign ownership of strategic British assets threatened to become an election 
issue tonight after a political row began to gather around a £1.5bn move by the 
German state-owned railway company Deutsche Bahn to buy UK bus and train 
operatorArriva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness>.

Vince Cable, the deputy leader of the Liberal Democrats, said that the deal 
highlighted the stupidity of a government decision to scrap the public interest 
test when it revised the takeover code eight years ago.

Digby Jones, minister for trade in Gordon Brown's first year as prime 
minister, and a past head of employers' body the CBI, said he had considerable 
"reservations" about whether these kinds of deals were appropriate.

The controversy surrounding foreign acquisitions intensified last year when 
American food company Kraft launched a hostile – and ultimately successful – 
bid for chocolate makerCadbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cadburyschweppes>, causing embarrassment 
for ministers.

But the latest bid for a key UK company has raised the stakes because it has 
the added complication of coming from a state-owned body – DB is 100%-owned by 
the German government. A successful bid would in effect mean that a privatised 
British rail service had been renationalised overseas.

Cable said: "I have no problem with the principle of foreign ownership but the 
government made a mistake in 2002 when it removed the public interest [test] 
for takeovers that could have stopped the Kraft deal. It should be possible in 
cases where publicly owned utilities are involved for an investigation on a 
national-interest basis."

Jones said he also believed that serious questions were being raised by the 
spate of companies being bought by foreign predators: "I am not saying I would 
put a stop to them but I do think we need politicians, regulators and consumers 
to engage in a public debate about overseas takeovers. They would need to look 
at whether you can do it [a foreign takeover] in their country and whether the 
buyer is owned by the state. That is an important point."

The RMT union expressed its concern after Deutsche Bahn announced a 
recommended cash offer for Arriva. The Sunderland-based transport operator owns 
the Cross Country and Arriva Trains Wales franchises and bus networks across 
the UK, as well as public transport operations in European countries including 
Denmark, Germany and Spain.

Bob Crow, the union's general secretary, said there was a danger that profits 
made on British railways would be exported and reinvested in the German 
transport network.

DB predicted a dominant role for state-backed transport groups across Europe 
today, forecasting that control of all bus, rail and coach networks on the 
continent would be divided between a maximum of five businesses.

Its chief executive, Rüdiger Grube, said liberalisation of transport systems 
across Europe, including those in France and Germany, would create between 
three and five super-groups. "It will take place within the next 10 years, 
there is no doubt about it," he said, adding that France's state-owned rail 
company, SNCF, would probably be one of them. Asked if state-backed companies 
would be among the prime contenders to become a super-group, Grube said: "Yes."

Deutsche Bahn is already a significant player in the UK rail market through 
its ownership of the British rail freight business formerly known as EWS and 
Chiltern Railways, which operates a passenger franchise between London and 
Birmingham. That presence will be significantly reinforced by the Arriva deal.

Other state-backed transport groups with a foothold in the UK market include 
Abellio, formerly Holland's NedRailways, which operates the Northern Rail and 
Merseyrail franchises, and SNCF, which has a shareholding in the cross-channel 
Eurostar service.

Over here

Foreign governments already have a grip on a whole range of British assets 
deemed important by politicians and members of the public alike: from the 
railway services to postal deliveries and even football clubs.

Deutsche Bahn already runs the royal train in Britain as part of its control 
of EWS – renamed DB Schenker Rail (UK) Ltd – while also operating passenger 
services on Chiltern Railways.

But the German state's incursion into the UK railway system is not unique. The 
Dutch state-owned operator, NedRailways, has also taken over slices of the 
British network, operating trains on the Merseyrail and Northern Rail 
franchises in conjunction with UK services firm Serco. The French state-owned 
railway group, SNCF, is also the major shareholder in the Eurostar business 
that controls the passenger rail services between St Pancras station in London 
and Paris and Brussels. The French firm Connex once ran the busy south central 
commuter route before it was removed from the franchise.

The British energy sector has also seen major inroads from state-owned foreign 
groups, with Électricité de France (EDF) buying up nuclear operator British 
Energy as well as local UK electricity supply groups.

The UK's biggest atomic complex at Sellafield in Cumbria is now part-managed 
by Areva, a company 90%-owned by the French state. Areva is also a part 
operator of the UK's only low-level waste repository, at Drigg in the same 
region.

German state-owned telecoms operator Deutsche Telekom snapped up T-Mobile in 
this country while Deutsche Post – also part-owned by the Berlin government – 
was the first to break the Royal Mail's UK postal monopoly by winning a licence 
to deliver letters here.

There have also been advances by foreign state-owned groups through sovereign 
wealth funds, with the most notable being the £4bn purchase of P&O by Dubai and 
the Abu Dhabi purchase of Manchester City football club.
 