
If you were searching for 10 seconds of footage to demonstrate the concept of 
a box-to-box midfielder, it would be difficult to find anything more fitting 
than Aaron Ramsey’s goal in Arsenal’s 2-0 victory at Villa Park.

In a flowing move described simply by Arsène Wenger as “the way we want to 
play football”, Ramsey touched the ball just twice. The first was a crunching 
tackle on the edge of his own penalty area, dispossessing Idrissa Gueye and 
setting upArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> for a 
counterattacking opportunity. The second was the simplest of finishes, inside 
the Villa penalty box, converting Mesut Özil’s typically selfless pass – the 
German’s 13th assist of the Premier League season. Between the two touches was 
something equally important – a 70-yard run which took him past six Villa 
players.

Giroud and Ramsey on target as Arsenal cruise to win over Aston Villa and go 
top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/13/aston-villa-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
“It was obviously nice to be there and finish it off,” the Welshman said. “It 
was a great move from us, we’ve seen there was an opportunity to get forward, 
it was a great ball from Theo [Walcott] and then the vision of [Mesut] Özil to 
play me in for a simple tap-in was delightful as well. It’s part of the job in 
the middle to win tackles, and I was happy to start [the goal] as well.”

This is what Ramsey is all about. One of few top-level Premier League 
footballers who can reasonably be described as a true box-to-box midfielder, 
Ramsey was magnificent throughout 2013-14 in his favoured central midfield 
role, contributing significantly in two completely different areas. Of the 
Premier League’s central midfielders, only Yaya Touré scored more goals from 
open play, and only four attempted more tackles.

Recording such outstanding figures in both respects is extremely rare, and 
Ramsey was aware of this statistical peculiarity, keeping an eye on the numbers 
fed to him by Arsenal’s backroom staff, keen to maintain high standards, as 
well as being aware of his numbers involving distance covered.

Since then, Ramsey has suffered from injuries, before finding himself out on 
the right thanks to the excellent form of Francis Coquelin and Santi Cazorla, 
who provided all-round midfield attributes as a partnership rather than as 
individuals.

Ramsey has repeatedly, if politely, outlined his dislike for playing on the 
wing – and Wenger fully knows it wasn’t his best role. The team simply fell 
into place that way, and redeploying Ramsey centrally at the expense of either 
Coquelin or Cazorla, who were both playing wonderfully, would have been an odd 
decision.

With both out injured, now is Ramsey’s time to shine – and he has grabbed the 
opportunity with both hands. In his three games back in that central role, he 
contributed a goal and an assist in the 3-1 victory over Sunderland, another 
assist in the midweek 3-0 win at Olympiakos, and then this role-defining goal 
to put the game out of Villa’s reach.

Here, Ramsey had more shots, played more passes and won more tackles than any 
other player – illustrating his all-round ability perfectly. Arsenal’s next 
league fixture is at the Emirates against Manchester City and Touré, arguably 
the only other top-level box-to-box midfielder in the division. Another 
performance like this against the Ivorian and Ramsey can claim to be the 
Premier League’s best player in his role.
 