
With the caveat that this is a pre-season warm-up and therefore not the most 
accurate gauge of what is to come (remember the ballad of Yaya Sanogo, who 
scored four in a mini-explosion at the Emirates Cup before disappearing into 
the background for the season proper),Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> watched his Arsenal squad 
flex their goalscoring muscles with a look of serene contentment.

For all the chitchat about £200m sloshing around to strengthen his squad, 
Wenger is encouraged enough by what he has to feel relaxed about any further 
business in this transfer window. He is, he mused, “not in desperate need” for 
anything, even though he retains an interest in any gems that might present 
themselves as buyable.

“We have a good squad. We score goals. We can create chances. But we are 
open-minded. Everybody is on the market – many clubs have big, big money,” he 
said.

Arsenal director backs Arsène Wenger to break transfer record on striker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/23/arsenal-director-arsene-wenger-break-transfer-record-striker>
His squad have an encouraging rhythm, which they beat loud and clear to 
lacerateLyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon>. The French have a 
word for the kind of instinctiveness and slickness that comes with a group of 
players who know each other well –automatisme – and it’s a buzzword within 
Arsenal’s dressing room. “Football is subtle, it’s not mathematics,” Wenger 
said. “There is a logic in the game that means everybody playing for each 
other.”

Six goals, including four in a nine-minute blur, allowed Wenger’s team to show 
off their attacking verve. There was variety in the strikes, too.

Olivier Giroud’s came from a set piece. Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain’s from a pacy 
break and confidently steered in. Alex Iwobi, the 19-year-old nephew of Jay-Jay 
Okocha, finished off a fluent passing move. ThenAaron Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aaron-ramsey> and Mesut Özil epitomised 
automatism – both knew exactly what the other wanted to do. The exchange of 
passes, with Özil’s delicate delay as he waited to return the ball to meet 
Ramsey’s surging run, was timed to perfection. They made it look easy.

The quality in Arsenal’s attacking game during that spell was achieved without 
some of their chief creative exponents: Santi Cazorla and Theo Walcott started 
on the bench; Alexis Sánchez is on his extended holidays; Jack Wilshere and 
Danny Welbeck were not able to take part. (Wilshere will play on Sunday against 
Wolfsburg). Lyon’s Alexandre Lacazette, linked withArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, among others, this summer, was 
not granted much opportunity to impress.

Arsenal’s players are focused on picking up where they left off with that 
sumptuous performance in the FA Cup final against Aston Villa. “This seemed a 
continuity of what we have done at the end of last season and in pre-season,” 
said Wenger. “We have a good team dynamic. We have more cohesion than last year 
at the same period. That was a post-World Cup year and some players came back 
mentally exhausted. I hope we can take advantage.”

Özil is one of those who suffered last time and looks conspicuously charged up 
and focused now. On a number of occasions the German made darting runs, much 
more driven and obviously forward-minded than his usualmodus operandi of 
orchestrating from his luxury floating role. He was able to mix a more direct 
style with his penchant for assisting, and earned his goal with a precise 
finish early in the second half. Cazorla, on as a substitute, notched number 
six with a low, fizzing free kick.

In the end, the twinge of disappointment that Saturday’s Emirates Cup crowd 
wouldn’t get the privilege of witnessing Petr Cech’s first home appearance (he 
will be in Sunday’s selection) was comprehensively swept away.

Arsenal’s combinations, their craft, their hunger, their happiness as a bunch 
of footballers, reflects the mood that has been growing since they began to hit 
form at the start of the calendar year.

The attitude of Arsenal’s players is going to make it hard for Wenger to pick 
his best XI to start the campaign against West Ham on 9 August.

Ahead of that, they play Chelsea in the Community Shield next weekend, which 
will no doubt give them a much sterner barometer of where they are, and where 
they hope to be.

“We won the FA Cup and finished third last season. Our target is to do 
better,” concluded Wenger.
 