
Arsène Wenger is determined to continue Arsenal's tour of Austria after being 
given police assurances over safety following the abandonment of their match 
against Rapid Vienna due to crowd violence.

Fans spilled on to the pitch at the Eisenstadt ground and fought running 
battles with the police, forcing the match to be abandoned with more than 20 
minutes remaining.

Arsenal fans were not involved in the trouble and Wenger confirmed the tour 
will continue after meeting police. "We have been given assurances that the 
necessary security measures are in place for the remaining fixtures in 
Austria," he said.

"Naturally the club finds the unsavoury incidents at Saturday's match wholly 
unacceptable. However, the club will not allow the actions of a mindless 
minority to disrupt our pre-season preparations."

Police had wooden benches, empty beer crates and bottles thrown at them as the 
trouble continued for around 10 minutes. The hooligans were eventually 
contained and the match, which was suspended with 67 minutes on the clock and 
the score at 0-0, briefly restarted before the players left the field.

Trouble had been brewing before kick-off and at one stage during the match 
thick smoke enveloped the main stand as a flare set a pitch-side speaker on 
fire. Rapid Vienna fans, disillusioned with their side's fall from grace, have 
already caused trouble in the opening games of the Austrian Bundesliga.

Fans are unhappy at last season's eighth-place finish under Lothar Matthäus, 
the lowest in the club's 103-year history.

"We had trouble not long ago with the Rapid fans in another game," said Franz 
Feuzi of the Austrian police. "But in this case there was still no sector 
organisation and the Ultras from Rapid Vienna were not particularly isolated."

Arsenal will now complete the tour with a mini-tournament in Kapfenberg on 
Thursday night against Roma and Panathinaikos, followed by a game against 1860 
Munich in Innsbruck on Saturday.

"We know there is enough security at Kapfenberg," said Nicolas Pichler, the 
general manager of Kapfenberg. "The situation that happened at Eisenstadt will 
not happen here. I am happy with the safety measures in Kapfenberg and I'm sure 
it will be a friendly tournament that everybody can enjoy."

Despite the assurances the Arsenal vice-chairman David Dein has called on the 
Austrian FA to launch an inquiry into the violence.

The trouble could have an impact on Austria's bid with Switzerland to host the 
2008 European Championship. Scotland and Ireland have put in a rival bid and 
will be closely monitoring Uefa's reaction.

Angus Robertson, the SNP's foreign affairs spokesman, said: "I have no doubt 
this is a major blow to the bid by Austria and Switzerland for the 2008 
European Championships. Despite the fact the majority of Austrian and Swiss 
fans are overwhelmingly non-violent, this incident has underscored a policing 
and hooligan problem in Austria.

"This is a problem for Austrian football and I'm certain Uefa will take it 
into consideration when assessing the joint Austrian-Swiss bid. It shows how 
important it is for Scottish and Irish fans to maintain their record of 
friendly and non-violent behaviour."
 