
At this time of year we invariably look ahead: divining the runes, tracking 
the currents, calculating and extrapolating in an attempt to map out likely 
eventualities. And this year, of course, is also the beginning of a new decade: 
chronological circumstances that almost demand we make daring forecasts, grand 
leaps of faith. The coming years and decades are, to paraphrase JG Ballard, a 
vast untouched continent of predictive possibility stretching out before us.

Arthur C Clarke is possibly the greatest of all futurologists; almost 
certainly the most famous and oft-quoted. Lately I've been rereading his
Profiles of the Future (An Inquiry into the Limits of the Possible) 
<http://www.infinityplus.co.uk/nonfiction/profiles.htm>, first published in 
1962 – just five years after Sputnik II carried Laika the dog into orbit. The 
sky really did seem the limit back then. Within a dozen years humans were 
playing golf on the moon, nonchalantly asserting our mastery over the universe.

So vertiginous was the ascent from earth to the heavens that everyone assumed 
the road of scientific progress would continue ever upwards. Seduced by the 
infinite potential of infinite space, we were sure that man would soon colonise 
the moon and the other planets. The kitschy cartoon image of suburban families 
enjoying their vacation against the inky backdrop of space wasn't that far 
removed from popular expectations.
From there, it was a short step to hyper-drive transports, which would 
circumvent the restraints of light and time, and zoom intrepid souls beyond the 
solar system. The details were fuzzy, but we had faith and blind optimism. Like 
an interstellar version of Manifest Destiny, the entire cosmos was there to be 
explored and commanded.

Except it never happened. Disappointingly, those golf trips to the moon turned 
out to be the final frontier. No galactic cruises, humanoid robots or 
self-aware artificial intelligence. No immortality, nuclear-powered vehicles or 
close encounters with alien life-forms. The future, alas – it's just not what 
it used to be.

We're so much more cynical now; we're indifferent towards space exploration 
and blasé about scientific wonders. Even Clarke's famous Third Law, about 
advanced technology being indistinguishable from magic, is declared obsolete. 
We don't dream about conquering the universe anymore; our ambitions are 
smaller, more prosaic, leaden-footed and bound to this planet, this realm of 
existence.

From that perspective, it's remarkable how ridiculous large portions of 
Clarke's Profiles of the Future now seem. Soon, he predicted, we would be 
mining the moon. By the 1980s we would be travelling to the other planets. 
Cyborgs would clunk into our lives in the 90s, briskly followed by matter 
transference (including people: "The time will come when we can move from Pole 
to Pole within a single heartbeat.") We should also look forward to gravity 
control and colonisation of the solar system (adding with retroactive poignancy 
that "'It would be theoretically possible ... to ship back lunar products 
aboard robot freighters …(for) only a few pence of chemical fuel".) And, about 
two decades from now, get set for contact with extra-terrestrials. He writes in 
the introduction, "The one fact about the future of which we can be certain is 
that it will be utterly fantastic." So why doesn't it seem that way?

Of course Clarke isn't the only writer to make outlandish predictions, and I 
don't want to be mean-spirited: futurology is by definition an inexact science, 
hindsight is 20:20 vision, and so on. Clarke admits as much in his opening 
chapter, "Hazards of Prophecy".

But futurologists are often so maddeningly sure of themselves, and this 
inexact notion of "progress", and our species' inexorable march forwards and 
upwards and onwards … it's hard to resist pointing out where they get it 
spectacularly wrong. (I'm betting Francis Fukuyama regrets ever coiningthat 
notorious "end of history" line <http://www.wesjones.com/eoh.htm>.) 

Ultimately there is only one certainty: in the timeless words of William 
Goldman, nobody knows anything. To that, let me add an addendum for our times: 
when in doubt, assume the most prosaic outcome possible. Think small. Think 
safe. Be sensible.

Maybe this isn't cynicism, really – maybe it's simple practicality, good 
sense, healthy scepticism. And yet it's strange: I can't help feeling a flicker 
of melancholy while reading Profiles of the Future, a tiny pulse of yearning, 
like the fading echo of a collapsed star in deep space. Though I wasn't even 
born then, I miss those more naive times; that almost childish era when people 
not only believed in a magnificent, amazing future but knew it was coming. The 
fact that it never actually happened does not, I feel, negate the truth of 
their feelings and that zeitgeist.

I think I miss those pioneering days, encapsulated in Profiles of the Future, 
before tedious reality and awareness of our limitations lumbered in like a 
police officer breaking up a house party; those days of grandiose ambitions and 
frontier dreams, of man preparing to step boldly into the unknown: bright, 
reckless, energised, unique.
 