
A letter written by Stephen Fry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-fry> to a soldier who died in the 
Great War reduced the theatre director Neil Bartlett to tears on Thursday as he 
read it aloud at the launch of the cultural programme that will mark the 
centenary of the conflict.

Fry's letter – written as if from the soldier's brother, a conscientious 
objector, and inspired by the statue of a soldier reading a letter that stands 
on Paddington station in London – is part of Letter to an Unknown Soldier, one 
of hundreds of arts events in 14-18 Now, a programme of work by visual artists, 
theatre companies, dancers, photographers, poets and composers, across Britain 
and in collaboration with other countries.

The events take place this summer between 28 June, the date the shot was fired 
in Sarajevo that toppled Europe into war, and 4 August, the date Britain 
officially declared war on Germany.

The programme will end with Lights Out, an attempt to persuade everyone in the 
UK to turn out all lights between 10pm and 11pm, the hour of the declaration, 
except for single candles.

It is intended to recall the grim statement by Sir Edward Grey, then foreign 
secretary, in August 1914: "The lamps are going out all over Europe; we shall 
not see them lit again in our lifetime."

Artists are being commissioned to create digital light works which can be 
downloaded free, and the dark hour will coincide with a candlelit service in 
Westminster Abbey and a special late-night Prom at the Albert Hall which will 
include the world premiere of a new work.

The Letter to an Unknown Soldier project is already under way. Thousands of 
commuters pass the statue every day: the bronze soldier by the sculptor Charles 
Sargeant Jagger, who served with the artists' rifles atGallipoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallipoli> and on the western front – stands 
in full uniform and kit, head bowed over his letter, on platform one at 
Paddington Station.

Bartlett and his collaborator on the project, the novelist Kate Pullinger, 
would like as many people as possible to imagine what that letter says.

Pullinger said Bartlett's response to Fry's contribution was no exception: the 
pair have already dubbed their work "the crying project".

"Every time we have received a letter to the soldier, we have cried over it," 
she said.

They are hoping to get hundreds of thousands of letters, which will be added to
an online archive <http://1418now.org.uk/letter/> that will be live over the 
weeks of the festival and will then be stored permanently at the British 
Library.

Contributions have so far included a letter from the playwright Caryl 
Churchill, who also takes the theme of conscientious objection, and one from 
the former poet laureate, SirAndrew Motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrewmotion>, wondering whether the soldier 
has just written rather than received his letter.

The project also has pledges for letters from writers such as Alan 
Hollinghurst, Bonnie Greer, AL Kennedy, David Almond, Deborah Levy, Kamila 
Shamsie, Liz Lochhead, Malorie Blackman and Sebastian Faulks, along with a 
choir in Derbyshire, prisoners in Buckinghamshire, nurses in Hull, older people 
who meet at the Empire cafe in Glasgow, a creative writing group in Derry, and 
400 pupils from one London school alone.

Many of the events in 14-18 Now will be free outdoor happenings on an epic 
scale: the street theatre companyRoyal de Luxe 
<http://www.royal-de-luxe.com/en/>, which brought an estimated 800,000 people 
on to the streets of Liverpool in 2012 for their retelling of the Titanic story 
with giant puppets, will return to create a five-day event in July, telling the 
story of Liverpool's "pals battalions", formed after a wartime recruiting drive 
that encouraged entire districts, workplaces and sports clubs to join up 
together.

In Liverpool, 1,600 men queued to volunteer on the day the recruiting office 
opened.

In Wales, the National Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> is 
working with poet and novelist Owen Sheers in ancient woodland, inspired by his 
poem Mametz Wood, which tells of the battle in which 4,000 of the 38th Welsh 
division were killed or wounded.

The combatants included the poets Robert Graves and Siegfried Sassoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/siegfried-sassoon> and Sheers's own great 
great uncle, William Cross.

Dazzle Ships will recreate the war contribution by the artists of a century 
ago: the creation of jagged patterns – related to contemporary vorticist and 
cubist styles – which distorted the outline of ships at sea, helping to hide 
them from enemy submarines and torpedoes.

Most of the designs were created and some were carried out by artists, and 
more than 1,000 ships were dazzled until radar in the second world war made the 
technique obsolete.

The leading Venezuelan artist Carlos Cruz-Diez has been invited to transform a 
historic pilot ship, the Edmund Gardner, which is in dry dock near Tate 
Liverpool.

In London a genuine first world war veteran, HMS President, which was 
dazzle-painted in the war and is now a party ship moored on the Thames 
embankment, will dazzle again.

More commissions will be announced, and there will be cultural programmes in 
2016, the centenary of the battle of the Somme, and in 2018 to mark the end of 
the war.

Each will be part-funded by £5m from the Heritage and Arts Lottery Funds.

"We want to ensure that a living memory is created for generations to come," 
said Vikki Heywood, chair of 14-18 Now.

Her own family's memories remain vivid: her grand father was grievously 
wounded but the only survivor, when his dugout took a direct hit.

 Letters to an Unknown Soldier

Beloved brother,

Enough time has passed now for us to think only one thought: that we will 
never see you again. The last I heard you were cheerful and funny, as ever.

Remember when I told you that I was going to declare myself a conscientious 
objector? I saw a look in your eye. "My brother, a coward?" It nearly killed 
me. I would give anything to be in your place, a hero respected and at peace — 
and not just because of the insults, beatings and stones hurled at me from bus 
conductors, shopkeepers and children in the streets.

Every night Ma and Pa sob as they try to swallow their food. I eat in another 
room. They cannot look at me. I try not to feel sorry for myself, but I do 
believe it is wrong to kill. I made my decision. you made yours.

For eternity your image will stand for unquestioning courage. I will die proud 
of you and ashamed of myself. And that is in spite of me being right.

Stephen Fry

Dear Jack

I know we're not on speaking terms but I've been thinking what if you die.

I've been finding it hard to forgive you and it's worse because I'm the only 
one who thinks you've done anything wrong. Your family and mine certainly don't.

It was hard to bear the white feathers and specially getting one from Ellen. 
Don't flap your hand at me, I know you like her. (So do I of course, but you're 
the hero now.) You'll still say it wasn't the feathers, you just saw the light.

Maybe you're right. Maybe it is sometimes not wrong to kill people. Maybe this 
war is a glorious exception and

No, I can't think that or only for a short time about four o'clock in the 
morning. I hope in a way you're still as determined as the day you got on the 
train and don't have doubts at night to suffer as well as all the other things 
there. When it's over we can argue about it in the pub.

I keep wanting to say how could you? how could you leave me? and trying to 
stop myself.

I want you to regret it bitterly. I'm sorry.

Will I send this? It helps writing it anyway. If I go to prison they might not 
let me write to you so I will send it. I expect your mother will send socks and 
chocolate (Ellen too?) So just this from your friend still

Edward

Caryl Churchill

With most of us asking the same questions,

among them: did you receive this letter today

or weeks or even months ago and produce it

now to refresh your memory of what it says;

is it a love letter, a letter from home, or lines

from a friend you are happy to know is alive;

who knitted that scarf untied round your neck,

the only piece of non-regulation kit and a clue;

is that a smile on your face or is it just the way

your mouth curves when it is settled in repose;

is it possible you never in fact received the letter

but composed it and now are reading it through

one last time before dropping it in the postbag;

if so, is it a love letter, a letter from home, or lines

to a friend who will be happy to know you alive;

yes with most of us asking these same questions

we forget to think this might not be a letter at all

but a list of questions you have prepared for us,

among them: what makes it possible to end now

our conjectures and leave perfectly free and easy,

heading into town or out to Oxford and the West,

with it making no difference to anything apparently

whether we notice you watching us or fail to notice.

Andrew Motion
 