
Pop

The lost Johnny Cash gets released
According to Cash's son John, the country legend was a prolific hoarder, 
hanging on to everything from original audio tapes for The Johnny Cash Show to 
"a camel saddle gift from the prince of Saudi Arabia". That explains why it's 
taken several years since his death in 2003 for anyone to find Out Among the 
Stars, an album he recorded in the early 1980s. Columbia dismissed the album as 
not worth releasing, but John Cash describes the 12 tracks – which include a 
duet with Johnny's wife, June Carter – as "beautiful".24 March.

Theatre

Hairspray
Barely has the set for a blistering revival of Chicago been cleared away than 
director Paul Kerryson sets about reinventing this joyous musical, inspired by 
John Waters's cult movie. It's a show that mixes the heart-rending and the 
hair-curling, the serious and the sentimental.Lyn Gardner Curve, Leicester 
<http://www.curveonline.co.uk/curve.php?view=homepage.php> (0116-242 3595), 28 
February to 5 April.

Angela Lansbury
When Lansbury was last on the West End stage, the BBC's idea of interactive 
coverage was Ceefax. Forty years on, the 83-year-old is as much of a star as 
ever – and her reprise of a role she first played on Broadway in 2009, that of 
the eccentric clairvoyant Madame Arcati in Noël Coward's Blithe Spirit, is 
hotly anticipated.Andrew Dickson Gielgud, London 
<http://www.delfontmackintosh.co.uk/Theatres/gielgud_theatre.asp> W1 (0844 482 
5130), 1 March to 7 June.

Peter Brook
Every return by the visionary 88-year-old director, based in Paris since the 
1970s, is worth watching out for. Co-directed with long-term collaborator 
Marie-Hélène Estienne, the new play The Valley of Astonishment promises much: a 
kaleidoscopic journey into the miracles of the human brain. Some have said 
Brook's horizons are shrinking since the days when he did epic versions of 
texts such as The Mahabharata; can this work buck the trend?AD Young Vic, London
 <http://www.youngvic.org> SE1 (020-7922 2922), 20 June to 12 July.

Film

Jean Dujardin
When Jean Dujardin made a sensational splash in silent movie The Artist in 
2011, many assumed he would be all over international cinema from that point 
on. Instead, he was absent, and it was rumoured that his much-anticipated 
Hollywood career was hobbled by his poor command of English. Now he is back in 
George Clooney's wartime caper-thriller The Monuments Men.Peter Bradshaw 14 
February.

Val Kilmer
Alec Baldwin is living proof that actors can gain weight and still be sexy. 
Val Kilmer has put on a pound or two since the days of Heat in the mid-90s, but 
he still has a fanbase. Now he is understood to be making an appearance in the 
new Terrence Malick movie about the Texas movie scene.PB

Jim Carrey
Time was when Jim Carrey was an undisputed comedy superstar. His profile seems 
to have faded, playing minor character roles and cameo turns in other people's 
movies. Perhaps Dumb and Dumber To will change things: an outrageous and 
dodgily spelt sequel from the Farrelly brothers.PB 19 December.

TV

Lacey Turner
There is no way in the world that Stacey Slater, played by Turner, should 
return to Albert Square. She framed someone for murder there. She had an 
abortion there. She had an affair with her father-in-law there, and became 
alcoholic there, and murdered a man, and watched her husband fall off a roof to 
his death there. And yet, for reasons that make no sense at all, in early 2014 
Stacey Slater is returning to EastEnders.Stuart Heritage BBC1

W1A 
During an Edinburgh TV festival session with Jon Morton, I suggested he follow 
Twenty Twelve with a show set at the BBC. Morton looked shifty – presumably 
because this new show about the corporation was even then working its way 
through various exploratory committees at the Beeb. Expectation is high. The 
cast includes Hugh Bonneville, Jessica Hynes and Olivia Colman.Mark Lawson BBC2
 Returning for a third season … Girls. Photograph: Allstar/HBO/Sportsphoto 
Ltd./Allstar 
Girls 
Over its previous two series, Lena Dunham's creation has succeeded in 
fulfilling its remit to become a Sex and the City for the 21st century. It 
shares the sexual frankness and the social satire of the earlier show, but 
benefits from the considerable shifts in the technology and psychology of 
friendship. Third series are problematic, however: they must strike a balance 
between repetition of the familiar and injection of the new.ML Sky Atlantic

Endeavour 
Several successful TV shows have managed one popular spin-off (Cheers/Frasier, 
Dallas/Knots Landing) but it's rare to see three hits from the same line. 
However, the trilogy of Man About the House/Robin's Nest/George and Mildred is 
now challenged by the Inspector Morse industry. The original show ran for 
13 years, and the sidekick spin-off, Lewis, will return for an eighth series in 
2014 alongside more of these stories about the young Morse, played by Shaun 
Evans.ML ITV

Comedy

Jimmy Carr
It's hard not to see Funny Business <http://www.jimmycarr.com/live/> as Carr's 
effort to bounce back after the tax-avoidance row that has dogged him over the 
last 18 months. Chances are, he'll just glide insouciantly on, dispatching 
nuggets of taste-free wordplay, and trusting we all forget.Brian Logan Swan, 
High Wycombe <https://www.wycombeswan.co.uk/Online/> (01494 512000), 24 April, 
then touring.

Art
 Radical … Paolo Veronese's The Conversion of Mary Magdalene. Photograph: 
National Gallery 
Veronese
In the eyes of the first modern artists, Veronese was a radical painter whose 
rich feel for colour and light anticipated their own discoveries. Renoir 
revered this 16th-century Venetian as a sensual painter with a colossal 
appetite for life, velvet textures and dazzling perspectives. It's time to 
rediscover this libertine genius.Jonathan Jones National Gallery, London WC2 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk> (0844 847 2409), 19 March to 15 June.

Dance

Tanztheater Wuppertal Pina Bausch: 1980
When Pina Bausch first came to London, performing the emotionally gruelling 
1980, audiences were divided between rejection and a sense of ecstatic 
discovery. Three decades and a devoted fanbase later, the company bring this 
rarely performed work back to the UK.Judith Mackrell Sadler's Wells, London 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com> EC1 (020-7863 8198), 7-16 February.
 