
Hi Mark, what can you tell me about English Pocket Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> Company (EPOC)?

Well, it's been going for over 20 years now, the last 10 of which have been 
dedicated solely to working with children and young people. Our strapline says 
that we produce opera "for, by and with children" although in truth, our 
mission runs much deeper.

We work with up to 50,000 children per year (in over 250 schools in 2012), 
producing multidisciplinary programmes in partnership with a range of social, 
artistic and educational organisations designed to achieve broad educational 
and social impact. At the very core of our mission is the belief that music has 
the power to transform lives and communities.

What makes opera such a powerful educational tool for children?

I'll answer this with an anecdote that involves one of the most pleasing, yet 
double-edged pieces of feedback we've ever had. It came from a headteacher who, 
while expressing his view that the project we did with his school seemed 
expensive, said that he would have paid twice as much for it had he known it 
was going to be the catalyst for "sorting out" a particular year group.

He went on to explain: "Your workshop leaders, in helping year 5 to create On 
Mount Olympus [a mini-opera based on Greek myth] have helped turn them around. 
Never have we seen them work so well as a team, take such pride in a collective 
piece of work and – most surprisingly – praise each other! They owned it and it 
was totally inclusive. The feedback from their teacher, and most importantly, 
from their parents, has been wholehearted. No one could believe they had done 
it all themselves."

What, specifically, were those young people learning?

We were helping develop their skills in music, singing, instrumental playing, 
drama, dance, composition, design and poetry. Along the way we took in history, 
foreign languages, geography, computer skills and maths. No wonder that another 
headteacher I recently spoke to in Waltham Forest – a "super head" working in 
his fifth failing school – said that the first thing he does in all his schools 
is to put on a whole-school show.Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/music> and opera really do have the 
power to transform lives and communities.

EPOC also targets teachers, through training, mentoring, resources and so on – 
is teacher training a problem in music education?

My mother, who was a primary school class teacher, taught in a school in the 
70s where seven colleagues played the piano well enough to play for assemblies. 
Nowadays, the large majority of schools have none. Against the background of 
the social change this story represents, we should have been planning a 
strategy to reinvigorate music in schools – and we haven't.

Worse, there are many who seem determined to accelerate a decline. Michael 
Gove and the Department for Education are not offering an effective teacher 
training framework and believe that anyone teaching it should be able to do so 
without any formal qualifications. A one year PGCE may, if one is lucky, 
contain a couple of hours' training in music, which is pitiful. In the absence 
of specialist music teachers, trained or not, there are many keen 
non-specialist teachers. But they need help.

Ofsted released a rather damning report in November 2013 on the apparent 
failure of music hubs (pdf) 
<http://www.ofsted.gov.uk/sites/default/files/documents/surveys-and-good-practice/m/Music%20in%20schools%20what%20hubs%20must%20do.pdf>
 – what are your views on the document's findings?

Where do I begin? Firstly the report correctly identifies many of the problems 
that exist – but that is easy part. The hard part is identifying the root 
causes of those problems and then to offer solutions in accordance with an 
agreed framework for operation and review. Sadly it does neither.

I'm afraid I'm in agreement with Jonathan Savage in his response to the report,
Music education deserves better 
<http://www.jsavage.org.uk/music-education/another-spectacular-failure-ofsted-music-education-deserves-better/>
. That said, there is a huge disparity between the quality and range of music 
provision offered by the hubs. My own children attend schools in an area that 
boasted they worked with 6,000 children. With over 74,000 school-aged children 
and young people in the area this figure represents a meagre 8% hit rate.

In its report, Ofsted challenged music hubs to do better – what does need to 
change?

Firstly, schools not hubs, need to be the main deliverer of music education. 
But for this to happen, music needs to become a compulsorily Ofsted-inspected 
subject. Only then will all headteachers take full responsibility for its 
development.

Hubs are a way forward, but their terms of reference need to be realistic and 
matched to Ofsted's criteria for evaluation. Any future plan needs to be 
realistically funded. Ofsted needs to review individual hubs instead of tarring 
the whole sector with the same brush. The process of bidding for the next round 
of hub awards needs to encourage meaningful competition – as far as I am aware 
there was not one contract awarded to a hub that was not already an existing 
provider.

You've worked more widely in opera, as a singer and director – what state is 
the artform in right now?

I love opera and the future in many areas is bright. But I want the children 
that we work with to have real and free access to it. Times are hard but if the 
taxpayer is paying over £26m in subsidies to the Royal Opera House, then I want 
to give the children we work with the option to see it weekly on the BBC. By 
the same token, I want the same for non-trained teachers providing music.

The taxpayer invested over £40m in Sing Up <http://www.singup.org/> and a 
whopping 98% of primary schools subscribed to it. Now, with a further £4m, it 
is a "sustainable" model that you have to pay to subscribe to. Predictably, the 
statistics for the current sign-up are not published but I know that in one LEA 
it is only 18%. Sustainable? Sustainable for whom? Not for the teacher in the 
school who can't, or won't, afford the subscription. Not for music education in 
general.

Mark Tinkler is artistic director of the English Pocket Opera Company 
<http://www.epoc.co/> 

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 