
Theatre

Oh! What a Lovely War
Theatre-maker Joan Littlewood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2013/sep/18/theatre-joan-littlewood-culture-fun-palaces>
 was a visionary, an iconoclast and a subversive. Her 1963 "documentary 
collage" about the bitter ironies of the first world war was way ahead of its 
time, using popular period song and hard-hitting testimony.Lyn Gardner Theatre 
Royal Stratford East <http://www.stratfordeast.com>, London E15 (020-8534 
0310), 1 February to 15 May.

Macbeth
Shakespeare's dark tale as you've never seen it before 
<http://macbeth.in/collections/macbeth>, taking place in a secret location from 
dawn to dusk. Party with Duncan, bed down in Macbeth's castle on the 27th floor 
of a tower block, glimpse the witches in an underground car park, and join the 
feast at which Banquo will be an uninvited guest. The spectres will be bloody – 
but the food will be vegetarian.LG Secret location 
<http://macbeth.in/collections/macbeth>, London, 4 April to 31 May.

Grit
This show brings together the talents of Scottish theatre hell-raisers Cora 
Bissett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/aug/27/cora-bissett-roadkill-edinburgh-interview>
 and Kieran Hurley to celebrate the life and music of Scottish musical 
shape-shifter Martyn Bennett. Add in Cirque du Soleil's technical director, 
Andrew Watson, and there should be plenty to see. Plays Tramway before heading 
to Mull for the midsummer weekend.LG Tramway Glasgow 
<http://www.tramway.org/Pages/home.aspx> (0141-276 0950), May.

A View from the Bridge
Belgian auteur Ivo van Hove has presented Shakespeare's Roman tragedies as a 
six-hour multimedia spectacular, and reworked Bergman's Scenes from a Marriage 
as a promenade production that collapsed into a full-scale fistfight. Whatever 
he ends up doing to Miller's operatic tragedy of an Italian longshoreman and 
his frustrated American dreams, expect the unexpected.Andrew Dickson Young Vic 
<http://www.youngvic.org/whats-on/a-view-from-the-bridge>, London SE1 (020-7922 
2922), 4 April to 24 May.

Adler & Gibb
Tim Crouch's return to the Royal Court focuses on the real-life relationship 
between conceptual artists Janet Adler and Margaret Gibb, once described as 
"the most ferociously uncompromising voice of their generation". Prepare to be 
discomfited.AD Royal Court 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/adler-and-gibb>, London SW1 
(020-7565 5000), 13 June to 5 July.

The White Whale
Slung Low's ambitious and futuristic Moby-Dick has an all-male, all-singing 
cast. Performed on boats and floating platforms in Leeds's canal district, it 
should be a leviathan of a show. Tickets free.LG Leeds Dock, 4-14 September. 
<http://www.slunglow.org>

Golem
Last time we saw them, the company 1927 considered rebellion and revolution in 
The Animals and Children Took to the Streets. Now they apply their sizzling 
blend of animation, live music and action to ask what happens when humans and 
machine become one.LG Young Vic, London SE1 <http://www.youngvic.org/> 
(020-7922 2922), 9 December to 17 January 2015.

Art

Hannah Hoch
Cut with a Kitchen Knife Through the Last Weimar Beer Belly – the title of 
Hannah Hoch's most notorious collage says it all. In Berlin just after the 
first world war, this revolutionary artist used scissors and paste to subvert a 
society. She belonged to the Dada movement that rejected the "civilisation" 
that murdered Europe's young men in four years of mud and blood. Hoch looks at 
her divided and turbulent times through the shattered lens of photomontage: 
chopping up images from newspapers and magazines, she reassembles them into a 
dream world of machines and monsters. Decades later, punk album covers were to 
echo her angry hilarious mayhem.Jonathan Jones Whitechapel Gallery 
<http://www.whitechapelgallery.org/exhibitions/hannah-hch>, London E1 (020-7522 
7888), 15 January to 23 March.

Vincent van Gogh: The Sunflowers
When the troubled, self-taught artist Vincent van Gogh got off a train in 
Arles in 1888, he wanted to start an artists' colony, "the studio of the 
south", and he turned the house he rented into a utopian vision of the simple 
creative life. To decorate The Yellow House he painted sunflowers – and this 
exhibition brings together two of his most powerful attempts at capturing their 
golden light.JJ National Gallery 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/the-sunflowers>, London 
WC2 (020-7747 2885), 25 January to 27 April.

Ryan Trecartin
The first UK solo exhibition by LA-based Ryan Trecartin, whose work divided 
audiences at the 2010 Liverpool Biennial when it was first shown here. People 
ran out, screaming, but maybe they were caught up in the infectious mayhem of 
Trecartin's absurd video installations. Cheap technological effects, fractured 
storylines, shrill and stilted dialogue in peculiar accents, over-the-top 
ensemble acting, cross-dressing, crowd control and violence, particularly to 
smartphones, are Trecartin's forte. His work surfs the post-internet age and 
plumbs the shallows of modern TV culture. Yet he has really got a handle on the 
contemporary condition, and his art is as ordered and critical as it is 
seemingly chaotic and complicit with modern banality. Whether as comment or 
symptom, Trecartin's work is both addictive and deeply queer. The exhibition 
will centre on Priority Innfield 2013, Trecartin's most ambitious project to 
date, last seen at the 2013 Venice Biennale.Adrian Searle Zabludowicz Collection
 <http://www.zabludowiczcollection.com/>, London NW5 (020-7428 8940), 2 October 
to 21 December.

Sigmar Polke: Alibis
This retrospective aims to show the German painter, sometime film-maker and 
sculptor in full. A founder, with Gerhard Richter, of Capitalist Realism (a 
rejoinder to British and American pop art) in the 1960s, Polke went on to make 
an enormous variety of hallucinatory, poisonous, gorgeous and unsettling works 
that still reverberate with a strange dark humour and trenchancy. Polke took 
painting to places it had never been, both in terms of imagery – quoting Goya, 
John Teniel's illustrations to Lewis Carroll, Richard Dadd, medieval manuscript 
illustrations, images of Concentration camp watchtowers and the patterns on a 
tea-towel – and technical innovation – he painted with poisons, soot and much 
besides – and was possessed of a demonic skepticism and playfulness. The more 
time goes on, the more powerfully Polke's art resonates.AS Tate Modern, London 
SE1 (020-7887 8888), 9 October to 8 February 2015.

Classical

Opus
Australian contemporary circus company Circa went where no acrobats have gone 
before with 2012's tour of cathedrals that melded Renaissance music to their 
own extraoardinary leaps and tumbles. Their next project, Opus, choreographs 
their physical feats of grace and beauty to the intensity of Shostakovich's 
String Quartets, performed on stage by the Debussy String Quartet.Imogen Tilden 
Barbican theatre, London EC1, 18-22 February.

Moses und Aron
If the highlight of opera in the UK in 2013 was Welsh National Opera's 
production ofAlban Berg's Lulu <http://tinyurl.com/nk9wp7x>, the company could 
repeat that success with its staging of another of the 20th century's great 
unfinished operas. No one has attempted to complete Schoenberg's magnum opus, 
but Moses und Aron is still an immense, spectacularly difficult undertaking for 
any opera company, complete with a notorious orgy scene to climax the second 
act. This production, directed by Josse Wieler and Sergio Morabito with John 
Tomlinson as Moses and Rainer Trost as his brother Aron, will be the first 
chance to see it on stage in this country for almost half a century.Andrew 
Clements Millennium Centre, Cardiff, 24 May to 7 June; Hippodrome, Birmingham, 
18 June; Royal Opera House, London WC2, 25-26 June.

Crowd Out
David Lang <http://davidlangmusic.com> began his composing career in the late 
1980s as one of the founders of Bang on a Can, the New York-based collective. 
Choral music has played an increasingly important role in his output – his 
hauntingLittle Match Girl Passion <http://tinyurl.com/nvzsud5> won a Pulitzer 
Prize in 2008 – but his latest project is on a far bigger scale. Crowd Out is a 
piece for 1,000 voices of all abilities on a text Lang created using the 
auto-complete function of an internet search engine, and will involve 
everything from whispering to shouting and clapping as well as normal singing.AC
Millennium Point, Birmingham <http:>, 8 June; Arnold Circus, London E2 <http:>, 
21 June.
 Visceral and visionary … Matthew Barney's River of Fundament. Photograph: 
Hugo Glendinning 
Matthew Barney
For the last few years, Barney's been working with composer Jonathan Bepler on 
The River of Fundament, partly based on Norman Mailer's novel Ancient Evenings. 
Having previewed it at the Manchester festival, English National Opera will 
screen the complete version this summer and it could be the wildest, most 
visceral, most visionary myth of creation and destruction you've ever seen. Or 
an exuberantly pretentious folly. The risk is the thing; there's no one and 
nothing like Barney.Tom Service Coliseum, London WC2 (020-7836 1111), from 29 
June.

TV

Jonah 
The Australian comedian Chris Lilley has followed his nation's greatest 
comedian – Barry Humphries – in creating an interacting array of fictional 
characters. His characters are based around Summer Heights High: a high school 
in Australia, which is being filmed for a TV documentary. Lilley has now spun 
off two of the characters – a Tongan immigrant and a posh girl – into series of 
their own: Ja'mie: Private School Girl and now Jonah. Which should raise the 
profile of this versatile and daring performer.Mark Lawson BBC3

Pop

Damon Albarn
Given that his recent projects have involved staging Chinese operas and 
chartering a train of African musicians across Britain, the notion of Damon 
Albarn releasing a solo album seems almost small-scale. Yet, amazingly, it's 
another first: he's never released a solo record before (Demo-crazy was a 
double EP, Mali Music a collaboration). The preview we've heard – all 20 
seconds of it – involves gentle piano and electronics, although Albarn calls it 
"folk soul" with added beats by producer Richard Russell. Oh, and as ever, 
there's talk of possible new Blur material in 2014 too.Tim Jonze

TV on the Radio
Renowned for their experimental take on traditional indie rock, perhaps the 
most surprising thing about TVOTR's comeback single Mercy is that it's so 
straight. Gone are the shades of funk, R&B and electronica in favour of a 
to-the-point, punky blast. Whether this will be indicative of their new album – 
their first since the death of bassist Gerard Smith – remains to be seen.TJ

Comedy

Analog.Ue
One of the most consistently interesting and experimental performers in UK 
comedy, Daniel Kitson brings his new is-it-comedy-or-is-it-theatre? show to the 
National – and this one sounds like yet another push at the formal envelope 
from the restless Yorkshireman. Reports from New York, where Analog.Ue 
premiered, suggest a play made up entirely of recorded text, with Kitson 
himself manhandling the equipment but not speaking a word. And all in aid of "a 
strangely hopeful story about what we learn from loss," in the words of the 
show's rave New York Times review.Brian Logan National Theatre 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/>, London SE1 (020-7452 3000), 25 February 
to 20 March.

Lynn Ruth Miller
You want daredevil? How about taking up standup when you're 70? That's what 
Lynn Ruth Miller did 10 years ago. Now the Ohio native is an Edinburgh fringe 
regular, and the current holder of the TO&ST cabaret award, which she bagged 
for her standup-and-songs show Granny's Gone Wild! "The wonderful aspect of 
Miller's set," wrote Time Out, which co-runs that prize, "is that she utterly 
embraces her age, without the slightest shred of sentimentality or solemnity." 
Miller also has a celebrated appearance on Britain's Got Talent under her belt 
(judge David Walliams called her "fantastic") – but don't hold that against her.
BL Soho theatre, London W1 (020-7478 0100), 11-22 March.

Miranda Hart
Her first live standup tour this spring is a gamble. Hart wasn't a 
well-established standup before she found TV stardom, and her experience is 
limited to a few middling solo character-comedy shows at Edinburgh. But Hart 
isn't fazed. "Yes, I would probably say I am more of an actress than a 
stand-up," she said in a recent interview (with herself). "But I hope that is 
what will make the show a bit different." And if not, well, at least the queen 
of slapstick is used to falling on her face and getting back up again.BL 
Bournemouth International Centre <http://mirandahart.com/> (0844 576 3000), 28 
February.
 Appropriately mysterious … Norman Foster's Virgin Galactic spaceport. 
Photograph: Nigel Young 
Architecture

Virgin Galactic Spaceport
Rising from the deserts of New Mexico like a winged creature burrowing up from 
the depths of the earth, Norman Foster's spaceport is an appropriately 
mysterious site from which to launch yourself into space. Designed to heighten 
the drama before blast-off, the building has a long axial entrance, funnelling 
visitors through a great cleft in the landscape past walls that depict the 
history of space travel, before depositing them beneath the undulating shell of 
the terminal building's roof. After long delays, Virgin's first commercial 
flights should begin this August. Foster, an avid pilot, is first in the queue.
Oliver Wainwright

Film

Frank
Michael Fassbender has played a serene cyborg, Bobby Sands, a slavemaster and 
a sex addict. But in 2014, he gets inside the most bizarre mind of all: Frank 
Sidebottom, aka Chris Sievey, the musician-comedian who wore a giant fibreglass 
head with a beautifully unreadable expression. Maggie Gyllenhaal and Domhnall 
Gleeson co-star in an one of the most improbable – but potentially riveting – 
biopics of recent times.Ben Beaumont-Thomas 9 May.

Foxcatcher
Steve Carell, that lovely man from the Despicable Me movies, whacks the dial 
round to full-on weirdo for a biopic of John Eleuthère du Pont, an eccentric 
multi-millionaire who was convicted of the murder of his friend, Olympic 
wrestling champ Dave Shutlz. Mark Ruffalo plays the ill-fated brawler, Channing 
Tatum's his brother and training partner. Carell's done drama before, but 
nothing this heavy.Henry Barnes

Dance

English National Ballet: Lest We Forget
For the centenary of the first world war, Tamara Rojo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tamara-rojo> has commissioned this 
fascinating-sounding programme for ENB. Akram Khan, Russell Maliphant and Liam 
Scarlett have all been invited to create works inspired by the cataclysm of 
1914-18.Judith Mackrell Barbican theatre, London <http://www.barbican.org.uk> 
EC2 (020-7638 8891), 2-12 April.
 