
Hi Donagh, what can you tell me about Askonas Holt?

Askonas Holt <http://www.askonasholt.co.uk/> is one of the world's leading 
arts management companies, specialising mainly in the field of classical music. 
We are agents for some of the greatest talent in the field – conductors, 
singers and instrumentalists – as well as arranging international tours for 
many outstanding orchestras and dance companies.

You're the company's new chief executive – what changes are you hoping to make?

I'm fortunate that I've taken over the leadership of Askonas Holt at a very 
healthy time. I'm not in a hurry to make major changes just for the sake of it. 
I intend to support the staff to continue to deliver excellent service, to grow 
the company, and to expand the territories in which we can work effectively. 
I'm keen to see the company utilise more of the exciting technologies around 
us; the artists should have access to information wherever they are, and I'm 
interested in the continuous development of our systems to ensure that we 
remain industry leaders.

You have an almost endless roster of artists – what's the key to ensuring it 
all runs smoothly?

The key is to trust your colleagues, delegate well and to support them with 
the tools they need to do their jobs effectively. With over 250 artists and 
more than 50 tours per annum, I cannot be the main contact for each artist or 
every tour, nor should I try to be. Our industry is all about going that extra 
mile and giving a personal touch to the service that we provide for our 
clients. We have a very strong team and I work hard to make sure that 
communication within the company is strong so that we can all share ideas, 
potential and problem-solving.

I already know many of the artists through my work previously as the company's 
director of tours and projects. I will continue to get to know them. I can't 
complain, I have a wonderful job for someone who loves music.

How do you handle a situation where you have an artist and venue at a 
disagreement?

Naturally we are often in the middle of a negotiation between a venue and an 
artist – that's the essence of what we do. Through openness and professionalism 
it is nearly always possible to come to a successful conclusion for all 
parties. Our role is to make the connections, enable conversations and to make 
things happen.

How do you approach the careful balance of building artistic credibility but 
also commercial success for your artists?

Artistic credibility brings commercial success; they are not mutually 
exclusive. Actually, that's how I believe Askonas Holt and our artists remain 
successful. If we are working for great artists, representing them well and 
remaining true to our mission, I'm certain that commercial success follows. 
When our artists are commercially successful, the company will also do well – 
after all, the majority of our income is earned through commission.

Does a more personal relationship help when managing artists, or is there a 
need to keep a certain distance?

Those who know me well will know that I'm not very good at keeping a distance. 
My way of doing business is to be close and approachable, open and honest.

You spent a lot of time on the road – what keeps you motivated?

I spend a lot of time on the road, attending concerts and accompanying 
orchestras on tour. I enjoy travelling, though with two children of my own I 
try to strike the right balance between time at home and life on the road. I'm 
also conscious of not spending too much time away from the office, so I can 
concentrate on leading the company forward and keeping my ear to the ground.

In terms of touring tips, I'm extremely good at sleeping on planes! I also try 
to go for a run while I'm away so I can see a little more than the inside of 
hotel rooms and concert halls.

It was sad to lose Claudio Abbado recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/20/conductor-claudio-abbado-dies-aged-80>
, who Askonas Holt worked with – do you have any fond memories of him?

Claudio Abbado's death is a huge loss; he was an extraordinary musician. 
Abbado was managed by Lies Askonas here in the UK, and subsequently by Martin 
Campbell-White, who worked with him closely when he was a principal conductor 
of the London Symphony Orchestra in the 1980s. We had concerts arranged for 
Abbado in London last year, but unfortunately he had to cancel at the last 
moment due to him being so ill.

I was lucky enough to work with him on some legendary concerts here in London, 
with the Berliner Philharmoniker and the Lucerne Festival Orchestra – who could 
forget his sublime Mahler 3 at the BBC Proms in 2007.

Donagh Collins is chief executive of Askonas Holt 
<http://www.askonasholt.co.uk/> – follow the company on Twitter @AskonasHolt 
<https://twitter.com/AskonasHolt>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 