
Hi Camilla, what can you tell me about the Royal Albert Memorial Museum and Art
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery?

Founded in the 1860s, the Royal Albert Memorial Museum and Art Gallery (RAMM 
<http://www.rammuseum.org.uk/>) was part of the mid-19th century movement for 
public education that saw many museums established in UK towns and cities. In 
our case it was all about bringing the world to Exeter.

The project here had huge local support and was funded through public 
subscription, creating a sense of community ownership of the museum – it's a 
legacy we still benefit from today. That grassroots support was incredibly 
important to us when we undertook the recent capital redevelopment project, 
expressing itself in the museum's vision and ambition. We reopened in December 
2011.

Why was the redevelopment needed?

The idea of joined up education is nothing new. In the second half of the 19th 
century, our building was repeatedly extended to eventually house a school of 
art, library and science laboratories. All of these activities eventually moved 
out, developing to become some of the region's key cultural institutions.

It all began at RAMM. With each departure, the museum expanded to occupy the 
vacated spaces. However, this incremental growth didn't make for a very 
coherent or sensible use of space, both operationally and for visitors. 
Addressing this was critical. Central to our planning was the flexibility of 
the visitor journey – audiences can now shape their visit by following their 
own personal interests, instead of a predetermined, prescriptive route.

The museum has a long and colourful history – does that heritage play a part 
in today's museum?

Our project was about transforming the museum for a new age, not reinventing 
it. RAMM has a distinctive character; a personality that visitors value. Local 
people in particular loved aspects of the old museum, so while they welcomed 
the investment, some were concerned the museum might be "spoiled" by its 
redevelopment.

Identification of this kind presents an interesting challenge. It required 
sensitive handling. I like to think that together, as client and design team, 
we successfully achieved the balance between old and new. Certainly, most of 
our visitors seem to think so.

What is the museum doing to encourage engagement?

As part of the redevelopment project, we spent a lot of time thinking about 
public outcomes. Crystallising the process down, our aim was for visitors to 
leave the museum enriched: thinking, seeing or feeling about the world in a 
different way. This led to our new strap line, RAMM: home to a million 
thoughts. We're home to more than a million artefacts, but the real magic 
happens when a human mind encounters an engaging object. In this sense, museum 
collections are powerful sources for thought.

Albert Szent-Gyӧrgyi, the Nobel Prize winner wrote: "Discovery consists of 
seeing what everybody has seen, and thinking what nobody has thought." We can't 
always predict the diversity and multiplicity of people's interactions with 
collections, but we are always looking for opportunities to engage with 
audiences to share thoughts and discussions, with us and between visitors. 
Maintaining and developing our dialogue with users is part of RAMM's DNA.

Is being a museum outside the capital an advantage?

The scale and the strength of local connections can be a huge benefit, 
bringing with them an organisational agility that supports innovation. A museum 
like RAMM occupies a more significant role in the wider cultural infrastructure 
than might otherwise be possible in the capital with its greater provision.

This can be very effective in establishing cross-cultural collaborations. In 
Exeter, the cultural sector is finding that by working together it's possible 
to make a real impact. We're at a very exciting moment; culture's contribution 
to economic development is high on the city's agenda. This is an important 
argument for everyone working in the sector, regardless of location.

What does it take to be a good museum manager?

• Energy – to create a sense of organisational momentum, to support 
development and improvement; you can't afford to stand still
• Creativity – to link the strategic priorities of your governing body and 
stakeholders to operational delivery
• Passion – you have to be passionate about what you do; if you don't believe, 
you cannot expect others to follow

As a museum manager, what could you not do your job without? 

The support of the team around me. The richness and depth of the museum is the 
sum of its many parts, making it a collective endeavour; however wonderful the 
building and collections, it is people that bring it to life.

Camilla Hampshire is museums manager and cultural lead at the Royal Albert 
Memorial Museum and Art Gallery <http://www.rammuseum.org.uk/> – follow RAMM on 
Twitter@RAMMuseum <https://twitter.com/RAMMuseum>

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> – this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 
 