
Television

True Detective 
Crime drama is always looking for new ways of dramatising a murder 
investigation: one killing investigated over 10 episodes; alternating 
viewpoints of cops, killer, victims and so on. However, in this ambitious 
series from HBO, multiple seasons will follow the search for a serial killer in 
Louisiana over 17 years, with each year introducing a new cast.Woody Harrelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woody-harrelson> and Matthew McConaughey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/matthew-mcconaughey> are in the first group. 
Either magnificent or mad.Mark Lawson HBO.

Penny Dreadful 
This has a remarkable lineage: it is produced by film and stage director Sam 
Mendes and John Logan, who wrote Skyfall for Mendes as well as Hugo, The 
Aviator and Gladiator. Its disadvantage may be the daring concept, in which a 
number of fictional horror story characters – Dracula, Frankenstein's monster 
and Dorian Gray – are living in Victorian London.ML Sky Atlantic.

Film
 Photograph: George Kraychyk 
Pompeii
This big-budget account of the eruption of Vesuvius is directed by Resident 
Evil'sPaul WS Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/mar/25/3d-buck-rogers-paul-ws-anderson>
 – not the most subtle hand on the tiller, perhaps – but the ever-so-literate
Julian Fellowes <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/julian-fellowes> has 
contributed to the screenplay. Still, we're talking blood, guts and death from 
above. Kit "Game of Thrones" Harington stars.Andrew Pulver 21 February.

Captain America: The Winter Soldier
Marvel Films just keep churning them out. This is the ninth recent derivation 
from The Avengers family, a follow-up to 2011's Captain America: The First 
Avenger, and a side-project of all those Iron Man and Thor movies. If the title 
is anything to go by, this one features the Cap's former sidekick Bucky, 
revived and transformed into a Soviet-era assassin. The usual Marvel crew are 
due to put in an appearance, led by Chris Evans and Scarlett Johannson 
(as Black Widow). We'll also get to see Robert Redford in his first superhero 
movie, as a senior Shield operative.AP 28 March.

The Amazing Spider-Man 2
Hands up if you think there's been too many Spider-Man films? Well, it doesn't 
matter: here's another, courtesy of studio Sony's desire to keep hold of its 
rights to the material. Admittedly, the new series of Marc Webb-directed 
webslingery infuses the Spidey story with a roughhouse, skater-chic charm, with
Andrew Garfield <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield> one of the 
classiest performers to ever don Spandex. Not too much has yet emerged of this 
one's plot, except that the Rhino (Paul Giamatti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-giamatti>) and Electro (Jamie Foxx) 
appear to be the big villains.AP April.

Dawn of the Planet of the Apes
Tim Burton's 2001 Planet of the Apes remake encouraged studio 20th Century Fox 
to punt a hopeful new series of the simian-bothering sci-fi. Now Cloverfield 
directorMatt Reeves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/02/dawn-planet-apes-director-matt-reeves>
 is in charge, filling in events well before the classic Charlton Heston story. 
Gary Oldman is the human talent, facing off against the apes.AP 17 July.

Sin City: A Dame to Die For
Almost a decade after the first instalment, here's a second collection of 
Frank Miller's sicko noir stories, with Miller again sharing directorial duties 
with Robert Rodriguez. Many of the same characters (and actors) are returning, 
including Mickey Rourke, Clive Owen and Bruce Willis; expect another dose of 
highly stylised comic-panel noir, with stunning visuals doing their best to 
compensate for the rampantly creepy sexism.AP 29 August.

The Hobbit: There and Back Again
Critical opinion has held that things have picked up with Smaug, after the 
bloat of the first film, An Unexpected Journey, so here's hoping Peter Jackson 
can keep the standard up. Presumably There and Back Again will take in the 
aftermath of the dwarves' takeover of the Lonely Mountain, their confrontation 
with the Wood-Elves and humans of Lake-town, and the climactic Battle of the 
Five Armies. After that, we'll all need a rest.AP 19 December.

Exodus
Ridley Scott is offering up a Cecil B DeMille-ish answer to Darren Aronofsky's 
Noah, by retelling the Moses story withChristian Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/christianbale> as the Jewish law-maker. Joel 
Edgerton is the Pharaoh Rameses, Sigourney Weaver the Pharaoh's mum Tuya, and 
Aaron Paul the Mosaic sidekick Joshua. As the founding myth of biblical Israel, 
this could be controversial territory, but Scott has successfully handled this 
type of tricky material before, in the crusades movie Kingdom of Heaven, and we 
expect him to be as agile here as before.AP 5 December.

Theatre

Shakespeare in Love
The film made Joseph Fiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/oct/18/joseph-fiennes>. And, 
thanks to a smartly self-aware script by Tom Stoppard and Marc Norman, wasn't 
too bad for Shakespeare either. Screen-to-stage musicals have become almost as 
predictable as traffic jams in the West End, but thanks to the involvement of 
adapter Lee Hall (Billy Elliot) and director Declan Donnellan (of Cheek by 
Jowl), hopes are high that this might not pale beside the Shakespearean glories 
of West Side Story and Kiss Me Kate.Andrew Dickson Noel Coward theatre 
<http://www.london-theatreland.co.uk/theatres/noel-coward-theatre/shakespeare-in-love.php>
, London W1 (0871 976 0072), from 1 July.

Miss Saigon
It's 25 years since this reworking of Puccini's Madame Butterfly – set in 
Saigon in 1975 as the Americans withdraw from Vietnam – opened in a production 
by the then little-known Nicholas Hytner. The Prince Edward is a smaller space 
for this epic love story from the writing team behind Les Misérables, so it'll 
be interesting to see if the reboot (and the famous helicopter scene) come off.
Lyn Gardner Prince Edward theatre <http://www.delfontmackintosh.co.uk/>, London 
W1 (0844 482 5155), from 3 May.

I Can't Sing!
In one sense, it doesn't matter if no one can, because apparently Simon Cowell 
already approves of Harry Hill's and Steve Brown's irreverent take on the story 
behind The X Factor. With the TV programme's ratings on the slide, this tribute 
to the show that gives birth to talented and talentless alike arrives at an 
intriguing moment.LG London Palladium <http://www.icantsingthemusical.com/> W1 
(0844 811 0058), from 27 February.

Fatal Attraction
No announcement on casting yet, but this Trevor Nunn-directed adaptation of 
the 1987 thriller about a New York lawyer who discovers it wasn't so smart to 
end his affair will need big names to bring it (and the bunny) to the boil.LG 
Theatre Royal Haymarket <http://www.trh.co.uk/>, London SW1 (020-7930 8800), 
from 8 March.

Art

Matisse: The Cut-Outs
There is no more enigmatic masterpiece of modern art than Matisse's Snail, a 
huge paper cut-out whose revolving planes of colour have been delighting 
visitors to the Tate since it was bought by the museum in 1962. A toddler can 
enjoy this work of art – and recognise the shape of a snail – but is it an 
image or an abstract decoration that happens to be snail-like? This feast of 
colour and movement that Matisse created in 1953 exceeds any possible pictorial 
intention. Matisse made his cut-outs when the art world was transfixed by 
American abstraction. Yet the French painter asks more profound questions about 
the nature of meaning in art than Jackson Pollock ever did. His Snail is a sly 
subversive mocking all attempts to interpret it. Promises to be the most 
popular and beautiful artistic event of the year.Jonathan Jones Tate Modern, 
London SE1 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/henri-matisse-cut-outs>
, 17 April to 7 September.

Vikings
The world shuddered. Monks in Lindisfarne lay awake listening for war cries. 
On the far side of the world, native Americans saw sails on the horizon. The 
Vikings were a power in the world, a demonic force of pagan mayhem that 
threatened to destroy the frail beginnings of Europe and even put a frostbitten 
toe in Newfoundland. Yet a lot of the time, these Scandinavians farmed and told 
stories. To be a "viking" was a seasonal occupation: it meant to go out on the 
summer seas looking for trouble. Destructive as these warriors were, their 
myths are fascinating, their art has a rugged splendour, and this show – which 
includes a real longship – should thunder like Thor's hammer.JJ British Museum 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/whats_on/exhibitions/vikings.aspx>, London WC1, 6 
March to 22 June.

Mondrian and Colour 
Two major shows focus on the impeccable Dutch abstractionist Piet Mondrian. 
Mondrian and Colour at Turner in Margate considers the significance of colour 
in his early career, bringing together around 40 paintings by the artist from 
the Gemeentemuseum Den Haag and other collections in Europe and the US. Tate 
Liverpool will present the concurrent show Mondrian and his Studios: 
Abstraction into the World. This will explore the artist's importance both as 
abstractionist and in his relationship with architecture and urbanism, and the 
spaces and places, in Amsterdam, Paris and New York, where he worked. The show 
will also include his wonderful 1914 series Pier and Ocean. Do that geometric 
boogie-woogie thing!Adrian Searle Turner Contemporary, Margate, 24 May to 21 
September; Tate Liverpool, 6 June to 21 September.

Colour
Colour in painting is as much the product of chemistry and the availability of 
pigments as it is of an artist's perceptions. Colour can be symbolic, it can 
imitate nature, it can be as earthy, ethereal and fugitive as it can be 
poisonous and exorbitantly expensive and rare. The history of painting is, in 
part, a history of materials and their uses. The development of impressionism 
andplein-aire painting was as much related to new industrially manufactured 
pigments and their availability in tubes as it was to artistic theory. Trade 
routes and artistic experiment, technical innovation and an almost alchemical 
search for the lost secrets of the old masters changed the way paintings looked 
and were made in radical and far-reaching ways. Each room will be devoted to a 
different colour, and will look at the National's own collection in relation to 
minerals, textiles, ceramics and glass on loan from major national and 
international cultural institutions.AS National Gallery, London WC2, 18 June to 
7 September.
 Photograph: The National Gallery 
Rembrandt: The Final Years
Forty paintings, 20 drawings and 30 prints by an artist doesn't sound a lot, 
but when the person we're talking about is Rembrandt and the focus is on the 
works he created in the last two decades of his life, expect something 
magisterial. Like late Titian, Rembrandt's style towards the end of his life 
became ever more frank and unconcerned with the kind of painterly 
decorum and detail expected by his patrons. With his churned-up surfaces, harsh 
lighting and dramatic settings, his manner achieved more than an illusion of 
directness. Nowhere is this clearer than in his drawings and etchings. And when 
we look at Rembrandt looking at himself, in his late self-portraits, we get the 
feeling that he just doesn't care what we think. Which is exactly what makes us 
care as much as we do.AS National Gallery, London WC2, 15 October to 
18 January 2015.

Architecture

Shanghai Tower, by Gensler
As America bickers over which of its towers is tallest, the new World Trade 
Center or the Sears Tower, China is busy building soaring totems that will 
outshine them all. Next year will see the completion of the gargantuan Shanghai 
Tower, the second tallest building in the world after the Burj Khalifa in 
Dubai, at 632 metres. Designed by anonymous corporate giant Gensler, it climbs 
in a spiral like a frozen whirlwind, captured in glass, housing a stack of 
offices, shops and vertical gardens, and accommodating up to 16,000 people.
Oliver Wainwright

Music

Mariss Jansons/Concertgebouw
The titan of the podium brings one of his ensembles – Amsterdam's 
Concertgebouw – to celebrate Bruckner's symphonies. An orchestra steeped in 
Bruckner's existential symphonic experiences with a conductor who's never been 
bolder.Tom Service Barbican, London EC2, 3-5 April.

Antonio Pappano: Verdi Requiem
Few conductors today bring out the drama of Verdi better than Pappano. His 
2009 recording of the Requiem with his Rome-based Orchestra of Santa Cecilia 
won rave reviews, not only for its moments of blazing theatricality, but also 
for its finely crafted details and quality of intense inwardness. For these two 
UK concerts he's joined by top-notch soloists, including tenor Joseph Calleja, 
in what promises to be an unbeatable live experience.Imogen Tilden Symphony 
Hall, Birmingham, 16 May; Royal Festival Hall, London SE1, 18 May.

John Eliot Gardiner: Monteverdi
Fifty years ago a Cambridge undergraduate assembled a group of singers to 
perform what was then still an extreme rarity, Monteverdi's great 1611 setting 
of the Vespers, in King's College Chapel. Those singers formed the nucleus of 
what became the Monteverdi Choir and have continued their close association 
with that concert's conductor,John Eliot Gardiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-eliot-gardiner>, ever since. On the 
exact anniversary Gardiner and his choir and orchestra, the English Baroque 
Soloists, return to King's to recreate that debut; even though Monteverdi's 
Vespers is much more familiar now than it was in 1964, it is always thrilling 
to hear it live.AC King's College Chapel, Cambridge  
<http://tinyurl.com/ocf6dnn>(01223 769342), 5 March.
 Photograph: Kevin Winter/Getty Images 
Adele
Will Adele's third album really be inspired by "modern jazz"? That's just one 
of the rumours doing the rounds, although nothing has been made official just 
yet.Tim Jonze

Coldplay
When it comes to Coldplay's sixth album, there's nothing official out there. 
But rumours suggest the wheels are in motion for a 2014 comeback of some 
description: what with them playing small gigs in Somerset pubs and releasing 
music for theHunger Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142857/hunger-games> soundtrack. 
According to rumour, it'll be a May/June release, although we were particularly 
amused by the one that went out on a limb to predict that it might sound like 
"a mixture of new and old Coldplay".TJ
 