
Hi Jenni, can you tell me a bit about Camden Arts Centre?

Camden Arts Centre <http://www.camdenartscentre.org/> is a space for 
contemporary visual art with an internationally known programme of exhibitions 
and education projects, where a strong emphasis is placed on making art as well 
as showing it. Our splendid building, a former library, was renovated 10 years 
ago with the addition of a café, specialist bookshop and a leafy garden.

It still retains an atmosphere of learning, contemplation and discovery that's 
reflected in the choice of artists we work with, who are invited to make 
something new or to present an existing body of work that is close to their 
heart and has a current relevance. This supports a major aspect of our mission, 
which is to make the thinking and making processes of artists more visible to a 
wider public.

You've been director since 1990 – what are the big lessons you've learned in 
that time?

The centre has been through so many changes that it honestly doesn't feel that 
long. We've never had huge financial resources to call upon and this has taught 
me the importance of doing things as simply and directly as possible. An 
economy of means makes you ever more resourceful and realistic about what an 
artist can successfully achieve in their exhibition or project. Building and 
maintaining a good staff team who care about the values of the centre has been 
essential in establishing the trust of those who fund us, the other 
organisations we work with and, of course, our artists and visitors.

I have also learned that it usually pays to put complete trust in an artist 
once you have made the decision to work with them; it makes things risky in a 
good way. When you have been doing something for a long time you have to keep 
on your toes and seek out what you don't know as much as what you are already 
familiar with – I have always discovered more from going to the underground, 
grassroots artists' spaces and student shows than I have from Art Basel or 
FriezeArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Fair.

I like that you give tours and exhibition talks personally – could directors 
be doing more on the front line?

All gallery directors are on the front line in one way or another. I happen to 
enjoy talking to people about art; it's what I did in my previous job at
Whitechapel Gallery <http://www.whitechapelgallery.org/> and when teaching in 
art schools. Being with the public is what we are here for, particularly as 
part of our mission is to assist in creating a dialogue between the art we show 
and the very different visitors to the centre.

I always consider an exhibition, a performance or a film screening as a 
thinking machine, not a fixed entity – it is important to extend this dialogue 
about the work with visitors.

The arts centre has its own residency programme – what's the key to making 
sure both the artists and the centre get the most out of it?

The main thing for all the artists is for them to have time and space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/jul/03/artist-in-residence-schemes-top-tips>
 to think and experiment with their ideas. Many of our artist alumni talk about 
their residency as a time where they made significant changes in what they were 
doing – Mike Nelson, Martin Creed, Enrico David and Anne Hardy were cases in 
point where the work they made at the centre took them in new directions. It's 
important that expectations are clear from all sides and that artists will be 
supported by the whole organisation; they need to know who they can call on for 
assistance and advice.

How is the arts centre funded, and how are you working towards a more 
sustainable model?

Our core revenue funding comes from Arts Council England through the national 
portfolio. It was a big blow to us when Camden Council withdrew their regular 
support two years ago. While we have always had to fundraise from individuals 
and trusts and foundations to be able to deliver our programme, we have to 
substantially increase both our raised and earned income streams in order to 
maintain an adequate income level.

The centre has been fortunate to have some very generous and loyal supporters 
who have given consistently over the years, but our task now is to keep 
widening the pool of donors along with everyone else in the London arts sector. 
Our exhibitions and most of our activities are free for all and we are asking 
those who can afford it to join ourFriends scheme 
<http://www.camdenartscentre.org/support/friends> to ensure we can keep it this 
way.

Finding working partners to share costs is a successful way of bringing 
budgets down and we are looking very closely at how we might earn more income 
through our summer schools and courses, artists editions and art services. We 
are always thinking of ways of making cost savings on fuel bills and materials 
that also help sustain the environment – as I mentioned earlier, we have become 
expert at doing a lot with a little.

Where does your passion for the arts come from?

I was passionate about art at school and was determined to go to art school. 
After a foundation course at Rochdale College of Art I went to Maidstone to 
study fine art, which in the late 60s and early 70s was a brilliantly open and 
vibrant place to be. Looking at art and visiting galleries in London opened up 
a new world of possibilities. I moved to London after graduating and did 
various bits of teaching in art schools and also working on art projects with 
young people. Gradually, I became more interested in education and getting 
other people involved in art rather than being an artist.

Jenni Lomax is the director of Camden Arts Centre 
<http://www.camdenartscentre.org/> – follow the centre on Twitter @CamdenArtsCtr
 <https://twitter.com/CamdenArtsCtr>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 