
Hi Brendon, what can you tell me about DigVentures?

It's a running gag in our profession that if we had a pound for everyone we 
met at a party who said: "wow, an archaeologist. I've always wanted to try 
that," we would be considerably better off.DigVentures <http://digventures.com/>
 was started as a response to this intangible and wonderful public fascination 
with archaeology, launching the world's first crowdfunded and crowdsourced
excavation at Flag Fen <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-17211285>
, an internationally important bronze age site near Peterborough.

Our motto is: archaeology in your hands. Everything we do is about finding new 
ways to give people the chance to participate. It's fun for us and for them, 
plus we get help, both in terms of crowdsourced labour and financial 
assistance. This is the "ventures" part of what we do and over the past year 
we've raised over £55,000 in seed funding from a global network of supporters. 
This sum has gone on to leverage four times that amount for our project 
partners in match funding. With a 30% loss of jobs in our sector, that's no bad 
thing.

What is it about archaeology that captures the imagination?

It joins the dots between so many other subjects in the sciences and 
humanities. Pablo Picasso wrote: "the purpose of art is washing the dust of 
daily life off our souls." I think archaeology is similar, but with less 
washing and more brushing! If you draw a Venn diagram with art on one side and 
science on the other, archaeology would sit in that sweet spot in-between.

Like art, archaeological artefacts can be aesthetically pleasing, but its true 
power lies in inspiring us to think differently about our lives and 
surroundings. It can shock, intrigue, impress and delight us, but it's only 
through a rigorously applied scientific method that we can break through the 
layers of contemporary bias. This continual challenge to see the past as it 
really was brings a clarity of vision for the present and an imagination that's 
unafraid of engaging with new possibilities.

You mention new possibilities; in what ways has technology changed archaeology?

Archaeology <https://www.theguardian.com/science/archaeology> has been a real 
magpie when it comes to technology, adopting and adapting innovations developed 
in other sciences and applying them to our own. From the molecular level (DNA 
analysis) to the macro level (3D landscape modelling using drone technology) we 
routinely use techniques that were unimaginable to archaeologists a generation 
ago. I think of these as sustaining innovations in that they don't disrupt the 
status quo, but merely help archaeologists deliver increased value.

What impact do planning conditions have on your work?

Planning conditions are the oxygen of our profession. There are about 4,800 
professional archaeologists working in the UK – 70% of those are involved with 
planning-led archaeology with the rest working in universities or museums. As 
well as sustaining a workforce of skilled archaeologists, this work has led to 
the identification and excavation of a vast number of previously unknown dig 
sites.

Archaeology has grown into a commercial industry embedded with environmental 
risk management. While it has led to an increased professionalism, it has also 
come at the cost of our connection with the wider public. The adventure of 
digging has become the exclusive preserve of experts, hidden behind building 
site hoardings or locked up in ivory towers.

The closest most people can get to archaeology now is watching a TV special 
years after the original discoveries were made. By cutting ourselves off from 
the wellspring of public interest, we run the risk of becoming completely 
irrelevant. We need to find a way to work fundamental outreach and 
participation into the system, as well as servicing the necessary planning 
conditions.

Do you think the work being done behind the scenes gets its due in exhibitions?

One of the most fascinating aspects of the new Vikings exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/feb/27/british-museum-vikings-show-nordic-noir-longboat>
 at the British Museum was seeing material that had been excavated recently, 
such as the Ardnamurchan boat burial and the Harrogate hoard. The museum did a 
very good job of ensuring the exhibit captured up-to-the-minute research and 
Gareth Williams, the curator, has discussed how the exhibition took longer than 
expected to prepare because they had to keep making changes in order to 
accommodate new material.

The process of archaeology is hard to show or represent. Time Team did a very 
good job of demystifying it, taking archaeologists out from behind the 
hoardings where we normally work and planting us in your grandmother's garden. 
That was a great step forward in showing the public the behind-the-scenes 
action, but I'd really like to see more exhibitions along the lines of Vikings, 
where recent discoveries help to lead the direction of the final product.

I would love it if the arts and culture sector more widely could see how our 
discipline feeds into its own, rather than viewing archaeology as something 
separate from what they do.

Brendon Wilkins is projects director at DigVentures <http://digventures.com/> 
– follow it on Twitter@TheDigVenturers <https://twitter.com/TheDigVenturers>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 