
Graphic novels

A new Superman
2014 looks set to be a big year for comics, and a great year for Grant 
Morrison, with the long awaited Multiversity due to strike in the second half 
of the year. The nine-issue miniseries will feature seven stories set on 
parallel Earths in the DC multiverse, including Earth-23, a world where the 
majority of the heroes are black, including Superman who is also, secretly, 
President of the United States.Laura Sneddon

Film

Jack O'Connell
With his trapezoid chin, O'Connell could easily make a tween pinup, but for a 
tinge of unpredictability – which he gets to exercise to full effect in Starred 
Up, a prison drama that could be this generation's Scum. Already 
tabloid-friendly following his relationship with Tulisa, O'Connell is ready to 
transcend the gossip pages.Ben Beaumont-Thomas

Joel Edgerton
Like Channing Tatum before him, Edgerton is set to continue his passage from 
roughly sanded beefcake to smoothy rounded actor. After strong turns in Animal 
Kingdom and The Great Gatsby, he'll next appear in Ridley Scott's Exodus as 
Ramses, and out-glower Michael Shannon in Midnight Special – he's even written 
Felony, a detective drama in which he stars.BBT

Quvenzhané Wallis
Wallis became the youngest best actress Oscar nominee for her role in 
magical-realist drama Beasts of the Southern Wild, aged just six. Now a veteran 
at 10, she's appearing in Oscar-hoover 12 Years a Slave and playing the 
quintessential tot role, Annie, on the big screen alongside Jamie Foxx; Jay Z 
and Will Smith are producing.BBT 
 Seizing the minute … Oscar Isaac in Inside Llewyn Davis. Photograph: 
Allstar/Sportsphoto Ltd 
Oscar Isaac
"He seizes that minute like a motherfucker," was T Bone Burnett's assessment 
of Oscar Isaac's turn in the Coen brothers' Inside Llewyn Davis, the story of 
New York's 60s folk scene that Burnett helped score. Isaac steals the film from 
co-stars Justin Timberlake and Carey Mulligan in the most downbeat way possible.
BBT 24 January.

TV

Andy Samburg
In the post-30 Rock American sitcom landscape, there's not much to cling to. 
Cue Andy Samburg, currently of Lonely Island, to save the day with Brooklyn 
Nine-Nine. Samburg plays a childish detective; Andre Braugher his strict 
captain and, despite that hokey premise, it's very funny – it has already been 
nominated for two Golden Globes.Stuart Heritage E4, January.

Keith Akushie
Keith Akushie's IMDb page currently lists one entry, as a writer for a single 
episode of Fresh Meat in 2011. But in 2014, that will change. Akushie has 
written a new sitcom for BBC3 called Siblings, starring Charlotte Ritchie and 
Tom Stourton. We don't know how funny it'll be. But fingers crossed.SH BBC3, 
spring.

Theatre

Kate O'Flynn
Debuting at the National Theatre last year, Kate O'Flynn blew us away with her 
portrayal of a young woman in working-class Stockport. Now she's taking on a 
role just as juicy in Shelagh Delaney's A Taste of Honey.Andrew Dickson 
National Theatre <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/a-taste-of-honey>, 
London (020-7452 3000), 10 February to 5 April.

Blanche McIntyre
Since she first leapt to prominence with her unsettling production of Dawn 
King's Foxfinder in 2011, McIntyre has been regarded as one of the hottest 
directors around. Her latest project is attention-grabbing: nine one-act plays 
by Noel Coward, performed as a cycle and spanning the full gamut of Coward's 
writing.AD Nuffield theatre, Southampton (023-8067 1771) <http://www.ett.org.uk>
, 24 April to 24 May, then touring.

Dance

Yonah Acosta
Yonah Acosta was voted last year as one of ENB's emerging talents. This year, 
his feisty personality and technique will be showcased in the role of Mercutio, 
which he'll be dancing alongside his uncle Carlos.Judith Mackrell Royal Albert 
Hall, London SW7 (020-7589 8212) <http://www.ballet.org.uk>, 11-22 June.

Francesa Hayward
The media has a bad habit of dubbing any promising British dancer "the next 
Darcey", but Francesa Hayward's talent is very much her own. She makes her 
debut this February in the virtuoso challenges of Ashton's Rhapsody.JM Royal 
Opera House, London WC2 (020-7240 1200) <http://www.roh.org.uk>, 8 February.

Comedy

Aisling Bea
When Aisling Bea won the biggest prize for rookie comedians, So You Think 
You're Funny?, in 2012, she became only the second woman to do so in 25 years. 
The sheer comic force of this actor-turned-standup is irresistible.Brian Logan 
Soho theatre, London (020-7478 0100), 27 January to 1 February.

John Kearns
The absurdist strand of British humour found a new hero this summer, when 
26-year-old John Kearns upset the odds and bagged the Edinburgh comedy award 
for best newcomer. One critic instantly bracketed the rookie with Spike 
Milligan, Vic Reeves and Bob Mortimer. No pressure, then, as Kearns reprises 
his award-winning set at Soho theatre.BL Soho theatre 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com>, London (020-7478 0100), 13 to 31 January.

Pop

Sam Smith
After guesting all over other people's records in 2013 – including 
Disclosure's Latch – Sam Smith is set to emerge as a star in his own right, 
with debut album In the Lonely Hour due in May.Tim Jonze

Banks
Banks is one of several artists – along with FKA Twigs and Kelela – whose 
vision of R&B emphasises the intimate. She's the most commercial prospect of 
the pack, thanks to a keen ear for melody and pop-honed production.TJ
 Slinky … Say Lou Lou 
Say Lou Lou
Say Lou Lou have been creating a buzz for nearly 18 months with a series of 
slinky, seductive pop songs. Now they're on the BBC's Sound of 2014 longlist, 
with an album due in spring.Michael Hann

Jazz

Spring Quartet
Supergroups make jazz fans suspicious, but the members of the newly formed 
Spring Quartet are such creative performers that all anxiety fades.John Fordham 
Birmingham Town Hall (0121-780 3333), 4 April; Sage, Gateshead (0191-443 4661), 
5 April; Barbican, London EC2 (0845 120 7550), 7 April.
 