
Chris Grayling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>, the 
justice secretary, celebrated the successful deportation of Abu Qatada to 
Jordan on Sunday by saying the long-running saga meant there would have to be 
"wholesale changes" in Britain's human rights laws.

The home secretary, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, also promised she would 
remove "the many layers of appeals available to foreign nationals we want to 
deport".

Liberal Democrat sources accepted the need to change "the phenomenally long 
deportation procedures in this country", but said it was perverse to call for 
withdrawal from the European convention on human rights on the day it had been 
shown the ECHR was not incompatible with Abu Qatada's deportation.

The radical cleric was finally flown out of Britain under police guard in the 
small hours of Sunday morning and has spent his first night in a Jordanian 
prison cell facing terrorism charges.

Jordanian military prosecutors in Amman questioned the 53-year-old for two 
hours as he pleaded not guilty to charges of conspiring to carry out 
al-Qaida-inspired terror attacks on Israelis, Americans and other westerners in
Jordan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan>. The allegations relate to 
plots to carry out bombings between 1998 and 2000.

He has already been convicted in his absence and sentenced to life 
imprisonment and hard labour but those convictions have been suspended before a 
fresh trial. His lawyer, Tayseer Thiab, said Qatada would apply for bail today, 
on the grounds that he returned voluntarily and that his father is in ill 
health. The father and son saw each other for about 10 minutes in an emotional 
reunion in whichAbu Qatada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada> knelt 
and kissed his feet.

In a statement issued through his lawyer, Abu Qatada said: "I'm happy to be in 
my country again. I came back voluntarily, because I'm innocent, so I wish the 
court will accept my bail application."

Abu Qatada left on a privately chartered jet that took off from RAF Northolt 
at 2.46am on Sunday, more than 12 years after he was first arrested in the UK 
in February 2001. In 2005, he was identified by the UK authorities as someone 
who "poses a continuing threat to national security and a significant 
terrorism-related risk to the public". Abu Qatada, whose real name is Omar 
Mahmoud Othman, has previously been described as Osama bin Laden's righthand 
man in Europe.

On arrival in Jordan, he was whisked away in a green SUV escorted by a 12-car 
convoy manned by masked anti-terrorism police, to a state military court. His 
father, Mahmoud, and three brothers were waiting for him and were allowed to 
see him briefly in the prosecutor's office.

His brother Ibrahim said Abu Qatada "looked well and in high spirits" and 
neither Britain nor Jordan had used handcuffs. Asked about the meeting, he said 
tearfully: "How do you think I felt seeing my brother after 22 years? Look at 
my eyes and you'll know the answer."

Prosecutors said the Bethlehem-born Jordanian was expected to be detained for 
15 days, pending further questioning. Thiab said his client "told military 
prosecutors that he is not guilty of terrorism and rejected the charges against 
him". Abu Qatada was taken later to the maximum security Muwaqqar 1 prison.

The charges of conspiring to carry out terror attacks in Jordan relate to a 
foiled plot against an American school in Amman, and the alleged targeting of 
Israeli and American tourists and western diplomats.

Keith Vaz, chairman of the House of Commons home affairs select committee, 
said it had taken Home Office lawyers too long to conceive of the treaty with 
Jordan to allay Abu Qatada's fears that evidence extracted through torture 
would be used against him. "Only 446 days after the home secretary said Abu 
Qatada would be on a plane shortly, he has finally reached the end of the 
runway," Vaz said.

It was recently disclosed that the fight has cost the taxpayer more than £1.7m 
since 2005, including £647,658 for Abu Qatada's legal aid costs and more than 
£1m in Home Office legal costs. May said she would be proposing reforms to the 
immigration bill in the autumn and restricting appeals linked to the right to 
family life in the ECHR. She said longer-term work was also under way on a 
British bill of rights for inclusion in the Tory manifesto, so opening the way 
for UK withdrawal from the convention, something she has backed.
 