
Role

I am one of 11 probation officers based in the Belfast intensive supervision 
unit, supervising people convicted of violent or sexual offences. Most are on 
licence following release from prison – they are still serving a sentence but 
can live in the community. I develop risk management plans for how each person 
can be managed in the community to prevent them from reoffending.

I work with people who have offended, as well as liaising with other 
professionals and the police, prisons and social services. Sharing information 
with others is critical. Protecting the public and making communities safer is 
our first priority.
 Lesley Bell, probation officer. Photograph: Probation board for Northern 
Ireland 
How I got where I am

I knew from the age of 16 that I wanted to be a probation officer, when in the 
summer holidays I spent time volunteering and came into contact with a 
prisoner’s family. In the early 1980s inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/northern-ireland>, probation 
officers started as trainees and they worked for a year while also training in 
social work. I began a degree in psychology, but a year in the goal posts 
changed, and a social work qualification was required before becoming a 
probation officer.

I revised my plans and after graduating in psychology spent two further years 
studying social work. Once I qualified, the probation board for Northern 
Ireland didn’t recruit for another number of years. I worked as a residential 
social worker with young people until 10 years later, when I finally became a 
probation officer. Social work definitely prepared me for my current job, as I 
understand what it’s like when people’s lives haven’t gone according to plan.

A typical day

There is a lot of variety and autonomy in my work. There’s the planned aspect 
of working with people who have been convicted in a court of law, preparing 
assessments and court reports, then working with those who have gone through 
the court process, spent time in custody and are subject to licence conditions 
on release. Communication is essential in my job. People subject to licences or 
orders need to know what is expected of them and what they can expect from me 
in helping them to change their lives.

Home visits are an important part of working with people who have offended. 
Sometimes I am accompanied by a police officer, particularly when dealing with 
individuals at a high risk of reoffending. This has been helpful to me when 
supervising sexual and violent offending cases.

Over the years I have worked with people who have committed serious offences. 
Some don’t show any empathy towards their victims, but others fully understand 
and are deeply affected by what they have done. I worked with one young man who 
had been convicted of causing death by dangerous driving. He was deeply 
affected by the harm and trauma he had caused to the victim’s family. He also 
felt that he had completely ruined his own and his family’s life. Part of my 
challenge was helping him come to terms with what he had done. This aspect of 
probation work is generally not seen. In working with him I had to look at the 
factors contributing to his offending, and in particular his home 
circumstances. I worked with him and his family to help him turn his life 
around.

'One person had her housing benefit stopped while in hospital giving birth'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jun/19/one-person-had-her-housing-benefit-stopped-while-in-hospital-giving-birth>
A motivational, respectful approach and belief in the individual’s ability to 
change is essential to my practice, treating people as I would want a family 
member to be treated. I worked closely with someone recently who had severe 
problems with addictions and had relapsed. I helped him persevere and move on 
when he felt that all was lost. Many others that I have worked with have been 
encouraged to return to education, and find a purpose and meaning in life.

The issues affecting my work at the moment

One of the biggest challenges we face is carrying out our work against the 
backdrop of reducing financial resources. We constantly need to be innovative 
and creative in our practice.

The moment I’ll always remember

Early in my career an 18-year-old I was working with was murdered in Belfast. 
When you work closely with someone and something as tragic as this occurs it is 
incredibly sad, and this is when the support from your colleagues and team is 
essential.

What I love about what I do

I love working with people and helping them to change their lives. It’s a 
privilege that they put their trust in me. There’s a real sense of satisfaction 
when you see someone turn their life around and stop offending, and in going 
the distance with them.

One thing I wish I’d known when I started out

That I don’t need to feel responsible for people’s choices, as long as I have 
acted with integrity and have done what I needed to.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 