
At the Cup of Nations two years ago, as Junior Agogo enjoyed unlikely double 
acclaim as sex symbol and international striker, Asamoah Gyan endured the 
darker side of the Ghanaian public's mood. Derided after a series of missed 
chances, he walked out on the squad, vowing he could never play for his country 
again, and was only persuaded back by sympathetic team-mates. Seeing how 
demoralised he was, how his confidence had sunk to the level that the abuse had 
become self-fulfilling, it seemed possible that he would struggle to play any 
kind of football again.

His redemption since has been remarkable, speaking of great mental fortitude, 
and this afternoon he represents the main threat to Egypt's hopes of lifting a 
third successiveAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> title. Gyan has 
blossomed since a move from Udinese to Rennes and has been central to the 
progress of Milovan Rajevac's side. He has scored two of their four goals but, 
more than that, he has proved himself the model of the modern leader of a line.

"I always thought Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> would do 
well if he played well," said Abedi Pele, arguably Ghana's greatest ever 
player. "He is very good and you can play him alone up front. He's composed and 
fast, good at dribbles, good in the air. He has all that. But in the 2008 Cup 
of Nations, he was unlucky, and he missed all the chances that he had, and so 
he couldn't play. The fans got on his back and then he was injured."

Gyan may be ungainly, but it is his ability to hold the ball up and his 
ceaseless movement that occupies opposition defences and allows Ghana to field 
as many as four creators in midfield – a rarity in west Africa where, since the 
days of Pele and Nigeria's Jay-Jay Okocha, the game has become increasingly 
direct and based on power.

His goal against Angola in the quarter-finals was typical, as he drifted 
behind the centre-back Francisco Zuela, opening the angle for Kwadwo Asamoah – 
at 21 perhaps the most promising midfield creator on the continent – to loft a 
long, diagonal ball into his path. Gathering it, Gyan held off Kali, Angola's 
libero, and with great awareness and technique, clipped a precise low finish 
past Carlos Fernandes. His goal against Nigeria, bulleted in from a near-post 
corner, was rather more prosaic, but underlined what a threat he poses at 
set-pieces, a vital part of Ghana's armoury given their largely defensive 
strategy.

Given he scored the fastest goal in the 2006 World Cup, when he reportedly 
drew admiring glances from Manchester United and Arsenal, it is easy to forget 
that Gyan is still only 24. It's hard to know whether he is more surprised by 
his own change of fortune or by the progress of an inexperienced Ghana side 
who, missing a host of established players through injury, including Michael 
Essien, have been able to play without the pressure of expectation. "It's 
unbelievable," he said. "We're a young team and nobody gave us a chance of 
reaching the final."
 