
So the warm-up Ashes, the undercard to this Australian summer's title fight, 
are over, disappearing over the horizon at The Oval amid a dorky fireworks 
display, bad English dancing, and some arguments over the correct use of light 
meters that killed anyone with an IQ higher than 57. In any other decade, this 
would have been cause for national anguish in Australia on a scale not seen 
since 'Baby' John Burgess was cut as host of Wheel of Fortune and replaced with 
Tony Barber. But this is post-Warne-McGrath Australia, a country of short 
faith, its near-past glories gone forever, resigned to little but still vaguely 
expectant of much. Another defeat at The Oval would have sapped morale, already 
at a historic ebb, to the point of total depletion. But a buccaneering 
declaration, some lusty hitting and fisticuffs over the fading light mean 
Australia end these Ashes with something to salvage for the return series.

The contrast in Darren Lehmann's demeanour from earlier in the series says 
much. At Lord's, the cameras panned constantly to the face of the Australian 
coach as he took in the unfolding disaster from the balcony, his bald pate and 
lined, mortified mouth giving him the look of an out-manouevred Renaissance 
consigliere surveying the tableau of his strategy's destruction from a window 
set high on a villa in flames. At The Oval, as the trophies were being 
presented at the end of the day's play, Boof the Medici was gone and in his 
place stood the reassuringly fatty and jolly presence at the heart of 
everything good about Australian cricket. As Lehmann moved from player to 
player, mouthing words of encouragement and issuing bum pats in the manner of a 
solicitous, if overly physical, uncle, the message seemed to be: Boof the 
Medici is dead; long live Boof the Boof. After the horror shows of Lord's and 
Durham, hope for Australian cricket, to a limited degree, has been restored.

Australia can find encouragement in almost every area of play as the nation 
looks forward to Brisbane. Each of the Australian players, with the possible 
exception of Ryan Harris, has had to contend with his own small storm of 
criticism throughout this series, none more so than Shane Watson. In the final 
Test, Watto finally came good, delivering on the promise of that Samson-like 
front foot while simultaneously remedying, for a time, its great deficiency. 
The top order now has a pleasingly varied tempo to it, the hangdog, 
Stakhanovite persistence of Chris Rogers complimenting the meaty left-right 
combination of Dave Warner and Watson, as thick-cut and filling as ham off the 
bone, to offer the promise of something other than inevitable collapse every 
time Australia begin an innings. Michael Clarke remains, on his day, one of the 
world's best batsmen - and this series has provided confirmation, once more, of 
his great sense of adventure and mischief as a captain. Steven Smith's 
wonderfully tempered century at The Oval, mixing moments of aggression with 
long passages of intense patience and concentration, confirmed his place as the 
great Australian discovery of the series.

Our pace attack remains as strong as any in the world, with Harris at The Oval 
both confirming his status as the series' most consistently excellent fast 
bowler, and correcting his own historical status as the most regularly injured 
person in Australia. Nathan Lyon appears to have settled Australian cricket's 
post-Warne Spin Question - once again and for now, at least. Even the 
debutant's performance at The Oval was encouraging. James Faulkner's bowling 
action means he collapses into each delivery like soggy fusilli, but he showed 
throughout this last Test that he's cooked through with far more al dente 
stuff. Yes, his outburst about England's negative tactics on the third day was 
slightly water-brained; but at least it showed a lust for combat. With his 
unselfish hitting through both innings at The Oval and his astute, surprisingly 
sharp bowling, Faulkner has surely done enough to be handed another start when 
the teams resume hostilities at the Gabba in three months.

Watson, Smith, Faulkner, Harris. Despite deep flaws to the exercise revealed 
earlier in the series, Australian cricket's Anglo-Saxon immigrant experiment 
now looks set to continue. The selectors will persist with these men, 
emboldened by the small signs of encouragement glimpsed at Old Trafford, 
Chester-le-Street and The Oval to continue their brave journey into the choppy 
waters of Anglo-Saxon empowerment. Hats off to them. (In saying this, I'd like 
to emphasise that I have many, many Anglo-Saxon friends. They're good people, 
overall; Australia should give them a chance.) Beyond that, and setting the 
cheap cracks to one side, the Australian team can at least legitimately now 
argue, despite the shambles of Trent Bridge, Lord's and that single session at 
Chester-le-Street, that it is a team on the up.

Australia will be both deeply frustrated at, and dimly encouraged by, the 3-0 
scoreline - especially since this England team presents as an unlikely band of 
conquerors. In physical bearing, there's something feather-light, 
non-cricket-seeming, about most of these English. Joe Root looks like he's at 
the cricket in the breaks between choir practice. Alastair Cook strikes me as 
the kind of guy who introduces himself as "Alastair, yeah" and has taken on the 
England captaincy as a part-time summer lark before returning to his regular 
job as a snowboarding instructor and après ski party promoter in Val d'Isere. 
Graeme Swann looks like he's just chucked in for a quick bowl before heading 
back up to the pub for a cheeky pint and a flutter on the stage at open mic 
stand-up night. Simon Kerrigan and Chris Woakes, meanwhile, dibble-dobbled 
about the field in the final Test like a couple of high school mates briefly 
distracted on their way to watch a movie. Kerrigan's contribution in 
Australia's first innings, in particular, was not so much left arm orthodox as 
left arm mumblecore, the kind of ambling, directionless, soft-bellied bowling 
you could build a whole Noah Baumbach screenplay around, less a series of 
cricket deliveries than a statement about Young People Today.

The exception to all this, of course, is Stuart Broad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stuart-broad>. Broad, who gets about the 
cricket field like he's playing the on-screen role of an evil, sunken-eyed 
child genius who was raised on a diet of whipped cream and liver and has kept a 
jar collection of preserved rat brains on the mantelpiece of his bedroom since 
the age of 12, is alone among the England XI in presenting a straightforwardly 
dislikeable front to the world. He has embraced his role as Australia's chief 
tormentor with Blofeldian glee in this series; England can learn much from his 
example. If we are to be crushed in Australia as well, could we be crushed by 
more dependably villainous opponents?

The serious point, if we need to insist on one, because let's be clear, it's 
been said by many others and is in any event quite bland, is that Australia and 
England have been incredibly closely matched throughout these Ashes. But 
Australia have been at their best when there's been seemingly nothing to play 
for; their passages of dominance have been timed to coincide almost perfectly 
with dead rubbers or the imminent arrival of rain. The English, meanwhile, have 
shuffled through whole sessions seemingly disengaged, before snapping 
thrillingly to life at the times where it has mattered most. Australia arguably 
won more days this series, on balance; but England won almost every decisive 
moment.

England's superiority has been a pure achievement of temperament, the 
nervelessness and focus that come, perhaps, with greater experience. But will 
that temperament hold in Australia? With Rogers, Warner, Watson and Clarke 
seemingly confirmed as the top four, who will fill in for the Australians at 
five? Will England persist with Jonny Bairstow, and how will they manage their 
pace attack on what is expected to be a far more varied menu of pitches than 
has become the norm in recent Australian summers? How will Australia cope 
should both Harris and James Pattinson be unavailable? And what will become of 
Ed Cowan?

Okay, let's be honest – no one really cares about the answer to that last 
question. With the next five just three months away, these first five Ashes 
Tests were never going to reveal definitive answers to anything, but simple 
sketches of answers to be confirmed or revised come January. Let's not force a 
coherent narrative onto events that are still in the process of figuring 
themselves out. From Shane Watson and the mysteries of Ryan Harris' physique to 
the precise thinking that went in to Stuart Broad's haircut, there are many 
things in the rivalry between these two teams we still don't understand. But 
that's where Australian cricket finds itself now; we're more certain of what we 
don't know than what we do. That's not a bad position to be in, despite the 
apparent thrashing Australia have just been subjected to. Roll on 21 November 
and the Gabba.
 