
England received apologies from the International Cricket Council and the 
founder of the Hot Spot thermal imaging technology after the dismissal of 
Jonathan Trott for his first golden duck in Test cricket had marred another 
memorable day of Ashes cricket in Nottingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/11/ashes-ashton-agar-first-test>.

They took the highly unusual step of seeking clarification from the ICC after 
Trott had been given out lbw by the third umpire, Marais Erasmus, who overruled 
the original not-out decision of Aleem Dar even though the crucial Hot Spot 
angle was not available to determine whether the ball had hit bat before pad.

That infuriated England, who were left tottering at 11 for two in their second 
innings after conceding a first-innings lead of 65 to a remarkable last-wicket 
stand, with the team director, Andy Flower, immediately demanding an 
explanation from the match referee, Ranjan Madugalle. Confirmation is expected 
on Friday that Dave Richardson, the ICC chief executive, conceded to the 
chairman of the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board, Giles Clarke, that Erasmus 
made a mistake.

Meanwhile Warren Brennan, a New Zealander who adapted the Hot Spot technology 
for cricket, contacted the ESPN Cricinfo website to confirm Sky's claim that 
the "glitch" which cost Trott his wicket was down to "operator error".

Brennan explained that the operator in question had not "triggered the system 
for the Trott delivery" because he was waiting to offer a replay of the 
previous ball from which Joe Root was given caught behind down the leg side. 
Root was left to regret his failure not to call for a review, as those replays 
showed no proof that he had edged Mitchell Starc's delivery.

"The operator sat on the Root delivery in order to offer a replay from the 
previous ball and did not realise until it was too late that he should have 
triggered the system for the Trott delivery as the priority," said Brennan. 
"Simple mistake, something that anyone could have made but my Hot Spot operator 
has worked on the system since 2007 and to my knowledge this is the first 
serious mistake he has made."

England's greater complaint was with Erasmus, not only for overturning Dar's 
not-out decision despite the absence of all necessary evidence but also for 
reprieving Ashton Agar much earlier in another wildly fluctuating day. It will 
long be remembered fora historic debut innings by Australia's debutant Agar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/jul/11/ashton-agar-australia-england-first-test>
 that charmed Trent Bridge, but by the close its appeal had long worn thin on 
England.

They were convinced that Agar, the grinning Victorian teenager whose 98 was 
the highest score by a Test number 11, should have been dismissed in single 
figures when Erasmus turned down a loud stumping appeal.

Neither Flower nor any other ECB officials commented publicly, leaving Jimmy 
Anderson, who claimed three of five Australia wickets that tumbled for nine 
runs in the space of 31 balls to reduce the tourists to 117 for nine, to face 
the media.

"Trotty hit the ball and he's been given not out, so it's very frustrating, 
yeah," said Anderson. "Whatever happened after that I'm not too sure. It is 
frustrating that it got overruled, overturned, so I'm not sure what went on."

He also confirmed that Matt Prior was confident he had stumped Agar, although 
Anderson had the grace to offer warm praise for the teenager's remarkable 
innings.

"I'm sure it will be looked back on as one," the Lancastrian said when asked 
if he considered the last-man stand a great Ashes moment, although he added: "I 
probably didn't think that at the time. It was a pressure situation and he 
coped with it really well and really did frustrate us for a while."

Agar was finally dismissed by Stuart Broad, who passed a morning fitness test 
on his bruised shoulder, trying to reach his century with a boundary, caught at 
deep midwicket by Graeme Swann – who rushed to intercept him on the way back to 
the pavilion to shake his hand as Agar received a standing ovation from 
everyone in the ground.

Agar's partnership of 163 inside 32 overs with Phil Hughes, who ended unbeaten 
on 81, set another record for the 10th wicket in Test cricket, earning 
Australia a first-innings lead of 65 – whereas had the youngster been given out 
stumped by Erasmus, England would have led by 84.

Starc's dismissal of Root and Trott then left England in real trouble in their 
reply. But Alastair Cook and Kevin Pietersen dug on their considerable ability 
and Test experience to bat through the evening session in a patient and 
disciplined third-wicket stand that has so far added 69 in 34 overs.
 