
This was an odd time for an audition. The notion of Moeen Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/moeen-ali> taking over from Adam Lyth as 
Alastair Cook’s opening partner in the UAE has been suggested and Moeen was 
soon at the crease on Sunday. However, he was – after the decision to employ 
Mark Wood as a nightwatchman – batting at No9. Wilfred Rhodes famously went 
from No11 to the top of the order in his England career but somehow any 
parallel between Rhodes and Moeen seems a tad tenuous.

But Moeen was facing a new ball and initially he played and missed at it half 
a dozen times. Well, that was quite a good start. Playing and missing is so 
much better than nicking off.

Moreover, when Moeen misses he looks wonderfully unconcerned by the event, 
which is all part of the battle.

Moeen has never opened the batting in first-class cricket so his elevation 
would be a bit of a punt. He has opened often enough against a white ball and 
he is very likely to continue in that role in the one-day matches against 
Australia, which start next week. And he has always batted at three for 
Worcestershire. So there are some grounds for thinking such a gamble might work.

Moeen would probably prefer the considerable challenges of opening to 
continuing as England’s No8. In this series he sits at No3 in the averages as 
well as being the third highest England runscorer, despite batting so low. At 
the very least it has been an error by England to persist with him batting 
below Jos Buttler for the entire series, especially when it became apparent 
that Buttler was struggling for form. Cricketers are not so inflexible or 
sensitive that their confidence is shattered by a change of one place in the 
order.

Or, at least, they should not be. In fact, it may well have been beneficial to 
Buttler to drop down the order. This would have given him a little more time to 
recover from the rigours of keeping wicket, which he has done well in this 
series. It would also have taken the pressure off just a fraction when batting 
had suddenly become such a complex operation for him.

It would be an imposition to cast Moeen in an uncharacteristic role. But such 
is his phlegm he would be prepared to do it. He does not have many similarities 
with Cook, but he is certainly a better cover driver of the ball. His presence 
at the top of the order is likely to get the spectators in on time. It would 
also allow England to play an extra spinner in their Test team in the UAE 
without sacrificing any of their pacemen.

This notion of an audition will be extended in the ODIs when Moeen will 
probably be strolling out with Alex Hales, who has been scoring runs for 
Nottinghamshire in all forms of the game at a most appropriate time. Hales, 
partly through that familiar process of elimination, is now emerging as a Test 
candidate.

Ashes 2015 ratings: How England’s and Australia’s players shaped up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/ashes-2015-ratings-england-australia>
He would also be a bold choice, who is noted more for his power than his 
technical prowess. He is another who would demand a prompt arrival at the 
ground.

If either is given the job in the UAE, England’s batting line-up would have an 
even more gung-ho feel to it. In fact, England would be well advised to 
consider the balance of their batting line-up. Currently there is no shortage 
of strokemakers, who can be exhilarating and exasperating in equal measure. It 
is a line-up which may bring raptures of pleasure if Jonny Bairstow, Ben Stokes 
and Buttler happen to have a good day.

But there is a very strong case for a bit more pragmatism, some ballast. There 
is Cook at the top of the order, who is prepared to dig in. There is an 
argument for one other sticker. Hence the attraction of a Gary Ballance, back 
in form – and he has justhit a century for Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/22/sussex-yorkshire-county-championship-match-report>
 – at No5.

It has always been an oddity that Ballance has been stationed at 
three for England, albeit with considerable success last summer. He got there 
thanks to the old elimination process again. For whatever reason, there was a 
reluctance to put Ian Bell or Joe Root there, so Ballance gladly picked up the 
mantle. The simple fact is that he has usually batted at five for Yorkshire, 
below Root, and up at Headingley they get a lot of things right nowadays. They 
know how to get the best from Ballance.

Meanwhile, back at the Kia Oval Moeen was left with the tail and he was last 
man out, having an almighty waft outside the off-stump. He would probably not 
have played such a shot had he been batting up the order. But, such is Moeen’s 
eagerness to have a go, this cannot be regarded as an absolute certainty.
 