
Michael Clarke took exception to umpire Aleem Dar getting physical in a fiery 
mid-pitch confrontation over bad light, as the Ashes finished amid high-drama 
at The Oval on Sunday.

The ICC is likely to examine the ugly incident and also post-match comments 
from Clarke, when he revealed the reading on the light meter on Sunday was 
vastly inconsistent with earlier in the series Bad light also cost Australia 
valuable time in the third Test at Old Trafford.

Play was abandoned on day five of the fifth Test with England needing 21 runs 
from four overs to pull off a stunning win. The draw left the crowd irate, 
jeering Clarke during the post-match presentation on the field.

However the gripping series finale wouldn't have been possible without 
Clarke's bold declaration which set England 227 runs to win in 44 overs.
Clarke was fuming at the amount of time it took umpires to call for the light 
meter.

When Mitchell Starc ran out player-of-the-series Ian Bell on the last ball of 
that 40th over, Clarke got in Dar's face to make his point and reacted angrily 
to the umpire prodding him away with his left hand which was holding the meter.

"I remember Aleem touching me and I asked him politely to not touch me because 
if I touched him I'd be suspended for three matches," Clarke said. "That's all 
I can remember, coincidentally.

"From my point of view I have no issue. I just know a player is not allowed to 
touch an umpire."

Clarke said on the podium that he was baffled at the discrepancy between the 
readings at Manchester and The Oval, but refused to elaborate at the post-match 
press conference, acknowledging that his original comments may land him in 
trouble.

"I think the concern from our players was the reading was taken so late," he 
said at the presentation to a chorus of boos.

"I think the reading in Manchester was 8.1 and then today it was 5.7 but at 
the end of the day what do you do? You do your best and try and set up a game 
and unfortunately home fans (react angrily)."

Clarke continued at the post-match press conference: "I'm not going to get 
into the numbers. I think I did up there (on stage). I will probably get in 
trouble for it...," he said.

While the attacking declaration of Clarke was a win for Test cricket, 
inflexible ICC rules regarding bad light robbed fans of a result.

Clarke wouldn't be drawn on whether laws needed to be altered, as he digested 
a 3-0 series loss and a ninth straight Test without a victory - the longest 
winless streak since Allan Border's side went 14 matches without success in 
1985-86.

However, he did avoid becoming just the third captain to lose a Test in which 
he declared twice.

A brilliant 62 from 55 balls from England star Kevin Pietersen set up the 
possibility that Australia could suffer their worst-ever series result on 
English soil.

Clarke said he had no regrets about playing to win.

"That's the way I'd like to see cricket played and I'd certainly like to lead 
the Australian team playing in that type of manner," he said. "We had nothing 
to lose."

England scored at just two runs an over on day three, yet when Clarke declared 
at 6-111 on the final day they finally decided to come to the party and provide 
some entertainment for fans, finishing on 5-206.

Ryan Harris took the crucial wicket of Pietersen to finish the series with 24 
wickets at 19.5 and be named Australia's player of the series.

Harris was forced off late with a right hamstring strain, but he'll have 
plenty of time to rest up before the summer.

"His stats are as good as anyone's who I have ever played with," Clarke said.

James Faulkner made an outstanding debut, taking six wickets across the two 
innings on day five.
 