
Opinion was divided. For the England players the innings of Ashton Agar was 
horrible. For everyone else, even ardent home supporters, provided they 
possessed a touch of humanity,it was a joyous, refreshing fairytale, in which a 
gifted, carefree cricketer let his instincts run riot gloriously 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2013/jul/11/ashton-agar-australia-england-first-test>
.

In the process Agar just may have changed the course of an Ashes series.

It all happened so swiftly. One moment Australia had lost five wickets for 
nine runs, which was bound to induce a feeling of invincibility among the 
fielding side. The next Agar was stroking the ball to all corners of Trent 
Bridge with Phillip Hughes reduced to the role of startled junior partner.

The cricket was breathtaking, as if scripted by Tom Tully (for it was he who 
was responsible for a good majority of the Roy of the Rovers comic strips). It 
provided a wondrous spectacle unless you happened to be sitting on the England 
balcony. On that balcony, the bowling coach David Saker, a sympathetic man but 
also a straight talker, might have allowed for a few extenuating circumstances. 
England were on such a roll that they might have been seduced by the thought 
that the last wicket was bound to fall at any moment.

But of more relevance to England's coaching staff is the fact that their 
bowling attack went from irresistible to irredeemable in the space of 
half-an-hour. They were slow to recognise that Agar was an imposter and they 
could not induce another error from him until he fell for 98.

Even before Thursday's heroics the word was that this talented young cricketer 
bats as well as he bowls. England discovered that the hard way.

Expertly led as ever by Jimmy Anderson, they bowled beautifully for the first 
hour. The principle was simple, obvious and familiar, a probing length just 
outside off-stump. But so often, against all logic, the method that has worked 
so well for an entire innings (almost) is deserted when the last pair come 
together.

The pursuit of bouncers, yorkers, any sort of magic ball to take the final 
wicket, is so tempting. The problem was that Agar is not – and never will be 
again – a No11. Thus he lapped up all those run-scoring opportunities. This was 
not so different to playing for his university side in first-grade cricket in 
Perth.

Moreover that partnership highlighted the disparities within the England 
attack. Anderson and Graeme Swann, though both suffered from Agar's strokeplay, 
are in control of the ball. Steven Finn andStuart Broad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stuart-broad> do not always give that 
impression at the moment.

Finn's two wickets on Wednesday night 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jul/10/england-australia-first-test-trent-bridge>
 were critical but there remains a confusion. Does he aim for pace or swing? 
Has the notion of a stock ball deserted him (he did not seem to aim for any of 
those against Agar)? As in the Ashes series of 2010-11 when Finn was dropped 
after three Tests despite taking 14 wickets, he is leaking runs fast, which is 
not part of the grand plan.

Broad was hamperedon Thursday by his bruised upper arm and the fact that he 
was introduced when Agar and Hughes were flowing. So looking ahead there is a 
form issue with Finn, a fitness one with Broad and the increasing possibility 
that England will not embark on the next Test match with the same attack. 
Certainly selection will not be as easy for England next time around.

Meanwhile there could be some preening among the Aussie selectors, except that 
they are really not the preening types. So far the choice of Hughes (not an 
automatic selection) looks good; so does that of Steve Smith (not in the 
original party) after his half-century. And then there is Agar (not in the 
original party nor even in the match programme), who produced an innings as 
enchanting as any in Ashes history. For those of us lucky enough to be at Trent 
Bridge on Thursday we will remember that – rather than England's inability to 
"hit the right areas"- for years to come.
 