
The chances are you might not know a great deal about Cristian Raimondi, but 
it is a nice line in self-deprecating humour that he calls himself CR77. 
Raimondi has had what they know in Italy as apacco postale career, going from 
club to club like a game of pass the parcel before returning to Atalanta and, 
at the age of 31, scoring his first goal inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>.

He is 34 now and a right-back by trade. But then he was asked to experiment as 
a winger when Atalanta took onRoma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> 
last season andIl Messaggero summed up rather neatly what happened next. “For 
one afternoon,” it observed, “the modest Raimondi became Cristiano Ronaldo’s 
older brother.”

His opponent that day was Ashley Cole – three Premier League titles, seven FA 
Cups, one Champions League and 107 international caps – and the player many 
consider to be the finest English left-back there has been was subjected to the 
kind of ordeal that made it tempting to wonder if the same panicking thoughts 
flashed through his mind as Gary Neville experienced forManchester United at 
West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/01/west-bromwich-albion-manchester-united-premier-league>
 on New Year’s Day 2011. Neville’s decision to retire was made on a toilet at 
half‑time, trying to work out how he had just made “Jerome Thomas look like 
Ronaldo”.

Roma agree to terminate Ashley Cole’s contract one year early
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/14/ashley-cole-roma-left-out-squad>
Raimondi’s first nutmeg came after 54 seconds. Maxi Moralez scored from the 
cross and Cole was given such a chasing for the rest of the match it felt like 
a trick of the mind to remember that when it came to the real Ronaldo there was 
once a time this was the only left-back you would consistently back to get the 
better of him.

A month earlier, Bayern Munich left their calling card at the Stadio Olimpico 
and Cole was taken off at half-time with the score at 5-0.It finished 7-1 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AJxsHXfb6gw>, Roma’s worst home defeat since 
an equally heavy beating by Torino in 1947.La Repubblica’s verdict was that 
Cole had been “massacred” by Arjen Robben.Gazzetta dello Sport gave him three 
out of 10 andIl Messaggero accused Cole of letting Robben “play cat and mouse 
with him”. But at least Roma were confronted by one of Europe’s genuine 
superpowers. Atalanta, on the other hand, finished 17th last season. “If it’s 
Robben who knocks you out, you’ve got an excuse,”Corriere della Sera said. “If 
Raimondi is the one to do it, you’ve got a problem. A serious problem.”

Cole was excluded completely when Roma began the new season at Verona on 
Saturday night, not even warranting a place among the 12 substitutes. Nobody 
should expect him to feature in Rudi García’s 25-man squad for the Champions 
League and, while all the focus has been on John Terry’s durability over the 
past week, it is Cole, the younger man by 13 days, whose career probably 
deserves our epitaphs.

It happens to them all at some point. They tell themselves they will quit when 
they start to slide and then one day they wake up and they realise they already 
slid. “Age,” Wilfrid Diamond wrote inThis Guy Marciano, “is a mighty important 
subject for a champion, because it is the only opponent he can’t lick.”

Very often, it is others who see it first judging by the story Roy Keane tells 
of the day he broached the subject of retirement with the Celtic manager, 
Gordon Strachan. Keane’s hip had been distressing him for longer than he wanted 
to remember. Waking up, his joints sounded like popcorn. Strachan agreed 
without a moment’s hesitation that it was for the best and that, for Keane, was 
that. “And I was saying to myself: ‘Try to persuade me. At least pretend.’”

Terry is not immune to the same processes and he has been putting his body on 
the line for so long now it is a surprise that he has lasted to this age, a few 
months shy of his 35th birthday, without coming under the kind of sustained 
scrutiny he has had to endure recently.

As it is, let us not forget the Chelsea captain would have been a worthy 
recipient of last season’s player-of-the-year awards. The decline can be quick 
in football but, generally, players don’t lose it that rapidly and it has 
certainly been intriguing to see the difference in the way Terry’s ordeal
against Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/16/manchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 last Sunday was reported compared to what happened to Michael Carrick, a 
player of the same age, during Manchester United’s Champions League qualifier
against Club Brugge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/18/manchester-united-club-brugge-champions-league-playoff-first-leg>
.

Carrick scored an inelegant own goal and played with uncharacteristic 
carelessness before being substituted at half-time. He was dropped for 
Saturday’sgoalless draw against Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/22/manchester-united-newcastle-united-premier-league-match-report>
 but, as yet, there has been absolutely zero focus on whether he has, in the 
parlance of the game, shot it. Louis van Gaal was not asked about it either at 
Friday’s press conference or directly after the match.

The truth is straightforward: both players are now at the juncture of their 
careers where it is unreasonable to expect them to go through the grind of 
playing every week in a league where there is Prozone data showing the speed 
has gone up 20% in five years. That, however, doesn’t necessarily have to be a 
scary thought if it is handled sensibly, without some of the snap judgments we 
have seen over the past week.

It was one of the areas where Sir Alex Ferguson excelled and Neville, one of 
the players who reaped the benefits, called it perfectly when he argued that 
Liverpool ought to have done the same withSteven Gerrard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/16/steven-gerrard-premier-league-liverpool-la-galaxy>
 rather than moving out all that experience and presence. Liverpool play at 
Arsenal on Monday and their new captain, Jordan Henderson, is likely to miss 
the match through injury. When the other players look around the dressing room 
beforehand one imagines they would all feel rather more assured if Gerrard was 
among their number, no matter his diminished powers.

In Cole’s case, the process has been much more jarring. Roma have pulled down 
the shutters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/14/ashley-cole-roma-left-out-squad>
 and it would be no surprise if we hear in the next few weeks that an agreement 
has been made to settle the rest of his contract. Cole would then be free to go 
travelling and take himself away from the sport after talking recently about 
the way he had “been to so many beautiful countries and never got the chance to 
see them”. Or maybe he could join the semi-retirement home of Major League 
Soccer, and become the third member of England’s 100 Club, beside Gerrard and 
Frank Lampard, to have one last hurrah.

No doubt his time in Rome will be cited as another example of English players 
being unable to acclimatise outside their own country, the old Ian Rush quote 
about it being “like living in a foreign country”, and all that.

Tot up the number of overseas players in English football who struggle to fit 
in, collect their money and then disappear and my guess is you will quickly 
lose count. It just tends to get noticed more when it is an Englishman abroad 
because there are fewer of them who have the gumption to try it.

Cole has embraced Italian life and at least he gave it a go, but García lost 
trust in him last season, just as José Mourinho did the year before that at
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, and his position was 
not helped when a slack backpass let in Manchester City to score during their 
pre-season fixture in Melbourne. He has started four games since getting the 
runaround from Raimondi and the difficult truth is that Cole’s time with Roma 
will probably be best remembered for the awkwardness of a team photograph when 
he can be seen standing apart from the rest of his colleagues, separated from 
the group and wearing the body language of someone unsure whether he should 
join in.

Francesco Totti adopted the same pose in the follow-up photos. In pre-season 
it was Radja Nainggolan’s turn to stand on the outside. They are laughing with 
Cole, rather than at him. Yet there will be soon be a time when Cole is not in 
the picture at all and Roma are shot of the playerCorriere della Sera has 
condemned for “unbearable lightness”.

If this is the end, it has been a sorry way to go but it is difficult to take 
issue with the verdict of Mimmo Ferretti, one of Rome’s leading football 
writers. “Whoever thought Chelsea were drunk out of their minds for letting 
Cole go for no money must now say alunghissimo mea culpa,” he wrote.

Burnley start burning money too late

When the news came through that Bristol City had bid £9m for the Brentford 
striker Andre Gray a message on Twitter flashed up. “Wow,” it said. “World’s 
gone mad.” That was the personal account of Burnley’s head of press (one of the 
better press officers, incidentally) and, yes, we probably all know where Gray 
ended up.

The fee is being held up as another sign of football’s excesses and it is 
certainly startling that there are second-tier clubs – one just promoted from 
League One – who are now willing to throw that kind of money at a player the 
Premier League teams have decided to pass up.

The alternative argument is that the riches are so extreme in the top division 
now that if Gray helps Burnley win promotion it will be money well spent.

It does, however, raise the question of why Burnley did not show that kind of 
transfer-market ambition before being relegated from the Premier League last 
season.

David Sullivan puts foot in it over Charlie Austin

Charlie Austin did not take David Sullivan’s comments out of context, as the 
West Ham United co-owner would like everyone to think, because there really is 
no grey area when someone floats the idea that a potential transfer is too 
risky because “they say he has no ligaments in his knee, who knows?”

The impression it left was that Austin was a physical wreck and, if anything, 
Sullivan should probably be relieved the Queens Park Rangers striker does not 
want to take it any further. Sullivan’s supposed apology was actually a 
non-apology and he clearly doesn’t see, or isn’t willing to admit, how damaging 
his words were.

Maybe he has no cells in his brain, who knows?
 