
Avid Life Media (ALM), the corporate parent of hacked extramarital dating site 
Ashley Madison <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison>, is 
being investigated by the US Federal Trade Commission according to the 
company’s new executive team.

Appointed in April, the new chief executive, Rob Segal, and the president, 
James Millership, have been given the job of righting ALM in the aftermath of 
the hack,which saw the entire membership register of Ashley Madison posted to 
the internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madison-hackers-release-10gb-database-of-33m-infidelity-site-accounts>
. Over the following year, ALM lost more than a quarter of its revenue, as 
worried members fled the company’s portfolio of dating sites.

While they are aware of the FTC’s investigation, neither Segal nor Millership 
know what precise aspect of the company is being examined. As well as the hack 
itself, the perpetrator of which is still unknown, the breach exposed several 
other potential red flags in the company.

Most damningly, the database suggested that a huge proportion of the female 
users of the site were in fact fake accounts, created and operated by Ashley 
Madison to lure men into using and paying for the site. When the “fembot army” 
was first exposed, by tech site Gizmodo,Ashley Madison denied the allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/02/ashley-madison-denies-allegations-of-fembot-army>
, saying that the reporter had “made incorrect assumptions about the meaning of 
fields contained in the leaked data”.

However, ALM later commissioned its own report into the creation of user 
accounts, from independent auditors Ernst & Young, and found that the company 
had indeed made fake profiles, which were then run automatically to impersonate 
real women.

According to the report, those “fembots” ran until late 2015, although the 
company stopped using them in the US, Canada and Australia earlier. Another 
American company had been forced by the FTC to pay a fine of $616,165 similar 
practices in 2014.

ALM said it does not know the focus of its own FTC investigation, but asked by 
Reuters about the fembot messages sent to US customers, Segal said: “That’s a 
part of the ongoing process that we’re going through … it’s with the FTC right 
now.”

ALM is trying to recover from the hack, and has positioned the two new 
executives as the starting point of its push back to respectability. In a 
statement, Segal apologised for the hack, and said the company was trying to 
make amends.

“A year ago, Avid Life Media was silenced by a devastating, criminal hack that 
affected our company and some of our members,” he said. “The company is truly 
sorry for how people’s lives and relationships may have been affected by the 
criminal theft of personal information. That’s why we’re charting a new course 
and making some big changes.”

The company has hired cyber security experts at Deloitte and expects to reach 
the first level of Payment Card Industry compliance, an industry standard, by 
September.

 “We had to basically reinvent their security posture,” said Robert Masse, who 
leads Deloitte’s incident response team. His team, hired by the company in late 
September, found simple backdoors in Avid Life’s Linux-based servers.

One unexpected result of the hack: a surge in popularity for Ashley Madison 
itself. Apparently taking the stance that lightning doesn’t strike twice, more 
than 4m new accounts were made in the four months after the hack,according to a 
counter on the site 
<http://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/264382-ashley-madison-membership-swells-following-hack>
.

ALM’s new leadership expressed little desire to lose that membership pool, but 
said they would be moving some focus away from infidelity: a big change for a 
site which once advertised with the tagline “life is short, have an affair”.

 “We certainly feel that the Ashley Madison brand can be repositioned,” Segal 
said. The new Ashley Madison website focuses instead on “discretion”, and 
advertises itself to people wanting to explore polyamory or same-sex 
relationships as much as it does to those wishing to cheat on partners.

The site does concede that “there are still men and women seeking an affair on 
Ashley Madison, but we don’t let that define us and neither should you”.

• Life after the Ashley Madison affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/28/what-happened-after-ashley-madison-was-hacked>
 