
As Ian Rush once infamously admitted to much mirth, it was like living in a 
foreign country. Yet after a career that has taken him from the streets of 
Stepney Green to Arsenal, Chelsea and 107 caps for his country, the prospect of 
starting a new life in Italy at the age of 33 will surely not fazeAshley Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-cole> in quite the same way.

It is now more than 25 years since Rush left the cozy confines of Anfield for 
an ill-fated season at Juventus and, besides a Gazza-inspired post-Italia 90 
splurge of players that included David Platt and Des Walker plus Paul Ince’s 
relatively successful spell at Internazionale,Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> has not been particularly 
kind to British players over the past two decades.

After David Beckham’s brief sojourns at Milan which ended with a torn achilles 
tendon that ruled him out of the previous World Cup, the most recent Englishman 
to try his luck in Italy was Jay Bothroyd, last spotted turning out for the 
mighty Muangthong United in Thailand despite only winning his solitary England 
cap in 2010. Having befriended Al-Saadi Gaddafi when the tyrant’s son signed 
for Perugia in 2003, Bothroyd’s adventure ended after two years as the club ran 
into financial difficulties and he was forced to swap the glamour of Umbria for 
deepest south-east London and Charlton Athletic.

Under Roma’s ambitious Italian-American president James Pallotta, Cole should 
encounter no such problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/07/roma-ashley-cole-proposed-move>
. TheGiallorossi finished as runners-up behind all-conquering Juventus last 
season – their highest placing for five seasons – and with the progressive 
French coach Rudi García in charge for a second season, they are dark horses 
for a decent run in the Champions League having already signed several 
promising players including the Belgian midfielder Radja Nainggolan from 
Cagliari and the Argentina starlet Leandro Paredes, plus the experienced Mali 
midfielder Seydou Keita.

The question is whether Cole, not exactly known as the sharpest tool in the 
box despite his distinguished career on the pitch, has the requisite acumen to 
succeed after so many years cocooned by the financial rewards of the Premier 
League? Desire should certainly not be a problem given the nature of his public 
shunning by the England manager Roy Hodgson and thedecision to take an untested 
teenager to Brazil instead of a player who has been among the best defenders on 
the planet for more than a decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/11/ashley-cole-left-out-england-world-cup-squad>
.

However, while there is now an acknowledgement that Hodgson got it horribly 
wrong, doubts remain over Cole’s ability to still perform at the very highest 
level, as witnessed by José Mourinho’s preference to play César Azpilicueta out 
of position at Chelsea last season.

The example of Maicon – ridiculed by many British fans after being taken back 
to school by Tottenham’s Gareth Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/nov/03/gareth-bale-hailed-european-press>
 before an ill-fated spell with Manchester City – should provide plenty of 
reasons to be optimistic. Still only 32, the right-back was one of Roma’s 
outstanding performers last season and was preferred to Dani Alves for his 
country until it all went wrong against Germany. Similarly with the 
Juventus-bound Patrice Evra and the new Internazionale signing Nemanja Vidic, 
the pace of the game in Serie A is much kinder to those of advancing years and 
should allow Cole to make a quick adaptation to his new environment.

Perhaps his greatest challenge, though, will be the cultural one. In spite of 
his reputation as a prickly customer given regular run-ins with the tabloid 
press over the years, at least Cole had the honesty to address the issue 
directly in his first pronouncements as aRoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> player on Tuesday.

“English players feel in their comfort zone in the UK. This is a chance for me 
to try a different language, culture and way of living,” he said.

García’s excellent grasp of the English language, having previously worked 
closely with Joe Cole in the former Chelsea midfielder’s season on loan at 
Lille, should help. Yet it will be up to the player himself to embrace the 
situation over the next two years, with an option for a third should all go to 
plan.

Cole has made a habit of proving people wrong throughout his career. There 
will be nothing he would like better than to do it again one more time.
 