
Sir Alex Ferguson <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sir-alex-ferguson> has 
agreed that Ashley Young is attracting a reputation for going down too easily 
after "a dramatic fall" to win the penalty for Manchester United's opening goal 
in the 4-0 defeat of Aston Villa at Old Trafford.

The win restored United's five‑point lead over Manchester City in the 
title race but it was Young's clash with Ciaran Clark on seven minutes that 
again made the forward the focus of controversy.

Young went down after he appeared to move his leg to Clark's. Wayne Rooney 
scored the penalty just as he did when Young fell under the touch of Queens 
Park Rangers' Shaun Derry in the 2-0 win last Sunday that caused the QPR 
midfielder to be sent off.

Asked if Young was getting a reputation for falling too easily, Ferguson said: 
"Yes. In the last week or two, yeah. I've never seen that in him, it's not a 
habitual thing in him. He was brought down, he just made the most of it. I 
think he played for the penalty. If the player decides to put his foot in and 
doesn't stay on his feet and read the situation, he has fallen into the 
situation. But he's definitely taken him. It was a dramatic fall. He overdid 
the fall but it's a penalty, there's no doubt about that and I don't think they 
can have any complaint because he has taken him."

Alex McLeish <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish>, the Aston 
Villa manager, said: "I didn't think it was a penalty. He had his foot planted 
firmly on the ground and tried to pull it away. I certainly felt it was a very 
soft decision. It's so difficult for refs because it happens that fast. We had 
a young player at Liverpool last week who stepped inside Agger. It should have 
been a penalty but he got booked. It looked as if he was a diver. It's a 
split-second decision for referees and a difficult job."

Ferguson also offered rare criticism of Rooney. "He was careless. Wayne has to 
play on the edge of a game, when it is really close and competitive. When the 
game gets to that casual bit, he is worse than the rest of them. He gets really 
casual about it. It is better when he is on the edge, then he is a marvellous 
player."
 