 This time last year, I'd only just gone for my first audition for Extras. It's 
amazing what can happen in a year, but my life really hasn't changed that much. 
I still get up in the morning, get the coffee on, let the dog out for a widdle, 
and then make a list of what we need to get for the flat.
We - me and my partner, Terry - moved into our new house at the end of the 
summer, so every spare moment, we're doing DIY. I'm forever going to auditions 
with paint in my hair. And, you know the underside of your forearm you don't 
really notice? I've always got paint on mine. It was a miracle I looked clean 
at the Comedy Awards. We had these guys in doing the bathroom, so our 
facilities were a bit limited.

So, we spent Friday night at Wickes - it's more hardcore than Homebase, isn't 
it? That's a big night out for me. That, or doing a big shop at Sainsbury's.

When you're not working, every day's a bit like a weekend - we're lucky that 
we can wake up on a Tuesday and think, "We can have scrambled eggs and smoked 
salmon for breakfast" - but my Saturdays are given focus by the Portobello Road 
market. I love it. I toyed with the idea of getting one of those old-lady 
shopping trolleys. I thought it was practical, and you can get quite funky ones 
now, but Terry put his foot down.

I start at the market's antiques end: I love pootering around among the dusty 
old treasures, finding broken old chandeliers and asking, "Is that the best 
price you can do for cash?" Being Scottish, I'm not very good at bartering, but 
I'm getting better at it.

At the vegetable bit, I really like getting a blue plastic bag of tomatoes for 
£1, taking them home and making soup. It's very therapeutic. I made a wee pot 
on Saturday evening after we'd taken the dog - Barney, he's a utonagan - out 
for a run. Well, he runs for the ball that Terry throws, but I'm rubbish at 
throwing, so Barney only comes to me to throw when he's tired and wants to 
stop. After more DIY, we popped to our local for a couple of swift halves of 
Leffe.

The weather was a bit grim on Sunday, so I drove to B&Q. I've not long learned 
to drive, but I'm not what I'd call a proficient driver. Actually, I'm a bit 
crap. Which was worrying when I was filming my new TV show and I had to drive 
this huge Land Rover. It was an automatic and I had to have Patrick Stewart in 
the car with me. On a road. It was terrifying.

I made it back to do more DIY and then we had friends over. I didn't cook - 
I'd planned to, but we ended up channelling a hole in the wall that took longer 
than we thought - but we had some wine. And a bottle of Kahlua. I don't mind a 
wee Kahlua and ice. It's a bit sweet, though. You can only have one, really.

· Ashley Jensen is an actor.
 