
Many of Ashley Madison’s 37 million registered users have a lot of explaining 
to do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madison-hackers-release-10gb-database-of-33m-infidelity-site-accounts>
 this weekend. Here are some tips that just might smooth things over.


Broach the subject

“I can’t believe my name and credit card number were exposed in that Ashley 
Madison <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> account we 
created together a while back as a joke. You don’t remember that? Are you 
serious? Are you feeling OK? You really don’t remember that? Maybe we should 
make an appointment with Dr Cales on Monday morning. I’m worried about you.”

Admit to a lesser transgression

Tell your spouse you created the account in an attempt to blackmail any one of 
the hundreds of government or military employees registered on the site, and 
that you were planning to use the money to pay for a luxurious vacation on your 
next anniversary.

Give your spouse a compliment

“Your sexual technique is so massively satisfying that I consider going 
outside of our marriage and sharing everything you’ve taught me to be a public 
service.”

Turn it around

Tell your spouse that you created the account because you suspected it might 
eventually get hacked and exposed and you wanted to see if he or she trusted 
you enough not to check if you were a registered user. Act hurt; shed a tear if 
you can. Tell your spouse you are not sure what you have done to deserve such 
disrespect, and that maybe it would be best if you spent some time apart.

Try to convince your spouse he or she is a ghost

This is a real long shot, but if everything else fails try explaining to your 
spouse that he or she is dead and has in fact been haunting you for years: “In 
so many ways it’s wonderful that we’ve been able to continue on with one 
another since the accident, but as the years have gone by I find myself longing 
for human contact and connection.”

Get a friend to pose as a supernatural expert and explain that it’s normal for 
ghosts to have selective memories, as this prevents them from taking any trauma 
experienced at their time of death with them to the other side. If your spouse 
asks why, if he or she is dead, you chose a website geared towards married 
people, explain that even though he or she is dead, you’ll always consider 
yourself married.

Blame identity theft

Prepare for this in advance by racking up secret credit card debt you can 
point to as further evidence.

Fall back on semantics

“I wasn’t cheating, I was aggregating female companionship.”

Tell the truth

Calmly explain that monogamy is an outdated concept that doesn’t really 
address the realities of 21st century life, that the traditions surrounding 
marriage have failed to change and adapt as society has progressed, and that 
ultimately going outside of your marriage for sex is a subversive and 
revolutionary act designed to push society forward. This will almost definitely 
not work, but if you’ve got to spend the next couple nights on your brother’s 
couch, you might as well do so with a smug sense of superiority.
 