
Ashley Giles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> is "very 
interested" in replacing Andy Flower as the England team director. Giles has 
been tipped as the man most likely to replace Flower, who announced he was 
leaving the post on Friday.

Paul Downton, the England and Wales Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board managing director, will begin 
the task of finding Flower's successor after Giles and the England team return 
home from Australia on Monday.

"I'd be very interested in doing the job, definitely," the England 
limited-overs coach said, after his side finished their nightmare tour with an 
84-run defeat in Sydney to concede the Twenty20 series 3-0. "I'm not going to 
deny that and I'm sure I will be applying for the post."

The 40-year-old said he had already spoken to Downton following Flower's 
decision, which came as a shock to him.

Defeat in Sydney condemned England to a second series whitewash of the winter, 
following their 5-0 Ashes embarrassment, after losing the one-day international 
series 4-1.

Giles is reluctant to think too far ahead with a limited-overs tour to the 
West Indies and the World T20, which starts in Bangladesh on 16 March, foremost 
in his thoughts.

"I've not given him my CV yet," he said. "I think it is important that I 
control what is coming up in the next couple of months. If I have to put an 
application in over the next couple of weeks then I'll think about that and get 
it done.

"Results will talk as well and I've got a really big series in the West Indies 
and more importantly the World Cup in Bangladesh. Our record in the 
sub-continent for limited-overs cricket isn't brilliant so it is a good 
challenge.

"We're pretty much at base level right now. We have a lot of work to do and 
before that we have a lot of talking to do about which squad we take."

Downton has time before any decision on the new head coach needs to be made, 
with England's next Test not until June when they host Sri Lanka.
 