
Extras star Ashley Jensen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashley-jensen> has landed a role in a 
new US drama,Ugly Betty, from Lost and Desperate Housewives broadcaster ABC.

Jensen is making the move to US TV after picking up a string of awards for her 
role as Ricky Gervais's lovable but dimwitted sidekick, Maggie Jacobs, in last 
year's BBC2 comedy Extras.

In Ugly Betty, Jensen has another sidekick role as best friend to the show's 
main character, who is played by US actress America Ferrera.

Alan Dale, who since his days playing Jim Robinson in Neighbours has 
reinvented himself as a US TV character actor in shows such as 24 and The OC, 
also features.

Ugly Betty stars Ferrera as an unattractive woman hired as PA to the boss of a 
fashion magazine, to try to stop him sleeping with his assistants.

The ABC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc> show is a telenovela, a drama 
format increasingly being borrowed by US broadcasters from Latin America, where 
they have been popular for years.

Telenovelas tend to feature over-the-top, melodramatic storylines that run 
over several series and many years.

The show will be just one of a host of new dramas and comedies unveiled this 
week by the big four US TV networks in New York.

ABC, NBC, CBS and Fox are announcing their new programming lineups for the 
autumn as part of the annual series of "upfront" presentations to advertisers.

NBC will kick off the upfronts in New York later today with an autumn schedule 
featuringStudio 60 on the Sunset Strip, the new show from The West Wing 
creator, Aaron Sorkin.

The network, which has sunk from first to fourth place in the ratings in the 
past couple of years, will be hoping Sorkin's new offering, a drama set behind 
the scenes of a late-night television show, can lead a revival.

Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip looks at the backstage shenanigans of a Saturday 
Night Live-style comedy show after two new writers, played by former Friends 
actor Matthew Perry and The West Wing's Bradley Whitford, are drafted in.

NBC executives hope the drama will do for the network what The West Wing did 
when it launched seven years ago.

The West Wing, which at its height pulled in 17 million viewers, finally ended 
last night, although British viewers will have to wait until later this year to 
see its climax.

New NBC dramas


Other NBC dramas for the autumn include Kidnapped, about the snatching of a 
wealthy family's teenage son, andHeroes, a Lost-style series about a group of 
young people who discover they have sudden unusual powers. Detective series
Raines features actor Jeff Goldblum as an eccentric policeman.

Returning drama series include Las Vegas, which airs on Sky One in the UK, 
ITV3'sCrossing Jordan, and BBC1's Medium.

New comedy includes a series starring actor Alec Baldwin, believed to be called
The Girly Show, which is also based around backstage conflicts at a television 
comedy show.

NBC is also expected to axe its version of Channel 4's Teachers, which has 
been performing badly in the ratings.

ABC's autumn lineup is expected to feature new dramas include Traveler, a 
thriller about three friends, one of whom ends up framing the others for a 
terrorist act;Brothers and Sisters, which stars Ally McBeal's Calista Flockhart 
in a tale about adult siblings: andMen in Trees, featuring Anne Heche as a 
relationship coach who moves to Alaska.

Not so lucky is ABC's Invasion, which airs on Channel 4, which has been 
cancelled.

New ABC comedies include Big Day, which follows the events of a single day's 
wedding over the course of 22 episodes, and an untitled project about a plot to 
rob Rolling Stones' frontman Mick Jagger's apartment.

Fox has ordered the comedy Happy Hour, about a pair of room-mates; and the 
dramaWedding Album, about a wedding photographer; and a fourth season of The OC
, broadcast in the UK by Channel 4.

Shows that will not be returning to Fox in the autumn, include BBC2's Malcolm 
in the Middle and Arrested Development.

The upfronts are important for British broadcasters as they give the first 
taste of the next season of potential hits which will ultimately find their way 
on to British screens.

UK TV buyers will be making their way to Los Angeles later this month for the 
annual LA Screenings, at which foreign TV executives get their first chance to 
view the networks' new programming for the autumn.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 