
The terms of service of hacked extramarital dating service Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> allow the company to 
run fake accounts, protecting it from at least some user lawsuits in the wake 
of its massive data breach in August.

The company had previously denied allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/02/ashley-madison-denies-allegations-of-fembot-army>
 of a “fembot army”, but according to information in the data dump, it actually 
ran tens of thousands of fake female accounts to send millions of messages to 
users.

However, in the terms and services of the site 
<http://www.ashleymadison.com/app/public/tandc.p>, it explicitly warns would-be 
cheaters that many users of the site subscribe “for purely entertainment 
purposes”. It continues:

You acknowledge and agree that any profiles of users and Members, as well as, 
communications from such persons may not be true, accurate or authentic and may 
be exaggerated or based on fantasy. You acknowledge and understand that you may 
be communicating with such persons and that we are not responsible for such 
communications.

The language in the current terms and conditions is toned down from a previous 
clause, present in February of this year, which was more explicit about the 
presence of fake accounts. The document explained that the accounts were 
created “In order to allow persons who are Guests on our Site to experience the 
type of communications they can expect as Members”.

The terms state: 

The profiles we create are not intended to resemble or mimic any actual 
persons. We may create several different profiles that we attach to a given 
picture. You understand and acknowledge that we create these profiles and that 
these profiles are not based on or associated with any user or Member of our 
Service or any other real person. You also acknowledge and agree that the 
descriptions, pictures and information included in such profiles are provided 
primarily for your amusement and to assist you navigate and learn about our 
Site. As part of this feature, the profiles may offer, initiate or send winks, 
private keys, and virtual gifts. Any one of these profiles may message with 
multiple users at the same or substantially the same times just like our users.

Our profiles message with Guest users, but not with Members. Members interact 
only with profiles of actual persons. Guests are contacted by our profiles 
through computer generated messages, including emails and instant messages. 
These profiles are NOT conspicuously identified as such.

According to Gizmodo’s Annalee Newitz, who identified the presence of the 
clauses 
<http://gizmodo.com/how-ashley-madison-hid-its-fembot-con-from-users-and-in-1728410265>
 based on emails contained in the leaked data, the site’s managers “struggled 
internally with the legality of what they were doing”.

She writes that users made numerous complaints about bots, and that chief 
executive Noel Biderman had discussions with various attorneys about how to 
disclose the bot accounts to users without admitting wrongdoing. Apparently, 
the disclosure in the terms and conditions is the compromise the company came 
up with.

Hackers release new Ashley Madison data targeting site's CEO and operators
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/20/hackers-new-ashley-madison-data>
Regardless of whether the disclosure protects the company from disgruntled 
users angry at being duped, the dating site still faces a lawsuit of almost 
half a billion dollars over its data breach. Two Canadian law firms, led by Ted 
Charney of Charney Lawyers, filed the class action suit in August, on behalf of 
Canadians whose personal information was disclosed in the breach.

“They are outraged that AshleyMadison.com failed to protect its users’ 
information. In many cases, the users paid an additional fee for the website to 
remove all of their user data, only to discover that the information was left 
intact and exposed,” Charney said.
 