
Todd Ferguson was enjoying the Oxfordshire sunshine in his weekday role as a 
landscape gardener when he received a text from the secretary at Henley CC 
informing him that the gangly teenager who took a hat-trick against North Mymms 
in the Home Counties Premier League in late May had just been presented with 
his Baggy Green cap by Glenn McGrath at Trent Bridge and would be making one of 
the more unlikely Ashes debuts.

But as an old sparring partner of Darren Lehmann in South Australia, Ferguson 
was not wholly surprised by the startling rise ofAshton Agar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashton-agar>. "As soon as we saw Ashton down 
at Henley I said to a few of the guys that I wasn't sure how long he'd be with 
us, because I thought he had something that Boof [Lehmann] would like," said 
Ferguson, who first came to England in 2006 and now doubles as coach and 
wicketkeeper at the Brakspear Ground.

"I played cricket against Boof for many years in Adelaide, he's a great 
character and he likes a certain type of player. It's not been great news for 
Henley because we were supposed to be getting Ashton for the whole season, then 
it went down to five games, then four and in the end he played only three. But 
it's worked out pretty well for him. I'm delighted for him because he's always 
got a big smile on his face – a very easygoing lad. If you don't get on well 
with him there's something wrong. It's just a shame we couldn't have had him 
for a little bit longer."

Agar was sent to England in the spring by Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia as one of the first batch 
of six "Hampshire Scholars" – the south coast county having volunteered, rather 
unpatriotically, to aid the development of talent for the old enemy. "He was 
living down in Southampton with a couple of the other guys who have come over, 
and driving up to Henley to play at the weekends," Ferguson said. "It was a 
good deal for us – Giles White [the Hampshire cricket manager] is a friend of 
our captain, Bjorn Mordt, and he got in touch during the winter and asked if we 
wanted an overseas player for nothing.

"We knew he was going to be heading off with the Australia A team some time in 
June for some games in Scotland and Ireland. But coming off the ground after he 
took his hat-trick – all lbws and all arm balls, funnily enough – he told the 
boys he didn't want to go home, he was enjoying it so much."

Henley's ground may be named after the town's brewer but Agar was not tempted 
to taste the product, even after taking the first hat-trick of his career. "We 
stayed in the dressing room chatting for a long while and a few of us went 
across to the pub later on," Ferguson said. "But not Ashton – he does drink, I 
think, but he didn't touch a drop in all the time he was with us. He's fully 
committed to his cricket." That attitude seems to be paying off.

Agar was born in Melbourne and has a Sri Lankan mother but had never played 
first-class cricket until January, after moving from his native Victoria to 
Western Australia. Yet within a couple of months he was fast-tracked into the 
senior Australia squad for the tour of India that will long be remembered for 
all the wrong reasons.

"His rise has been phenomenal since he was given an opportunity," said Justin 
Langer, the former Australia opener who now coaches WA. "What I love about 
Ashton is not only is he a very good cricketer who can bowl, bat and field but 
he's an excellent person, so from that point of view we're very thrilled."

After being handed his cap by McGrath, Agar looked back at the pavilion after 
taking the field with the Australia team, as if he still could not believe what 
was happening. Michael Clarke gave him an early bowl, a tidy enough three-over 
spell from the Radcliffe Road end in which he induced a couple of false shots 
from Jonathan Trott, and he returned for a second spell after lunch.

"He was a pleasure to keep to," said Ferguson. "Watching his variation and his 
hand placements and what he does with the ball and his control is exquisite. 
You don't see that often, especially in such a young spinner. And he's also a 
brilliant fielder, and a very decent bat – it's like he's not really trying, 
with a beautiful fluent backlift and all very smooth."

Agar has now become Australia's 12th youngest Test debutant and the 12th 
specialist spinner selected since the retirement of Shane Warne. His rapid 
progress from the Thames to the Trent is already a great story, whatever 
happens next.

Surprise Ashes selections

Michael Beer (2 Tests, Ave 59.33)

Beer made his debut for Australia in the fifth Test of the 2010/11 Ashes 
series. Despite having played just seven first-class matches, he was given the 
nod ahead of Doug Bollinger having been twelfth man in the third and four 
tests. Beer managed figures of 1-112 at the SCG as England won by an innings 
and 83 runs.

Graham Manou (1 Test, Ave 21, 3 catches)

Manou received the latest of call-ups in the drawn third Test of the 2009 
Ashes. He was a late replacement, after the toss, when Brad Haddin was ruled 
out through injury. Manou managed 21 runs and took three catches in a rain 
affected game at Edgbaston.

Martin McCague (3 Tests, Ave 65)

Despite the surprise selection of McCague for the third Ashes Test in 1993, 
the Kent seamer claimed the vital wickets of Mark Taylor, Steve Waugh and David 
Boon. After his surprise call up in the summer, there was further shock when he 
was selected ahead of Angus Fraser for the 1994-95 Ashes series.

Usman Afzaal (3 Tests, Ave 16.60)

Following injuries to Graeme Thorpe, Mark Ramprakash and Michael Vaughan, 
England brought 23-year-old Afzaal into their squad for the first Ashes Test in 
2001. Afzaal batted at seven, below wicketkeeper-batsmen Alec Stewart, and made 
scores of just four and two as England lost by an innings and 118 runs.Andrew 
Lawton
 