
At the 2010 Boxing Day Test in Melbourne a 17-year-old Ashton Agar sat among 
the MCG crowd with his family, watching as England played Australia. The pages 
of the day's newspapers revealed that a young nets bowler had taken the wicket 
of Ricky Ponting in an earlier training session. There was no name in the 
report, but Peter Wells, administrator of the nearby Richmond Cricket Club 
where Agar was cutting his teeth as a lanky teen spinner, had an idea.

Wells recalls sitting with the Agar family in the crowd. He turned to Ashton. 

"Hey Ash, did you bowl Ponting yesterday?" he asked.

"Yeah, I did," came the measured reply.

"Was it a good ball?" Wells asked.

"Yeah, it wasn't bad," said Agar.

Wells says Agar had always been a cherished asset at the club for his modesty. 
But the day Agar toppled Ponting, Wells says, something twigged in his mind.

"I turned to one of my mates sitting next to me, and said: 'Don't be surprised 
if we're sitting here watching this kid play for Australia when England come 
back out again. He's an amazing talent.'"

The prescient remarks might have been realised. Agar's lifesaving innings of 
98, which transformed an Australian side glaring down the barrel of defeat into 
command of the first Test, has captivated Australia. The prime minister, Kevin 
Rudd, declared that 12 July should be named Ashton Agar Day. Agar's name has 
trended on Twitter for nearly 24 hours, and the teenager has already had apoem 
published in his honour 
<http://www.news.com.au/sport/cricket/ant8217s-ashes-an-ode-to-ashton-agar/story-fndpt0dy-1226678247091>
.

But still relatively little is known about the 19-year-old spin bowler, and 
lower order batsmen, who smashed his way on to the scene by changing history 
with the highest score for a number 11 in Test history.

Agar was born to a Sri Lankan mother and an Australian father. He grew up in 
Melbourne and started playing for the local club,McKinnon 
<http://mckinnon.vic.cricket.com.au/>, at the age of six. It was where his 
father, John, and uncle James played and where his two brothers and cousin 
would also follow.

James says the family owes much to the club, who nurtured Agar until he moved 
on to Richmond.

Already the Australian press is awash with reports that a new cricketing 
dynasty has been born. It is an optimistic declaration at the very least, given 
that 19-year-old Ashton is the oldest among the new Agar generation of 
cricketers. But Ashton said at a press conference after the day's play that he 
based much of his game on his 17-year-old brother William's style.

James Agar, who has not slept since Wednesday, is measured in response to the 
speculation: "You see the Waugh brothers out there. I've never thought of it 
that way, but maybe there will be a thing with the Agar brothers, and my boy 
too. That path is a long road, and it's not an easy road though."

Ashton Agar joined Richmond in 2009, a premier cricket club – the tier below 
state level – as a 15-year-old. Wells recalls his enthusiasm. He would turn up 
for matches early and always ask if there was anything he could do to help set 
up.

"He was a quiet, unassuming lad. Just went about his business. He was a big, 
tall lad. He bowled very well, and batted too," says Wells.

Almost instantly Agar was moved to the Richmond second XI where he played with 
grown men. By his third game he was batting at five and scored 85 before he was 
run out.

Then, 18 months ago, Agar was recruited to play at state level for Western 
Australia, having already been selected to play for Australia under-19s at the 
age of 17.

His bowling coach at Western Australia, Adam Griffith, agrees with Wells. 
Agar's modesty is palpable. Griffith recalls a shield game last season against 
Tasmania at the Waca in Perth.

Agar was one of the partnership who scored the winning runs. As he left the 
pitch triumphant, he blew a kiss to his girlfriend who sat in the crowd with 
her family.

"It wasn't all just about 'me', about how we've won. It was just about being 
out there, happy to be playing the game," says Griffith.

But the key question for most Australians is not really about whether Agar is 
a nice bloke. It's whether the teenager, who has only played 10 first-class 
games of cricket, has the potential to fill the void that has been left in 
Australian spin bowling since Shane Warne's retirement. Since Warne left the 
game Australia have fielded 13 Test match spinners with only two playing more 
than 10 international Tests.

What does Griffith think?

"It's a bit early to say, as a 19-year-old. We generally tend to think that 
spinners don't mature until their mid 20s.

"He has got all the tools though, and I think that mentally he is the sort of 
kid who could fill that role. Maybe one day he will be the permanent member in 
the team that we haven't had for a while."

Agar still awaits his first Test match wicket, which will more likely 
determine the future of his international career. But his 98-run knock could 
well rank up there with Warne's ball of the century, which announced him on to 
the international stage in a similarly aggressive, tantalising fashion.
 