
My dad and I have been rehabbing my old porch this fall. We’ve done most of 
the work ourselves but for certain things we’ve hired help, and so I’ve been 
spending some afternoons with an electrician and a painter. They are kind, 
hard-working guys. I’m always happy to see them in their trucks, backing into 
the driveway.

The electrician went to school with one of my younger brothers and lived for a 
short time at my mom’s house when he was a teenager. Now he’s a dad and a 
former marine, something that makes me proud of him. He’s thoughtful, mature 
and competent.

He was also leaning towards Trump last time we talked.

Our sons started kindergarten on the same day this fall. We exchanged pictures 
of them in first-day clothes. We were both emotional. Me, because of passing 
time. Him, because he worried for his kid’s safety. It might not be rational, 
he told me as I watched him twist wires, but that’s how he feels. As the 
conversation went on, he lifted his pant leg to show me a small handgun 
strapped to his ankle.

He told me Trump. I told him Clinton. 'Are you crazy?' I asked. 'Are you 
crazy?' he replied

Many people own firearms here in Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska>, and many people carry them all 
the time, often concealed. It’s part of the culture, and practical in rural 
places. Even so, I thought about my electrician friend later, about feeling 
like it might come down to that, that you might need to protect yourself and 
your family because nobody else would.

Democrats once represented the working class. Not any more | Robert Reich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/democrats-working-class-americans-us-election>
The next time he came by, we talked about the election. He’s self-employed. 
Alaska’s health insurance situation under Obamacare might be the worst in the 
country. That alone was a reason to want a change. Plus, he’d read somewhere 
about Clinton being in poor health. I told him I was voting for her. I wasn’t 
passionate about it, but I’m a journalist, gay, married, with children, I said. 
I didn’t want to end up in the clink.

We both laughed. He flipped on the lights and they worked. It was about time 
for him to head out, he said.

Next came the painter. He nearly died of cancer some time ago and my dad, a 
doctor, cared for him. He works a little slower now, but he’s full of 
wisecracks and calls me “darlin’”. He’s got nothing but gratitude about being 
alive. The day before the election, I asked who he was voting for. He told me 
Trump. I told him Clinton.

“Are you crazy?” I asked. “Are you crazy?” he replied. 

She’s really smart, I said. He’d heard she’d had people killed, he said. I 
told him to read a regular newspaper. He said the media was part of the 
problem. They get things wrong all the time.

I thought about that as the election results unfolded. There it was, the thing 
that seemed like it would never happen. With the children asleep, I scrolled 
through hundreds of apocalyptic tweets. What would be our place in the world? 
The supreme court? Syrian refugees? Muslims? Journalists? The environment? Have 
you heard Mike Pence talk about gay people? Were our children safe here? My 
grandmother was in Italy during the rise of fascism. I felt alarm coming from 
my DNA.

I got it then, all the paranoid stuff I’d heard when I switched my car radio 
to the local conservative talk station the past eight years. The preppers. The 
gold bars. The guns. Feeling afraid. Like your rights might be taken away. Like 
nobody saw your concerns. I wanted to move somewhere off the grid.

I grew up in Alaska, just as my wife had. It felt right to us, and real, all 
the differences here between people

Then I heard my son crying in the other room. I went in to find him in his 
bed, struggling to breathe with the croup. We tried giving him a steamy shower, 
but it did nothing. We were gearing up for the ER when I thought of one last 
trick. I bundled him up and took him outside. I held him on the porch in the 
cold air. His breathing settled down. He fell asleep.

We lived in Portland once for a couple of years. I remember during the second 
George W Bush election, watching the results come in with complete surprise. I 
hadn’t even seen a single yard sign for Bush. That was part of why we couldn’t 
stay there. It was a bubble, a monoculture. I’d grown up in Alaska, just as my 
wife and my parents had. It felt right to us, and real, all the differences 
here between people and the way we live with them. Now I’ve been in Anchorage 
so long, every face looks familiar.

I've heard enough of the white male rage narrative | Hadley Freeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/misogyny-us-election-voters>
Sometimes, when I start to worry I am too far from the rest of the world to be 
a writer, I comfort myself with the idea that what I get in exchange for this 
isolation are all these nuanced relationships with interesting people, some 
that go back to my parents’ childhoods and wind out through my extended family 
and my wife’s family. I know the history of all the city blocks on my way to 
work.

Community like this is what I want for my kids. It’s valuable and rare. It 
takes work and time and it goes deeper than politics. I can’t let politics 
destroy it. Aside from my family, this community is all I’ve got.

Somewhere about then, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> was giving an acceptance 
speech. My mom, a few houses down, was wiping tears off her face. I was holding 
my son in the cold, looking at the lights of my city and a smudge of moonlight 
beneath the clouds and the outline of the mountains I’d grown up with, same as 
ever.
 