
I have created a family rift by accidentally forwarding an email to my 
sister-in-law that was meant for my daughter. The email was critical of my 
niece, who is in her 20s and very spoilt. My sister-in-law was outraged, and 
although I sent her a grovelling apology I’m wondering if she’ll speak to me 
again. What can I do? She’s the sister of my ex-husband and after the divorce I 
remained very friendly with her up until now. Can you help?


Oh man, the sent-to-the-wrong-person thing is devastating. A letter in which 
you are processing or venting is so important to write for gaining clarity, and 
a nightmare when it falls into the wrong hands. It is the equivalent of 
inadvertently sharing a page from your diary that was meant for your eyes only.

The only way to attempt to repair this would be to apologise and express your 
regret (which it sounds like you already have), and to gently say that you know 
it is not your business, that you regret her having received the email that was 
meant for your processing only, but that now that your feelings about your 
niece’s behaviour are out there, you would be open to sharing more directly 
about that, and to find out if she would be up for it.

If there is any goodwill to be salvaged, some honesty from you about your care 
for her daughter could (if she is brave and open enough) lead to a deeper 
dialogue. But the truth is, this only happens in the safest of contexts and the 
deepest of friendships (which you may not have). And you would need to be 
willing to hear her thoughts about your style of parenting and your children’s 
behaviour, too, if she has any. She may not be up for this, and I am not sure 
how deep a friendship you really want with her.


Ask Alanis Morissette: my friend has become my boss. Will it work?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/26/ask-alanis-friend-become-boss-changed-things>
With a true and heartfelt apology (I have written about the art of this on my 
blog <http://alanis.com/wellness/the-art-of-apology/>), she might bite. But 
there is a good chance she might not. And if that is the case, there will be a 
friendship to grieve. It’s funny how sometimes hitting the wrong button can 
force your hand, and can actually result in the deepening of intimacy. Whether 
you and she want that or not, you will soon find out.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://www.alanis.com>. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in 
general to Alanis Morissette ataskalanis@theguardian.com 
<mailto:askalanis@theguardian.com>
 