
Dear Carrie,

As another person with bipolar disorder, I really admire the way that you have 
spoken candidly about your own mental health and made people like me feel less 
alone. I hope that over the next decades of my life from my 20s now to my 60s 
I’ll be able to get to where you are.

Right now, though, it’s tough. I’m doing the best that I can. I see my doctor 
regularly. I’ve tried different medications. But trying to deal with my mental 
illness and meet all of my responsibilities at school, work and home feels like 
a terrible balancing act. Some days I juggle everything better than others, and 
sometimes I let everything drop. It feels like only a matter of time until the 
things that I drop shatter irreparably. Have you found a way to feel at peace 
when even your brain seesaws constantly? I can’t see very far down the line 
from here and I hope that you can give me some insight.

Sincerely,
Alex

Ask Carrie Fisher: my husband has been seeing prostitutes. Can I trust him 
again?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/06/carrie-fisher-advice-column-cheating-husband-prostitutes>
Dear Alex,

You’re lucky to have been diagnosed as bipolar and accepted that diagnosis at 
such a young age. I was told that I was bipolar when I was 24 but was unable to 
accept that diagnosis until I was 28 when I overdosed and finally got sober. 
Only then was I able to see nothing else could explain away my behavior.

Going to AA helped me to see that there were other people who had problems 
that had found a way to talk about them and find relief and humor through that. 
It doesn’t sound like you have a dual diagnosis as an alcoholic and/or addict 
so you’re not a perfect fit for that, but there are groups that are simply for 
people with affective disorders (depression, bipolar, etc).

 Initially I didn’t like the groups. I felt like I had been banished to sit 
with a group of other misfits like myself to sit still for an hour. But then 
someone said, “You don’t have to like these meetings, you just have to go, go 
until you like them.” That took me by surprise. I didn’t have to like something 
I did? Wow, what a concept. I thought I had to like everything – so I would 
wait to be OK with something and if I didn’t get there it was permission to 
give up. But if I didn’t have to like it – if I just had to effectively put my 
head down and move through some uncomfortable feelings till I got to the other 
side – what a notion! My comfort wasn’t the most important thing – my getting 
through to the other side of difficult feelings was. However long it might seem 
to take and however unfair it might seem, it was my job to do it.

We have been given a challenging illness, and there is no other option than to 
meet those challenges. Think of it as an opportunity to be heroic – not “I 
survived living in Mosul during an attack” heroic, but an emotional survival. 
An opportunity to be a good example to others who might share our disorder. 
That’s why it’s important to find a community – however small – of other 
bipolar people to share experiences and find comfort in the similarities

Don’t I sound like I know what I’m talking about? The truth is, I’ve never 
done what it sounds like you’re doing: balancing school, home and work. I left 
home and school. So as difficult as it seems like it can be, you’re ahead of 
the game. You’re doing more than I did at your age, and that’s courageous.

You don’t have to like doing a lot of what you do, you just have to do it. You 
can let it all fall down and feel defeated and hopeless and that you’re done. 
But you reached out to me – that took courage. Now build on that. Move through 
those feelings and meet me on the other side. As your bipolar sister, I’ll be 
watching. Now get out there and show me and you what you can do.

Want to ask Carrie Fisher <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> 
for advice? Send your problem to carrie.fisher.advice@theguardian.com
 