
I was struck by the absence of dialogue for much of the opening of WALL-E. 
When did silent films finally stop being made?
Andrew Lancer, Brighouse
 Don't say a word ... Charlie Chaplin in City Lights. Photo: Kobal 
Just as screen historians will tell you that films have never been wholly 
silent, they will also insist that movies without spoken dialogue have never 
entirely died out. There was certainly a time during the Talkie boom when mass 
silent production ceased, with Britain's last feature being John Argyle's crime 
drama, Paradise Alley (1931).

Things were more complicated in the US, however. Pictures like Charlie 
Chaplin's City Lights (1931) and the Marquis Henry de la Falaise's Legong: 
Dance of the Virgins (1935) eschewed dialogue, but George Melford's The Poor 
Millionaire (1930) was the last Hollywood feature released without a 
pre-recorded soundtrack, while Oscar Micheaux's Phantom of Kenwood (1933) seems 
to have been the last produced outside the studio system.

Elsewhere, silent production persisted into the late 30s, although silent 16mm 
melodramas remained the staple of the Thai film industry for another four 
decades. Subsequently, silent techniques have been used for comic effect by the 
likes of Jacques Tati and Mel Brooks, while avant-gardists like Stan Brakhage 
often dispensed with soundtracks to concentrate focus on their visuals.

However, there has been a mini revival of silent cinema since Aki Kaurismäki 
billed Juha (1999) as the last silent of the 20th century. The master of the 
silent pastiche is Canadian Guy Maddin, whose wordless homages include Careful 
(1992), The Heart of the World (2000), Cowards Bend the Knee (2003) and Brand 
Upon the Brain! (2006). However, Rolf de Heer and Esteban Sapir respectively 
revived classic tropes in 2007 with Dr Plonk and La Antena (which is currently 
showing at the ICA in London), and Michael Pleckaitis is due to follow suit 
later this year with the Gothic comedy, Silent.

In your previous column, you mentioned the first person to swear in a 12A 
film? Go on then, tell us who it was.
Martin Atkins, Honiton
 Oh bugger ... Matt Damon in The Bourne Identity. Photo: Kobal 
The first film to receive a 12A certificate in this country was Doug Liman's 
The Bourne Identity (2002) and its first swear word was delivered by Matt Damon 
in the line, "Fuck it. I can't remember anything that happened before two weeks 
ago."

Given the advances in digital technology, why has nobody updated the Wilhelm 
Scream?
Antony Chase, Wembley
 What a screamer ... Robert Powell and Robert Stephens in The Asphyx. Photo: 
Kobal 
Over 170 Hollywood movies have now used the Wilhelm Scream. This year alone, 
you will have heard it in Cloverfield, Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the 
Crystal Skull, Hancock, Horton Hears a Who! and Kung Fu Panda.

It was first used for a sequence in which a soldier is attacked by an 
alligator in Raoul Walsh's Distant Drums (1951). Sheb Wooley, who played 
Private Jessup in the film, recorded six excruciating screams in all. But the 
effect was named after Richard Brooke's character, Private Wilhelm, in Gordon 
Douglas's The Charge at Feather River (1953) by Ben Burtt, who included it in 
The Scarlet Blade (1974), a swashbuckling spoof he made at USC with Rick 
Mitchell and Richard Anderson.

While researching effects for Star Wars (1977), Burtt found Wooley's original 
recordings in the Warner sound archive and it became something of an in-joke 
among designers and editors during the Movie Brat era. However, it has since 
become a standard effect in films, TV, theme park rides and video games. As for 
why it's never been replaced, no one seems to have done it better than Sheb 
Wooley, whose other claim to fame was a 1958 No.1 hit with 'Purple People 
Eater'.

Got a query? Email ask.parky@guardian.co.uk
 