
I’ve got to that age when my best friends have become wives, fiancees and 
serious girlfriends, and suddenly my secrets are not so safe. My innermost 
thoughts and feelings are being shared with their partners, and it leaves me 
feeling vulnerable. I’ve been told that as someone who has never been in a 
serious relationship, it’s something I can’t understand. And something I can’t 
change. So do I just start keeping things to myself?
It can be challenging to adjust to having your one-on-one friendship shift to 
being part of a triangle. There is loss in this for you, to be sure.

I can, however, relate to your friends making this choice. In my life, my 
husband is primary, and our marriage has benefited from this prioritisation. I 
appreciate that, if there is an important piece of information I am processing 
about a friend, I can bring it to my husband to get his perspective. Similarly, 
there came a turning point where I knew I was no longer sharing what was going 
on with me with just my girlfriends; they would be bringing this information 
home to their spouses – which makes sense, if they also consider their partners 
their primary relationship.

The key to this working is that you don’t feel judged. Ideally, it is less 
that they are gossiping about you, and more that they care enough about you to 
want to discuss your wellbeing with each other. I have spent a lot of time with 
my friends’ partners, and I feel safe sharing vulnerabilities with my friends – 
because I know I am cared for and supported by both parties. Of course, if you 
feel judged by your friend’s partner, it may not continue to feel as safe to 
open up with your friend, and this could negatively affect your friendship. 
Perhaps try finding someone else to confide in, until you feel safer with your 
friend’s partner, if that is possible.

Ask Alanis Morissette: my friend has become my boss. Will it work?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/26/ask-alanis-friend-become-boss-changed-things>
There may well be a day soon when your friends will understand that you 
discuss what they have shared withyour partner, knowing (hopefully) that your 
partner loves them as much as you do. And that instead of getting the insight, 
empathy and support from only one of you, they get it double-barrel, from both 
of you. This is what it is to be friends with couples: ultimately, you get 
double the love.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://www.alanis.com>. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in 
general to Alanis Morissette ataskalanis@theguardian.com 
<mailto:askalanis@theguardian.com>
 