
I am 35 and have hardly any friends. My family travelled a lot, meaning I lost 
most of my friends from childhood, and now I have only a handful of close 
friends, most of whom live in other countries. I am happily married with 
a young child and my husband has lots of friends, but I feel alone. I see lots 
of my acquaintances who regularly go out with friends, or other mums, and I 
think, “Why haven’t they invited me?” What’s wrong with me?
There are perks to the travelling lifestyle, to be sure, but when we are 
young, these ruptured friendships can leave little scars. As a result, you 
might resist diving into an intimate friendship as an adult. It could otherwise 
be that your background was unique, or that you were educated in a way that has 
left you feeling different or isolated in some way. Compatibility, especially 
in adulthood, is a subtle, fragile and sometimes complicated thing.

I find that in friendship, sharing the same values, priorities, interests and 
worldviews is important, as well as having the ability to empathise, and some 
emotional maturity. But what would you need to know in order to commit to a new 
friendship? Writing that down is worthwhile, because it can help you work out 
which events or invitations to say yes to, and which to decline.

A little dose of vulnerability might serve you well here, too. A well-placed 
conversation where you share that you “would love to be invited” somewhere, or 
“are having a hard time making friends” could open up opportunities with people 
who may assume you don’t want to be invited. If there is a behavioural habit 
that is somehow offputting, perhaps you could enrol a couple of people around 
you (your husband? family?) to give you feedback? Failing any huge behavioural 
red flag, it could be that you are someone who has fewer friends than some, but 
that the one or two you do have will be intimate and long-lasting.

Ask Alanis Morissette: I wish my girlfriend didn’t smoke pot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/01/ask-alanis-morissette-wish-girlfriend-didnt-smoke-pot>
There is nothing wrong with you. And there are friends out there for you. The 
more you know what matters most to you, the more you’ll be like a beacon to 
those who are looking for a friend like you – as much as you are looking for 
one like them.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://www.alanis.com>. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in 
general to Alanis Morissette ataskalanis@theguardian.com 
<mailto:askalanis@theguardian.com>
 