
Bearing in mind the imminent release of Oliver Stone's W. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/126059/w>, would I be right in assuming 
there is an entire alphabet of single-letter movie titles?
Colin Marsh, Sutton Coldfield 

Surprisingly, you'd be wrong. To date, no film of any artistic or commercial 
significance has been called C, N or R, and T was only used as a working title 
for Italian softcore auteur Tinto Brass's Trasgredire (2000). Single-letter 
titles seem to be something of a recent phenomenon, as the following alphabet 
suggests (although please note this is not an exhaustive list).

A
(Tatsuya Mori, 1998)
A controversial documentary about the Aum Shinrikyo Buddhist sect that 
launched a sarin attack on the Tokyo subway in 1995. The sequel was called A2 
(2001).

B 
(Daniel Vázquez Sallés, 1998)
A Catalan thriller short, with Bert Palment in title role.

C
Anyone know anything shorter than Claus Drexel's 1996 four-minute romcom, C4?

D 
(Vishram Sawant, 2005)
Having refused to testify in a murder inquiry, cop's son Randeep Hooda takes 
over Mumbai mobster Goga Kapoor's gang.

E
(Jananathan & Jhananathan, 2006)
Tamil crook Jeeva allies with terrorist Pasupathy to prevent doctor Ashish 
Vidyarthi from conducting experiments on the impoverished locals.

F. 
(Tze Chuan Chew, 2007)
A profile of Toh Hai Leong, the director of the Singaporean mockumentary 
Zombie Dogs, and his battle with Type 2 diabetes.
 Christopher Scott Cherot's hip-hop reworking of The Great Gatsby, G 

G 
(Christopher Scott Cherot, 2002)
A hip-hop reworking of The Great Gatsby, with Richard T Jones as the music 
mogul who owes as much to P Diddy as F Scott Fitzgerald.

H
(Jong-hyuk Lee, 2002)
Antipathetic Korean cops Yum Jung-Ah and Ji Jin-Hee are paired to catch a 
copycat killer.

I
(Jason Connell, 2004)
A short by the director of the 2007 extras documentary, Strictly Background, 
which stars Ryan Gesell in a tale about visibility in a digitally enhanced 
world.

J 
(Fred Cavayé, 2000)
A short about the need to communicate in relationships.

K
(Alexandre Arcady, 1997)
Cop Patrick Bruel becomes embroiled in the perilous worlds of art theft and 
Middle Eastern espionage when an SS war criminal is murdered in Paris.

L.
(Vania Leturcq, 2006)
A Belgian short that sees Edwige Baily waiting in a hotel room for her lover.

M
(Fritz Lang, 1931)
The best single-letter picture, in which Peter Lorre excels as the child 
killer lured into a kangaroo court by members of the Berlin underworld. Joseph 
Losey produced a fascinatingly flawed remake with David Wayne in 1951.

N
All suggestions welcome.
 Tim Blake Nelson's O 

O
(Tim Blake Nelson, 2001)
A high-school variation on Othello, with Mekhi Phifer as the black basketball 
star duped by coach's son Josh Hartnett into believing that white girlfriend 
Julia Stiles is cheating on him with a teammate.

P
(Paul Spurrier, 2005)
Khmer sorceress Suangporn Jaturaphut breaks the three rules of an ancient code 
in trying to help her ailing grandmother and unleashes the ravenous Phii Borb 
upon an unsuspecting Bangkok.

Q
(Larry Cohen, 1982)
New York crook Michael Moriarty discovers the lizard-like winged Aztec god 
Quetzalcoatl residing in the spire of the Chrysler Building and holds the 
terrified city to ransom.

R
Anything shorter than the Betty Thomas documentary, R3 (2003)?

S
(Guido Henderickx, 1998)
The daughter of a prostitute and a murderer, bisexual Belgian stripper Natali 
Broods decides to rid Brussels of its lowlife.

T
Anything to beat T9, Guido Guerrasio's 1951 documenary about the first postwar 
Triennale in Milan?
 Serge Elissalde & Grégoire Solotareff's U 

U
(Serge Elissalde and Grégoire Solotareff, 2006)
A hand-drawn French animated feature about the friendship between an orphaned 
princess and a unicorn.

V 
(Richard Eyre, 1987)
A tele-visualisation of Leeds poet Tony Harrison's dissertation on the 
fissures and frustrations of British society in the mid-80s that uses the 
quatrains of Gray's Elegy in a Country Churchyard.

W
(Richard Quine, 1974)
A "w" is left at the scene of the near-fatal accidents that an amnesiac Twiggy 
survives in a psychological thriller that was later reissued as I Want Her Dead.

X
(Roger Corman, 1963)
Scientist Ray Milland suffers the consequences of using himself as a guinea 
pig for a serum enabling x-ray vision.

Y
(Zoe Margolis, 2000)
The noirish debut short by the author of Girl With a One-Track Mind, which 
draws on Don't Look Now and Pulp Fiction for its story of a man unwittingly 
having premonitions of his death.

Z
(Costa-Gavras, 1969)
Yves Montand stars in this exceptional, Oscar-winning insight into 
assassination, conspiracy and governmental hypocrisy that was inspired by the 
murder of Greek pacifist Gregoris Lambrakis.
 