
We raised our daughters on healthy food and made sure they had a nourishing 
meal each night. It’s with a feeling of despair that I see them take the easy 
way out with their own children’s diet: fish fingers more nights than not, and 
lots of processed foods. I worry my grandchildren will develop health issues. I 
have a good relationship with my daughters and don’t want to spoil it. What can 
I do?
First, I want to acknowledge how moving it is to see you care about your 
grandchildren’s bodies and their futures. The challenge is how to bring this up 
in a way that respects your daughters. As you seem to know, it is up to them to 
decide how they feed or raise their children.

Having been on the receiving end of a lot of unsolicited advice about 
parenting, and having felt frustration (and, occasionally, gratitude), I assure 
you that proceeding with tenderness, respect and caution is a great way to go. 
I would start by asking your daughters (separately) if they are up for a 
conversation about something that feels important to you. Mention that on 
some level it is your business – they areyour grandchildren, after all – yet on 
another level it is none of your business, because these kids aretheir 
children. This is more likely to go down well than saying: “I have some advice 
for you.”

I would simply say: “This might not be my business, but you know how much I 
love your kids and how much I love you. And I just want to share how I feel 
with you, whether you respond to it or not.” This establishes that you are 
passionate, but have enough humility and respect to know you can’t control 
these choices. I would then continue: “I’ve done some research into how 
important healthy food is, and because I care about them and you so much, 
I just want to support you in providing those foods whenever it is possible, 
circumstantially or financially.” You could also offer to help: would you be 
willing to do a food shop for them once a week, or even cook?

After this, I would let go. If your daughters are going to accept your 
support, they will do so on their own terms. If they resist it or even resent 
it, there is nothing you can do. I wish you well.

• This is my last column – I’m taking a break to have a baby and focus on 
being a mother. Thank you so much for sharing your stories and challenges with 
me. I have been deeply moved by your bravery and willingness to ask tough 
questions, and I will miss you.

Ask Alanis Morissette: I still get physical with my ex. Can we just be friends?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/13/ask-alanis-morissette-still-get-physical-with-ex-can-we-be-friends> 