
Has there ever been an animal equivalent of an Oscar? Phila, the wondrously 
photogenic dog in Time to Die (which I saw at the Edinburgh film festival), 
would be a shoo-in.
Beryl Madison, Leith
 Orangey, tabby extraordinaire from Rhubarb. Photo: Kobal 
Tokaj, the border collie who played Phila, and 91-year-old Danuta Szaflarska 
certainly had a scene-stealing contest in Pole Dorota Kedzierzawska's charming 
drama. But Tokaj has already missed out on this year's Palm Dog and must now 
hope to get his paws on a Fido at October's London film festival.

However, neither of these awards yet carries the prestige of the Patsy, which 
was inaugurated by the American Humane Association to commemorate the 
blindfolded horse that broke its back during a 70ft plunge for a stunt in Henry 
King's Jesse James (1939). The Picture Animal Top Star of the Year was first 
presented to the four-legged lead of Francis (1950), the talking mule voiced by 
Chill Wills. Among his successors was Roy Rogers's horse, Trigger, who followed 
his Patsy for Son of Paleface with the 1958 Craven award for outstanding equine 
achievement.

Onetime Lassie wrangler Frank Inn earned over 40 Patsies, with his most 
enduring winner being Orangey, the hefty tabby from Rhubarb (1951) and 
Breakfast at Tiffany's (1961).

I've just seen Jhoom Barabar Jhoom on DVD, in which Bobby Deol saves Preity 
Zinta from being crushed by a giant waxwork of Superman at Madame Tussaud's. 
Have any other movies been filmed there?
Asha Patil, Tewkesbury
 Looking peaky ... Corridor of Mirrors. Photo: Kobal 
Shaad Ali's 2007 Masala is the most recent picture to be filmed at Tussaud's. 
But the first to feature the London wax museum seems to have been the slapstick 
silent Pimple in The Whip (1917), in which Fred Evans escapes from its confines 
with the help of the genie from Aladdin's lamp.

Regretably, Alfred Hitchcock dispensed with Mrs Belloc Lowndes's Tussaud 
ending for his 1926 adaptation of The Lodger. But 1936 saw Katharine Hepburn's 
Victorian free spirit visit the galleries in Mark Sandrich's A Woman Rebels and 
Polar explorer James Carew wager to spend a night in the Chamber of Horrors in 
George Pearson's Midnight at Madame Tussaud's.

The same room figured in Laurence Huntingdon's Wanted for Murder (1946), a 
thriller co-scripted by Emeric Pressburger and starring Eric Portman as a man 
haunted by the fact that his executioner father is displayed among the 
grotesques as "The Happy Hangman". Ironically, Portman found himself 
immortalised in wax in Terence Young's Corridor of Mirrors (1948), after he is 
sentenced to death for murder while deranged by the conviction that Edana 
Romney is the reincarnated subject of the 400-year-old painting that hangs 
among the period-costumed dummies in his sinister abode.

Has a film ever been disqualified from the Oscars? 
Larry Morgan, Hulme
 It never rains but it pours ... Lust, Caution was barred from the Oscars 
Several pictures have been deemed ineligible for the Academy Awards, but only 
one has been disqualified after the announcement of the nominations.

The 2007 Oscars were particularly mired in controversy, with the percentage 
indigenity of the principal cast and crew preventing Taiwan from submitting Ang 
Lee's Lust, Caution, while a surfeit of English dialogue precluded Israeli 
director Eran Kolinn's The Band's Visit. Similarly, Jonny Greenwood and Eddie 
Vedder's scores for There Will Be Blood and Into the Wild were disbarred 
respectively for containing insufficient original music and too many songs.

The sole nomination to have been withdrawn by AMPAS, therefore, remains Nino 
Rota's Original Score nod for The Godfather (1972), after it was discovered 
that the composer had plagiarised his own work for Eduardo De Filippo's comedy, 
Fortunella (1958). Ironically, Rota and Carmine Coppola shared the Oscar for 
The Godfather, Part Two (1974), even though it reprised themes that had been 
deemed impermissible two years earlier.
 