
Has any film had stand-ins for a dead actor as famous as Johnny Depp, Colin 
Farrell and Jude Law for Heath Ledger in Terry Gilliam's The Imaginarium of 
Doctor Parnassus?
Mark Robertson, Lewisham

In a word, no. Leo McCarey borrowed footage from Alfred Hitchcock's Strangers 
on a Train to complete Robert Walker's performance in My Son John (1952) and 
Douglas Trumbull utilised unused scenes and a stand-in to finish Brainstorm 
(1983) after Natalie Wood drowned. More recently, CGI was employed to disguise 
the demise of John Candy in Wagons East (1994) and Oliver Reed in Gladiator 
(2000). But film-makers usually seek to mask a star's absence by using 
anonymous body doubles, who are shot from oblique angles to hide their more 
obvious dissimilarities.

Since Mary Dees and Paula Winslowe teamed to duplicate Jean Harlow's physical 
and vocal presence in Jack Conway's Saratoga (1937), several high-profile 
pictures have resorted to such tactics, including The Misfits (1961, Clark 
Gable), Game of Death (Bruce Lee, 1978), Poltergeist III (Heather O'Rourke, 
1988) and The Crow (Brandon Lee, 1994). Similarly, Nick Adams dubbed some of 
James Dean's dialogue in Giant (1956), while Jane Withers completed Mary 
Wickes's voicing of Laverne the gargoyle in Disney's The Hunchback of Notre 
Dame (1996).
 Isn't that your chiropractor? ... Plan 9 from Outer Space 
The deception hasn't always been convincing, however, with neither bit player 
George Sorel nor chiropractor Tom Mason looking anything like Lionel Atwill or 
Bela Lugosi respectively in Lewis D Collins and Ray Taylor's serial Lost City 
of the Jungle (1946) and Edward D Wood, Jr's legendarily awful B flick, Plan 9 
From Outer Space (1959).

An intriguing variation occurs in King Vidor's Solomon and Sheba (1959), 
however, as the late Tyrone Power can be seen in occasional long shots instead 
of his replacement, Yul Brynner

Last week, you said Dragnet was the first feature spun off from a TV series. 
What was the first in the UK?
Magnus Barrington, Coleraine
 Scene from The Quatermass Xperiment 
The first British programme to translate to the big screen was the sci-fi 
drama, The Quatermass Experiment, which had been broadcast live from Alexandra 
Palace by the BBC in 1953. An attempt to record the action using the Kinoscope 
process was abandoned after two episodes, but the show so unnerved armchair 
viewers that Hammer snapped up the rights and retitled the property The 
Quatermass Xperiment to emphasise its X-rated content. Nigel Kneale, who had 
scripted the six-part original, was unhappy with the performance of fading 
American star Brian Donlevy in the role created by Reginald Tate, Professor 
Bernard Quatermass: "He took very little interest in the making of the film or 
in playing the part. It was a case of take the money and run. Or in the case of 
Mr Donlevy, waddle."

I was ankle deep in popcorn on my last visit to the local multiplex. Who on 
earth introduced the disgusting stuff into cinemas?
Andrea Lilley, King's Lynn
 popcorn sofa cinema 
You may have read last month that some independent chains are considering a 
ban on popcorn, but you'll never escape it in the multiplexes. It recently 
emerged that UK cinema tickets would cost an extra £31.30 without the popcorn 
subsidy. So maybe you should be grateful to David B Wallerstein, who, in 1928, 
talked the management of the Chicago Theater into offering popcorn to its 
patrons. During the silent era, audiences paid such close attention to the 
action and captions that they didn't need the distraction of confectionery. But 
Wallerstein reasoned that viewers could listen to the new-fangled spoken 
dialogue while also tucking into buttered popcorn. Hence director King Vidor 
opining, "Popcorn and necking only came into pictures with the talkies."

Joining the Balaban & Katz Corporation from the Harvard Business School in 
1926, Wallerstein established himself as a pioneering exhibitor. He introduced 
live entertainment between films and Judy Garland, Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra 
and Mary Martin all sang at his venues. He retired as president of B&K in 1965, 
but not before he had persuaded ABC to help his friend Walt Disney finance 
Disneyland. But, as Morgan Spurlock would confirm, Wallerstein's lasting legacy 
is the fast food concept of supersizing. Realising that people felt greedy 
returning for second helpings of popcorn, toffee apples and iced drinks, but 
needing to increase his concession takings, Wallerstein abandoned two-for-one 
offers in favour of the kingsize portion. Furthermore, he persuaded founder Ray 
Kroc to adopt the idea on joining the board of McDonald's in 1968.

Do you have a question? Email ask.parky@guardian.co.uk
 