
Is it true that Michael Winner once sold condoms in Piccadilly Circus?
Malcolm Lewington, Eastbourne

Yup, because he lost a bet with Marlon Brando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/marlonbrando> over the correct pronunciation 
of "integral".

Winner already had form where Piccadilly Circus was concerned, having twice 
annoyed the Metropolitan Police by blowing up a stunt Rolls Royce during the 
making of You Must Be Joking! (1965). Indeed, while filming cover shots, he 
denied having anything to do with the smoking, leaking vehicle as ten coppers 
pushed it off the road and another couple arrested the driver and the 
production manager (who had to pay minor fines).

So, on the third occasion, he tipped off the Met that he was going to pose as 
a blind beggar selling French ticklers from a tray bearing the legend, 
"Purveyour of Sexual Aids to the Gentry, 1st July, 1977". He had photographs 
taken to prove he had paid his forfeit and an amused Brando sent him a 
medallion inscribed: "Michael. The loser is also a Winner, M.B."

With Westfield, London due to have a 14-screen cinema, I was wondering which 
is the world's biggest multiplex?
Tony Lascelles, Welwyn Garden City
 The new Westfield shopping centre. Photo: Getty/Oli Scarf 
Eleven venues currently share the record, with 30 screens. Among them is the 
Vue Birmingham, which forms part of the Star City complex and is the biggest 
cinema outside North America. However Iranian producer Ahmad Golchin has plans 
to top this in Tehran next year.

Multi-screen sites have come a long way since the Regal Twins opened in 
Manchester in 1930. London followed with Studio 1 and 2 in 1936, but dual 
screens didn't catch on in the States until the Alhambra Twin launched in 
Alhambra, California three years later. In 1969, the Metro Plaza in Kansas City 
beat its own record by expanding from a quadriplex to a six-plex.

But the driving force behind multi-screen exhibition was the Canadian Nat 
Taylor, who devised the idea of splitting single-screen venues when he divided 
the Elgin, Ottawa to show both Alfred Hitchcock's Witness for the Prosecution 
and David Lean's The Bridge on the River Kwai in 1957.

Having opened the first triplex in Burnaby, British Columbia in 1965, Taylor 
defied his critics to build the 18-screen Cineplex in Toronto's Eaton Centre. A 
film was even made about the construction of what was then the world's biggest 
venue.

But "Taylor's folly" was eventually surpassed when Studio 28 in Grand Rapids, 
Michigan - which had launched as a drive-in in 1948 and been converted into an 
indoor theatre in 1965 - added eight screens to its 1983 refurbishment to 
become the world's first 20-screener in 1988.

Why do they keep using white type for subtitles when it's so often impossible 
to read against bright backgrounds?

Helena Francis, Durham
 Victoria and David Beckham in a subtitled Japanese advert. Photo: Rex 
The majority of English-language subtitles come in white sans serif type and 
are burned into the print during the manufacture of release prints. In most 
cases, the process involves the production of an inter-negative, which is a 
composite of a duplicate photographic print of the graded master show print and 
a computer file containing both the translated dialogue and frame-accurate 
codes which dictate the precise placement of each subtitle. However, where 
limited releases are concerned, it's often cheaper to burn the subtitles 
directly on to the individual prints.

Subtitles appear white, as they are usually burnt into or drawn on the 
emulsion to allow light from the projector lamp to pass through them. The best 
titles have dark edges so they can be read white on white. However, some 
distributors opt for opaque or translucent bars to prevent the titles from 
disappearing during changes in the colour and/or luminosity of the image and 
there was a vogue in the late 1990s for yellow text. But, while these afforded 
greater title separation, they often clashed with the picture's carefully 
chosen palette.

In some instances, illegibility results from a conscious choice made by 
projectionists unable to get image and text to coalesce, as they would rather 
have fuzzy subtitles than unfocused visuals. This problem should be eradicated 
by digital projection, as the titles will be added to the action 
electronically, as they are currently with most DVDs.

• Do you have a question? Email ask.parky@guardian.co.uk
 