
I read in the Eileen Herlie obituary that she was 11 years Laurence Olivier's 
junior when she played his mother in Hamlet. Is this a record age discrepancy? 
Marcus Porter, Aldershot

It seems to be. Michael J Fox was a mere three years older than Crispin Glover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/crispin-glover> when he played his son in 
Back to the Future (1985), and Jessica Tandy was only two years husband Hume 
Cronyn's senior when she essayed his daughter in The Green Years (1946). Helen 
Hunt was a year older than "father" Nicolas Cage in Peggy Sue Got Married 
(1986), while Roger Daltrey was born three months before screen dad Robert 
Powell and only three years after "mother" Ann-Margret in Tommy (1975).

Cinema's smallest mother-child discrepancy is the six months separating 
Maureen Stapleton from Dick Van Dyke in Bye Bye Birdie (1963), while the 
father-child gap appears to be the 331 days between Roger Livesey andLaurence 
Olivier <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/olivier> in The Entertainer (1960). 
Angela Lansbury was cast as the mothers of Elvis Presley and Laurence Harvey in 
Blue Hawaii (1961) and The Manchurian Candidate (1962), despite only being 
older than her "sons" by 10 and three years respectively. Similarly, Sean 
Connery was only 12 and seven years older than Harrison Ford and Dustin Hoffman 
in Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade and Family Business (both 1989). However, 
the oddest age-gap scenario involved Greer Garson, who married Richard Ney, the 
son who was only 12 years her junior in Mrs Miniver (1942).

I was enchanted by Lotte Reiniger's The Adventures of Prince Achmed at the 
Bath film festival. Did she invent silhouette cinema? 
Mary Fowler, Bath
 Lotte Reiniger. Photo: Kobal 
Despite the title of Katja Raganelli's 1999 documentary, Lotte Reiniger: 
Homage to the Inventor of the Silhouette Film, the Berliner didn't devise the 
technique of animating silhouetted paper cut-outs. Its origins lay in thewayang 
kulit <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wayang> shadow puppets of Java and the 
ombres chinoises that were popular in Europe from the 17th century. The 
godfather of shadow spectacle was François Dominique Séraphin, who performed in 
Paris either side of the French Revolution, and Lotte Reiniger reproduced an 
extract from his knockabout farce Le Pont Cassé for Jean Renoir's La 
Marseillaise (1938).

Séraphin's theatre closed in 1879, but shadow plays were revived six years 
later at the Chat Noir by Henri Rivière and Rodolphe Salis, an artist and set 
designer who introduced theatrical lighting, perspectived sets and special 
effects in shows like La Marche à l'Etoile, which anticipated Reiniger's 
illusion of staged depth. Animators like Emile Cohl were regular visitors to 
the celebrated Montmartre cabaret, and he used silhouetted cut-outs for his 
1910 history of locomotion, En Route. But he was not the first to employ the 
technique on a moving picture.

Opinion is divided as to whether Segundo de Chomón 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=InOf93gc3r8> or Briton Charles Armstrong was 
the actual pioneer. The Spaniard utilised a translucent screen to create shadow 
characters in La Maison Hantée (1906) and employed shadow puppets in Sombras 
Animadas (1907) and Les Ombres Chinoises (1908). He also seems to have used 
silhouetted cut-outs for Les Cocottes en Papier (1908). But other historians 
insist that Armstrong was the first to animate silhouettes in The Sporting Mice 
(1909). He even achieved a negative effect to show white figures against a 
black background in his sole surviving film, The Clown and His Donkey (1910).

What's not disputed, however, is that Reiniger (who made her first silhouette 
animation, Das Ornament des Verliebten Herzens, in 1919) transformed the 
technique into anart form <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a2S9uEz3lNA>. The 
Adventures of Prince Achmed (1926) is available on DVD and the BFI will release 
a two-disc selection of her exquisite fairy tales later this month.

I saw Verne Troyer on Keith Lemon's Celebrity Juice. Is he the smallest movie 
actor ever? 
Marcus Porter, Aldershot
 Verne Troyer. Photo: Kobal 
Having debuted as the puppet's double in Pinocchio's Revenge (1996), Verne 
Troyer made his name as Mini-Me in Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me 
(1999). At 2' 8", he is the smallest adult actor in Hollywood history. However, 
he's not the most diminutive performer, as 2' 7" Tamara de Treaux operated the 
alien doll in E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial (1982).

• Do you have a question? Email ask.parky@guardian.co.uk
 