
My nephew is seven years old. He’s very intelligent and has a lot of friends. 
Lately, he’s been talking about an imaginary sister for hours. He doesn’t 
interact with her; he just imagines situations or adventures in his head. My 
question is, should we worry? Also, why a sister and not a friend? Is this his 
way of telling us he wants a sibling? Should we encourage or discourage this? 
My brother (his dad) says he’s too old for all this.
Whenever a child invents a fictional, imagined, character, it is as if they 
have opened a portal for you to find out what they really yearn for, what they 
love, what they are feeling and what they are afraid of. There is so much you 
can find out about them by sitting with them and exploring their relationship 
with this character. Children often come up with this third-person narrative as 
a way to address things that they are finding tough to face up to in their real 
life.

I would take the counterintuitive approach, and ask as many fun and gentle 
questions as you can. These can be direct ones: “Hey, I am curious – would you 
like a sister in your life?” (Avoid talking about “real life” here, because 
young people and older alike can feel deeply connected with their imaginary 
adventures and friends, which can often feel more real than anything else.)

He may simply yearn for a young female presence, or for an actual sister, or 
for the feeling he gets when he is imagining these adventures with her. On the 
other hand, it might be his way of addressing something even more profound – 
which he will open up to you about as soon as you show a non-judgmental 
interest.

Whatever the reason, I can assure you that there is nothing to worry about. I 
would ask questions about her whenever he brings the subject up, and enjoy it 
as the sweet opportunity for sharing that it is.

Ask Alanis Morissette: I have no friends – what’s wrong with me?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/08/i-have-no-friends-alanis-morissette-advice-column>
You are clearly a very engaged aunt, and your nephew is likely to sense the 
safety that comes from discussing some of his innermost thoughts with you, to 
the point of no longer needing his imaginary friend as a buffer. He will 
probably outgrow her entirely in time. In the meantime, you have yet another 
way of bonding with him.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com. Send 
your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to Alanis Morissette at
ask.alanis@theguardian.com <mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com>
 