
Did Harold Lloyd become a pornographer? 

Tom Saunders, Ilfracombe

Pornography is a rather extreme word for the self-consciously arty nude 
studies that Harold Lloyd produced after his screen fortunes dwindled. Between 
the late 1940s and early 60s, Lloyd amassed a collection of some 100,000 
photographs of naked women, but they were all processed by Eastman labs that 
had very strict rules about acceptable content. Besides some chaste cheesecake 
snaps of Marilyn Monroe and Jayne Mansfield, Lloyd's most celebrated pictures 
were taken with a Stereo Realist camera and images of Bettie Page and such 
starlets as Shirley Kilpatrick, Arlene Hunter and Joy Harmon (who later got 
Paul Newman in a lather washing a car in Cool Hand Luke) are included in the 
book Hollywood Nudes in 3-D.
 Officially not a pornographer ... Harold Lloyd. Photo: Kobal 
However, Lloyd also photographed landmarks and landscapes around the world and 
was the first president of the Hollywood Stereoscopic Society, whose members 
included Ronald Colman, Dick Powell, Robert Cummings and ventriloquist Edgar 
Bergen.

I have a couple of colorised Laurel and Hardy films. Why did they stop making 
them?

Ally Bradford, London
 A colourised Oliver and Stanley. Photo: Kobal 
There are some genies that refuse to go back in the bottle and colorisation 
ranks among the peskiest. The process was first used in 1970 by Canadians 
Wilson Markle and Brian Hunt to add colour to monochrome footage of the Apollo 
moon missions. But controversy arose when Markle formed Colorization Inc. as a 
subsidiary of Hal Roach Studios and colorised Norman Z. McLeod's spectral 
comedy, Topper (1937). The purists cried bowdlerisation and argued that such 
tinkering would distort film history. But the movie's star, Cary Grant, liked 
the transformation and persuaded Frank Capra to consider colorising It's a 
Wonderful Life (1946). However, Capra joined the chorus of disapproval when he 
discovered that the picture was in the public domain and he was powerless to 
block the gaudily altered print.

The debate grew more heated in the mid-1980s, when Ted Turner announced a deal 
with Color Systems Technology to colorise 150 MGM and Warner Bros features. 
Turner insisted these reissues would entice younger audiences to watch films 
they had resisted in black and white. But opponents accused him of disregarding 
artistic integrity in the name of profit and dismissed arguments that 
artificial colouring had a legitimacy rooted in the aniline dyes used in the 
1890s and in such stencil formats as Pathechrome (1905) and the Handschiegl 
Color Process (1916). Such was Hollywood's renitence that legends like James 
Stewart, Ginger Rogers, Steven Spielberg and George Lucas testified to a 
Congressional panel in 1987, while the carelessness of the enterprise was 
exposed when Frank Sinatra, Ol' Blue Eyes himself, was given brown eyes in a 
colorisation of Lewis Allen's assassination thriller, Suddenly (1954).

Ultimately, poor video sales did more to condemn colorisation than righteous 
indignation. But enthusiasm has revived in the digital era, withTimebrush 
<http://www.timebrush.com/> and Legend Films <http://www.legendfilms.net/> 
generating subtler and more natural hues. Colour versions of Laurel and Hardy 
and Three Stooges comedies are now offered alongside the monochrome originals, 
while the likes of Ray Harryhausen, Jane Russell and Shirley Temple have 
actively collaborated in the colorisation of their work. So, Billy Wilder seems 
to have answered his own question: "Do they hope to palm off some of the old 
stinkers by dipping them in 31 flavors? Is there no end to their greed?"

Is it true that Fred Astaire considered partnering Jessie Matthews after 
splitting from Ginger Rogers?

Helena Ranwick, Dumfries
 Jesse Matthews in post-dancing days. Photo: Rex 
Adele Astaire always hoped that Jessie Matthews would become her brother's 
stage partner when she retired and Fred once told Picturegoer magazine, "There 
is nothing I would like better than to appear in a film with Jessie Matthews." 
However, caprice kept the pair apart. In November 1933, RKO suits were so 
excited by Astaire's showing with Ginger Rogers in the yet-to-be-released 
Flying Down to Rio that it refused to loan him for Rodgers and Hart's Evergreen 
and Gaumont-British exacted its revenge in 1935 by turning down a $50,000 offer 
for an unspecified Astaire project and then by blocking a deal for A Damsel in 
Distress two years later. A mooted project at Columbia similarly failed to 
materialise in 1940.
 