
 I am a stay-at-home mother, and most days I fail to accomplish even the most 
basic tasks like folding the clean laundry that has been accumulating for a 
week. I used to be an ironworker and I am no stranger to hard work, but now I 
have an energetic 10-month-old who would rather follow me around thwarting any 
attempt I make at productivity than play with his toys, and I am four months 
pregnant with twins. I rarely have time to eat or drink during the day – my 
wants and needs get put on the back burner. I’m terrified at the thought of 
adding more babies into the mix. I love my son, but I feel like a prisoner in 
my home.




One of my pet peeves is when people say mothers “have to take care of their 
needs first”, using the oxygen mask on a plane theory. The commitment you have 
made to being at home to raise your children is beyond commendable. It will 
afford them security as they continue to develop, but it does not leave room 
for much else on your list of priorities right now.

This is a gift you are offering them that they will carry with them through 
every stage of their development. But at each stage I hope you are availing 
yourself of something vital: community. In her bookMothers And Others 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mothers-and-others.html>, the anthropologist 
Sarah Blaffer Hrdy examines how different configurations of caregivers (of 
different genders and ages) yield incredibly connected children. Doing it all 
on your own only leads to burnout. I hope you are able to rely on friends, 
family, neighbours and support groups. Ask for help: even if it is just someone 
coming to watch your children for an hour while you shower (luxury!) or eat 
something nutritious.

Ask Alanis: should I follow my boyfriend to the big city?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/05/ask-alanis-should-i-follow-my-boyfriend-to-big-city>
Even with support around me, I found the post-partum period challenging. If 
reaching out to a therapist or doctor offers support for you, I highly 
recommend that as well. You are about to enter back into the fray, threefold. 
As a twin with an older brother, my heartstrings are pulled for you: I don’t 
think my mother could have done it alone. Know that it is perfectly appropriate 
for you to have a dusty, messy, cluttered home for a while – and your psyche 
may feel the same. Your priorities are breathtaking, and if anyone takes issue 
with your laundry, they are welcome to fold it for you while they make your 
dinner.

• Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to Alanis 
Morissette atask.alanis@theguardian.com <mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com>
 