
I recently graduated and have been with my boyfriend for three years. He’s 
naturally intelligent and popular; I’m quiet and hardworking. Now he wants to 
move to a new, big city, where we will find jobs (hopefully) that will pay 
enough to cover our bills. I was offered a job in our local town that I’m not 
too excited about, but I at least know I will have enough to make ends meet. 
Though the idea of moving and having a new life sounds like a dream, at the end 
of the day that’s all it is. Should I follow my heart and move to the big city 
with him? Or do I stay where I know I have a job waiting for me, yet possibly 
ruin my relationship?

It sounds as if you and your boyfriend complement each other temperamentally 
(as my husband and I do), which can make for a lifestyle that is both grounded
and delightfully risk-taking. The challenge can be when his desire for 
excitement and novelty runs into your practical and pragmatic approach to life.

Have you shared your misgivings with him? Something that has worked for my 
husband and me in the past is for each of us to take the floor for a few 
minutes and hold nothing back in the sharing of our vision for the future. Only 
after you have gone with gusto into why your approach feels like a good one, 
and feel as though you have been truly heard, can you begin to sit in your 
partner’s shoes.

If you are only acquiescing to his desires, this is a recipe for resentment. 
But having a sense of what you need to make a big move will help: highly 
sensitive people often need to pause to check before they leap, if they leap at 
all. Those of us who are more novelty-seeking value spontaneity. Both 
approaches yield wonderful things, and both of your temperaments need to be 
taken into consideration before you make big changes.

Ask Alanis Morissette: I'm married but attracted to another man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/16/emotional-affair-evening-class-husband-alanis-morissette>
Might there be a way to make the move less risky for you? Perhaps giving it 
six months in the new city, or telling the new job that you might not have an 
answer for a few months? Either way, I would recommend a heart-to-heart 
conversation to establish whether there is an air of “we won’t stop until we 
both win” (which makes a relationship work) or less of a partnership mindset 
(“Sorry babe, I am going with or without you”). Only a big dose of 
self-knowledge will yield the answer you are both looking for.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://smarturl.it/zkqq8l>. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in 
general to Alanis Morissette atask.alanis@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com>
 