
A few years ago, I got very ill and I am still suffering the after-effects. I 
can’t work and now struggle in social situations. I am finding myself 
incredibly lonely, isolated and depressed. I used to be outgoing and confident, 
but I have been losing contact with my old friends. I had thought it was 
because I often turn down invitations due to being unwell, but this week I 
received a message from one of my oldest friends to tell me that I bring her 
down and that I need to cheer up. I am heartbroken. I have so much love and 
friendship to offer, just not in the same way I was able to before. What should 
I do?

Sometimes, illnesses or injuries or bouts of depression can leave us feeling 
completely altered. It makes sense to me that your big life adjustment would 
have an effect on your social life, and I have a lot of empathy for how hard 
that can be.

When I had postnatal depression, I rarely saw any of my friends – it was as if 
they all disappeared off the face of the planet, and I was devastated. I can 
only assume that I was “bringing them down” and that they felt helpless to 
influence my mood. Sometimes people don’t realise that just sitting with us, 
staring at a sunset, eating soup, watching a movie – essentially just being – 
is all we really need. We are social creatures. In the best of friendships, you 
are there for each other through both celebrations and suffering.

Those outgoing and confident parts of your personality still reside somewhere 
inside you; they have not gone anywhere. It’s simply that other more vulnerable 
aspects have emerged and taken a front seat. But all these parts of you – 
lonely, confident, ill, outgoing – come together to make you who you are, and a 
true friend will recognise that.

Ask Alanis Morissette: I wish my girlfriend didn’t smoke pot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/01/ask-alanis-morissette-wish-girlfriend-didnt-smoke-pot>
Your friends aren’t responsible for cheering you up, but they can certainly 
make dark times more tolerable, even humorous. Do you have even one friend who 
has dived into the murky waters with you? Is there someoneyou have stuck with 
in difficult times? Sometimes even one visit from such a friend can shift the 
loneliness. If not, it could be time to join a support group, or try to meet 
new friends who want more than simply to be near you when you are in a good 
mood.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://www.alanis.com>. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in 
general to Alanis Morisette atask.alanis@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com>
 