
My girlfriend and I have been dating for a couple of months now. Before this 
we were really good friends. I have always known that she smokes pot. I don’t 
do drugs because I am bipolar, and I just can’t accept the fact she still 
smokes. I love her so much, I just need to know how to accept this part of her.
 In broaching this with your girlfriend, I would be clear about why you don’t 
enjoy being with her when she smokes. Focus more on your experience and less on 
her needing to change. Is it that you somehow feel lonely when she is high? 
Does her smoking disconnect you in some way? I would recommend getting to the 
essence of what you miss when she is high with you, and explaining that to her.

If she’s prepared to stop smoking, then wonderful. If she is not open to 
changing her habits, it comes down to how important this is to you, and how 
much of a boundary you are willing to set. Would you walk away from the 
relationship if she were unwilling to stop? Is it something you could tolerate 
if she did it less? These are questions only you can answer.

My husband and I have always taken care to look at whatever habit or behaviour 
keeps intimacy at bay for us. There are many survival strategies that kept us 
alive when we were younger, that now simply keep us estranged from each other.

What you might have been willing to tolerate years ago in the context of a 
friendship might not be something you are willing to stand by as you get older 
or more deeply involved. It sounds like the drug-free environment you yearn for 
indicates your wanting a deeper intimacy – something substances and even 
obsessions with people can stop us from truly having.

Ask Alanis Morissette: I am dating a younger man, but my friends disapprove. 
Help!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/25/dating-younger-man-friends-disapprove>
Having been someone who turned to people and substances to keep a lifestyle in 
place that was not good for my nervous system, out of mere survival, I can say 
that stopping them led to a better, long-term way of navigating life, as well 
as my relationship with my husband.

When you change behaviour “for” each other, it turns out it almost always 
benefits the one who changes. But I recommend taking it slowly. My best to you 
both.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://www.alanis.com>. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in 
general to Alanis Morissette ataskalanis@theguardian.com 
<mailto:askalanis@theguardian.com>
 