
So many films these days seem to be collaborations between companies from 
different countries. When did cross-border co-production actually begin?
 Jason Freeman, Sheffield 
 The Lumière brothers, whose Cinématographe was used by itinerant cameramen 
all across the globe. Photo: Sipa Press/Rex Features 
 Co-production has technically existed since 1896, as many of the earliest 
international images were filmed using the Lumière Cinématographe by such 
itinerant cameramen as François-Constant Girel, André Carré, Gabriel Veyre, 
Marius Sestier and Jean Promio. The most widely travelled Lumiere operator, 
however, was Félix Mesguich, who filmed in the US, Canada, Russia, Britain, 
Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Greece, Palestine, Egypt, Ceylon, India, 
Cambodia, Vietnam, Burma, Singapore, Japan and China, as well as France and his 
native Algeria.

Unfortunately, little is known about the first contracted co-production, as no 
print of Das Geheimnis der Lüfte has survived. Directed by Ernst Klein and 
starring Julius Brandt, Eva Roth, Max-Ralf Ostermann and Karl Illner, the 
five-reel drama premiered at the Grabenkino in Vienna in August 1913.

The co-producers were Erich Pommer from Wiener Autorenfilm and Marcel Vandal 
of (it is presumed) Pathé Frères. Pommer clearly enjoyed the experience, for, 
as head of Ufa, he became a leading advocate of the Film Europe initiative in 
the mid-1920s to make "continental" films for pan-European audiences. However, 
the deleterious impact of the Parufamet agreement he signed with Paramount and 
MGM in 1925 hastened the end of his tenure and any hopes of sustained 
co-production perished beneath the triple threat of the talkies, the Depression 
and authoritarianism.

What happened to the proposed Mr Benn movie?
 Alison McGoldrick, Plymouth
 Fancy dresser ... Mr Benn. Photo: King Roll Films Ltd/Nickelodeon UK/PA 
 Plans for a live-action feature based on David McKee's 1971 animated 
children's favourite were announced in early 1999. John Hannah was slated to 
star as the besuited, bowler-hatted occupant of 52 Festive Road, while Ben 
Kingsley was due to play the owner of the fancy dress shop whose changing room 
was a portal to adventure. The storyline was to chronicle Mr Benn's search for 
lost love Monica McBride (Jane Horrocks), in what director Jevon O'Neill called 
"one man's journey to fulfil his potential".

But Mr Benn seemed doomed when the sponsoring UK Films Group collapsed. As if 
by magic, Erinfilm stepped into the breach in March 2000, promising a budget of 
£4 million. However, the green light was extinguished again in April 2001 and 
the project has since remained dormant.

When were the earliest moving images projected?
Martin Hipkiss, Rhyl

According to some theories, images have been projected since prehistoric 
times, with the caves at Lascaux possibly acting as a primitive pinhole camera. 
Ancient thinkers like Mo Tzu, Plato and Aristotle all discussed optical 
principles central to the making and showing of moving pictures, while Han-era 
China saw the development of the magic "makyoh" mirror and the Shao Ong shadow 
play, which inspired the famouswayang kulit puppets of Indonesia.
 The earliest screening room? ... prehistoric paintings in caves at Lascaux. 
Photo: Sissie Brimberg/National Geographic/Getty 
 In 1290, physician-cum-showman Arnaud de Villeneuve used a camera obscura to 
project images of outdoor performers enacting combat and hunting scenes on to 
the wall of a darkened room. Mathematician Girolamo Cardano presented similar 
"moving shows" in the 1550s, complete with sound effects. But the process of 
confining the object and the means of projection within a single piece of 
apparatus had already begun.

Around 1420, Giovanni de Fontana had included in his Liber Instrumentorum an 
illustration of a demonic figure being projected by a lantern. Yet the German 
Jesuit Athanasius Kircher is usually credited with evincing the first feasible 
magic lantern. The science in his book, Ars Magna Lucis Et Umbra (1646), is 
somewhat shaky. But, in the 1571 second edition, he acknowledged the 
refinements of fellow pioneers Thomas Rasmussen Walgensten and Christian 
Huygens in describing his Lanterna Magica and also described a revolving wheel 
of eight paintings known as a "Smicroscopin", which sequentially depicted 
Christ's death and resurrection.

Another 60 years were to elapse, however, before Dutchman Pieter van 
Musschenbroek devised a dual slide method that enabled movement within 
projected images. One 1736 scene, for example, showed a man doffing his hat and 
bowing to a lady in front of a windmill with revolving sails.
 