
I recently saw Joshua Dugdale's documentary, The Unwinking Gaze: The Inside 
Story of the Dalai Lama's Struggle for Tibet. Seemed a pretty long title to me 
- how does it fare compared with others?
John Horwich, Battersea 
 Dr Strangelove. Photo: Kobal 
At 13 words, it ties for seventh place with Stanley Kubrick's Dr Strangelove 
or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb (1964).

The longest title is Night of the Day of the Dawn of the Son of the Bride of 
the Return of the Revenge of the Terror of the Attack of the Evil, Mutant, 
Hellbound, Flesh-Eating Subhumanoid Zombified Living Dead, Part 3 (37 words, 
192 letters).
 Sophia Loren in Blood Feud. Photo: Kobal 
This comic redubbing of Joseph Green's 1962 sci-fi chiller, The Brain That 
Wouldn't Die, was directed by James Riffel, who, in 1991, had used the 
pseudonym Lowell Mason to rework George A Romero's Night of the Living Dead as 
Night of the Day of the Dawn of the Son of the Bride of the Return of the 
Revenge of the Terror of the Attack of the Evil, Mutant, Alien, Flesh Eating, 
Hellbound, Zombified Living Dead Part 2: In Shocking 2-D (41 words, 168 
letters).

The record for an original work, however, belongs to Lina Wertmüller's 1978 
drama, Un Fatto di sangue nel commune di Sculiana fra due unomini per causa di 
una vedova si sospetanomoventi politici. Amore-Morte-Shimmy. Lugano belle. 
Tarantelle. Taratelle e vino (26 words, 171 letters). This was abbreviated in 
Italy to Fatto di sangue fra due uomini per causa di una vedova - si sospettano 
moventi politici, while the English-language title was Blood Feud. A recut 
version was simply dubbed, Revenge.

If Sacha Baron Cohen and Robert Downey Jr are racing to become the big 
screen's nextSherlock Holmes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sherlock-holmes>
, who was the first?
Meg Little, Luton
 Robert Stephens in The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes. Photo: Kobal 
The identity of the eponymous actor in Sherlock Holmes Baffled remains 
unknown. Running some 30 seconds, the film was produced for the Mutoscope 
peepshow in 1900 (although the copyright on one existing version states 1903) 
and features a cigar-smoking Holmes disturbing a burglar, who keeps 
disappearing thanks to some stop-frame magic.Click here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-eO3EbFG0ak> to watch the clip and try and 
solve the mystery.

When did 20th Century Fox introduce its famous logo and theme tune? Marsha 
Rodgers, Ipswich

The edifice and searchlights logo was designed in 1933 by matte artist Emil 
Kosa Jr to preface releases by 20th Century Pictures, with the accompanying 
fanfare being composed by Alfred Newman. The original third layer words 
"Pictures Inc" were replaced by "Fox" when the studio merged with the Fox Film 
Corporation in 1935 and this combination remained in situ for 18 years, with a 
Technicolor version being available from Henry King's Ramona (1936).
 The poster for How to Marry a Millionaire. Photo: Kobal 
With the introduction of CinemaScope in 1953, the front office decided that 
the logo needed to be more imposing and new graphics were commissioned for 
Howard Hawks' How to Marry a Millionaire, to which Newman appended the 
"CinemaScope extension", which became the standard following another Marilyn 
Monroe vehicle, Henry Hathaway's River of No Return (1954). This revision, 
which was conducted by Alfred's brother Lionel, predominantly held sway over 
the next four decades, although Fox inexplicably dropped its trademark in 1970, 
only to reinstate it a year later after a public outcry.

New recordings of the fanfare were made by John Williams for Irvin Kershner's 
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and respectively in 1994 and 1997 by Bruce 
Broughton and David Newman (who is Alfred's son) to accompany the existing CGI 
aerial swoop version of the so-called "majestic tower".

Several novelty credits have been produced down the years, with cars driving 
through the "O" in The Cannonball Run (1981), the searchlights going out in Die 
Hard 4.0 and Ralph Wiggum singing along with the fanfare in The Simpsons Movie 
(both 2007).
 Ralph Wiggum (far left) in The Simpsons Movie. Photo: Kobal 
Want to ask Parky a question? Email ask.parky@guardian.co.uk. Thanks to those 
who've already done so, and apologies to those who tried last week and failed - 
all technical problems are now resolved so do try again.
 