
Dear Carrie,

I’m a woman in mid 50s, two kids older than 18 (one launched), and have been 
married for 30 years to a man who, I recently discovered, has been seeing 
prostitutes since before we were married, at the rate of about every other 
month (“But not all the time!” he says – I would estimate about 100 during the 
course of our marriage). We are seeing counselors, both separately and 
together, and trying to make it work. I know I have every right to walk out in 
high dudgeon, but the facts remain – I am not financially independent. He is in 
many ways a good partner. I did love him like crazy. We have built a lot of 
life together. But on the other hand, he lied, lied and lied. I can forgive the 
fucking around, but the lying is difficult. And even with therapy, I don’t have 
reassurance that he will understand that lying is wrong. It’s like having a 
really sweet dog who doesn’t understand that peeing on the carpet is a no-go. 
But with the dog, at least I can go out and form relationships with other 
animals. I have so much invested at this point, and I am stubborn about giving 
up. But that stubbornness sometimes only allows me to see the exit signs in the 
rear-view mirror. I am at a loss as to what I would gain or lose by staying or 
going. If I leave, I will have no reason to keep his secrets, and he will lose 
his kids and a lot of his family. I feel bad about that, even if it’s not my 
fault. But on the other hand, maybe he needs some of those natural consequences 
to give him a kick in the pants. Having lived a well-experienced life, what are 
your thoughts?


Carrie Fisher: tell me your story, I’ll tell you mine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/10/carrie-fisher-advice-from-the-dark-side-column>
It’s difficult to know what to say to someone whose partner has cheated on 
them. You write about how your husband lying to you is worse than his being 
with the prostitutes – and I know what you mean. It’s also the feeling that one 
has been a disappointment somehow – not enough. But no one can be everything to 
everyone. It’s a lot of time to spend with someone, 30 years – more than half a 
life.

And you’ve had children together – made people – combinations of you both – 
something like forever mixed into two beings. But the lying. It is a big thing. 
My question to you is – has he lied to you about other things? Can you believe 
him now when he says he hasn’t?

If you do believe that this is the “only” thing he lied about, then maybe 
there’s something to be salvaged. Everyone always lies about sex. If you 
haven’t lied about it, it isn’t sex. Have you ever faked an orgasm? Some might 
say that’s a kind of well-meaning lie – but it’s still lying, no?

His lying about the prostitutes shows you that he’s ashamed of his behavior. 
He didn’t want to hurt you. None of this justifies his behavior, but it 
explains it – superficially at least. You’ve been together a long time. I think 
it’s worth maintaining your marriage. Forgive him. It’s the most amazing thing 
to be able to forgive. And so difficult. But relationships are difficult. 
You’ve managed to maintain your commitment to him. You’re the better person in 
that arena and in the position to forgive. Resentment, on the other hand, is a 
toxic experience. Superior and final – and when you walk away, what have you 
got?

You’re already doing the right thing – seeking help, in the way of therapy – 
and even me – yay! I’ve not managed to sustain a relationship and in many ways 
I wish I had. There is no true bottom line for this question – there are many. 
You know what I think? It sounds like it’s similar to what you think based on 
the actions you’ve already taken. He needs to prove he’s ready to stop hanging 
around with hookers. You need to be able to punish him for as long as you may 
have already and then no more. But he has more to prove than you do. I want him 
to send you a present or get you flowers. If he doesn’t, I will. You’re a good 
gal and don’t deserve this. I’m proud of you for taking the long road and not 
the easiest and fastest. You’ve already proven you can go the distance. It 
might get easier as you go – it might not. It sounds like it’s worth trying. In 
which case we all owe you a present. Post me your address and see what you get. 
A stone, a leaf, an unfound door, some cliché flowers or perfume and a dress. 
Keep in touch. Good luck, and keep up with the gusto. I’m cheering.

Love, 
Carrie 

Write to carrie.fisher.advice@theguardian.com 
 