
My husband and I have been married for eight years. I love him, we’re happy. 
The biggest gripe in our lives is his job, which he’s kept for 13 years. I feel 
he’s institutionalised. I’m the risk-taker, he has to analyse everything. He 
has no trust in his superiors and is close to walking out all the time, but 
won’t leave out of fear. This is despite getting job offers, which he ends up 
turning down. How can I help him take a leap of faith?
It sounds as if your marriage has a lovely balance between your risk taking 
and your husband’s pragmatism. Ideally, your approaches are rubbing off on each 
other over time. Perhaps your desire to support your husband’s happiness could 
take the form of listening to and understanding his concerns. He may have a 
goal in mind that he has not yet shared with you, or a valid fear that keeps 
him frozen in place. I would encourage him to discuss his visions for your 
future as a team, what he wants to provide, and how he wants to protect that 
future and your wellbeing, as well as his.

I would also (if you can) suspend your agenda of “getting him to leave his 
job”, so he can see that what you really want is to support him, rather than to 
control his actions. That’s hard to do, I realise, but the lens through which 
he looks at life is different from yours. And there is likely to be some wisdom 
in his resistance to taking this leap.

You could offer assurance that part of the charm of taking risks for you is 
that things could go either way, that his wellbeing is more important than the 
amount of bacon he brings home (if this is in fact true), and that you would be 
willing to adjust and make any necessary lifestyle changes that are required of 
you in order for him to be happy in his job. This might liberate him.

Ask Alanis Morissette: how can I stop drinking so much?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/15/ask-alanis-morissette-how-can-stop-drinking-so-much>
He may be thinking, “It’s easy for you to say you want to take these risks, 
but what if I wind up not bringing home the same amount of money, would you be 
so happy about it then?” If you would be, then sharing this, along with real 
empathy about his goals and dreams, could help you both move forward. Hopefully 
you will reach a point where you both feel comfortable with him staying at his 
job, or with him being willing to leave it.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available on iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://alanis.com/>.

Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to Alanis Morissette 
atask.alanis@theguardian.com <mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com>
 