
Who is the Michael Phelps of the Oscars?
Malcolm Burke, Sevenoaks

The runaway winner is Walt Disney. He converted 22 of his 59 Oscar nominations 
as a producer of animated and live-action films, while also receiving three 
special citations and the Irving G Thalberg Award, giving him a grand total of 
26 Academy Awards.

However, as head of his own studio, Disney could pretty much append his name 
to any project he chose. Yet art director Cedric Gibbons (who actually designed 
the Oscar) stood an even better chance of landing gongs, as his 1924 contract 
entitled him to a credit on every MGM picture released in the United States. No 
wonder he won 11 Oscars from 39 nominations.

Costume designer Edith Head's eight wins from 35 nominations were all her own 
work, however. She remains the most decorated female in Oscar history, and a 
woman also leads the way in the acting stakes, with Katharine Hepburn winning 
Best Actress on four occasions: Morning Glory (1933); Guess Who's Coming to 
Dinner (1967); The Lion in Winter (1968); and On Golden Pond (1981). She also 
has the distinction of receiving all 12 of her nominations in this one category.

Eight men have won Best Actor on two occasions - Fredric March, Spencer Tracy, 
Gary Cooper, Marlon Brando, Dustin Hoffman, Jack Nicholson, Tom Hanks and 
Daniel Day-Lewis. However, Nicholson also has a Best Supporting statuette to 
his credit, which puts him ahead on points of Walter Brennan who was chosen as 
Best Supporting Actor three times in five years between 1936 and 1940.

Typically, a couple of plucky Brits figure among the unlucky losers in the 
acting categories, with Richard Burton joining Irishman Peter O'Toole on seven 
failed nominations and Deborah Kerr heading the actress list with six.

Any idea about a film made some 15 years ago that involved pigs and DNA?
Franny Armstrong, London
 A still from Leon the Pig Farmer. Photograph: Channel 4 
Billed as "the first Jewish comedy feature film to come out of Britain", Vadim 
Jean and Gary Sinyor's Leon the Pig Farmer (1993) tells the story of a London 
estate agent (Mark Frankel), who discovers that he was the product of 
artificial insemination, because his presumed father had a low sperm count. 
Curious about his biological parent, Leon heads to North Dinthorpe in Yorkshire 
to meet pig farmer Brian Chadwick (Brian Glover) and his wife Yvonne (Connie 
Booth), who are determined to conform to Leon's Jewish traditions. However, 
things change when he accidentally uses sheep semen to impregnate a sow and 
produces the world's first kosher pig.

Partly inspired by Sinyor's encounter with a pig farmer who haggled over the 
price of tractor-towing a caravan out of some mud, Leon was produced at the 
suggestion of Monty Python's Eric Idle, after he had seen the Sinyor-scripted, 
BAFTA-nominated short, The Unkindest Cut (1988).

Originally budgeted at £33m, the picture was completed for £3,150,000, after 
the cast and crew agreed to defer their salaries. They were eventually paid 
after the film scooped around £31m at the UK box office.

Which film has been banned for the longest time by the British censor?
Ric Marron, Stafford
 Try showing this in 1913 ... A still from Cannibal Holocaust. Photograph: 
Graham Turner / The Guardian 
According to the British Board of Film Classification database, 875 films have 
been rejected on first submission since the turn of the last century. The first 
year for which listed titles are available is 1913, when 22 pictures were 
refused a certificate and none seems to have been reappraised. The earliest 
dated is Edison's The Great Physician, which was rejected on 21 January. 
Sources differ as to whether this drama was directed by Richard Ridgely or 
Bannister Merwin, but it's agreed that Charles Ogle starred as Death alongside 
Mabel Trunnelle, Robert Brower and Helen Coughlin.

Among the other 1913 titles are Spanish Bull Fight and A Snake's Meal, which 
were presumably spurned on the grounds of animal cruelty, and Religion and 
Superstition in Beloochistan and The Crimson Cross (aka The Mysteries of the 
Rosary, which starred Barbara Tennant as the Virgin Mary), which would probably 
have fallen foul of the strict guidelines on the depiction of religious topics.

One suspects British prudery accounted for Emil Albes's Frou Frou, Allan 
Dwan's Love Is Blind and Henri Pouctal's The Love Adventures of Faublas. But 
the rejection of the slapstick shorts Funnicus the Minister and La Culotte de 
Rigadin are more puzzling, as the prolific comic-director partnerships of 
Funnicus (Paul Bertho) and Romeo Bosetti and Rigadin (Charles Prince) and 
Georges Monca were firm family favourites across the globe.
 