
How long has product placement existed in films? 
Denise Wallace, Alnwick

The tie-in is as old as cinema itself, with Auguste and Louis Lumière plugging 
father-in-law Frank Claire's beer in The Card Game and the Lever Brothers's 
Sunlight Soap in Washing Day in Switzerland (both 1896). And, long before Shane 
Meadows, Thomas Edison had a penchant for publicising railroads.
 All tied up ... Harpo Marx in Love Happy. Photograph: Kobal 
By the late 1940s, there existed Hollywood agencies whose purpose was to 
exploit film, radio and television tie-ins, some of the biggest names in the 
business taking corporate coin. Billy Wilder placed a box of Ivory Snow Flakes 
on a shelf behind Barbara Stanwyck and Fred MacMurray in the classic film noir, 
Double Indemnity (1944), Michael Curtiz dotted bottles of Jack Daniels around 
Mildred Pierce (1945) and Frank Capra had young George Bailey (Bobbie Anderson) 
read National Geographic magazine while dreaming of becoming an explorer in 
It's a Wonderful Life (1946).

The most flagrant example from this period, however, occurred in the Marx 
Brothers's swan song, Love Happy (1949). Having struggled to bankroll the 
picture, co-producers Lester Cowan and Chico Marx concocted a Time Square chase 
sequence to sell space on the rooftop billboards over which Harpo clambered in 
making off with a pocketful of hot diamonds. By the end of the sequence, he had 
ridden Mobil Oil's red Pegasus mascot, swung on a giant Bulova clock pendulum 
and emerged exhaling smoke from the mouth of a penguin smoking a Kool cigarette.

TV spin-off movie seems to be making a comeback. When did cinema start 
poaching from the small screen?
Martine Kelsey, Birmingham
 Photograph: Kobal 
In 1954, when Jack Webb directed himself as Sgt Joe Friday and Ben Alexander 
as his sidekick Frank Smith in a feature version of the NBC hit, Dragnet. 
Launching on radio in 1949 and based on cases from the files of the LAPD, the 
show transferred to television in 1951 and the movie followed the episode trend 
of opening with the disclaimer, "The story you are about to see is true; the 
names have been changed to protect the innocent." It also borrowed the famous 
"dum-da-dum-dum" motif that the TV producers had borrowed uncredited from 
Miklos Rozsa score for Robert Siodmak's seminal noir, The Killers (1946). 
Ironically, the film also indulged in some blatant product placement, as 
Chesterfield cigarettes abounded.

Now Fred Crane is dead, how many members of the Gone With The Wind cast are 
still alive?
Marsha Rodgers, Ipswich

With a year to go until the 70th anniversary of David O Selznick's epic 
adaptation of Margaret Mitchell's novel, seven principal and three uncredited 
cast members have survived Fred Crane. The nephew of silent siren Leatrice Joy, 
he was spotted by then-director George Cukor while accompanying his cousin, 
Leatrice Joy Gilbert, to an audition for the role of Suellen O'Hara that 
eventually went to Evelyn Keyes (who died on July 4). Struck by his strapping 
frame and lazy Southern drawl, Cukor cast Crane alongside future Superman 
George Reeves as the twins Brent and Stuart Tarleton - although they were 
wrongly credited on screen and the error proved too costly to correct. 
Ultimately, Crane's career rather petered out, but he did have the distinction 
of uttering the film's opening line to Vivien Leigh: "What do we care if we 
were expelled from college, Scarlett? The war is going to start any day now, so 
we'd have left college anyhow."
 Olivia de Havilland in 1950. Photograph: Kobal 
The most prominent extant star is Olivia De Havilland, who won the Best 
Supporting Oscar for her performance as Melanie Hamilton. The Tokyo-born 
actress, who turned 92 on July 1, is not the oldest survivor, however. That 
distinction falls to 93-year-old Alicia Rhett, who auditioned for the role of 
Melanie, but had to settle for playing her sister-in-law, India. The baby of 
this exclusive club is Cammie King, who was 74 on August 5. Ironically, her 
character perished in the picture itself, as she played Bonnie Blue, Scarlett's 
daughter with Rhett Butler (Clark Gable), whose riding accident doomed her 
parents' already tempestuous marriage.

For the record, the other credited GWTW survivors are Ann Rutherford (Carreen 
O'Hara), Mickey Kuhn (Beau Wilkes) and Mary Anderson (Maybelle Merriwether), 
while Frank Coghlan Jr, Tommy Kelly and Ann Bupp are the last remaining bit 
players. What are the chances of the latter emulating her brother, Sonny? He 
played Orson Welles's son in Citizen Kane (1941) and was the last cast member 
to die, on November 1 last year.

Got a question for Parky? Email ask.parky@guardian.co.uk
 