In John Buchan's classic thriller The Thirty-Nine Steps, Richard Hannay is 
watched by German spies after learning about a plot to assassinate the Greek 
Premier. What does he disguise himself as to leave his safe home in London?  A 
postman  An old woman  A milkman  A German spy Harrison Sherpherd works as the 
secretary of a famous, assassinated individual in Barbara Kingsolver's The 
Lacuna. Who is it?  Leon Trotsky  John F Kennedy  John Lennon  Abraham Lincoln 
Alan Moore's graphic novel V for Vendetta follows the anarchist assassin V as 
he takes on the fascist ruling class in a dystopian Britain. What mask does he 
wear?  A gas mask  A Guy Fawkes mask  A Zorro-style eye mask  A Mickey Mouse 
mask The Godfather by Mario Puzo follows the murderous activities of the Mafia 
family Corleone. What does the last name Corleone mean in Italian?  Bravery  
Eagle-eye  Lionheart  Soldier HhHh by Laurent Binet is a fictionalised account 
of the assassination of Nazi SS officer Reinhard Heydrich in 1942. Who 
described Heydrich as "the man with the iron heart" in real life?  Adolf Hitler 
 Winston Churchill  Joseph Stalin  Heinrich Himmler The assassin in The 
Manchurian Candidate by Richard Condon is a sleeper agent. What symbol is used 
to activate his subconscious?  A yellow casino chip  The DIsney logo  A Queen 
of Diamonds playing card  A yin and yang symbol The eponymous quiet American in 
Graham Greene's novel is working for which intelligence agency?  FBI  MI6  MI5  
CIA I, Claudius by Robert Graves is a fictionalised biography of the Roman 
Emperor Claudius. Which assassinated Roman Emperor did Claudius succeed?  Caesar
 Octavian  Nero  Caligula Which of the brothers in The Brothers Karamazov 
suffers character assassination when he is found guilty for a crime he did not 
commit?  Pavel  Dmitri  Ivan  Alexei How many people did James Bond have to 
assassinate to earn his 00 status – his licence to kill – in Ian Fleming's 
novels?  One  Two  Three  Four  You got…  Well, you sure know a lot about 
assassinations. It's a bit suspicious, actually... Et tu, Brute?  Like Caesar's 
time as Emperor, this is not bad but not great either. Have another go!  Are 
you dead? Better try again.  Challenge your friends Submit answers  