
Alex McLeish <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> has been 
given the final three games of this season to somehow try to hold on to the 
manager's job that he looks likely to lose in the summer, irrespective of 
whether Aston Villa avoid relegation to the Championship.

In a joint statement issued on Wednesday night, Randy Lerner, Villa's owner, 
and Paul Faulkner, the chief executive, stopped short of offering anything 
close to long-term support for McLeish and, instead, admitted that they were 
looking no further than the next three fixtures. They also acknowledged the 
frustrations of the Villa fans and, rather damningly, said that they "share in 
them completely".

McLeish was subjected to vitriolic abuse from the supporters in the final 
minutes ofTuesday night's 2-1 defeat by fellow strugglers Bolton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/24/aston-villa-bolton-wanderers-premier-league>
, in a game that was watched by Lerner. Emotions were running high towards the 
end of the match, when Villa supporters turned on the former Birmingham 
manager, who was subjected to chants including "Sack McLeish, my lord".

The defeat means that Villa make the short trip to The Hawthorns to face West 
Bromwich on Saturday three points above the relegation zone and on the back of 
a miserable run that has seen them win only one of their past 13 league games. 
The Bolton result was particularly damaging because it allowed Owen Coyle's 
side to move to within three points of Villa with a game in hand.

Lerner's and Faulkner's joint statement said: "Right now everyone connected 
with Villa is hurting badly. A win was in sight [on Tuesday night] against 
Bolton after a strong start and the tenacity the team displayed, although 
ultimately we weren't able to hold on for the points. We very openly 
acknowledge the frustrations of Villa fans and share in them completely.

"What matters to us and the board at this moment is how we, as a club, handle 
adversity and the pressure it brings. Our horizon is the next three games and 
we continue to be in control of our own destiny. Young players side by side 
with more senior players are fighting hard for the club. They are now preparing 
for West Brom followed by Spurs and Norwich. We will continue to support and 
rely on our manager and the squad and therefore give them our full support.

"We are totally conscious, as is everyone at the club, that this is a very 
trying time for those who loveAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>. We know that the team will 
continue to fight through every minute of the remaining games and we hope Villa 
fans will continue to show their great support."

Stephen Warnock, who scored Villa's goal against Bolton, said that he 
understood the fans' response but insisted that the players were to blame. 
"It's a natural reaction in football, they come, they pay their money, they are 
entitled to their opinion," he said. "But we've got to be behind the manager 
because he's the one who puts us out on the pitch. It's down to us to go out 
and perform. It's our mistakes which have cost us, not the manager."

Villa were last relegated from the top flight in 1987, returning a year later. 
"It's a real test of character and we have to stand up and be counted now," 
Warnock added. "We've got three more games left. It's not like it is the last 
day of the season and that defeat has sent us down. We're in this and we're 
going to fight for it. We are still one game away from staying up and I'm 
confident we will get it."
 