
The first final to be disputed by two North African teams is not the one many 
would have predicted. The hosts Tunisia have surfed on a wave of popular 
support with a minimum of style and a maximum of efficiency, whereas a young
Morocco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morocco> side who were not 
expected to reach even the quarter-finals have combined organisation and flair 
in telling quantity.

The fervour of the 60,000 Tunisians packing the Olympic Stadium this afternoon 
will swell the hosts' morale, as will the knowledge that they have overcome the 
more fancied Senegal and Nigeria in the knockout stages. Nevertheless Tunisia 
are keenly aware of how good the Moroccans are.

Morocco's progression to the final has surprised even their players. "No one 
expected us to do much," said their striker Youssef Hadji. "But we get on so 
well as a group, we are like a family. When we beat Nigeria in our opening game 
our confidence grew and we kept getting better. Now we are within 90 minutes of 
winning the Nations Cup. That would be magnificent."

Morocco have one previous trophy but have yet to play in a final: in 1976, 
when the Atlas Lions were champions, the tournament was decided in a second 
group phase.

If Morocco are to win a sec ond continental title, their impressive defence, 
which has conceded only twice so far, will need to be at its best to ward off 
the lively Tunisia attacking pair of Silva Dos Santos and Zied Jaziri.

The Paris St-Germain centre-half Talal El Karkouri faces a late fitness test, 
with Morocco's formation depending on him. If he plays, the Atlas Lions will 
opt for 3-5-2; if not, a four-man back line.

El Karkouri says he does not fear the Tunisian strikers. "A man should never 
be scared of another man but you must respect him," he explained. "It's like in 
boxing; if you underestimate your opponent you will get a beating. But if you 
say my team is scared of Tunisia, you're wrong."

Up front, the vibrant and creative triumvirate of Hadji, Jaouad Zairi and 
Marouane Chamakh has provided Morocco with the tournament's best attack, with 
13 goals, including four in the semi-final against Mali.

El Karkouri, who spent a frustrating loan spell at Sunderland last season, 
believes both sides will create chances. "The first 15 minutes will be 
defensive, as we feel each other out," he said. "But after that we will see 
lots of chances and lots of goals. And I am happy that, whoever wins, it will 
be a North African side with their hands on the cup."

In yesterday's third-place game, Jay Jay Okocha led Nigeria to a 2-1 win over 
Mali and the small consolation of a bronze medal.

The Bolton midfielder opened the scoring with a deflected first-half free-kick 
and then created his country's second goal with a precise centre which Osaze 
Odemwingie headed low past Mahamadou Sidibé.

Tottenham's striker Frédéric Kanouté scarcely threatened and it was not until 
he was replaced that Mali came back into the match. Janvier Abouta's reply 
after 69 minutes was stunning, a left-foot volley which left Vincent Enyeama 
pawing the air. But it was not enough to save Mali.
 