
Polly Tommey was finding it difficult to attract attention to her campaign for 
increased awareness of autism, so she took her top off and posed, 
Wonderbra-style, for billboard posters beneath the words "Hello Boys". The boys 
she has in mind are the three main party leaders, and the appearance of dozens 
of these images around London last week prompted a surprisingly swift response 
from representatives of each party.

Tommey was invited by an adviser to Gordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> to meet Phil Hope, care 
minister, to discuss her concerns, while David Cameron's office contacted her 
to promise that a detailed response was on its way. Nick Clegg wrote a letter 
pledging a week's respite for those caring for people with autism, and 
improvements in special educational needs training for teachers.

There has been a swift but mixed reaction from other autism charities, some 
uncomfortable with the style of Tommey's campaign and the agenda behind it, but 
she shrugs off the criticism.

The poster was, she says, simply a ruse to force people not to avert their 
eyes from the subject of autism, and its success is evident, she argues, in the 
instant reaction from the politicians she was targeting. To those people who 
have emailed theAutism <https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> Trust, the 
charity she founded, saying the image is degrading to women, she replies: "What 
is degrading is how people with autism are forced to live."

"It's sad that billboards have to go up in the first place to get autism the 
attention it deserves," she says. "I'm 43; I shouldn't be on billboards taking 
my top off, but if that's what's needed to get attention, then I'll do it."

Tommey is the mother of 14-year-old Billy, who has autism, the editor of the 
Autism File, a magazine directed at parents and carers, and the founder of a 
charity dedicated to developing autism centres across the country. This is 
where adults with autism could be housed and employed, and where the rest of 
the public could receive training about the condition. She is also a former 
body double for actor Charlotte Rampling, making her relatively relaxed about 
being photographed in her underwear.

The posters, funded by anonymous sponsors, went up last week to mark 
World Autism Awareness Day, and come a year after a similarly arresting set of 
billboards that featured a postcard to Gordon Brown with Tommey's home phone 
number scrawled across it, and promising: "I can save you £508m a year [through 
improved autism care]. Please call me when it's convenient." That campaign 
secured her an invitation to breakfast with the wife of the prime minister, 
Sarah Brown, and time with the government's health advisers.

Tommey's assertion that 6 million voters could be swayed by positive 
commitments on autism comes from a complicated calculation based on the number 
of people with autism across the country, and the number of family members, 
carers and teachers who she believes would vote for any party that pledged 
greater resources for the condition. Autism affects one in 100 adults, and 
there are an estimated 300,000 adults with a condition somewhere on the 
autistic spectrum. "I know of 14 people in my family alone that would vote for 
any leader who would seriously consider initiating a real action plan for 
Billy," she says.

Tommey has five points she wants party leaders to commit to, including: 
demands for improved training in autism for public sector workers, a commitment 
to building regional autism centres, and funding of further research into 
the condition.

Her campaign has proved divisive also because of her record of supporting 
Andrew Wakefield <https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield>, the 
chief proponent of the theory of a link between the vaccination against mumps, 
measles and rubella (MMR) and a form of bowel disease and autism. His research 
triggered a huge dip in the numbers of children being vaccinated. The General 
Medical Council found him "dishonest" earlier this year, and the Lancet 
subsequently retracted the 1998 paper in which he had set out his findings.

Tommey is controversial in other ways, too. Her desire for residential centres 
for people with autism is not universally supported, with many other charities 
advocating that care should be brought into the wider community. Her magazine's 
focus on nutritional remedies has raised questions: her husband, a 
nutritionist, runs the Autism Clinic, a private practice offering treatment 
through dietary modifications. Some, such as the GP and author Michael 
Fitzpatrick, have voiced concern that her success at grabbing the attention of 
political leaders has detracted focus away from the efforts of the more 
mainstream National Autistic Society.

Tommey concedes that there is a lot of "bickering" among campaigners in this 
area, and says she had hoped to move away from the discussion of vaccinations, 
because she knows how divisive it is.

At the forefront of her current campaign is a desire to get politicians to 
focus on adult care for people with autism. Despite this government introducing 
an Autism Act to improve services for people with autism, and an adult autism 
strategy aimed at tackling the isolation experienced by adults with autism, she 
argues that not enough has been done.

"We are better at looking after children with autism. I'm not saying we are 
brilliant, but we are better. But we haven't a clue what to do with adults with 
autism. Starting with diagnosis, right through until death, we have to take 
this pressure off families," she says. She receives calls "24/7" from parents 
and carers who are worried about what the future holds. "A lot of parents are 
at breaking point."

Responding to Tommey's campaign, Benet Middleton, director of communications 
at the National Autistic Society, says: "While there can be differences of 
opinion, we firmly believe it is important that autism charities and 
campaigners keep working together in order to create the biggest noise and 
achieve change."
 