
David Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough> has urged the 
government to use Brexit to better protect the UK’s nature and wildlife.

“Like it or not Brexit has happened. All agriculture and environment treaties 
for nature and wildlife will have to be rethought. It’s a great opportunity to 
refine the legislation to match our part of the world,” he told 
conservationists at the launch of the2016 State of Nature report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/one-in-10-uk-wildlife-species-faces-extinction-major-report-shows>
.

The report, compiled by more than 50 conservation organisations including the 
RSPB, the National Trust, the Marine Conservation Society and the Natural 
History Museum, showed that Britain was one of the world’s most 
“nature-depleted countries”, with more thanone in 10 wildlife species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/sep/14/2016-state-of-nature-report-wildlife-winners-and-losers-in-pictures>
 threatened with extinction.

“The report is very important. Our wonderful nature is in serious trouble and 
it needs our help as never before. This document produces facts and figures. We 
are living at a time of climate change so we need to know what is happening to 
wildlife. It gives us a huge opportunity. I hope we can take it,” said 
Attenborough.

Andrea Leadsom <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom>, in one 
of her first speeches as environment secretary at the same event, made no 
reference to nature protection after Britain leaves the EU, or the birds, 
habitats and other directives which have been the backbone of British 
conservation for 40 years.

“I want a 25-year plan for the environment, a truly long-term vision that sets 
the direction for future policy. We will publish a framework setting out a 
game-changing approach,” she said at the event.

She added: “Following our decision to leave the EU, we now have a unique 
opportunity to develop a set of policies tailored to the needs of the United 
Kingdom, our species and our habitats.”

Leadom said the report showed the scale of the challenge facing Britain’s 
environment but said there was much to celebrate. “We have truly ambitious 
plans to transform our approach to the environment,” she said.

She added that government would use big data and new technology “to tackle old 
problems in different ways”.

 Conservationists said the report was shocking, showing that modern 
agricultural techniques had had a major, negative impact on wildlife.

“Increasing agricultural production has fundamentally changed the countryside. 
The report shows that we do not have a green and pleasant land. We have little 
more than green concrete yet we have come to accept it,” said Trevor Dines, a 
botanist with the NGO Plantlife.

“The pendulum has swung too far towards production. Big agriculture has won,” 
he said.

But Guy Smith, National Farmers Union vice president, denied that farming was 
to blame for the dramatic wildlife declines recorded in the report. “When 
farmers go out their front doors, and they see their farms, and they see lots 
of wildlife, and then they open up the newspapers and see the RSPB painting 
some lurid picture of a countryside with no birds, or bees, or mammals in it, 
they just get a bit depressed. There are many species that are not declining. 
All we say is, ‘just change the record, please’.

“One thing that mystifies us about this is that there has been no 
intensification of agriculture in the last 25 years,” he told the BBC.


National Trust calls for complete reform of British farm subsidies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/04/national-trust-calls-for-complete-reform-of-british-farm-subsidies>
Caroline Drummond, chief executive of Leaf, a pressure group linking farming 
with the environment, said: “Whilst this data is compelling, we do not feel it 
represents the whole picture. Farmers are fundamentally committed to conserving 
and enhancing the biodiversity on their farms.”

Dame Helen Ghosh, director of the National Trust, which is one of Britain’s 
biggest landowners, said farmers had to work more with government and 
conservationists.

“We have to see Brexit as an opportunity to think about how we can create a 
support system for farmers; that makes it easy for farmers to do the right 
thing. This is a chance to think differently about the future of farming and to 
work collaboratively.”
 