
Australian trio PVT have really gone to town with their festive playlist 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/riff3000/playlist/4CtHDvBoJibEIH6tMt6t1n>. So sit 
back and enjoy while the band's Richard Pike explains their choices ...

PVT playlist 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/riff3000/playlist/4CtHDvBoJibEIH6tMt6t1n>

John Maus – Bennington 
John Maus is a bedroom composer/singer who teaches political theory at the 
University of Hawaii. This is a great B-side but you all have to get his record 
Love Is Real, which features just drum machines, synths and his low and 
unsettling voice intoning mantra-like lyrics. For a while this was the only 
record I could bear listening to in a sea of inane new music. The vinyl is 
translucent too.

Grasscut – Muppet (Nathan Fake Remix)
Dave (from PVT) suggested we get Nathan Fake to remix us so I checked out his 
stuff, and this became my favourite electronic track this year. He's a bit of a 
post-modern master, blurring the line between producer/engineer/audio sensei. 
Nathan remixed our last single Light Up Bright Fires, which is superb.

Depeche Mode – Condemnation 
I never listened to DM when I was young. A friend recommended we check out 
Songs of Faith and Devotion when he listened to our new album. This track is a 
cracker – Dave Gahan sings like he means it.

The Units – High Pressure Days
A good friend played this to me recently. Why have I never heard of this band 
before? Early-80s post-punk from San Francisco with amazing keyboard and 
programming work. They're like Devo but with a looser vibe. And no one's heard 
of them. Why?

Scott Walker – Copenhagen
PVT played Copenhagen for the first time this year. We got a parking fine as 
soon as we got there and our tour van was broken into that night. Then we 
played in Christiania, basically a hippy commune a bit like Barter Town in Mad 
Max 3. We walked for hours to the landmark Little Mermaid statue, which turned 
out to be exported to China. Copenhagen isn't even a place. Personally I don't 
believe in Copenhagen. Fortunately, this track is great. Beautiful 
orchestration.

David Bowie – Crystal Japan
A B-side produced by Brian Eno that should be regarded as an ambient classic. 
I think Trent Reznor owes something to this track.

Alan Vega – Saturn Drive
Alan Vega's 80s solo diversions from Suicide are a trip.

Jonathan Richman – When I Dance
Only really discovered Jonathan Richman this year. I know people who are just 
like him, but he turns his drunken insecurites and womanising into great songs.

Here We Go Magic – Casual
PVT did a remix of these guys this year, and they are the loveliest bunch. 
They made Broken Social Scene look like complete amateurs when they opened for 
them in London. Jen the bass player is the new Tina Weymouth, if that isn't 
going too far. The clip for this song is really great too, but is NSFW.

Elvis Presley – I'll Never Let You Go (Lil Darlin')
I put this in for my girlfriend. Elvis both swoons and shows off. Singing was 
a joke to him. I also love the vocal delay/reverb. He really plays into it. No 
one makes them like this any more.

PVT – Felicity's Blue Dress
Thought I'd put in a PVT B-side that no one's really heard. This track didn't 
quite make the cut of the album, but it's one of the best things I've written.

Gyorgy Ligeti – Lux Aeterna
Famous maybe for being in 2001: A Space Odyssey, this is a beautiful a 
cappella choir piece. I've loved this for years. I have still yet to hear it 
live, but I'm sure I would bliss out.

PVT released their album Church With No Magic earlier this year. You can buy 
it here 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/album/church-with-no-magic-bonus/id381426299>. For 
more PVT info check outwarp.net/pvt
 <http://www.warp.net/pvt>
 