
To explain their playlist 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/dominorecords/playlist/7DWIBi67V0DApTHBDgGB5a>, 
She & Him's Zooey Deschanel and M Ward wrote us a little line about each track 
...

She & Him's audio advent playlist 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/dominorecords/playlist/7DWIBi67V0DApTHBDgGB5a>

James Brown – I Know It's True 
M Ward: "A beautiful and rare find."

Michael Nesmith – Joanne 
Zooey: "This song has such an incredibly beautiful melody. Michael Nesmith is 
a very underrated songwriter."

The Carter Family – Lover's Lane 
M Ward: "Probably my favorite musical group of all time."

Dusty Springfield – Let Me Down Easy
Zooey: "Dusty Springfield's voice is as great as they come. This is a 
lesser-known song from her London days."

Elmore James – Sho Nuff I Do 
M Ward: "My favorite slide guitar player."

The Louvin Brothers – My Baby's Gone
Zooey: "The Louvin Brothers are genius. Like the Everly Brothers they are 
masters of the two-part harmony, but lesser known. It's definitely worth buying 
all of their records."

Daniel Johnston – To Go Home 
M Ward: "The Beatles filtered through the mind of Daniel Johnston."

Ozzie Kotani – Ku'u Kika Kahiko 
M Ward: "Probably my favorite Hawaiian guitarist"

The Zombies – Whenever You're Ready
Zooey: "One of my favorite bands of all time. This song is a classic. Colin 
Blunstone is an exceptional vocalist. There is no other group like the Zombies."

Fats Domino – What a Party 
M Ward: "Great chorus, great voice, great piano, great production."

Gene Clark – No Other
Zooey: "He left the Byrds because he was afraid of flying. Gene Clark had a 
very interesting solo career with many great records. This is the title track 
from his haunting album No Other."

Sonic Youth – Kool Thing 
M Ward: "Revolutionary guitars." 

Christopher Parkening – Bach: Prelude 1 from Well-Tempered Clavier 
M Ward: "Good song to wake up to." 

Billy Joel – Allentown
Zooey: "This song has an uplifting melody but dark subject matter: my 
favourite combination. One of Billy Joel's finest."

She & Him – Why Do You Let Me Stay Here?
M Ward: "One of the first songs we ever recorded together."

Ella Fitzgerald and the Ink Spots – I'm Making Believe
Zooey: "This song puts me to sleep in the best way. I love all of Ella 
Fitzgerald's duets with the Ink Spots but this is a favourite."
 