
Men and women are poles apart when it comes to choosing their top screen 
sirens, a survey has found.

While women opted for Audrey Hepburn's gamine charm in Breakfast at Tiffany's, 
men voted Ursula Andress their favourite female movie icon, according to aRadio 
Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-times> poll.

Andress memorably emerged from the sea in a white bikini in the 1962 James Bond
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond> film debut, Dr No. Hepburn came 
fifth in the men's poll behind three popular female sci-fi sirens.

Sigourney Weaver in The Alien saga took second place, ahead of Carrie Fisher 
in Star Wars in third place and Jane Fonda in Barbarella in fourth.

The top five as voted by women was dominated by musical legends, with Julie 
Andrews as Maria in The Sound Of Music in second place, followed by her Mary 
Poppins role in third and Judy Garland's performance in The Wizard Of Oz in 
fourth. Julia Roberts took fifth place for her memorable role in Pretty Woman.

About 2,000 people voted for their favourite from a shortlist chosen by Radio 
Times' film experts of both genders.

Film critic Barry Norman told Radio Times readers: "You seem to have a 
penchant for naughty girls, women who play hookers: Catherine Deneuve in Belle 
de Jour, Julia Roberts in Pretty Woman and, of course – top of the heap –Audrey 
Hepburn <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audrey-hepburn> in Breakfast at 
Tiffany's, although in the demure age in which it was made, just before the 
swinging sixties got under way, the nature of her profession couldn't be 
specified.

"In fact there could easily have been a fourth - the Oscar-winning Jane Fonda 
in Klute, but instead you chose her for Barbarella and, as an impressionable 
young man who interviewed her in Rome in 1967 when she was actually wearing 
that erotic costume, I can well understand why. It was an unnerving experience, 
as you can imagine. I didn't know where to look never mind what to say. As 
interviews go, it was a washout. Memorable, though."
 