
Retired Chilean army colonel Cristián Labbé, an outspoken defender of former 
dictator GeneralAugusto Pinochet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet>, 
has been arrested.

Labbé was charged with being part of a conspiracy in the kidnapping and 
homicide of 13 prisoners. Another nine military officials were charged, some of 
whom are already in custody for a variety of human rights crimes.

Labbé’s arrest on Monday delighted Chilean human rights activists who had long 
wondered why the high-profile colonel had eluded justice despite members of the 
Chilean army and victims saying they had seen him at a torture centre near the 
coastal city of San Antonio.

A former bodyguard to the Pinochet family, Labbé was infamous for organising 
parties and celebrations in honour of colleagues convicted of murder and 
torture. Labbé was also key in organising protests against the detention of 
Pinochet at a private hospital in 1998.

Labbé is now being held at a military base in Santiago while his lawyers seek 
to get him out on appeal. One of his lawyers, Cristián Espejo, told CNN he was 
stunned and claimed that Labbé was guilty only of being part of the Chilean 
army. “He never tortured or assassinated anyone,” said Espejo, citing what he 
said was years of investigations into Labbé’s past.

But last year the Chilean journalist Javier Rebolledo reported detailed 
witness accounts that placed Labbé at the torture camp. In his book El 
Despertar de los Cuervos (Rise of the Ravens) Rebolledo interviewed guards and 
prisoners at the notorious camp Tejas Verde who said Labbé was central to the 
death camp operations, though not participating in torture directly.

Samuel Enrique Fuenzalida Devia, a former army conscript in 1973, was key in 
breaking the ring of silence that had long protected Labbé. He described Labbé 
as an instructor who was part of a notorious crew that created Pinochet’s 
secret police, who developed plans to murder an estimated 3,200 civilians, most 
of them during the first years of the 1973-1990 dictatorship.

The arrest of Labbé was yet another blow to Chile’s far-right Independent 
Democratic Union (UDI) party, which is currently embroiled in a campaign 
finance scandal known as Pentagate.
 