
The grandson of Augusto Pinochet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet> 
is organising followers of the former dictator to launch a political party in 
Chile.

“Republican Order My Country” [Orden Republicano Mi Patria] is the name of the 
political movement. It condemns gay marriage yet supports legalised marijuana 
and reforms to the Pinochet-era constitution.

Though the pro-Pinochet forces have been organised for at least six years as a 
movement known as “For My Country”, after thearrest of a top Pinochet aide last 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/21/cristian-labbe-augusto-pinochet-former-bodyguard-detained-santiago>
, Augusto Pinochet Molina, grandson of the dictator, stepped up formation of 
what supporters described as a centre-right political party.

While the proposed party acknowledges that the military abused citizens, they 
never speak of a dictatorship but of a “military government” followed by “a 
witch hunt” and a “vendetta” that jailed dozens of officers for the murder and 
disappearance of some 3,200 Chileans during the 17 years of Pinochet’s rule.

Pinochet Molina this week also sent out hundreds of invitations to the 99th 
birthday party of the dictator to be celebrated on 25 November. The location 
remains secret but among the invited guests is Cristian Labbé, a former 
Pinochet bodyguard charged last week with being part of a conspiracy to kidnap 
and murder 13 political prisoners.

A former captain in the Chilean army, Pinochet Molina was kicked out of the 
military after an impromptu speech he made at his grandfather’s 2006 funeral in 
Santiago, in which he applauded his grandfather’s campaign to “defeat Marxism” 
inChile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile>. A one time candidate for 
congress, Pinochet Molina is now positioning himself to run for office again.

“Augusto wanted to invite him because it is known that Labbé is a grand 
admirer of his grandfather, so for that very reason it would be an honour,” 
said Paolo Zarate, general secretary of For My Country in an interview.

Pinochet Molina’s decision to launch a political party is the latest salvo in 
a battle to lay claim to the now-deceased dictator’s legacy. For nearly a 
quarter of a century, the rightwing UDI party has held a lock on what Chilean 
pollsters call “the military family”, a conservative and influential bloc of 
voters. But moves to shut down a country club-style prison for imprisoned 
military officers and ongoing efforts to jail human rights violators has led to 
claims that even the pro-Pinochet UDI party has abandoned their former hero.

When Labbé was detained last week, a parade of rightwing politicians including 
senators went to honour their former colleague, though they sought to describe 
the visit as purely “humane” and not political.

“It is a party destined to be minority and most of all fascist,” said Chilean 
senator Alejandro Navarro in an interview with CNN.
 