
Andrew Symonds <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> has been 
included in Australia's squad for their limited-overs series against Pakistan, 
which starts this month.

The injured fast bowler Brett Lee and all-rounder Shane Watson have also been 
recalled but Ricky Ponting, Mike Hussey and Mitchell Johnson have been left 
out, with a view to keeping them fresh for this summer's Ashes series in 
England.

Symonds had been overlooked by selectors in recent months after being warned 
about his behaviour following a series of off-field incidents. After receiving 
counselling, the all-rounder has been deemed fit for selection.

"Andrew Symonds has been cleared by Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia to resume playing for the 
Australian cricket team and he has been included in the squad," said 
Australia's chairman of selectors, Andrew Hilditch. "At his best Andrew is a 
dynamic one-day player with an outstanding record for Australia. It will now be 
up to him to seize this opportunity."

Hilditch said Lee's participation was subject to a fitness test, after foot 
and ankle surgery. Watson, who has suffered from back stress fractures, is 
included as a specialist batsman.

In Ponting's absence, the batsman Michael Clarke will captain the 14-man squad 
in the six-match series, which includes five one-day internationals and a 
Twenty20 fixture. Due to the security situation in Pakistan the matches will 
take place in the United Arab Emirates, starting on 22 April with a one-day 
international at Dubai Sports City.

Hilditch said the tour presented the perfect opportunity for Australia to test 
the fitness of several returning players while seasoned regulars were given a 
chance to recharge their batteries.

"Having Ricky Ponting and Michael Hussey in prime form mentally and physically 
for the Ashes is critical and the series against Pakistan is the only 
opportunity to give them an appropriate break prior to the start of a very 
important period," said Hilditch.

"Mitchell Johnson is now a key bowler in all three forms of the game for 
Australia and we've also taken this opportunity to provide him with a break 
before he commences preparation for the World Twenty20 and Ashes."

Australia squad: Michael Clarke (captain), Brad Haddin, Nathan Bracken, Callum 
Ferguson, Brett Geeves, Nathan Hauritz, Ben Hilfenhaus, James Hopes, David 
Hussey, Ben Laughlin, Brett Lee, Shaun Marsh, Andrew Symonds, Shane Watson.
 