
Nathan Lyon and Steve O’Keefe spun Australia to a 220-run win over Pakistan in 
the third Test at the SCG, with Steve Smith’s side completing a 3-0 series 
sweep.


The tourists resumed at 55-1 on day five in Sydney, having been set a target 
of 465 following Smith’s declaration at 241-2 on day four.


Pakistan almost dragged the contest into Saturday’s final session but were 
eventually rolled for 244, with Lyon and O’Keefe turning the screws ahead of a 
four-Test tour of India.


Australia wrap up third Test win over Pakistan on day five – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/06/australia-v-pakistan-third-test-day-five-live>
Josh Hazlewood grabbed two wickets in his opening spell on Saturday and 
returned with the second new ball to end the series by dismissing Imran Khan.


Lyon, whose status as the country’s top spinner was in doubt earlier this 
summer, finished the match with five wickets.


“Nathan Lyon couldn’t bowl much better than he’s bowled,” former legspinner 
Shane Warne said on the Nine Network. “I just love the way the ball’s left his 
hand.”

Lyon, who rediscovered his mojo by helping bowl Australia to victory in the 
Boxing Day Test, started day five with a fantastic nine-over spell from the 
Randwick End.


The highlight was his removal of first-innings century-maker Younus Khan. 
Younus, who finished 175 not out on Friday and was responsible for more than 
half of Pakistan’s first-innings total, loomed as the batsman most likely to 
defy Australia.

The veteran skipped down the pitch to Lyon but skied an edge to Hazlewood 
instead of clearing the rope, falling 23 runs short of boosting his Test career 
tally to 10,000.


Lyon held a swirling skied edge to dismiss Pakistan captain Misbah-ul-Haq, who 
was one of O’Keefe’s three victims on Saturday. O’Keefe also accounted for 
nightwatchman Yasir Shah, who showed admirable resistance in a 93-ball stay at 
the crease, and Wahab Riaz.

The left-arm tweaker, likely to play a key role in next month’s tour of India, 
also ran out Mohammad Amir.


Memories of Pakistan’s epic run-chase in Brisbane, where they suffered a 
39-run loss after threatening to haul in an imposing target of 490, would have 
been at the back of Smith’s mind in the morning.


But Hazlewood, who has been Smith’s go-to man in good times and bad this 
summer, single-handedly grabbed the crucial scalp of opener Azhar Ali with his 
sixth delivery of the day.


Azhar, who produced a masterful double-ton in Melbourne and set a Pakistani 
record for most runs in a Test series in Australia, attempted to clip a ball 
off his pads but instead offered Hazlewood a simple catch.


Hazlewood then needed just 10 balls at Babar Azam to trap the out-of-form 
batsman lbw for the second time in the match.


It was Pakistan’s 12th straight Test loss in Australia, with both sides now 
focusing on a five-match ODI series that starts in Brisbane on Friday.
 