
Josh Hazlewood will be the first bowler rested during the Pakistan one-day 
series, set to miss Friday’s series-opener against Pakistan at the Gabba.


Coach Darren Lehmann announced the move on Sunday as part of a plan to rest 
both Hazlewood and fellow Test spearhead Mitchell Starc during the five-match 
ODI series, ahead of next month’s key four-Test series in India.


Steve Smith hails Australia's resurgence after four straight Test victories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/steve-smith-hails-australias-resurgence-after-four-straight-test-victories>
“He [Hazlewood] is not injured but we have decided to give him a week to 
freshen up at home and he will link up with the ODI squad in Melbourne ahead of 
the second match of the series,” Lehmann said.


“Although if one of our other fast bowlers picks up an injury in the run-up to 
Friday’s first game at the Gabba then he could be called up to slot in.”


Resting Hazlewood and Starc had always been part of Australian management’s 
plans for the one-day series. Both delivered more than 250 overs in the 
six-Test summer, along with a three-match ODI series slotted between the South 
Africa and Pakistan Tests.

Queensland quick Billy Stanlake is likely to be the beneficiary of the 
decision to rest Hazlewood, with only four quicks named in the 14-man squad for 
the series.


Lehmann had earlier confirmed on Saturday that he wanted to play three pacemen 
at the Gabba, which now opens the door for the 22 year-old to make his 
Australia debut.


“He’s tall, he’s fast, he’s got some bounce, so that’s a pleasing thing for 
us,” Lehmann said of Stanlake on Saturday. “It’s a good challenge for him. 
Young kid coming through, exciting times.”

Starc had been limping on day five of the third Test but remained on the field 
and skipper Steve Smith suggested he was fine.


Lehmann and selectors also won’t want to overwork oft-injured tearaway Pat 
Cummins, who returned from a lay-off of almost 15 months earlier this summer.
 