
Australia all-rounder Andrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> insists he will not stop 
drinking and socialising in public after being cleared of any wrongdoing 
following an altercation with a fan at a Brisbane hotel last weekend.

Symonds was involved in a scuffle with a member of the public at the Normanby 
Hotel in Brisbane on Sunday night, butCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia chief executive James 
Sutherland confirmed today that he will not be punished. The Queensland 
all-rounder, who returned to the team for last week's first Test in his 
hometown following a three-month exile for failing to attend a team meeting, 
will now take his place in the Australia team for this week's second Test 
against New Zealand in Adelaide.

"I just need to make clever decisions," he said. "That's why I've got to be 
smart when I go out and where I go out."

In his explanation of the incident, which was supported by witnesses and hotel 
employees, Symonds said a fan tried to hug him and take a photo, which Symonds 
rebuffed. The fan then reportedly tried to punch Symonds, who left the venue 
soon after the incident and returned to his own hotel.

"I maintain that I acted appropriately while at the hotel, but I regret making 
the decision to visit the hotel as I realise I put myself in a compromising 
position," said the 33-year-old. "I have told my team-mates that I am sorry to 
have put them through this distraction at a time when they are trying to 
prepare for a Test match so soon after the Brisbane game, particularly those 
who were also at the hotel and were named in media reports. I have learnt a 
valuable lesson from this incident and I know that actions speak louder than 
words and that's how I will be judged."

Australia captain Ricky Ponting has insisted that Symonds remains an important 
player in the team, which will look to follow up the 149-run victory over the 
Black Caps at the Gabba when the second Test gets under way at the Adelaide 
Oval on Friday. "We were very impressed with what he did in and around the 
group up in Brisbane during the game," Ponting said.

"We also identify that yes he made a mistake, he made a wrong decision to do 
what he did after the game but we were also reasonably impressed that he acted 
in a sensible way while he was at the pub so Andrew Symonds is definitely worth 
having around. He knows what commitment is required for him to stay around. It 
can't become any clearer to him than it has been laid to him in the last couple 
of days."

Ponting said the team and Cricket Australia were keen to help Symonds overcome 
his problems and become a "better person". Cricket Australia chief executive 
James Sutherland said an internal investigation found that Symonds had not 
provoked the incident and had acted in a "restrained and mature" manner, but he 
conceded that the incident was concerning.

"I thought it important to talk to Andrew and take advice from his 
professional counsellors to understand why he could be quite open about having 
a problem with alcohol and then find himself in the spotlight by visiting a pub 
a few days later," he said. "I've revisited that advice to ensure that we are 
not rushing Andrew's progress with his work in managing behavioural issues. 
That to me is more important than discussing, as media have suggested, whether 
or not I should impose curfews or other school-boy type restrictions.

"Andrew is no saint and never will be but his lessons from counselling, 
reinforced to him by this incident, are that he is committed to making 
intelligent off-field decisions, taking accountability for those decisions and 
being aware there will consequences if he makes the wrong decisions."
 