
Australia have left Andrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds>, the controversial 
Queensland all-rounder, out of their 15-man squad for the four-Test tour of 
India, and called up the uncapped 36-year-old legspinner Bryce McGain.

Symonds, 33, was omitted after being sent home from Darwin during the recent 
one-day series with Bangladesh for missing a team meeting when he opted to go 
fishing, and will be replaced by Shane Watson.

Andrew Hilditch, Australia's chairman of selectors, revealed that Symonds was 
going through a process overseen byCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia to give him the chance to 
decide on his future.

"Cricket Australia has told us that selectors will be advised once Andrew can 
be considered again for selection and we hope we can look forward to that 
advice in due course because as we all know, a fit and fully-committed Andrew 
Symonds can be a world beater," Hilditch said. "In the meantime, our advice was 
that he was not available to be considered for selection this time."

While the decision does not come as a surprise, the fact that Symonds' 
averaged 77.70 in Tests over the last 12 months shows it is one that will 
significantly weaken the Australian middle-order for what is traditionally one 
of the toughest tours on the circuit. Symonds was also heavily involved in the 
racial controversies with Harbajhan Singh that marred a bad-tempered series in 
Australia earlier this year.

Watson, 27, has not played a Test since November 2005, and is joined in the 
squad by newcomers McGain, Peter Siddle and Jason Kreza.

It is the selection of Victoria's McGain at the expense of Beau Casson that is 
of the greatest surprise, highlighting the problems Australia have had in the 
spin department since the retirement of Shane Warne. McGain impressed on 
Australia 'A's recent tour of India on the back of a strong Pura Cup campaign 
when he claimed 38 wickets at 34.15 for Victoria, and if picked would become 
Australia's oldest Test debutant since the 38-year-old Bob Holland in 1984.

"Bryce McGain was the standout leg-spinner at interstate level last year and 
we think he is really well suited to the Indian conditions and bowling plans," 
Hilditch said. "His story is a great example of how those who perform at 
interstate level will be rewarded. Jason Krejza had a good season for Tasmania 
last year but is a selection very much for Indian conditions. The selectors 
felt right-arm finger spinners would perform well in India and Jason now has a 
chance to prove himself at the international level."

McGain is selected subject to fitness after suffering a minor-strain to his 
right shoulder, while Australia also have a minor worry over Matthew Hayden's 
heel.

Squad Matthew Hayden, Phil Jaques, Ricky Ponting (capt), Michael Hussey, 
Michael Clarke, Simon Katich, Shane Watson, Brad Haddin (wk), Brett Lee, Jason 
Krejza, Mitchell Johnson, Peter Siddle, Bryce McGain, Stuart Clark, Doug 
Bollinger.
 