
This may not have been a memorable series but once more The Oval managed to 
provide a final day to savour. Tickets were sold out last November, an 
unprecedented feat, but after the slim pickings and dull cricket of Friday and 
Saturday's washout there can have been scant expectation of anything beyond a 
slow drift to a draw. Credit then to Michael Clarke for his initiative in 
trying to salvage something from the wreckage of the tour and to Alastair Cook 
and England for taking up a challenge of making 227 in 44 overs when they had 
no real need to play his game.

Even then there was an unsatisfactory end to match and series. It was 25 
minutes to eight when Ian Bell was run out by Mitchell Starc's direct hit and, 
as he walked off, the umpires conferred and took the players from the field. By 
then, although the floodlights were on, the light was closing in rapidly. 
Street lights blazed and the scoreboard stood out like city centre neon signs.

It was Clarke who would have been the happier of the captains because England, 
led magnificently by a Kevin Pietersen cavalry charge, were closing in on what 
would have been a fourth victory. Pietersen played an astonishing hand, his 62 
from 55 balls containing 10 fours and a repertoire of strokes beyond the scope 
of other batsmen. One drive down the ground off Starc was as brutal a shot as 
played all summer. But he needed support and it came from Jonathan Trott, with 
whom he added 77, after Trott had earlier put on 64 with Cook for the second 
wicket.

By now Clarke had scattered his field, his bowlers, unencumbered by the 
restrictive rules of limited overs cricket, were sending balls wide down the 
legside and he, sensing the game was out of his grasp, was all too obviously 
using up time in his consultations and deliberations. Maybe Darren Lehmann will 
accuse him of cheating. There were four overs remaining and England, on 206 
with five wickets in hand, and Matt Prior marching purposefully to the crease, 
required only 21 more runs.

But it was not to be and it meant that England failed to win by the 4-0 margin 
they craved but they will take memories of a 3-0 victory into the winter 
series, having shown that they are not a team with which to trifle, even in 
trying to tease out a result when it did not really matter. And 13 matches 
without defeat since they lost to India in Ahmedabad is their best Test run in 
more than four decades.

Clarke ran the risk, and ultimately avoided the opprobrium, of being only the 
fourth captain, after Garry Sobers against England in Port of Spain in 1968, 
Hansie Cronje also against England in the notorious fixed match at Centurion in 
2000 and Graeme Smith against Australia in Sydney in 2006 to have declared 
twice in a Test match and lost.

There were some personal milestones to the day. Brad Haddin's 29th victim of 
the summer, Joe Root in the second innings, was the most by any wicketkeeper in 
a series anywhere, beating the record of Rodney Marsh. And, with his second 
innings, Bell managed to equal the 562 runs scored by Denis Compton in 1948, 
the most by an England batsman in a five-Test home Ashes series. Bell was 
unchallenged as England's man of the series, with Ryan Harris, outstanding for 
Australia, the visitors' equivalent.
 England's Chris Woakes and Matt Prior walk off at The Oval after bad light 
ended the match. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
If it was anticlimax, then the day had produced its entertainment – 447 runs 
and 17 wickets – first by England, who not only avoided the follow-on first 
thing but got to within 115 runs of Australia and then by the tourists, who 
extended their lead by a further 111 runs before Clarke declared.

It was a tribute to modern drainage systems and wonderful work by the 
groundstaff that there was action at all, so much water had fallen in the 
previous 36 hours. But once play got under way only half an hour late it was 
England's primary goal to avoid the follow-on by scoring 46 more runs. That 
they achieved this with some gusto after the dreary entrenchment of Friday and 
then proceeded beyond at a canter was to their credit.

The follow-on was avoided after 50 minutes' play in which time Chris Woakes 
had been caught behind and Bell followed for 45, well caught by Haddin from a 
genuine leg-glance to give James Faulkner a maiden Test wicket and the first of 
four he was to take in the innings. Matt Prior made an unselfish 47, 
particularly so given the lack of success he has had with the bat this summer, 
and Graeme Swann provided the final irritant with 34 that helped England to 377.

At this point the game might have died. These are unusual circumstances, 
though: the series was already dead, there was no imperative, it seemed, for 
England to do anything other than draw in order to secure their rise to second 
in the rankings, and Australia might well have settled for 3-0 as it was. What, 
Clarke might have wondered, would be the outcome if he gambled a little and 
lost? These are rarely considerations in live series but would it matter if his 
side rose to the challenge and lost? And what would it do for England's esteem 
if they were offered a carrot and pragmatically refused to take it?

It was a bold move by Clarke to try and set up the game, even if scoring was 
not as easy as might have been thought. He juggled his batting order, sending 
the specialists in to hurry up the rate, with the batting rock Chris Rogers 
slipping ever further down the order. But England just about managed to keep a 
lid on things, with Jimmy Anderson taking a stunning one-handed return catch to 
get rid of David Warner, Pietersen waiting an eternity to catch Shane Watson on 
the long-on boundary off Swann and then Stuart Broad helping himself to four 
wickets. The declaration at tea was inevitable if there was going to be any 
meaning to the final session beyond the last rites of the series.
 