
In four years on the road with Austra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/austra>, Katie Stelmanis has seen it all. 
She's played stadiums with Gossip, intimate venues withthe xx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-xx>, and rocked up in New Orleans during 
Mardi Gras expecting a joyous carnival only for someone to vomit on their tour 
van. "I'd always imagined Mardi Gras as a romantic place, all traditional 
parades and beautiful costumes," says Katie, "and it was just a disgusting 
drunkfest." In the UK, things weren't altogether better: at Austra's gig at the 
Tooting Tram & Social in 2009, one girl was so smashed that she did a poo on 
the floor of the ladies' loos.

Katie may be unfazed by such unpleasantness, but there's one aspect of 
fronting a band that she still can't get her head around. "I don't really like 
having my photograph taken," she confides. "I find it uncomfortable that 
there's so much expectation to be a fashion model as well as a musician. It's 
not my comfort zone, but it's part of being a woman in music."

Her massive green eyes suggest that the photo accompanying this article will 
be pretty fly, but our interview comes on the day that Claire Boucher AKAGrimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/grimes> – Katie's old support act – posts on 
Tumblr about the difficulties of being a woman in the apparently liberal 
"alternative" sector of the music industry. "I'm tired of creeps on 
messageboards discussing whether or not they'd 'fuck' me," wrote Claire, a 
feeling that Katie more than understands. "Certain people at my label were 
forwarding photos of Lana Del Rey, as if to say, 'Use this example for your 
press shots', and I'm like, 'Are you kidding me?'"

One listen to Katie's haunting, chamber-choir vocals and the surging thunder 
of her piano-led instrumentals should be enough to instantly dispel any Lana 
comparisons, while Austra's new album Olympia is more of a house-influenced 
record, retaining the tormented vocal chants and sad lyrics of their debut, but 
offsetting them with funky, bass-driven mid-tempo dance beats. "I found a 
version on YouTube of Marshall Jefferson's Move Your Body played entirely with 
real instruments," says Katie. "I really wanted to emulate that sound."

Olympia would seem to align Austra with Grimes, Blood Diamonds, Doldrums and 
the other alt-synth music currently coming out of Canada, but Katie prefers to 
see her band part of a new, international feminist movement alongside acts like
the Knife <https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-knife>, Planningtorock and 
Parisian duo CocoRosie. Far from diluting feminism to make it marketable, these 
musicians are open about their quest for sexual equality, and Katie's excited 
about what that means. "A lot of bands are becoming more political. For a long 
time people were afraid of that word. And now with the Knife album, which is 
very blatant about gender politics and feminism, it's starting to become cool 
again."

Olympia is out now on Domino
 